The General HISTORY OF WOMEN: of the most holy, and profane; The most
Famous, and Infamous in all Ages.

Printed by Will: Hunt.

Apollo Clio Euterpe Thalia Melpomene Terpsechore Erato Polymnia Urania Calliope



The General HISTORY OF WOMEN, Containing the Lives of the most Holy and
Profane, the most Famous and Infamous in all ages, exactly described not only
from Poetical Fictions, but from the most Ancient, Modern, and Admired
Historians, to our Time^*

By T. H. Gent.

LONDON, Printed by W. H. for W. H. at the sign of the Blew Anchor, at the
backside of the Royal Exchange, 1657.

To the Reader.
I Here present before thee, judicious Reader, uno intuitu, or at one view, the
whole series and order of all the most Heroic and Illustrious women of all
times, from the first dawning of the world to this present age, of all degrees,
from the Imperial Diadem, to the Shepherds Crook, of all regions and climats,
from the spicy East to the golden West, form the northern cynosure, to the
southern Pole, of all Faiths, whether Jews, Ethnicks, or Christians, of all
Arts and Sciences, both the graver, and more polite; of all Estates, Virgins,
Wives, and Widows; of all complexions and humors, the fair, the foul, the
grave, the witty, the reserved, the familiar, the chaste, the wanton. What ever
Poets have fancied, or credible Histories have recorded, of the first thou have
the mysteries and allegories clearly interpreted and explained; of the latter,
the genuine relations impartially delivered. If the inventions of all good Arts
and Disciplines have been fabulously ascribed to the Muses, if in the stories
of the Goddesses, Graces, Destinies, the Nymphs, both of Fountains, Hills, and
Woods, the precepts of morality, knowledge, Wisdom and Philosophy have been
mystically and abstrusely comprehended, that they might not lie open to common
ignorance and con-tempt, no less have all great virtues and qualities really
shined in others, whose names are registered in unquestioned history, he is an
utter stranger to learning and antiquity, who is not acquainted with the memory
of Sappho, Cleobule, Lindia, Aspasia, and a thousand more equally renowned, or
though we should go no farther then the Fables already mentioned, yet certainly
it argues no mean veneration and esteem which the Ancients had for that Sex,
since they made choice to personate under their (...), so many divine and
glorious attributes. (...) the most powerful argument that could be (...), to
incite men to virtue, has been the (...) of their forefathers achievements,
(...) properer object can there be of woman's (...) then the deeds of other
famous women, who (...) then men have ever afforded examples of all (...); here
therefore as in a perfect (...) may behold the lively Ideas of all laudable
qualities whatsoever, suitable to them in all callings and conditions, here
they may observe the profoundest of learning and divine contemplation in the
Prophesies of the Sybils, in the stories of Phemonoe* Nicostrate and Castandra,
here are erected the trophies of female fortitude and valor in Semiramis,
Penthe^lea and Clelia. Here Queens may learn the arts of splendour and
magnificence from Nitocris, Artemisia, and Cleopatra. Wives here may read how
to d^mean themselves toward their husbands in all conjugall affection, in
Berenice, Phile, and Portia. Daughters may here be taught examples of obedience
and chastity, from Iphigeneia, Virginia, and the Vestall Votaresses. Matrons
may find here that decent deportment which becomes their gravity, and Widows
that constancy which befits their solitude, from the lives of Placula,
Amalasunta, and Zenobia: Nor have these latter Ages come short of what ever
antiquity can boast noble and generous; it would be too tedious to reckon up
all those of modern times, that have miraculously flourisht in all famous Arts
and Sciences, those that have been remarkable for their spirit and undaunted
courage; it shall suffice us only to mention ^^ota de Nugarolis, Laura Cereta,
the brave Venetian Lady, Modesta a Puteo, Madam Maria Shu^man, the ornament of
this age, as appears by her learned works now extant; and to sum up all in one
the most accomplished both for learning and bravery of spirit, Christina Queen
of Sweden. In fine, generous Reader, there is contained abundantly in this book
wherewith to please thee, of what nature or inclination soever thou art* if
thou art of the same species with those here mentioned, thou can not but take
delight to hear of the virtues and memorable acts of those of thy own sex; If
of the contrary sort, and that thy prejudice against women prompt thee to seek
occasions of insulting over their miscarriages, there are not wanting of them
who have perpetrated the most daring vices that any man could aspire unto; but
if thy more corrected judgment teaches thee to admire them, thou will here
find to thy satisfaction, that the gallantest of Heroes, the wisest of
Philosophers, the most ingenuous of Artists have been fully equaled, if not
excelled by them in each of these perfections I could not therefore but
conclude it the highest of injuries, that whereas the actions of men, had met
with so ample and so many memorials, theirs not inferior to them, should meet
with so slender and so few, and that to erect this monument to their lasting
glory, would be a piece of justice great as their misfortune in not having a
more judicious recorder of their worths then

E. P.

An Index or Table, of Nine Books of Various History, only concerning Women,
inscribed by the Names of the nine Muses.
The Contents of the first Book, entitled Clio: Treating of the Goddesses,
Celestial, Terrestrial, Marine, and Infernal, etc.
A Pro^m of the several opinions of all the the ancient Philosophers,
concerning the Deity. Fol. 1. Of the Goddesses Celestial, and first of Juno. 7
Of Sybil. 10 Of Venus. 12 Of Minerva. 14 Of Diana. 20 Of Ceres. 22 Of
Proserpina. 24 Of Nemesis. 25 Of Latona. 27 Of Fortune. 29 Of the Goddesses
called Selectae. 35 Of the Goddess Rhaea. 40 Of Isis or Io. 42 Of Ate. 43 Of
Pandora. 44 Of the Marine Goddesses. 45 Of Amphitrite. ibid. Of Thetis, or
Tethies. 47 Of the Nereides. 49 Of the daughters of Triton. 51 Of the wives and
daughters of Proteus. 53 Of the daughters of Phorcis. 54 Of Scilla and
Charibdis. 56 The Goddesses, of Hills, Woods, Groves and Trees, etc. 59 Of the
Oreades. 60 The Driades and Hamadriades. 61 Of the Goddesses infernal. 62 Of
the Furiae, or Eumenides. 64 An abstract of all the Fables in the fifteen books
of Ovids Metamorphosis, as they follow in the Poem. 67
The Contents of the second Book, inscribed Euterpe: Treating of the Muses,
Sybils, Vestals, Prophetesses, Hesperides, the Graces, etc.
A Discourse concerning the Muses. 77 Of Clio. 83 Of Euterpe. 86 Of Thalia. 88
Of Melpomene. 90 Of Terpsi^hore. 93 Of Eralo 95 Of Polymnia, or Polyhimnia. 98
Of Urania. 100 Of Calliope. 102 A discourse of the Sybils. 105 Sybilla Persica
and her Prophesies. 108 Sybilla Lybica, and her Prophecies. 106 Sybilla
Delphica, and her Prophecies. 113 Sybilla Cumaea, and her Prophesies. 114
Sybilla Samia, and her Prophecies. 116 Sybilla Cumana, and her Prophesies. 118
Sybilla Hellespontiaca, and her Prophecies. 121 Sybilla Phrygia, and her
Prophesies. 122 Sybilla Europaea, and her Prophecies. 124 Sybilla Tiburtina,
and her Prophesies. ib. Sybilla Aegyptia, and her Prophesies. 126 Sybilla
Erithraea, and her Prophecies. 127 A discourse of the Virgin Vestals. 128 Of
Oppia, Claudia, Fonteia, Martia, etc. 131 Of the Prophetesses. 134 The History
of a great Magician. 136 Of the Hesperides. 141 The Pleiades, or Hyades: and
why of the seven Stars, but six appear at once. 143 Of the Graces. 145 Of the
Hours. 148 Of Aurora, or the Morning. 149 Of the Night. 153 Of Sleep. 155 Of
Death. 159
The Contents of the third Book, inscribed Thalia: Treating of Illustrious
Queens, famous Wives, Mothers, Daughters, etc.
A Discourse concerning Illustrious Women. 161 How kissing first came up. ibid.
Of three Gentlemen and their wives. 166 Of Illustrious Queens. 167 A Funeral
Ode upon the death of Anna Panareta. 169 Of diverse Ladies famous for their
Modesty. 171 The wife of Fulvius. 174 Of Aretaphila 176 Of Pieria, Aspasia,
etc. 178 The memorable History of Odatis. 184 Of Aristomache, Hyppo, and
Chiomara, etc. 185 Of Tertia, Aemilia, Turia, Sulpitia, Julia, and Portia. 187
Of Horestilla, Artimesia, and Hormisda. 188 Of Queen Ada and Zenocrita. 190 Of
the wise of Pythes: 192 Of the wise of Nausimenes. 192 Of Ciano, Medullina, and
Erixo. ib. A Woman of the City Pergamus. 195 Of Stratonica, Valeria, and
Cloelia. 196 Of Olympias, and the Troades. ib. Of the Phocides, and women of
Chios. 200 Of the Persides, Celtae, Melitae, and Tyrrhaenae 202 Examples of
Modesty and Magnanimity. 204 Of Dido, Caesara, Gumilda, and Ethelburga. 209 Of
Policrita. 213 Of Queens and other Ladies, for diverse Virtues memorable. 214 Of
women remarkable for their love to their husbands. 220
The Contents of the fourth book, inscribed Melpoment: of Women incestuous,
Adulteresses, and such as have come by strange deaths.
A Discourse persuading to good life. 225 Of Women incestuous, and first of
Queen S^miramis. 228 Of Tagenna, a woman of seventy Cubits high. 231 Of
Pasiphae. 232 Of Canace, Canusia, and Valeria Tusculana. 233 Of Iulia the
Empress. 234 The sisters of Cambyses. 235 Of Livia, Horestilla, Lollia
Paulina, Cesonia, etc. 237 Of Iocasta. 238 Of Crythaeis, the mother of Homer.
240 An Epitaph upon Homer, Prince of Poets 242 A strange Incest. 244 Of
Cyborea, mother to Judas Iscariot. 245 Of Veronica. 247 A discourse concerning
Adulteresses. 248 Of many great Ladies branded with Adultery amongst the
Romans. 251 A Country fellow and his mistress. 252 The water of a chaste woman
excellent for the eie-sight. 254 Of La^dice, an unnatural wife. 255 The birth
of Antoninus Commodus. 256 Of Phedima, and a notable Imposter. ibid. Of Begu^
Queen of Persia. 259 Of Queen Olympias, and the birth of Alexander. 261 The
death of Olympias. 264 Of Romilda, with ^are examples of Chastity. ib. Of
Ethethurga, with her Epitaph. 266 A merry accident concerning an Adulteress
267 A true modern History of an Adulteress. 268 The wife of Gengulphus, and
diverse others. 274 The history of Elphritha. 276 Of Gu^^^ra, with other
intermixture of History. 280 Of Women that have come by strange deaths 283
Women that died golden deaths ibid. Women that died in Child birth. 285 Women
that suffered Martyrdom. 286 The strange death of Aristoclaea, Democrita, etc.
289 The Hostlers Tale. 292
The Contents of the fifth Book, inscribed Terpsichore. Entreating of Amazons,
and other women, famous either for Valor or Beauty.
A Discourse whether Valor or Beauty may claim priority. 302 Of the Amazons,
their original, etc. 310 Of other warlike women, and those of masculine
virtue. 316 Examples of Fear. ibid. Of Helerna, Camilla, Maria Puteolana, and
others. ibid. The race of Hyppomanes and Atlanta. 322 Of other warlike Ladies.
323 A description of the Messagers. 325 Of Zantippe and Mirho. 327 Of a Sheep
and a Shrow. 329 A trick of an English scold, etc. 330 Of English Virago's, and
of Joan de Pucil. 330 A discourse of Fair women. 337 Of Fair women. ib. The
fair Mistress of Pisistratus. 349 Of Ni^^tis. 350 Of Bersane. 352 Of the wife
of Candaules. ibid Rowan and Estrilda. 355 The fair Lady of Norwich. 356 Of
Calirrhoe, daughter to Boethius. 361 Of the wives of Cabbas and Phaillus, etc.
362 The daughters of Danaus, and the sons of Aegyptus. 365 Of Manto. 366 The
wife of Agetus, etc. 36^ A Vicars daughter. 369 A fair witty wench. 376 Of
women deformed. 371
The Contents of the sixth Book, inscribed, Erato: Treating of Chaste women, and
Wantons.
A Discourse concerning Chastity and wantonness. 375 Of Mary the blessed
Virgin. 380 Of Petronilla, the daughter of St. Peter, and other chaste Virgins.
383 Of chaste wives, and first of Penelope. 388 The History of a woman of Casa
Nova. 393 Of Edeltrudis, Editha, and others. 355 Of wantons. 398 Of common
Strumpets, Concubines, and private Mistresses. 402 Of such as merited the name
of Honest Whores. 403 Of Lais. 405 Of Glicerium, alias Glicera, and others. 411
Of Agathoclea. 413 Of Cleophis. 415 Callipigae, Alogunes, Cosmartidenes, Audia,
etc. 416 Iulia, the daughter of Augustus Caesar. 418 Harlotta, the mother of
William the Conqueror. 421 Of diverse Wantons, belonging to sundry famous men,
Poets and others. 422 Of famous Wantons. 426 Of Mista, and others. 427 Of
Wantons converted. 432
The Contents of the seventh Book, inscribed Polihymnia, or Memory: Entreating
of the Piety of Daughters, Mothers, Sisters and Wives.
A Discourse concerning Lies, Jeasts, and witty Sayings. 439 Of Pious
Daughters. 447 The love of Mothers to their children. 451 Friendship betwixt
women. 453 The love of Sisters toward their Brothers. 456 Of Matrimony and
Conjugall love. 458 Ceremonies before Marriage. 461 Times forbidden in
marraige. 461 Of Contracts. 462 Of Nuptial Dowers. 463 Of Nuptial Gifts or
Presents. ibid. Of Nuptial Ornaments, Pomp, Feasts, and Epithalamions, etc. 465
A description of the bride coming from her chamber. 467 The bridegroom first
appearing. 468 The Nuptial O^^ering. ibid. The Nuptial Song. 469 The
entran^ce into their Bedchamber. ibid. (...) Anguries, and Nuptial Expiations.
472 (...) of Women to their Hubands. 475 Of Bawds. 480 Of Age. 483 Of women
addicted to Gluttony, or Drunkenness. 484 Of women beloved of diverse
creatures. 488 Of women excellent in Painting, Weaving, etc. ibid. Of women
contentious and bloody. 494 Of women strangely preserved from death, and such
as have unwillingly been the deaths of their Parents. 501 Of Clamorous women,
commonly called scolds. 504 Of Tullia, and her sister. ibid. Examples of
Patience in women. 506 Variety of discourse concerning women. 510 The daughters
of Apollo. ibid. The Sirens. ibid. Women that have dissembled their shape to
good purposes, or to bad. 511 Women that have changed their Sex. 512
The Contents of the eight Book, inscribed Urania: Entreating of Women every
way Learned: Of Poetesses and Witches.
A Discourse of Astrology. 517 Of famous Astrologians. 518 Of Women Orators
that have pleaded their own causes, or others. 523 Of women studious in
Divinity. 525 Of women excellent in Philosophy, and other Learning. 529 A
discourse of Poetry. 536 Of women excellent in Poetry. 538 Of Minerva, and
others. 542 Of Sapho. 543 Of Cleobule Lindia, and other Poetesses. 550 Of
Telesilla Poetria. 552 Of Perhilla, etc. 554 A discourse of Witches. 556 How
the Devil rewards his servants. 558 The wretched ends of sundry Magicians. 559
Several sorts of superstitious Juggling. 560 Of Cyrce, Medea, and other Witches
remembered by the Poets. 563 Of Witches transported from one place to another by
the Devil. 567 Of Witches that have either changed their own shapes, or
transformed others. 572 Lycantropia. 573 A piper transformed into an Ass. 574
Other miraculous transformations. 575 Of she Devils. 576 A Witch of Amsterdam.
581 A Witch of Geneva. 582 Examples of strange kinds of Witchcraft. 583 Witches
called Extasists. ibid. Diverse things to be observed in witches. 585.
The Contents of the ninth Book, inscribed Calliope: Entreating of Women in
general, with the Punishments of the Vicious, and Rewards due to the Virtuous;
interlaced with sundry Histories.
A Discourse of Death. 586 Of women ravished. 589 Of Handmaids, Nurses,
Midwives and Stepdames. 592 The punishment of Incest in the sister of
Leucippus. 603 The punishment of Adultery. 605 Sisters that have murdered
their brothers. 606 The punishment of Fratricides. 607 Of mothers that have
slain their children, and wives their husbands. 608 Punishment due to
Regicides. 609 Punishment of unjust Divorce. 611 Whoredom punished. 612
Loquacity punished. 613 Lying punished. 614 Perjury punished. ibid. Prodigality
and Excess punished. 616 Witchcraft punished. 619 Honor and Reward due to
Fortitude. 627 Honor and Reward due to Temperance. 629 Reward due to fertility,
or many children, illustrated in diverse Histories. 630 Of Beauty and the Reward
thereof. 638 A Convertite rewarded. 641 Of Cura, or Care. 647 Rewards due to
women Philosophers, Orators, or Poetesses. 648
Nine Books of various History, only concerning Women: Inscribed by the names
of the nine Muses.
The first Book which is CLIO, treating of the Goddesses Celestial,
Terrestrial, Marine, and Infernal.
BEfore we enter into a particular tractare of these Goddesses, it shall not be
amiss to speak something of the opinions settled in sundry Nations, concerning
them Who were their first Adorers and Worshippers; the multiplicity of their
gods; and what several Rights, and Customs, Observations and Ceremonies they
used in their Oblations and Sacrifices. The Aethiopians are said to be the most
ancient, and first beginners of Divine adoration, as Diodorus is of opinion;
Imagining in themselves, and verily believing some of their gods to be
everlasting, and others to participate of a mortal and corruptible nature. The
Phoenicians, they delivered admirable and strange things concerning their gods,
and the first beginning and Creation of things: above all others, having in
Divine worship, Dagona and Chamas. The Atlantides (a people of Africa) they
are confident that the generation of the gods proceeded from them, and the
first that reigned amongst them they called Coelum, which is heaven. The
Augitae another Nation (in the Afric Continent) acknowledged no other
Deities, then the Ghosts of such Noble persons as were deceased, to whose
Sepulchers they usually repaired to demand answers of al such things wherein
they doubted. The Theology of the Phrygians was not much different from theirs.
The Persians neither erected Statues nor Altars, they worshipped the Hea^ens,
which they called Jupiter; the Sun, by the name of (...) the Moon Venus; the
Fire, the Earth, the Winds, and the Water. Isiodorus says, the Graecians first
honored (...) whom they styled Jupiter, and were the first devis^rs (...)
Images, erecters of Altars* and offerers of Sacrifice. The Jews as Cornelius
Tacitus relates, apprehended but one divine power, and that only they
acknowledged. The German of old (as the same Author affirms) were of opinion,
That the gods could not be comprehended within walls, not have any humane shape
appropriated unto them, measuring the^^ incomprehensible power, by the
magnitude of the heavens. Now concerning the diverse opinions of men, what this
supreme Deity should be; some held it the universe or the globe of the world:
of which opinion was Origenes in his fifth book against C^^sus. The Stoics
held it to be the first world; the Platonists, a second world; and diverse other
S^ct^sts of Greece, to be a third world. Thales M^lesius called God, a Mind,
that fashioned all creatures out of the water, that knew ^o beginning, and was
not capable of end. Anaximander, he ascribed a Deity to the Stars and the
Planets, and these coelesti^ll bodies, attributing no honor to that Mind, of
which Thales dreamed. Anaximenes thought it to be Infinite (...), to which he
attributed the Original of all causes, and derived the birth of the gods from
thence; for so Saint Augustine and Cicero affirms. Democritus Abderites (as
Cicero and Arnobius testify of him) was of opinion, that it was a Mind of
fire, and the soul of the world. Plutarch in the (...) of Numa, sets down
Pythagoras his opinion concerning this godhead, and thus defines it: A Mind
still traveling, never out of motion, but dispersed and diffused through all
the parts of the world, and things natural, (...) which all creatures
whatsoever that are born, take life, ^ysis and Philolaus, call it an
unspeakable number, or a summity of the greatest or smalest number, for so
Origenes says. Archelaus Physicus would have all things to be created of
earth, and (as Epiphanius testates of him) the beginning of all things to
proceed from thence. Ph^recidas taught, that the earth was before all other
things, and therefore to that he appropriated a divinity. Heraclius Ephesius,
contested the gods to be made of (...); so Varro writes of him: of the same
belief was Hippasus Metapontinus (witness Simplicius.) Anaxagor^s Claz^^en
called his god, Homoeomeria, that is, L^^^^esse of part; and that a divine
thought was the producter of all things whatsoever: So Augustine reports of
him; others, that he held an infinite mind to be the first mover. Prodicus
Coeus, as Epiphaenius tells us, placed his god in the four Elements: likewise
in the Sun and the Moon; in which two Planets there existed a living virtue.
Diogenes Apollonaites, derived his god from the Air, as the matter from whence
all things had their reality, as likewise that it did participate of divine
reason, without which nothing could be created. Cleanthes Assius would have his
god of the Firmament, as diverse others of the Stoics. And as Arnobius
witnesses of him, sometimes he called him the Will; now the Mind; then that
part of the air which is above the fire: and sometimes again, the reason.
Straton made Nature his summum bonum. Antisthenes Atheniensis, he taught that
there were many popular gods, but one only Architector of the fabric of the
world. Chrysippus Silix the Stoic, he taught that God was a natural power
endued with divine reason; and then again, he called him a Divine necessity.
Zeno Citteieus, called him a divine and natural Law; and sometimes the
Firmament. Zenophanes Collophonius, called him, Whatsoever was infinite in a
conjoined mind, or one universal and every thing that (as Theophrastus says
of him) he imagined to be God. Parmenides Eliates, called him ^a^ta^me, or an
apprehension of an Imaginary thing, something resembling a Crown; which the
Greeks call (...) containing within it a fiery light, an orb, or girdle (...)
compasses and embraces the heavens: adhering to ^his fantasy, were Cicero
and Simplicius. Empedocles Agrigentinus, he would have four natures of which
all things should subsist, and these he taught to be divine: as also, that they
had birth, and should see end; for so Cicero writes in his book de natura
deorum. Theodorus and Epiphanius speak of one Theodorus, surnamed Atheos, the
Atheist: He affirmed the gods to be mere ioies, and not worthy of divine
honors, that would persuade men by their examples, to theft, perjury, and
rapine. Protagoras Abderita was of opinion, That it was not lawful to enquire
concerning the gods, whether they were or were not, or of what nature and
quality. Xenocrates Chalcedonius, made eight gods; in the wandering stars the
number of five, in the whole number of the Planets, one, a seventh in the Sun,
an eighth in the Moon. Plato Atheniensis went more divinely to work; who taught
that it is neither the air, nor reason, nor nature, but that there is one only
God, by whom alone the world was fashioned, and made perfect, and miraculous.
Zenophon Socraticus held argument, That the form of the true God, was not
visible, and therefore his essence nor lawful to be sought into. Ariston the
S^oick affimed, than God might be comprehended within his own substance.
Aristotle proposed, That one Mind governed the whole world, and that it was the
prime and principal cause of all things. Spe^sippus constituted a natural
living power, by which all things were governed, and that he styled a Deity,
for so Arnob. in his eighth book reports. Al^maeon Crotoniates did attribute a
Deity to the Sun, Moon, and the rest of the Planets; in his ignorance (as
Cicero speaks of him) giving immortality to things merely mortal. Ecphantus
Siracusanus, as Erigines relates of him, imagined the divinity to exist in the
mind and soul. Brachmanae, (who were the Indian wise men, or Sophoi) called it
the Light; but not as the splendor of the Sun, or Air, but the light of
reason; by which wise and understanding men might enquire into the dark and
mystical secrets of nature. Lactantius and Cicero say, that it was the opinion
of the Stoics, for the most part, That this isntrumental power was a divine
substance, intelligible and airy, but wanting form; yet to be transhap'd, or
made like to whatsoever it best pleased it self. The same Philosophers
attributed a god-hood to the stars, and all other celestial bodies.
Heraclides Ponticus, thought the World and the Mind both divine, and was of
opinion, that this form of the Deity was mutable, reducing the earth and the
heavens within the compass of Godhead. Epicurus Atheniensis, he made him gods
of Atoms or M^ats, allowing them bodies differing from men, but bea^ing humane
form. M. Terentius Varro, supposed him to be the soul of the world, and the
world it self to be god. Cicero defines him thus, a certain pure and free
mind, separate from all mortal commixtion, ever moving, and all things
knowing; and Origenes adhering to the opinion of Exilneus, concludes that the
gods are eve^ during, not subject to corruption, and yet altogether without
providence. But lest I should grow tedious in the search of so many diverse
opinions, which to some may appear impertinent to the tractate in hand, yet not
altogether unnecessary ^o such who have not traveled in the search of these
Antiquities; I will come nearer to the matter, and to speak of the goddesses,
as we promised* Hesiod has left to memory, that there are no less then thirty
thousand gods within the compass of the world, and every one have several
predominance over men, beasts, fish, fouls, and al other creatures vegetative
and sensitive. Tertullian speaks of three hundred Joves or Jupiters counted by
M. Varro. Therefore it was not permitted amongst the Romans, to adore any other
gods or goddesses, then such as were approved and allowed by the Senate. In the
books of the high Priest, it was thus written: Let no man bring in an
innovation of any new gods, or aliens, to be privately adored, unless they be
publicly approved; only such as have from antiquity been held celestial, and
unto whom Temples and Altars have been consecrated; let none else have divine
worship. The Heathen of old amongst their goddesses, counted these Pudicitia,
Concordia, Men's, Spes, Honor, Clementia, and Fides; that is, Bashfulnesse,
Concord, the Mind, Hope, Honor, Clemency, and Faith. Pliny writes of a Temple
in Rome, dedicated to Honor. Certain living creatures, and other things, were
in the old time reverenced as gods. The Trogloditae (as the same author
testifies) worshipped a Tortoise. The Egyptians had in honor, Garlic and
Onyons; they have the Crocodile likewise in divine adoration, to whom they
offer Sacrifice: But the Ombytae, chiefly a people of that Country, by whom he
is held most sacred; and if it so happen that their children be by him
devoured, the parents rejoice, imagining they are specially beloved of the
gods, that are thought worthy to beget food to please their appetites. Serpents
are honored by the Phoenicians. In Gadeta a City of Spain, two Temples were
erected; the one to Age, the other to Death: to one as the Mistress of
Experience; to the other, as a quiet harbor or cessation from all miseries and
calamities. In other Cities were the like instituted to Poverty, and to
Fortune; lest the one should afflict them, and that the other should favor
them, Floods likewise and Rivers, were esteemed as deities, some portrai'd in
the figure of men, and others in the semblance of beasts. Amongst the
Lacedaemonians as Plutarch relates, Temples were edified, one to Fear, another
to Laughter, a third to Death. The Egyptians worshipped the Sun and Moon, the
goddess Ibis, a Cat, an Eagle, and a Goat. The Syrians adored a Dove: The
Romans a Goose, by reason that by the cackling of Geese, the Capitol was
preserved from the sack. Amongst the Th^^alians it was held an offense
Capital, to kill a Stork. These that inhabit the Island Sy^en, (...) the fish
called Pha^os. Those that dwell in M^^tis, the fish Oxiringus: In Ambracia, a
Lioness, because in times past a Lioness seized upon a Tyrant, and tore him
to pieces; by which they were restored to their ancient liberties. Those that
live by Delphos, a Wolf, who by scraping up the earth, discovered a great
quantity of gold buried, and till then concealed. The men of Samos, a Sheep;
the Argives a Serpent; the Islanders of Tenedos, a Cow with Calfe; after whose
conception, they tender her as much service, as to a woman young with child. A
Dragon in Alb^ (a grove just opposite against Juno's Temple) was honored by
the Spa^^ane virgins: to which at certain times they went, and fed him from
their hands. The Egyptians had Asps likewise in great worship, which they
fostered and brought up together with their children. The Thebans honored a
Sea L^mprey. There were gods called Medioxum dei, or middle gods: or which
Plautus in his Cistellaria, makes mention, Isa me dei deaeque superi, and
inferi, and mediorum; as the gods and goddesses supernall or infernal, or
those betwixt them both, etc. He speaks likewise of Dii potellarii, such as had
power over the dishes that were used in Sacrifices: to which Ovid has
reference in this verse, (...). Missos Vestae pura pa^ella cibos; The clean
platter presents those cates sent to Vesta. And Plautus in another place, Dii
me omnes, magni, minuti, and patellarii, etc. There be others called Semones;
who have domination over as much as lies open from the middle Region of the air
to the earth, and they are called by us semi-dei, or halfe-gods: Fulgen^^^^
calls those Semones, that for the poverty of their desert, are not worthy a
place in the heavens: Amongst whom he reckons Priapus, Hippo, and Vertumnus. In
Italy there were diverse others called Dii municipales, as belonging to private
men in Cities, not called into any public office; as amongst the
Crustuminians, Delvent^nus; amongst the Narnienses, Viridiarius; amongst the
Astrulanians, Ancharia; amongst the Volcinienses, Nortia. But now of the
Goddesses in order.

Of the Goddesses Celestial: and first of JUNO.
IVNO is the daughter of Saturn, the Queen of the g^ds, and chief of those
that are called Celestial, The wife and sister of Jupiter, goddess of Power
and Riches, and soveraignesse of marriage, and all conjugall contracts. The
Festivals kept in her honor, were called Herea, which was a name appropriated
to her own person* so Enneus says, as Cicero cites him in his first book of
offices, Vos ne velit an me regnar^ Hera? Will the Mistress have you to reign,
or me? where some take Herae for Fortune. One of her Priests, as Virgil
testates, was Calibe, of whom he thus speaks; Fit Calibe Junonis anus templique
sacerdos.

The old woman Calibe, was Priest in Juno's Temple. Ovid in his second book
Metamorph. nominates Alcinoe.

Ante tamen cunctos Junonis Templa colebat,
Proque viro (qui nullus erat) veniebat ad Aras.
Alcinoe before the rest, did Juno's Temple grace:
And for a man, (for men were none) had at her Altar place,
She was honored most in the City of Carthage, the chief City of Africa: of
which Virgil in his first book Aenei^ad. thus speaks: Quam Juno fertur terris
magis omnibus unam
Posthabita Coluisse, Samo --


Which only (says he) Juno is reported to prefer before all other Countries,
even Samos it self. Statius in his first book Theb. says that she was much
honored in the City called Prosimna: but in Samos (an Island compast in with
the Icarian sea) she was chiefly celebrated, as said to be there noursed in her
infancy. In Argos and M^cene, two chief Cities of Ach^ia, she was likewise
much honored, as their Queen and Patroness, for so Horace affirms, lib. 1*
Carmin. Ovid in his 6. book De fastis says, that the people called Phalisci,
have her in great adoration, calling them Junonicoli, as those that honor
Juno. Of there chastity, majesty, her brawling and chiding with Jupiter, her
revenge upon his strumpets and bastards, diverse things have been diversely
commented, of which I will insist upon some few. Juno having in suspicion,
Semele the daughter of Cadmus and Hermione, to have been often prostituted by
Jupiter, she changed her self into the shape of her Nurse Beroe, persuading
her that she should beg of him, That he would grace her so much, as to lie with
her in the same state and majesty, with which he bedded Juno; that as his power
and potency was great above all, so her (...) wantonnings, might be remarkable
above others: which he unwillingly granting, and she as unfortunately
obtaining, was the occasion that she with her Palace, were both consumed in
(...) and thunders.

It is related of Juno further, that when she and her husband being reconciled
and pleasantly discoursing, held argument betwixt themselves, Whether in the
act of generation, men or women took the greatest delight? and that by joint
consent, their controversy was to be determined by Ty^esias (one that had been
of both Sects) Ty^esias giving up his censure, That women were by nature the
most wanton; her sport turned into spleen, and her mirth into such madness,
that she instantly bere^v^d him of his sight, and struck him blind: to
recompense which loss, Jupiter inspired him with the spirit of Divination and
Prophecy; to which her continued anger further added, That howsoever he truly
prophesied, yet his presages should never be believed.

Alomena too, growing great of Hercules, and ready to be delivered, she taking
on her the shape of a Beldame, sat her down before her own Altar, with her
knees crossed, and her hands clutched, by which charm she stopped the passage
of her childbirth; which Gallantis espying, and apprehending (as it was
indeed) that to be the occasion why her Lady could not be delivered, she
bethought her of a craft to prevent the others cunning; for leaving Alomena in
the midst of her throws, she assumes a counterfeit joy, and with a glad
countenance approaches the Altar, to thank the gods for her Ladies safe
delivery. Which Juno ^o sooner heard, but up she rises, and casts her arms
abroad; her knees were no sooner uncrost, and her fingers open, but Alomena was
cased, and Hercules found free passage into the world. Gallantis at this
laughing, and Juno chasing to be thus deluded, she afflicted her with an
unheard of punishment, by transhaping her into a Weesill, whose native is to
kindle at the mouth; that from the same jaws with which she had lied to the
gods about Alomena's child be (...) she should ever after bring forth her young.

No less was her hatred to all the posterity of Cadmus; for when Agave had
lost Penthaeus; and Antinoe, Actaeon, and S^mele had been consumed by Jove's
thunders; and there remained only two, Athames and Ino, she possessed them both
with such madness, that he being on hunting, transpierc'd his son L^^^chus,
mistaking him for the game he chased; and Ino snatched up young Melicertes, and
with him cast her self down headlong into the Sea, from the top of an high
promontory. But at the intercession of Venus, who was born of the waves,
Neptune was pleased to rank them in the number of the Sea-gods, so that
Melicertes is called Palaemon; and Ino, Iaeucothoe. I could further relate of
many other poetical Fables, as of Ixion, who enterteined and feasted by
Jupiter, attempted to strumpet Juno, and adulterate the bed of Jupiter; which
to prevent, and shun the violence of a rape, she fashioned a Cloud into her own
similitude and semblance, which Ixion mistaking for Juno, of that begot the
Centaurs. As also the birth of her son Vulcan, and her daughter Echo; he lame,
and she so deformed, that being ashamed to show her self, or appear to the
eyes of any, she has so concealed her self in thick woods and hollow vaults
and caverns, that never any part of her could ever yet be discovered more then
her voice.

Yet (...) show that in all these seeming Fables, golden meanings were
intended, I will briefly thus illustrate them: Juno was therefore called the
daughter of Saturn, because the world was created by God, the great work-master
of Nature. Then, in his course was Time born; from thence, (...), which is,
whatsoever is above the Element of Fire, the Firmament, or the S^y, and next
that, the Elements: The highest (...) Jupiter is Aer, namely Juno, the
moderatresse of the life of man, by whom the treasures of rain and ball are
disposed and governed: of the air waxing hot are generated creatures, trees and
plants, etc. whose temperature has an influence in the bodies and minds of
reasonable creatures: therefore when from water Aer is next begot, she is said
to be nourisht by Oceanus and Thetis; when the force of the Element works with
the Aer in the procreation of creatures, she is then said to be the wife of
Jupiter when she is changed into fire, then she brings forth Vulcan: when the
benignity of the air has cooperation with such things as are generated, she is
then styled the goddess of marriage. So likewise it is said of Ixion, that for
attempting the bed of Jupiter, he was from heaven cast down into hell; which
some would bring within the compass of history: But that he is there tortured
upon a wheel incessantly turning round, must needs include morality. Most
probable it is that Ixion disgraced and banished from the Court of that King,
whose wife he had sought to adulterate, was thereby made of all men the most
wretched and miserable, as one excruciated with perpetual ambition and envy:
for such as under the imaginary Idea of virtue, apprehend the reality of vain
glory, they can attempt nothing good, nothing sincere or laudable, but all
their actions are criminal, irregular and merely absurd, importing thus much,
That their estates can have no continuance, that by sinister and indirect
courses, seek to climb to the height and crown of glory.

Cybele.
SHE is the wife of Saturn, and is called the mother of the gods. Her Chariot
is drawn with Lions. To her, Ida and Dindymus (two mountains of Phrygia) were
sacred, whereupon Virgil says, Alma parens, Idaea deum cui Dindyma sacer.
From that place she is called Dindymene, by Martial.
Non per mystica sacra Dindymenes.
Not by the mystical oblations of Cybele.


In Phrygia the Ministers of this goddess, called Galli, kept certain feast
days in her honor, after the manner of Fencers or Gladiators, contending
amongst themselves even to the shedding of much blood; which when they saw to
flow plentifully about their heads and faces, they ran to a certain flood not
far thence, sacred to the goddess, and in that washed both their wounds and
weapons: the like did the Romans in Almo, a River near to Rome, the eleventh of
the Calends of April, which Valerius Flaccus remembers.

Sic Vbi Migdonios Planctus sacer abluit Almo:
Letaque jam Cybele --
Where Almo, the Migdonian knocks laves off,
And Cybele now rejoices --
Reate (as Sylius says) a City in Umbria, is sacred to her, so is Berecinthus
a mountain in Phrygia, of whom she takes the name of Berecynthia Apuleius,
lib. 11. calls her Pesinuntica of Pesinuntium a City among the Phrygians: Ovid
in his Metamorph. amongst her Priests, reckons up Alphitus: and Virgil in his
11. book, Choreus. Melissa was a woman Priest, of whom all that succeeded her,
were called Mel^ssae. Plutarch in Mar. nominates one Barthabaces, Perea
tempora, etc. About those times came Barthabaces Priest to the great mother of
the gods, saying, she had spoken to him in her Temple, and predicted victory.
This Cybele is likewise called Vesta, and Rea. The rights of her sacrifices
performed in her honor, Ovid in his Fastis thus expresses: Of old with
tinckling sounds, did Ida ring,
But weakly, as young Infants cry or sing.
Some beat their Bucklers, some their empty casks;
(For this, of Cybeles Priests, the labor asks)
The myster^'s conceall'd: yet still remains
An imitation of those ancient strains.
Cymbals for Helms; for Targets, Timbrils play,
The Phrygian Pipe still sounds, as at that day.


Her Priests were called Curetes, and Corybantes; as also Idaei Dactili, who
like madmen wagging their heads and playing on Cimbals ran about the streets,
provoking others to do the like: They came from Ida in Phrygia into Creet, in
which Island they called a hill by the name of Ida.

The Poets (who in their Fables hid all the mysteries of learning, as the
Egyptians in their Hieroglyphics) by the mother of the gods, would have us
thus much understand, That when they meant to signify to our apprehensions,
that the earth, as the stability of the world, and firmament of all natural
bodies, from whence all things born had beginning; they therefore Cybele or
Vesta, the mother of the gods, and to her sacrifices brought all the first
fruits of the earth as due to her. Further to express the nature of the earth,
many things have from antiquity been remembered touching her: for Rhea signifies
the force or strength of the earth, who passes and shifteth, piercing into the
generation of things.

Venus.
SOme report her to be born of the Nymph Dione, daughter to Oceanue and Thetis:
Others, that she was borne of the foam or froth of the sea. She is the goddess
of Love, the wife of Vulcan, the sweet heart of Mars, the mother of Cupid and
the Graces. She goes armed with Torches, and bound about with a marriage
girdle. Her chariot is drawn by Swans, as Juno's with Peacocks, as Ovid in his
tenth book Metamorph.

-- Iunctisque per Ae^a Cign^^
Carpit iter --
With yoaked Swans she travels through the air.
The like witnesses Horace, Statius, Silvius, and others. The places to her
most sacred, were Amathus, an Isle in the Sea Aegeum, of which she took the
name of Amathusa or Amathusis. She was honored in Cyprus; and especially in
Paphos, a City of that Isle: likewise in Memphis where she had a Temple: of
Cyprus she had the denomination of Cypria, Cypris, and Cyprigena; of Paphos,
Paphia; of Gnydos, Gnydia. Pliny reports, that Praxitiles was nobilitated for
his graving of Marble, but especially for the Statue of Gnidian Venus. The
Idalian woods, the Ciclides, and the hill Cythera were to her sacred. Of Erix a
mountain in Sicilia, she was called Erecina; as Horat. Carmin. lib. 1.

Sive tu mavis Erecina ridens. Concerning her love to Mars, and his mutual
affection to her, it is frequent amongst the Poets; only I will introduce Ovid
in his second book de art amandi.

Fabula narratur toto notissima Coelo,
Mulciberi capti Marsque, Venusque dolis, etc.
This Tale is known to all and spoken still,
Of Mars and Venus took by Vulcans skill:
The god of war does in his brow discover,
No more a frowning soldier, but a lover.
To his demands what could the Queen oppose?
Cruel, or hard? alas, she is none of those.
How often the wanton would deride his trade
Polt-foot, and hard-hand, black with Cole-dust made.
He Is pleased to see her imitate his pace;
that ever she does, her beauty seems to grace:
At first their meetings they concealed with shame,
None to their bashful sins could scarce give name.
The tel-tale Sun (who can deceive his sight?)
Sees, and to Vulcan does of all give light.
Oh Sun, what bad example have thou lent?
Ask her a bribe; she has to give content,
So thou will secret be. Vulcan down sits,
And his obscure wires to the place he fits:
The work so fine, that it beguiles the eye,
About their bed he placed them, low and high.
He makes as if to Lemnos he would scour,
The Lovers keep appointment just at the hour;
And caught together in his wiery snare,
Naked and fast bound Mars and Venus are.
He calls the gods to witness, they are spied;
Soft hearted Venus scarce her tears can hide:
Their hands to veil their cheeks they cannot git,
Or shadow that which to behold's unfit.
One of the gods said smiling, If they be
Tedious, good Mars, bestow thy bonds on me.
Scarce at thy prayers, Oh Neptune, the are unti'd;
Mars hasts to Creet, to Paphos Venus hi'd:
What by this gott'st thou Vulcan? what they two
Before with shame did, now they boldly do.
Their lusts it did encourage, not assuage;
And thou have since repented of thy rage.
Of her love to Adonis, the incestuous issue of Mirrha, and her father Cyniras;
how he was slain of the boar, and how his blood was turned into a purple flower
by the power of the goddess: her doting upon Anchises, the father of A^neas;
it might appear superfluous to insist upon. Therefore to avoid all prolixity, I
will briefly come to the mysteries included.

Because some creatures are born of corruption, Moral*
and others by copulation, the Poets by Venus would illustrate what is
requisite and convenient to both: To those which are bred of corruption, the
mediocrity of heat, and clemency of the heaven is very necessary to their
breeding. Again, to those that are begot by conjunction, male with female,
most convenient is the temperature of the air, for the matter of generation
being of the most subtle part of the blood, it acquires a moderate heat, which
is chiefly helped by the Spring: for the temperature of the Spring is called
the baud to all procreation: and therefore the ancient writers, to express the
matter of the seed, and moderation of the air (both necessarily to meet in the
appetite of generation) have fabulated, That Venus was born of the generative
parts of heaven, as also of the Sea: For these parts, are the mediocrity of
heat by motion, which is useful and necessitous in the begetting of all
creatures whatsoever.

Minerva.
SHE is likewise called Pallas, born of the brain of Jupiter; she is the
goddess of Wisdom, Discipline, and Arms, and therefore called Bellona, and
therefore translated into the number of the gods, because the invention of arts
and sciences are attributed to her. The places celebrated to her deity, were
Ithinas, a hill near to Athens, where she had a Temple erected; the mountain
P^^eas, in Attica; in Aracinthus, a place in Aetolia, from which (as Statius
writes) she was called Aracinthia. Pliny says, that Nea, one of the Islands
called Cyclades, was peculiar to her. But Athens was her place of most honor,
which City she is said to have built. From thence she has the name of Athnaea,
Attica, Cecropia, and Mosopia, Horace Carm. lib. 1. The great City called
Alcomeneum, situate in Boeotia, has likewise by the Testament of the first
founder submitted it self to her patronage. Of Scira, a Prophet of Elucina,
she was called Sciras. The solemnization of her festivals, were called
Panathenea. There were certain wrestling contentions, which Theseus in Athens,
first instituted to this goddess, as Plutarch has delivered. She had likewise
her Quinquatria yearly celebrated, which were kept sacred five days after the
black day, (and therefore so called) the black day was immediately after the
Ides: In her sacrifices it was their custom to offer a Goat, because as Pliny
has left recorded, The biting of the Goat is prejudicial to the Olive tree,
whose fruit Minerva best loves; the very licking of the rind with their
tongues makes it barren. She slew the beast Alcida, a monster that from his
mouth and nostrils breathed fire. Aelianus writes, that when Alexander brought
his army against Thebes (amongst many other prodigies) that the image of
Minerva, surnamed Atalcomineides was burnt by a voluntary flame, no fire being
near it. At Assessum she had two Temples: from that place she was called
Minerva Assessia. From other places where she was worshipped, she took the name
of Pallenides and Pedasia: Alea from her Temple amongst the Tegeates. Tutelaris
she was called by the inhabitants of Chios, and honored as an Oracle amongst
the Egyptians; she had only a po^ch amongst the Scians. In some places her
statues were covered with gold, in others they were of plain stone. She had a
Temple in Sigeum: three others, Si^adis, Aegis, and Crastiae: she was by some
called Minerva Vrbana, and Minerva Isliadi. Herodotus writes, that when Xerxes
transported his army into Greece, passing by Troy, and being perusing the
antiquities thereof; and upon his departure thence, at the Altar of Minerva, he
sacrificed a thousand oxen one day. Many things are fabled of her by Poets, as
of her contention in weaving, with Arachne, which I purposely refer to her
story as it falls in course. She is the Hieroglyphick of Wisdom, and therefore
the Poet Martianus writes that she was born without a mother, because that in
women there is scarce any wisdom to be found; in a Hymn upon Pallas he is thus
read: Hanc de patreferum, sine matris saedere natam;
Provida co^silia, quod nescit curia matrum.
Of father therefore, without mother born;
Because learned Courts, the women's counsel scorn.


The Maclies and the Auses, are two nations that border upon the spacious Fen
Tritonides: Their virgins in the yearly feast of Minerva, in celebrations of
their rights to the goddess, divide themselves into two armies, and fight one
part against the other, with stones, clubs, and other weapons of hostility:
such as perish in the conflict, they hold to be no true and perfect Virgins,
because not protected by the goddess: But she that has born her self the most
valiant in the conflict, is by common consent of the rest* ^^ichly adorned, and
beautified with the best armor, according to the manner of the Greeks, her
head beautified with a Corinthian crest or plume, and seated in a Chario^ d^awn
through the Tritonian Fen. They have it by tradition, that Minerva was the
daughter of Neptune, and the Fen before named, and being reproved by her
father, she ^^ok it in such scorn, that she utterly rejected him and gave ^he
self to Jupiter, who adopted her his daughter. Zaleucus when ^e commended his
laws to the Locrenses, to make them the better observed by the people, told
them, Minerva had appeared to him, and did dictate and propose to him
whatsoever he had delivered to them. The most famous of Poets, Homer, he mad
Minerva a companion of Ulysses in his travels; in whom he personated the most
wise man amongst the Grecians, who freed him from all dangers, labors, and
ship-wrecks, and brought him in safety to his Country, Parents, Queen, Son,
and Subjects: thereby intimating, That by Wisdom and Knowledge, all difficult
things may be easily undergone. This is that winged horse Pegasus, by which
Perseus subdued so many monsters. This is that shield of Pallas, to which the
Gorgons head being fastened, turns the beholders to stone, amazing the ignorant
and unlearned. Agreeable to this is Homers first book of his Odyssae, the
argument I give you thus in English: Pallas by Joves command, from heaven
descends,
And of the Paphian Mentor takes the shape,
In which she to Telemachus commends
Such Greeks as from revenging Hellens rage
Were home returned, Nestor amongst the rest,
And Menelaus; urging him to enquire
Of them, who in the wars at Troy did best?
And whose heroic acts did most aspire?
But of Ulysses, chiefly to learn news,
What course he takes, or what attempt pursues.
Again, in the second Book.
Unknown to fierce Antinous and his mates,
Telemachus^ from Court in secret steals,
On him Joves daughter, bright Minerva waits,
And taking Mentors shape her self conceals.
He by the goddess Urgence, straight prepares
For such a voyage, instantly providing
All needful helps, apt for such great affairs.
Their ship made ready: unto Pallas guiding*
He trusts himself, by help of sail and oar,
They put to sea, and lose the sight of shore.


Ulysses suffering ship-wreck, Perioch. 6.
and cast naked upon the shore of Pheacus, he was assisted further by her, as
follows in the sixth and seventh arguments.

The wearied Greek all naked steps on shore,
Whether Nausiaca descends to play,
With other Virgins, as it was before
Their custom: up the Greek starts, spying day,
With a fair slock of Ladies him beside;
Up by the roots he tears the herbs, and grass,
Thinking with them his nakedness to hide;
And so proceeds unto the queenlike less.
Pallas his patroness, moves her to pity,
She gives him both her chariot and attire,
So to Minervas Temple, near the City,
He Is proudly drawn, guarded by many a squire:
Thus in her altars sight, being lodged that night
Ne s^ives with incense Pallas to requite.
Minerva takes a virgins shape upon her, Perioc^^ 7.

And to the City first Ulysses brings.
But after, to aspire him to more honor,
Into the Palace (the ancient seat of Kings.)
Arete wife to Alcinous, first demands,
Where he received those garments, and what fate
Brought him that way? the Princess understands
The utmost that Ulysses can relate.
Therefore the Queen accepts him as her guest,
The night persuades, they part to several rest.
In all his negotiations and travels, Pallas was still his assistant, for
Wisdom never forsakes any man in necessities: insomuch, that after he had
freed his Court of his wives unruly ^utors, having slain them all, and was now
peaceably possessed of his Kingdom, she was still constant to him in all his
extremities. Which I will conclude with the four and twentieth argument of
Homers Odysse, and the last book.

Tartaream vocat in sedem Cillenius umbras.
The mutinous Ghosts of the sad woers slain
Mercury forces to the vaults below,
What Time the heroic spirits, thronging complain,
That Agamemnon should be murd'red so,
These being young men of chief beauty, and age,
Why they so press in heaps demands the cause;
And are resolved, amongst whom Ulysses sage,
And chaste Penelope, gain much applause;
Especially from Agamemnons ghost*
Who had to him a fate much contrary;
Yet whom in l^fe he had respected most.
Mean time Ulysses (that (...) l^ng'd to see
His Father, old Lae^tes) (...)
His fortunes, dangers, travels, misery,
Both foreign and domestic; what strange spells,
Witchcrafts, and shipwracks, had so long detein'd him
From his grave Father, and his constant Queen,
And to what dire exigents constrein'd him,
In what strange coasts and climats he had been.
By this, the Fathers of the suitors dead,
(Grieving their sons should so untimely fall)
Take counsel, and against the Ithacan make head:
These he opposes, and repels them all;
But gathering new supplies, by Joves command,
Pallas from descends to at tone these ^ars,
To free all foreign forces from the land,
And by her wisdom compromise these wars.
By his decrees, and her own wisdom guided,
Arms are surceast, all difference is decided.
Pallas has been often invocated by the Poets, but amongst infinite I will
only instance one; and that for the elegancy. Homer in his long peregrination
through Greece and other Countries, sometimes by sea, and sometimes by land,
and by the reason of his blindness grooping his way, he happened to pass by a
place where Potters were at work, and setting such things as they had newly
molded into their furnace; who finding by his harp (for he seldom traveled
without it, being one of the best means he had to get his living) that he had
some skill in Music, entreated him that he would play them a fit of mi^th, and
sing them a fine song; which if he would do, they would give him so many small
pots and necessary drinking cups for his labor, vailes that belonged to their
trade. The conditions were accepted; and he presently to his harp sung this
extemporall ditty, called Caminus, or Fornax.

Oh Potters, if you will give to me that hire
Which you have promised, thus to you I Will sing:
Descend O Pallas, and their brains inspire,
And to their trade thy best assistance bring,
That their soft cha^ices may harden well,
And their moist cups of clay wax brown and dry;
This being done, they may with profit sell,
And customers from all parts come to buy,
Not to the market only, but even here
Where they be forged and burnt: so shall it be
When I am pleased, and you have sold them de^r^
Profit to you, and covenant with me.
But if you mock me, and my meed deny,
All hideous mischifes to this furnace throng,
May those gross plagues that thicken in the sky*
Meet at this forge, to witness this my wrong.
Hither rush Smaragus, and with him bring
Asbetes, and Sabactes: quench their fire,
Oh Pallas, 'bout their rooms their models fl^ng,
On Oven, Shop and Furnace vent thine ire:
Else let Omodomas with too much heat
Crack all their vessels, and their art confound,
Bash all their works to mammocks, I entreat;
Pull furnace, forge, harth, house, and all to ground,
That they may bruise together in their fall,
(Whilst all the Potters quake) with such a ruin,
As when huge masts are split and cracked withal,
The warring winds, the seamans wrack pursuing.
In such a tempest let the Chimnies shatter,
And the vast frame within its basses sink:
Whilst 'bout their cars the tiles and rafters clatter,
That all their pipkins, stea^, and pots for drink,
And other uses, may be crushed to powder;
And so convert again into that mire,
Whence they were forged. Or if a horror louder
May be devised, here vent thy worst of ire.
Else let that Circe.
Witch that calls Apollo father,
Who can from hell the blackest furies call,
And her infectious drugs and poisons gather,
And sprinkle them on workmen, work and all.
Let Chiron to this forge his Centaurs bring,
(All that survived the battle, against Jove's son)
That they these pots against the walls may ding,
And all their labors into ruin run,
Till what they see, he nothing; and these here
Spectators of this wrack, may howl and yell,
And their great loss lament with many a tear,
Whilst I may laugh aloof, and say 'twas well.
And to conclude, that he that next aspires
But to come nere the furnace where they stand,
May be the fuel to these raging fires,
And be consumed to ashes out of hand:
So may the rest that shall escape this danger,
Be warned by these, how to deride a stranger.
That the former writers might demonstrate unto us, That humane actions are not
altogether so governed by the force celestial, but that there is some place
left open for man's prudence, and wisdom; and besides, to deliver unto us, how
acceptable the knowledge of good things is to him who is the giver of all
graces: they therefore left this expression to posterity, that Wisdom was the
daughter of Jupiter, and born without a mother, since God is only wise, and men
not so, but merely in a similitude or shadow. Therefore to manifest the power
of Wisdom, they feigned her to come into the world armed, because the wise man
respects not the injuries of Fortune, nor puts his trust in any worldly
felicity, further then by counsel and patience to subdue the one, and moderate
the other; still placing his hopes in that fountain from whence she first
proceeded. Next, because the fear of the Lord is the beginning of Wisdom,
she is said to have combated Giants, the sons of the earth: such as in that
Gigomantichia, would have plucked Jupiter out of his throne; by which are
intended the presumptions of nature, and the insolences of men; who, all
service and adoration to the divine powers neglected, are not afraid to make
insurrection against heaven it self. I may therefore conclude, that all humane
wisdom different against the divine will, is vain and contemptible, since the
good man is only wise, and in the grace and favor or his Maker.

Diana.
SHE is the daughter of Jupiter and Latona, the goddess of Virginity and
Chastity. In the heaven she is called Luna, the Moon; in the earth, Diana; in
Hell or amongst the Infernals, Pros^erpina: of which threefold power, she is
called Triformis and Triula. The places sacred to her, were (as Valerius
Flaccus affirms) Parthenius, a flood of Paphlagonia. She with her brother
Apollo, was born in Cinthus, a mountain hanging over Delos; of whom Statius
says, they are both called Cinthii. In Ephesus, a City of Ionia, or Lydia, she
had a magnificent Temple numbered amongst the seven wonders of the world. In
Bauron, a City of Attica, she was likewise honored. And as Lucan testates, in
Taurus, a mountain in Sicily; and as Virgil, in Delos, Notior ut canibus non
jam sit Delia nostris.
Not Delia to our dogs is better known.


Horace reports her to have two mountains in Italy dedicated to her deity,
Aventinus and Algidus. In her sacrifices, a Heart was stall offered at her
Altar; and dogs or hounds, as Ovid writes; Extra canum Triviae vidi mactare
Sabaeos:
Et quicunque tuas accolit Haeme Nyves.


The S^baeans and the Thessalians inhabiting the snowie mountain Haemus, used
dogs in their oblations. Of her Temple at Ephesus, it shall not be amiss to
speak a word or two by the way. Plutarch in his book De vitando Aere alieno,
says, that the Temple of Diana was a Sanctuary, wherein all debtors were safe
from their creditors. As the Vestals of Rome had the time of their service
distinguished into three parts; in the first to learn the mysteries of Vesta;
in the second to do the ceremonies; and in the third, to instruct others that
were ignorant: So amongst the Priests of Diana in Ephesus, the first order of
them gave them the name of Melieres, that is, to be capable of the Priesthood,
but not admitted; the second was Hieres, that was in present office; the third
Parieres, that was dead from the service. This stately and magnificent
structure was first erected by the Amazons, so beautiful and sacred, that when
Xerxes had with sword and fire wasted and demolisht all the Temples of Asia, he
spared only that, as the richest jewel of the world. It is reported of one
Herostratus, a wicked and debauched fellow, who finding in himself nothing
good to preserve his memory, and willing that his name should live to
posterity, set this Temple on fire, for no other purpose, but that he would be
talked on: the Ephesians understanding this his malicious ambition, they made it
death once to name him. Cornelius Nepos writes, that the same night that this
famous structure was ruined and defaced by fire, Alexander was born in Pella,
in the three hundred and eighth year after the building of Rome: so that at
the extinguishing of one light of the world, another was kindled. It being
demanded of one of Diana's Priests, Why Diana being a goddess, would suffer her
Temple to be utterly destroyed? and what she was a doing the while? It was
answered again, That it was done unawares to the goddess, for she was that
night at the labor of Olympias, and busied about bringing Alexander into the
world. Notwithstanding this great ruin, the people of Ephesus caused it to be
re-erected, and made both richer and more beautiful than before: of which work
Dinocrates an Architectour of Macedonia was chief. Lib. de Solert, animal.
Diana (as Plutarch in his Symposaicon says) is called Elitheia, or ^ucina, as
also Locheia, as goddess^ of childbirth: she is called also Dictiana. And in
his Solertia animalium, that Apollo would be called Lycoconos; and Diana,
Multicida Elaphibolos: The one for killing so many wolves; the other, Hearts.
Amongst the Egyptians she is called Bubastis: she is celebrated (witness
Herodotus) amongst the Thressae, and the Peloniates: amongst the Bizantians she
has the name of Diana Orthosia.

The Poets fain that she is continually exercised in hunting, for no other
reason but to instruct and encourage all such as profess virginity to shun
sloth and idleness: so Ovid, Otia si tollas periere cupidinis areus*
Take sloth away, and Cupids how unbends;
His brands ^^^inguish, and his false fire spends.


Diana and Phoebus, were therefore said to be the children of Latona, because
in that, the ancient Poets would signify the beginning of the world: so* when
the matter whereof it was made, was a mere confused Mass, and without shape,
because all things were obscure and hid: that darkness is signified in Latona;
and whereas they make Jupiter their Father, it imperts as much as if they
should fetch Jupiter out of this darkness called the Sun and the Moon. More
plainly, the Spirit of the Lord said, Let there be light; of which light.
Ap^^llo and Diana, the one by day, and the other by night, are the greatest: by
this inferring, that the generation of the world began first from Light.

Ceres.
THE Goddess of fruits and grain, and daughter to Saturn and Ops, a Lawgiver
to the Sicilians: therefore by Virgil called Segifera. In Eleusis, a City of
Artica, she had divine worship; because she there taught plantation and
agriculture; and of that place had the name of ^lusina; she was honored in the
mount Aetna: in Aeona and Catana, two Cities of Cicily, From whence, as
Claudian ^^lates, she had the name of Aetnaea, Aennaea, and Catanensis the like
does Selius, etc. Lactantius reports, that into these her Temples erected in
these Cities, it was not lawful ^o any man to enter. The manner of the rights
among the Philagenses were, that no sacrifices should be slain, only the fruits
of planted trees, Honycombs, and new shorn wool, were laid upon the Altar, and
sprinkled with sweet oil, and were set a fire, burnt and offered: these
Customs were privately and publicly observed yearly, as Pausanias left
recorded. The Argives sacrifice to this goddess by the name of Ceres
Clithonia, upon certain set days in the Summer, after this manner: Their
sacrificial pomp is attended by the chief Magistrates of the City: after which
company, the women and children next followed, the boys all in white robes
with chaplers about their brows of Hyacinthes interwoven: and in the lag end
of the same troop were driven a certain number of fair and goodly Oxen, but
bound in the strict bands, and dragged toward the Temple: being thither come,
one of these beasts with his cords loosed was driven in, the rest of the people
standing without the gates, and looking on; who, no sooner see him entered, but
shut the gates upon him: within the Temple, are four old women Priests with
hatches and knives, by whom he is slain, and one of them has by lot the office
to cut off the head of the sacrifice. This done, the doors are again set open,
and the rest, one by one forced in, and so in order by the same women slain and
offered. In a book of the situation of Sicily, composed by Cl. Marius Aretius,
a Patritian, and of Syracula: Entitled Charographia Siciliae; In the City
Aenna says he (as Strabo consenting with him) were born Ceres, and her
daughter Libera, whom some call Proscrpina; From which place she was rapt, and
therefore is this City to her sacred. Near to this City is a river of an
infinite depth, whose mouth lies toward the North, from whence it is said Dis
or Pluto; with his chariot made ascent, and hurrying the virgin thence, to have
penetrated the earth again not far from Syracusa. This is that most ancient
Ceres, whom not Sicilia only, but all other nations whatsoever celebrated. Most
certain it is, that she was Queen of the Sicilians, and gave them laws, taught
them the use of ^illage and husbandry; and that her daughter Libera, was
transported thither by O^cus, or Dis, King of the Molossians. In her Temple
(part of which, not many years since was standing) were two statues of Marble;
one sacred to her, another to Proserpina; another of brass, beautiful and
fair, but wondrous ancient. At the entrance into the Church in an open place
without, were two other fair portraictures; one of her, another of
Triptolemus, large, and of exquisite workmanship: In Ceres right hand was the
image of victory most curiously forged. This History with many other, is with
much nimble and dextrous with fabulated by Ovid; Moral.
to whose Metamorphosis I refer you.

In Ceres is figured to us, an exhortation to all men to be careful in the
manuring and ^illing of the earth, since Ceres is taken for the Earth, the
treasuress of all riches whatsoever; and just is that usury, and commendable,
which arises from thence: for the fertility that grows that way, is begot by
the temperature of the weather, and the industry of man's labors. She is
therefore said to wander round about the earth, and over the spacious Universe,
because of the obliquity of the sign-bearing circle, and the progress of the
Sun beneath that, by which Summer is in some parts of the world at all seasons
of the year, and elsewhere, when not here. Besides, from hence this morality
may be collected, No man unpunished can despise the gods: for miseries are the
handmaids of dishonesty, therefore of force, a wicked and irreligions man is
subject and incident to fall into many distresses and casualties: therefore
Piety toward heaven, Wisdom in managing our affairs, and Thri^^^ (...) in the
disposing of our private fortunes, me all requisite in an honest, religious, a
parsimonious, and well disposed man.

Proserpina.
THE daughter of Jupiter and Ceres, she was honored in Sicily, of which
Province she was called Sicula, of whom Seneca thus speaks, V^disti Siculae
regna Proserpinae?

Have thou seen the Kingdoms of Sicilian Proserpine? She is likewise called by
Lucan, Ennaea, of the City Enna.

Eloquar (...) terrae sub pondere, quae te
Contineant Ennaea dapes? --
Shall I, (...), discover on what dainties thou seedest
Beneath the huge weight of the Massy earth?
Many f^^les of Proserpina have been introduced for our better instruction, by
the ancient Poets; which is only to express to us the nature of the seeds and
plants; for Proserpina, by whom is signified the Moon, shining to us one half
of the month, and lying the other half in the arms of her husband Pluto, that
i^ being half the year in Heaven, and the other in Hell, six months beneath
(...), and as many above: so is it (...), whose (...) for six months space, is
by (...) cold, forced and (...) upword (...) and branches: ag^ine, by the
extremity of the Winters upper cold, it is compulsively driven back downward
into the ^oot, beneath the earth: for so does nature (...) her power and virtue
to all creatures and natural b^dies whatsoever, that th^^ may observe a
mutuality (if I may term it so) in their cooperation. After the like manner i^
the day sorted out for our labors and affairs, the ^ight for our rest and
repose. So likewise in explicating the power of Luna, or the Moon: some call
her the daughter of H^perion, or the Sun, because she being Corpus diaphanes,
that is, a body christall^n, like reflective glass, transfers the light
received from her father, upon the earth to us, for which cause she is called
also the sister of the Sun; by the swiftness of her course her proper motions
are declared. To express her nature always appearing to us greater, or lesser,
is to signify her strength and multiplicity of working, therefore they allot
her a garment of diverse and sundry colors. In attributing to her the double
sexes of male and female (as some have commented) the reason is, in that as she
is woman, she in^useth an humor necessary and profitable to the (...) of all
creatures: in respect of her virile nature she allows a moderate and sensible
heat, much available to increase; for without this heat, in vain were her
opera^^^n, which is easily proved in all creatures that are p^egna^t and
bri^ging forth therefore, she is called (...), as the goddess that b^ings
creatures to light. She is likewise operative to (...), which is the reason
that si^k men and such as are troubled with any grievous m^lady, are most in
danger of death in the critical days of the Moon.

Nemesis.
SHE is the goddess of Reven^e and Wrath, and (...) of the proud and
vainglorious, She had a Temple in R^mnus, a Town in Ar^^ca, (...) which she
took the name of Rhamnusia. Aristotle, by the passion of Indignation, and
affection of Commiseration, says Nemesis is figured; and both of these took in
the better part: Indignation when good men are troubled and vexed to see bad
men use good things ill: Commiseration, to see honest and just men crossed with
the disasters of the world. Plutarch in his book de capienda ex hostibus
utilitate, speaking how ridiculous it is for any man to reprove another of that
vice, of which he is himself guilty, or taint any man for the least deformity
unto which he is subject himself, bring in Leo Bizantius a crooked backed
fellow, gybing at him, because he had a weakness and infirmity fallen into his
eyes: to him he thus answered, Why do thou mock me for this mischance by
fortune, when thou thy self carriest Nemesis upon thy back by nature. O what
power this Nemesis was, and how honored, many authors as well amongst the
Greeks, as the Latins, have labored industriously to make manifest, I will
insist on few: Ausonius from the Greek interpreted this Epigram; Me lapidem
quondam Persae advexore trophaeum,
Vt fierem bello: nunc ego sum Nemesis.
Ac sicut Graecis victori^us asto trophaeum,
Punio sic Persas vaniloquos Nemesis.
The Persians took me hence long since,
From Greece a stone: and vow
To make me a wars-Trophy stand,
But Nemesis I am now.
But as I to the victor Greeks
A Trophy now appear,
The prating Persians Nemesis,
I punish with my fear.


The History from which both Epigrams are derived, Pausanias recites much after
this manner: From Marathon (says he) some threescore leagues distant is
Rhamnus, a City bordering upon the Sea, just in the way to Oroxus: by which
stands the Temple of Nemesis, a goddess, who is the inevitable revenger of
such men as are haughty, proud, and contumelious. It seems the barbarous
Persians under the name of Nemesis, do comprehend Indignatio: for coming
toward Marathon, and despising the Athenians, are not able to interpose their
incursions. They took a stone of white Marble, as if they had already obtained
the victory: of which stone Phidias (the excellent statuary) made the
portraicture of Nemesis: A fair Crown upon her head, with forest Hearts carved
about it, and small Imageries pourtraying Victory, in her right hand a golden
cup, in which the Aethiopians were figured. Some think her the daughter of
Oceanus, some of Jupiter* others of justice Amm^anus Marcellanus in his book of
the deeds of the Emperor Gallus, speaks to this effect: These and such like
things (says he) (...) (under whose name by a double signification, we
understand Nemesis) often times works in (...) being a certain sublime law of
some high and power effectual in the (...), and placed, or having residence
about the (...) circle, who suppress^th the lofty necks of the proud, and from
the lowest of despair erects the minds of the humble. For when the wise and
understanding men would illustrate to us, nothing to be more acceptable to
heaven, of more commodious to the life of man, than a moderation of the mind,
as well in prosperity as adversity; they devised many fables, to exhort m^n
nobly to endure the miseries and afflictions of this life, with constant
sufferance and resolved patience. And because many had by such examples yielded
their submissive shoulders to the burden of disasters, but in prosperity, and
in the superabundance both of Wealth and Honor, knew not how well to behave
themselves; they therefore introduced Nemesis the daughter of Justice (a most
grave and severe goodesse) to see punishment inflicted upon such, that in the
excess of their felicity, and height of their authority prove over other men
Tyrants, and therefore intolerable.

Latona.
SHE was honored in Delos, Lucian in Dial. superior.
as there being delivered of Apollo and Diana, to illustrate whose history the
better I will give you a taste out of Lucians dialogues, the interlocutors are
Juno and La^onae. You have brought to Jupiter two beautiful (...) says Juno.
To whom she replied, We cannot (...) cannot all, indeed, be the mothers of such
sweet babes as Vulcan, Juno replies, Though he be Iame, as falling from the
upper region down to the earth, by the negligence of his father, yet is he
profitable and useful both to gods and men; for Jupiter, he provides thunders;
for men, armor, and weapons,: when on the contrary, thy daughter Diana
imploies her self only in hunting, and unnecessary pastime, an extravagant
huntresse, never satiate with the blood of innocent beasts: Thy beautiful son
pretending to know all things, to be an exquisite Archer, a cunning Musician, a
Poet, a Physician, and a Prophet: and not of these alone the professor, but the
Patron. To this purpose has he set up Temples, and Oracles, here in Delphos,
there in C^atos, and Dydimus: by his dilemmaes and oblique answers to questions
demanded (such as which way soever they be taken, must necessarily fall out
true) deluding and mocking all such as come rather to be resolved of their
doubts and fears, or to know things future: by these illusions, raising an
infinite gain and riches to himself, to the loss and discommodity of others;
his foreknowledge merely consisting of legerdemain and juggling. Nor is it
concealed from the wise, how in his predictions, he dictates false things as
often as true. For could he exactly and punctually presage all things to come,
why did he not foresee the death or his Minion, and know before that he was to
perish by his own hand? why did he not predict, that his love Daphne (so fair
hair'd and beautiful) should fly and shun him as a monster hated and scorned?
these with infinite others considered, I see no reason thou should think thy
self more happy in thy children than the most unfortunate Niobe. To whom
Latona replied: I well perceive (great goddess) wherein this many killing and
much gadding daughter, and this lying and false prophesying son of mine offends
you, namely, that they are still in your eye glorious, numbered amongst the
gods, and of them esteemed the most beautiful: yet can you not deny but that
he is most skillful in the Voice and the Harp, exceeding whatsoever can be upon
the earth, and equalling if not preceding that of the Spears in heaven. I
cannot choose but smile says Juno: Is it possible his skill in music should
beget the least admiration? when poor Marsias (had the Muses not been partial,
but judged indifferently of his side) had gained of him priority: but he alas
by their unjust sentence, lost not only his honor in being best, but being
vanquished, he most tyrannously had his skin flead off for his ambition: and
this your fair Daughter and Virgin, is of such absolute feature and beauty,
that being espied naked by Actaeon (bathing her self in the fountain) she
transformed him into a Heart, and caused him by his own dogs to be torn in
pieces, lest the young man should survive to blaze her deformities. Besides, I
see no reason why to women in labor and travel in childbirth, she should
show her self so careful and common a midwife every where, and to all, if
she were as she still pretends to be a Virgin. With her Latona thus concluded:
You are therefore of this haughty and arrogant spirit, because you are the
sister and wife of Jupiter, and rain with him together, which makes you to us
your inferiors so contumelious and harsh: but I fear I shall see you shortly
again weeping, when your husband leaving the heavens for the earth, in the
shape of a Bull, an Eagle, a golden shower or such like, shall pursue his
adulterate pleasures. Ovid in his sixth book Metamor. and his third fable
says, That Niobe the daughter of Tantalus, born in Sypilera City of Lydia,
having by Amphion, six brave sons and as many daughters, though she were
forewarned by the daughter of Tyresias to be present with the Thebans at their
sacrifice to Latona and her children, yet she contemptuously denied it,
preferring her self in power and majesty before the goddess; and her own
beautiful issue, before the others: at which contempt the goddess much
enraged complained to Apollo and Diana, in whose revenge, he slew all the young
men, and she the virgins; with grief whereof, Amphion slew himself, and Niobe
hurst her heart with sorrow. Moral.
Latona is by interpretation Chaos, it was believed that all natural bodies
and seeds of things, mixed and confused, lay buried in darkness. Some take
Latona for the earth, and therefore Juno did oppose the birth of the Sun and
Moon* by reason of the frequent fogs and damps arising, by which the sight of
these two glorious planets, are shadowed and kept from our eyes; for when by
the thickness and tenebrosity of the clouds, the Sun is weakened and made of
less force, ofttimes there proceeds a pestilent air, with many pests and
diseases prejudicial both to sensible creatures and to plants: but when the
Sun resumes his virtue and vigor, then by the purifying of the air, all these
infections are dispersed and scattered, unless they have proceeded so far as
to contagion, And so much for Latona.

Fortuna.
ANtium a City of the Latins bordering upon the Sea, had Fortune in great
reverence, to whom they erected a magnificent Temple. Wherefore Horace thus
speaks: Oh Divae gratum quae regis Antium.

So Rhamnus or Rhamnis, a Town in Attica, where Nemesis and Fortune were held
in equal reverence; and from hence rather called Ramnusia. In Preneste a City
of Italy, Sorts and (...) were held in like adoration, of which they were
called Praenestine. Petrus Crinitus in his first book of honest Discipline and
the six^ Chapter, concerning this goddess, rehea^seth these verses from
Pacuvius* Fortunam insanam esse, and Brutam perhibent
Philosophi:
Saxique ad instar globosi praedicant esse,
Volab^lem.
Quia quo saxum Impulerit Fors, Ea Cadere
Fortunam autumant:
Cae^am ob eam rem esse vocant, quia nil
Cernant quo sese applicet.
Insanam autem aiunt, quia atrox, incerta
Instabilisque sit;
Brutans, quia dignum aut indignum
Nequeat ignoscire.


Which I thus English. The Philosophers tell us that Fortune is both mad and
brutish:
They preach to us that like a round rolling
Stone, she is voluble:
Intimating, wheresoever chance shall force,
Fortune shall incline.
Therefore they make her blind, because she can
discern nothing to which she can apply her self,
They term her mad, because she is cruel without
Pity: uncertain and unstable.
Brutish; because she cannot distinguish betwixt
what is right and injury.
Hitherto Pacuvius, whose verses M. Cicero commemorates. Pliny to Vespasian
speaks thus concerning the power of Fortune: Through the whole world (says he)
and in all places, at all hours, and by all tongues, Fortune is still
invocated, and she alon^; she is only nominated, she alone is accused, alone
made guilty, solely thought upon, solely commended, solely reproved, and with
her reproaches adored; of many she is held mutable and blind: she is wandering,
inconst^nt, uncertain, diverse, and a favourer of the unworthy, at her shrine
are all things expended, to her are all things acceptable, offered; she
altogether swaies, guides, and directs the reason of men. Amongst the Scythians
she is painted without feet; she had only hands and feathers. Amongst the
Smy^nians, with her head she supported Heaven, bearing in one of her hands the
horn of Amalthea, that is, of Plenty. She is described by Pausanias, in the
statue of a Buffe or wild Ox: but amongst all her figures and attributes, let
me not forger that of ingenious master Owens, Live. lib. 2.
the Epigrammatist, speaking of Fortune: Spem dat pauperibus divitibusque metum.
She is the poor man's hope, and the rich man's fear.


Livy, Lib. 8.
Dionysius Halicarnasseus, Lactantius, Plutarch, and others, Lib. 2. c. 8.
affirm that the statue of Fortune which stands in the Latin way, with the
Temple, was dedicated at the same time that Coriolanus by his mothers
intercession, withdrew his forces from the sack and spoil of Rome. Which image
was heard to speak these words. Rite me matronae vidistis, viteque dedicastis.

So superstitious they were in the days of old, that they attributed all their
intents, actions, and events of things, to the guidance and will of Fortune,
nay, that she had a power in their very birth-daies, and days of death: as of
Euripides the most famous Tragick-Poet, he was born on the same day that before
Salamine, the Greeks and the Meads fought that famous Sea-battel, and died upon
the birthday of Dionysius senior, the Tyrant of Sicily. When as (Timaeus
says) at one instant, Fortune took away the imitator of Tragic calamities,
and brought in their true actor and performer. Ascribed it is to Fortune, that
Alexander the Conqueror, and Diogenes the Cynick, should dye both on a day:
and, that King Attalus left the world, the same day of the year that he entered
into the world. The like was read of Pompey the Great, the same day of the
month that he was born in Rome, the same (or as some will have it the day
after) he was beheaded in Egypt. Pindarm the Greek Poet, born in Pithea,
consecrated many divine Hymns to Apollo, patron of the place. Fiorus remembers
Carneades in the celebration of Plato's birthday, whom he calls a stout
champion of the Academy, observing that they were both born on the feast day of
Apollo, Plato in Athens, where the Thargetia were acted; and Carneades in
Cyrene, where the Carnia were celebrated; both these feasts falling upon the
seventh day, on which his Priests say Apollo himself was born, and therefore
they call him Sep^imanatus, and Hebdomagenus, as much as to say, the seventh
day born. Those therefore that call Plato the son of Apollo (as Plutarch
says) have done the God no indignity or dishonor, he having succeeded him in
the Oracles of divine Philosophy, of whom Tindarus Lacedemonius has left this
character: Non hic creditus est mortali de patrenatus
esse: Deo genitore satus --
Derived from mortal parents he was not;
No, 'twas some Deity that him begot.


Plutarch in his quaest. Romans the 64. question, demands why Servius Tullius
dedicated a Temple to little Fortune, or Short? (for so the Latin words imply,
being Parvae and Brevi) because says he, that in the beginning from baseness
and obscurity (as being born of a captive mother) by the benefit of Fortune he
was exalted to the Principality of Rome: or does this change not rather show
her power then her poverty, that she is a giant, and no dwarf? Of all the
other Deities, Servius was known to celebrate her with the most Divine honors,
and to inscribe her in all his actions: for he not only built Temples to
Fortuna bonae spei, of good hope; Averruncae, to turn away her anger; Blandae
to her smiling; Primogeniae, as to the eldest child of Inheritance; Virili, as
she was manly: but he erected one also to his own proper fortune. He gave her
also the denominations of Convertentis, turning, or turning toward; Been
sperantis, of well hoping; and Fortunae virginis, Fortune the Virgin; likewise
Viscosae, as catching and clinging to us in all our attempts and actions: May
it not therefore be observed, that this Temple, and these rights and ceremonies
were celebrated to Little Fortune, that she may assist and much avail us even
in things of the smallest moment? Teaching us, that in all occurrents and
events we ought to intermit no occasion or opportunity that may avail us, for
the smalnesse in show or sleightne^^e in appearance: But to apply these things
to our better use, and show that all these Divine attributes bestowed on this
goddess were heathenish, and absurd, I hold opinion with Plutarch lib. de
Fortuna, That wisdom guides the life and actions of man, not Fortune. Was it
by Fortune (says he) that Aristides lived in poverty, when it was in his own
power to purchase wealth? or that Scipio having taken Carthage, neither saw the
prey, nor took part of the spoil? That Philocrates having received so many
Talents of Alexanders, spent them upon strumpets, and fishes. That Lasthenes
and Euthycrates, by proposing to themselves no other felicity, than the throat
and belly, lost Olynthus? If these things be attributed to Fortune, we may as
well say, Cats, Goats, and Apes, are by chance given to voracity, lust, and
squirility. If all things be attributed to fortune, what can be devised? what
learnt? what Cities government could subsist? or what Kings counsel be managed
without providence, and wisdom to direct it? did Fortune sway all? Many brute
beasts are better furnished in their nature and condition than man; some are
armed with horns, some with teeth, some with prickles, not so much as the
Porcupine, nay, the Hedgehog, but as Empedocles says: Dorsum horret spinis
and spicula torquet actua.

Some of their feet are armed with horn, most of their backs clothed with
hair; man only, as Plato says, is left by nature naked and unarmed, without
shoe or garment: Vnum sed haec largita, emoll it omnia.

She has yet bestowed one thing upon him, which makes good all the rest, The
use of Reason, Industry and Providence: nothing more wild, or more swif^ then
the horse, yet he runs to man's use: The dog is a beast, fierce and cruel, yet
his servant and keeper; with the Forests beast, the Airs foul, and the Seas
fish he feeds and banquets: what beast is greater then the Elephant? or to
behold, what more terrible? yet to him he is a spectacle of pleasure, like a
play in a public Theater? Anaxagoras says, That bruit beasts excel man in
all things, yet whatsoever they have, man applies to his own use; he gathers
the honey from the Be, and draws milk from the Cow; yet in all this Fortune
has no hand, only Counsel and Providence. Look but into Crafts, Arts, and
Sciences, we see metals tried, houses built, Statues carved, ye not any of
these by chance or accident; for the Arts and Crafts (as we call them)
acknowledge Ergana, that is, Minerva (not Fortune) for their goddess and
Patroness. It is recorded of a Painter, that having drawn a horse in all his
lineaments, colors, shape, and every thing in their true posture, only the
form forced from the horses mouth by the curb or bit of the bridle, he had not
done to his mind; which often blotting out, and again seeking to make perfect
but in vain, in a great vexation and anger, he cast his pencill (being then
full of the same color) against the table, which hitting in the same place
gave so fortunate a dash, that what art could not do, mere chance and accident
made complete and perfect: and this is the only master piece or Fortune that I
have read of. In all Sciences, A^^sicers use their rules, squares, lines,
plamme^s, measures, numbers, lest any particle of their cunning should be
conferred upon ^ap or accident. There is a providence even in tuning or (...)
instrument, in slacking or stre^^^ing the seeing; in the l^tchin to season meat
to the palate: nor does any man that has boughe cloth to suit himself,
^neel down and make his orisons to Fortune, to make them up and fit them to his
body. He that has gathered together abundance of treasure and riches, has
many captives about him, and servants to attend him, dwells in a Palace with
many porches and gates, sees it furnished with costly hangings, sumptuous beds
and tables, without true wisdom to m^nage all these, apprehends no true
felicity or happiness of lite. Therefore one asking Ip^icrates, why having
arms, and bows, and weapons, and other military ornaments, What kind of man he
was that professed not any? he answered, he was that man that had dominion over
all these, and power to use them at his pleasure. Therefore wisdom is neither
gold nor silver, nor glory, nor health, nor riches, nor strength, nor beauty;
it is only that which by knowing how to use them well, makes them saudable and
profitable, without which they are merely vain, barren, yea, and ofttimes
damnable, and to him that enjoies them, brings trouble and shame. I will
conclude this tractate with the saying of the Poet, Vires exiguae sunt mortalium
Sed calliditate mul^^pl^ci,
B^lluas Maris and T^^ stria,
(...) sub Coela voluantta (...) homo domat.
Small is the strength of (...) man,
(...) full of (...) and sk^le:
(...) and land monsters. he ^an tame,
And bring birus to his will.


Of the Goddesses called Selectae.
THese Goddesses were honored amongst the Gentiles Canina, Leuana, Edulica,
Potina, and Statana; these as they are opinionated, have the government of
children in their infancy, till they find their feet, and can stand, or begin
to go. Canina looks to them in their swathing bands, whilst they are bound up
and mantled. Leuana lists them from the earth when they chance to fall, and
keeps them from breaking or spoiling their faces. Edulica and Potina, have the
charge of the meat and drink by the nurses provided for them. Fabulana teaches
them when they begin to prattle; and Vagitana to still them, lest they should
spoil themselves by too forcible crying. Libentina, is a bawdy goddess, and an
overseer of their lust and pleasures. I here are likewise Aldonea, Albeona*
Voluna, Pellonia, all diligent and circumspect about men. Pellonia, she keeps
off and beats back their enemies. Then there is Agenoria, Strenua, and Stimula,
which stirs up men, and accites them to some action or other. Numeria, to help
them in numbers, and to make even their accounts. Augerona, she is instead of a
Physician to ease their maladi^s, and to prevent or help against diseases.
Febris, which is the Ague, was made a goddess, and had a Chapel allowed her
in the Palace. Postuerta and O^ bona, were two others. Prosa directed the
tongue in the voluble speaking of Prose. Sentia, had predominance over quick
and witty sentences. In marriages, child births and funerals, they used the
invocation of others, as Deneverra, Interci ^ones, Domiduca, Manturna,
V^rginenses, Lucina, Prema, Parrunda, Populonia, Mena, Tellumone, Rusona,
Naenia. For corn and grain were Tutulina, Nodinum, Volutina. Patalena,
Hostil^na, Flora, Lactucina, Natura, Averrunca, and Run^ta. Against thieves
they had Spineosis: and to preserve their fruits from blasting, and that they
might ^ipen in time convenient, Fructesa. Rurina was goddess for the Country.
Mountains, and Promontories. Empanda, over the Plo^^^easts, and Country
pastimes. To these were added Tanagraea, Ante^^^ta, Larunda, Moneta, Larentia,
Majesta, Ventilia, and infinite others. Those which they called the select
goddesses, were in number eight, Tellus, Ceres, Lucina, Juno, Diana, Minerva,
Venus, and Vesta.

Ana^is. She was a goddess that was particularly adored by the Lydians, and
not known to any other nation: to her service were selected the choice and
picked damsels out of the chief and principal of the Nobility. These had no
sooner been in her ministry, and admitted to serve at her Altar, but all
modesty and shame^astnesse set apart, they exposed their bodies to public
prostitution, by this means to be made more capable of husbands, and better
practiced against marriage.

Angerona. She was a goddess honored by the Romans, when the whole City
labored of a disease called the squinancy, which is an inflammation or fiery
heat of the Jaws, breeding a tumor in the throat, which suddenly (if not
prevented) suffocates and stops the passage of the breath: In this extremity
they offered many sacrifices to her. Her Sacreds and Festivals were called
Angeronalia. Her Image was, with her finger laid upon her lips. Pliny in his
second book thus speaks of her: Angerona, to whom the Romans use to sacrifice,
the thirteenth of the Calends of January, has her effligies in her Temple,
with the mouth closed or sealed up.

Atergatis. Strabo.
A goddess honored by the Syrians, so says Strabo, That beyond Euphrates is
the great City Bambice (whom some call Edessa, others Hierapolis) in which
Atergatis the Syrian goddess has divine reverence.

Drias, or Bona Dea, was adored by the Roman Matrons, as also by the ordinary
women of less state and quality: to whose sacrifices, no man could be at any
time admitted; of her Tibullus speaks, Tibul. lib. 1.
Sacra bonae ma^ibus non adeunda deae.

Her name was (...) the daughter, or (as some will have it) the wife of Faunus,
who was of that modest Temperance and Continency, that she so much retired her
self from the sight of all men, that she never walked abroad, nor was at any
time seen in (...). A great aspersion and calumny still lives upon the Seplchre
of (...). Claudius, a noble man of Rome, in that he was so impudent and
irreligious, as to violate her rights and ceremonies; For in her Temple (as
Juvenal amongst others remembers of him) he adulterated Pomp^^^a the daughter
of Quintus Pomptius, and niece to Sylla.

-- Nota bonae secreta deae -- Bubona and Carna is the goddess of oxen, and
herds of cattel^, all such she takes to her charge: but Carna was called Dea
Cardinis, The goddess of the hinge or hook, on which the door or gate hangs
or moves. Ovid in his first book de Fast^, thus writes; Prima dies tibi Carna
datur, dea cardinis haec est,
Numine clausa aperit claudit aperta suo.
The first days Carna's; She of doors,
The goddess is and guide:
She by her power, opes closed gates,
And shuts such as stand wide.


The Ancient writers affirm, that she was held to have predominance over the
intrails, and all the interior parts of man or woman: to whom they made their
orisons, that she would keep and preserve their hearts, liver, lungs and
bowels, free from anguish and the disease of consumption. To her Brutus erected
a Temple.

Dice, and Diverra. Dice was one that had power over the Tribunal, or seat of
judgment: she had imploiment in taking up quarrels, ending strifes,
compounding law-cases, and deciding all contentions whatsoever. Her ministers
were called Dica^stae, quasi litem diremptores, as much in our English tongue,
as if we should call them Peacemakers. Deverra was a goddess too, and h^ld in
reverence, for no other reason then that she preserved them from ominous night
birds, called Scopae.

Empanda, She had the charge of all such things as were negligently left open;
where she took the charge, it was held to be more safe then under lock and key.

Feronia. She is a goddess of the woods memorated by Virgil in these words, --
Et viridi gaudens Feronia luco,
Feronia rejoicing, and taking pleasure in the green groves.


Flora. She was first a strumpet in Rome of extraordinary fame, state, and
beauty, who by her prostitution attain^d to such an infinite wealth, that she
at her own proper charge, not only repaired, but new built a great part of the
walls of Rome. After her death, she consticuted the people of Rome for her heir:
for which bounty they caused her to be deified, and offered unto her divine
honors. Her Feasts were called Floralia. Of her Ovid thus speaks, in his fifth
book Fastorum.

Hunc men's implevit generosa Flore maritus,
Atque ait arbitrium tu dea Floris eris.
Tro and Thor. Saxo Grammat.
These are the names of a goddess and a god, spoken of in the history of Saxo
Grammaticus.

Furina. Is the goddess of thieves; her sacrifices are kept in the night, as
best affecting deeds of darkness. The Etruscians call her the goddess of
lots, such as are drawn for the taking up of controversies.

Hippona. Iuven. Sa^yr. 8.
She has the government and protection of Horses, whom hostlers and grooms of
stables have in great adoration, her picture is still in the place where their
horses stand: of her Juvenal speaks in his eighth Satyr.

Horchta, is a goddess worshipped in the City of Etruria, as the genius of the
same place. From her the village by, called Horchianus, takes name.

Laverna. She is over thieves, who make supplication to her for good and rich
booties, as that she would charm the household with sleep, keep the dogs from
barking, and the door hinges from creeking, to detend them from shame, and keep
them from the gallows. Horat. epi. lib. 1.
Horace in his first book of Epistles, -- Pulchra Laverna
Da mihi ^allere, da sanctum justumque videri.


Viz. Oh fair Laverna, grant me that I may cosen and deceive; but grant me
withal, that I may appear to the world, a just man, and an holy.

Mania was a goddess, and mother of the Lares, or household gods, to whom
children were used to be offered in sacrifice, for the safety of their familiar
friends, that were in travel by land or sea, or in any fear of danger. But
Junius Brutus in his Consulship, altered the property of that oblation, and
changed the innocent lives and blood of Infants, into the heads of garlic and
poppie, which served in the stead thereof.

Medetrina, Mellonia, Mena, Murcea, etc. Medetrina. She was the medicinal
goddess, and was called so a Medendo, she had power in the ministering of
Physic, her solemnities were called Medittinatia. So likewise Mellonia was
thought to be goddess and chief Patroness of honey. Mena had predominance of
some secrets belonging to women. Murcea, was she that was worshipped by such as
were lazy, idle, and sloathfull.

Nundina. Macrobius.
She was a goddess amongst the Romans, taking her denomination of the ninth
day, called dies Lustricus. In that day children had their names given them, as
Macrobius relates the males on the ninth day, the females on the eight day
after their birth.

Pecunia likewise was numbered among their goddesses*
Pitho, Razinna, Robigo, Rumilia.
Pitho was thought to be the goddess of eloquence: the Latins called her
Suada.

Razenna, was one amongst the Etruscians, who was to rule in Wedlock, and
marriages.

Robigo and Robigus, were a two sex deity, of whom the Romans were opinionated,
that they could preserve their sheaves and unthresh'd corn from being musty or
moldy. Their Festivals were called Robigalia.

Rumilia, was the protect^^sse of sucking infants, as ancient Writers are of
opinion: for Ruma signifies mamma, a dug, and therefore sucking lambs are
called Subrumi.

Runcina belongs to the gardens, and is said to be the goddess of weeding;
her, the poor women weeders have in great reverence.

Seia, Segesta, Tutilina, etc. Seia, the ancients report to be the goddess of
sowing; and Segesta had her name from the binding up of the sheaves: both these
had their Temples in Rome in the time of Pliny.

Tutilina and Tutanus were gods, so called of Tutando, preserving, or keeping
safe. Eanius calls them Aevilernos, and Aevilogros, as much as, Ever lived, and
ever in the perfectness and strength of their age; because it was in full power
and vigor, not subject to mutability or capable of alteration. In naming of
gods, we may as well use the feminine as the masculine, and the masculine as
the feminine gender, as Virgil speaking of Venus.

Discendo and ducente deo Flammam inter and hosts.
Expedior.
Down come I, and the god my guide, I make no stay,
But boldly through the enemy and fire I force my way.
Vacuna dea, was Lady and Governess over those that were vacant, and without
business; especially had in reverence by swains and husbandmen, who after the
gathering of their harvest had a cessation from labor.

Vallania was held to be the goddess of valleys.

Vitula dea, had predominance over youthful mirth and blandishments: For
Vitulari was by the ancient grammarians taken for gaudere, to be glad or
rejoice.

Volupta is held to be the goddess of Pleasure.

Rhaea This goddess has by the Poets allowed her a Chariot drawn by four
Lions, a Crown upon her head of Cities, Castles and Towers; and in her hand a
golden Scepter. Priests could not offer at her Altar before they were guelded,
which order was strictly observed in memory of Atyos a beautiful Ph^ygian
youth, and much beloved of Ceres, but would no ways yield to her desires:
because (as he excused himself) he had a past vow of perpetual chastity; but
after, not mindful of his promise (as Dorytheus Corinthius in his histories
relates) he comprest and defloured the nymph Sagaritides, of whom he begat
Lydus and Tyrhenus. Lydus gave name to Lydia, as Tyrhenus to Tyrhena. For this
the imaged goddess struck him with such fury and madness that he guelded
himself, and after would have cut his own throat, had not she commiserating
his penitence, transformed him to a Pine Tree, or as others will have it,
restored him to his senses, and made him one of her Eunuch Priest* N. cander in
Alex^pharm. says, her sacrifices were observed every new Moon with much
tinckling of brass, sound of timbrels, and strange vociferation and clamours.
Some fable, that Jupiter being asleep, and dreaming, let that fall to the earth
which may be called Filtus ante patrem; of which the earth conceiving, produced
a genius in an humane shape, but of a doubtful sex, male and female, called
Agd^st^; the gods cut off all that belonged to the masculme ^ex, and casting it
away, out of that first grew the Almond tree, whose fruit the daughter of the
flood Sangatius first casting, and hiding part thereof in her bosom, as they
wasted there and vanished, so she began to conceive, and in time grew great and
brought forth a Called Attis.
son, whom laying out in the wood, he was nursed by a goat, and fostered till
he was able to shift for himself. As he grew in years, so he did in beauty,
insomuch that he exceeded the ordinary feature of man: of him was Agdistes
wondrously inamored, who when he should have married with the daughter of the
King of Pestinuntium, by the intercomming of Agdiste, such a madness possessed
them borth, that not only Attes, but his father in law likewise, caused their
parts of generation to be cut quite away. Pausanias in Achaicis says (that for
his tare beauties sake) Rhea selected Attes into her service, and made him her
Priest. Those of that order were called Matragyrte, as either begging
publicly, or going from house to house to demand things necessary for her
Offerings: For the Greek word Meter signifies Matter, or Mother, and Agartes,
Praestigiator or Mendicus, a Jugler or Beggar. She was called by diverse names,
as Proserpina, Isis, Cybele, Idea, Berec^^thia, Tellus, Rhaea, Vesta, Pandora,
Phrigia, Pylena, Dindymena, and Pessinuntia: sometimes of the places, sometimes
of the causes. Rhaea bearing young Jupiter in her womb, and ready to be
delivered: knowing the predicted cruelty of Saturn, who commanded him to be
slain, retired her self to Thaumasius a mountain in Arcadia, fortified by
Hoptodamus and his fellow giants, lest Saturn should come with any forcible
hostility to oppress her: this mountain was not far distant from the hill
Molossus in a part of Lysia, where Jupiter was born, and Saturn there deluded;
into which place it is not lawful for any man to enter, only women. Lucian in
Nigrino says, that the Phrygian pipe was only sufficient to yield music to
her sacrifices, for that was no sooner heard, but they fell into a divine
rapture resembling madness, neither was the Pine only sacred to her, De diis.
l. 3^
but the Oak, as witnesses Apollodorus. Euphorion attributes to her the Vine,
Argon. l. 1.
because out of that wood her Effigies was always cut. Apollonius left
recorded* that the Milesian Priests accustomed first to sacrifice to Taetia and
Silaenus, and after to Rhaea, the mother of the gods, whose altars were decked
and adorned with Oaken bows. By Rhaea is meant the earth, or that strength of
the earth which is most pertinent and available in the generation of things:
She is drawn in a Chariot, because the globe of the earth hangs in the middle
of the air, without supporture, neither inclining or declining to one part or
another, and that by nature. About her chariot are wild beasts, the reason is,
she is the producter and nourisher of all creatures whatsoever. Deservedly she
wears a Crown of Towers and Turrets, being the Queen and Mistress of so many
Towns, Castles, and Cities. By the noise of music and clamours at her
sacrifices, is observed the whistling and blustering of the winds, who are
necessary in all the affairs of nature, especially in heat and cold, bearing
the showers and tempests to and fro upon their wings, to make foul weather in
one place, and a clear sky in another. Her Chariot is drawn with four Lions,
which imports those four brothers which blow from the Orient, the Austr^ll,
the Occident, and the Septentrion; these are said to be her Coach steeds, and
hurry her from place to place because in generation they are much availing:
therefore (...) all things, as from a fountain derive their original and
beginning from her, she is most pertinently called R^aea a sluendo, of flowing.

Isis or Io. She was the daughter of the flood I^ach^s: and as Andraetas
Ti^^dius le^t written, was no better then a strumpet, who by sorcery and
witchcraft sought to attract the love of Jupiter, in which business she used
the assistance of Inyae the daughter of Pan and Echo, or ((...) will have it)
of Suadela: this being discovered to Juno. she changed her into a bird which
still bearet her name, Inyx, which is frequently used amongst witches in their
sorceries and inca^tations: who because she moves her tail so much and so
often, is by the Latins called A wagtail.
Motasilla: from the intrails of this bird, with other ingredients, was made a
confection which (they say) Jason gave to Medaea to in^m^urate her, in that
expedition which he made to Col hos: this Ione or Io by the cunning of Inyx,
lay with Jupiter in a clowd, and after to conceal her from Juno, he transhap'd
her into a Cow: but this juggling being discovered by Juno, she begged her as a
gift and gave her in custody to Argus the son of Aristor, whose hundred eyes
Mercury (by the commandment of Jupiter) having charmed asleep, he cut off his
head and so slew him. In these distractions, she past the Ionian sea, which
from her bears the name (though Theompus and Archidamus rather are of opinion,
that that Sea took his denomination from Ionius, an eminent man of Illyria;)
from thence she came to Haemus, and transwasted thence to a gulf of Thracia,
which by her was called Bosphorus: There were two Bosphori, the one called
Cimnerius, the other Thracius (so much Prometheus speaks in his Escilus) she
past thence into Scythia, and traicting many seas, that divide and run by
Europe and Asia, came at length into Egypt, and by the banks of Nilus
reassumed her humane shape: and this happened near the City Iax, so called of Io,
after which she brought forth Epaphus (as Strabo writes) in a cavern or den in
Eubaea by the Aegean sea shore, Lib. 10.
which place is to this day called The Cow-house.
Aula Bovis. That she past all these seas in the shape of a Cow, the meaning
is, that the ship wherein she sailed, had the image of a Cow carried upon the
stern, and therefore was so called. By Argus with so many eyes, was intended
Argus a wise and provident King of the Argives, whom Mercury having slain,
released her from his servitude. After all her transmarine navigations (being
the most beautiful of her time) she was espoused to Apis, King of the
Egyptians: and by reason she taught them in that Country the profitable usury
arising from agriculture, was esteemed by them a goddess, whose statue her
for*. Aepaphus (after he had builded Memphis the great City) caused to be
erected. Some more ingeniously and divinely withal, say that Isca, by which
name the first woman and wife of Adam was called, imports to more than Isis,
whom the Aegyptian^ honored as the great and most ancient goddess and mother
of mankind: for the Latins and Greeks corrupt the pronuntiation and e^ymology
of the word, speaking Isis for Issa or Isca. Therefore as Isca is the wise of
our great grandfather Adam, so by the ancient tradition of the Egyptians, Isis
was the wife of Ossidis whom the Latins call Osirides, transferring the
Egyptian Euphony, to their own Idioma or proper form of speech.

Ate. Ate, whom some call Laesio, is the goddess of Discord or Contention, and
by Homer termed the daughter of Jupiter: Ate prisca proles quae laeserit omnes
Mortales.
Ate the ancient off spring that has hurt and harmed all
Mankind.


He calls her a certain woman that to all men has been obnoxious and perilous
alluding (no doubt) to the parent of us all, Eve, that first transgressed, and
by some relics of truth, with which he was enlightened, for he says Filia
prima Iovis quaeque omnes perdidit Ate
Perniciosa --


As much to say, Pernicious Ate the eldest daughter of Jupiter, who has lost
us all. In another fable he alludes to the same purpose, where he says,
Jupiter notwithstanding he was the most wise of all mortals, yet was in days
of old tempted and deceived of his wife Juno. And this Homer has plainly
delivered, that the beginning of evil came first from a woman, and by her the
wisest of men was beguiled. Hesiod. (in his book of Weeks and Days) is of the
same opinion, and writes to the same purpose: but in another kind of fable,
from the old tradition. For says he, From Pandora a woman of all creatures the
most fairest, and first created by the gods, all mischiefs whatsoever were
dispersed through the face of the whole earth. And though Palephatus in his
fabulous narrations, and Pleiades Fulgentius in his Mythologicis otherwise
interpret Pandora, yet Hesiodus is still constant in the same opinion, as may
appear in these verses: Namque prius vixere Homines, verum absque labor,
Absque malis morboque grav^ tristique senecta:
At mulier, rapto de poclo ^egmine sp^^rsit
Omne mali genus* and morbos curasque molestas.
Which I thus interpret.
Man lived at first from tedious labors free,
Not knowing ill or grievous malady,
Nor weak and sad old age: till woman mad
Snatched from the pot the cover which it had,
Sprinkling thereby on mankind, every ill,
Trouble, disease, and care, which haunts us still.


Therefore the same author in his Theogonia (as Cyrillus testifies in his third
book against Julian, and in the beginning of the book) calls women Pulchrum
malum, The fair evil.

Pandora. Of her thus briefly (the better to illustrate the former) Hesiod tells
us: that Promaetheus upon a time offered two Oxen to Jupiter, and having
separated the flesh of either from the bones; in one of the skins including all
the flesh without bones, in the other all the bones without any part of the
flesh; and artificially making them up again, bad Jupiter make choice of these,
which he would have employed in his sacrifices, who chused that with the bones:
and taking it in great rage to be thus deluded he to be revenged, took away all
fire from the earth, thereby to inflict the greater punishment upon mankind.
But Prometheus by the assistance of Minerva, ascended heaven, and with a dried
cane or reed, kindled at the Chariot of the Sun (unknown to Jupiter) brought
fire down again upon the earth, Carm. l. 1.
which Horace expresses in these words; A^dax Iapeti Genus,
Ignem (...) malu gentibus intulit.
The bold (...) of Japetus,
By his had fraud brought fire again among the nations.


This when Jupiter understood, he instantly commanded Vulcan to fashion a woman
out of clay, who being the most subtle and best furnished with all kind of arts
(so endued by the gods) was therefore efore called Pandora. In Atticis.
Pausanias terms her the first created of that sex; she was by Jupiter sent to
Prometheus with all the mischiefs that are, included in a box; which he
denying, she gave it to Epimetheus; who taking off the cover or lid, and
perceiving all these evils and disasters to rush out at once, he scarce had
time to shut it again, and keep in Hope, which was the lowest and in the
bottom. The purpose of the Poets in this, as I can guess, is that since
Pandora, signifies all arts, all sciences, all gifts, it imports thus much for
our better understanding, That there is no mischief or evil happens to man,
which proceeds not from a voluptuous life, which has all the arts to her
ministers and servants: for from them Kings were first instituted and raised to
their honors, by them were plots, stratagems, supplantations, and dangerous
innovations attempted; with them grew emulation and envy, discord and
contention, thefts, spoils, wars, slaughters, with all the troubles, cares,
vexations, and inconveniences belonging and hereditary to mankind.

Of the Marine Goddesses.
IN these, as in the former, I will study to avoid all prolixity, because I am
yet but at the start of the race, and measure in my thoughts, the tediousness
of the way I am to run, before I can attain the goal intended; and therefore
thus desperately from the Earth, I leap into the Sea, direct me O ye Marine
goddesses, and Amphitrite first.

Amphitrite.
JVpiter having expelled Saturn from his Kingdom, by the help of his brothers,
Neptune and Pluto, and having cast ^^ts for the tripartire Empire; the Heaven
fell to Jupiter, Hell to Pluto, and the Sea with all the Isles adjacent, to
Neptune, who solli^iced the love or Amphitrite, but she not willing to
condescend to his amorous porpose, he employed a Dolphin to negotiate in his
behalf, who dealt so well in the business, the^ they were not only
reconciled, but soon after married. For which, in the parpetuall memory of so
great and good an office done to him, he placed him amongst the stars, not far
from Capricorn, as Higinus has left remembered in his Fables, and Aratus in his
Astronomicks: others contend that Venilia was the wife of Neptune: but
notwithstanding his love to, and marriage with Amphicrite, he had many children
by other Nymphs, Goddesses and wantons. Of Lyba he begot Phaenix, Betus, and
Agenor: of Cataeno, Cataenus: of Amimone, Nauplius: of Pylanes, (of whom a City
of Lacoonia bears name) Avadne, and Aone, from whom the province of Aonia takes
his denomination; Phaenix that gave the name to Phaenicia; and Athon, of whom
the mountain is so called: as also Pheaces, from whence Pheacia (now called
Corcyrus) is derived; Dorus, that gives name to the Dorii; and of Laides, the
daughter of Otus, Althepus; by Astipataea he had Periclimenus, and Erginus; by
Alccone the daughter of Atlas, Anathamus, Anthas, and Hyperetes; by whom
certain Cities amongst the Trezenians were erected, and from them took their
name. Of Arne he had Boetus: of Alope the daughter of Certion, Hippothous: of
C^clusa, Asopus: of Brilles, Orion. He begot the Tritons, one of Celaene, the
other of (...) of Tyrho, Palaemon, and (...): of Molio, Cr^atus, and E^ithus;
of Crisigone, the daughter of Almus, (...): of Melantho, Delphus: of (...) of
Venus* Erix: of Alistra, Ogigus: of Hippothee, Tap^^^us: he had one Cygnus by
Caces; another by Scama^drodices, by Tritogenia, the daughter of Aeolus: Minyas
of the Nymph Midaea: Aspledones of Cleodora: Pernasus of M^cio^ca (to whom, as
Asclepeades relates, he granted a Boo^, that she should walk as firmly and
steadfastly upon the water as the land) Euripilus and Euphemus: Besides these he
(...) another Euphemus that was steers man in the Argo, when all the brave
Heroes of Greece made their expedition for the golden fleece. As also Amicis,
Albion, (...), Amphimanus, Aethusa, Aon, Alebius, Dercilus, (...) and Astraeus,
who ignorantly having been (...) with his sister Aleyppa, and the next day
their (...) of blood and affinity being known to him by a (...) himself
headlong into a river, and was drowned; Lib. 3. de (...).
which (...) Leo Bizantius writes, was first from him called (...) and after
Caius, of Caicus the son of Mercury and (...): moreover these were his
children, Acto^on (...), Bromes, Busyris, Certio^ Crocon, Cromos, Crysoos,
(...), Chrisogenaea, Crius, Dorus, Euphemus, Ircaeus, Lelex, Lamia the
Prophetess, and S^billa, Hallerhoitius, Laestrigone, M^garaeus, Mesa^us,
Ephialtes, Nictaeus, Melion, Nausithous, O^hus, Occipite, Poliphemus, Piracmoa,
Phorcus, Pelasgus, Phaeax, Pegasus, Phocus, Onchestus, Peratus, Siculus,
Sicanus, Steropes, Farus, Theseus, Haretus, and others infinite, besides
fourscore whose names are remembered: there are others scarce to be numbered,
for as Zetzes says in his History, Elatos animo enim omnes, Hist. 51. chil. 2.
and omnes strenuos,
Filios and amicos dicunt and amatos a Neptuno.


All that are high minded, and strong men, were esteemed as the sons and
friends and beloved of Neptune. Amphitrite, signifies nothing else, but the
body and matter of all that moist humor which is earth above, below, or within
the earth, and for that cause she is called the wife of Neptune: Euripides in
Cyclope, In Cyclop.
takes her for the substance of water it self. In Argonaut.
Orpheus calls her Gla^cae and Piscosa, that is blew and full of fish, being
attributes belonging solely to the goddess of the Sea. And by the Dolphins
soliciting the love of Neptune to Amphitrite, and reconciling them, is meant
nothing else but to illustrate to us That of all the fishes that belong to the
sea he is the swiftest, the most active, and apprehensive.

Thetis or Tethies.
HEsiod calls her the wife of Oceanus, In Theog.
who is styled the father of all the floods, creatures, and gods: because (as
Orpheus, Thales, and others are of opinion) all things that are bred and born,
have need of humor, without which nothing can be beget or made corruptible.
Isacius has left recorded, that besides her he had two wives, Partenope, and
Pampho^^^e; by Par^^nope he had two daughters, Asia and Libia: by Pampholige,
Europa, and Thracia: and besides them, three thousand other children, for so
many Hesiod numbers in his Theogonia. This Thetis was the daughter of the earth
and heaven, and therefore as Oceanus is called the father of the (...), so is
she is esteemed as the mother of the goddesses. In Hebes nupt.
(...) calls one Thetis the daughter of Chi^on the C^ntaure: and Homer in his
hymn to Apollo, the child of Nereus, which (...) confirms, In Anax.
as also Euripides in Aphigema and in (...) she was the wife of Peleus, and of
all women living, the most beauti^^ll, of whom Apollodorus thus speaks, They
say Jupiter and Neptune contended about her Nuptias, but she not willing to
incline to Jupiter, bebecause because she was educated by Juno, therefore he in
his rage allotted her to be the bride of a mortal man. Homer writes that she
was angry, being a Marine goddess, to be the wife of a man, therefore to avoid
his embraces, she shifted her self into sundry shapes and (...): but Peleus
being advised by Chiron, notwithstanding all her transformations (as into
(...), into a Lion, and others) never to let go his hold till she returned into
her own natural form, in which he vitiated her, and of her begot A^^illes; the
last shape she took upon her, was a Sepia, which is a fish called a Cuttle,
whose blood is as black as ink; now because this was done in Magnesia, a City
of Thessaly, the place (as Zertzes in his history records) is called Sepias:
Hist. 46. Chil. 2. In prin. rer. Aeginitarum.
Pithenaetus and others say that she was not compelled or forced to the
marriage of Peleus, but that it was solemnized in the mountain Pelius, with her
full and free consent, where all the gods and goddesses, saving Discord, were
present, and offered at the wedding, for such has been the custom from
antiquity; Pluto gave a rich Smaragd, Neptune two gallant steeds, Xanthus and
Ballia; Vulcan a knife with an have richly carved, and some one thing, and some
another. By Peleus she had more sons then Achilles, which every night she used
to hide beneath the fire, that what was mortal in them might be consumed: by
which they all died save Achilles, who was preserved by being in the day time
anointed with Ambrosia; therefore (as Amestor in his Epithalamium upon Thetis
(...) relates) he was called Piresous, as preserved from the fire, additur hinc
n^men Piresous. She was the sister of Titaa, and brought forth Ephire (who was
after married to (...)) and (...), Lib. 5.
who as Ovid relates in his book de Fast^, was the (...) Atlas. These are
likewise numbered amongst the daughters of Oceanus and Thetis, Acaste, Admete,
Asia (that gave name to a part of the world, till now called Asia) Clim^ne,
Idy^a, Ephire, Eudora, Eur^ome, Jamra, (...) Plexame, Primno, Rhodia, Thea,
Thoe, (...), who was beloved of Apollo, but being jealous or his affection to
Leucothoe, she had discovered it to her father Orchamus; Apollo therefore left
her: in grief of which, she vowed an abstinence from all sustenance
whatsoever, onl^ with fixed eyes still gazing upon the course of the Sun; which
the gods commiserating, changed her into an Hel^^aropi^n, which is called the
Suns flower, which still inclines to what part soever he makes his progress.
But whether she be Tethies or Thetis, she is no other than the reputed goddess
of the Sea: her name importing that huge mass of water or element (as Virgil
in his Pollio says) necessary to the generation of all creatures whatsoever.
Toward the East she is called Indica, toward the West Atlantica^, where she
divides Spain and Mauritania; toward the North, Pontica and Glaciatis, as
likewise Rubra, and Aethopica, for so Strabo relates, as also Rhianus in the
navigation of Hanno the Carthaginian. Stiphilus in his book de Thessalia has
bequeathed to memory, That Chiron a wise and skillful Astrologian, to make
Peleus the more famous, consulted with the daughter of Acloris and Mirmidon,
and betwixt them published abroad that he by the consent of Jupiter, should
match with the goddess Thetis, She was called P^ilomela.
to whose nuptials all the gods came in great showers and tempests (for he had
observed a time when he knew great store of rain would fall) and from that the
rumor first grew, That Peleus had married Thetis. But Dailochus and Pherecides
report, that Peleus having purged himself of the murder of his brother Phocus,
murdered Antigone: others say that he first took Antigone, and after her death,
Thetis; and that Chiron being an excellent Surgeon, was so called for the
lightness and dexterity of hand (which is an excellent gift in the searching
and dressing of wounds, in any of that profession.) Apollodorus says, that
Thetis after many windings and turnings, and transhapes to preserve her
virginity, was at length comprest by Jupiter. The Nymphs called Dorides, were
her Ministers and handmaids.

Nereides.
THey were the daughters of Nereus and Doris; he is said by Hesiod to be the
son of Oceanus and Thetis, he is styled a Prophet or South saier, who as Horace
tells us, did predict to Paris all the calamities that were to succeed at Troy.
Apollonius tells us that his chief mansion, or place of residence, is in the
Aegean sea. The same is, that Hercules being sent to fetch the golden apples of
the Hesperides, and not knowing where abouts they grew, went to the Nymphs that
dwell by the banks of Eridamus, to be resolved by them: they sent him to demand
of Nereus, who thinking to delude him by shifting himself into sundry shapes,
was notwithstanding held so fast by Hercules, that he was forced to assume his
own form again, and tell him; for so O^pheus in his A^gonauticis informs us.
He is said to have a principality in the sea, to be delighted in the company of
Nymphs and Damsels; as also to be the beginning and end of waters; of whom
O^pheus in one of his hymns thus sings: Tu fundamen aquae tu terrae Finis, and
Idem
Principium es cunctis.


Euripides in one of his Tragedies, says, he was educated and noursed by the
waters, and calls him the father of the Nereides. He had daughters by Doris, the
Nymphs Halia, Spio, Pasitaea, and Lygaea; Hesiod in his Theogonia reckons of
them to the number of fifty. Doris was the sister of Nereus; Horace and others
describe her with green hair. Theocritus in Thessaliis, says, that the birds
called Halciones, were to them most grateful: some say that they use to dance
and revell in the waters, and play about the chariot of Triton, as nimbly as
fishes. Homer in his Iliads reckons of that rank, Glauce, Thalia, Cymodoce,
Nesea, Spio, Thoe, Halie, Cymothoe, Actaee, Melite, Agane, Amphithoe, Iaere,
Doto, Proto, Pherusa, Dinamione, Doris, Amphinome, Panope, Callianira,
Dexamine, Gala^aea, Amathaea, Callianassa, Climine, Ianira, Ianassa, Mera,
Orithia. Hesiod besides these reckons up Euerate, Sao, Eudore, Galene, Glauce,
Pasithaea, Erato, Eunice, Doro, Pherusa, Nesaee, Protomedea, Do^is, Panope,
Hippothoe, Hypponoe, Cymatolege, Cimo, Eione, Halimeda, Glanconome, Panto,
Pautopenia, Liagore, Evagore, Laomedala, P^l^nome, An^onoe, Lasianassa, Evarne,
Psamathe, Menippe, Neso, Eupompe, Themito, Pronoe, Nemertes, Apollodorus
Athentensis adds to these, Glancothoe, Nonsithoe, Halia, Pione, Plesrure,
Calipso, Crante, Neomeris, De^ane^ra, Polinoe, Melie, Dione Isaea, Dero,
Eumolpe, Ione, Ceto, Limnoraea, and all these are held to be most beautiful*
it is therefore thus fabled, That C^ssiope wife to Cepheus King of Aethiopia,
gloried so much in her beauty, that she held her self to be the fairest woman
in the world; and did not only compare, but prefer her self before the
Nymphs called Nereides: for which, their indignation was kindled against her,
and in that high measure, that they sent into those seas a Whale of an
incredible greatness; the people consulting with the Oracle, how to appease
the goddesses, and free themselves from the monster; answer was returned, That
it could not be done, but by exposing their only daughter Andromeda, fast bound
to a rock that overloked the sea, to be a prey to the sea-Whale; but she was
thence released by the virtue of Perseus: and Cassiope by this means (as a
perpetual example that all such rashness ought to be avoided) translated
amongst the stars, for so much Arataeus has left to memory in certain verses
interpreted by Cicero.

This Nerius is for no other reason said to be the son of Oceanus and Tethis
than to denote unto us the counsel, judgment, and cunning, in guiding and
directing ships by sea; and therefore to have many daughters, which are nothing
but inventions, new devises, stratagems, and changes belonging to navigation.
He is therefore said to be a Prophet, because in all arts and disciplines,
there is a kind of knowledge, by which we foresee and divine of things to come,
for he is held no skillful navigator, that cannot foretell by the weather, the
changes of winds, and certain signs of tempests, thereby to use prevention
against them before they suddenly come. He is also said to change himself
into many figures, to give us to understand, that it is the part of a knowing
and understanding man, to arm himself against all chances and variety of
things whatsoever. It is therefore required of such a man, to use providence
and care in all his affairs and actions, and not to accuse the gods if any
thing sinisterly happen unto him through his own temerity and rashness; since
with a prudent and well governed man, their help and assistance is always
present.

The daughters of Triton.
ACesander calls Triton the son of Neptune. Numenius in his book de
piscatoribus, derives him from Oceanus and Tethis. Lycaphron in those verses
wherein he tells of a cup presented unto him by Medea, calls him the son of
Nereus. The Poets ascribe to him the invention of the trumpet, and that it was
first used in the Gigomantichia, the great battle betwixt the gods and the
gaints: for in the midst of the skirmish, when the event of the battle grew
doubtful, Triton blew so shrill a blast, that the giants thinking it had been
the voice of some dreadful and unknown monster, that undertook the party of
the gods, turned their backs and sled; by which accident they obtained a more
sudden and safe victory. Pausanias calls Tritia the daughter of Triton, who was
at first one of Minerva's Priest, who being comprest by Mars, brought forth
Menalippus, but that he had more then her, I have not read.

Ino. She was the daughter of Cadmus and Harmonia, who with her son Melicerta,
were enterteined into the number of the Sea-gods; he, by the name of Palaemon,
she, of Leucothea: both these are said to have predominance over sailers, and
power in navigation. That she cast her self headlong into the sea, I have
before related in the tractate of Juno. She was a stepmother, and so prosecuted
the children of Nephetes, that she would have sacrificed one of them to the
gods; for which (as Polizelus says) her husband Athanas did prosecute her with
such rage, that flying to Gerania (a mountain amongst the Megarenses) from a
rock called Maturides, she cast her self and her son into the sea; and of the
same opinion is Pausanias: some think it happened at the same time that the
Nereides were dancing there, and that his body was transported by the waves to
Sisiphus, from Exhaenuntia, where the Ithmian pastimes were first celebrated to
his remembrance. They of the City Megaera affirm, her body to be cast upon
their shore, and by Cleso and Tauropolis, the daughters of Cleson, took up and
buried. She was afterward called Matuta, as Cicero in his Tuscul.
disputations, says, Ino the daughter of Cadmus, Is she not called by the
Greeks Leucothoe, and by us Latins Matuta? And that she is taken for the
morning, is manifest by Lucretius, lib. 5. Pausan in his Messanaicis says,
that she was first named Leucothoe in a small village not far from the City
Corone, and that she had clemency in the securing and preserving of ships, and
pacifying the violent and troubled billows of the Ocean. Palaemon is also
called Portunus, or the Key-carrier (as one that keeps a key of all the ports
and havens, to exclude and keep out all foreign enemies) and the son of Matuta,
or the Morning; in that time commonly the winds begin to breath and rise with
the departing of night, and because that from the land they rush upon the
waters, they are therefore said to cast themselves headlong into the sea; for
the morning is the most certain interpreter either of succeeding winds and
tempests, or of the countenance of a serne sky, and fair weather. Strabo calls
Glaucus the son of Anthedon, a Boeotian; but Theophrastus will have him the
issue of Polybus the son of Mercury and Euboea, Promothidas, Heracl^ota,
derives him from Phorbus, and the Nymph Pampaea, born in Aothedon, a famous
City of Boe^tia; Thelytus Methimnaeus in his Bacchick numbers, brings his
progeny from Nopaeus. Epicus in one of his hymns, from Evanthes the son of
Neptune and Maedis. He is said to have ravished Syma the daughter of Iclemis and
Doris, and to have transported her into Asia; and was after married to Hidua,
the daughter of Sydnus Scioneus, one that used to dive and fetch things up from
the bottom. But of his issue there is nothing left remembered. It is commented
of him, that being a fisherman, and having taken more fishes then he could
carry upon his back with ease, and laying down his burden to rest him by the
shore, there grew an herb, which the dead fishes no sooner touched or tasted,
but they instantly recovered life, and one by one leapt into the sea: he by
tasting the same herb to prove the virtue thereof, was forced to leap after
them, and so was made a Sea-god* Others are of opinion, that wearied with the
tediousness of his age, he willingly drowned himself.

The wives and daughters of Proteus.
ZEtzes in his four and fortieth history, calls Proteus, the son of Neptune
and the nymph Phenica; who traveling from Egypt into Phlegra, there took to
wife Torone, by whom he had three sons, Toronus, Timilus, and Telegonus, all
wicked and bloody minded men, who for their cruelty perished by the hands of
Hercules. Euripides speaks of one Psamethes, a second wife, by whom he had
Theonone and Theolymenus. He had moreover these daughters, Cavera, Rhetia, and
Idothaea. This was she that when Menelaus doubted of his return into his
country (having sojourned somewhat long in Egypt) counseled him to apparel
himself and his followers in the fresh skins of Porposes, and counterfeit
themselves to sleep amongst these Sea-cattell, and that about the heat of the
day, at what time Proteus used to come out of the deeps upon the dry land, and
there take a nap with his Porposes, then to catch fast hold on him sleeping:
and notwithstanding all his changeable shapes and figures, not to dismiss him,
till he had reduced himself to his own natural form, and then he would
predict to him whatsoever was to come. This counsel given by Idothaea, Homer
excellently expresses in his fourth book of his Odyssaea. It is said of him
that he could change himsel^e sometimes into water, and again to fire, to
(...) birds, trees or serpents, etc. Neither did this mutability of shape
belong to him only; for we read the like of Thetis and Mestra or Meter, the
daughter of Eresicthan the Thessalian. Periclemenus the son of Neleus and
Polymela, and brother of Nestor obtained the same gift of Neptune: of him
Euphor^on and Hesiod speaks more at large. Empusa is remembered by Aristophan^s
to have the same faculty and dexterity in changing her shape: so likewise
Epicharmus.

Empusa planta, bos fit, atque vipera,
Lupisque musca, pulchra and illa semina:
Quicquid cupit vel denique ille conferat.
Empusa is made a plant, an ^xe a viper,
A stone, a fly, and a fair woman too:
What she desires, that she does still resemble.
The Poets (in these changing of shapes, and turning themselves into so many
sundry sorts of creatures) importing nothing else, but the wisdom of such
persons who have searched into the hidden mysteries of Philosophy, and acquired
the natures and properties of water, fire, herbs, (...), and plants, beasts,
birds, and serpents; in which being perfect, they may be (and not altogether
unproperly) said to change themselves into the similitudes of so many creatures.

The daughters of Phorcis.
THis Phorcis, whom the Latins call Phorcus, was the son of Terra and
Pontus, the Earth and the Sea, as Hesiod in his Theogonia makes him: But Varro
will have him to be the issue of Neptune, and the Nymph Thosea. He had besides
those daughters, begot one Ceto the Ph^rcidae, namely, the Gor^ons; and Thoosa,
who lay with Neptune, and brought forth the Cyclops Polyphemus, as Homer
witnesses. He is called also the father of the serpent that kept the
He^perides, by Hesiod. But I will forbear the rest, to speak something of his
daughter Medusa.

Medusa. She for her lust and immoderate appetite to inchastity, incurred the
ire of the gods, being so impudent, as to suffer the embraces of Neptune in the
^emple of Minerva. There were diverse of that name, one the daughter of Priam,
another of Sthenelus and Niciope. Pa^sanias, in Corinthiacis calls her the
daughter of Phorhus, others of (...) sea monster, which I take to be Phorcus
before mentioned. Minerva, for the profanation of her Temple being grievously
incensed, thought to punish her in those hairs which a little before were so
wondrous pleasing to Neptune, and turned them into hissing and crawling snakes;
giving her this power, that whosoever gazed upon her face, should be in the
instant converted into stone. Isacius is of opinion, that that was not the
cause of her calamity, but relates it another way, That Medusa was of Pisidia,
and the fairest of all women, who glorying in her feature, but especially the
beauty of her hair, dared to contend with Pallas; which arrogant impudency the
goddess heinously taking, her hair (in which she so ambitiously gloried) she
changed into filthy and terrible snakes, and then gave her that killing look
before mentioned; but pitying at length so general a mischief, incident to
mortal men by that means, she sent Perseus the son of Jupiter and Dana (or
rather as some will have it, he was employed by Polydectes, King of the
Seriphians) to cut off her head, who having before received a hooked skein
called Harp, from Mercury, and a shield from Pallas, came to the ^en called
Tritonides, amongst whose inhabitants she exercised her mischief; and first
approaching Pephredo, and Aenio, two of the Phorcidae and of the Gorgonian
sisterhood, who were old and wrinckled crones from their nativity, they had
betwixt them but one eye and one tooth, which they did use by turns; and when
they went abroad, or when they had no occasion to employ them, laid them up in
a casker, for so Ascilus relates. He borrowed of them that eye and tooth:
neither of which he would restore till they had brought him to the Nymphs with
winged shoes, which taking from them, and being armed with the Helmet of
Pluto, the sword of Mercury, and the mirror of Pallas, he fled to Tartessus, a
City of Iberiae where the Gorgons then inhabited; whose heads crawled with
adders, whose teeth were like the tusks of a boar, their hands of brass, and
their wings of gold; and there arriving, found them asleep, and spying her head
in Minerva's glass, in which he still looked, it directed him so, that at one
blow be cut it off, out of whose blood Pegasus sprung forth. The other two
sisters, Sthumo and Aeuryale, awaking, and this seeing, with the loud hissing
of these innumerable snakes, made a noise most dreadful and horrible: From
whence Pallas first devised the pipe with many heads. The form and shape of
these Phorcidae, In Scuto:
Hesiod elegantly describes. Crisaor and Pegasus were begot of the blood
dropping from Medusa's head, (...).
as Apollonius Rhodius writes in his building of Alexandria. The Gorgons were
called Graee, as Zetzes explicates in his two and twentieth History. M^nander
in his book de Mysteriis, numbers S^ylla amongst these Gorgons, and that they
inhabited the Doracian Islands, situate in the Aethiopick sea, which some call
Go^gades, of whom they took the names of Gorgones. Nimphodorus in his third
book of Histories, and Theopompus in his seventeenth, affirm their girdles to
be of wreathed vipers: so likewise Polemo in his book to Adaeus and Antigonus.
The occasion of these fictions are next to be inquited after. By these Graee
the daughters of Sea Monsters is apprehended, Knowledge, and such Wisdom as
is attained too by Experience They are said to have but one ere, which they
used when they went abroad, because Prudence is not so altogether necessary to
those that stay within, and solely apply themselves to domestic affairs; as to
such who look into the world, and search after difficulties. Of this Wisdom,
or these Graee (not impertinently called the sisters of the Gorgons) is meant
the pleasures and vain blandishments of the world, with the dangers that
appertain to the (...): from either of which, no man without the counsel of
(...) can acquit himself: Therefore is Per^^us said to overcome the Gorgons,
not without the (...) of Pluto, the eye of the Grae^, the sword of Mercury, and
the mirror of Pallas; all which who shall use a^ight, shall p^ove himself to be
Perseus, the friend and son of Jupiter.

Scylla and Charybdis.
ACusilaus and Apollonius, both nominate Scylla to be the daughter of Ph^^cia
and H^caete: but Homer, that her mothers name was Crataeis. (...). 21.
Chariclides calls her the issue of Pho^bantes and H^cate: Ste^ichorus, of
Lamia; Tymeus terms her the daughter of the ^^ood Cratus. Pausanias in Atticis,
and Strabo in l. 8. agree that this Scylla was the daughter of Nysus, King of
the Megarenses, who surprised with the love of King M^nos, stole from her
fathers head that purple lock in which consisted the safety of his own life and
Kingdom. The Athenians having invaded his dominion, and seized many of his
Towns, and wasted the greatest part of his country by their fierce and bloody
incursions, they at length besieged him in the City Nysaea. Some are of
opinion, that ^^sus incensed with the foulness of that treason, caused her to
be cast into the sea, where she was turned into a sea monster. Pausanias
avers, that she was neither changed into a bird, nor a monster of the sea, nor
betrayed her father, nor was married to Nisus, as he had before promised her;
but that having surprised Nysaea, he caused her to be precipitated into the
sea, whose body tossed to and fro by the waves of the Ocean, till it was
transported as far as the Promontory called Scylaea, where her body lay so long
upon the continent unburied, till it was devoured by the sea-fouls: this gave
pl^ce to that fable in Ovid.

Filia purpureum Nisi furata capillum,
Puppe cadens navis facta refertur avis.
It Is said, the daughter having stolen her fathers purple hair, sair. Falls from
the hin-deck of the ship, and thence sores through the Z^nodorus says, that
she was hanged at the stern of Minos his ship, and so dragged through the
waters till she died: and that Scylla the daughter of Phorcus, was a damosel of
incomparable beauty, and vitiated by Neptune, which known to Amphitrite, she
cast such an invenomous confection into the fountain where she accustomed to
bath her self, that it cast her into such a madness, that she drowned her
self. Of his mind is Miro Prianaeus in his first book Rerum Messanicarum.
Others imagine, that she had mutual consociety with Glaucus the sea god, which
Circe (who was before inamoured of him) understanding, she sprinkled the well
wherein she used to lave her self with such venomous juice, that from her wast
downwards, she was translated into diverse monstrous shapes; which as Zenodotus
Cyrenaeus says, was the occasion of the Fable commented upon her. Isaoius thus
describes her deformity; She had six heads, the one of a canker-worm, the other
of a dog, a third of a L^on, a fourth of a Gorgon, a fifth of a whirl-poole or
a Whale the six^ of a woman. Homer in his Odysses, describes her with six
heads, and twelve feet, every head having three order of teeth. Virgil in
Sileno says, that all ships were wrackt and devoured by those drugs that grew
beneath her navell.

Charybdis. She was likewise a most devouring woman, who having stolen many
Oxen from Hercules, which he before had taken from Geryon, was by Jupiter
stroke with a thunderbolt, and so transformed into that monster of the sea;
others contest, that she was slain by Hercules, and after so transhap'd: of
these diverse are diversely opinionated. Strabo says, that Homer imagined the
vehement flux and reflux of that sea about the concaves of those rocks made so
terrible a noise, that therefore the Poets fabulated, that in her sides, and
about her interior parts were the barkings of dogs continually heard. Isacius
writes, that Scilla is a proeminent promontory over against Rhegium in Sicily,
hanging over the sea, under which are many huge and mas^ie stones hollowed by
the billows in whose concavities many sea monsters inhabit, and when there is
shipping in those parts amongst those rocks and shelves, they are either
swallowed by Charybdis or Scylla. Charybdis being situate directly against
Messina, and Scylla against Rhegium: they are therefore said to be women,
because afar off these promontories appear as it were in a feminine shape,
what fleet soever by the tides and tempests was forced upon Charybdis, were
there shipwrackt, and such as by Charybdis were ^ost on the rocks of Scylla
were there swallowed. In which fable is included the nature of Virtue and Vice.
No man but in the progress of his life, sails betwixt these two quicksands:
if he incline to one hand more then the other, he is either swallowed by
Scylla, or devoured by Charybdis. What else does this signify, but that which
Aristotle in his Ethics illustrates, Virtue, which is the medium betwixt two
extremes? both which are to be avoided, and the middle, wherein is safety to
embraced: for man's life is nothing else but a continual navigation betwixt
diverse molestations of one hand, and tempting and unlawful pleasures on the
other; both which are comprehended in these Syrtes, or places of certain
destruction. For Scylla is so called (...) spoliand^, or repando; of spoiling
or grieving; And Charybdis of sucking up and swallowing; betwixt which two
dangerous, and almost inevitable gulfs, a virtuous and a pious man shall in the
greatest storms and tempests (neither inclining to the right, nor the lose)
securely, and with great safety attain unto his wished harbor. Moreover, where
Scylla is said to transhap't into this monster, by Circe, being so fair and
beautiful a creature, What is it but to demonstrate unto us, that all such as
digress from reason, and the true institution of good life and manners, do
withal put on a bestiall and brutish shape, since Circe imports nothing else
then a wanton ^i^illation, inciting us to immoderate and unlawful lusts and
pleasures: and so much I guess was intended by the Poets in these Fables of
Scylla and Charybdis.

The Goddesses of the Hills, Woods, Groves, and Trees.
IT is commemorated by Plato, Hydriades, Nymphs belonging to the Rivers and
Wells.
in certain of his verses, that the Hydriades and Hamadriades much delighted in
the music of Pan, who was the god of shepherds, and that they used to dance
about him; the first beginning of the harmony which came from the pipe being
invented by him, and made from his love the nymph Syrinx, by London changed
into a reed, Lib. 1. Metam.
the manner was thus, as Ovid manifests: Syrinx one of (...) ^raine,
Chacing with her o'r the plain: The tale of Pan and Syrinx.

A^^'d alike with shaft and bow,
Each from other would you know?
Which is which cannot be told,
Save one was born, the other gold.
Pan he sees, himself makes fine:
In his cap he pricks a pine,
Now grows careless of his herd,
Sits by brooks to prune his beard,
Meets her and has mind to woo,
Much he speaks, but more would do.
Still his profers she denies,
He pursues, and Syrinx flies.
Past her knees her coats up flew,
Pan would fain see something new,
By the leg and knee he guest
('t seems) the beauty of the rest:
Wings it adds unto his pace,
Now the goal he has in chase.
She adds further to his speed,
Now it is no more then need,
Almost caught, alas (she cries)
Some chaste god my shape disguise,
A river of Arcadia compassing the Fen where the reeds first grew.
L^don hears, and girts her round,
Spies a reed to make sweet sound,
Such is Syrinx: wondering Pan
Puts it to his pipe anon:
Syrinx thou art mine he said,
So of her his first pipe made.


Isacius says, that the Nymph Echo was beloved of him, and that by her he had
a daughter called Iringes, she that to Medea brought the love potion which she
presented to Jason: but of Pan and Syrinx, Ovid thus speaks, Panaque cum
preusaem sibi jam Syringa putaret
Corpore pro Nymphae calamos tenuisse palustres.
Pan (flying Syrinx) when he thought
To have caught about the wast,
'Stead of the Nymphs fair body, he
The fenny reeds embraced.


Which reeds being shaken by the wind, making a kind of melody, of these he
made his first pipe, which he called after her name. Of the Satyrs, Silaeni,
Fauni, and Silvani, memorable things have been recorded, but all being
masculine, they belong not to this history in hand: therefore I purposely omit
them and proceed to our terrene goddesses, and of them briefly.

Oreades.
THese because they were bred upon the Hills and Mountains were said to have a
dominion and divine government over them. Strabo calls them the daughters of
Phoroneus and Hecataea, but Horace in his Iliuds, will have them the issue of
Jupiter and Oristrade: some hold them to be but five in number, but Virgil
numbers them to be many, and companions with Diana in her hunting.

-- Quam mill secutae
Hinc atque hinc glomerantur Oreades.
Viz. Such as attend Diana over the banks of Eurota, and over the mountains of
Cinthus, a thousand of the Oreades in her company here and there shining:
Mnasaea Patarentis has bequeathed to memory, that these were the first that
absteined from eating flesh, contenting themselves with Chestnuts and Acorus,
and the fruits of trees. One of them called Melissa. first found and tasted
honey in Peloponnesus, with whose taste the Greeks were so pleased, that they
call all Bees Melissae, after her name: From hence it came, that in the sacreds
of Ceres, and in all nations the Priests derived their names from her. These
Nymphs were supposed to have the charge of hills and mountains, and sometimes of
such wild beasts as they pursued in the company of Diana: but the protection of
private herds or domestic flocks was not conferred upon them; so religious
were the people of old, that neither public place, nor private, was destitute
of some peculiar and divine power: so likewise every element, herb, root, and
tree, or whatsoever simple was useful and medicinable, or obnoxious and
hurtful to the life of man. Those of the mountains were Oreades or Orestiades.

The Dryades and Hamadriades.
THe Dryades had predominance over the woods and groves, as Pomona over the
orchards and gardens. The Hamadriades were the genii of every particular tree;
and as Callimachus in a Hymn to Delos witnesses of them, they begin with their
first plantation, grow with them, and consume and perish as they rot and
wither: their number is not agreed upon. Pausanias in Phocicis, calls one of
them Tythorera; in Arcadicis, a second, Erato; and a third, Phigalia.
Claudianus in laudibus Stiliconis, reckons them seven. Charon Lampsacenus
produces one Rhaecus, who in the country of Assyria, having a goodly fair
oak, whose earth shrinking from the root, and being ready to fall; as he was
propping and supporting the tree, and supplying the decayed mould about it, the
nymph or genius of that tree, which was to perish with it, appeared to him, and
after thanks for so great a courtesy, bid him demand of her whatsoever, and it
should be granted, since by the repairing of that plant she was still to live:
He taken with her beauty, demanded liberty freely to embrace her to his own
fill and appetite, to which she instantly yielded. Apollonius in his Argonaut,
tells of the father of one Paraebius, who going to cut down an ancient fair
oak that had stood many years, a Nymph in like manner appeared unto him,
humbly petitioning, that he would spare the tree for her sake, since the age of
it, and her, and the lives of both, were limited alike: which he refusing, so
enraged the other of her fellows, that many afflictions befell both himself
and his posterity. Mnesimachus says, that they are called Dryades, because in
their oaks their lives are included; and Hamadriades, because they are born
with them; and Isacius the interpreter of Apollo, because they perish with
them. I will conclude these with one tale recited by Charon Lampsacenus: Archus
(says he) the son of Jupiter and Calisto, being chacing in the forests,
incountred one of the Hamadriades, who told him how near she was to ruin, in
regard that the river running by had eaten away the earth from the root of such
a goodly oak (to which she pointed) and that by saving that, he should preserve
her: at her entreaty, he turned the stream another way, and supplied the root
with earth; for which this Nymph, whose name was Prospetia, granted him her
free embraces: of whom he begot Philatus and Aphidantes. Whether these
relations were true or false, is not much to be disputed on; if false, they
were for no other causes devised, but by the superstition of the people of
ancient days, who left nothing unmeditated that might stir up men to the
adoration of the divine powers, since in every thing they demonstrated a deity.
If they were spoken as truths, I rather believe them to be the mere illusions
of devils and spirits themselves, then the genii of plants and trees, that made
such apparitions.

Of the Goddesses Infernal.
IT lies with much convenience in our way to make discourse of Pluto, the third
brother of Satu^n; of the river Acheron, and the properties thereof; Of Styx, a
flood terrible to the gods themselves, and by which they use to swear; of
Cocytus, of Charon, of Cerberus, of the three infernal judges, Minos, Aeacus,
and Rhadamant, of Tartarus, with diverse others, out of all which many excellent
fables, pleasant to read, and profitable to make both moral and divine use of,
might be collected: but I skip them of purpose, since I am injoined to it by
promise, for but women only I have now to deal with: It therefore thus follows.

Of the Parcae.
OF Proserpina we have treated already amongst the supernall goddesses above,
and therefore must necessarily spare her here amongst these below. The Pa^cae
(or fatal goddesses) are three, Clo^ho, Lachesis, and Atropos, Ceselius Vindex
he gives them three other names, Nona, Decima, and Morta; and cites this verse
of Livius, a most ancient Poet, Quaendo dies venit quam praefata Morta est.
When the day comes that Morta has presaged.


Some calls them the daughters of Demorgorgon: others (as Cicero) of Herbus, and
Noz, Hell and Night; by another name, they are called Fata, the Fates, as
Seneca,

Multa ad Fata venere suum dum fata timeant. As much as to say, Many come to
their death whilst they fear it. They are said moreover to measure the life of
man with a spindle and thread which they spin from their distaffe; from which
they are called Lanificae by the Poets, Lanificas nulli tres exorare puellas
Contigit: observant quem statuere diem.
The three wool-weaving sisters none can pray
To change their time, they fix a constant day.


They are said to be inexorable, and by no prayers or entreaties be moved to
alter the limit of the fixed time, or prorogue the life of man one minute after
the date be expired, which was proposed at our births; therefore Seneca: Nulli
susso cessare licet:
Nulli scriptum proferre diem.


The Poets thus distinguish their offices: one begins the life of man, and
plucks the towe from the distaffe; the second makes the thread, and continues
it; the third cuts it off and so ends it. The first is Clotho, whom Satius calls
Ferrea, or hard hearted; Seneca, Grandaeva, or extremely aged; Pontanus,
Improba, and Sedula, obstinate and yet careful and diligent. The second,
Lachesis, called by Ovid, Dura, hard; by Martiali, Invida, envious; by
Claudian, Ferrea, obdure and rude. The third Atropos, of whom Statius, -- Hos
ferrea neverat annos
Atropos --


Some number Illithia amongst the Parcae.

Plutarch speaking of the face that is visible within the Orb of the Moon,
says, some are of opinion that the souls of men are resolved into the Moon,
as their bodies into the Earth: Aliquanto post tempore eas quoque animas in se
recepit Luna, at quae composuit. 1. After some time the Moon receives into her
self those souls which she had before framed, restoring their minds before
lost: (for they are all in a dream, like the soul of Endimion) and by
coadjuting with the Seminary and vital powers of the Sun, makes them as new
souls. The Tetra, that is the number of Four supplying the body: for she
gives nothing after death, who receives toward generation. The Sun takes
nothing from, but receives again the mind which he gives; the Moon both
receives and gives, and composeth or makes, and divides; when she makes, she is
called Lucina; when she divides, Diana. So of the (...) Parcae, Atropos is
placed about the Sun, as the beginning of this new birth; Clotho is carried
about the Sun, to collect and mingle; Lachesis the last, her office is upon the
Earth: but these are riddles rather to trouble the brain than profit the
understanding. Parcae the mother of these three sisters, is said to be the
daughter of Necessity: doubtless the Ethick writers held these to be most
powerful goddesses, because all things born, or that had subsistence, were
thought to be under their jurisdiction and power, and therefore they were
imagined by some, to be the daughters of Jupiter and Themis, because (as the
Pythagoreans taught) Jove gave to every one a body and form suitable to the
merits or misdeeds of their former life; or else because the divine Wisdom
allotted to every soul, rewards or punishments, as their good deeds or bad
deserved, the cause of which division the ancient Writers not truly
understanding, appropriated all to ^ate and the Parcae.

Furiae or the Eumemides.
THose whom the Poets call Furiae. Virgil terms the daughters of Night and
Acheron. Therefore Galtreus in his twelfth book de Alexand. calls them by a sit
Epithet, Noctiginae, Ego si dea sum, qua nulla potentior, inter
Noctigenus, si me vestram been nostis alumnam.
If I a goddess be, of whom
Amongst the night born, none
More potent is, it is well you knew
Me for your nurse alone.


By the same law Mantuan calls them Achecontiginae, as born of Acheron: they are
called by Lucan amongst the infernals, Canes, dogs: -- Stygiasque Canes, in
luce superna, Destiluana.
In the upper light, I will forsake the Stygian dogs;
meaning the sisters* Amongst mortals they are called Furiae, because they stir
up and spur on rage and malice in the hearts of men. They are called also
Eumenides by an Antiphrasis, in a contrary sense, for Eumenis signifies Been
volens, or well wishing, therefore Ovid, Eumenides tenuere faces de funere
raptas.

Their temples and foreheads, instead of hair are said to crawle with snakes
and serpents, as witnesses Catullus, Statius, Mantuanus, in Apollon. and
others. By Virgil they are called Dirae.

Vltricesque sedent in Limine dirae Lactantius in his sixth book de Vero Cultu,
writes after this manner: There be three affections or passions, which
precipitate into all violent and facinerous actions, therefore Poets call them
Furies: Ire, which covets revenge; Covetousness, which desires riches; and
Lust, whose itching appetite is after all unlawful pleasure. The first of
these Furies, called Alecto, discovered by Virgil, where he terms her
Luctifica, as making strife and contention: The second is Tesiphone, or
Tisiphone, the daughter of Acheron, whom Ovid thus delineates, Nec mora
Tesiphone madefactam sanguine sumit,
Importuna facem, stuidoque cruore madentem:
Induitur pallam tortoque incingitur angue.
Egreditur que domo, luctus comitatur euntem
Et pavor and terror trepidoque insania vultu.
Importunate Tesiphone, without delay makes speed
And snatcheth up a smoking brand, which burning seems to bleed,
A garment on her back she throws
All gore, about her wast
A girdle of a wreathed snake
In curled knots she makes fast.
So forth she goes; sad mourning she
Attends her at the gate:
Upon her sleps, grim Terror, Feake,
And troubled Madness wait.


Claudian in his book of the praises of Stilico, calls the third daughter of
Acheron and Night, Megaerat so likewise Mantuan de Calam temporum, lib. 2. The
sacreds that were made to these, were by such as having escaped any dangerous
disease, or pestilent sickness, had been spared by the fates; and their
sacrifices were only done with a sad silence. The Priests were called
Hesichidae, of a Hero called Hesicho, to whom, before the solemnity, a Ram was
still offered, a^ Polemo witnesses in that work he writ to Er^^osthenes: It
was held a profanation (says he) for any of the meaner sort of people to have
access to these to these ceremonies, only to these Hesichides, whose family
was only acceptable to these severe goddesses, and in all their oblations had
the principal, prime place and precedence. Their Chapel is near to Cidonium
by the Nine ports. All such as sacrificed to them, were in black vestures; and
they were always celebrated in the night season, as it is manifest by
Apollonius.

Indutam obscuram per noctem vestibus atris
By night their sable habits they put on.
To them was slain and offered a c^le black Ewe, and great with young ready to
yeane: neither was there any wine u^ed in their sacrifices, which were called
Neph^lia. Now because no man should have hope to hide and conceal his own guilt
and wickedness, to the three severe judges of Hell, were given these three
ministers; which some call by the name of Erinnae, which signifies the pricks
and stings of Conscience (the parents of which were born, importing so much)
for there is no greater torture or deeper piercing, then a man's own sentence
against himself. And (compendiously to shut up all) the ancient writers would
by these signify unto us, That to a good and just man only, all things are
safe: and that innocence and integrity alone, make men fearlesse and constant
against all the mutabilities of fortune, since the like torments of Mind, and
troubles of Conscience still attend on all such as are impute and dishonest.
Thus having past over the goddesses Celestial, Marine, and Infernal, the
goddesses Selectae, Terrestrial, and others; lest my discourse might grow too
redious by appearing dull and heavy; and besides, in regard that my purpose is
aimed at many, or most of that sex, of what estate and condition soever, to
make my work more succinct and compendious, and to spare you some reading, and
my self more labor, I will deliver you a multiplicity o^ histories and tales
in few, namely, in a short Epitome give you the arguments of all the Fables of
O^i^s Metamorphosis which for your better content I shall express to you in
verse, and with that conclude my first book called Cho.

An abstract of all the Fables in the fifteen books of Ovids Metamorphosis, as
they follow in the Poem.
CHaos into four elements divided, Lib. 1.

Each one into their several place is guided.
And for their sundry creatures, Roo^^th prepare,
The inhabitants of the earth, sea, heavens, and air,
Of earth and water man is first begot,
And the four ages next succeed by lot.
Gold, silver next, third B^asse, the fourth of iron:
In last of which, the Giants seed inviron
The spacious earth, and are become the head
Of Na^ions: of their sp^lt blood man's bred.
This wicked generation, Jove (instated
In high Olympus (...)
(...) to the shape of w^^fe) destroies
In a deep (...) sole injo^es
The earth, with her (...): these at last,
(...) behind their shoulders cast,
(...) generation: other creatures
From earth and moissture breed their several features.
Amongst these, the serpent Python is hegot,
Him, with an arrow, bright Apollo shot;
In memory of which, Pithaean plays
Are celebrated, even to Caesar's days.
Yet was no Laurel known on earth to be,
Till Daphne was transformed into that tree.
Her father grown discons^late and sad,
The floods (that of his sorrow notice ha^^)
Come to his comfort: Inachus alone,
To Poeneus (Daphnes father) tells his name:
Whose beauteous daughter Io (heaven knows how)
Jove, after Rape, transforms into a cow.
Argus that had a hundred eyes, her kept,
Whom Mercury so charmed, that he slept:
And after Syrinx transformation hard,
His sleepy head he from his shoulders pared.
His hundred eyes, whose sights begin to wain,
Juno disposed into her Peacocks train.
Io restored unto her first shape, bears
Young Epaphus; who being grown to years,
To Phaeton objects, That he was bred
Of mortal strain, and not divinely spread.
The aspiring lad, Lib. 2.
his mother Climen' leaves:
And of his father Phoebus he receives
An ominous boon: he, for three days, has won
The guidance of the Chariot of the sun:
By which, the universal globe is si^'d,
Joves thunder strikes the lad that so aspired;
And as a token of that general wrack,
The sunburned Ae^hiops have since then been black.
Now whilst the sisters of young Phaeton,
With Cignus for his death lament and moan,
The Fates (that all our mortal actions scan)
Change these to trees, and him into a swan.
Now Jove surveighs the universe, restored
To pristine beauty: saw, and seeing adored
The bright Calisto, whom he made a rape,
And vitiated in Dian^'s shape.
For which, the wrathful Juno changes cheer,
And in her rage, (...) shapes to a Bear;
Whom as young Archus chaceth o'r the plain,
(Her son) and with his arrow had nigh slam,
Jove by his power determinates their (...),
Changing both mother and the son to stars.
And now the enraged Juno having long
Complained to old Oceanus her wrong,
Is born to heaven upon her Peacocks train,
Stuck with the eyes of A^gus lately slai^.
Next must the Crow her snow white how forgo,
For she despised the shape of Cornix, who
(...) her own tranformation. having mourned
For fair Nictimene to a night-crow turned;
She notwithstanding, to Apollo prates,
And how Coronis played himself, relates.
Wrathful Apollo having rashly slain
His beauteous love, turns to the Crow again,
Condemns his habling, and in deep despite,
To cole-black fathers turns his silver white.
Of her and Phoebus ^^culapius came,
Whose fo^tunes whil^st Ocirihoe does proclaim,
The gods (that of prophetic spells have care)
Transmute her to the equinall shape of Mare.
Apollo, that but late the Suns coach stear'd,
Leaving the heavens to keep Admetus herd,
His Oxen stray: Battus to Hermes lies,
Whose faith the god in double habit tries:
And finding him, his falsenesse he so hated,
That to a Touchstone Battus is translated.
Thence to the Attick Regions having past,
King Cecrops daughter he enjoies at last,
Hearse the fair, whose envious sister hight
Aglaurus; her, the god of her despite
Turns into stone. Great Jove, Europa spies,
And for her love he leaves the Olympic skies.
Commanding Mercury, whom Maia bore,
To drive Aegenors cattle to the shore.
Thither Europa comes, sweet flowers to cull,
Her Jove transports to Creete in shape of Bull.
Cadmus her brother, Lib. 3.
by Aegenor charged
To see his sister by some means enlarged
In his long search a monstrous Dragon slew;
From whose sown teeth, men ready armed grew:
With these, he founded Thebes; after, laments
Actaeons fall, born to such strange events,
Who by Diana to a Heart transformed,
Was worried by his hounds. Then Cadmus stormed
At his near Kinsmans death. This Juno joies,
Who in her hate fair Semele destroies;
The shape of her Nurse Beroe she assumes,
By whose bad counsel, Semele presumes
To ask her own death. Now some few days after,
Jove with his Queen disposed to mirth and laughter,
Dispute of Venus, and desire to find
Which Sex to pleasure should be most inclined.
Tiresius (who before both sexes proved)
Judges the cause on Joves side. Juno moved
Deprives him fight; to recompense his eyes,
Jove fills him with spirit of Prophesies.
His augury Narcissus first made good,
Who against all women's loves opposed stood;
Amongst whom the fair Nymph Echo by her sorrow,
Lost all save voice, which she from voice does borrow;
He, pining with self-love, was the same hour
(^^^ing his sorm) transhap'd into a flower.
Pentheus the sage T^resius does deride,
Though he before the truth had prophesied;
(...) when god Bacchus writes were celebrated,
One of his Priests (who had before related
Of sailors turned to fishes) he keeps bound,
Receiving from the Bacchides many a wound.
This makes the wine gods Orgyes of more fame,
Alcathoe with her sisters mock the same. Lib. 4.

And at their distaffes many tales they tell,
First what unto the blacked Moors besell;
Of Phoebus to Eurinome transverst,
By which all lets and troubles are dispersed,
That he may freely with Leucothoe lie,
For which the jealous Clytie seems to die;
But turns into a Turnsole; they relate
Hermophraditus next (by wondrous fate)
And Salmacis, both in one body mixed.
This done, the sisters in their madness fixed,
Convert to Ba^^, their spindles change to vines,
Their webs to leaves, made by the god of wines,
At which whilst Agave rejoiced, her glee
Is turned to discontent, so she may see
Ino and Ar^amas of great renown,
Run headlong to a rock and thence leap down,
These being made sea gods; whilst the Theban dames
Lament their new change and invoke their names,
Amidst their sorrows and sad funeral mones.
Part are made birds, and part are turned to stones,
Cadmus with these calamities distressed,
Leaves Thebes, and in Illyria he seeks rest.
Where with his wife debating 'midst the brakes,
They soon may see each other turned to snakes*
Alone (...) still remains instated,
Of all that Bacchus and his Oryges hated*
Perseus his grandchild, of fair Danae bred,
With crooked harp cuts off Gorgones head.
Whose purple drops as to the earth they fall,
Turn into Serpents, and before him crawl.
Atlas he changes into a mountain hie,
and all those shackles that Andronia (...),
Are into stones converted: many a ^old guest
Intends to interrupt his bridal feast.
Where Phineus, Pretus, and their furious band
Are changed ^o Marble, and before him stand.
Pallas (till now the noble Perseus guide)
Leaves him and through the air does gently glide
To Helicon, Lib. 5.
there does the goddess mean
To view the famous Well called Hippocrene.
The nine Muse sisters of the Pyrens tell,
And what to the Pyerides befell.
How they contending with the Muses were
Tran formed to Pies, still chattering every where.
By whose example Pallas soon puts on
A Beldams shape transports her self anon
To Ariachne, Lib. 6.
who with her compares,
And having after strife, wrought sundry chares,
Pallas transhapes her to a spider, leaving
Her ancient Art, to take delight in weaving.
This moves not Niobe, who late had lost
Her children, and in diverse turmoils tossed,
Is changed to stone. Now when the people knew
This portent, they the memory renew
Of the base Lysian rusticks turned to Frogs,
And by Diana doomed to live in bogs.
They Marsias likewise can remember still,
Who ranks his music with Apollo's quill:
But he that against the gods, sought praise to win
In this contention lost both lawd, and skin.
When all the neighboring Cities. came to chere
Distressed Thebes, the Athenians absent were;
And to their sorrows can no comfort bring,
Being at home awed by a tyrant King.
Tere^s, who the fair Philomel' deflowring,
Turns to a Lapwing, in the air still towering,
As Philomel' into a Nightingale,
And Progne to a Swallow. This sad tale
Unto Pandion told, he dies with grief:
In whose sad Kingdom next succeeds as chief,
Ericteus: Orithea the fair
His daughter, Boreas to his Kingdom bare.
Of her, (...) Cal^in and Z^thus got:
Amongst the Argonauts these took their lot.
There Jason the white teeth of serpents sew,
Of which, men armed in complete harness grew.
The waking dragon made to sleep: the Fleece
Of gold from Phasis after brought to Greece.
Medea he bears thence; Lib. 7.
She by her art
Makes young, old Aeson, promising to impart
Like good to Pele^s; to his daughters showing,
From a decrepit Ram, a young lamb growing:
But slew him by her fraud. Transported thence,
She with Aegeus makes her residence:
Against whom Minos wars, having collected
Men from all places, by his skill directed:
As some from Paros, which long time before,
Arne betrayed, for which she ever wore
The shape of Daw. King Aeacus supplies
With Mirmidons, that did from Pismires rise,
King Minos: Cephalus these forces led,
Who seeking to adulterate his own bed,
Prevai^^ with Procris: whilst his dogs in chase
Of a wild Fox, both in the self same place
Are changed ^o sione. Minos, Alchathoe won:
N^^us and Scylla are in shape foredone, Lib. 8.

He to a Hawk, she to a Lark is shifted,
And through the air with their light feathers listed.
Thence he returns to Creet, all sad and dull,
Where lived the Minotaure, half Man, half Bull;
Him Th^seus slew, and after does beguile
Fair Ariadne left in Naxos Isle.
With her god Bacchus enters amorous wars,
And places on her head a Crown of stars.
Young Icarus with his old father flies,
And down into the sea drops from the skies.
His death, whilst Daedalus laments: this sees
The Patridge new transformed. Now by degrees
Theseus wins fame, scarce spoken of before,
Being called to hunt the Calidoman Boar;
Which Mealeager slew, and died by the hand
Of his own mother, in the fatal brand.
His sisters with loud shreeks his death proclaim,
Being all changed into Birds called (...).
birds that bear his name.
He visits Ac^elous in his way,
And all these Islands that but the other day
Were Nymphs and Nai'des which appeared true,
Since the like transformation Lelex knew,
In Baucis and Philemon, whom he sees
Growing before him in the shape of trees.
Their cottage made a Temple for their sakes,
The village where they dwelt, all standing lakes.
Achelous adds to these the transformations
Of Proteus and of Mestra, with the fashions
That he himself appeared in, when he proved
His strength against Hercules: both dearly loved
Fair Deiane^^a; Lib. 9.
who having understood
Her husbands scapes, dipped in the Centaures blood
A fatal shirt. Alcides does expire,
Being after made a a star: Lychas her squire,
Is fixed a sea-rock: whilst Alcmena hies
To Iole, and as they two devise,
She tells her of Galantis, before made
A monstrous Weasil; the other shows the glade,
In which at that time she might growing see
Her elder sister, now grown to a tree.
To them comes Iolaus, in the way
(Made young by Hebe:) Jove himself can say
And instance Aeacus, this to be true,
From him Mile^us sled, and thence withdrew
Himself to Asia, from whom descended
Ca^nus and Biblis whose hot love extended
To her own brother (as the stories tell)
And weeping, was dissolved into a well.
This had appeared more strange, were it not known
Young Iphis on her marriage day was grown
To be a complete man; these nuptials saw
Hymen; and thence he does himself withdraw
To Orpheus spousals, Lib. 10.
but his bright robes di'd
In funeral black: Euridice the bride
Expires upon her marriage day, being stung
In the anckle by a snake, when Orpheus sung
His various transformations to the Lyre,
The trees to hear him from all parts desire,
Amongst whom came the Cypress and Vine,
The one clasps Cyparissus in her twine,
The other Aris; every Thrasian fro,
That in his death had hand; besides them grow,
And are made trees. Lib. 11.
Bacchus departs from Thrace,
And because Midas gave Silenus place,
With entertainments due, to quittance this,
He guerdons Midas with his golden wish:
Who f^er wearried with his ravishing dreams,
Was made to wash him in Pactolus streams.
They since that time their golden tincture keep
Still glistring when the Sun shines on the deep.
Pan's music and Apollo's, Midas hears,
And by false sentence gains him Asses ears.
Phoebus (this done) an humane shape put on,
And build's Troy's walls, to be excess'd by none.
This City, great Alcides having rac't:
With Priam's sister, Hesion.
be the valor graced
Of Ajax ^elamon, who in these brauls
Was fixed set foot upon the Dardan walls.
Peleus weds Thetis, though against her will,
For though she by her godhead had the skill
To shift in sundry shapes, yet was comprest,
And Peleus lodged upon her ivorie breast.
To Ceix he past thence (one of his blood)
Where he part saw and partly understood
Dedalion take on him a goshawkes shape,
And Wolf made stone, that flying thought to escape.
Soon after this, Alcinoe in her bed,
Dreaming she saw her Lord shipwreckt and dead,
And from the shrre his livelesse body floting,
Both were made birds; which some spectatours noting,
Straight call to mind, how Esacus the son of Priam.
Aesacus before
Was changed into a Sea-gull: him deplore,
Priam, and all his sons as lost and dead,
Excepting Paris, who to Greece was sped,
And brought thence Hellen: him the Greeks pursue
At Aulis Gulf they anchor: where in view
Of the whole fleet. (...) Dragon they epsy
Obdur'd to stone. To Troy-ward thence they hie,
Where Cygnus, on whose skin no steel could bite,
Was by the great Ach^lles bruised in fight:
And at the instant made a silver Swan,
So Coenis once a woman, now a man,
Was after likewise to a bird converted.
This tale amongst others Nesto^ had inserted.
Periclimenes change to her repeats.
Neptune mean time the other gods entreats
About Achilles death, Lib. 12.
being much offended
At his late loss: he dead, Ajax contended
With sly Uly^^es for his arms and shield:
Ajax disgraced expires, and in the field
Where his blood dropped a purple Hycinth grew,
In memory that Ajax, Ajax slew.
Troy fact by the A^gives, H^cuba the Queen
Turns to ash dog, keeping still her spleen;
Her sad disaster all the gods lament,
Aurora sheds most (...), still discontent
For Memnons death. Aeneas leaving Troy,
To Anius comes, a Prince deprived all joy,
Because his daughters were made house-doves, sad,
That be of them no greater comfort had.
Thence past he diverse shores, and sundry nations,
With wonders ^^ll'd, and various transformations.
Till piercing Italy (yet free from scar)
With the bold Turnus he begins new war.
He sends to importune Diomedes aid
By Venulus: Lib. 13.
whose fellows were all made
Light feathered birds: the imbassador denied,
And back returning by a rivers side
Spies a wild Olive, which before had bin
A lovely shepherd, but now changed for sin.
Aeneas ships are in the haven burned,
But pitied by the gods, to sea nymphs turned;
Ardea to a bird more strange then these,
Himself into a god called Indiges.
Him, other Kings succeed, and amongst the rest,
Lived under Proca (that fair Nymph who best
Can skill of Gardens) unto whom resorted
The fresh Vertumnus, and Pomona courted;
He in an old wives shape to her relates
The tale of Anaxarites, how the fates
For her obdurenesse turned her into stone.
Pomona listening (and they both alone)
He to his youthful shape again retires,
And in the garden quenched his amorous fires.
In process under Numitor the King,
Where erst cold waters slid, now warm baths spring.
Him Romulus succeeding, is created
The god Quirinus, and his wife instated
The god^esse Ora'. Him Numa next ensues,
Who of the birth of Croton asking news:
He chanced on pebbles, who in all men's sight
Once being black, were changed to perfect white.
He likewise heard Pythagoras declame
All the transhapes beneath the heavenly steam.
Aegeria next King Numa's death deploring
Not comforted at all with thy restoring,
Hippolitus, nor yet to hear thee tell
Thy change; she wept her self into a well.
Nor is this to he wondered, since we see
T^y Lance (oh Romulus) a flourishing tree.
And Cyppus to wear horns: (having gone so far)
We end with Julius Caesar made a star.
Explicit lib. primus. Inscriptus CLIO.
THE SECOND BOOK inscribed EUTERPE.
Of the Muses, the Sybils, the Vestals, the Prophetesses, the Hesperides, the
Graces, etc.
THE bodies of all reasonable creatures (as Ficinus says) are naturally
pregnant, as having in them the seeds of issue, so likewise is the mind; both,
still procreating and bringing forth; as we see at such a time the heir
appears; after, the teeth break forth of the gums; at such an age, the beard
grows upon the chin, and in time alters and changes colour^; and still the
natural faculties are in action. If then the body be so fertile, how much more
is the nobler part of man, the Soul and the Mind, plentifully furnished with
these seeds, that long for production? as the instinct of manners, of arts, of
disciplines, and such like, which are generated in the breast, and in their fit
and due time have their seasonable birth. For no sooner are we past the cradle*
but we begin to affect few things good, honest, or profitable: but none at that
age acquires after things unknown. It is therefore a consequent, that there is
born with us and bred in us, certain notions of those outward things, the forms
of which we apprehend, and their practice study to imitate. This every man, if
he will but observe, may by experience find in himself. For if we collect our
selves to apprehend any problem or mystical doubt, which is not within the
compass of our present capacity; after deep consideration, and mature
deliberation, all the bars and rubs of our fantasy and senses being removed,
we retire our selves into a more private and inward contemplation, and then
most subtly reasoning with our selves, we shall by degrees perceive the cloud
to vanish, and the truth appear in full glory and splendor. Therefore when we
present our selves unto school Masters, the brain fashioneth in it self many
Ideas without rule or example, which like a ^^nk and well manured field, has
in it the seeds and grounds of many fruitful sciences; these if a skillful man
take in hand bring oft-times a crop above expectation. Thus much Plato expressed
in many places, but in his Theage most plainly, No man (says he) has of me
learnt any thing, though from me, many a one has gone the more learned. And
as* Socrates says, Me tum exhortante tum bono daemone suggerente, By my
exhortations, and the good Angels sugg^stion. With this short preparation, we
come now to the Muses, of these innate seeds, the glorious and ever-during
fruit. Hesiod pronounces them to be the daughters of Jupiter and Memory,
Plutarch in Graecis petit.
in his Theogonia. From hence it seems, the men of Gnydos had a custom to
select sixty grave and understanding men out of the prime of the nobility, and
to commit unto them the affairs of the Commonwealth, and such they called
Amnemodes or remembrancers. Alcmaeon and some few others, call them the
daughters of Earth and Heaven. Pindarus in one of his Hymns thus speaks to one
of them, Incipe vero Coeli filia. Aristarcus and Minnerca (if we may believe
^ustathius) determine, that the Muses were before jupiter, interpreting the
word Musa the knowledge of the soul, which is a thing no less divine then the
soul it self. To him Homer assents, calling it The celerity of knowledge
Plato in Cratilo derives it from diligent search and inquisition, to whom
Pharnutus in his book entitled, Of the nature of the gods, subscribes. Of the
same opinion is Suidas, They are (therefore says he) derived from Inquiry,
being the originals and causes of all sciences and disciplines: others, as
Cassiodorus, because they contein in them a conveniencie and concordance of
arts: or (to conclude) as D^oorus writes, They were therefore called Musae,
because they comprehend the Art of modulation or tuning, with a consent or
agreeing of all other disciplines. Diverse authors much differ about their
number, Varro, as Servius witnesses of him, allows only three, Ina, which is
bred by the motion of the water; a second, begot by the sprinkling of air; a
third, merely arising from the sound of the voice. Augustine speaks of a City,
which Gyraldus names Sicyon, the primates of which, of three several famous
workmen, bespake three effigies or images of the Muses, to bestow as a gift
upon the Temple of Apollo; and which of them could express the greatest art
and most exquisite workmanship, he to be the best paid for his pains. It so
happened, that their three labors were equally beautiful, and so esteemed,
insomuch, that all the nine pieces pleasing generally, they were all bought and
dedicated to the Temple. To every of which, the Poet H^siod after gave a
several Emblem or Motto: Not (says he) because jupiter had begot nine Muses,
but that three Artificers had forged three a piece; and therefore the number of
three, because it is easy to observe, that every sound which begets any
material thing concerning music, is tripartite by nature: either it proceeds
from the voice simply, as to those that sing without an instrument; or with the
breath, as the Trumpet, Cornet, or Sackbut; or by the strokes, as the Lute,
Harp, or Gittern. The names of these Statue-makers, Augustine says, were
Cephisodotus, Strongilio, and Olimpiosthenes. Pausanias relates, that in times
of old, there were acknowledged no more then three, (by Oto and Ephialtes the
sons of Aloeus) called Meditation, Memory, and song or Music. Archestratus the
Poet, affirms as much; as also, that these two were the first that offered
divine sacrifice to the Muses, and imposed these names upon them in Helicon.
Some authors will approve but two; others will make them up four, for the
excellency of the number, which the Pythagorists held to be so sacred, that by
that (as Plutarch replies) they used to swear, Per quaternionem sacrum, qui
animae nostrae tradit naturam aeternam, etc. By the holy number of four, which
lends to the soul an eternal nature, etc. Some have raised them to five;
others to seven; Pierius Macedo, he increased their number to nine. Some are of
opinion, that the names of the nine daughters of Pierius were imposed upon the
Muses: these are characterd' by Hesiod in his Theogonia. Lucan in his third
Dialogue of the supernall gods, calls the M^ses virgins, and such as are
contented with their n^^ive color and beauty, he likewise terms them
invulnerable, as not to be touch or wounded with the wanton dares of Cupid.
They were crowned dive^^ ways by diverse nations: some bestow C^roners of the
palm tree upon (...), some laurel, others chaplets of roses: to which Sath^
seems to alludemost, elegantly taunting an unlearned woman, -- Mortua Jacebis
Nec enim hortulum habes rosarum ex Pieria,
-- Thou shall lie dead
Without Pierian roses 'bout thy head.


Cornutus in a book entitled De natura D^orum, says, that there were first
only three, according to that number which is attributed to the deity, ^s the
most simple and perfect of all others. Those that made four, as C^cero, or
five, had reference to the ancient instruments of music then in use, and which
yielded no more several sounds. Those that approved seven, to the seven
liberal arts, alluded the seven Muses. But there are nine received and allowed
amongst us, and that for diverse reasons; as first, because the number of nine
is held to be vertuall and perfect; being an even four, arising from a first
odd; and then odly to an odd: it is likewise divided and distinguished into
three equal od^, then it consists of Triangulars, etc. Besides Mnemosyne, who
is said to be the mother of the Muses, her name consists of nine letters.
Fulg^ntius says, that the nine Muses, with their brother Apollo, import
nothing else then the ten modulations of man's voice, therefore is Apollo's harp
represented with ten strings: so in the Scripture we read of the Dechacord or
Psaltery: others morallize it to be the four former teeth, against which the
tongue strikes: the two lips, which are the Cymbals or Instruments to fashion
the words: the tongue, and the string of the tongue: the Palate, whose
concavity begets a sound: the wind pipe which is the passage of the breath; and
the lungs which like a pair of bellows, gives or takes back the air or
spirit. Virgil of the Muses writes thus; Clio g^sta canens transactis tempora
reddit,
Melpomene tragico proclamat maesta boatu.
Comica lascivo gaudet sermon Tualia,
Dulciioqui cala^os Eu^erpe flatibus u^get.
Terpsichore affectus Cytharis movet, imperat, auget,
Plectra gerens Erato salt at pede, carmine, vultu.
Carmina Calliope libris heroica mandat.
Urania poli motus serutatur and Astra:
Signat cuncta manu loqui^urque Polymnia gestu
Mentis Apolliniae vis has movet undique Musas,
In medio residens complectitur omnia Phoebus.
Clio's past acts to after ages sings,
Melpomene, with tragic buskin, she
In bellowing breath proclaims disastrous things.
Comic Thali^ affects wantonly
To speak and w^ite. The eloquent man's quill
Euter pe undertaketh to inspire
With her learned breath* Terpsichore is still
Busied about the music of the Lyre,
The affections to command, to move and sway.
But Erato a Rebec^ hears, and knows
To tread to it: of (...) she can the way,
And how to frame the gesture. Number flows,
In strains heroic, from Calliop's p^n;
Which she to book^ commits. The stars and spears,
U^ania searches, and (...) men
In their true motion. Polybymnia steeres
Action and language, by her hand directed,
Which by her help, an Orator much graceth.
By Phoe^us thus the Muses live protected,
He in the midst, the Nine about him places.


It may now lastly be demanded by those that are studious of antiquity, Why
the Virtues, the Disciplines,the Muses, the Devisers and Patrons of all good
arts, with diverse of the like nature, should rather be comprehended under the
feminine sex, by the names of Virgins and women, as also their pictures drawn
to the portraitures of d^mosels, then either by masculine nomination, or
according to the ^^ffigies of men; the rather since not only the Ethnicks and
Moral men, but even Christians and Theologists themselves, in all their books
and writings which they (...) to posterity still continue them under the same
gender? for who is ignorant that Sophia, which signifies Wisdom, was not from
the beginning, and (...) who is said to be the mother of the th^ee The (...),
Hope, and Charity, and these represented as women? why should the seven
liberal Arts, be expressed in Women's shapes? why the Nine Muses be the daughters
of Jupiter, as all writers agree? why is Wisdom called the Daughter of the
Highest, and not rather the Son, as wituesseth the book of Wisdom? why
Pallas, otherwise called Minerva, not the Son, but the Daughter of Jove (of
whose brain she was born?) and why the most cu^ious and diligent inquisiters
into these curiosities figure the liberal Arts and Disciplines like women, and
not rather like men? or by what reason the Muses should be personated rather
like Damsels then young men, strenuous and excelling in masculine Virtue? To
all these objections, it is briefly answered by Lilius Gregorius, as likewise
by Cor^tus, whom some call Pharnutus; That by the symbol or semblance of such
women, much science is begot, and besides much fruit arises from the judgment
of the soul: besides, it was a custom for Virgins of old to play and dance in
companies, which excellently fitted the coupling and sisterhood of the
sciences: these coherences are called by Martianus Capella, Ciclicae; from
whence Vitruvius grounded his Euciclium: besides, the Greeks Euciclopaedia is
frequent with Pliny, Plutarch, and the rest; likewise in Beroaldus commentaries
upon the golden Ass, he adds this one thing worthy observation, to the great
honor of the feminine sex; the four parts of the world have their
denominations from women. Asia was so called of the Nymph Asia, from whom and
Japethus, Prometheus descended; Europe, of Europa the daughter of Aegenor;
Lybia, which is Africa, of Lybia the daughter of Epaphus; in like manner,
America (since discovered) bears the like female figure; which (as Beroaldus
says) if the women of our age did fully apprehend, and truly understand, how
insolently would they boast of their worth and dignity? how would they glory in
vain boasts and ostentations, with what continual chidings would they upbraid
their husbands, still casting in their dishes their own virtues and goodness;
still commemorating and urging, that women bear the names of all the four
parts of the divided world; that wisdom and the Theological Virtues, are
personated under the sex or women; that the Arts, the Disciplines, the Muses,
the Graces, and almost whatsoever is good, are deciphered both by the names,
and in the persons of women: therefore (I fear) this had been better kept as
secret as mysteries in Sanctuaries, and not to have been published to them in
their own mothers tongue, in which they are so nimble and voluble; lest calling
a Council about this argument, it may add to their insolences, who have too
great an opinion of their own worths already.

I will only speak briefly from what places they took their general
denominations, and so proceed to every particular person: They are called
Pierides, of the mountain Pieris, or as some will have it of Pierius, who had
nine daughters: Likewise Camoenae a Canendo, of singing; Heleconiades of the
fountain called Helicon, that flowed from a mountain in Boeotia; Pernassides,
of the hill Pernassus, situate in the Region of Phocis; Aonides, of the Aonia^
mountain; Pegasides, from a spring or well so called, first discovered by the
hoof of Pegasus, the horse of Perseus; Cithereides, of Citheron, a hill near to
Thebes; Libethrides, from a mountain in Magnesia, Pimplaeades, from a place in
Macedonia; Ilissiades, from a flood by Athens; Thespiades, from the Thespians;
Ligyae, of a people of Larissina, who aided Xerxes against the Greeks;
Castalides, of the fountain so called; Corycides, of a hill, or rather a cave
amongst the Delphians; Pateides, of a well in Macedonia; Olympiades, of the
mountain Olympus; Ardalides, of Ardalus the son of Vulcan: of these you may
further read in Varro, Herodotus, Terentianus, Plutarchus, Pompeius, Pausanias,
Solinus, Servius, Macrobius, Sidonius, Placiades, Lilius, Gregorius, Picus
Mirandula, and others.

Clio.
HEsiodus in his Theogonia says, that Clio is the daughter of Jupiter and
Memoria, and is the eldest of those Muses, which he was nine nights a getting;
she is called Clio, apo tou kleno, which is Laudo, to praise; or of apo tou
eleous, for glory which learned men acquire; or that glory which is conferred
on eminent and great men, by the encomiasticks of the Poets, so says Diodorus:
but Placidus derives the etymology of her name, from the cogitation and
investigation of Arts and Sciences. Some say, that she has the preeminence and
government over histories, as Apollonius in his Commentaries relates (and
therefore at this time I am to invocate her aid and assistance in the
prosecution and perfecting of this work in hand.) She is moreover, taken for
the mother of Or Jalemus.
Hy^^^mus and Hymenaeus, the god of marriage; who are therefore called the sons
of Clio because of their knowledge in History, for so Johannes, Grammati^us is
of opinion: the first, the Author of sad and mourning M^d^i^als: the other of
pleasant and joifull Epithalamions and nuptial ^ongs, the first in melancholy
Elegracks; The last in (...) lambicks. A^ollodorus in his first book of the
Original of the gods, says, that Cl^o was besotted with the love (...) the
son of Magn^^is: (by the incensed wrath o^ Venus, because she reproved her for
too much do^age on (...) and that by (...), she had the boy Hyacinthus: But
that it is she by whom all men are accited and (...) on to the purchase of
honor and glory, whence elle came that magnanimous and b^ld enterprise of
Hercu^es in that great (...) against the sons of Ixion? to call to combat all
the obu^tious pyrots at sea, and robbers and spoile^s on earth? Tyrants and
evil doers to tame? and horrid and dreadful labors to overcome? the
invulnerable Lion of Cyth^^on to tear in pieces? The many headed monster Hydra
to suff^cate and strangle? the E^emanthian Boar to slaughter, and the golden
horned Heart to overcome? The ravenous Stymphalides to repel? and all the
monsters and terrors of the earth in single monomachy to overcome? but to
attain to the Apex and height of fame and glory. What moved The^eus (the
second Hercules) to remove the (...), and pluck thence and bear away the
enchanted (...) to kill? the tedious way to (...) to traveli? the streights and
passages in his journey to (...) with his own proper (...) Sinis, the son of
(...), to oppress? and many other enterprises of no (...) to acquire and
accomplish? What encouraged the (...) and Generals of the G^aecian and R^man
Empire to such noble ^chievements, save only the spur of ^lory to (...) their
names to all perpetuity? So did (...) Poetry (...) Homer; his eloquence,
Demosthenes, and his integrity (...). In like manner, others by other means
have celebrated their names to posterity, to whom this Encomium may be justly
given, Such as have (...) and (...) they tread the illustrious path; (...) does
nobilitate his own name. Such (...), it behooves them auspi^^^ (...) act either
of consequence or danger. For so says P^^darus in his sixth Hymn Olymp. In the
beginning of an enterprise, a courageous and an undaunted countenance (...)
housefull. For Virtue. are senseless of dangers. And H^siod says, V^rttutem
posuere dii sudore parandum.

The gods have placed Virtue, not to be arrived to without sweat and travel.

But it is next to be enquired what the ancient Poets chiefly intimated in this
Nymph Clio: She is called the daughter of Jupiter, and signifies glory. If it
be lawful therefore to acquire glory, and to leave the memory of your noble
actions to posterity, far be it we should seek the daughter but from the
father, or court her without his consent; who from the memory and contemplation
of a deed well done, derives to us a fame, in no age not to be celebrated. She
is called Prima cogitatio, i. The first thought of seeking knowledge; and
because no man's meditations are about that by which he has not a purpose to
enlarge the dignity of his own name, therefore she is called the first of the
Muses. Plutarch in his Symposaicon, divides the nine Muses into two halfes; the
one to govern and have dominion over pastimes and pleasures, lest any man
should foolishly and unadvisedly fall upon actions dishonest or uncomely,
stirring them up with songs, dances, and sweet sounding instruments, to
virtuous exercises; and reteining and keeping him back from lusts, both
unlawful and pernicious: the other division incourages us, to actions
difficult, to affairs serious and of import; and these are Clio, Calliope, and
Thalia: for all things ought to be done in Symmetria and due proportion of
mediocrity, that in our sports we slide not into lusts, and in things serious,
we stumble not at the morosity and peevishness of age. She had two sons,
Ialmus and Hymenaeus, men of two sundry lots and conditions; the one in no
place, but where there was ejulation and mourning; the other where there was
ever sport, mirth, banque^s, and nuptial joies. And as Athenaeus observes from
Aristophanes, In Luctu Ialmus, in nuptiis Hymenaeus. Nothing else is
apprehended by these two brothers of such contrary dispositions, but that all
such as seek after glory and the immortality of their names, are sometimes with
cross and sinister accidents oppressed, and sometimes with fair and
prosperous successes encouraged and puffed up; singing sometimes the joyful
songs of Hymenaeus, and forced (...) other times to be subject to the sad and
melancholy howlings of Ialmus. And so much of Clio.

Euterpe.
EVery man has his pleasures and delights, as well wise men as fools: there is
no man of so severe gravity, or austere a condition (no not Timon himself)
whose nature is not mollified, and made more tractable with the delight of some
one thing or other. One is much pleased with horses of good stomach, another
with dogs of excellent scent or swiftness, some with wealth, others with
honor, and so of the rest; and thus we pass through the pilgrimage of a life
full of infelicities and calamities, with the greater content and case by
pondering some such things in our minds, in which we take the greatest pleasure
and comfort. Neither are the wise men without this alacrity, being sometimes
extasi'd in the contemplation of things sublime and high. Plato in Philebis
(says he) As the intemperate man takes pleasure, so does the temperate man in
his temperance; As the fool is delighted in his foolish opinions and vain
hopes, so is the wise man in his wisdom and constant purposes; but that their
contents are different, and of contrary qualities, no man makes question. The
wise man therefore, and the unwise, have both their pleasures, but so far
pre-excelling is the one, as the other is vile, abject, and contemptible: for
the one is gorged and surfeited with his delicacies, even to loathing and
vomit; the other, inebriated, or rather quickened and inspired with the
sprightly nectar of contemplation, flies into the celsitude and majesty of
things inscrutable; neither conteins he himself within the narrow and straight
empire of this universe, but acquires things above capacity, and transcending
nature; for incited with the deep study of metaphysicall Philosophy, he strives
even to trace the steps of infinite majesty, though it be confessed that this
ambition of his, is both foolish and arrogant, yet is it daring, and noble,
that not satisfied with the knowledge of humble and terrene things, pierces
deeper, and aims higher, till it attain that perfection of height, that the
mind or understanding being filled, may stop at the farthest, as there having
fixed non ultra. But this small digression being of Euterpe, which word implies
nothing else but true delectation or delight, I hope has not been much
impertinent. Hesiod calls her the second Muse in order, and the daughter of
Jupiter and Memory. Neanthes in his book entitled Rerum Graecarum, calls her
the mother of Themistocles: but Amphicrates in his tractat of illustrious men,
Lib. 3.
contraries that, and affirms the strumpet Abrotonum to be his mother. Euterpe
is called the goddess of pleasantness and jollity, said to be delighted in
all sorts of pipes and wind instruments, and to be both their inventresse and
guidresse; therefore it is not probable or credible, that Themistocles should
be her son, when at a solemn banquet, as M. Tullius witnesses, he refused the
Harp, for which he was accused in that assembly of rudeness and discourtesie,
or else of want of skill, which was a kind of aspersion in those days and
places. Lib. Sherap.
Galenus says, that the Lyre or Harp (the pipe of which Enterpe was the first
deviser) were held in great estimation and honor: these be his words, As in
times of old to play upon the Harp at meetings and banquets, or the like
instruments, was held laudable and honest; so either to deny it, or have no
skill in it, was an opprobry and scandal. Lycurgus, though he instituted most
hard and severe laws over the Lacedaemonians, yet the practice of music he did
both allow and highly commend, as a solace by which the troublesome burden of
labor and travel, might be easilier transmitted. Favius says, that songs
cheer the gally slave at his oate, and the pipe not exquisitely played upon,
yet the modulation is comfortable to such as are over-trave^led. The first use
of pipes amongst the Greeks, was after certain great victories achieved, where
they were in great opinion of themselves; but they were after relinquisht in
Athens, either because they were held as inciters to wanton meetings, or
because they raised a kind of uncomelinesse and deformity in the faces of such
as played upon them. Of these pipes there were diverse kinds, That which was made
of the Lote-tree, was called Plagiauton; that of the Box-tree, Elimon; that of
the Laurel tree, Hippophorbon; Monantus was likewise made of the Lote tree,
and most used at Nuptials, which was called also Pholingia. The pipe named
Libis, called by some Matroa, was that which was solely attributed to the
invention of Euterpe, though some bestow it on the mother of the gods. The
Tyr^henes used pipes of horn; the The^ans made theirs of the shank-bones of
Hind calfes; the Celtae, of reeds; the Islanders of the Ocean (as the Scythae,
the Antropagi, and Armaspians) of the leg bones of Eagles and Vultures; the
Egyptians pipe called Polypthongos, is composed of the st^lks of Barlie. There
be as several sorts of this kind of instrument, as it is used amongst sundry
nations and places. Certain it is, though her invention was but poor and
wretched at the beginning, yet it increased miraculously: for almost no nation
but sung their songs, odes, ditties and hymns to several sorts of wi^d
instruments; but especially amongst the Germans in Europe they were in the most
frequent use, from whom they had the name of Ty^iae. The interpreters of
Apollonius and Rhodius, ^ffirm that she first invented the Mathemat^, or
disciplines: others, that she was much practiced in Logic. To speak in one
word what the Poets materially intended by Euterpe, Plutarch best expresses in
his Sympos^^co^, All attribute to E^^erpe, the contemplation of the truth of
nature, Lib. 5.
esteeming no delectations to be more pure, or recreations more fair, then
such as have their birth from her. This therefore is the consequence and
coherence betwixt Clio and Euterpe, according to Fulgentius: we first in Clio
acquire Sciences, and Arts, and enterprises, and by them honor and glory: that
obtained, in Euterpe we find pleasure and delectations in all such things as we
sought and attained; which agree with Plutarchs words from Chrysippus, I take
something to my self which is appropriate to Euterpe, that she has in her that
which instructs men in civility and decency For Euterpe imports to us nothing
else but the joy and pleasure which we conceive in following the Muses, and
truly apprehending the mysteries of discipline and Science. Therefore with
O^pianus in hi^ Halieuticis, I conclude, Laborem. sequitur gaudium. i. Joy
still follows labor. And so much of Euterpe.

Thalia.
IT is a position, That the lawful Pl^tonick banquet, does refresh both the
body and the mind: such a one expressed Athenaeus in his D^pnosophistae; which
signifies Cnoea sapientum, A supper or seast (...) men, which is a discourse at
table, both of pleasure and profit; and of such is the Muse Thalia L^dy and
Mistress. For there is nothing that does better delight the body, refresh the
mind, or make cheerful the countenance, then a banquet of that condition and
purpose. Aristotle says, That man is composed of a body (which is an earthy
mass consisting of spirit and humor) and of a mind which includes two things,
namely, Sense and Reason, from which all honest pleasure does arise and flow,
fit be temperately and moderately governed. And Galen says, That in a modest
and well disposed banquet, all these occur and meet: For who knows not, but by
such means the members are nourished, the humors renewed, the spirit
refreshed, and the reason after a sort watered? By this we have a cestation
from labor, a retirement from care; for the body solace; for the brain
encouragement. Take away the hilarities and mirth of feasting and banqueting;
the nutriment of love, the community of friendship, and the solace of life, is
by such a restraint oppressed, and by degrees ^d ichilate: for the communion and
society of life, is the scope at which moderate banquets aim, and not the
lavish invitation to healthing, and intemperate drinking: which Plutarch in
Symposiacis, seems to approve in these words, speaking of the Muse Thalia: For
that which belongs to surp^ulage of meat, and superfluity of drink concerns not
Thalia, who makes a man sociable in his banquets, who otherwise of his own
condition is churl^sh and froward. I herefore is Thalia derived of Caliazein,
which as the Greeks give the etymology, is Convenire, to meet according to
appointment, well and contentedly to please the pallar, and satisfy the
appetite, and not to gormandise and exceed in surfeit. Therefore the counsel of
Varro is, that all such banqueters be either musical or learned, and not to
exceed the number of the Graces, or the Muses at most. From such a feast are to
be excluded all such as are full of spleen or prone to anger: but such whose
ability is smooth, and apt for the time and place, void of all loquacity and
superfluous language, that rather sweeten then dist^st the company; let such be
welcome guests to her table: but the gluttonous and far dishes of Sardanapalus,
let them be as hateful as cates sauc'd with poison, and such belly-gods appear
to thee as dogs and serpents. Fulgentius and Epicharmus Comicus, says, that
this Muse is the most of all the rest favorable and gracious to Poets, because
they love to meet familiarly and fare daintily, to expel sorrow as they would
do shame, and melancholy as they would do madness: and this they do with an
Antipharmacum, composed of neat and brisk wine, which does smooth and enlighten
a wrinkled and cloudy countenance; for Thalia will at no time suffer a Poet to
droop in spirit, Eclog. 6.
or his fame to wither, as Virgil says: Nostra nec rubuit silvas habitare
Thalia.

Our Thalia blushed not to dwell even in the woods amongst us.

She is the third in rank, who has a denomination of a Virescendo.
dallc^^ that is. Still springing and growing green. Cornutus says. That from
that denomination she renewes and reinspires the (...) life of a Poet: or else
because at their free and (...), she persuades them to friendly and honest
conversation without brawles or riot; or lastly (as others will have it) in
regard the Poets fame once deservedly go^, shall outlast time, and live with
eternity. Many bestow on her the invention of the Comedy; some make her the
first teacher of Agriculture; and others, to be the mother of Palephatus, who
writ much concerning plantation and inoculating, besides five books
Incredibilium, or things past believe. Therefore the papers of Palephatus grew
into an Adage or Proverb, because his books had no credit given to them. Much
is spoken of him by Coelius in his Antiquae Lection: L. 30. c. 34.
But of her there is nothing left save this to speak, That whosoever shall
embrace the Muses, shall purchase to themselves immortality. Therefore Pindarus
in Olympiis calls Poems, The purchases of divine fame and glory immortal.
Plutarch in Quaest. 14. and in Symposiac. lib. 9. will have Thalia, Calliope
and Clio to be conversant in things serious, grave, and philosophical; in
divine things to have speculation; and lastly, to measure all things, justly,
and weigh them in an even balance equally: He that can do this, is not only
worthy to be reckoned amongst the best of men, but to be numbered even in the
catalogue of the gods, of whose memory no age shall ever be silent.

Melpomene.
BY sweet modulation, all things are moved. Plato in his dialogue de Furore,
calls her the daughter of Jupiter, and voice of Apollo; nor without merit, if we
but retire our selves, and look back into the original of things. Her name
derived from the Greek dialect, importing Canere, to sing; and Concentum
facere, to make conseat or concord; which includes the temperature and
modulation of the whole world. For what is better moderated or kept within a
more due proportion, then melody: For as the many limbs and members of the
body, though they have diverse place and motion, and have sundry gifts and
offices, yet all their faculties are directed to one business, as having one
scope and aim: so the variety that arises from diverse voices or strings, all
agree and meet to make one melody, which as Plutarch writes in his book de
Musica, signifies a Melos.
member of the body. And that every creature living is delighted with harmony,
Plaeto does gather, because the celestial spirit from which the world first
took life, had his first lively being and existence from music. Strabo writes
that the Elephants are made gentle, by the voice and the beating of the
timbrell, or the tabor. And Plutarch in Symposiac. That many brute beasts are
much affected to, and delighted in music: Nam video, etc. For I see (says he)
creatures wanting reason are much pleased with harmony; as the Heart with the
pipe, and the Dolphin with the harp and voice: Of which Pindarus and Virgil are
manifest witnesses: -- Inter Delphinus Arion --

Which Arion, Plutarch in his Convivium thus elegantly describes.

Quod mare non novit? quis nescit Ariona tellus?
Carmine currentes ille tenebat aquas,
Sepe sequens Agnam, etc.
Which I thus English*
What sea, what earth, does not Arian know?
Whose verse could make the waters ebb or flow;
His voice has called the woofe back from pursuit
Of the mild lambs, and made his howlings mute.
Often at his voice, the silly lamb has staid,
Whilst on his life the fierce wolf might have prayed.
Often in one shade the hare and hound has li'n,
Both listening to a music so divine.
The Lioness and Ewe together are
Attentive both: but neither fierce nor jar.
The Prating crow to Pallas owl is nie,
And quarrels not: the dove, the hawke sits by.
Often Cinthia has he set thine heart on fire,
And made thee swear, his was thy brothers Lyre.
All the Sicilian Cities are at ones,
And Italy is rapt with thy Lyrick tones.
Bound homewards good Arion shipping takes,
With all the store his art, or music makes.
He feared to see the wind and waters rise;
But there more comfort then a shiphor'd lies.
Behold the Captain with his sword in hand,
With all that guilty crew at his command,
Ing^rt him round: (he well nigh dead with fear)
Entreats them their rude violence to forbear:
Or if so madly they his death desire,
He first may take some comfort of his Lyre,
They grant him leave, and smile at his delay;
He takes his chaplet of the st^ll green B^y,
A chaplet which even Phoeous might have tried,
Then don's a robe in Tyr^an purple di'd*
And as the swan that dying sweetly sings,
So he betakes him to his voice and strings:
And from the inviron of these marine knaves,
Down suddenly he s^^ps into the waves.
The crooked Dolphin takes him on her back,
To save Arion from the present wrack.
She swims, he sits and plays upon his Lyre,
And paies with music the sw^ft Dolphins hire.
But to leave to speak of unreasonable creatures. In man there is a peculiar
reason above the rest, by which his mind is made pliant and tractable to this
modulation, for it insinuates into his bosom soonest. For none is of so rude
and rough hewn a disposition, that yields not an attention to melody, and is
not captivated and surprised with the ravishing sounds, Five several sorts of
songs.
of Melpomene. In the monuments of ancient writers there are observed five
several sorts of songs: the first Suph^onistiche, such were the songs that
were used to be relished in the ears of ^litemnestia; and all such singers are
called Sophronistai, according to the Greeks; the second were called
Encomiastice, Laudatory; in which the praises of the most excellent men were
celebrated; and such were sung by Achittas: the third, D^inetiche, or Cantus
Lugubris, the mournful song; the fourth, Orchematiche, or Saltatoria, the
dancing dit^y; the fifth, P^^n^che, such as is in Homers Iliads, and is called
Poeean, or Poean; such were Hymns to Apollo, not only in a plague time, that
the Pest should cease, but for the cessa^i^n of war, or any other present
mischief then immediate whatsoever. Melpomene is likewise the chief, and has
the prime precedence in the Tragedy; as Virgil in the verse before remembered.

Melpomene, tragico, etc. Therefore it was the custom in all the Tragedies of
old, to annex to the end of every act, a Chorus, with some sad and mournful
song: and the nearer they grew to the catastrophe or conclusion, the songs were
set to the more passionate tunes, and sung with the more sorrowful accent,
expressing an augmentation of grief both in countenance and gesture. Some of
the great authors confer upon her the invent on of Rhetoric, of which
opinion was Pharnutus, who does etymologise Melpomene from Molpe, which
signifies the sweetness of the voice: for one of the chiefest ornaments in an
Orator, is, first, Action, then a constancy in Voice, Motion, and Gesture
beseeming and comely. Most certain it is, that all these things commented of
Melpomente, either concerning the derivation of her name, or her invention of
arts, meet in this one center (to which so many lines aim) to signify to us a
well spoken, learned, and eloquent man, from whose lips issue all foecundity
and sweetness: And that he may attain to this elegancy, which so much graceth
an Orator, behooves him to take counsel of M. Cicero that is to join Wisdom
with his Eloquence, and substance and matter to his pronuntiation and phrase;
by which practice, he may prove to the Commonwealth a most necessary and
profitable member. Lastly, Fulgentius teaches, that by this Muse is meant a
maid given to meditation: as first, Clio begets a will; secondly, Euterpe a
desire to prosecute that which the will is bent unto; thirdly, Thalia to be
delighted in that which we have acquired; fourthly, Melpomene, to meditate upon
that in which we are delighted. And so much for meditation, or the fourth of
the Muses.

Terpsichore.
IN the fifth place succeeds Terpsichore, whose name is derived a T^^po
del^cto, and Kore^a tripudium, that is, delighting in dancing* This Muse has
no less reference to Music, then (...) her eldest sister; the one governs the
voice, and has predo^^nance over songs, the other over dancing (...) measures.
They are by the great writers much commended, who therefore make the Muse the
inventresse of them, being the daughter of Jupiter: the original of dancing
they derive from the high heavens, from the order of the stars and planets,
from their motion, their going forward and return backward; which even at the
first creation began in an harmonia call measure of the celestial bodies.

Of Dances there be sundry kinds; some took name from the song, and such was
called Emmelcia, that was held to be Tragical: a second, was called Cordax
Comica, or a Country dance; of such Arriamnus in his Indian Commentaries,
remembers us: some bestow the invention of such upon the Satyrs; others affirm
that Bacchus by his Orgyan leapings or dances, brought the Tyrthenians, the
Indians and Lydians, all warlike nations, to his subjection* Therefore those
that were called Siccinastae, they confer on him or some of his fellows and
adherents, though the Sicinni were the people of Creet, amongst whom that kind
of measure was most celebrated. In what estimation these were of old, may be
easily imagined, when no sacrifice was offered at Delos, but dances were the
chief in all their superstitious ceremonies. The Brachmani, a people of India,
morning and evening in their adoration of the Sun, frequently use them. Amongst
the Aethiopians, the Thracians, the Egyptians, the Scythians, their sacreds
are not solemnized without them, as first instituted by Orpheu^ and Musaeus.
Some danced in the honor of Mars. The Lacedaemonians had them in continual
practice, so likewise the Thessalians; insomuch that the most wise Socrates
after he was grown in years, practiced to dance, and not only gave such
exercises an extraordinary character of commendations, but numbered them amongst
the best Sciences. These dances were not in custom without music, especially
in their festivals and sacrifices; for the boys or young men went in the first
place, some playing upon harps and pipes, and others selected for the dances:
whose custom was, as they tripped and skipped about the Altar, they first
proceeded so, that from the left hand, they might incline to the right, to
observe the course of the Zodiac; and again, from the right hand turn to the
left, to imitate the motion of the Primum mobile. Pindarus calls Apollo,
Orcheste, that is, Saltator, a dancer. Plato in his first book de Legum
latione, says, that the first ground of learning proceeded from the works of
Apollo and the Muses; holding that man untutored and ignorant, that was not
practiced in the measures of the Muses, and him accomplished and best
instructed that could tread them with the best agility and cunning. By which it
may be concluded, that these Choreae were begot by music, and fetched from the
very intrails of number used in verse (which some of Rith mus call Rhyme) and
from other Ethick observations: therefore some attribute to her, the invention
of that which we call Humanitatis Disciplina, which signifies, The discipline
of humanity. By the son of Ach^lous she had the Syrenes (though Fulgentius calls
them the daughters of Cal^ope) and by Mars, Bistone, of whom the Country is
called Bistonia; she is therefore rankt in the fifth place, and said, Choreis
delectari, because it is a pleasure and delight to the auditors, for the
benefits they received by hearing the mysteries of learning and knowledge
manifested and laid open unto them: as if we should say, Terpsichore, is a
delight in instruction; or, to take a felicity to be instructed. Fulgentius
will have Polymnia to take place before her, his reason is, because after
invention or much memory (which is Polyhimnia) it is then necessary to judge
and determine of that which was before devised and invented. Cornutus says
that good men transmit the best and greatest part of their lives in delectation
and joy; or else that they bring pleasure and content to all such with whom
they shall converse: of which delight this Muse is the patroness. Others think
she was so called, because she was so pleasing to the society of the rest of
her sisters: but whence soever she had that name bestowed upon her, it was
neither idle nor unmomentary; the Fable of this Muse thus much insinuating,
that part of the Muses are intentive only upon serious and solid matters, as
Philosophy, the Mathematics, and the like: the rest upon recreations, sports,
and pastimes By which the ancients would teach us, That it is not possible, but
he that has spent most of his age and study upon Calliope and Urania, but
shall in that knowledge be most joifull, and filled with all manner of
delectation: which pleasure and content they signified by dances, music and
banquets.

Erato.
IN Plato's Sanctuaries it is left recorded, that Amor, which is love, in Greek
called Erota, which is the name of the Muse of whom we are now to speak (and by
him called the voice of Venus) is known to be nothing else by such as truly
understand, then the desire of beauty; of which Plotinus makes a three^old
distinction, it is either in the Mind, begot by virtue, and that is called
V^n^stas, which may extend to a graceful pleasantness in speech, or
delectable utterance; or in the Body, of the lineaments and color meeting in
the greatest (...) and that is called Decus, which is comeliness or a
sweetness of proportion; the last is the concordance and pleasantness of
sounds, which comprehends in it an excellent, though invisible fairness or
pule^^itude.

This threefold beauty has three senses subservient or agreeing; The interior
eye of the Mind. The sight of the Body; and hair, accommodated and apt for the
entertaining of sounds. Banished the the from the integrity and perfection of
Plato's love are all the refore inst^mmations of fiery lust, and (...) of
unlawful pleasure. Even Socrates, who by the Delphick O^acle was judged the
wisest of his time, profett himself (...) o^ this love. In Athens, as of as
any sacreds were made to Pallas, so often were they to the statue of love, which
was placed in the same Temple. In the popular ceremonies, Love was honored of
all men. The L^cedemonians (before they affronted or encountered the foreign
enemy) made their oblations to Love, as it he had the power to give them both
safety and victory. The b^nd or company, which among the Thebans was called
S^cred, consisted on Lovers, and such as were beloved. They had besides, a
School or an Academy dedicated to Love. (...) in Phed^a, proclaimed Love to be
a god, and (...) with gods and men, as it is in his Symposi. Love (...), and
wonderful both to men and gods. and (...) and gods, and besides many other
things, (...) generation and birth.

(...) spe^king in his Th^^gonia, says, that Ch^os was first (...) Earth and
(...) next created, and immediately after them, Love; this is to be understood
in an allegorical sense, and mystical and obscured: for he does not by love
understand the son of Venus, for how can he be born when his mother was not yet
come into the world. We must understand (...) Love more ancient, which is
significan^ in the name of this (...) called Erato; therefore H^siod define him
both of Chaos and the Earth. O^ the same opinion is D^^us Dionysius Areopagita,
for thus he says, Love, (...) you term it divine or angelical, or spiritual,
lively, according to creatures, Lib. de Divinis nominibus.
or natural; you must understand an inherent and commixt virtue which does
insinuate or entice the superior things to the inferior, which does reconcile
things equal amongst themselves; making them sociable, and equally
communicating; and lastly does pleasantly provoke such things as are infinite,
to be converted to matters more sublime and greatlier to be desired; that like
things combustable added to fire already kindled, may make them sparkle and
burn afresh. Worthy he is no doubt, who is commended of all men, not only for
the nobility of his birth, but the antiquity of his house, as is observed from
Plato; but great must he needs be of force, to whose Empire both gods and men
are subjected.

He is besides to be wondered at for his shape and feature, because every man
admires that beauty which he best loves. Lastly, he is to be commended, and
Encomiasticks to be sung in his praise, for the utility and profit that arises
from him. Therefore from those before us, for his nobility; from these present
with us, for his magnitude and potency; and from those that shall succeed and
come after us, for the expected utility, this Love is to be held in great
honor and adoration. But the opinion of Ovid does no way assent with the words
of Hesiod, who says, Nunc Erato and tu nomen amoris habes; deriving the son of
Venus from the foresaid antiquity; by which he would make him much more elder
then his mother. But to speak according to the Greeks, it is delivered unto us
by them, that Erato was the mother of Thamira, she that was the first
Inventresse of the Amatorious Poem (or love-verses.) The Ar^adians will not
allow Erato in the number of the Muses, only they give her the character of a
prophetess, who was married to Archas the son of Cal^s^o begot by Jupiter; and
that she was the first publisher of Pans O^acles.

Patroclus that commented upon Hesiod confers upon her the invention of Poesy;
but the Poet himself says, that she first devised dancing; as may appear by
that which I have before interpreted.

Pl^ctra gere^^ Erato saltat pede, carmine, vultu. Some of the Greek authors
allow her dancing, others music. Pharnu^us writes, that she was so called from
demanding and resolving, which is (more plainly) from questions and answers,
which two are much frequent amongst disputants. Fulgentius derives her from the
invention of Similies, because that after Science and Memory, is requisite that
we devise something resembling that which we have learned. To conclude
therefore: Erato is a certain Love born by nature, which the wise men received
from the gods. Or (to speak according to Areopagita) a certain institution by
which Socrates, being elevated, and (as it were) rapp'd into an higher element,
sung and declared his divine mysteries: before which time (as he has of
himself delivered) he was altogether ignorant of things Superior or Inferior,
Celestial or In^ernall. Therefore with Erato I thus conclude, The force of
Love is in all creatures miraculous but in man especially.

Polymnia
THis Muse purchased to her self the famous and reverend name of Mother, or one
more condign and excellent, and was of old held in great honor amongst
Generals, Princes, Optimates and Emperors. Her name importing nothing else but
Memory. Th^mistocles of Athens (as Tully affirms) had learned the names of all
the Citizens. In Cant. Mayor.
Cyrus, with no less happy retention, having an infinite army, yet knew every
one of his soldiers, and called him by his proper name. Homer in his Iliads,
speaks the like of the Archduke Agamemnom, who commanded his brother Menelaus,
from him to go to evey particular soldier in the camp, and by name to salute
them. Nicias the Athenian, before he attempted that unfortunate navall battle
against the Syracusans, spoke to all the Captains and Masters of ships, not
only by their own names, but the names of their fathers, and of their Tribes,
exhorting and encouraging them to fight valiantly; for this Thucidydes writes
of him, Again, he called every ship-master by his own and his fathers name,
remembering the very tribes from whence they were descended. Many have excelled
in memory, but especially the Poet Simonides, of whom I have thus read. That
being invited by one Scopa (a fortunate and rich man) to a great feast, where a
multitude of his acquaintance, friends and allies were then present, so that
all the Tables in his large Hall were furnished and thronged with guests, and
every man had took his place, and he amongst the rest; suddenly a hasty message
was brought unto him, that two young men attended without to speak with him
upon business of great urgence and importance; he presently arose from his
fear, but coming to the gate, saw no man: In this interim whilst he expected
them without, the whole structure with the roof and battlements, fell upon
those within and slew them all, not leaving one alive; only Simonides by this
prodigy escaped. Now when the friends of those that perished came to the place
of slaughter, intending to give their allies and acquaintance the due rights of
funeral, according to their degrees, but by reason of that confused massacre
and multitude of persons there shattered almost to nothing, no man could
distinguish one from the other: Simonides by remembering in what place every man
sat (notwithstanding that confusion) distinguished the bodies, and gave to
every one his friend and kinsman to give unto them their due rights of burial
according as their births or offices in the Commonweal deserved. This
approves unto us, Lib. 16.
that order is a chief rule in memory; which Cicero himself has observed.
Ammianus Marcellinus is of opinion that he strengthened and preserved his
memory with potions, extracted from the juice of diverse drugs and simples. Most
requisite and necessary is Polyhimnia to all such as shall enter the Chapel
where the holy things of the Muses are kept. Whether the memory come by nature
or by art, or practice and exercise, who knows not but all men are retentive
of such things as they are first instructed in, and that by nature;
nevertheless it is to be observed, that children and old men, the first have
not their memories so perfect, the latter, not so full and strong; for being in
continual motion, the brains of the one not ripe, and of the other somewhat
decayed, answer not to the va^eity or greatness of the body, the prime senses
being oppressed with an unwieldy and unprofitable burden: in those likewise that
are fat and full of thick and gross humors, the exact forms of things are not
so easily designed or expressed. Plutarch in his book of Oracles calls the
Antistrophe is where between two things conjoined that have mutual dependency,
there is a concesion by course.
Antistrophon to Divination: for things past only belong to Memory, and things
present are the objects of the senses. Themistius says, that the S^uthsayer
deals only in predictions. And Plato in his Philebus affirms, That memory is
neither sense, nor imagination, nor understanding, but an habit or affection of
these, with Time added, by which there is made an impression and a spectre or
imaginary fancy l^ft in the soul. Lucian says, he that proposes to himself
to have Polymnia propitious unto him, endeavors to keep all things in memory.
She is called also Polyhimnia by Horace, a multudine cantus of the multiplicity
of songs, as Lambinus observes in his Commentaries. Ovid gives them the same
title, Lib. 1. Carmin.
as Muretus writes upon this verse; Dissensere Deae quarum Polyhimnia prima
Caepit --
The goddesses were at odds, of which Polyhimnia first began.
So Virgil;
Nam verum fateamna amat, Polyhimnia verum.
-- We must confess it sooth,
For Polyhimnia nothing loves but truth.


In many place, and by diverse Authors, she is sometimes called Polymnia, of
Memory, and again Polyhimnia of variety in history: In the commentary upon the
Argonauts, she is said to be the mistress of the Lyre, or Harp. Hesiod gives
Geometry to her, and other of the Greek Poets, Grammar. Cassiodorus in variis,
entreating of the Comedy, makes her the first inventresse of Mimick action: and
Plutarch in Sym^^sia of Histories: For (says he) She is the remembrancer of
many. Polymnia therefore, or Polyhimnia, is called Multa memoria, because
memory is most behovefull to all such as practice the study of Arts and
Disciplines.

De Urania.
FRom Polymnia I proceed to Urania, and from Memory we are drawn up to Heaven:
for the best remembrancers, as Pliny says, comprehend the whole world or
universe, in which the heavens are included, and all the secrets therein, as
much as by investigation can be attained to, have the full and perfect
knowledge: for the most secret and hidden things are contained in the heavens
above, and therefore such as are expert in them, cannot be ignorant of these
less and more easy to be apprehended below: Plutarch of Urania thus speaks:
Plato (as by their steps) has tra^'d all the gods, thinking to find out their
faculties by their names. By the same reason we place one of the Muses in the
Heavens and about celestial things, which is Urania for that which is above
has no need of diversity of government, (...) full directresse, which is
Nature: where (...), excesses and transgresses, there (...) to be transmitted
(and one particular Muse still reserved) one to correct this fault, and another
that. Urania therefore (according to Plutarch) has predominance in things
celestial, which by how much they are above things terrestrial in
excellence, they are so much the more difficult. Some stretch the influence of
the stars to Zoriasta's magic, in which he was popularly famous, nay more, his
name by that art enobled. notwithstanding, the annals testify that he was
subdued and slain in battle by Ninus. Pompey the great was curiously addicted
to these divinations; yet his potency failed him, and he dyed a wretched death
in Egypt. Howbeit by these instances it is not to be inferred as the
mysticallest and powerful part of the Mathematical Disciplines. The
inventions of Manilius most indirectly confers it upon Mercury. Plato in
Epinomide, would have all that contemplate Astrology, to begin in their youth;
such is the excellency of the art, and the difficulty to attain unto it; for
these be his words, Be not ignorant that Astrology is a most wise secret: for
it is necessary, that the true Astronomer be not that man (according to Hesiod)
that shall only consider the rising and setting of the stars, but rather, that
has a full inspection into the eight compasses, or circumferences, and how the
seven are turned by the first, and in what order every star moves in his own
sphere or circle; in which he shall not find any thing which is not miraculous.
If therefore the praise of Astronomy be so great, What encomium then is Urania
worthy, who first illustrated the art? This only shall suffice, that by her is
meant celestial Astrology, so called of the Heaven, for (as Pharnutus says)
The entire universe, the ancients called by the name of Heaven. So by this
means Urania is acknowledged to be frequent in all Sciences below, and
speculations above whatsoever. Her etymology importing Sublimia spectantem,
that is, Beholding things sublime and high. Or her Ovid thus: Incipit Urania,
secere silentia cunctae,
Et vox audiri, nulla, nisi illa potest.
Urania first began to speak:
The rest themselves prepared
To hear with silence, for but hers
No voice could then be heard.


She is then received from the heaven, either because all nations and languages
beneath the firmament, have some learned amongst them; or that such as are
furnished with knowledge, she seems to attract and carry upwards; or, to
conclude, because glory and wisdom elevate and erect the mind to the
contemplation of things heavenly. Fulgentius says, That some of the Greek
authors have left written, that Linus was the son of Urania; but it is
elsewhere found that she was called Urania of her father Vranus, otherwise
styled Caelum, whom his son Saturn after dismembered. Xenophon in Sympos.
remembers, that Venus was called Urania, speaking also of Pandemius: of both
their Temples and Altars, the sacrifices to Pandemius were called
Radiovorgaraera; those to Venus Agnotaera. Some as Lactantius Placidas) call
Helenevae that menacing star, Urania. In a word, that celestial Musc called
Astrologia or Urania, intimates nothing else, then after mature judgment* to
deliberate what to speak, what to despise; to make election of what is useful
and profitable, and to cast off what is frivolous and impertinent, is the
adjunct of a mind celestial, and a wisdom inculpable. M^st true there ore
is the sentence of Plato, who tells us that Urania is she that first attracts
the eyes of our mind to sublime things above, Lib. 7. de Repub.
and if it were possible, would draw our selves after.

Calliope.
THere are two things in the mind chiefly predominant, Plat in Gor.
Knowledge and Disposition, which as Plato says, are in continual and
restless motion. Knowledge, which by the Sophists under a color of truth, is
abused, with things false and erroneous; and Disposition or Affection, which
tempted by the popular Poets, under a bait of delight and pleasure swallows
the hook of many perturbations and distractions; those Orators that are merely
superficial and not seen in the grounds of wisdom, corrupted with idle and
vain reasons, they delude the knowledge, and with unnecessary curiosities
precipitate the affection. From Sophists we must altogether beware, as
pestiferous and infectious; from Poets and Orators, in some kinds, but not in
all cases. plato confineth Sophisters every where and from all places, and
Poets too, but not all; such only as comment false and scandalous tales of the
gods; nor these from all places, but from the Cities only that is, from the
society of of young men, and such as are ignorant, prone to perturbation, and
not capable of the allegorical sense included: admitting only such as speak
well of the gods, sing divine Hymns, and bravely register the acts of noble and
illustrious persons; Such is the practice that Calliope teaches her Poets;
which practice as Ficinus witnesses, is nothing but the rapture of the soul,
with a transmigration into the majesty of the Muses. This Poesy rouseth us
from the sleep of the body, to the awaking of the mind, from the darkness of
ignorance to the light of knowledge, from death to life, and from dull oblivion
to a contemplation divine and heavenly: But where the wit fails, there is no
help to be expected from the invention, for it is no^ within the compass of
man's capacity to compass deep and great matters in a moment, for all knowledge
is inspired from above. And since Poetry comes not by fortune, nor can be
attained to by art, it must consequently be a gift from the gods and Muses. For
when Plato names the god, he intends Apollo; when the Muses, he understands the
souls of the spheres; for Jupiter is the mind of the deity, who ecstasies and
illuminates Apollo, Apollo the Muses, the Muses, the Poets, the Poets inspire
their interpreters, the interpreters make impression in the auditors. By diverse
Muses, diverse souls are enlightened, as it is in Timaeus, that sundry souls are
attributed to sundry spears. The Muse Calliope, is a voice resulting or
rebounding from the sound of the other spears, and of the rest the most
excellent, L. 2. Theog.
who is not only a friend of Poets, but the companion of Kings, as Hesiod
says; Calliopeque and haec excellentissima est omnium,
Haec enim and reges venerandos comitatur
He makes her the mother of Orpheus, and to inspire him as Urania did the Poet
Musaeus; Clio, Homerus; Polyhimnia, Pyndarus; Erato, Sapho; Melpomene,
Thamyras; Terpsichore, Hesiodus; Thalia, Virgilius; Euterpe, Pub. Ovidius. Thus
the nine Muses, who have reference and hold correspondence with the nine
celestial sounds, make one harmony and consent by inspiring nine illustrious
Poets; Amongst them Calliope is held to be the most ancient. Ancient likewise
is Poesy, whose invention is given to Calliope, as to the Championess that
defends the standard of the Muses. Besides Orpheus, some say she had two other
sons, Ialmus and Hymenaeus* of whom we spoke before. Hymenaeus was beloved of
Tham^^as, who was the first Poetiser of unchaste venery. She is also said to
have a son called Cymothon, by Oeagrus; some also make the Syres the
daughters of Calliope, others of Melpomene: Venus (because Orpheus the son of
Calliope discovered Adonis, whom she had delivered to Proserpina to be six
months concealed) gave him to be lacerated and torn in pieces by the Thracian
women. But now to search what was chiefly aimed at by the Poets in this Muse
Calliope: It appears that by her they apprehended the sweetness and modulation
of song, as taking her denomination a bona voce, of a good and tuneable clear
voice; therefore she is called Vox deae clamantis, The voice of the calling
goddess; from which they gave her the dominion over the persuasive art of
Rhetoric and Poetry. The general tractate of the Muses, aiming only at this,
That the first thing requisite, is to have a will to knowledge and learning;
the second, to be delighted in that will; the third, to be constant in that we
delight; the fourth, to attain to that in which we are constant; the fifth, to
commemorate that which we have attained; the sixth, to make similitude and
compare what we have commemorated; the seventh, to judge of those likes which
we have made and compared; the eighth, to make elections of such things as thou
have judged; the last, eloquently to speak, and facundiously to delate of that
thing of which before thou have made election. So much Fulgentius. And those no
doubt that have long and much exercised themselves in these disciplines, and
have been the devout adorers of the Muses, the daughters of Jupiter, and
practiced themselves as well in the gentler Sciences as the hidden mysteries of
Philosophy, shall not only by their endeavors attain to the perfection of fame
and glory, but purchase to themselves incredible joy, pleasure, content and
delectation.

A word or two of the Muses in general, and so conclude with them. They are
held to be the souls of the Spears: Urania of the starry heaven, and of that
Sphere which is called Aplanes; Polybimnia of Saturn; Terpsichore of Jupiter;
Clio, of Mars; Melpomene, of the Sun; Erato, of Venus; Euterpe, of Mercury;
Thalia, of Luna. These eight Muses are referred to the eight tones of the
spears; from all which Calliope, not till now named amongst them, arises and
is begot: these being near to the body that is first moved, which is said to be
next to the seat of the supreme deity, are said by Hesiodus to dance about the
Altar of Jupiter. But because diverse and sundry are the studies of these Muses,
therefore by their influence the minds of mortal men are inspired with sundry
and diverse delectations, which (as the Pythagoreans think) descend down upon
them from these spears* those, over whom the Moon has predominance,
participate of the nature of Thalia, and are therefore delighted with comic
lasciviousness and wantonness. Those whom the sphere of Saturn governs, or
Polyhimnia, being of a dry and cold temperature, they are wondrous retentive
in the remembrance of things long past. For the dispositions of the mind, and
constitutions of the body, have a consonance to the nature of that Planet under
which they were born: therefore some are delighted with one study, some
another, according to the aspect of the Plane^. For example, if Mercury be in a
good and pleasing aspect, he begets eloquence, facundity, and elegancy of
speech, besides skill and knowledge in many things, but especially in the
Mathematics: the same being in conjunction with Jupiter, they are bred
Philosophers and Divines: being joined with Mars in his happy aspect, it makes
men skillful Physi^ians and fortunate; but in his bad aspect, such as prove
unskilful, unlucky and sometimes thieves and robbers, which commonly happens
when he is scorched with the Planet of the Sun. Being in conjunction with
Venus, thence proceeds Musicians and Poets; joined with Luna, wary Merchants,
and diligent and thrifty husbands; with Saturn, it infuseth men with prediction
and prophecy. But let this little serve to illustrate the rest, so from the
Muses we come to the Sybils.

Of the Sybils.
ISiodorus says, Lib. 4.
that the word Sybilla is a name of place and office, and not of person: It is
derived of Syos, which signifies Deus, God; and Beele, as much as to say,
Thought. So that Sybill comprehends a woman that had gods thought: For as a man
that prophesies, is called a Prophet, so a predicting woman is called a
Sybill. Of their number the ancient writers much differ. Aelianus in his book
De varia Historia thus speaks: There were four Sybils, Erithraea, Samia,
Aegyptia, and Sardinia. Others to these add six more, to make the number ten:
amongst which are numbered Cymaea, and Judaea, with the three Bacchides, one of
Greece, a second of Athens, a third of Arcadia. It seems he had forgot to
reckon the tenth. Lib. 2. c. xx.
Aretine in his book De aquila volante, agrees with Isiodorus. In the etymology
of the word Tanto sona quanto a air mente devina. He likewise numbers ten, the
first (says he) was of Persia, the second of Lybia, the third was named
Delphica, being born in the Island of Delphos, and near to the Temple of
Apollo, who prophesied of the wars of Troy; the fourth was called Omeria, and
was of Italy; the fifth, Erythraea, and born in Babylon; she composed a book,
which in the Greek tongue was entitled Vasillogra; the sixth was called Sania,
or rather Samia, as born in the Isle Samos; the seventh, Cumana, of the City
Cuma, whose Sepulcher, as Isiodorus writes, is in Sicily, she brought certain
books to Tarquinius Priscus, which spoke of the Roman succession, and what
should futurely betide them, prescribing them the Ceremonies to be used in
their sacrifices; the eighth, Ellespontiaca, who likewise prophesied of the
wars of Troy; the ninth, Phrigia; the tenth and last, Alburnea, who prophesied
many things concerning the Savior of the world. Lib. 1. c. 7.
And so far Aretine. The opinion of Johannes Wyerius, in his book De
praestigiis Daemonum, is to this purpose, That the devil in the theater of
this world, might put a face of honesty upon all those Tragedies which he aimed
to execute upon mankind, he instituted his Enthusiastae and his Pythean
Oracles, which were in use almost amongst all nations, insomuch that their
superstitions, and prophanations had crept in amongst the people of God: so
that Moses made a law, that all those that repaired to these juggling
sorcerists, should be stoned to death. Amongst these are counted some of the
Sybils, though not all, as the hirelings of the devil, for the conservation
and confirmation of his Kingdom: for out of their books the Romans were drawn
into many lunacies and frenzies, as (besides many other) it is manifest in
Zoz^mus, who recites many of there verses full of tradition, and superstitions
merely unlawful, though the two Sybils, Erythraea and Cumana in heroic Poems
prophesied of Christ, and sung and declared his praises: which as some
conjecture, they did by the sight of the prophesies of Esaias and David. These
Oracles lasted to the coming of our Savior, but then surceast through all the
parts of the world. There were also a kind of sorcerists, which some call
Lemures; the word importing the spirits and ghosts of such as perished before
times, or abortively, for from such they fathered their predictions and
prophesies. Of this kind there were many in Germany (as Wyer^us relates) who
were of long continuance, and such were called Alhae Mulieres, or the white
women, which in their modern tongue, implies as much as the white Sybils: The
white Sybils.
and this sort of people was ominous to women with child, and to infants
sucking at their mothers breasts, and in their cradles: These, though in times
of old they were most frequent and common, when the world attributed too much
to the juggling illusions of the devil yet since the Savior of the world, and
our only patron, has supplanted him by the more pure and fervent preaching of
the Gospel; these mockeries and fallacies, by which he cheated the unlettered
multitude of their faith, and God of his honor, are merely adnichilated,
insomuch there is scarce left to posterity, the least memory of their wicked
traditions. Of such as these, it seems S. Hierom took especial notice, when in
an Epistle writ to Paula upon the death of Blesilla, he thus speaks, Quae causa
est ut saepe Dimuli and Trimuli, and ubera lactantes* etc. i. What is the
reason that children of two or three years of age, and such as suck at the
breast should be corrupted by devils? The Ethnicks custom was to give names to
such, according to the diversity of their actions: there were some called
Hecataea, as sent from Hecate: others by the Italians, Tolletae or Empedusae.
But this may appear a digression from our Sybils, therefore I thus proceed
with them. P^trus Crinitus in his twentieth book De honesta disciplina,
speaking of the Sybils, the Branchi, and the Delphick prophetesses, alleges
Gellius, Firmianus, Hieronymus, and other ancient writers, extracting from
their opinion, which way and by what means these Oracles were imagined to be
possessed with the spirit of divination: These of that order (as Plato and
Iamblicus, have learnedly related) either from the gods or spirits (say they)
are inspired with that illumination, by which they discern the fundamental
causes of things, and can presage and foresee such events as shall succeed.
Iamblic. in his book to Porphyrius, says thus, The Sybill of Delphos two
several ways conceives the spirit by which she prophesies, either by a soft
breath, or else by fire proceeding from the mouth of a certain den or cave;
before the entrance of which she seats her self upon a three-footed or
four-footed stool of brass, in which place the divine power either by
whispering in her care, or by some other infused blast inspired into her, gives
her the facility of uttering her predictions. The Branchae sitting upon an
axeltree, held in her had a wand consecrated to some deity or other, and either
washed her self in some sacred fountain, or received some influence from the
vapor of fire, and by this means were made repleat with divine splendor.
These Branchae derive themselves from Branchus the son of Apollo, upon whom his
father bestowed the gift of divination; Mirandula in Hymnis.
to which Statius assents; so Strabo in these verses makes him a Priest of the
Temple of Apollo.

Phoebus, from Branchus axeltree,
His Prophet did inspire;
Who with a thousand Ambag^s
Has set the world on fire.
Colephonius Zenophanes has denied, that there can be any divination at all,
but Democritus has approved it: of the same argument Chrysippus has writ two
books, one of Oracles, another of Dreams. Diogenes Babylonius, published one De
divinatione, Antipater two, Possidonius five. Panaetius the scholar of
Antipater doubted whether there were any belief at all to be given to that art
or no, Cicero is of opinion, that it has only power over such things as happen
accidentally or by chance. Of divination there be two sorts, one of art, as by
the entrails of beasts, or by casting of lots; the other of nature, as by
dreams and visions: in both, the conjectures made by vaticinations, aim at more
then they can accomplish, and intend further then they can proceed. Further,
this art is by the Greeks called Mantices, that is, the knowledge of things to
come; the first inventers thereof were the Egyptians and the Chaldeans, by
their observations of the stars. The nations of the Cilici, the Pysidauri, and
the inhabitants of Pamphylia near unto these, predicted by the singing of
birds. The Magi among the Persians had many assemblies of purpose only to
augurate and to divine: but all such are condemned of ignorance and want of
art, who presage merely by concitation and rapture, without the help of reason
and conjecture. Sagire signifies to perceive acutely or sharply; therefore they
are called Sagaces that know much: he that is said Sagire, viz. to know before
things come to pass, is said Praesagire, that is, to presage. It is called
Divination, when it extends to a higher degree of prediction. But when by
divine instinct (as in the Sybils) the mind is as it were transported and
extasi'd in rapture, it is then called Furor, or fury. Amongst the Ligurians, a
people of Thrace, it was a custom for their Priests before they would demand
any thing from the Oracle, to glut and gorge themselves with superfluous
excess of wine: The Clarii contrary to these in their superstitions, used to
quaffe great quantity of water. The Divination that was made by water, was
called Hydromantia: That which was made by an Axe or Hatchet, was styled
Axinomantia: That which was made by a Skin in which water was moved to and fro
(from whence a soft and gentle voice of presage was heard to breath) was called
Leconomantia: That which did consist of certain points and marks fixed in the
earth, Geomantia: That which was gathered from Figures and imaginary shapes
shining in the fire, Pyromantia: The Divination by smoke, was called
Capnomantia: That which was derived from skipping shadows in a mirror or
glass, seeming to leap this way or that, Capyromantia: That which was
apprehended from Brass, Aromantia: that which was begot from a Sive,
Coschinomantia: That which came by Lots, Cleromantia: That which was gathered
from the Aspect or Countenance, Physiognomia: The conjecture by the hands,
Chiromantia: That which was collected from Batanomantia: that which was
apprehended from a great big-bellied Vessel into which children were set to
look and tell what they spied therein, Gastromantia: It is called Augurium or
Auguri, from Birds: and Extispicum, from the intrails of Beasts. Phavorinus
upon Gellius says, that he would have no faith nor belief at all given unto
these Divinations, arguing in this manner, Either (says he) they must presage
Prosperity or Adversity, and bad or good fortune: If they promise good and
fail us, we are made miserable in our expectation; if prosperity to come,
though it happen in the process of time, in the interim, time spent in hope of
it, seems irksome and tedious; if they prognosticate Adversities, and lie, yet
are we made wretched in our fears; if Miseries to come, and lie not, we are
first excruciated in our minds, before we be once touched by the hand of Fate,
and by that means doubly suffer. Mart-Cappell. will allow but two Sybils,
namely, Symachia, and Herophila: yet our later authors approve the number of
twelve, of which though briefly we will speak in order.

Sybilla Persicae.
SHe was born in Persia, and is said to be the most ancient o^ all the rest,
and therefore she wears this character, Antiquissima viticinantium: she is
figured with her hand crossing her breast, her eyes fixed upward, as one
contemplating of divine things, holding a book in her hand open, as if she had
been lately reading, and now meditated what she had read: she prophesied of
Christ in this manner, as likewise of the seven ages.

From Adam unto Noah as (well appears)
Were a thousand five hundred fifty and six years, Age 1.

To make up the first age. Age 2.
And from the flood,
Two hundred ninety two, are understood
To Abraham. Age 3.
From him, Israel to free
From Egypt, makes five hundred adding three.
T^ll of King Solomon's Temple, Age 4.
the first stone
Be laid, just years four hundred eighty one.
Fourteen and full four hundred years there be, Age 5.

To Babylons distressed captivity.
The sixth age from that bondage, Age 6.
may be seen
To make up just six hundred and fourteen:
In which year, of a Virgin shall be born
The Prince of Prince of peace, crowned with a wreath of thorn.
Him the seventh age shall follow, Age 7.
and extend
Till the worlds frame dissolve, and Time see end.
Amalthaea and Marpesia, are the names of Sybils, as Tybullus accounts them in
his second book.

Quicquid Amalthaea, quicquid Marpesia dixit,
Heriphile Phstbo grataque quod monuit.
What Amalthaea said, or speak,
Marpesia was able:
Or what Heriphile forewarned,
To ^'hoebus acceptable.
Politianus reckons up diverse of the Phebaiedes, or Sybils, withal some men
skillful in divination, in these verses, -- Quod and veteres prompsere Sybillae
Carmen Amalthaea, etc.
Which I thus interpret.
The ancient Sybils did in numbers sing,
Amongst them Amalthaea, who did bring
The verse in use. Marpesia, rich infate:
Herophile next her, who does translate
Her birth from Ida. Sabbe of known skill.
Demo and Phigo, with Phaennis quill,
Which writ all truth. Carmenta who was held
A Matron still: with Manto that excelled.
Pythian, Phoemonoe, who thought it meet,
To make the proud verse stalk on longer feet.
Old Glaucus daughter in this art has strived
To exceed the rest. Deiphoebe long-lived
Marcia, and Bacis Olle does adorn
The train (just under the Trions born,)
Lycus most famous in the Attid land
Rankt; the Dodonian doves with these must stand.


This Persian Sybill is of so long standing, that it seems by antiquity she
has lost her name, neither am I willing further to inquire of her then the
writers of the former ages were desirous to leave recorded to posterity.

Sybilla Lybica*
SHe is by some called Phoemonoe, Plin. lib. 20.
and held to be the daughter of Apollo, surnamed Prima. By all ancient writers,
she has the honor to be the first that invented the heroic verse: of her
particular actions, much is not left recorded. It is reported of a Prefect,
whose government was over Cilicia, that he gave no credit at all to these
Oracles, and to make proof whether there was in them any thing worthy
admiration, or belief, he inscribed a question which he sealed up (his Aenigma
was not known to any save himself) this letter by one of his freed men whom he
best loved and most trusted, he sent to the Oracle, charging him not to open
it, till he had received a direct answer to the demand included. The messenger
having made his Orisons, offered sacrifice, and presented gifts according to
the custom of the place, petitioned for an answer to his unknown request, and
so laid him down to sleep by the Altar. In the morning being thoroughly awake,
he remembered himself of a vision that appeared unto him; it seemed unto him
that he saw one of the Sybils standing before the Altar who only spoke to him
this word, Nigrum, (a black) and so vanished. With this satisfaction he returns
to his Lord, and tells him every circumstance as it happened, withal, the short
answer that he received by vision: when the governor, unsealing the paper,
discovered only these words written with his own hand, Al^um tibi an Nigrum
immolabo taurum. i. Shall I sacrifice unto thee a white bull or black? to which
the answer was given, a black: this ever after, better possessed him of the
Oracles The first Oracle that was heard, The beginning of Oracles.
was by certain shepherds, the chief of whom was called Coretas, these grasing
their flocks in the place where the Temple now stands, heard a sound of certain
words uttered by Divine instinct; of which at first they took small heed, as
merely neglecting them; but when by proof they found all things to happen
punctually according to the prediction, they gave a sacred reverence to the
place, which since has enlarged the fame thereof through all the parts of the
world. But concerning this Sybill Lybica, her prophesies concerning Christ were
somewhat to this purpose.

A King, a Priest, a Prophet, all these three
Shall meet in one: sacred Divinity
Shall be to flesh espoused. Oh who can scan
This mystery, uniting God with man!
When this rare birth into the world shall come,
He, the great god of Oracles strikes dumb.
Plutarch in his book Oraculorum defunctione relates this history: Aemilianus
the Rhetorician was the father of Epitherses, a Doctor in Grammar, and a man of
approved truth and fidelity; he reports that in his travel by sea toward
Italy, he happened into a ship laden with Merchants goods, and full of passengers
of diverse nations: In the evening, being just against the Echinadae, they
sailed before the wind, till with an incertaine course they were driven near
unto Paxis, Epithe^ses with many of the other passengers being then awake, a
voice was heard from the Island which (to the admiration of them all) called
upon the name of one Thamus: this Thamus was in Egyptian, and his name scarce
known to any in the ship: twice he was called, but answered not, but at the
third summons breaking silence, these words with a loud voice were uttered:
Thamus, when thou arrivest at the Palodes, tell them there that the great Pan
is dead, Epitherses reported that these words put them into an universal
fear; diverse arg^ments being held amongst them, and it being long disputed,
Whether it were necessary that this command should be performed or omitted? But
Thamus thus resolved, that if the wind stood fair, he would not alter his
course, but pass the Island, but otherwise he would deliver the message
according as he was injoined. Coming near the Palodes, their sails were on
the sudden becalmed, for neither wind was felt to blow, nor tide or water
perceived to move; which he perceiving, turned himself toward the Island, and
made this loud acclamation, The great god Pan is dead: which words were no
sooner uttered, but a great intermixture of howling, yelling and mourning, was
heard from the Island, to the infinite amasement of them all. This was done in
the presence of so many witnesses, that the rumor thereof spread so far as
Rome, even to the ears of Tiberius Caesar, by whom Thamus being sent for, he
related the circumstance in the presence of the Emperor and many learned men:
all which concluded, that this Pan before spoken of, was the same who was held
to be the son of Mercury and Pen^lope. The truth is, and agreed upon by all
approved authors, that at the birth of Christ, all Oracle ceased, and since
that time were never heard to give answer unto any demand whatsoever. And thus
I take leave of the second Sybill, Phoemonoe.

Sybilla Delphica.
SHe was called Daphne, and said to be the daughter of the Prophet Tyresias;
many of whose verses, Homer is said to assume to himself, and make them his
own. She prophesied of the wars and destruction of Troy. Tyresias was King of
Thebes, who as some say was struck blind, because he unawares saw Diana naked,
bathing her self in a fountain. Of whom Ovid speaks in Metamorph. Lib. 3^*


At pater omnipotens, etc.
Omnipotent Jove did for his loss of eyes,
Iaspire him with the spirit of Prophesies:
Things future to predict, which was (I guess)
To make his plague seem in his honor less.
Of him Statius likewise speaks in the second book of his Thebaiedes, Some
think Daphnis the neatherd, who was the first inventer of the Bucolick verse,
Lib. 10.
to be her brother; he (as Sindus and Volateranus both aver) was struck blind
because he adulterated a woman in his drunkenness; the circumstance is so set
down by Aelianus. He was the darling of Mercury, and no sooner born, but laid
out under a Laurel tree; the Kins which he fed, were said to be the sisters of
the Sun (for so Homer in his Odyssaea relates.) In his flower of youth he was
beloved of a beautiful nymph, who grew inamoured of him in Sicilia, with whom
he made a covenant, That if ever he cast himself into the embraces of any
second love, he desired of the Faces that his eyes might for ever lose the
benefit of the Sun. Not long after, the Kings daughter fell in love with him,
whom he vitiated in the heat of his wine, and grew blind soon after. Some make
him the inventor of the Beucolicks, which others confer upon Stesichorus
Himeraeus. But touching Daphne, thus Palephatus in his fabulous Narrations
speaks of her: Terra, or the Earth, fell in love with the flood Ladon, of their
mutual compression of Daphne was begot; of her Apollo grew inamoured, and laid
daily siege to her chastity, but she not able to oppose his importunities, and
willing to preserve her virginity pure and without blemish, petitioned to her
mother Earth, that she would again receive her (to conceal her from the Sanne)
into her bosom, from whence she at first proceeded: to whose request her
mother condescended, and kept her so long, till from her breast she sprung out a
Laurel tree, whom Phoebus notwithstanding courted, but in vain. The manner of
her transportation, Ovid with great elegancy relates in his Metamorph. Lib.
prim.
Without this Laurel (as some think) the Tripos in B^oetia (placed near the
vaticinating cave) cannot be erected. All writers confirm her a Sybill and a
Prophetess, belonging to the Delphian Oracle, howsoever the Poets have fabled.
Her prophecy was to this purpose.

An Angel shall descend and say,
Thou blessed Mary hail;
Thou shall conceive, bring forth, yet be
A virgin without fail.
Three gifts the Chaldaeans to thy son
Shall tender, with much piety,
Myrrh to a Man, Gold to a King,
And Incense to a Deity.
Sybilla Cumaea.
SHe was called Cimmeria, and was one of Apollo's Priests, born in Cuma, a City
of Aeolia. Leonard Aretine in his book de Aquila volante, calls her Omeriae, and
would derive her from Italy. Lib. 2. 22.
H^rodotus in his first book has left this history recorded, That Pactias the
Persian flying for refuge into the City Cuma, he was demanded thence by Mazares
the great General; but the Cumaeans would not deliver him up without advise
from the Oracle. There was in those days an ancient and much adored Altar,
sacred to Apollo, to which the Aeoles and the Ionians in all their hesitations
repaired for counsel; it was situate in the Milesian fields, near to the Port
called Panormus; to this place were sent men both of birth and trust, to demand
from the Cumaeans, Whether Pactias should be delivered unto the Persians? who
answered, Let him be surrendered up: which when the men of Cuma heard, they with
a joint suffrage concluded to send him thence, and to obey the Oracle. To which
decree, Aristodicus the son of Heraclius, violently opposed himself (a man
amongst the rest at that time most illustrious) either not giving credit at all
to the answer, or distrusting their fidelity that brought it: therefore he
himself with other of the prime Citizens, prepared themselves for a second
expedition; these repairing to the Branchidae or Priests, of which this Cumaea
was one; Aristodicus humbly kneeling before the Altar, thus bespake Apollo,
Pactias the Lydian (O King and god) to shun a violent death, gave himself into
our patronage, the Persians redemand him of the Cumaeans; we, though we fear
not their forces, yet dare not surrender up a suppliant to death, who has
tendered his safety into our hands, till we hear from thee what in this
distraction is most fit to be done. To these words, the Priest as from Apollo,
returned this answer: Let Pactias be delivered up to the Persians. This done,
Aristodicus it seems not well pleased to betray the life of his friend,
surveying the Temple round, he spied where sparrows and other small birds had
builded their nests, who taking away their young was about to depart the
Temple; when instantly was heard from the Altar, the sound of a voice thus
speaking; Oh thou most wicked of men, what arrogant boldness has so far
possessed thee, that thou presumest to take hence my supplyants, and such as I
have taken to my protection? at which words Aristodicus returning, made this
free and bold answer, Do thou (O King) succor and protect thy supplyants,
and command us to betray the life of Pactyas to the Persians?

Some have cavilled with these Oracles, that their verses have been harsh, and
not in smoothness of style or elegancie or phrase to be compared with those of
Hesiod or Homer: to which may be answered, We are sick with the disease of the
ear and the eye; let us not blame a Pythian Prophetess, because she sings not
so sweetly as Glauce the minstrel, nor appears in her hair perfumed with
precious unguents, and her self jetting in Tyrian purple; when the Sybill
utters her divinations with a troubled brame, and a distracted countenance, her
words harsh and unpleasant, as not relishing laughter, delight, or ornament;
for such things are least pleasing to us in show that are most beneficial to
us in proof, Voluptatem enim, non admittit quod integrum and castum, That
admits no pleasure which of it self is perfect and chaste. Besides, these were
answers to be leasurely writ, not suddenly spoke; studied with long meditation,
and not extemporall; it is probable, that they in sweetness and smoothness
might equal if not exceed the facundity of the former: neither is it the
sound, the voice, the language, or the number or meeter of the god himself,
but of a woman, and she too extasi'd in spirit, and ravished with a divine fury.
These shall suffice for Sybilla Cumaea, I will only conclude with her prophecy.

The ancient of days, shall then submit to time,
The Maker yield himself to new creation:
The deity and Godhead most sublime,
Take shape of man to ransom every nation:
Die, to make others live, and every crime
Committed, from the round worlds first foundation
Take on himself: as low as Hell descending
To win man Heaven, upon his grace depending.
Sybilla Samia.
SHe is called Erophile or Hierophile, She was derived from Jupiter and Lamia
the daughter of Neptune.
taking the name of Samia from the Ille Samos where she was born. Simon
Grinaeus in his annotations upon Justin, thus says, That this continent was
called Samothracia, because it buts so near Thracia; in that place was
Pythagoras the Philosopher born, with one of the Sybils, styled Samia. The
Island is dedicated to Juno, because as they believe, there Juno was born,
brought up, and espoused unto Jupiter Heraclides in P^litus says, That it was
first a solitude or desert, only inhabited by wild beasts, amongst which were
the Neides first seen in that wilderness. It was once called Partheni^, after
that Driuse; there Ancaeus reigned, of whom came the Proverb first, Multa
cadunt inter etc. Many things fall between the cup and the lip. In this Island
have been seen white Swallows, as big in body as a Partridge. In this place
flourisht Aesop, where he first published his Fables; and Theagines Samius,
after, the scholar of Euripides. Plut. in Quaest. Graecis, relates, that when
any sacrifice was offered to Mercurius Charidota (which is as much as to say,
Munificent) it was lawful for any to steal and catch away each others
garments: because that having by the command of the Oracle left their own
country, and were forced by shifting into Micale, there to live by rapine and
theft; that time being expired, and at their return, by vanquishing their
enemies, being possessed of their own inheritance, in remembrance of their former
confinement, they have observed that custom. Of this Sybils particular
actions, much has not been commended to posterity; only of her person, that
such a one there was; and of her prophecy, which was thought to be this; The
world shall to six thousand years aspire,
By water once, but then destroi'd by fire:
The first two thousand void: the next, the Law;
The fast two, under the Messiah awe.
And as repose by Sabbath is expressed,
Sun, Moon, and Stars, all things shall then have rest.


It is likely, and may be conjectured, that she came to the light of Elias
prophesies, for in the like manner he distributed the world, divining of the
continuance of mankind, and the change of times; the first two thousand years
he call Tempus inane, which may be thus interpreted, because the many regions
of the earth were not fully inhabited, Babylon not yet built, and diverse
spacious Provinces undiscovered; or else because the politic estate of the
Church was not yet visibly established, and separated from other nations: For
then were no Empires extant, which after were apparent in the Monarchies. Yet
doubtless it is, that the first age was the golden and most flourishing;
because the nature of man was then most potent and vigorous, as may appear by
their longevity, living so many hundred years; moreover, it bred many wise old
men, full of the divine light, that spoke of God, of the Creation, and were
witness of the Arts and Sciences. The second time was numbered from the
Circumcision to Christ's coming in the flesh, and being born of a Virgin; which
conteins little less than two thousand years, and that is under the Law. The
third time, if it reach not to the full number to equal the former, it is for
our sins, which are many and great, for which mankind shall be the sooner
destroi'd, and Christ for his elect sake will hasten his judgment.

Sybilla Cumana.
SHe was likewise called Amalthaea. Cap. de Heniacho.
Hyginus in his second book speaks of Amalthaea, that gave suck to Jupiter in
his infancy; his history he derives from Parmenesius, and relates it thus:
There was a certain King of Creet called Mellisaeus, to whose daughters young
Jupiter was sent to be nursed; but they wanting milk, brought unto him a goat
called by that name, which gave him suck. This goat was so fruitful, that she
ever brought forth two Kids, and was then newly eased of her burden, when
Jupiter was brought thither to be fostred. In gratitude of which good done to
him, he after translated her and her kids amongst the stars; which Cleostratus
Tenedius first observed. Musaeus reports otherwise, That Athemides and
Amalthaea were two nurses, to whom the charge of Jupiters infancy was
committed, both beautiful Nymphs: Amalthaea having a goat whom she much loved,
and with whose milk she brought him up. Palepbatus in his fabulous narrations,
Lib. ^.
speaks of the horn of Amalthaea, which Hercules still bore about him, which
was of that virtue, that it still supplied him with all necessaries whatsoever:
from which grew a Proverb, That all such as were supplied without complaining
of want, were said to have the (...) of Amalthaea; the history is thus.
Hercules traveling through Boeotia to visit his Nephew Iolaus, sojourned by
the way for a season amongst the Thespians, where lived a woman of approved
beauty and virtue, called Amalthaea; with whose feature Hercules being much
delighted, he hosted there longer than his purpose, which Iolaus taking ill,
Amalthaea out of a horn in which she had hoarded some quantity of money,
furnished Hercules with all things needful: which some strangers taking
especial notice of, they rumored it abroad, and from thence first grew the
Proverb. But to return to our Amalthaea Cumana: This was she by whose conduct
Aeneas had free passage into hell, as Virgil expresses at large in his sixth
book. She brought to Tarquinius Priscus, Vale. Max. lib. 8. cap. de Sen.
those three books of Prophesies, of which two were burnt, and one preserved.
By which computation comparing the time betwixt Aeneas and Tarquin, she could
live no less then five hundred years; nor is it altogether incredible, since
when Livia, the daughter of Rutilius, Terentia of M. Cicero, and Clodia of
Aulus, the first lived ninety seven years; the second, a hundred and thirty;
the third, a hundred and fifteen, after the bearing of fifteen children.
Gorgias Leontius (the tutor of Isocrates, and many other learned men) in the
hundred and seventh year of his age, being asked, Why he desired to live any
longer? answered, Because he felt nothing in his body, by which to accuse age.
Herodotus, Pliny, Cicero, and others, speak of one Arganthonius Gaditanus, who
reigned fourscore years, being sixty years of age before he came to his
crown. Solinus and Ctesias with others, aver, that amongst the Aethiopians a
hundred and thirty years is but a common age, and many arrive unto it.
Hellanicus testates that the Epians, a people of Aetolia, attained to two
hundred; whom Damiales exceeds, naming one Littorius that reached to three
hundred; the like we read of Nestor. I will conclude with Dondones, whom Pliny
affirms survived five hundred years, yet never stooped with age. More liberally
speaks Zenophon, who bestows on one of the Latin Kings, eight hundred, and
six hundred upon his father: but I will forbear further to speak of her age,
and come to her Oracle.

Unto the Assyrian Monarchy we assign
One thousand years, Monarch 1.
two hundred thirty nine.
When thirty six successions shall expire,
The last, his glories pomp shall It ended in Sardana. who burnt himself, his
concubines and jewels.
end in ^i^e.
Thence to the Meads it transmigrates, and they
Shall in nine full successions bear chief sway:
Three hundred years shall memorise their deeds,
Wanting just eight. Monarch 2.
The Persian then succeeds
In the universal Empire; which must last
Fourteen Kings reigns, and then their sway be past
Over to Greece: Monarch 3.
but ere the light blow out,
Two hundred fifty years shall come about,
Adding five months. Monarch 4.
The Monarchy now stands
Transferred on Macedonia: who commands
The world, but Alexander? by him is guided
The spacious earth, but in his death divided
Amongst his Captains: Macedon one cease,
Asia another, Syria best pleases
A third, Egypt a fourth: thus lots are cast,
Two hundred eighty eight their pomp shall last,
And then expire. Great Rome shall then look hie,
Whose proud towers from 7. hills shall brave the sky,
And overlook the world. In those blessed days,
Shall come a King of Kings, and he shall raise
A new plantation: and though greater far
Than all the Monarchs that before him are,
In majesty and power: yet in that day,
So meek and humble, he shall dain to pay
Tribute to Caesar: yet thrive happy he,
That shall his subject or his servant be.
After the death of Alexander, the Kingdom of Macedonia was successively
injoied by fifteen Kings, and endured a hundred fifty seven years, and eight
months. Asia and Syria were governed by nineteen Kings, and lasted two hundred
eighty nine years. Egypt was possessed by ten Ptolomies, and lastly, by
Cleopatra; and it continued two hundred eighty eight years. These Kingdoms
failing, the Romans gained the chief predominance. Of this Sybill S. Isiodore,
Virgil and Ovid writ more at large; she writ her Prophecy in leaves of trees,
and then placed them over the Altar, which when the wind moved or made to
shake, they had no efficacy, but when they remained firm and without motion,
they received their full power and virtue; therefore Dante the famous Italian
Poet thus writes; Come la neve al sole se distilla,
Cosi, al vento nelle soglie leve,
Si perdea la sententia de Sybille.


I cannot here pretermit Ovids expression of this Sybill; who when Aeneas
(having received from her that great courtesy to enter Hell, and to come safe
thence, and for that would have sacrificed to her, and done her divine
adoration) she thus answered him.

Nec dea sum dixit, nec sacri thuris honor, etc.
I am no goddess (goddess son) it is true,
Nor are these divine honors to me due:
I had been such, and darkness not have seen,
Had I a prostitute to Phoebus been.
For whilst he courts my love, and day by day
Hopes with large gifts, mine honor to betray;
Ask what thou will, oh bright Cumaean maid,
It shall be granted thee, Apollo said.
I^ willing that my days should ever last,
Prostrate upon the earth, my self I cast,
And graspt as much dust as my hand could hold;
Let me then live (said I) till I have told
So many years as there are bodies small
Locked in this hand. The god could not recall,
Nor I unsay; I had forgot in truth,
To insert in my rash boon, All, years of youth.
Even that too, to have yielded to his will,
I might have had: but I a virgin still
Have to this hour remained, my happier days
Are all forespent, Decrepit age now lays
His weak hand on me, which I must endure
Long time to come: seven ages I am sure
Are past, nor shall my thread of life be spun,
Until the number of these sands be run.
The hour shall be, when this my body here,
Shall small or nothing to the sight appear,
(This, time and age have power to do) and when
I shall not lovely seem as I did then;
Nay (doubtless) Phoebus will himself deny
That ever he cast on me an amorous eye.
Save by my voice, I shall no more be known,
But that the fates have left me as mine own.
Ovid has fabulated, that she was changed into a Voice, the word Sybilla
importing Vox. She prophesied much of the Roman wars, and the success of their
Empire.

Sybilla Hellespontica.
SHe has the denomination of Marrinensis, and as most Authors affirm, derives
her self Ex agro Trojano, from Troy in Asia. She sung of the wars betwixt the
Trojans and the Greeks. I will be brief with her, because I fear I have been
too tedious in the former; her Prophecy of Christ, I have included in these
few lines.

When Atlas shoulders shall support a star,
Whose ponderous weight he never felt before,
The splendor of it shall direct from far,
Kings, and Wise men, a new light to adore,
Peace in those days shall flourish, and stern war
Be banished earth, lost mankind to restore.
Then shall the Eastern Monarchs presents bring,
To one, a Priest, a Prophet, and a King*
And so much for Sybilla Hellespontica.
Sybilla Phrygia.
SHe was called Vates Ancirrae, and as most will have it, this was Cassandra
the daughter of King Priamus and Hecuba: their female issue are thus numbered,
Creusa, Cassandra, Ilione, Laodice, Lycaste, Medesicastis, Polixena, Climene,
Aristomache, Xenodice, Deimone, Metioche, Pisis, Cleodice, and Medusa. Amongst
which, she only attained to the spirit of Prophecy, and predicted of the
destruction of Troy; but her Augurie was never credited. Apollodorus, as also
Higinus gives this reason: Apollo inflamed with her beauty, promised if she
would prostitute her self to his pleasure, he would inspire her with the
spirit of Divination, which he accordingly performed; but she failing in her
promise to him, he in revenge of that injury, caused that her Prophesies,
howsoever true, should never have credit; which makes her in her divination
thus complain: The world to Troy I sitly may compare,
Erected first by Neptune and the Sun:
These two, the aptest Hieroglyphics are,
For water, and for fire. The buildings done,
Laomedon, their right the gods denies;
For which, by water Troy was first destroi'd:
So was the world for man's false perjuries,
In the great Deluge, where but eight enjoi'd
The benefit of life. Troy happy were,
If it by water could forewarned be;
So were the world: but oh, too much I fear,
In their like fatal ruin they agree.
Troy must be burnt to ashes (woe the while)
My mother in her womb conceived a brand,
To give it flame: he that shall many a mile
Travel by water, to bring fire to land.
Lust is the fuel: Lust and other sins,
Are the combustible stuff, will bring to naught
The worlds great fabric, since from them begins
All desolation, first to mankind brought.
The world like Troy must burn; they both before
Suffered by water, so they must by fire.
We Prophecy these things; what can we more?
But after our predictions, none inquire,
Unless in scorn. This does Cassandra grieve,
To speak all truth, when none will truth believe.


The better to illustrate this Oracle, know that Laomedon, about to build the
walls of Troy, borrowed much coin of the Priests of Neptune and Phoebus to
accomplish the work, upon promise of due payment when the walls were finished:
But breaking his faith, and denying ^estitution of those sums lent, the gods
enraged at his perjury, Neptune brought up his wave so high, that he in a
deluge utterly destroi'd the City; whilst Apollo by the scorching of his beams
made the upper Countries barren. For the burning of Troy, it happened after the
ten years siege; elaborately described by Virgil in his Aen^idos, when Aeneas
discourses the whole desolation of the City to Dido: in which he speaks of the
Prince Chorebus to be much inamoured of Cassandra, who rescued her when she was
dragged by the hair from Apollo's Altar, and was slain in the attempt. The
death of Cassardia is thus reported by Higinus in Fabulus: when the spoils and
prisoners of Troy were divided amongst the Princes of of Greece, Cassandra fell
by lot to the Archduke and General, Agamemnon, with whom he safely arrived in
Mycene, of which place he was King and governor. But Clitemnestra, the
daughter of Tindarus, sister to Hellen, and wife to Agamemnon, being before
their landing possessed by O^aces (or as some call him Cethus) the brother of
Palamedes, that Cassandra was the prostitute of Agamemnon, and had supplanted
her from his love (which lie he had forged, to be revenged of the General, for
his brothers death before Troy:) Clitemnestra therefore surprised with
jealousy, complotted with Aegistus the son of Thiestas, to murder them both
the first might they lodged in the Palace, which was accordingly performed;
but Electra the daughter of Agamemnon, stole thence her brother Or^stes, then
but an infant (who else had perished with his father) and conveied him to be
safe kept to one Sthophius of Phocis, who had before been married to Astichaa
the sister of Agamemnon; he brought him up to manhood, till Orestes found fit
opportunity to revenge himself on the two Regicides, his mother and Aegistus.

Sybilla Europaea.
SHe is said to be Incertae patriae, as no man knowing from what particular
region to derive her, and therefore is known by no particular name, nor by the
ancient Historiographers numbered amongst the ten: only amongst the twelve she
has the place, as may appear by this her Prophecy, When the great King of
all the world shall have
No place on Earth, by which he can be known;
When he that comes all mortal men to save,
Shall find his own life by the world o'rthrown:
When the most just, injustice shall deprave,
And the great judge be judged by his own;
"Death when to death a death by death has given,
"Then shall be opened the long shut gates of Heaven.


Sybilla Tiburlina.
IT seems she derives her self from the River Tyber; she is otherwise called
Albunaea, of the City Alba, (which was erected before Rome) as also Italica,
and by some, Alburnaea. It is reported that the Romans (going about to deifie
Augustus Caesar) demanded advise of this Sybill, who after three days fast,
standing before the Altar, where the Emperor himself was then present, after
many hidden words miraculously spoken concerning Christ, upon the sudden,
Heaven opened, and Caesar saw a beautiful virgin standing before the Altar,
who held in her arms as lovely an infant; at this apparition Caesar affrighted,
fell on his face: at which instant was heard a voice as from Heaven, saying,
This is the Altar of the son of God. In which place was after built a Temple
dedicated to the Virgin Mary, and called Ara Coeli. i. The Altar of Heaven.
This Polycronicon affirms, and for the truth thereof cites Saint Augustine,
lib. 18. cap. 24. There is little more remembered of her life, saving that in
her books she prophesied of the coming of the Savior of the world, much after
this manner: Seven wonders of the world have been proclaimed,
But yet a greater then these are, not named.
The Egyptians high Pyramides, 1. Wonder.
who seemed
To meet the stars, a work once much esteemed.
The Tower of Pharos. 2. Wonder.
The miraculous wall
That Babylon begirt. 3. Wonder.
The fourth, we call
Diana's Church in Ephesus; 4. Wonder.
Fame sings
TO had six and thirty Pillars, built by Kings
As many. 5. Wonder.
Next to these, Mausolus Tomb;
Than which, the Earth supporteth on her womb
No braver structure. 6. Wonder.
Next to these there was
The huge Colossus that was cast in brass,
Of height incredible, whom you may epsy,
Holding a lamp fifty seven cubits high,
Bestriding an huge river. 7. Wonder.
The seventh wonder,
Was of great love that strikes with trisule thunder:
His Statue carved in Ivory, and contrived
By Phideas, the best workman then survived.
"What at these trifles stands the world amazed?
"And has on them with admiration gazed?
"Then wonder, when the troubled world ^' appease,
"He shall descend, who made them that made these.


Of these wonders briefly, That 60000 men were 20. years in building.
to make her divination the more plain. Of these Pyramides there were diverse,
of which the greatest took up eight acres of ground, parted into four angles,
each equally distant eight hundred eighty foot, and in height twenty five. A
second, four angles, every one containing by even spaces, seven hundred thirty
and seven foot. A third, comprehended three hundred sixty three foot betwixt
every angle. A fourth erected by Rhodope the strumpet, the mistress of Aesop,
by the money which she got by her trade. Herodotus speaks of a Pyramid made by
Cleopys King of Egypt, of stones ferch'd from Arabia, whose length was five
furlongs, the breadth ten paces. He erected a second more magnificent, which
was not not finished in twenty years, upon which he spent so much treasure, that
he was forced to prostitute his daughter, a most beautiful young virgin, to
supply his own necessity. Pliny reports, that in this structure he employed so
many workmen, that they eat him 1800. talents in onyons and garlic. 2. The
Tower of Pharos, built by Ptolomaeus, in that Isle, which served as a lanthorn
to direct Navigators by sea in the night; he spent upon it 5300. Talents;
Sostrata was the Architectour, as appears by the inscription of his name upon
the Cittadell. 3. The walls of Babylon were built by Semi^amis, they were (as
Hermodorus writes) in thickness fifty cubits, in height two hundred, within
the compass of which, were an hundred Ports, having brazen gates that all
moved upon hinges; they were beautified with three hundred Turrets, and
Chariots might meet upon the top of them, and have free passage without
impediment. 4. The Temple of Diana, of which I have spoken before, was in
length 425 foot, in breadth 220. It was beautified with 127. Columns. 5. The
tomb of Mausolus, built by Artimesia Queen of Caria, was in height 25. Cubits;
it was compast with 36 Columns; it contained from the South to the North, 33.
foot, the whole compass contained 1411. That part which lay toward the East,
was perfected by Scopas; that which was toward the North, was ended by Briax;
that toward the Meridian, by Timothaeus; that which butted upon the West, by
Leocares. 6. The Colossus of the Sun, which bestrid the River Rhodes (betwixt
whose legs ships without vailing their topsails, came into the harbor) was of
that vastness, that a man with his spread arms could not compass his thumb,
every finger being as big as a common statue. After it had stood six and fifty
years, it was emolisht by an earthquake. The Souldan of Egypt having invaded
Rhodes, with the broken brass thereof, laded thence 900. Camels. The chief
workman was Chares Lindius, the scholar of Licippus. 7. The image of Jupiter,
to which some equal the Palace of Cyrus King of the Meads, built by Memnon,
the stones of which were cemented together with gold. But I leave further to
speak of these, and proceed to the next Sybill.

Sybilla Aegyptia.
SHe was called Agrippa, not numbered amongst the ten, out has place among the
Twelve, she prophesied upon the number of Three, and on this manner; Sacred's
the number Three (as Sybils tell)
Betwixt three brothers, the Heaven, Sea, and Hell,
Were cast by lot. The Earth, as all men write,
In their divisions, is called Tripartite.
Jove, three ways striking, has his Trisulc Thunder,
Neptune's allowed his T^ident, to keep under
The mutinous waves. Three fatal sisters spin
Our thread of life. Three Judges punish sin.
Even monsters are described so, Geryon wears
Three heads; Grim Cerberus as many bears.
Sphinx has three shapes, of Bird, of Beast, of Maid,
All three, in wings, in feet, in face, displayed.
Chimaera is Triform'd; the monstrous creature
Scilla's of dogs, fish, and a woman's feature.
The Erynnaes, Harpyes, Gorgons, threefold all
The Sybils As divining three sundry ways.
Trifatidicae we call,
Divining from the Tripos. Orpheus Lyre
Sings, that 'twas made of water, earth, and fire:
Three Charites, three Fates, three Sirens be.
Number the Muses, they are three times three.
She Is triple Hecat's called. Diana styled
Trivia. The ground of Music was compiled
But on three cords at first, and still expressed
By voice, by hand, by breath. In the Meant natural Philosophy.
Physics rest
Three Principles, God, World, and Creature framed.
Creator, Parent, Issue, these are named
In all production. Into Three we cast
Man's age; two legs, next three, then four at last.
Physicians three things to observe are sure,
First to preserve, prevent, and then to cure,
Three governments are famous in Romes state,
That of the Tribunes and Triumvirate.
Three sorts of people they distinguish can;
The Senate, Soldier, and the common Man,
In the taking height of stars, w' observe these Three,
First Distance, then the Form, next Quality.
"But which of us observes that sacred Trine,
" Three persons in one Godhead sole divine.
"That individual essence who dares scan,
"Which is, shall be, and ere the world began,
"Was in eternity? When of these Three,
"One of that most inscrutable Trinity,
"The second person, Wisdom, shall intombe
"All majesty within a Virgins womb.
"True Man, true God, still to that blessed Trine linckt,
"True light shall shine, and false stars be extinct.


Sybilla Erythraea,
SHe is the twelfth and last, born in Babylon, of the Assy^ian nation, and
daughter to Berosus a famous Astrologian. She writ in Greek a book called
Vasillogra, which some interpret, Penalis Scriptura, which, as Eugenius in his
Res de Sicilia testates, was transferred into Latin. She prophesied of all the
Greeks that came to the siege of Troy, designed the places whence, and how long
they should continue there. In those books she spoke of Homer, and that he
should write of those wars partially, according to his affection, and not
truth. In the same volume she prophesied of Christ after this manner; The times
by the great Oracle assigned,
When God himself, in pity of mankind,
Shall from the Heaven descend and be incarnate,
Entering the world a lamb immaculate;
And as himself, in wisdom thinks it meet,
Walk in the earth on three and thirty feet,
And wit^ six fingers; all his subjects then
Though a King mighty, shall be fisher men,
In number twelve; with these, war shall be tried
Against the devil, world, and flesh; their pride,
Humility shall quell, and the sharp sword
With which they fight, shall be the sacred Word,
Established upon Peter, which foundation
Once laid, shall be divulged to every Nation.


The only difficulty in this prophecy is Trenta tree piede, which signifies
thirty three year, sand Mese dito, six fingers, intimating the time of six
months. And thus I take leave of the Sybils.

Of the Virgins Vestals.
FEnestella in his book entitled de Sacerdotiis Romany proposes Numa
Pompilius to be the first that devised the form of this Vestall adoration;
Fenest. l. de Sacerdot.
though the first institution thereof was held to be so ancient, that Aeneas
transferred it from the Trojans to the Albans; cap. 6. Virgi^ lib. 2. Eneid.
as Virgil. witnesses in these words; -- Vestamque potentem.
Aeternumque aditis adsert penetralibus ignem.


To this goddess Vesta (whom some call the earth, others the Mother of the
gods Fire perpetually burning was consecrated; and to this observation and
custom, certain Virgins picked out of the noblest families were chosen, as
directors and chief overseers of that Order; by whose negligence if by chance
at any time that sacred fire was extinguished, their judgment was to be beaten
to death with strokes, by the hand of the chief Priest or Flamin. Valerius
Maximus reports, that the same judgment was executed upon the same negligence,
by P. Licinius Crassus, then in the high Priesthood. All such as were found
guilty of incest, were condemned to be buried alive: nor was it lawful (as
Labeo Antistius writes) for any under six years, or above ten, to be admitted
into that service; besides, she must not be the only child of her father and
mother, neither must she have a lisping or stammering tongue, be deaf of her
ears, nor marked with any blemish about her body; neither such an one whose
parents, one or both, have lived in servitude, or have been conversant in any
base offices; neither such a one whose sister has been elected into the
Priesthood: all these are excused from the service of Vesta; neither she whose
father is a Flamin, a South-saier, or one of the Decemviri in the sacrifices,
or of the Septemvirate in the banquets. There is likewise a dispensation with
the daughters of Kings, and Priests, as incapable of this ministry: neither
can that man's child be admitted that has not a known house and an abiding
place in Italy, for so Capito Atteius writes: so likewise the children of all
such as are restrained, as have the number of Three, or more. By the edict of
the Praetor, that no Virgin Vestall or Dialis which belongs to the sacrifices
of Jupiter shall be compelled to any thing; these be the words of the Praetor
by the mouth of the crier: Through all my jurisdiction I will not urge or force
an oath from the Vestall Virgins, nor from the Flamin Dialis: in the choosing of
the Vestall these things were observed. There is a caution by the law called
Lex Papia, That by the approbation of the chief Priest, and by his special
appointment, twenty virgins were selected out of the people; but this ordinance
with many other, were abrogated and abolisht by Time, insomuch that it was
sufficient, if any of free parents and honestly descended, petitioned or made
means to the high Priest, she might without more difficulty enter her oath, and
be admitted into the sacred order; being received by him as one snatched and
taken violently from the hands of her enemies. The words he used were these,
This vestall Priest, whom I enter into this holy office, according to the
institution of the best law, I receive by the name of Amata, to make her
intercessions for the Nobility and people of Rome. It was a custom to admit
them all by the name of Amata, because she that was first chosen by King Numa
was so called; and with these Ceremonies she was as it were hurried to the
Temple of Vesta. In Labeons commentaries it is thus found recorded, The Vestall
virgin is incapable to be made heir of any man or woman that dies intestate;
her goods likewise after her death return to the common treasury. Pomponius
Laetus in his book de Sacerdotiis, agrees with Fenestella, That Aen^as first
brought the Vestall fire from Troy into Italy; and Lavinium being built he
there erected a Temple to her honor. After this, Ascanius consecrated another
in a part of the hill Alba; beneath which, or at the foot thereof, was a thick
grove, in which Mars vitiated Illia the mother of Romulus. These Ministers of
Vesta were tied to an oath of perpetual viginity; for it was a custom among
the Latins, to make choice of the most noble and chaste virgins. After many
years Romulus devised all the chaste ceremonies belonging to that Order; and as
Varro declares to us, created threescore Priests to those public services,
selected by their Tribes and Families, but of the most noble and unblemisht
stocks amongst the Romans: The Temple of Vesta is built round, and is betwixt
the Capitol and the Palace; in this is kept the perpetual fire; for the
Etymology of Vesta is nothing else, but Purus ignis. i. pure Fire. Some are of
opinion that in that Temple, are kept the remembrances of many, both sacred and
secret monuments, some strange and unknown even to Priests and Virgins. Some
speak of two tuns of no great quantity, the one continually shut, the other
open and empty; some of the Virgins have reported, that the Palladium that fell
from Heaven, and was received into Troy, is there still to be seen. The first
Virgins appointed by Numa, Gegania.
were four, Gegania, Berenia, Camilla, Tarpeia; two others were added by
Servius Tullius. Berenia.
Their vows of virginity were unalterable for thirty years. Camilla.
In the first ten years, they were to learn the ceremonies, Terpeia.
and to be as ministers and handmaids: in the rest she was to govern and
instruct others; and the thirty years expired, she had liberty (if she pleased)
to marry. If any of these Vestals had wantonly offended, she was to be
chastised by the Priest; but such ^s were found incestuous, were punished after
this manner, Being first bound, she was laid upon a Beer, like a coarse already
deceased, and so carried through the mid Forum to the port or gate called
Collina, for there betwixt two walls, is the grave of the unchaste Vestals still
apparent; there is a cave hollowed under the earth, the descent is with a
ladder by the mouth, which is of no great wideness; in this vault is a bed
ready prepared, a light burning, with bread, milk and oil; these things being
all made ready for the purpose, the delinquent is set down, her hands loosed,
and her head covered, the high Priest whispering certain secret things in her
ear, the other Priests turning their faces from her, which is no sooner done,
but she is let down into the cavern, earth thrown upon her, the grave filled,
and she stifled alive; and that day on which this execution is done, there is a
general silence and sadness through the whole City.

Oppia.
SHe was one of the Vestall virgins; who being taken in whordome, and the fast
manifestly proved, she was convented, convicted, and had her doom to be buried
alive. Upon whom Strozza filius inscribed this Epitaph; Vestalis virgo laesi
damnata pudoris,
Contegor hoc vivens Oppia sub tumulo:
I Oppia, once a Vestall, that
For sin my judgment have;
Condemned for lust, am living shut
And covered in this grave.


Claudia. There were two of that name, Claudia.
as Livy in his 22 book reports, who were addicted to the ceremonies of Vesta.

Fonteia was the sister of Marc. Fonteius, Fonteia.
who being a Prefect or Governor amongst the Gauls, was accused before the
Senate, of injustice and misgovernment, as transgressing the laws and edicts
of the Romans.

Marcia was a Vestall virgin, Marcia.
and one that attended upon the sacred ceremonies, she was condemned of incest,
and (as Oppia was before her) buried alive.

Minutia also, Minutia.
a minister of Vesta's sacrifices, who for her elegant feature, and
extraordinary beauty (and withal because the costly ornaments, with which she
used to attire her self, exceeded the precise custom of her Order) she was
brought within the suspicion of lust and inchastity; for which being called
into question, and not able legally to acquit quit her self, she was brought
within the compass of the law, and for her supposed offense, had both the
sentence and execution due to the like delinquents.

Justin in his 43. book commemorates this history; Ae^eas, after many tedious
travels, landing in Italy, was by marrying Lavinia the daughter of King
Latinus, made partner with him in the Kingdom; for which marriage, war was
commenced betwixt them two of the one party, and Turnus, King of the Rutilians
on the other. In which combustions, Turnus being slain, and Latinus yielding to
Fate, Aeneas both by the right of victory and succession, became Lord of both
the Kingdom and people; erecting a City called Lavinium, in remembrance of his
wife Lavinia. In process, he made war against Mezentius, King of the
Etruscians, whom having slain, Ascanius the son of Aeneas, succeeded in the
principality. Ascanius leaving Lavinium, built the City Alba; which for three
hundred years space, was the Capital City of that Kingdom. After many
descents, the regal honors were conferred upon Numitor and Amulius. These two
Princes emulous of each others greatness, Amulius the younger, having oppressed
his brother Numitor, surprised also his sole daughter Rhaea, Rhaea Vestalis.
who was immediate heir to her fathers honors and regal dignities: all which,
he covetous to ingrosse to himself, and fearing withal, left from her issue
might in time descend some one that might punish his insolences, and revenge
her and her fathers injuries, devised with himself how to prevent both; and
fearing lest by putting her to death, he might incur a general hate amongst
the people, in whose love he was not as yet fully settled; he apprehended (as
his safest course) to shadow her wrong beneath a veil of honor, and so caused
her with a strict vow of virginity to be elected into the sacred service of
Vesta. Being thus confined into the grove celebrated to Mars, whether begot by
Mars himself (as was then believed) or otherwise adulterously conceived, it is
uncertain, but she was delivered of two sons. This being know to Amulius,
increased his fears, who commanded the infants to be cast forth, and Rhaea to
be laden with irons, under whose severe sentence expiring, she yielded to
Fate. The two children ready to perish, were miraculously nursed by a she
wolf, and after found by the shepherd Faustulus, were by him brought up and
called Remus and Romulus, and so much of Rhaea Tranquillus, and Cornelius
Tacitus both of them remember one Rubria a Vestall virgin, Rubria.
who was forceably defloured by Nero. Pompilia.
Another, whose name was Pompilia, because by her inchastity she profaned the
sacred orders of Vesta, was buried alive; the same death for the like offense
suffered Cornelia. Floronea Cornelia.
the Vestall was convicted of whoredom, Floronea.
but she to prevent one death, made choice of another: For taking to her self
a brave Roman spirit, Posthumia.
she with her own hands boldly slew her self. Posthumia taxed for her too
curious habit and gaudiness in attire, (as much transcending the custom of
that more strict Order) was suspected of Lust, and accited before the Senate,
and there arraigned, she wittily and nobly answered to whatsoever could be
objected against her; so that being found guiltless, she was absolved by the
sentence of the high Priest, Sextilia.
or Arch-Flammin. Sextilia sped not so well as this Posthumia, for she being
suspected of inchastity, and found culpable, suffered according to the law made
for the punishment of the like offenders. Tutia.
The like suffered Tutia the Vestali for her unlawful prostitution. Plutarch
in Gracchis, in the Catalogue of these consecrated virgins, numbers Licinia.
Lycinia.
And Pliny relates, that when Clodius the Emperor was in opposition with his
wife Messalina (that sink of lust, and most incontinent of women) when their
differences could be no ways decided, Vbidia.
Messalina sent to Vbidia (one of the most reverent amongst the Vestals) by
whose mediation atonement was made betwixt her and the Emperor. The Vestall
fire upon a time going out, and it being imputed to their inchastity, Aemilia.
Aemilia with these words besought the goddess; Oh Vesta, thou that art the
protector of this famous City Rome, as I have truly and chastely, almost for
thirty years space, celebrated thy sacrifices, so either at this present crown
my purity with fame, or before this multitude, brand my lust with infamy. These
words were no sooner spoken, but casting her mantle upon the Altar, the fire
instantly brake forth, where before there was nothing in place save cold
embers; Claudia.
by which prodigy her innocent life was protected. Claudia the Vestall was of
no less remarkable chastity, who when a bark laden with the sacreds of the
goddess stuck fast in the river Tyber, and by no humane strength could be
loosed from the sand: she thus openly protested before the people, If (quoth
she) O goddess, I have hitherto kept my chastity undefiled, vouchsafe thesie
may follow me; when fasting a cord to the stearn of the ship, she without any
difficulty drew it along the river. Tuscia.
Tuscia likewise suspected of incontinence, by the like wonder gave testimony
of her innocence, who invocating Vesta in these words: If (says she) O mother
of the gods, I have offered thy sacrifices with chaste and undefiled hands,
grant that with this sieve I may take up water from the river Tyber, and
without shedding the least drop bear it unto thy altar: which when she had
obtained and accordingly performed, with loud acclamations of the multitude,
she was absolved, and her austere life ever after held in reverence. The
attributes of Modesty and Temperance, are greater ornaments to a woman than
gold or jewels; and because all perfections cannot be in one woman at one time,
this Modesty is that which supplies all things that are wanting. It is a dower
to her that has no portion, not only an ornament to deformity, but in
blackness it impresses a kind of beauty; it illustrates the ignobility of
birth, supplying all those defects wherein fortune has been scanting. And so
much shall suffice for the Vestals.

Of the Prophetesses.
COncerning these Prophetesses, I will only make a brief catalogue of some
few, whom the ancient writers have made most eminent. We read of Hyrcia the
daughter of Sesostris King of Egypt, most skillful in divination, who to her
father foretold his amplitude and Monarchy. Volatteranus in Georg. writes of
one Labissa, a divining woman, that was eminent for many predictions in
Bohemia, whom succeeded her daughter Craco, as well in skill, as in fame.
Plutarch in Mario speaks of one Martha, whom Marcius most honorably
circumducted in a horse-litter, and: ^t her appointment celebrated many
sacrifices; her the Senate with a general suffrage for her approved skill in
augury, rewarded with liberty, making her a free woman of the City. Polyxo is
the name of one of the Phebaiedes; of whom Val. Flaccus in his Argonauts thus
writes: Tunc etiam vates Phoebo delecta Polyxo.

Where he calls her a Prophetess beloved of Phoebus. S^sipatra, a woman by
nation a Lydian, and the wife of Aedesius the Sophist, was possessed with that
divining spirit, and true conjecture of future things that in their times
accordingly happened, that she was said to be educated and instructed by the gods
themselves. Of the like approbation was Spurina, who as Tranquillus testates,
forewarned Caesar to beware of the Ides of March, who in the same day was
murdered in the Capitol, of which he bid him beware. Martianus Capella speaks
of one Symachia, and calls her one of the Sybils; and often by all authors
granted, will allow but two; namely, Herophile Trojana the daughter of
Marmensis, and Symachia the issue of Hippotensis, who was born in Erythraea,
and prophefied in Cuma. Theano and Eucyppa, the daughters of one Scedasus, sung
many oraculous cautions, to the people of Sparta, yet could they not predict
their own disaster; for after they were forcibly defloured by the young men of
the same City, and slain, and their bodies cast into a well; their father after
long search finding them, confounded with the sight of so sad a spectacle, upon
the sight thereof slew himself. Caelius writes of a woman born in his
Country, called Jacoba, out of whose belly unclean spirits made acclamations
of future things to come; of which one of them called himself Cincinnatulus,
who gave mavelous answers to such as demanded of him, but spoke as often
falsely as truly. Of better knowledge (as it seems) was Apollonius of Tyana, a
City in Greece, who told one Cylix, a man given to all volu ptuousnesse, That
before three days were expired, he should be slain; which accordingly happened.
He used to protest, that he spoke nothing without the counsel of the gods, and
direction of the spirit that attended him: he professed the knowledge of all
languages and tongues, to have insight into the thoughts of men, to discourse
any thing punctually that had past, and divine as truly of any thing to come;
he was moreover an exact interpreter of dreams: his life is compendiously set
down by Vollatterranus. Parialla lived in the age of Cleomines, and was called
the championess of all the Delphian Prophetesses. Now how the Devil should
come to the foreknowledge of things to come, it shall be held no unnecessary
digression briefly to inquire. These spirits being of a thin substance (by
their tenuity, subtilty, and incredible celerity, moreover, by the quickness
of their apprehensions, in which they far excel the slownesse and dullness of
all earthly bodies) by the divine permission, understand and deliver many
things which appear to us miraculous: Cap. 8.
Therefore S. Augustine in book De Spiritu and Anima, says, That by reason of
their antiquity, and benefit of the length of time (as having continued from
the beginning of the world) they have gathered to themselves, that absolute and
unmatchable experience, of which man (by reason of the brevity of his age) is
no way capable, by which means some of their actions seem the more admirable:
some things they fashion out of the holy Scriptures themselves, as having them
all at their fingers ends, and often times predict such things as they themselves
have purpose to act; by this means tempting and seducing mankind. Therefore
Plato in Epinomide, attributes unto them, Lib. 4.
acuteness of wit, retentive memory, and admirable knowledge. Clemens in
Recog. says, That these spirits therefore know more, and much more perfectly,
as not being burdened or dulied with the gross weight of the body. Tertullian
in his Apology against the nations, thus argues: All spirits are winged, Cap.
22.
and therefore are every where in an instant; the spacious earth, and all the
corners thereof, are to them but as one place, and whatsoever is therein done,
they can as easily know, as suddenly declare: by this means they make
themselves the authors of many things; and so they are indeed of mischiefs
often, of good things never. The Croesians and the Pirrhians make it most
apparent, with what deceiving cunning he has shadowed the ambiguities of his
O^acles. No question but the devil by the infallible prophesies of Esaias and
Daniel (both which had lively and expressly deliueated the young man Alexander)
knew that this Alexander by subduing Darius, should enjoy all Asia, and
transfer the Monarchy from the Babylonians to the Graecians. The Prince thereof
coming to the Delphian Oracle, and of the Prophetess demanding the success
that should follow his intended expeditions, she of long time made him no
answer; but he not so satisfied, by entreaties, menacies, and all manner of
importunities, at length wrested from her these few words, Invictus eris
Alexander, Oh Alexander, thou shall be invincible: which words, had they failed
in the success of his wars, yet had a shadow of truth, in that his urgence
overcame the silence of the Oracle: After, trajecting his army against the
Persians, diverse Prodigies appeared; at his entrance into Asia, the statue of
Orpheus was seen to sweet; in his conflict with Darius, an Eagle was still
visibly seen soaring and hovering over his head, and as it were menacing the
enemy: these were no question, the mockeries of the devil, to avert the
opinions of such as gave not much credit to the superstitions of these vain
Auguries, and to the firmer establishment of his own kingdom. Esa. 23.
He knew before out of the Prophesies of Esaias, That Tyrus should be destroyed
by the Macedonians, for so says the Prophet: The burden of Tyrus: howl ye
ships of Tarshish, for it is destroi'd, so that there is no house; none shall
come from the land of Chitrim, it is revealed unto them. This land Cethim, many
hold to be Macedonia, for after that dialect the Macedonians are called by
Homer. Joseph. l. 1.
Others by Cethim, interpret the land of the Cyprians. Now when after the
defeat and utter subversion of Darius, Antiquit.
Alexander had invested his army before Tyrus, the devil by Oracle forewarned
one of the prime Citizens, That Apollo would instantly forsake the City: that
the event answering the prediction, might the more firmly establish the
confidence settled upon these false Idols. To this purpose makes that of the
Pythian damsel in the Acts of the Apostles, Act. 16. 16.
thus says the Text; And it came to pass as we went to prayer, a certain
maid having a spirit of divination met us, which gat her master much vantage
with divining; she followed Paul and us, and cried; saying, these men are the
servants of the most high God, which show unto you the way of salvation; and
thus did she many days. Here we see the devil confesses the truth, but not
with the intent to move the people to give belief to his doctrines: For that
appears by the sequel. For when Paul grieved, turned about, and said to the
spirit, I command thee in the name of Jesus, that thou come out of her; and be
came out the same hour. For instantly follows the innate malice of the devil;
for when her masters saw the hope of their gain was gone, they caught Paul and
Silas, and drew them into the market place unto the Magistrates, etc. The
devil prosecuting his hate against them, even to false accusations, beating
with rods, and imprisonment. This argument I will end with one historical
discourse. Cap. 15.
Johannes Wyerius in his first book, De praest. Demon tells us, that upon a
time mention being made of Hector and Achilles before the Emperor Maximilian
in his imperial palace, one of his chief nobility, and a prime Counselor of
State, among the rest began to speak most affectionately in their p^^^se,
extolling their actions, strength, and valor, in that high measure, that the
Emperor was most desirous (if it were possible) to behold them in their true
effigies and portraiture. A Magician at the same time lived about the Court,
who boasted so much of his skill, that he professed himself able to accomplish
the desires of the Emperor, and that without danger or prejudice to any: this
coming to the ears of the Emperor, he was sent for, and commanded to show
some testimony of his art. The Magician in hope of reward, and promise of
silence, free from all interruption, undertakes it, and moreover to secure the
spectators from danger: when placing the Emperor in his regal throne, he cast
about the same a wide and spacious circle, that done, he mumbles certain
unknown words to himself, which he seemed to read out of a small book of
characters, which he drew out of his pocket. This was no sooner done, but
Hector beats at the door with such violence, that at the terror of the
strokes, the whole palace seemed to tremble: the door being opened, Hector
enters armed Cap a pe in a helmet plumed, his target upon his arm, and in his
right hand a long mighty spear, headed with brass: who thus accoutred, with
terrible and flaming eyes looks round about the room; his stature much larger
then any that has lived in our latter days. At another door, first knocks,
then enters Achilles, with the like majestic gate, completely armed, with an
austere and menacing brow, beholding Hector, shaking and charging his spear
against him, as if he instantly purposed to invade him. These two, after honor
done unto Caesar, having gone on, and returned back three times, upon the
instant vanished. This act being past, next enters on the stage King David, his
head crowned with a rich diadem, and ado^ned with all Kingly magnificence,
playing upon his harp, but his aspect more plausible, and his countenance more
amiable then the former: he likewise three several times past by the Emperor,
still sitting in his throne, but without any reverence done to his person at
all, and so likewise vanished. The Magician being asked by the Emperor, Why, of
the rest, David had only denied to do him honor? he presently answered, That
all Kingdoms to the Kingdom of David must submit themselves, because Christ
himself came of his stock and lineage. Thus we see how the devil is never
without Scripture in his mouth, though blasphemy and execration in his heart.
Besides these kind of Diviners, there are such as are called Sortiligae, and
these predict by lots, and that after sundry manners, of which I will instance
one only: They make a round circle, and divide it into four and twenty equal
distances, according to the number of the Greek alphabet, every space having
the character of one of these letters, upon which they put a grain of wheat or
barley; then is put forth a Cock kept for the purpose, and by those grains that
he picks up from the letters, they make their conjectures. Valens the Emperor
much perplexed in his mind about the succession in the Empire, retired himself
to this kind of Augury: when the letters and the grains being placed as is
aforesaid, the vaticinating Cock (called Alectiomantious) was turned out, who
picked up the grains, and made bare these five letters* THEOD; by which was
signified Theodosius, who after succeeded. Other predictions were gathered out
of the sentences of the Poets; but especially out of Homer of the Greeks,
Iliad. 5.
and Virgil for the Latins. Socrates being in prison, out of a verse in Homer
told to Aeschinus, That he should not outlive the third day. Alexander Severus
thus meaning to calculate what should futurely betide him, Aeneid. 6.
happened upon this verse in Virgil: Tu regere imperio populos, Roman memento.
And after some few years he attained to the Empire. Claudius the Emperor
acquiring his own fate the like way, happened upon that in his sixth book of his
Aeneid: Tertia dum Latio regnantem viderit Aestas. Neither did he reign above
two years. The same Claudius inquiring after his brothers fortunes, he light
upon that verse, which after Gordianus Junior chanced upon: Ostendunt terris
hunc tantum fata. This Gordianus was slain within seventeen days after he had
taken upon him the imperial purple. Claudius Secundus, predecessor to the
Emperor Aurelian, inquiring of the success of his posterity, had the lot of
this verse in Virgil: His ego, nic metas rerum, nec nomina pono. Aeneid. l. 1.
Whose progeny lasted for a long time after. Of this kind there were infinite,
which I purposely pretermit. The ^i^hian woman that sat stradling with her
legs upon the Tripos, received the unclean spirit at the immedest parts of her
body, from whence she was likewise heard to deliver such answers as were
demanded of her, with a strange fury and rapture, her hair scattered about her
ears, and foaming at the mouth, she delivered her frantic oracles. Methodius
against Origin, writ a book of these mad diviners, as Sophranius says. Others
there were, called Ventriloquae (so named by S. Augustine) because they were
heard to speak from their wombs and bellies. Tertul. a great author, affirms
that he has seen such women, that from their immodest parts (sitting) have
uttered such kind of oracles, answering in that manner to questions demanded.
To conclude with these, Caelius ^odovicus that lived in the memory of our
fathers, Lect. cap. 10
in his eight book Antiquit. has left recorded, that he has seen such a woman
in Rhodigium, a City of Italy, from whose secret parts such a voice was often
heard, which though small and weak, yet was altogether intelligible: that which
she uttered, was strange to the hearers; but in future things, her words were
full of vanity and leasings. To speak of Fortune Tellers, Gypsies, Wisewomen,
and such as pretend to tell of things lost (a profession too much suffered, as
most frequently abusive in this age) would but fill much paper, and give small
or no content at all to the Reader, I will therefore shut up all their
impostorous lies in one short and known truth? A cunning woman.
A cunning woman that not long since lived about this City (whom I forbear for
some reasons to name) pretended great skill not only in Palmestry, to tell
maids how many husbands they should have; and young men, what wives and how
many children legitimate, or bastards, with such like ridiculous and illusive
conjectures; but besides this Art, she professed the knowledge of things lost,
and to return any stolen goods to the true owner: growing by this so popular,
that she grew not only in fame but in wealth, and of great opinion amongst the
vulgar. It happened that in a certain house a silver spoon being lost, and some
of the family above the rest suspected about the felony, two of the servants
knowing themselves innocent, to clear themselves, and find out the private
thief, made a stock betwixt them of ten groats (for that was her fee) and very
early in the morning repaired to this cunning woman's house, because they would
be sure both to take her within, and find her at leisure. They happened to come
just at the time when she her self opening the street door, the first thing
she cast her eye upon was, that some beastly fellow or other had egregiously
played the sloven just before the threshold of her door, at which being
exceedingly moved, she in her anger thus said, Did I but know, or could I find
out what rascal has done this, I would be revenged on him, though it cost me
twenty nobles. One of the serving men somewhat wiser then his fellow, hearing
this, plucked him by the elbow, and thus whispers to him, Thou hear her talk
of twenty nobles, but by my consent we will even back again, and save our ten
groats. The other demanding the reason; Marry (says he) she that cannot tell
who has done that abuse at her door, I will never believe that she can tell us
the party that has stolen the spoon. I would wish that all would take caution
from this servant.

The Hesperides.
THey were the daughters of Hesperus the brother of Atlas, or as some think of
Atlas himself, of which number is Eubulus. Chaerecrates derives them from
Phorcus and Cetus. Their names were Aegle, Arethusa, and Hesperthusa. These
kept certain pleasant and delectable gardens, not far from Lyxus a Town in
Mauritania in the farthest part of Aethiopia toward the West; where all the
Country was scorched with the heat of the Sun, and the place almost
inhabitable for the multitude of serpents. These Gardens were not far distant
from Meroe and the red sea, where lived the Serpent that kept the golden
Apples, whom Hercules after slew. The keeper of this Dragon was called Ladon,
Lib. 4*
the son of Typhon and Echidna, whom Apollonius takes to be the Dragon
himself: these Virgins inhabited the remotest parts of the Earth, the same
where Atlas is said to support the Heavens, as Dionysius signifies to us, in
his book de Situ orbis.

Sustinet hic Atlas Caelum, sic fata jubebunt
Vltimus Hesperidum locus est, in margin terrae
Hic Capite and manibus fert vasti pondera mundi:
Here Atlas does support the Heaven, for so
The fates command; the Hesperid's give it name
In the Earths utmost margent, he we know
Bears with his head and hands the worlds vast frame.
The fame is, the mountain Atlas has round incompast or hedged in this O^chard
or Garden, because Themis had prophesied to him, That in process of time the
son of Jupiter should break through his pale and bear away his golden Apples;
which after proved true in Hercules. These Apples, Agretus in rebus Libycis
explaineth them to be sheep, and because kept by a rude and churlish sheepherd,
were said to be guarded by a Dragon. But Pherecides, where he commemorates the
Nuptials of Juno, Lib. 10.
affirms that the earth next to the sea in the furthest West, brings Apples of
the color of Gold; whose opinion Lucan follows. With three of these Apples
was Atlanta the daughter of Scoeneus vanquished, which Venus gave to Hippomines,
when she was proposed the reward to the victor, and death to him that was
overcome: but more plainly to reduce these fables to history, It is probable,
that there were two brothers famous and renowned in these Provinces, Hespereus
and Atlas, that were possessed of sheep beautiful and fair, whose fleeces were
yellow and of the color of gold. Hesperus having a daughter called Hesperia,
conferred her on his brother Atlas, of this Hesperia the region was called
Hesperitis. By her, Atlas had six daughters, and therefore they had a double
denomination, from him Atlantides; from her Hesperides. Their beauties being
rumored far off, it came to the ears of Busiris, who desirous of so rich a
prey, sent certain pirates and robbers with a strict command, by some stratagem,
or else by force to steal them thence, and so to transport them within the
compass of his dominions. These Damsels sporting themselves in the garden,
were by these spies and outliers surprised and borne thence which happened just
about the time that Hercules combatted Antaeus: these Virgins being shipped away,
the pirates went on shore to repose themselves with their prey upon the beach;
of which Hercules having notice (who had heard before of the rape) he sallied
upon them, and slew them all to one man, returning the Virgins safe to their
father, for which he received not only a present of those sheep (the reward of
so great a benefit) but many other courtesies; amongst other things he
instructed him in Astronomy, and to distinguish of the stars: which knowledge
Hercules first bringing into Greece, he was therefore said to ease Atlas, and
in his stead to support heaven upon his shoulders. So the Hesperides are called
the daughters of Hesperus, which signifies the evening. And they are said to
have gardens in the Occident, which brings froth golden Apples, by reason the
color of the stars are like gold, and their orbs round as apples, neither rise
they but in the west, because instantly after the setting of the Sun, the Stars
appear, which by reason of his splendor, are concealed and obscured all the
day time: the Dragon, some think it to be the Sign-bearing Circle; there is a
river that by many windings and serpent-like indents incompast the Orchard. And
so much for the explanation of the Hesperides.

Pleiades or Hyades.
OVid in his first book de Fastis leaves remembered, how Atlas took to wife
Pleione the daughter of Oceanus and Thetis, by whom he received seven
daughters: these, when Orion (with their mother) had for the space of five
years together, prosecuted only to vitiate and deflower them, they all jointly
petitioned to the gods, That they might be rescued from all violence; whose
prayers Jupiter hearing, and withal commiserating their distress, he changed
the seven sisters into seven stars, whose names Aratn^ in Astronomicis, thus
recites, -- Septem illae esse feruntur.
Quamvis sint oculis hominam sex obvia signa.
Alcinoe, Meropeque, Electraque, diva Celaeno
Taigete, Sterope, praeclaro Lumine Maia.
-- Seven stars the are held to be,
Though we with our weak eyes but six can see,
Celaeno, Electra, Alcyone, Merope,
Clere-sighted Maia, Taygete, Sterope.


All these stars are placed in the head of the Bull, two in his ears, two in
his eyes, two in his nostrils, and one in the middle of his forehead, where the
hair curls and turns up. Some reckoned the daughters of Atlas to the number of
twelve, and that Hyas was their brother, who being stung to death by a serpent,
five of his sisters took his death so grievously, that they died with sorrow;
of whom Jupiter took such pity, that he translated them into so many stars,
which still bear their brothers name, and are called Hyades. Hesiod thus gives
us their names, Phoeola, Coronis, Cleia, Phoeo, and Eudora, Quas nymphas,
Hyades mortales nomine dicunt.

Others nominate them after this manner, Ambrocia, Coronis, Eudora, Dione,
Aesila, and Polyxo: Others have added to th^^^, Thic^, and Proitele, which they
have believed to be N^^ses of Bacchus: as also Dodoninas so called of Dodonus
the son of Europa, but write them as descended from other parents, whence some
held them for the daughters of Erecheus, others of Cadmus: some would have
Calypso to be the daughter of Atlas. Neither is their number free from
controversy; for Thales Milesius holds them but two, the one Australis, the
other Borealis, Euripides in his Tragedy de Phactonte, adds a third. Achaeus
makes them four, and Euripides six: some think them called Hyades, because
they were the Nurses of Bacchus, who is also called Hyes, of which opinion
Euphorion is.

Hyae cornuto Dionysio Iratae. Others think them to have took name of the
Rain, because their rising still portends shewers in the spring. Besides,
these are the most certain signs of weather, which the Navigators at sea
gather from the rising of these stars, as Euripides in Ione most perspicuously
demonstrates. These Pleiades and Hyades are therefore called the daughters of
Atlas, because Atlas signifies Axis mundi, i. the axeltree of the world. The
Columns of Atlas are the North and the Meridian or South poles, on which the
heaven is thought to be supported. Now the axeltree first made, the stars were
next created: some think them the issue of Atlas. Libicus who being a most
skillful Astronomer, called his daughters by the names of the stars, thereby to
eternise their memory, as diverse others have done the like. Amongst whom was
Conon, who lived in the time of P^olomaeus, who called his Coma and Berenices.
Proclus in his Comment. upon Hesiodus his works and days, writes that these
Pleiades are all divine, and their stars the souls of the Planets; as Ceraeno
is the soul of Saturn; Sterope, of the sphere of Jupiter; Merope, of Mars;
Electra, of Apollo or the Sun; Alcione of Venus; Maia of Mercury; and Taigete,
of the Moon. Of whom some have had congresse with their own Planets, and some
with other of the gods. Which Ovid in his fourth book Fastor. has with much
elegancy related: Pleiades Incipiunt humeros relevare paternos:
The wandering Pleiades gadding abroad,
Begin to ease their father of his Load.
Who though in number Seven, all shining bright,
Yet only six of them appear in sight
Twice three of these themselves have prostrate cast
Into the gods embraces: Mars clings fast
To S^erope; Alcione the fair,
And sweet Celaeno, Neptunes darlings are.
Maia, Electra, and Taigete, three
Of that bright sister-hood, Joves wantons be:
But Merope (the seventh) of mind more base,
Stooped lower, to a Merope was the prostitute of Sysiphus.
mortal man's embrace.
The thought of which fact she does so detest,
She since nere showed her face amongst the rest.
And so much for the Pleiades and Hyades shall suffice.


Of the Graces.
THese whom the Latins call Gratiae or Graces, the Greeks call Charites Hesiod
calls them the daughters of Jupiter and Eurinome, these called Oceanus father.
Orpheus in an hymn sung to the praise of these sisters, calls them the daughters
of Eunomea and Jupiter. Antilemachus derives them from Aegles and the Sun,
others from Antinoe and Jupiter; as they differ in their birth, so they do in
their names and number: some allow but two, and name them Clita and Phaena.
Pausanias in Boeticis styles them Auxo and Hegemone. Some number Suadela
amongst the Graces. But all those ancient writers that are best received, and
most authentically approved, conclude them to be three; their names Euphrosine,
Aglaia, and Thalia: of whom Hesiod in his Theogonia: Tres sibi, and Eurynome
Charites parit edita magno,
Oceano, etc.
Eurinome of the Greek Ocean born,
(A nymph excelling both in shape and face)
Brought forth the three Charites, to adorn
Jove's issue: Fair Euphrosine the first Grace,
Aglaia, and Thalia, etc.


They are never separated, but always put together, whenever they are
remembered by the ancient Poets. The younger sister Aglaia, is said to be the
wife of Vulcan, and all jointly the handmaids and attendants of Venus.
Concerning their habits, there has been some difference, because some have
presented them naked, and without any garments at all: In Boetick.
which difference Pausanias has reconciled, who witnesses that the Graces
were set forth as objects, either by the Gravers, the Painters, or the Poets;
or which number were Pythagoras, Parius, Bupalus, Apelles, and others: but in
habits fashioned in a modest decency, their hair fair, long, and comely;
therefore Homer in his hymn to Apollo, calls them Pulc^^omae, or fair haired.
Horace he sets them out with girdles, which are never worn without other
garments It is therefore apparent, that the ancient writers allowed them robes
and vestures, either because it was a great immodesty to present women
unclothed, or else to keep them from the violence of the winters cold, by which
their tempers are much distasted, howsoever since they have fallen into the
hands of later writers, who have robbed them of these habits, with which they
were apparalled by the former: for which robbery they are said, as ashamed of
their nakedness, to have exiled themselves from the earth. The first of all
mortal men that erected a Temple to the Graces, was Eteocles a King over the
Orcho^aenians; for as Strabo writes, Lib. 9.
amongst them was the founta^ne called Acid^lia, in which these three sisters
used to bath themselves. Plato advised X^nocrates, b^ing a good man, and of
honest conversation, but of austere life and condition, that he would sacrifice
to the G^aces. And Plutarch in his conjugall precepts, says, That a chaste and
modest woman in he^ society and conversation toward her husband, needs the
help of the Graces, that (as Metrodorus was wont to say) she may lead her life
with him so sweetly, that her boldness be to him no distaste, nor b^shfulnesse
any burden, for by all such as affect their husbands, nearness and
cleanliness in the house and at board, with pleasing and smooth language at
bed, are by no means to be neglected for coursnesse of manners in the one,
makes her ^ppear harsh; and frowardness in the other, Lib. 4.
unpleasant. Herodotus relates, that the Cynips glides by a hill dedicated to
the Graces, distant from the sea two hundred furlongs, which hill is only woody
and full of trees, and all the rest of the land of Lybia desolate and barren;
near to which hill a people called Goidani inhabit, whose wives use to wear
strings about their garments made of small thongs of leather, and so many
sundry men as they have carnal society withal, so many knots they tie upon
these strings, she that can show the most, being the most respected and
honored amongst the rest, as above the others beloved. But now to find out
what by these Graces was first intended; they are called the daughters of
Jupiter and Eurinome, which implies nothing else then the fertility of the
fields, and the abundance of fruits: all which plenty arises from the benefit
of peace, signified in this word, Eunomia. For where law and equity have
predominance, there violence, oppressions, robberies, and diceptions are
exiled, the fields smile, the houses flourish, the Temples of the gods are both
repai^ed and honored, and all places filled with splendor and ornament.
Neither are these the sole blessings of Eurinome or Eunomia, or of Autonoe (by
which is meant Prudentia, Wisdom) without the help of Jupiter, which includes
the Divine clemency, by which the air and the earth (...) b^th reconciled unto
us, the one in his temperature, the other in increase. They are called the
children of the Sun and Aegles, as knowing the Sun to be the chief planet in
the governance of the elements, without whose heat and encouragement, no herb
or plant can attain to any ^ipenesse and perfection. They are termed conjoined
and unseparable sisters, by reason of the threefold profit arising from
agriculture; the first from the fields, the second from the trees, the third
from the creatures: nor are their names unf^ly conferred upon them. Thalia is a
pleasant budding or burgening; Aglaia, is splendour; and Euphrasine, gladness.
All these commodious delights arising to the Lord of the foil, by his
industrious tillage and manuring the earth. And therefore is Aglaia called the
wi^e of Vulcan, because there is a refulgence arising from all arts whatsoever.
Others have preferred Pasithaea in the place of Aglaia, in that she signifies
herds, flocks, or such cattle as belong to tillage: out of whose labors or
increase, there grows pleasure or profit. They are nominated the goddesses of
Benefits and good Turns: the reason is, in regard that without the fertility of
the earth, no man can be liberal or munificent, nor rich, which is the
foundation of all bounty. They are upheld to be virgins, because the most
honest and conscionable usury is bred from the earth, without ^^llery or
brokage; at the first demonstrated unto us by the ancient Poets, habited and
well apparelled, unless injury, op^ression, and usury, in these latter times
leave them despoiled and naked.

Horae, or the Hours
OF the parents, or names of the Hours, there is small doubt or none at all,
since all the Poets from the first to the last agree, that they were the
daughters of Jupiter and Themis: amongst whom was Hesiod in his Theog* in these
words, Inde Themim rursus ducit sibi quae parit Horas,
Eunomiamque Dicensque, etc.
By marrying Themis, he begat the Hours,
Eunomia, Dyrce, and Irene fair.
And flourishing still, these sisters have the powers
To ripen all men's actions by their care.


Orpheus not only assents with him in their names, but ads also, That they were
born in the Spring time. Pausanias in Boetic. introduces other names and
foreign from these; one he calls Carpo, another Thalote, of the third he
conceals the name. Fastor. l. 1. L. de Sypacus. lib. 5.
Ovid calls them, the porters to the pates of heaven. They are deciphered, to
have soft feet, to be the most slow paced of all the goddesses, yet ever to
produce something new; for so Theocritus reports of them. Homer in his Iliads
rels us, that they are not only placed to keep the gates of heaven, but have
power at their pleasure over fair or foul weathers, calling it an open sky
when the air is fair and clear and a shut heaven when the welkin is dark and
cloudy, as may appear in these words: Sponte fores Coeli patuerunt, etc.
The gates of Heaven did of themselves stand wide,
Those which the virgin hours are set to keep
(As their great charge.) The Poles they likewise guide,
With all the upper regions. From the deep,
The showers exhaled they store: and when they please,
The borrowed rain pay back into the seas.


They are called Horae of the Greek word, which signifies Custodire, or to
keep; and therefore said to be the guardians of heavens gates, as having power
to admit of our devotions, and give them access unto the gods, or otherwise if
they be not faithful and sincere, to exclude them at their pleasures: having
moreover always been, and still continue great favorers and prosperers of all
such as are laborious and studious. They are called the daughters of Jupiter
and Themis, because as the Graces import nothing else but the hilarity and
gladness that arises from the increase of the earth, so these Hours signify
the fruit it self; for the Greek word, Carpo, is Fructus: properly then they
are said to be the attendants of the Graces, as the Graces are still the
handmaids of Venus, for the fruits of the earth are the increase, as that
plenty still follows delight: and therefore they all equipage together, as
being by the Poets never separate Besides, the names of the Hours are thus
properly Englished, Law, Justice, and Peace. The abundance of all things is the
companion of Virtue and Honesty: but Scarcity and Dearth are the pages to
Irreligion and Impiety: for there is not a clearer mirror in which may trulier
be discerned the malice or gratitude of men toward the gods, and consequently
of their punishment and pity toward men, then in the alterations of the
Seasons; which, the ancient writers the better to signify unto us, made the
Hours the Porters to heaven gates, and gave them power over the clouds, both in
the mustering of them, or dispersing them. And so much for the Hours.

Aurora, or the Morning.
HEsiodus in Theog, terms her the daughter of Hyperion, and the nymph Thya,
and sister to the Sun and Moon. Others derive her from Tytan and Terra, they
call her the way leader to the Sun; as Luciser the day star is styled her
henshman or usher: for so says Orpheus in an hymn to Aurora. Homer in an hymn
to Venus, allows her roseat fingers, a red or ruddy color, and to be drawn in
a golden Chariot. Virgil sometimes allows her four horses, sometimes but two,
and those of a red color. Theocritus describes them white or gray, according
to the color of the morning. Lycopheon in Alexandra, Lib. 6.
brings her in mounted upon Pegasus, Theoc. in H^la.
Pausanias in Laconic. wr^tes that she was doatingly besotted of the fair
young man C^phalus, as likewise of Orion, in which Homer agrees with him.
Odyss. lib. 5.
Apollodorus makes her the mother of the winds and the stars: Hesiod is of the
same opinion, that by prostrating her self to her brother Astraeus, the son of
Hyperion and Thia, she brought forth Arg^stre, Zephyrus, Boreas and Notus, with
a daughter called Jadama. She was married to Tythonus, the son of Laomedon and
brother to King Priam, but by diverse mothers, Priam being the son of Leucippe,
Tython of Strimo, or as others invert it of Rhaeo, daughter to the flood
Scamander. It is commemorated by the Poets, that this Aurora begged for her
husband Tython, Immortality, which was granted her by the gods. But for getting
in her p^tition to insert that withal, he should not grow old; in process, he
grew to that extremity of dec^epit age, that living to be twice a child, he was
swathed and crudled. Tython had two sons by A^^ora, Memnon and Aemathaeon, of
whom she (...) the name Aemathia. Pausanias cols Memnon the King of Aetheopia,
In reb. Phocen.
and from thence, or rather (as some more approved will have it) from S^sis, a
City in Persia, he came to the w^rs of Troy; for he, before that expedition had
subdued and subjugated all the nations near or adjacent to the river Cha^^^^^.
Lib. 16.
Strabo relates, that in the City of Abidus, not far from P^olomais in Egypt,
he had a magnificent Palace all built of stone, then which the Eastern would
afforded not a more miraculous structure; in which there was a lab^rinth of the
same stone, and erected by the self same work master, which was called after
his name, (...). He died in a single Monomachia valiantly by the hand of (...),
in a battle fought betwixt the Greeks and the T^ojans. In the place where he
was slain, a fountain pres^^^ly issued, which yearly at that day, ^^st^wed
nothing but blood, which Calaber commemorates: his S^pulchre was in (...) in
Syria, near to the river Bada, for so says the Poet Simonides. Some have held
argument, that Au^o^a made suit to Jupiter, and when Memnons body was committed
to the funeral fire, he would transh^pe him into a bird, which accordingly
happened, as his Metamorph, most lively expresses in these words: Memnonis orba
mei, venio qui fortia f^ustra, etc.
Deprived of my sweet Memnon, who in vain
Took arms for his deer Uncle: and now slain
By great Achilles in his prime of years
(For so you gods would have it) Lo, appears
Before thy throne, oh Jove (thou chief and rector
Of all the gods, their patron and protector)
A weeping mother: begging to assure
Honors to him, by which my wounds to cure.
To this great Jove assents. The funeral fire
Is kindled, the bright sparks toward heaven aspire,
And like so many stars they make repair
Through the thick smoke which clouds and duls the air,
Darkning the clear day, as when damps and fogs
Exha^'d from rivers, or from marish bogs,
Before the Sun has power: In such a mist,
Up fl^e the obscured sparks, till they subsist
Above, all in one body: which assumes
First shape, then face, next color, from the sumes:
Thus from that Pile the Memnian bird first springs
Fire gave it life, and lightness lent it wings.


It is said that many of these birds, which still bear the name, were seen to
arise from his ashes, which dividing themselves into diverse squadrons, fought
so long amongst themselves, till they fell dead into the fire, sacrificing
their own lives to his obits. But Theocritus in his Epitaph upon Bion, speaks
of none but Memnon only, who himself was changed into a bird, and was seen to
fly about and soar over his own funeral fires, Lucian in Philopseudo* speaks
of a prodigy, or rather a miracle, which was most frequent where his statue
was erected in the Temple of Serapis; no sooner did the rising Sun begin to
shine upon his monument, and seemed to touch it, but his statue yielded a most
sweet and melodious sound, but when he took his leave to rest himself in the
West, as if it mourned the Suns departure, it breathed an army so sadly
passionate, that often times it drew tears from the hearers: which was thus
interpreted, That he still rejoiced at his mothers approach and presence, but
lamented her departure and absence. Cornelius Tacitus, and Suidas, both report
the same, as likewise Zetzes, Chil. histor. 64. But to return to his mother
Aurora, she was still held to be the sweetest, the most delightful and welcome
of all the nymphs and goddesses, not to man only, but to all other creatures,
beasts, and plants. Orpheus in one of his hymns affirms no less: By thee O
goddess mankind is made glad,
Thy gracious presence chears such as he sad.
Since Memnons death, in tears thou risest still
And from thine eyes thick showers of dew-drops spill,
Through all the spacious earth: which to thy grace,
The mornings Sun still kisses from thy face.
By thee his glorious place is much graced,
By thee, the pitchy night to Laethe chaced:
All sleepy mankind to their sport thou wakest,
And sleepy slumbers from their eielids shakest.
Thy beauty to behold, or hear thy voice,
Serpents and men, beasts, birds, and all rejoice.
Tho very Marine Frye thy presence craves,
And to behold thee dance upon the waves.


And these things are the most remarkable which have been fabulouslie observed
of Aurora, who is therefore supposed to be the daughter of Hyperion and Thia,
because by the divine bounty, Light proceeds from the Sun, to illuminate the
earth, and all the inhabitants thereof; for there is no benefit either of
pleasure or profit that can accrue to us, which flows not from their immediate
grace and goodness. She is said to have a ruddy color, because she appears as
if she came blushing from the palace of the Sun. And for that cause they
descri^e her with ^oseat singers, a high complexion, a golden seat, and red
steeds to draw her Chariot, to answer and correspond to the livery which the
Sun gives, his being all of the like color. For the swiftness of her motion,
she is allowed a Chariot; and such as con^er white steeds upon her, derive not
their hue from the gray vapors that arise from the earth, but rather from the
clear and perspicuous splendor of the light it self. Those that of this fable
would make a history, say that Tythonus married a wife out of the Eastern
Countries, by whom he had the forenamed children, and after lived to that age,
that he grew not only decrepit and bed rid of his limbs, but do^^ing and
childish of his brain. From hence arises the fable. That Aurora was inamoured
of him, by reason of the temperature of those Oriental climats, to be possessed
of which pleasant places she purchased for him Immortality. And where some fable
that he was turned to a grasshopper, it signifies nothing else but the loquacity
of age, ambitiously groaning in the often repetiton of things past, glorying in
times of old, and despising those latter in respect of them; such a one did
Homer personate in N^ster. The mark at which all these arrows are aimed in
this Fable, is to persuade men by wisdom, patiently to undergo all the
chances and changes incident to us, both in time and nature; since death by the
bounty of the gods is granted to man as a rest and cessation from all
calamities and troubles. For when Aurora had begged immortality for Tython. he
feeling the infirmities and defects of age, became himself a supplyan to the
gods, That they would be to him so gracious, as to give him leave to sleep with
his fathers, accounting it much better and happier to die once, and be at rest,
then to be continually afflicted with the troubles and difficulties of a weary
and despited life.

Nox, or, the Night.
AFter morning past, the Sun gone about, and the day spent, comes Night;
neither was she in mean honor amongst the ancient Poets, who taught her to be
the first, and long before all other nymphs or goddesses, as possessing all
places, and all things, having in her own dispose and government that deformed
and unshapen matter, called Chaos, over which she reigned Empress before the
gods themselves had any existence or being: not withstanding, some contend to
make her the daughter of this Chaos, as Hesio^l and others: Inde Chao, est
Erebus, Nox, and tenebrosa creati.
From Cha^^, Erebus, and the Night tenebrous
Were both created --
And because so born, she was called the most ancient; the reason is approved,
For before the mass was opened, the matter of which to make things
distinguished, and the world it self created, there could nothing be which
might be properly called Night; therefore Aratus in Astronomac. styles her Nox
antiqua; and Orpheus in one of his hymns. The mother of gods and men, as both
having their birth from her. She is drawn in a Chariot, with stars waiting
upon her wheels, and ushering her, as Theocritus left recorded: -- Salveteque
Noctis
Sydera quae Canthis tacit praecurritis alta:
-- Hail all you stars so bright,
Softly forerunning the round wheels of Night.
She is habited in sable garments, for so al writers agree, her head bound up
in a black veil, whom the stars attend behind her Chariot, as well as before:
for so Euripides in Ione ^estates: Invita nigris vestibus currum insilit
Nox: Astra sunt deum secuta protinus.
Night in black vesture mounts into her car;
Behind, the Stars attend her, but not far.
Virgil gives her two horses to her Chariot: therefore Apollonius in this third
book describing the Night coming, Lib. 5.
says, Nox injecit equis fuga, the night upon her horses cast her yoke. But
this manner of the nights progress, is later then in the time of Homer, for in
his days she was allowed neither Chariot nor horses, they only deciphered her
with wings, like Cupid or Victory. Some introduce her at the departure of the
day, to rise out of the sea, as Virgil in his Aeneids, Lib. 2.
Vertitur interea Coelum: and ruit Oceano Nox:
Involvens umbra magna terramque polumque.
The Heaven mean time is turned, the Night
Leaps from the sea in have,
In dark and pitchy clouds: the Earth
And Poles involving fast.
Her whom Virgil brings from the sea, Euripides invocates as coming from
Erebus in these words, Verenda, Verenda. Nox ex Erebo veni, Oh reverend,
reverend Night, ascend from Erebus. Orpheus relates, that she sends day to the
regions below, and again chaseth her thence, in her own person bringing them
darkness.

Quae Lucem pellis sub terras, rursus and ipsa
Tartara nigra petis --
Below the earth thou drivest Light,
And then again thou bring'st them Night.
In all her sacrifices, a cock was still killed and offered, as a creature much
opposed against silence: for so Theagines has left recorded. L. 2. de diis.
Night had many children: Euripides in his Hercules Furens calls one of her
daughters Rabies, her name importing outrageous madness; a second daughter of
hers was called Rixa, which is Brawling and Scolding; a third Invidia, or envy,
for so says Hesiod in his works and days: Operib. and dieb.
but in his Theogonia, he makes mention of others, whom he calls her sons in
these verses Nox peperit Fatumque malum, par^^ ^^que nigrantem,
Et mortem, and somnum divers^ (...) somnia: na^os,
Hos peperit nulli dea nox (...) marito.
Night, evil fate brought forth, black Parc^ bred,
With Death, and Sleep, and diverse Dreams beside:
Of all these sons she was delivered,
And yet the goddess never husband tried.
Cicero in his third book De natura Deorum, having numbered all the children o^
Night, derives them also from their father Erebus, as may appear in these
words: Quod si ita est, etc. If it be so (says he) those that are the Parents
of heaven should likewise be reckoned in the number of the gods, Ether and
Dies, i. Air, and Day, with their brothers and sisters; by the ancient
Geneologists thus nominated, Amor, Dolus, Metus, Labor, Invidentia, Fatum,
Sinectus, Mors, Tenebrae, M^s^ria, Querel^, Gratia, Fraus, Pertinacia, Parcae,
Hesperides, Somnia: that is, Love, Deceit, Fear, Labor, Envy, Fa^^, old Age,
Death, Darkness, Misery, Complaint, Favor, Fraud, the Pa^cae, and the
Helperides. All which are by some imagined to be the children of Nex and
Erebus; I will only speak a little of two of these as they now lie in my way,
and that briefly too, and (because it may perchance be late before I have done
with them) I will conclude with Night. Death and Sleep are brother and sister*
and both the children of Night. Aristo calls Somnus a severe exacter from
mankind, who as it were vi^lently snatcheth away the half part of our age to
bestow on Sleep and therefore by Orpheus he is called the brother of Lethe,
which insinuates Forgetfulness, which he most elegantly expresses in his hymn
to Sleep, Somne beatorum Rex, and Rex sum virorum,
Quem fugiunt curiae, etc.
Sleep of the blessed man King, and King of men;
Whom cares still fly, and rest imbraceth then.
Of mischiefs, the sole solace and best friend,
To give them due repose, and comfort l^nd,
Who putting on the shape of Death, do give
(Only by that) all creatures means to live.
Sleep, thou have but two sisters, and these are,
Death and Oblivion, both which shorten care.


Ovid in his Metamorphos. for his so many benefits conferred upon Mortals, Lib.
11.
places him in the catalogue of the gods. The house of Seep the same Poet has
ingeniously described, upon whom he confers a thousand children, or rather a
number not to be numbered; nominating only three, Morpheus, Icelus and
Phant^sus: for sleep it is be moderately used, is of all mortal things the
sweetest, best and most profitable, to whom all creatures whatsoever are
subject, therefore not improperly by Orpheus, termed the King of men and gods.
Lib. 2.
Homer in ^is Iliads, makes an elegant expression, to show how wretched their
conditions are above other men, that are in high and eminent place and office,
and have predominance over the greatest affairs, which he thus introduces, by
making all both gods and men asleep at once, saving Jupiter; which Juno seeing,
she with great bribes and rewards, corrupts Somnus, that he would amongst the
rest charm the eyes of Jupiter; which he attempting, and the other perceiving,
the enraged god, feeling sleep to steal upon him unawares, cast him headlong
from heaven into the sea; where he had doubtless for ever perished, had not
Night snatched up her son, and in her darkness hid him from the wrath of
Jupiter. But had he been destroyed, Sleep had been exiled the earth, and so all
creatures deprived of their quotidian rest. From hence likewise may be
collected, how wretched those sleeping gods are, when Jupiter the only wise,
and potent, is ever awake, to see, provide, foresee, and gooern, by his
infinite providence both men and creatures.

The City of Sleep, Lucianus in his second book Verarum Historia^um, though
tabulously, yet has facundiously described: This City (says he) is situate
in a most spacious and silent plain, yet round incompast with tall and
spreading trees, amongst whose leaves the wind only whispers, but never
robustiously blows. There Poppy grows abundantly, Mandragora, and all such
plants, herbs and simples, as have the innate virtue to procure and provoke
sleep. There are multitudes of Bats, which fly continually this way and that,
and betwixt one tree and other, great store of N^ght-ravens, Owls, and
Screechowles: no bird that is ashamed of day, but is here frequently to be
found. But neither the crowing Cock, the chattering Pie, the quacking Duck, the
gagling Goose, nor any other foul, either of song or clamor can thither have
access. Fast by this City glides a river with a slow and silent pace, making a
murmr, but no noise, rather to rock and ^ull asleep than to waken; the water
is thick and soft like oil, the floods name is Lethe, whom others call Nicty
porus, it flows from two fountain heads, both hid and obscured in places to no
man known, the one is called Pannychius, the other Negre^as, This City has two
ports or gates, one of horn composed with miraculous workmanship, in which as
in a Table, are expressed all such true dreams as exercise the fantasies of men
in their depth of rest: The other is made of the most purest and most white
Ivory, in which are carved all sorts of dreams, but these as it were
artificially shadowed by the pencill, but none fully drawn and expressed to the
life. Within this City walls is a magnificent and spacious structure, called the
Temple of Night, which with all superstitious ceremonies is religiously
honored: there is a second instituted to the goddess Apales, and a third to
Alethia, in both which there are Oracles. The sole inhabitants of this place
are an infinite company, but not a Citizen in shape or favor one like another:
some are lean, lanck, and little, with crooked legs, and hutch-backs, rather
like monsters then men; others are comely, well featured, tall and proper, with
cheerful faces, and promising looks; some are of a froward and terrible
aspect, as if they threatened mischief and disaster; others portly, gallant,
and regally habited; and whosoever shall enter the gates of this City, some
domestic dream or other continually will encouter him and give him a familiar
and friendly salute, in the shape of some one of these formerly rehearsed,
relating to him some sad things, some pleasant things, to minister content or
distaste: sometimes they whisper truths, but that seldom, for the greatest
part of that multitude are lying and deceitful, because for the most part they
speak one thing and intend another: and thus far Lucianus of the house of
Sleep. I had once occasion to write my self in this manner: Near to the dark
Cimme^ians lies a cave,
Beneath the foot of a declining hill,
Deep in the earths warm intrails, like a grave,
Where charming silence makes all hushed and still;
Hither did never piercing Sunbeam crave
Admittance; nor the voice of hunter shrill
Pierce through the crannies of this concave deep,
Where stands the dull and leaden house of sleep*
Here the thick vapors from the earth exhaled,
Mists all the place about: a doubtful light,
Begot twixt night and day (when the one is failed,
And the other not yet perfect) duls the sight.
No wakefull dog, or clamorous cock has railed
Upon the drow^ie Morn, early to dight
The Suns steeds. Here, the bird that saved of old,
Romes Capit^l, is never heard to scold.
The brawling Crane, nor yet the p^ating Crow,
Or tatling Parret, to d^sturb the ea^^
No bellowing Bull, swift Hart^or Ass more slow,
Is heard to bray: we have all silence here.
Only a murmuring river (which does flow
From Lethe) with his streams among pebbles clear,
Luls the dull sense to soft and feathered rest,
Charming the cares and sorrows in the breast.
Before the gate the drowsy Poppy springs,
With thousand plants and simples without number;
Not one, but to the brain a numnessi brings,
Inviting all the powers of man to sl^mber;
Whose milkie juice, the Night on her black wings
Bears t'wart the earth, and scatters. Who dares cumber
This universal whistnesse; where none come,
But taciturnity, and silence dumb?
Upon the door no rattling hammers stroke
Is heard without, to startle those withn,
No creeking ^hinge, by which often sleep is broke.
Than to speak loud, there is held no greater sin.
Midst a vast room, a bed hewed out of Oak,
(That had of late some ancient rel^que been
Fringed with th^^k^^st and lasie ^obwebs) stands,
Not in an age (...) with careful hands,
Upon this easy couch with (...) hung
Of duskie colored silk, you may behold
The god of sl^ep in careless fashion flung,
Stretching his drowsy limbs, whom n^ne (...) so bold
To ^og or (...) where snortings are heard sung:
The are pincht to softer breath. Some dream of gold,
Of tr^stes some: his Court here Morpheus keeps,
Which no man sooner enters then he sleeps.


And this description begins to make me drowsy already. But lest speaking too
much of sleep, I may be taxed and so taken napping my self, I leave the
brother fast sleeping to find out the sister, who to the worlds end shall ever
be waking. Death is said to be educated by her mother Night. Pausanias, puts us
in mind, In Eliacis.
that in a Temple amongst the Eleans, there was a woman po^t^aied, leading two
sleepy children, that in her right hand White, that in her left hand Black,
both with (...) legs, and misshapen feet; the inscription upon the one, Sleep,
upon the other Death, the woman that cher^sht them, Night. This death of all
the powers that are, is most impartial and implacable, and because by no
prayers nor intercessions she is to be moved, therefore there are no Altars nor
Temples nor sacrifices celebrated to her honor, her impartiality and
implacability Orpheus has signified in one of his hymns, Nec prece, muneribus,
nec tu placabilis ullis.

She is attired in a sable garment spotted with stars. The wise men of the
former ages extold her with miraculous praises, calling her the portand only
secure harbor of rest: she frees the body from a thousand pains and diseases,
delivers the subject from the cruelty of the tyrant, and makes the beggar
equal with his Prince. She to all good men is acceptable and welcome, only
dreadful to the wicked, who have a presage and fear of punishments to come.
Alcidamus writ an excellent book in the praise of Death, having a large and
copious argument: in which he strove to express with what an equal sufferance
and modest patience she was to be enterteined. Of the same argument writes
Plutarch in Consolator: for life is nothing else but a light len^ us by the
Creator of all mankind, which if it be redemanded of us, ought no more
grudgingly to be paid back, then coming to a friends house to be merry in the
morning, and having feasted there all the day, to return to our home at night;
or to pay back what we borrow, to the owner: For there is no injury done to us,
if God demand that back at our hands, which he has before but lent us. Now
from the daughter to come back to the mother, and know what is allegorically
meant by Night. These pests and mischiefs before commemorated are therefore
said to be her sons and daughters, because the ignorance and malice of man
(which is indeed the night of the mind) is the parent and nurse of all
calamities incidents to us: yet may some of their violences by wisdom be
mitigated, though not frustrated of their ends, namely, Age, Love, Fate, Death,
and the like, who though they be in perpetual motion, their speed may be
slackned, though not stayed, and their pace slowed, though not quire stopped She
was called the most Ancient, because before the Heavens and the Sun were
created, there was no light ext^nt; which is said to proceed from the lower
parts of the earth, in regard that the Sun compassing the world, when he
lights the Antipodes with his beams, the earth shadows them from us, which
shadow is nothing else then Night. She is called the mother of all, as being
before the birth of any thing. The word Nox is derived a Nocendo, of hurting or
harming; the reason is, as some Physicians hold opinion, because the corrupt
humors of the night are infectious and dangerous, especially to men any way
diseased; of which there is continual experience in all such as have either
wounds, or aches, or agues, or fevers, or the like, to all such weaknesses or
imperfections, the humors of the night are still most hurtful and obnoxious.
And so much briefly what morally can be gathered, by that which has been
fabulously commented of Night.

That Sleep could not fasten on the eyes of Jupiter, it is intended, not to be
convenient for him that has the charge and protection of the whole Universe,
to whose care and foresight the administration and guidance of all things are
committed. should so much as slumber or wink at all; neither does the divine
Nature need any rest to repair and comfort his troubled spirits, when he is
not capable of either labor or discommodity. And Lethe is called the sister of
Somnu^, in regard that by our natural repose, we for the time forget all
pain, anguish, or trouble. Because he comes to many creatures, and at the same
time he is said to be winged; in regard the humor of the Night increases the
vapors of the stomach, ascending to the higher parts of the body, which after
by the frigidity of the brain, descend again lower, and more cool, by which
Sleep is begot; he is therefore not unproperly called, the son of Night: which
Night calls me now to rest, with the finishing of this second book, called
Euterpe.

Explicit Lib. 2.
THE THIRD BOOK of Women, inscribed THALIA.
Treating of Illustrious Queens, Famous Wives, Mothers, Daughters, etc.
Containing the Histories of sundry Noble Ladies.
GOrgias held opinion, that Women were not to be honored according to their
form, but their fame; preferring actual virtue before superficial beauty: to
encourage which in their sex, funeral orations were allowed by the Roman Laws
to be celebrated for all such as had been either presidents of a good and
commendable life, or otherwise illustrious for any noble or eminent action. And
therefore (lest the matrons or virgins in Rome, the one should divert from her
stayed gravity, or the other from her virgins professed integrity) the use of
Wine was not known amongst them; for that woman was taxed with modesty, whose
breath was known to smell of the grape. Pliny, in his natural history, says,
That Cato was of opinion, Lib. 14.
that the use of kissing first began betwixt kinsman and kinswoman, How kissing
first came up
howsoever near allied or far off, only by that to know whether their wives,
daughters or Neeces, had tasted any wine: to this Juvenal seems to allude in
these verses: Paucae adeo cereris vitas contingere dignae
Quarum non timeat pater oscula.
As if the father were jealous of his daughters continence, if by kissing her,
he perceived she had drunk wine. But kissing and drinking both are now grown
(it seems) to a greater custom amongst us, then in those days with the
Romans: nor am I so austere to forbid the use of either, both which though the
one in surfets, the other in adulteries, may be abused by the vicious; yet
contrarily at customary meetings, and laudable banquets, they by the nobly
disposed, and such whose hearts are fixed upon honor, may be used with much
modesty and continence. But the purpose of my tractate, is to exemplify, not to
instruct; to show you presidents of virtue from others, not to fashion any new
imaginary form from my self; and that setting so many statues of honor before
your eyes, of Beauty, Nobleness, Magnanimity, Bounty, Courtesy, Modesty,
Temperance, and whatsoever else in goodness can be included, each heroic and
well disposed Lady, or woman lower degreed and underqualified, may out of all,
or some of these at least, apprehend some one thing or other worthy imitation;
that as the best of Painters, to draw one exquisite Venus, had set before him a
hundred choice and selected beauties, all naked, to take from one an eye,
another a lip, a third a smile, a fourth a hand, and from each of them that
special lineament in which she most excelled; so having in these papers as
many virtues exposed to your view, as the Painter had beauties, and all le^t as
naked to your eyes, you may make like use of it: draw from one a noble
disposition, bounty and courtesy, the ornaments of great Ladies; from others
temperance, sobriety and government, things best beseeming matrons; the married
wives, conjugall love and sincerity; the virgins chaste life and purity; and
every of you fashion her self as complete a woman for virtue, as Apelles made
up the pourtraiture of his goddess for beauty. I need not speak much of the
worth of your sex, since no man (I think) that remembers he had a mother, but
honors it; the renown of which, some by their virtues have as much
nobilitated, as others by their vicious actions have studied to disgrace: of
both which, though my promise bind me to speak in their course, yet you Ladies
in this treatise (as you most worthily deserve) have the precedence and
priority of place. What man was ever known to be eminent, whom woman in some
manner has not equalled? Come to Fortitude, as there was an Hercules and a
Theseus; so there was a Menalippe and an Hippolite to encounter them: who as
they conquered not, so they were not vanquished. Come to limning or drawing of
Pictures, as there was a Zeusis, a Timanthes, an Androcides, and a Parrhasius;
so the world yielded a Timarete, the daughter of Micaon; an Irene, the daughter
and scholar of Cratinus; an Anistarite, the issue and pupil of Nearchus; a
Lala Cizizena, and a Martia, M. Varronis to boot: to them in that art no whit
inferior. In Poetry compare the Lyricks of Sapho with Anacreons, and Corinnaes
with Pindarus, and it shall be easily made manifest that Sapho in all points
paralleled the first, and Corinnae, in five several contentions for the palm,
preceded the last. But the similitude or discrepance of men and women's virtues
conferred together, can be made no better apparent (as Plutarch says) then by
comparing Life with Life, and Action with Action, by which we shall see they
have almost one and the same effigies: For oppose the magnificence of
Sesostri^, against that of Semiramis; the craft and subtilty of Servius Tullius
against Tanaquils; the magnanimity of Brutus against Porceas; compare Pelopidas
with Timoclea; and which shall yield to the other pre-eminence? especially if
we exactly consider the end at which the virtue it self does aim: for diverse
virtues have diverse colors laid upon them, according to the temperature of
body, or the disposition of the mind. Achilles was valiant one way, and Ajax
another, yet both their endeavors intended to one Fortitude; the Prudence of
Nestor unlike that of Ulysses, yet both wise men; Cato and Agesilaus were both
upright men, yet executed justice two sundry ways; Irene loved one way,
Alceste, another, yet both enderedly affected their husbands; so likewise
Cornelia and Olympias were differently magnanimous, yet either of them attained
to that height of honor, to which their heroic minds aspired. But to come to
our former comparison from which I have somewhat digrest, in what greater
virtue can either sex express themselves, than in true conjugall love? Cicero
de Divinatione, and Pliny in lib. 1. cap. 16. report of Tiberius Gracchus.
Tiber. Gra^.
That finding two snakes in his house, male and female, he consulted with a
south-sayer concerning the prodigy; who told him as a consequence infallible,
That if he slew the male, swift Death should surprise himself, but if he
killed the female, himself should escape death, and his wife in like manner
perish, but to one of them that fate must necessarily happen. He therefore
preferring the safety of his wife before his own health, caused the male to be
instantly cut in pieces, and the female let go, beholding with his own eyes,
his own instant destruction in the death of the serpent. Therefore it was
disputed, whether Cornelia were more happy in enjoying such a husband, or made
more wretched in losing him? An admirable and rare president in man, and a
husband; which I can easily instance in woman, and a wife; for as there is
nothing more divelish and deadly than a malicious and ill disposed woman, so
there is on the contrary, nothing more wholesome and comfortable to man, than
one provident, gentle, and well addicted; for as she that is good and honest,
will upon just necessity lay down her life for her husbands health and safety,
so the other will as wilingly prostitute hers for his destruction and ruin.
Therefore a wife by how much nearer she is to us in the strict bond both of
divine and humane laws, by so much either the sweetness of her behavior
tastes the pleasanter, or the harshnesse of her crabbed condition, relishes more
bitter; for she is ever either a perpetual refuge, or a continual torment:
she of wh^m I intend to speak, is none such as the last, her history I thus
receive in brief. Admetus a King of Greece, Alceste.
demanded Alceste in marriage, whose father had published an Edict, That none
should enjoy her save such a one as could reconcile two wild beasts of contrary
cruelties and natures opposite, to draw without jarring together in his
Chariot. This Admetus hearing, he petitioned to Apollo and Hercules, who
commiserating his suit, the one brought him a Lion, the other a Bear, both
made tame and gentle to his hand; who presenting them to the father of Alceste,
and having yoaked them and made them draw according to the Edict, received her
as his bride, and departed with her thence into his own Country of Thessaly.
Not long after Admetus falling into a great infirmity of sickness, and
consulting with the Oracle about his health, answer was returned, That he must
necessarily leave the world, unless he could procure some Friend, Kinsman,
Courtier, or other, who by sacrificing their own lives to his love, might
ransom his, and by no other means his health to be restored. This motion being
made to many both near and deer to him (who no doubt had promised more, with
purpose to perform less) in conclusion it was refused by all; which coming to
the ear of Alceste, she gave her self up to a most willing death, to redeem
the health and life of her husband; and with her own hands slew her self. Now
tell me (O you Satyrists against the sex of women, that call them frail,
inconstant, weak and timorous) in which of these two did manly courage, noble
resolution, or conjugall love most shine? in him that by suffering death to
steal upon him, yielded himself to the necessity of fate, or in her who like a
bold Virago with an unmarchable resolution, with her own hand extracted that
blood from her chaste breast, with which she writ her self a character of
honor, to outlast all antiquity? In these things then you see, they may justly
claim an equal competence with men, but in many things a just priority, as in
nursing and bringing up children, in mannaging the affairs of the house, and
care of all domestic business, in providing us Diet, Linen for the back and
bed, in sewing, weaving, and in spinning: for who cannot imagine how ill great
Hercules did become the distaffe? But I will cease further to speak in their
praise, lest I be taxed of palpable flattery, and some may lay on me an
aspersion, That either I loved that sex wondrous well in my youth, or perhaps
now begin to dote on them in my age. And since I last spoke of that conjoined
love that ought to be betwixt man and wife, I will produce an Epigram taken
from Ausonius to that purpose, the inscription is as follows.

Ad Vxorem.
Live as we have lived, still to each other new,
And use those names we did when we first knew:
Let the same smiles within our cheeks be read,
The same sports thought on, we first used in bed,
Let the day never come to see the change,
That either Time or Age shall make us strange:
But as we first met, let us ever be,
I, thy young man, and thou a girl to me:
To others, though I seem like Nestor old;
And thou more years have, then (...)
Cumana told:
Times snow we will not see, though it appears,
It Is good to know our age, not count our years.
Such I must confess, Husbands ought to be to their Wives, and Wives to their
Husbands, but they are seldom found in these days, as may appear by a short
tale that I will tell you* Of three Gentlemen and their wives.
Three Gentlemen being late at supper in a Tavern, every man in courtesy made
offer to pay the reckoning, at length a motion was made amongst them, that
because it equally concerned them all, to put it to fortune and cast the dice;
so that committing it to chance, the other should be no ways beholding to him
for his charges. To this two of them assented, but the third presuming much
upon the love of his wife, was willing to put it to another venture, both to
save his purse, and express to his friends the gentle disposition of a woman
to her husband, whose welcome home was still as constant at midnight, as at
midday: he therefore made a second motion, that to decide the controversy,
every man should instantly make have home by turns, as they lay nearest in
their way, and he that did not that thing instantly which his wife bad, the
whole charge of the reckoning should be imposed upon him, and not to part
company till they see this done: upon which they concluded. They went to the
next house, the Gentleman first knocked at his own door, and he was let in, the
rest followed, but the husband only showing himself, found his wife in the
Kitchen; how now wife (says he) what have thou reserved for my supper? She
churlishly replied, here is nothing but the porridge the dog has lapt in, you
had best sup up them: this was sport to the other two, and he not willing both
to be charged and laughed at, and so doubly punished, did as she bad, and so away
they went all three to the house of the second. His wife was in bed, how now
sweet heart, where are you (says he) here sweet husband (she answered again)
and I pray you come to bed quickly: who hastily put off his cloths, went to
bed, and as speedily rose again to see what would become of the third. To his
lodging they went (and this was he that presuming on his wives gentleness,
drew the rest to the motion) being entered, he asked the maid for her mistress,
who told him she was newly gone to her chamber, up the stairs runs he, the
Gentlewoman asked who is there? it is I sweet wife says he, and for have
stumbled at the uppermost step: you had best break your neck down the stairs
says she. At which words he pausing a little, Nay on my word not so quoth he,
rather then do that, I will even back again with my friends to the Tavern, and
pay the reckoning. But leaving this, which by some may be ^^^sured to be little
better then existing, I (...) break ^ff my introduction, and proceed to matter
more serious, beginning with a brief summary or catalogue of the names of some
famous Queens, Mothers, and Daughters, many of which we shall have occasion to
handle more at large in the process of our Treat^se.

Of Queens Illustrious.
SEmiramis was Queen of the Assyrians, Camilla, of the Volscians, Nicaula (whom
some call Saba) of the Aethiopians, Athalia of the Hebrews, Thomiris of the
Scythians, Hesther of the Persians, Cleopatra of the Egyptians, Zenobia, of
the Palmyriens, Amalasuntha, of the Goths; of these we shall speak more at
large, Wherefore the Huns were first called Lombards or Long-beards
as they fall in course. Theolinda of the Longobards or Lombards, succeeds.
This nation dwelt first in Pannonia, and were governed by the King Albinus: now
the reason why they were first so called, was this. In the time that Justinus
surnamed the Less wore the imperial purple, Narses the Eunuch had fought
under him many brave and victorious battles against the Goths, who had usurped
the greatest part of Italy, from whence he expelled them, slew their King, and
freed the whole Country from many outrages. Notwithstanding his great good
service, he was calumniated to the Emperor, and so hated by the Empress
Sophia, that she sent him word, That she would make him lay by his sword and
armor, and with a distaffe spin wool amongst her maids: to which message he
returned answer, That he would make such a thread to put in her loom, that all
the weavers in the Empire should scarce make good cloth on. Upon this ground
he sent to Alhinus King of the Huns, who then inhabited Pannonia, asking him
why he would dwell in the barren continent of Pannonia, when the most fertile
Country of Italy lay open to his invasion? Albinus apprehending this
encouragement from Narses, in the year six hundred threescore and eight, made
his first incursion into the Emperors consines, who sent certain spies to
discover the forces of Albinus; of which he having intelligence, caused all the
women to untie their hair and fasten it about their chins, thereby to seem
men, and make the number of his army appear the greater. The spies observing
them, wondered amongst themselves, and asked what strange people these were with
the Long beards? and from hence their names were first derived, which has
since been remarkable in the most pleasant and fertile climate of all Italy,
from them called Lombardy. Others say, that when they went to fight against the
Vandals, There was a man that had the spirit of Prophecy, whom they besought
to pray for them and their good success in the battle; now when the Prophet
went to his orisons, the Queen had placed her self and her women just against
the window where he prayed, with their hair disposed as aforesaid; and just as
he ended his devotions, they opened their casements and appeared to him, who
presently said to himself, what be these Long beards? to whom the Queen
replied, To these Long-beards then whom thou have named, let the victory
happen, thus says the history. Rhodegondis was Queen of France, but after her
not any. Now some may demand the reason, Why women in France, are disabled from
bearing Sovereignty
why the Salick law was first made, by which all women were made incapable of
succession in the principalities, which (as Policronicon relates) was this: The
Crown lineally descending to a Princess of the blood, whom for modesties sake
he forbears to name, or at least their Chronicles are loath to publish; this
Lady having many Princely suitors, neglected them all, and fell in love with a
Butcher of Paris, whom she privately sent for, and as secretly married; since
when, all of that sex were by an irrevocable decree disabled of all
sovereignty. Cassiope was the famous Queen of Aethiopia; Harpalice of the
Amazons; Hippolite, of Magnesia; Teuca of the Illyrians, etc. Of these in their
places. Amongst whom let me not be so unnatural to her merit, or so
ungrateful to my Country (thrice blessed and divinely happy in her most
fortunate reign) as not to remember that ever to be celebrated Princess, The
memory of Queen Elizabeth.
Elizabeth of late memory, Queen of England; She that was a Saba for her
wisdom, an Harpalice for her magnanimity (witness the Camp at Tilbury) a
Cleopatra for her bounty, a Camilla for her chastity, an Amalasuntha for her
temperance, a Zenobia for her learning and skill in language; of whose
omniscience, pantarite, and goodness, all men heretofore have spoken too
little, no man hereafter can write too much; sacred be still her memory to us
on earth, as her blessed soul lives ever glorified in heaven. Her succeeded
(though not in her absolute Monarchy, yet a Princess of unspotted fame, Q.
Anne.
incomparable clemency, unmatchable goodness, and most remarkable virtue)
Queen Anne, whom all degrees honored, all Nations loved, and ^^^ongue was ever
heard to asperse with the least calumny; who in her too short eminence here
amongst us, was known to be the step of dignity to many, but detriment to none;
in whom all were glad, by whom none had ever the least cause of sorrow, unless
in the lamented loss of so grave and gracious a Princess. And for my own part
(gentle and courteous Reader) let me borrow so much of thy patience, that I may
upon this so just and good occasion, remember a long neglected duty, by
inserting in this place, a few funeral tears upon her hearse.

A Funeral Ode upon the death of Anna Panareta.
NOw Hymen change thy saffron weeds
To robe and habit sable:
For joyful thoughts, use Funeral deeds,
Since nothing's firm or stable;
This (alas) we
May read and see,
As in a map or printed table.
It was not at the time of year
Birds bid the spring good morrow,
Nor when we from the Summer clear,
Her warmth and pleasures borrow.
Nor when full fields
Ripe Autumn yields,
That we are thus involved in sorrow.
But when the barren earth denies
Fruits to the reapers mowing;
When Meteors muster in the skies,
And no fair fruits are growing.
When winter cold,
Dry, fear, and old,
His frozen fingers o'r the fire sits blowing.
When the Sun scants us of his heat,
And Phoebe tempests threateth:
When Boreas blustering in his seat,
His frozen pinions beats;
And as a King
Above the Spring,
The fresh and timely buds defeateth.
In this great barrenness were we
Our plenty made to smother:
But what might this rare jewel be?
A Saint, a Queen, a Mother,
An Hester fair,
A Judith rare;
These dead, oh point me out another?
Save Debora, that is likewise dead,
Famed for her Countries freeing:
But shall we henceforth see or read,
Of such another being.
Oh what a dearth
Is now on earth,
That here none lives with these agreeing.
Saba was wise, so was our Queen,
For beauty others famed,
Some for their virtue crowned have been,
And in large legends named.
Who living shall,
Contend in all,
With her alas shall be but shamed:
But since our praises at their best,
Shorten so far her merit,
Leave her to her eternal rest,
A glorious Sainted spirit:
For aye to sing
Unto heavens King
Thanks, for these joies she does inherit,
Yet it is a duty that we owe,
To give our grief impression,
The greater that our sorrows grow,
It shows the less transgression,
A loss like this
It Is not amiss
That we then leave to all succession.
Skies mourn her death in stormy clouds,
Seas weep for her in brine:
Thou earth that now her frailty shrouds,
Lament though she be thine;
Only rejoice
Heaven with loud voice,
That you are now become her shrine,
For this appeared the Blazing star,
Y^^ fresh in our memory,
Tha^ Christ^ndome both near and far
Might tell it as a story.
Great Jove is sent
With an intent
Only to get her to her glory.
In the Catalogue of Queens, The Lady Elizabeth.
having so late remembered the mother, how can I forget the daughter? she to
whom I must give that attribute which all soldiers bestow upon her, The Queen
of women, and the best of Queens, whose magnanimity in war, and gentleness in
peace, resolution in the one, and generous affability in the other, have so
sweet a correspondence, that when the Canon roared loud at the gates, and the
bullet forced a passage even through the Palace where she lodged, was no more
danted in courage, nor dismayed in countenance, then when the gentle and soft
music melodiously sounded at the celebration of her espous^ls. Sacred (Oh
Princely Lady) for ever be your memory, and fortunate and happy your hopeful
posterity; may your womb prove a bed of soldiers, and your breasts the nursery
of Kings, may the sons victories redeem the losses or the father, and the
daughters surmount the fertility of their mother: may your future fortunes be
answerable to your former virtues, that as you have the earnest prayers of all
good men, so you may have the success of their wishes: which millions that
never yet saw you desire, but all that understand you, know you worthily
deserve. And to conclude, that as you are the last of these in this my
Catalogue by order, posterity may reckon you the first amongst the Illustrious
by merit.

Of diverse Ladies famous for their Modesty.
OH thou chastity and purity of life, thou that art the ornament as well of
man, as woman, from whence shall I invoke thee? thou did first help to
kindle the sacred fires of Vesta, where virginity was made Religion: Thou that
was wont to frequent the chambers of great Ladies with sinlesse and undefiled
hands, make the beds of the City Matrons, and to be obsequious about the
Pallats strowed in the Country Cottages, where I shall find thee now to direct
this my pen in her large and unbounded progress? or to tutor me so far, that I
may know what on this argument thou thy self would have done? Livy, Florus,
Plutarch, and others, speaking of the wonder of the Roman chastity, Lucretia.
Lucretia, accuse fortune, or nature of error, for placing such a manly heart
in the breast of a woman; who being adulterated by Sextua Tarquinius, after she
had sent to her friends, and to them complained her injuries, because she would
not live a byword to Rome, nor preserve a despoiled body for so noble a
husbands embraces, with a knife which she had hid under her garment for the
same purpose, in presence of them all slew her self: which was after, the
cause that the tyrannical Monarchy of Rome was transferred into a Consular
dignity. Armenia.
Armenia the wife of Tygranes, having been with her husband at a sumptuous
banquet made by King Cyrus in his Palace Royal, when every one extolled the
majesty, and applauded the goodlinesse of the Kings person; at length Tygranes
asked his Queen what her opinion was of his magnitude and person: She answered,
I can say nothing, Sir, for all the time of the Feast mine eyes were steadfastly
fixed upon you my dear husband; for what other men's beauties are, it becomes not
a married wife to enquire. Cornelia.
Cornelia the wife of Aemilius Paulus, when a great Lady of Campania came to
her house, and opening a rich casket as the custom of women is to be friendly
one with another) she showed her gold rings, rich stones and jewels, and
causing her chests to be opened, exposed to her view, great variety of costly
and precious garments: which done, she entreated Cornelia to do her the like
curlesie, and to show her what jewels and ornaments she had stored to beautify
her self; which hearing, she protracted the time with discourse, till her
children came from school, and causing them to be brought before her, turned
unto the Lady, and thus said, These be my jewels, my riches, and delights, nor
with any gayer ornaments desire I to be beautified.

F^^i bonae indolis, parentum lauta supellex. Viz. No domestic necessaries
better grace a house, then children witty and well disposed. Many have been of
that continence, they have imitated the Turtle, who having once lost her mate,
will ever mourn, but never enter into the fellowship of another. Ania.
Therefore Ania Romana, a woman of a Noble family, having buried her first
husband in her youth, when her friends and kindred continually laid open the
solitude of widdowhood, the comfort of society, and all things that might
persuade her to a second marriage; she answered, It was a motion, to which she
would by no means assent: For (says she) should I happen upon a good man, such
as my first husband was, I would not live in that perpetual fear I should be
in, lest I should lose him; but if otherwise, Why should I hazard my self upon
one so had, that am so late punished with the loss of one so good. It is
reported of Portia Minor, Portia Mi.
the daughter of Cato, That when a woman who had married a second husband, was
for many virtues much commended in her presence; Peace (says she) That woman
can neither be happy, well manner'd, nor truly modest, that will a second time
time marry. But I hold her in this too censorious; yet the most ancient Romans
only conferred on her the Crown of modesty and continence, that was contented
with one matrimony, as making expression of their uncorrupted sincerity in
their continued widdowhood. Especially such were most discommended to make
choice of a second husband, who had children left them by the first resembling
their father. To which Virgil in the fourth book of his Aeneid. seems elegantly
to allude, Dido thus complaining of the absence of Aeneas: -- Siqua mihi de te
suscepta fuisset
Ante fugam soboles, etc.
Had I by thee any issue had
Before thy slight, some pretty wanton lad,
That I might call Aeneas, and to play
And prate to me to drive these thoughts away:
And from whose smiling countenance I might gather
A true presentment of the absent father;
I should not then my wretched self esteem,
So altogether lost, as I now seem.


Plutarch much commends the widdowhood of Cornelia, Cornelia.
the illustrious mother of the Gracchi; whose care, having nobly provided for
her children and family after the death of her husband; she expressed her self
every way so absolute a matron, that Tiberius Gracchus (of whom we spoke
before) was not ill counseled by the gods, by preserving her life, to
prostrate his own: for she denied to marry with King Ptolomeus, and when he
would have imparted to her a diadem and a Scepter, she refused to be styled a
Queen, to keep the honor of a chaste widow. Valeria.
Or the like purity was Valeria, the sister of Mss^lar; who being demanded by
her kindred and dearest friends, why (her first husband dead) she made not
choice of a second? answered that she found her first husband Servius, to live
with her still: accounting him alive to her, whom she had ever in remembrance:
A singular and remarkable sentence, proceeding from a most excellent matron,
intimating how the sacred unity in wedlock ought to be dignified, namely, with
the affections of the mind, not the vain pleasures of the body. This was proved
in the Daughter of Democion the Athenian, Democion Filia.
who being a virgin, and hearing that Leosthenes to whom she was contracted,
was slain in the Lemnian wars, and not willing to survive him, killed her
self: but before her death, thus reasoning with her self; Though I have a body
untoucht, yet if I should fall into the embraces of another, I should but have
deceived the second, because I am still married to the first in my heart.
Popilia.
Not of their minds was Popilia the daughter of Marcus, who to one that wondered
what should be the reason why all feminine beasts, never admitted the act of
generation but in their time, and when they covet issue, and woman at all times
desires the company of man? thus answered, the reason is only this, Because
they are beasts.

The wife of Fulvius.
THis Fulvius the familiar and indeered friend of Augustus Caesar, heard him
privately complain of the great solitude that was then in his house, since two
of his grandchildren by his daughter were taken away by death, and the only
third that remained, He was called Posthumus.
was (for some calumnies published against the Emperor) now in exile, so that
he should be forced to abandon his own blood, and constitute a son in law, and
a stranger, to succeed in the Imperial purple; and therefore he had many
motins in himself, and sometimes a purpose to recall the young man's
banishment, and to restore him to his favor and former grace in the Court.
This Fulvius hearing, went home, and upon promise of secrecy told it to his
wife: she could not contain her self, but makes what speed she can, and tells
this good news to the Empress Livia; Livia she speeds to Augustus, and
briefly expostulates with him about the banishment of her grandchild, and what
reason he had, not to restore him to his former honors? and why he would prefer
a stranger before his own blood? with many such like upbraidings. The next
morning Fulvius coming (as his custom was) into the Presence, and saluting
the Emperor, Augustus cast an austere look upon him, and shaking his head, said
only thus, You have a close breast Fulvius: by this he perceiving his wife had
published abroad what he had told her in secret, posts home with what speed he
can, and calling his wife before him, O woman (says he) Augustus knows that I
have revealed his secret, therefore I have a resolution to live no longer: to
whom she replied, Neither is that death you threaten to your self, without
merit, who having lived with me so long, and known my weakness and loquacity,
had not the discretion to prevent this danger to which you have drawn your
self by tempting my frailty; but since you will needs die, it shall be my
honor to precede you in death: which she had no sooner spoke, but snatched out
his sword, and with it slew her self. A noble resolution in an heathen Lady,
to punish her husbands disgrace, and her own oversight with voluntary death;
and a notable example to all women that shall succeed her, to be more chary in
keeping their husbands secrets: all which I would wish to follow the counsel
of the comic Poet Philippides, who when King Lysimachus called him unto him,
and using him with all courtesy spoke thus, What of the things that are within
or without me, shall I impart unto thee, O Philippides? he thus answered, Even
what thou please, O King, so thou still reservest to thy self thy counsels.
This puts me in mind of King Seleucus Callinicus, who having lost a battle
against the Galatians, and his whole army being quite subverted and dispersed,
casting away his Crown and all regal ornaments, was forced to fly only
attended with two or three servants; and wandering along through many deserts
and bypath, as fearing to be discovered, and growing faint with hunger, he
came to a certain ruinate cottage, where he desired bread and water; the master
of the house not only afforded him that, but whatsoever else the place could
yield, or the suddenness of the time provide, with a large welcome. In the
interim of dinner, fixing his eyes upon Seleucus face, he knew him to be the
King, and not able to contain his own joies, nor conceal the Kings
dissimulation, after dinner the King being ready to take horse, and bidding his
host farewell, he replied again, And farewell O King Seleucus: who finding
himself discovered, reached him his his hand as to embrace him, beckoning to
one of his followers, who at the instant at one blow stroke off his head, so
that as Homer: Sic caput estque adhuc cum pulvere mistum.

These were the fruits of unseasonable babbling; for this fellow, had he kept
his tongue till the King had been restored to his former dignities, might have
received large rewards for his hospitality, who suffered an unexpected death
for his loquacity.

Arctaphila.
ARetaphila Cyrenaea, is deservedly numbered amongst the heroic Ladies, she
lived in the time of Mithridates, and was the daughter of Aeglatur, and the
wife of Phedimus: a woman of excellent Virtue, exquisit Beauty, singular
Wisdom, and in the managing of the Common-weals business, and civil affairs
ingeniously expert: this Lady the common calamities of her Country made
eminent, for Nicocaentes the Tyrant, having usurped the principality over the
Cyrenaeans, amongst many other of his humane butcheries, slew Menalippus the
Priest of Apollo, and assumed to himself the sacred office and dignity. In the
number of these noble Citizens, he caused Phedimus the wife of Aretaphila, to
be injuriously put to death, and married her against her will: who as well
distressed with her private discontents, as suffering in the public calamity,
meditated a remedy for both, and by advise of some of her nearest allies,
attempted to poison the King; but the project being discovered, was prevented:
and upon that ground Calbia mother to Nicocrates, a woman of an unplacable
spirit, and prone to any thing wherein there might be blood and slaughter,
first condemned her to insufferable torture, and next to a violent death: but
the tyrant her son in regard of the extraordinary love he bore unto her, being
the more relenting and humane of the two, was pleased to put her cause first to
examination, and after to censure. In which trial she answered boldly, and
with great courage in the defense of her own innocence: but being by manifest
proofs convicted, insomuch, that her purpose could not be denied, she then
descended so low, as to excuse her self, alleging that (indeed) apprehending
the greatness of his person, and that she was in degree, no better to him then
an bandmaid; and fearing lest some other more accomplished beauty might step
betwixt him and her to insinuate into his favor and grace, she therefore had
prepared an amatorious confection, minding only to continue his love, not to
betray his life; and if her womanish weakness had in any kind (through
ignorance) transgrest the bounds of Ioialty, she submitted her self to his
^oiall clemency, whose approved judgment she made no doubt, kn^w how to
distinguish betwixt folly and malice. Notwithstanding these smooth evasions,
Nicocrates fully p^llest of the truth, gave her up into the hands of his mother
to be tormented, who (as she is before charactered) being harsh and merciless
woman, left nothing ^un^t^^^pted that torture could devise, to wrest from her a
capital confession: (...) with wondrous patience and constancy enduring
whats^ever the beldam could inflict up in her, Culbia grew as weary in
punishing, as she in suff^^ing, insomuch that Nicocrates was in some sort
persuaded of her innocence, and commanded her release, seeming sorrowful for
the torments she had endured, so that his former love conquering his suspicion,
he began to study a new reconcilement, and excusing his too much
credulousnesse, renewed his ancient familiarity and custom. But she not
forgetting her former rocks and strapadoes, now b^gan to me^itate upon his
death another way: she had a daughter of exquisite feature, and the Tyrant had
a brother called Leander, a wild headed young man, and apt for any innovation,
or hai^-brain'd attempt, she wrought (...) far with her, and so inwardly with
him, that by the consent of the King, (...) was concluded betwixt them. All
these things ^^lling out according to her wishes, her daughter (by the mothers
instigation) wrought so far upon his rashned^ in private, and the mother gave
him such encouragement with all, that putting him in hope to enjoy the
sovereignty (...) they persuaded him to supplant his brother: This took such
prosperous effect, that he suborned a (...), who attending his opportunity
(...) not with this contented, (...) the whole family of the (...) her Country
from all (...) the Citizens against (...) for the murder of her King and second
husband, d^awing him into the (...) of that public hate that (...) was forced
to fly as a traitor and ^a^^^icide: neither was she satisfied whilst he yet
lived, therefore by her wit and policy, and the industry of one Anabas, he was
at length subtly surprised; by which the City received her pristine liberty
and freedom. For which the people would have done her divine honors, as to a
goddess, which she utterly refused. They next proceeded to justice upon the
delinquents, where Calbia was judged to the fire, and burnt alive, and Leander
to be sowed in a sack and so cast into the sea, both which executions were
accordingly performed. The people then once again assembled and prostrated
themselves before her, jointly beseeching her either to take upon her the
primacy and chief government, or at least to be a gracious assistant to the
Magistrates and Princes, with her directions and counsel: both which she
utterly refused, betaking her self to a solitary and retired life, spending
the rest of her age in spinning, weaving, and the like womanish chares amongst
her handmaids.

Many of the Jones by reason of a discord that fell betwixt them and the sons
of of Neleus, were forced to leave the City Miletum, where they before
inhabited, and were driven to plant a new Colony in Manus, betwixt which Cities
there was a perpetual jar and enmity; insomuch, that from a private quarrel,
it grew to a public war, yet nor in that violence, but that upon certain
festival days, there was free recourse betwixt the Citizens of the one and
the other, to be present at the sacred solemnities. There was amongst these of
the City of Minus, one of a Noble family, whose name was Pythes, his wife was
called Japigia, and his daughter Pyeria: Pyeria.
He, when the great Feast celebrated to Diana, called Nelaim (of the opposite
family) was kept, sent thither his wife and daughter, entreating the Milesians
to suffer them to participate of their solemnities, which was granted: at which
enterview, Phrigius, the chief of the sons of Neleus, a man post potent in the
City, grew enamoured on Pyeria; and in cou^ting her, desired her to demand what
courtesy soever the City or his power could yield, and it should be instantly
granted; to which he answered. That nothing could be more acceptable unto her,
then that the (...) might have more often and peaceable recourse into their
City. By which he apprehended that she desired no more then a cessation of
arms, and that peace might be established betwixt the two Cities: which by
their marriage was accordingly effected, and Pyeria ever after honored for the
motion. Insomuch that it grew to a Proverb, All the Milesian women desiring to
be no better beloved of their husbands, then Pyeria was of her Phrigius.

Aspasia being the daughter of Hermotimus Phocencis (her mother dying of her in
childbirth) was by her fathers care brought up, Aspasia:
though meanly, yet modestly: and growing toward understanding, she had many
dreams as presages of her future fortunes; namely, that succeeding times should
afford her a husband, fair, good and rich. In this interim she was troubled
with an unseemly swelling of the chin, so great, that it grew almost to a
deformity, being a sorrow to the father, and almost a heart-break to the
daughter. Hermotimus careful of her health, presents her malady to the
Physician; who was willing to undertake the patient, but withal proposed too
great a sum for the cure: the one replying, The demand is above my strength;
the other answered, Then is the cure above my skill, and so departed. This
discouragement from a Tumor without, grew to a Corrasive within; as much
tormented with the despair of her recoveries, as the violence of the disease.
In this anxiety of thoughts, and agony of pain being much perplexed, she gave
her self to all abstinence, and forbear to eat; till on a time gentle slumber
stealing upon her, there appeared to her a Turtle, which was instantly
transhapt into a woman most beautiful, who drawing more near, bids her take
courage, and be of comfort, and forgetting the Physicians with all their drugs,
unguents, and emplasters, only to apply to the place then grieved, Rose leaves
dried to powder, and not to doubt of her present recovery; and having thus
said, upon the instant vanished. Aspasia awaking, and by this vision much
comforted, applied to her face such things as she was taught; in short time all
swelling was taken away, and she restored to her pristine beauty, with such an
addition of comeliness, that those with whom she before was held but equal,
she in the eyes of all men might now claim over them a just precedence: for she
is thus described, Her hair somewhat yellow, and from her temples naturally
curling, her eyes big and clear, her nose somewhat (but most becommingly)
hooked, her ears short, her skin white and soft, her cheeks seeming to lodge
the sweet blushes of the Rose (for which cause the Phocenses called her from an
infant, Milto) her lips red, her teeth then snow more white, her feet without
all fault, her voice so sweet and ravishing, that when she spoke, she would put
you in mind of what you have read of the Sirens. From all effeminate
curiosities, she studied to alienate her self, these being commonly the
superfluities of wealth and abundance, she being but of humble fortunes, and
descended from me in parentage. It happened this Aspasia was by a Persian
soldier taken from her father (as all their Cities in those days were subject
to the like oppressions) and presented unto Cyrus the son of Darius and
Parasatides, but much against her own will, or the liking of her father: thus
presented to him in the company of other to the most choice virgins she was
commended above them all, both for the modesty of her countenance, the civility
of her carriage, and an irreprovable beauty without all stame or blemish; and
that which heightened the love of all men toward her, she was of singular
wisdom: for which Cyrus afterward often admitted her into his counsels, and
so often as he was swar'd by her advise, his designs never failed their wished
success. The first time she stood before the King, was at supper time, which
ended, and Cyrus after the Persian manner willing to take his cups somewhat
lavishly in midst of their healthing, there were presented before him, ^ou^
Grecian damsels, with Asp^sia the Phocensian making up the number; the other
three being richly adorned, whose friends had set their (...) out in (...),
beautified their heads with jewels, and polisht their face and bodies with
sweet odouis and unguents; besides, they had instructions how to behave
themselves toward the King, how to insinuate into his favor, not to m^ve back
when he come forward, not make squemish of any courtesy he should (...), but
freely to recompense kiss for kiss, being rolly instructed in the amo^orious
precept belonging to such a business. But on the contrary, A^pasia would not
present here felt in any curious or gay vesture, nor suffer any robe of ^^uour
or state to be put upon her, neither would she wash or bath her self: but in
sadness and sorrow she invoked all the Grecian and E^^^therian gods to her
assistance, shall calling upon her fathers name, accounting those unusual
arguments and super^^uous (...), rather the marks (...) servitude then honor;
(...) could she be forced to appear (...) any (...) cast and unblemisht virgin
(...) coming before Cyrus, smiled using (...) gestures* she only with her eyes
(...) in her cheeks, by her tears expressed an extraordinary bashfulnesse. The
King commanding them to sit down in his presence, the rest boldly contended who
should place her self next him: but this Phocean damsel at first seemed not
to hear, nor without the robustious usage of that soldier who first surprised
her, could be won to sit down. The King beginning to dally with them, and
playing with their cheeks, necks, and breasts, the rest willingly suffered him;
she only struck his head aside, and if he offered but to touch her in the least
part, she presently (...), and told him he should not do it unpunished* The
King much delighted with this unexpected (...) every offer of his she fled his
embraces (which was against the custom of the Persians) he more ardently fix
his affection upon her, and turning to the Soldiers who first presented them,
thus said. This Phocean only thou have brought me chaste and uncorrupted, the
rest both in beauty and behavior are impostures: and from thenceforth she was
solicited and beloved of the King above all others, with whom he had before or
after converst with, and from that time a mutual affection grew betwixt them,
so great that it increased as far as the modest and absolute confirmation of
marriage, conformable to the custom of the Graecians. Insomuch that the love
of the King to Aspasia was not rumoured in Ionia solely, but through all the
spacious Provinces of Greece, even Peloponnesus was filled with the bruit
thereof, to the glory of the great King; who after his familiar acquaintance
with her, was never known to have used the company of any other woman. And now
began the vision of Aspasia (concerning the Dove) to be much spoken of, and of
the goddess that appeared to her, to whom she dedicated (after) a goodly
statue, called the image of Venus, beautified with many rich jewels; withal,
the picture of a Dove, to which she made daily supplications, sacrifices, and
oblations, still imploring the favor of the goddess. To her father Hermotimus
she sent many rich and unvalued presents, making him of a subject, almost
unparalleld for wealth, using in the process of her life (as witness, as well
the Persian as Grecian Ladies) a wondrous modesty and continence. Hormus,
sometimes of Thessaly, was sent from Scopa the junior, who was of Sicily, with
an admirable rich jewel to Cyrus for a present. Who having showed it to many,
all wondering at the cost and workmanship, and proud of so rich a gem:
presently after dinner, repaired to the chamber of Aspasia, and finding her
asleep, cast himself upon the bed by her without disturbing her rest: who
waking and espying the King so near, began to embrace him according to her
accustomed manner, who presently taking the jewel from the casker, showed it to
her, using these words, This I bestow on thee as a gift worthy the daughter or
mother of an Emperor, which I charge thee to wear for my sake in a carkanet
about thy neck. To whom she wisely and considerately answered, And how dare I
be the possessor of so great a treasure, which rather becomes the majesty and
estate of your mother Parasatides? therefore I entreat you send it to her, for
I without this ornament, can present you with a neck sufficiently beautiful.
The King much pleased with her answer, daily and hourly more and more increased
his love toward her, and what she said and did, sent in a letter to his
mother, with the jewel enclosed. For which she was not only much graced and
favored by the Princess, but after by Cyrus rewarded with money rich gifts, of
value inestimable, all which she modestly sent back with this message; These
things, O King, may be useful to thee that have the charge of such infinites
of men, when my greatest riches is to be solely beloved of thee: with these and
the like, she tied the King in inseparable bonds of affections toward her. For
without all competitorship, in the beauty of face, feature of body, integrity
of life, and nobleness of mind, she was above all those of her time admirable.
But after Cyrus being slain in battle by his brother, and his whole army
overthrown, she likewise fell into the hands of the enemy: whom the King
Artaxerxes with singular care and diligence caused to be sought, and brought
before him, as one whose name and virtues he held in great respect and
estimation; and being presented before him bound, he grew wondrous angry,
commanding all such to prison, as were the authors of her least durance:
withal commanding a costly and magnificent robe to be cast about her, which
she with many tears and much sorrow refused, till she was compelled to it by
the King, still taking to heart and lamenting the death of Cyrus. But thus
adorned, according to the Persian state, she appeared in the eyes of all men
the fairest of women, especially in the Kings, much surprised with her
extraordinary beauty, still persuading her to raze out the memory of Cyrus
dead, and in his room to admit of Artaxerxes living; which slowly, and at
length though late, he obtained, respecting her above all other his wives and
concubines. Soon after, his Eunuch Toridates, died, more then a child, and
scarce full man, the most beautiful youth in Asia, and of the King the most
beloved; who so much lamented his death, that all the pricipalities and nations
under him, seemed to participate of his grief; yet none that durst be so bold
as to come into his presence, or minister to him any words of comfort. Three
days being past in these lamentations and sorrows, Aspasia in a funeral
habit, and with her eyes fixed upon the earth, appeared before the King; who no
sooner espied her, demanded the cause of her coming: To comfort thee (said
she) O King, if thou be so pleased, else to return to the place of sorrow
from whence I came. At which seeming to rejoice, the King entreated her to her
chamber whither he would presently repair, to whom she obeyed. And having put
on a robe of the Eunuchs, so much bewailed, and in that casting her self upon
her bed, she gave the King such content, that he commanded her till the days
of mourning were past, never to appear to him but in that habit; she more
prevailing with him then all his Princes, wives, subjects, and servants about
him, still living in his most especial grace and favor. And so far Aelianua.

The Matrons of Lacedemon, The women of Lacedemon.
in all battles sought against the common enemy, as many of their husbands,
sons, or allies as they found slain, they used to search what wounds they had
about them; if the greater number were in the face or breast, with great joy
and solemnity they bore them to be intombed in the monuments of their
ancestors; but it on the contrary those on their backs exceeded the number of
the former, surprised with shame and sorrow they either left them to the common
burial, or gave them such private interment, as if they wished their memories
to have perished with their bodies. This history Aelianus in his twelfth book
records.

This discourse for the rareness of it, I hold not impertinent to insert
amongst the women most illustrious. Athenaeus in Dipsonoph. lib. 13.
Chares Mitylenus in his tenth book of Histories, thus writes. Zariadres the
younger brother of Hystaspes, both of them being so naturally beautiful, that
they were said to be the sons of Adonis and Venus. The elder reigned in the
lower parts of Media, the junior kept his principality in the higher Country,
as far as the river Tanais: not many leagues distant from thence, there lived
the King Homartes, who had one only daughter called Oda^^s, whom as diverse
authors affirm, seemed in a dream to have seen this Zariadres, and of his
person to be much enamoured. The liek in a vision happening to him, insomuch,
that he was ardently affected to her whom as yet he had never seen. This Oda^^^
was the fairest Princess in that time living in Asia, and Zariadres no whit to
her inferior, who sent to the King Homartes to demand her in marriage; he would
by no (...) yield to the motion, because not having any ^ale issue, he was ^oth
to transfer the succession of (...) Kingdom upon a stranger, purposing rather
to bestow her (...) Prince of his Country, though a subject. Not long (...)
caused to be assembled all the Friends, (...) and Gentry of his land, inviting
them to his daugh^^^s (...), but not yet knowing or having (...) on whom to
confer her. His subject, (...) assembled, he invited them all to a solemn and
high Priest, (...) having called his daughter, in the hearing of all his gueste
(...) bespake (...): We are now (^ Prince^ly daughter) (...) thy nuptials, take
therefore this golden (...) with rich Greekish wine, and having thoroughly and
advisedly perused all this Noble (...), to (...) shall (...) to drink he is
undoubtedly thy husband (...) having viewed and reviewed them all, and (...)
like that person presented to her in her (...) some few days respite, which
(...) word to Zariadres, bow her affairs stood (...) her marriage, and withal
much (...) in his army near (...) conceived himself (...) or auend^nt saving
(...) into the City of (...), having (...), this done, (...) his Chariot and
driver, and withal (...) he came to the place where this marriage was to be
celebrated, and (...) in amongst the rest, he behold the beautiful (...)
countenance, and tempering her draught with all (...) unwilling hand: to whom
approaching more (...), he thus whispered, Behold Odatis, thy (...), for whom
did lately send, ready to do thee all service. She casting an advised eye
upon him, and receiving him to be a stranger beautiful, and in all semblance
so like the person of whom she had dreamt; in a great ecstasy of joy drank to
him, and gave him the cup: and whilst ^^^rest were amazed at the novel, he
snatched her up and carried her where his Chariot stood ready, and so
transported her into Media. This their love was so famous amongst the barbarous
people, that the history was portraied in all their Palaces and Temples, nay,
even in their private houses; many of the Nobility in memory of her, calling
their daughters by the name of Odatis.

(...) the Tyrant banished D^on out of Sicily, taking into his own custody the
exiles wife, Aristomache Aelian. lib. 2
Aristomache, and her daughter: but after, at the great intercession of one of
his servants, Polycrates (^ man by him much affected) he compelled the Lady
(who still lamented the absence of her Lord) (...) second marriage with this
Polycrates, who was by (...). But D^on having gathered fresh forces, and
expelling. Dionysius from Syracusa unto the Locrenses: (...) his sister,
meeting him, and congratulating his famous victory, made intercession for
Aristomache, who with great shame had kept her self from the presence of her
first husband not daring to look him in the face, howsoever her second nuptials
were made by force and compulsion: But the necessity of the cause, the wondrous
submission and modest excuse of Aristomache, together with the mediation of
Arete, so much he prevailed with Dion, (all confirming her innocence) that he
received his wife and daughter into his family, still continuing their former
love and society.

Hippo, Hippo.
a woman of Greece, traveling by sea with her husband, and being surprised by
Pirates, finding the chief of them to be enamoured of her beauty: rather then
yield to his lustful desires, she voluntarily threw her self into the sea,
and was drowned, leaving behind her a remarkable president of chastity: her
body was driven upon Ericheon, or (as some will have it) the Erythrean shore:
in memory of whom, a sacred monument was raised, which was many years after
yearly celebrated with many condign honors. Valor. Max. lib. 7. cap. 1.

Chiomara, Chiomara.
of whom Livius, Frontinus, Florus, and others have written, was the wife of
Orgiantes Regulus, and born in Galatia; Plutarch calls her Oriagontes, it is
thus related of her: The army and the forces of the Gallogrecians being part of
them defeated, and the rest taken captive by Ca. Manlius, then Consul, cap.
12. Plin. de viris illustr. cap. 55.
near to the mount Olympus, this Chiomara the wife of Regulus, a woman of most
known modesty and chastity, being first taken, and after committed to the
custody of a Roman Centurion, V. Maxim. lib. 6. cap. 2.
was forceably by him adulterated. A commandment coming from the Consul, that
all the treasure of which the Lady was possessed, should be confiscate to the
Centurion, only her self with that ransom, to be returned safe and untoucht
to her husband: she presently promised the Captain, to bring him to a place
where all his desires should be satisfied. He of a covetous disposition, with
all celerity hasted with her to the discovery of this Magazine, where she
before had placed a company of Gallogrecians her Country men, and in their
language commanded them to fall upon him and kill him: which done, she cut off
his head and presented it to her husband and kneeling to him, both expressed
the nature of her injury, and the manner of her revenge. The censures of the
Consul Manlius, and her husband Regulus, both assented in this, That she was
of courage unmatchable, for though her body was brought under the subjection of
an enemy, neither her mind could be conquered, nor her chastity made captive.

An ancient woman amongst the Syracusans, Val. Max. lib. 7. cap. 2.
when all the the subjects of Dionysius, with many execrations cursed and
openly inveighed against his insufferable cruelties; she only was observed
morning and evening to solicit the gods for his long life and happiness:
which coming to the ear of the King, he caused her to be called before him,
and demanded of her the cause, Why amongst all his oppressed subjects, who
daily wished his ruin, she alone invoak'd the gods for his health and
preservation? to whom with an undanted resolution, she thus answered, That
which I do (O King) is not without due premeditation, and grounded both upon
reason and judgment, for we were before oppressed with a Tyrant, whose
government was very grievous unto us; after him succeeded another far more
burdensome and cruel then the former, for whose destruction I amongst the rest
besought the powers above; now you being by succession the third, and more
bloody and inhumane then the former, I therefore with great devotion pray for
your continuance, lest when you be taken from us, the devil himself take upon
him the Scepter, and succeed you in your principality. The Tyrant though touched
to the quick, yet in regard of her age, and fearelesse liberty of her language,
suffered her to depart unpunisht.

Th^s Tertia Aemilia, Tertia Aemilia.
a famous Roman Lady, was the wife of the first Affricanus, the mother of
Cornelia, mother to Cai^^ and (...) Gracchus. She was of such gentleness and
patience (...) knowing her husband to be familiar with one of her handmaids,
yet she dissembled it, lest he that had conquered the third part of the world,
should have the imputation of any such lightness laid upon him; being so far
from revenge, that her husband being dead, she gave her bondwoman manumission,
and married her richly to a freed man of her own.

Turia was the wife of Quint. Turia.
Lucretius, who when her husband was proscribed by the Triumvirate, and
therefore instantly to depart into exile (only trusting the secrefie of her
chambermaid) she hid her husband in her house betwixt two chambers, Val. Max.
lib. 6. cap. 7.
where no search could discover him, where to her great peril she kept him
long without any prejudice or danger; expressing therein her singular faith and
loialty, that when the rest that were confined into Countries remote, were
exposed to the labor of the body, and discontent of the mind, he alone under
his own roof, and in his own chamber, lived safe in the bosom of his wife, so
remarkably loving and constant.

Sulpitia being strictly kept by her mother Julia, Sulpitia. Plin. lib. 4.
lest he should follow her husband Lentulus Crustellio into banishment, who by
the Triumvirate, was confined into Sicily, notwithstanding, putting on the
habit of a servant, past through their guards and watches, and attended only
with two handmaids, and as many menservants, by secret flight came to the
place whither he was proscribed, leaving all the pleasures and delicates of
Rome to participate with the miseries of a husband. Pliny writes of another
Sulpitia a famous Roman Lady (daughter to Paterculus, Plin. Not. Hist. lib. 7.
cap. 35.
and wife to Quint. Fulvius Flaccus) she when the Senate and Decemvirat, by
inspection into the books of Sybill, had decreed that an image should be
dedicated to Venus Verticordia, by which the minds both of virgins and matrons
might be the more alienated from libidinous affections, and reduced to the
strict rules of modesty and shamefastness, when to the dedication of this
work, out of the whole City a hundred of the most chaste matrons were to be
selected; and then out of these hundred, ten supposed to be pure above the
rest; and out of these, one to be preferred; this Sulpitia carried the suffrage
from all, for virtue, modesty, and incomparable chastity.

This Julia was the daughter of Caius Caesar, Julia. Plut. in Pomp.
and wife of Pompetus Magnus; after the battle of Pharsalia, seeing the
garment of her husband brought home sprinkled with his blood (and not yet
knowing of his death) the object so affrighted her, that instantly at the sight
thereof she sunk down to the earth, and in the extremity of that passion was
with much pain and anguish delivered of that burden in her womb, which no
sooner parted from her, but in that agony she expired.

Portia, Portia. Val. Max. lib. 4. cap. 6.
the wife of Brutus and daughter of Cato, whose noble resolution, and conjugall
love to her husband, all future ages may admire; for hea^ing that in the
battle at Philippi he was vanquished and slain, when all weapons and
instruments of death were strictly kept from her, she feared not with her
womanish spirit to ^nitate (if not exceed the resolution of her father in his
death, for by swallowing h^^ burning coals she expired. Herein only they
differ, that he by a common, she by an unheard of death were extinct.

Horestilla was the wife of Marcus Plautius, Horestilla. Val. Max. cap. de
amore conjugal.
who by the commandment of the Senate, having the charge of threescore ships
to pass into Asia, his wife so entirely was devoted to his love that she shipped
her self with him, exposing her self to the dangers of the ^^a; but not able
through her weakness, to endure the casualties appending on so harsh a journie
(as the distemperature of weather, and such like) in the City Tarentum fell
sick and died. Plautius willing to show himself a husband worthy such a wife,
when her body was brought to the funeral (...), betwixt the ceremonies of
anointing her body, and taking his leave with a parting kiss, fell suddenly
upon his naked sword, and so slew himself: which his friends seeing and
lamenting, they took him as he was apparelled, without so much as stripping his
body, and joining it to the corse of his wife (and adding, more combustible
matter to the fire) burnt them both together. Over the urn that covered their
ashes, the Tarentines erected a famous sepulcher, which they called The two
lovers. By Plantius and Horestilla it may appear, that where the greatest and
most honest love is settled betwixt man and wife, it is often times more happy to
be joined in death, then to be separated in life.

Artimesia Queen of Caria, Artimesia. Herod. l. ^. Strab. l. 13.
so much honored the remembrance of her husband Mausolus being dead, that
after meditation, and deliberate counsel which way she might best decorate his
hearse, and withal to express to perperuity, her unmatchable love; she caused
to be erected over him a tomb so magnificent, that for the cost and state, it
was not doubted to be worthily reckoned amongst the nine wonders. But what do I
speak of so rich a structure, when she her self became the living sepulcher of
her dead husband, by their testimonies who have recorded, that she preserved
his bones, and having beaten them to powder, mingled their dust with her wine
in remembrance of him, every morning and evening, Cicer. Tusc. lib. 3. and
Plin. lib. 36. cap. 5.

Of woman's fortitude and magnanimity, Harmonia. V. Max. l. 3
I will add one admirable president in two virgins of Syracusa, equally
resolute: when by the intestine sedition and civil wars in Syracusa, the stock
and family of Gelo (in these combustions) was quite extirpt and rooted out,
even to his only daughter, Harmonia, and all the seditious weapons of the enemy
now drawn and aimed at her bosom: her nurse pi^ying her threatened ruin, made
choice of a young virgin like to her in favor, and of equal stature, and
attiring her in the habit and ornaments of a Princess, offered her to the
points of their yet bloody weapons; this damsel was of that constancy and noble
resolution, that notwithstanding she saw eminent death before her, was not
affrighted with the terror thereof, nor would reveal her name, or tell of what
condition she was. Which Harmonia seeing and admiring at her loialty and faith,
she called out to the murdere^s, and discovering her self to preserve her
handmaid, offered her own naked breast to the slaughter, telling them she was
present whom they s^ught for: so that a covered ^allacy to the one, and open
troth the other, in both an admirable and undanted constancy, was the cause of
their deaths.

This Hormisda was a great and mighty man amongst the Persians, The wife of
Hormisda.
and of one of the most noblest families amongst them, as Zozimus, Mercellinus,
and others commemorate. He being confined unto a certain (...) and fettered,
was there kept with a strict guard of (...), who against the laws of the
Kingdom, Pet. Crinit. lib. 18. c. 1.
had purpose (...) invest his younger brother in the state imperial (...) that
in the time of his (...), his (...) (the remembrance of whose name it is pity
time has abolisht, and not left it to posterity) thus devised for his
enlargement: she sent to him a fish as a present, of an extraordinary bigness,
in whose belly she had hid an iron file and other like engines fit for his
purpose, committing it to the charge of one of her most faithful Ennuchs,
desiring her husband by his mouth, not to have the fish cut up in the presence
of any, only to make happy use of such things as he found enclosed therein. To
his keepers the better to hide her stratagem, she sent Camels laden with sundry
kind of meats, and several wines. Hormisd^ apprehending the plot, gave it a
bold and resolute performance, for having first filed off his irons, he changed
his habit with that of his Eunuchs, and taking the advantage of their feasting
and healthing, past safe through them all and by study and policy of his wife,
came after to the possession of his right, which his younger brother had
usurped.

Alexander the Great amongst his many other conquests, Quint. Cu. lib. 2.
having besieged the great City Halicarnassus, and by reason of opposition made
against him, leveld it with the ground. Queen Ada
He entered Ca^ia, where Ada then reigned Queen, who being before oppressed by
Orontobas (employed by Darius) was almost quite beaten out of her Kingdom:
having at that time no more of all her large dominions left her, saving Alynda
the most defenced City, into which she had retired her self for safety. She
hearing of Alexanders approach, gave him a royal meeting, and submitted her
self, her subjects and her City into his power, withal adopting him by the
name of son. The King neither despising her liberality nor the name gave her
back the City entire as it was, and made her keeper and governesse thereof, who
soon after recovering all those Cities, Darius by invasion had usurped from her
(in gratitude of her former courtesy) reduced her Country and people to their
pristine estate, and stablisht her in her former Empire.

This Zenocrita was born in Cuma, Zenocrita.
whose father was at that time, amongst many other oppressed Citizens, in
exile: Her the bloody Tyrant Aristodemus, Plutarch de virtat. Mulier.
was much enamoured of, but not daining so much as to court her, or to persuade
her to his love, he imagined in the pride of his heart, that the damsel would
think it grace and honor sufferent to her, to be seen in his company, and only
for that cause to be held blessed and fortunate, of all such as should behold
her: But far other cogitations troubled her more noble mind, being tormented in
soul to lead such an unchaste life, though with a Prince, who never had
motioned contract, or promised her marriage; her apprehensions were rather how
to purchase her Countries freedom, and rid the earth of a Tyrant. About the
same time that she was busied in these and the like imaginations, it happened,
Aristodemus would needs compass in a certain spacious piece of ground with a
broad and deep ditch, not that it was any way necessary or profitable, but only
to vex and weary the Citizens with extraordinary pains, and insufferable
labors, for to every man was so much ground limited as a daily task, which
whosoever in the least kind neglected, he was fined in a great mulct, either of
purse or person. It happened she being abroad to take the air near to the place
where the Citizens were hard at work, that Aristodemus with his train came
thither also, to overlook his laborers; who after some faults found, and other
directions given, left the place, and in his return past by where Zenocrita was
then standing, she spying him come toward her, made him a low obeisance, and
withal covered her face with her apron. The Tyrant being gone, the young men
in the way of jesting and sport, and seeming a little to touch her inchastity,
demanded the reason, why to all other men her face was bare and free, only to
him veiled? (intimating that something had past betwixt them, which might
discover her blushes) to whom she made this plain and serious answer, I did it
to him as an honor, because amongst all the Cumani, there is but one only man,
and that is Aristodemus. These words touching all to the quick, it impressed in
the minds of the more generous, a true feeling of their baseness and slavery,
with a shame thereof, and withal an apprehension of the recovery of their
pristine liberties: which perceiving, she thus proceeded, I had rather to
purchase my fathers repeal from exile, to play the labourer, and bear burdens
as you do; then live the Tyrant in all the surfeiting riots and delicacies on
the earth: and so left them, These last words gave confirmation to what they
had before scarce apprehended; which after brought the embryons of their
thoughts unto a timely and full-born action: For with the Prince Timotoles,
they conspired against Aristodemus, and Zenocrita had made their entrance free,
at such time as he was secure, and his guard negligent, when with great ease
and small danger, they rusht upon him and flew him. Thus by her means her
Country recovered their ancient liberties and honors. But when great and
magnificent gifts were presented her for this good service, she refused them
all, only making one request unto the people, That it might be lawful for her
to take the body of Aristodemus, and give it a solemn and royal burial: to
which they did not only with great willingness condescend, but they instituted
her the Priest of Ceres, supposing it to be an honor no less acceptable to
the goddess, then worthily becoming her.

This Pythes lived in the time of Xerxes, The wife of Pythes.
who had to wife a Noble and wise Lady, whose temperance and humanity shall
outlive posterity: He in his Country finding a Mine of gold, from whence he
had gathered by the industry of his subjects, in insinite mass of treasure,
which he used with no moderation; for all his study, industry, and employment
both of his subjects and servants, were in this Mine either in digging O^e, or
drawing it up, or fining and refining it; all other actions, (...), affairs,
and businesses quite neglected, many having died in the Mine, and many ready to
perish for want of food, by reason the earth lay neglected. The women came to
make a petitionary complaint to the wife of Pyches, who understanding their
griefs, with fai^e language returned them back somewhat pacified, though not
altogether satisfied, yet putting them in good hope that their griefs should
shortly be redressed. They thus dismissed, she sent for all the Goldsmiths that
were known to be exquisite workmen, and requesting them into (...) place (...)
had ^itted them with (...) and all (...) necess^^y for the purpose, she (...)
and (...) all kind of fruits, as Apples, (...) and such like, with whose ^ast
her husband was much (...) and to (...) them all of gold. (...) Mine with a
good stomach, as (...) called to ear: His Lady served him in a gold (...) but
with no meat that could be eaten (...) very dish (...) gold. Being at the first
(...) with (...) (as pleased that art should so imitate (...)) after being much
delighted with the object, he demanded meat again, and calling for such a dish.
And such a (...) as his appetite was best inclined to: (...) whatsoever was
brought to the table, caused it to be all gold: he ^^ll growing more hungry,
and very angry withal, she made him this modest and effectual answer, O Sir,
consider with your self, of these and such like dishes, you have provided for
your self and your subjects plenty, but of other viands no plenty at all; we
have store of artificial, but the use of natural things has utterly forsaken
us: no man tils, plowes, sowes, or manures the fields; plantation, or hope to
reap from the earth, is now forgot, only we study things unprofitable, and (as
you see) unnecessary, to please the eye and not the palate, the fancy and not
the stomach, such indeed as to your subjects bring sorrow, but no satisfaction,
great molestation, but no meat at all to suffice the necessities of nature.
This short but pithy speech took such impression on Pythes, that though he
would not altogether desist from his Mines, yet upon her urgence, he only
peculiarized to himself, a fifth part of the people, and the rest were
employed in agriculture and tillage, planting, and such things most useful for
man's sustenance. This Pythes after many disasters (as rich men are seldom
without some or other) as the death of his children, who all came to violent
and unexpected death, by the means of Xerxes; he fell into a wondrous deep
melancholy, for he hated life, and yet was loath to die, and like a foolish
rich man (as this age affords many) grief still would have killed him, had not
the thought of his wealth still recovered him; therefore he proposed this
farewell, betwixt the weariness of life, and the rediousnesse of death* There
was in the City a great heap of gold, by which a river softly glided, which was
called Pythopolite, within the midst of this great magazin, he had provided
himself a Sepulcher, and had so turned the channel, that the water might come
just to the brink of the shore where his monument was ready prepared. The work
being finished, he committed the sole government of the State and Empire to his
wife, with this charge, That none should dare to approach his Tomb, but daily
send him such a quanty of victuals in a boat by the river; and when they found
the meat untoucht, to forbear to send any more, for they should then imagine
him dead. And such was the covetous man's end in the midst of his treasure.
His wife after managed the State with great wisdom and policy, and to the
general good of the subject.

The wife of Nausimenes.
HErodotus reports of one of the sons of Croesus, that he was born dumb, and
never spoke word from his birth, being in all things else complete, of an able
body, and a spirit undanted: to supply which defect he used all means possible
that art or humane skill could devise, but all failing, as his last refuge, he
consulted with the Oracle, which returned him this answer: Lyde genus, Rex
multorum, etc.
Thou of the Lydian off spring, and the King
Of many Nations, if such be thy care
To know this secret, and effect that thing,
Which divine work, no mortal can, or dare:
Be thus resolved, His tongue shall accent give,
When save by it, thou can no longer live.


Croesus being besieged in Sardis, and the City taken (as first entered by one
Mardus Hyreades) a Persian that had disguised himself, of purpose of murder
Croesus in his Palace: who insinuating into his p^esence, and now lifting up
his hand to strike the fatal blow, the King (by reason of his present
distress) not apprehending the danger, which his son coming in at the instant
and espying, the strings of his tongue were unloosed on the sudden, and he
cried out, Oh man, spare the King Croesus, and from that time forward his
imprisoned voice was ever at liberty. More disastrous was that which befell the
wife of Nausimenes the Athenian, V. Max. l. 1
who happening by chance upon the place where she found her sons and daughters
mixed together in the horrible action of incest, she was suddenly struck with
that horror and ecstasy, that neither able to punish the fact, nor reprove the
heinousness of the sin, she was struck mure and dumb. Her children punished
their own offense with voluntary death, and she was deprived the use of her
speech all her life time after.

Cyane and Medullina:
DOsithaeus in his book R^rum sicularum commemorates this history: Lib. 3.
Cyanippus Syracusanus sacrificing to the ^ods, amongst all others he had
neglected the celebrations of Bacchus; at which the god incenst, and to revenge
himself of the injury, punished him with drunkenness, when at a high feast he
found him pleasantly disposed, being otherwise in his own condition of a known
abstinence: the heat of his wine wrought with such violence upon him, that
meeting by accident his own daughter, Cyane, in a dark and remote place (and
ignorant who she was) he forcibly defloured her; in which wrestling together,
she wrang the ring off from his finger, hoping by that in time to find out the
adulterer. This ring she gave her nurse in keeping: not long after a pest
reigning in the City, the Oracle being consulted with, returned this answer,
That unless the incestuous person were sacrificed to the gods, that have the
charge of punishing these horrible vices, the plague should still continue
amongst them. The people being as much to seek as before, in regard that the
person aimed at, was to them altogether unknown. Cyane truly apprehending the
intent of the Oracle, took her father by the reverend locks, and dragging him
to the Temple, slew him there before the altar; which she intended for the
common good: but to expiate her own sin in killing her father, she fell upon
the same sword, and in her death mingled her blood with his.

Aristides writes a history to the like effect. In the celebrations of Bacchus
feasts, Arnutius (who was likewise a man of known temperance from his birth)
was for the like contempt, alike punished, by the god of Healths. This Roman
touched with the like distemperature, in the dark vitiated by force his
daughter Medullina; she also by his ^ing knowing the incestuous, bethought a
greater mischief, for having a second time besotted him in the dregs of the
grape, and crowning him with Vine leaves like a Bacchinall, slew him at the
Altar. Excuse me render, I illustrate not these as they are parracides, but as
without respect of time, person, or place, they thought no revenge great enough
to be inflicted on the corrupters of their virginities.

Erixo.
ARchelaus the Tyrant using many tyrannies upon the Cyraeneans, over whom he
usurped (but more by the evil instigation of one Laarchus, whom he had
enterteined as his familiar friend and counselor) was at length supplanted by
this Laarchus whom he most trusted, and as some think, poisoned. Archelaus left
behind him a son after his grandfathers name Battus Faelix, called Battus: who
because he was weak of body, and lame of his feet, his mother Erixo (in whose
guardianship he was) was by that means held in more respect and reverence,
being a woman of approved humanity and goodness. Laarchus, notwithstanding she
had the love and hearts of all the Citizens, yet he injoied the power, and by
the help of his mercenary soldiers, usurped the dominion over all. But
apprehending in himself that his tyranny could not last long without better
support, he sent to this chaste dowager to treat with her of marriage, proposing
to her as a main article, to make her son Battus copartner with him in his
regency. About this motion she consulted with her brothers, pretending a
seeming consent. They debated with Laarchus (but somewhat protractedly) about
the matter, in which interim, she privately sent to the usurper one of her
damsels with a message, That notwithstanding her brothers (as unwilling the
match should go forward) had made needless delays, yet her purpose was so
fixed upon the motion, especially since it concerned the general good, that she
wholly submitted her self to his service, insomuch, that if it pleased him to
vouchsafe to come privately in the night, she would yield her honor entirely
up into his hand: upon which beginning, a good success would doubtless
follow, for then in vain her brothers and kindred should oppose themselves
against that to which the public good, occasion, place, opportunity, and all
things necessary invited them. This message was plausible to Laarchus, who
apprehended at once, the embraces of a beauteous Lady, a principality, and a
continuance thereof. Briefly, the night was betwixt them appointed, and he in
regard of her honor, to come privately and unattended; all which she revealed
to her eldest brother, Poliarchus, making him solely of her counsel* who at
the time of their appointed meeting, hid himself in his sisters chamber.
Laarchus comes singly according to promise, and is admitted by Erixo; and in
the midst of his hopes, ready to cast himself* into her embraces, is
transpierc'd and slain, and his body cast over the walls, Battus proclaimed
Prince, and (...) liberty restored to the long oppressed Cy^aenian. This
Poliarchus did in revenge of Archil^^ (...) to his chaste sister, Erixo. There
were then about the City, many soldiers belonging to Amasis, King of Egypt, by
whose assistance Laarchus had been long terrible to the people, these
complained to the King, accusing Poliarchus and Erixo of the murder of
Laarchus. But as he was about to invade the Cyraenians, his mother happily
died, and so hindered that expedition. Poliarchus and Erixo notwithstanding,
purposed a voluntary journie into Egypt, to purge themselves of all accusations
commenced against them: in which journey, Critola, a woman of great reverence
and very aged (as having been the wife of Battus Faelix) woule needs accompany
them. These appearing before Amasis, so well pleaded their own cause, that
their injuries appeared to him much to surmount their revenge: so that
embracing Erixo, he commended her fortitude and temperance, and with Princely
gifts sent them back into their own Country.

A Woman of the City Pergamus.
MIthridates King of Pontus, having diverse ways oppressed the Galatians, as by
sending to the City by way of invitation to Pergamus, for diverse of the chief
Citizens, and then unjustly detaining them. This wrought such an impression to
supplant the Tyrant, in the heart of Toredorix, Tetrarch of Tosipporus, that he
made a combination wherein many Noble Gentlemen of quality were engaged, all
which had vowed the Tyrants death. Their plot being discovered, they in the
attempt surprised, were all commanded to death: in the midst of the execution,
Mithridates remembered a beautiful young man of extraordinary shape and
feature, that was one in the conspiracy; but half despairing whether he were
yet alive, he sent in have, that if the hangman had not done his office upon
him, to reprieve him to his mercy. This young man's name was Bepolitanus, whose
turn being come, and he presenting himself to the block, it happened on that
time, that he had a rich and precious garment of purple, embroidered with gold,
of which the executioner being greedy, and careful to keep it from blood,
thereby to make the better sale of it, he spent so much time this and that way,
not for the prisoners case, but for his own advantage, till the messengers
appeared from the King, and called aloud to make stay of justice: by which
means Bepolitanus his garment, was as much beneficial to his life, as the
Kings mercy; and covetousness that has been the destruction of many, was the
means of his unexpected safety. The executioner in his greediness making good
the old English Adage, All covet, all loose. To leave circumstances, and come
to the matter, The body of Toredorix was cast out, and by the Kings edict
denied all rites of burial, with a grievous penalty imposed upon any such as
should contradict the Kings writ. This notwithstanding, dismayed not a fair
Pergamaean damsel (with whom Toredorix had been in familiarity) to accomplish
the vowed office of a lover and a friend, who in the night watched the
opportunity to take thence the body and bestow on it a fair interment: but
being taken by the soldiers in the performance of this last memorable duty,
and brought before the Tyrant; either her beauty so much moved him, or her
rears so far prevailed with him, as that his body was not only left freely to
her dispose, but to recompense her love and loialty, she had a fair and
competent dower allotted her, out of the lands and goods of the trespasser.

Stratonica.
OF Stratonica, Galatia may boast, as breeding a Lady scarce marchable before
her time or since, in her condition, she being the wife of King Deiotarus, and
barren; and knowing how desirous her husband was to have issue from his own
^o^ns to succeed in the Kingdom, solicited him, and that with great
importance, to select some beautiful Lady whom he best fancied, and by her to
raise his posterity: which the King (overcome with so unexpected a courtesy,
and therefore unwilling to wrong her bed) refusing, she of her own accord, out
of many captive virgins, chused one who seemed to excel all the rest in
feature and modesty, and suiting her in all respects like a Princess,
presented her to the King as a jewel to be received from her hand. This
virgins name was El^ctra, by whom Deiotatarus had fair and fortunate issue; to
whom Stratonica was a second mother, and saw them educated with as much
magnificence and state, as if they had been born of her body, and she given
them suck from her own breasts. Her example is memorable, but since her time, by
few (that I can read of) imitated.

Valeria and Cloelia.
TArquinius Superbus being expulsed the Kingdom, because his son Sextus had
stuprated the fair Lucretia, wife to Collatine, to reobtaine his principality,
he insinuated unto his aid, Porsenna King of the Tuscans. These with an
infinite army besieged Rome, insomuch that the Citizens were not only wearied
with long war, but oppressed with famine; therefore knowing Porsenna, as well in
war as peace to be a Prince eminent both for justice and humanity, they made
choice of him to arbitrate and determine all controversies betwixt Tarquin and
them. This motion being offered by the Romans, Tarquin refused to stand to any
such comprimise, not allowing Porsenna a lawful judge in regard of their late
league commenced. This, Porsenna not well relishing, treated with the Romans
about a peace, conditionally that they should restore back certain lands before
taken from the Etruscians, and of them put him in peaceable possession, and
till this were performed, to send him ten young men, and as many virgins of the
noblest families for hostage; which was accordingly done, and he dismissed his
army. These virgins walking by the river side, which parted Camp and City, (for
though he had sent away the greatest part of his army, he had not yet raised
his Tents) two of the chief, the one Cloelia, the other Valeria, daughter to
the Consul Publicola, persuaded the rest, and by persuading so far prevailed,
that they were all resolved to pass the River: when st^ipping themselves
naked, and holding (as well as they conveniently could) their clothes above
their heads, they ventured over that unknown passage full of whirlpools, and
where there was no steadfast footing; and what by wading and swimming, to all
men's wonders got safe to shore, and presented themselves to their fathers and
friends: who though they admired their boldness, and commended their
resolutions, yet disallowing the act it self (as those that in their faith and
honor would not be outbid by any) they sent them back to King Porsenna, and
submitted their rashness to be punished at his pleasure. These Virgins being
presented before him, he demanded of them, Which she was that first animated
and encouraged the rest to so rash and dangerous an enterprise? When Cloelia
beckning to the rest to silence, took all the injury, contempt, or whatsoever
they pleased to call it, upon her self, protesting the rest innocent, and she
of what would be objected, the sole author. Porsenna observing, and withal
admiring her undanted courage, caused presently a horse furnished with
trappings to be brought, which he gave to Cloelia in recompense of her
magnanimous attempt, sending them all in his regal courtesy, back to their
friends and parents. Upon this horse given to Cloelia by Porsenna, some have
grounded that she first past the river on horseback, sounding the way for the
rest; which others deny, only that the King thought to gratify her manly
courage with the meed of a soldier. Her statue on horseback is erected in Via
sacra: this some confer upon Cloelia; others on Valeria.

Olympias.
ALexander having caused himself to be called the son of Jupiter, writ to his
mother in this manner, King Alexander the son of Jupiter Hamon, to his mother
Olympias sends health: to whom with great modesty she thus rescribed, Dear son,
as you love me, instead of doing me honor, proclaim not my dishonor, neither
accuse me before Juno; besides, it is a great as persion you cast upon me to
make me a strumpet, though to Jupiter himself. A great moderation in a woman,
who for no swelling title or vain oftentation, could be won to lose the honor
to be called a loyal and chaste wise.

Troades.
AMongst those frighted Trojans that fled from the fearful ruins of subverted
Troy, Plutarch.
some by the violence of outrageous tempests, were driven upon the coasts of
Italy, where landing at certain Ports near to the river Tygris, they made up
into the Country, the better to acquaint themselves with the conditions of
those places. In which interim, the women began to apprehend that they had
better far to take up an abiding place in any land, then again to commit
themselves to the merciless fury of the seas: Wherefore with one joint
consent, they agreed to make that their fixed habitation, seeing all hope of
their former losses at (...), were utterly desperate, Having thus conspired
together, with all possible expedition the ships (in this exploit one Roma is
reported to be chief) which being done, they can to meet their husbands
(making to their Navy to quench it) fearing their anger for their rash
enterprise; some of them embracing their husbands, others their friends and
acquaintance they tempered their amorous kisses with such persuasive
rhetoric, that soon allai'd the angry tempest of their husbands fury. From
these (as some have writ) the custom of kissing at salutations, by the Roman
women to their kinsmen, first took Original. The Trojans now tied by
necessity, and likewise finding the inhabitants so loving and courteous, they
much applauded this deed of the women, and dwelt there with the Latins.

The Phocides.
AFter an implacable war betwixt the Thessalians and the Phocenses, which had
long lasted with much slaughter on both sides; those of Thessaly (bringing
their Army through the Locrenses) invaded the men of Phocis on all sides,
making a decree to kill all that were of age, and the women and children to
bear away captive. Diaphantes the son of Bathillius, with his two colleagues
then governing the City: he persuaded the besieged boldly and valiantly to
issue out and give the enemy battle, but with this caution, That all their
wives, daughters, and children, even to one soul, should be brought into a
place circled, and compast in with all manner of dry wood, and matter
combustible, and the doors by which they entered, to be shut after them, and so
guarded; and if the day were lost, and they perished in battle, the pile to be
kindled, and all their bodies to be burned at once. This being not only
proposed, but confirmed by the men; the resolution of the women was demanded,
who all with one consent applauded the decree, not one amongst them having will
to survive her husband, son, or father, to fall into the captivity of a fierce
and bloody enemy. This concluded, the Phocenses issue, and encounter the enemy,
and fought against them a noble and victorious battle, in which they returned
conquerors. The Edict made, Aponaea.
they called Aponaea, as signifying, A bold action, arising from a desperate
foundation. On the day that battle was fought, and so remarkable a victory
achieved, they yearly celebrate a feast to Minerva, which they call
Elaphebolia.

The women of Chios.
IN Chios, a Gentleman of a noble family riding through the City with his
contracted Lady, in a chariot, as the custom was then amongst them: King
Hippasus being a familiar friend of the bridegrooms, meeting him in the
streets, with no pretense of injury, but rather as a testimony of their former
familiarity, leapt up into the Chariot betwixt them: which act being mistaken
by the Citizens, he was violently assaulted, and cruelly murdered in their
fury. Nor long after, their affairs on all sides succeeding but ill, they
perceived they had incurred the anger of the gods, and therefore sent to
consult with the Oracle; who returned them this answer, That nothing could
expiate the butchery of Hippasus, till all the Regicides were to one man exiled
the City: But when all of them confessed themselves guilty of the fact, the god
imposed on them all an equal doom of banishment: so that as well the murderers
themselves, as the abettors and accessaries (howsoever many and mighty) were
forced to transport themselves with their wives and families, into Leuconia;
where they had not long so journed, but growing distasteful to the Leuconians,
as fearing their power, who began to increase both in wealth and number, they
were commanded by such a day to depart the City, and bound by oath to bear
nothing forth the gates, saving a coat close gift to them, and a loose mantle
or cloak over them. The Chii distrusting their own strength (as no way able to
affront them in power and number, were forced to submit themselves to the
present necessity, binding themselves by oath to observe the covenants before
rehearsed. The day coming on, and the women seeing their sons and husbands
thus meanly accoutred, demanded of them, Why unarmed they would pass by the
face of a public enemy? They excused themselves by the strictness of the oath
injoined them: to whom the women with a joint acclamation, thus replied; Show
your selves worthy the Nation from whence you are derived, and gird your arms
about you: if they exact from you the strict conditions of an oath, answer them
thus, That to a soldier and a man magnanimous, his spear is instead of his
cloak, and his Target in the place of the garment, which he should buckle about
him. To whose counsel they assented, and at their departure appearing so
strongly armed, and their countenances menacing and daring, It struck such a
terror into the hearts of the Leuconians, that as men amazed, they suffered
them peaceably to dopart with honor, who but by the noble and brave counsel
of their women, had left the place with shame and infamy. As noble an act
worthy memory, was not long after done by the women of Chios, what time Philip
the son of Demetrius, opposed the City, who published a proud and barbarous
Edict to insinuate the slaves of the City to his aid, promising them not only
free manumission, but to marry them to their mistresses, and possess them of
their masters fortunes: which kindled such an unquenchable wrath in the Ladies
and Matrons of the City, that fired with rage and disdain, they together with
their servants assisting them, with incredible faith and honesty maintained the
breaches, defended the walls, guarded the ports, casting stones, darts,
fighting, exhorting, and encouraging one another, even to the beating on the
enemies back, raising their shameful siege, and pursuing them flying with
their weapons, till Philips army was quite discomfited. In all this troublesome
war (notwithstanding the proclamation) not one servant amongst so many, had the
lest suspicion, much less aspersion cast upon his fidelity.

Persides.
CYrus having alienated the Persians from King Astiages, was overcome in
battle, his soldiers flying toward the City for refuge, insomuch that the
enemy was ready to enter with them: the women this seeing, issued from the
gates, and holding up their clothes a^ high as their breasts met them running,
and said, Whither fly you, O you cowards and basest of men, have you any hope
to hide your selves in these places from whence you came? Which object cast
such a shameful blush upon them, that renewing the battle, the conquerors
were defeated, and they obtained a glorious victory: In memory of which, Cyrus
made a law, That what Persian King should ever after approach that City, so
often as he entered it, should bestow on every woman a piece of gold. Base
avarice in a King.
It is said of Occhus his successor, a covetous King, that he often past by it
and compast it, but would never enter the gates, only to spare his purse, and
to defraud the women of their reward. But ever-renowned Alexander visited the
City twice, according to the custom, bestowing on every woman one piece, and
upon all such as were with child, two pieces, to show himself as roially
bountiful as the other was penuriously sparing.

Celtae.
THese be a people of France between the rivers Graumna and Sequana, who
dissenting amongst themselves, fell into an intestine and implacable civil
war. After many bloody conflicts, being ready once more to join battle, the
women presented to themselves betwixt their armies, and with such smooth
Oratory and persuasive arguments laid open the miseries of war, with the
abundant commodity arising from peace and amity, that they not only reconciled
all hostility for the present, but betwixt all the Cities and chief families
confirmed an indissoluble league of friendship, which continued many years
after. Since which time, either in foreign differences, or domestic quarrels,
as well in war, as peace, their counsel is ever demanded, and for the most
part followed. Therefore in the league which this people made with ^annibal, it
is thus written; If the Celtae have any thing worthy taxation to object against
the Carthaginians, let it be disputed by the Generals and Praefects in Spain;
If the Carthaginians find any thing justly to reprove the Celtae, the matter
shall be discust and arbitrated by their women.

Melitae.
THis people growing to that multitude, that the Cities in which they inhabited
could neither conveniently contain the number, nor supply them with victual
sufficient, sought the plantation of a colony elsewhere, under the comband of a
beautiful young man, called Nymphaeus. These falling upon the Coast of Caria,
were no sooner landed to discover the Country, but by a mighty tempest, their
ships were either swallowed in the sea, or scattered and dispersed. The Carians
who then inhabited the City Cryassa, either commiserating their distress, or
fearing that boldness their necessities might enforce them too, were pleased
to allot them of their land, and suffer them peaceably to dwell amongst them:
But finding them in a short space to increase both in wealth and power, they
consulted amongst themselves by what means to destroy them, and utterly extirp
their memory: this stratagem was agreed upon to be performed at a banquet. It
happened that one of the Carian damsels called Caphaena, a Lady of a noble
family, grew much enamoured of this Nymphaeus, and loath that the least
detriment should happen to her best respected friend, especially loath to see
him perish, she opened to him the full purpose of the City, wishing him to use
all means of prevention. When therefore the Cryassences came to invite them to
the feast, Nymphaeus answered them, that it was not the custom of the
Graecians to assemble unto any such feasts, without the company of their women:
which the Carians hearing, entreated them likewise to grace the solemnity with
their presence. This done, Nymphaeus relates the whole circumstance to the
Melians his countrymen, entreating them to bear him company to the feast all
civilly habited, and without weapons, only that every woman should wear a
sword beneath her kirtle, and sit close by her husband. About the midst of the
banquet when the Carians were ready to give the watchword, the Graecians
perceiving that the instant (for the pretended execution) drew on, all the
women opening their garments at once, showed their concealed weapons, which
their husbands snatching from their sides, assaulted the barbarous Carians, and
slew them all to one man: by which prevention, they possessed themselves both of
the Country and City. But relinquishing that, they built another which they
called the new Cryassa, and in which they planted themselves. Caphaena was
married to Nymphaeus, having honors done to her, worthy her noble fidelity.
One thing in this history is worthy especial admiration, namely, Secrecy, to
be kept amongst so many women.

Tyrrhenae.
THE Tyrrhenians were by the Spartans oppressed and cast into Prison, where they
were providently kept and guarded, purposing to question them for their lives.
The wives of the captives this hearing, came to the prison doors, and with
humble prayers, and infinite tears, besought those that had the charge of
them, that by their visitation they might administer some small comfort to
their husbands: which after much importunity granted, they were admitted, where
suddenly they caused their husbands to change habits with them, which they did,
and so were let forth instead of the women; they arming themselves against all
the spite and fury of the Spartans. The men that had escaped, repaired to
^aygeta, entering league with the Heilotes: by which confederacy the Spartans
somewhat affrighted, by intercessors concluded a peace with them, conditionally
that taking back their imprisoned women, they should be furnished with ships
and coin to seek new fortunes elsewhere; they therefore made a brotherhood
betwixt them and the Lacedaemonians. Of which Collony, two brothers, Pollis and
Crataida of the City of Lacedemon, were made governors. Part of them made
residence in Melo, the rest with Pollis sailed into Creet, and having asked
counsel of the Oracle, answer was returned them, That part in the place where
they should leave their goddess, and lose of their anchor, they should find a
period of their travels, and upon that continent make their abode, plant their
Collony, and erect a City. In process, arriving in a part of Creet called
Cheronesus (a place half environed with water (or almost an island) a sudden
fear surprised them, insomuch, that hasting to get back to the Navy, they left
behind them the image of Diana, which they had received from their ancestors,
by Brauron first brought into Lemons, and borne by them a shipboard in all
their navigation. The fear being past over, and the tumult appeased, they
weighed anchor to make from shore: but Pollis perceiving a great part of his
anchor missing, and left in the rocks, he remembered the Oracle, and causing his
people to land again, he made his plantation in that Country, and after many
battles in which he prevailed against the inhabitants, he subdued Lictium with
diverse other Cities, of which he had prosperous and peaceable possession.

Examples of Modesty and Magnanimity.
THE Phocenses oppressed by the Tyrants of Delpho^, in that commenced war which
was called Bellum sacrum, in which the Thebans were engaged; it happened that the
Bacchanals (who were women that were usually drunk in the celebrations of the
feasts of Bacchus, and were called Thyades) extasied in their divine furor (for
so they termed it) in their nightly wandering, Thyades.
lost their way, and erred so far, that unwittingly they happened upon the City
of Amphissa, and wearied as they were, cast themselves dispersedly abroad in
the market place, there to repose themselves till they came to their better
senses. The Amphissesian matrons, fearing lest any outrage or offense might be
done unto them (by reason there were at that time many foreign soldiers who
were in league with the Phocences) themselves in person watched these Bacchides
till morning, guarding and girting them round, lest any thing unseemly might be
spied amongst them, and only with a reverend silence, attended them while they
waked: but finding them in their better temper, ministered unto them all such
necessaries as the City yielded, and sent them (though the wives of their
enemies) in the charge and safe conduct of their own husbands, peaceably home
to their own Cities. Comparable to their modesty, was the magnanimity of
Megisto, an eminent Lady of the City Elis. Aristotemus the Tyrant, having (by
the power of Antigonus) usurped the Franchises and Liberties of that City,
oppressed the people with infinite calamities; amongst which, that of
Philodemus was not the least, who having a beautiful daughter called Micca,
when Lucinus one of the Captains of Aristotemus, in the heat of wine and lust,
would forceably have ravished her, and the poor innocent virgin fled for refuge
into the arms of her father, he there most inhumanely transpierced her, mixing
the tears of the revend old man, with the blood of his daughter. The
horridness of this nothing moved the Tyrant, but (that if greater possibly
could be devised) he gave countenance even to such mischiefs, causing many of
the prime Citizens to be slain, and to the number of eight hundred banished.
But fearing in regard of their number, he might be in time subverted; he made
Proclamation, That all such women that had a desire to visit their absent
husbands, should with such gold and treasure as they could conveniently carry
(with their children) have peaceable passage from the City into Aetolia, where
many or the most of their exiled friends then sojourned. Many of the women
encouraged by this Edict, being to that purpose assembled, and with such goods
as they had, departed the City; he sent after them his horsemen, who not only
rifled them, but stamped their children beneath their horses feet, where many of
the infants perished, and so in confused heaps hurried them back into the Town,
bearing the spoil into the Tyrants treasury. These outrages were the least of
many which I purposely omit. There lived at that time an ancient Noble man in
the City, called Hellanicus, who entered into a combination with the exiles,
about the suppressing of the Tyrant, and by reason of his years, was neither by
him feared nor suspected: by the encouragement of this Hellanicus, the confined
Citizens assembled themselves into a City most convenient for their design,
called Amimona, to whom many of their allies and friends (copartners in the
public calamity) resorted. Aristotemus somewhat affrighted with this new
faction, repaired to a place of public assembly, whither he had caused all the
chief matrons to be before called, and there in a premeditated oration, stuffed
with many threats and menaces, protested to inflict upon them racks, tortures,
and lingering deaths, unless by speedy letters they did not only persuade but
prevail with their husbands, instantly to abandon the place where they had
fortified. To whom Megisto the wife of Tymoleon (a Lady amongst the rest most
respected, not daigning the Tyrant the least honor, or so much as rising to do
him reverence, but sitting) with a bold and undanted courage, thus spoke. Were
thou a true spirited man, as nothing less appears in thee, thou would not
threaten women in this base kind to betray their husbands, but would rather
have negotiated with them, who have entire power and command over us, and that
in smoother and more deceitful language then such by which thou have hitherto
beguiled us. But if thy cowardice and desperation compel thee to this exigent,
as thinking by our means to complot their ruins, thou art in that hope
destitute of all comcomfort: let that day never be callendred, to memorise them
among men so void of counsel and discretion, that by sparing the lives of
their wives and children, they should betray the sacred liberty of their
country: for the mischief is not so great to lose us altogether, whom they
have already wanted so long, as the good and profit that must necessarily
accrue by redeeming the Cities from thy insolency and tyranny. These words were
no sooner uttered, but Aristotemus distracted with rage and fury, commanded her
young son to be sought and brought, whom he purposed to massacre before the
mothers face: and whilst his lictors and sergeants were inquiring for him
amongst others that were then busied about their childish sports, she spying
him, of her own accord called him to her with these words, Come hither to me, O
my son, and now in thy childhood before thou have apprehension, or passionate
feeling of tyranny, be freed both from the terror and burden thereof; or mine
own part, I had rather see thee innocently dying, then basely and ignobly
serving. The Tyrant at her last speech more enraged then the former, drew out
his sword on purpose to have slain her, when Cylo one of his familiar friends
(but indeed a chief man in the confederacy with Hellanicus) staid his hand,
and by gentle words so tempered his spleen, that he departed thence without any
act of murder, yet purpose of a future revenge. Upon a day as he was sporting
upon the bed with his wife until dinner was prepared and disposed upon the
table, it happened that an Eagle soaring above the Palace, let fall a great stone
upon the battlements, just over the bed where the King then lay, and alighting
there, made such a fearful and prodigious noise, that it not only amassed the
King within, but was wonderful to all that beheld it without. The Augurers
were sent for, to know what omen should succeed: they flatter the Tyrant, and
promise nothing but what is good and prosperous. Hellanicus the same night in
his dream imagined his son appeared to him (which son was by Aristotemus before
murdered with his brother) who spoke to him to this effect, O father arise, is
this a time to sleep, when the whole government of the City must depend on you
to morrow? with this dream encouraged, he comforted his adherents, all
attending the opportunity of revenge. Aristotemus mean time hearing that
Craterus was marched as far as Olympius with a great army, leavied for his
safety and support, grew so bold upon the rumor of so great a power, that
without his guard accompanied with Cylo only, he adventured into the market
place: whom Hellanicus meeting by chance, and almost extasied to see him so
weakly attended; with both his hands advanced, and with an audible and clear
voice he made this clamor, Where be you, you good and long oppressed
Countrymen? a brave Theater is this for so noble a contention as our liberty,
being seated in the midst of our Country, and center of our City. This Cylo
invaded the next man to the King, and slew him. Thrasibulus and Lampides
assaulted the Tyrant, who fled to the Temple of Jupiter, where they fell upon
him, and killed him; then dragging his body into the market place proclaimed
their libe^ty. The women issued out of their houses with joy and clamor,
embracing their husbands, fathers, and friends, with loud and glad
acclamations; thence in multitudes they made concourse to the Palace. The
Tyrants wife to prevent their fury, made fast her door, and in her private
chamber strangled her self. Aristotemus had two beautiful young virgins to
his daughters, both marriageable, these they were about to drag into the
streets with purpose to destroy them, but first to excruciate them with all
disgraces and contumacies. Which Megisto seeing, with her best oratory appeased
their present fury, proposing to them how shameful a thing it were for a noble
and free state, to imitate the insolences of a bloody and inhumane tyranny:
liberty therefore was granted the young Damsels (at her intercession) to
retire themselves into their chambers, and to make choice of what death best
suited with their present fears. Myro.
Myro the elder sister unloosing from her wast a silken girdle, fastened it
about her own neck, and with a smiling and cheerful look, thus comforted the
younger: My sweet and dear sister, I more commiserate thy fate then lament mine
own: yet imitate (I entreat thee) my constancy in death, lest any abject thing
or unworthy may be objected against us, unagreeable with our blood and quality.
To whom the younger replied, That nothing could appear more terrible to her,
then to behold her die; therefore besought her, by the affinity of sisterhood,
to be the first that should make use of that girdle, and dying before her, to
leave to her an example of resolution and patience. Myro to her made answer, I
never denied thee any thing sweet soul in life, neither will I oppose thee in
this thy last request at thy death: and for thy sake will I endure that which
is more grievous to me then mine own death, namely to see thee die. When
accommodating all things for the present execution, she no sooner saw her dead,
but she gently laid her out, and with great modesty covered her. Then she
besought Megisto on her knees, to have a care of them in their deaths, that
nothing immodest or uncomely might be done to their bodies: which granted, she
not only with courage, but seeming joy, underwent her fate till she expired;
nor was there any spectator there present, to whom the memory of the tyrant was
never so hateful, from whose eyes and hearts this object did not extract tears
and pity.

In Megisto is expressed the Magnanimity of spirit, but in these following I will
illustrate Fortitude in action. The Turks busied in the siege of some Towns in
Catharo, Vluzales and Carocossa (two of no mean place and eminence among them)
wrought so far with the great Admiral, that he delivered into their charge,
the managing of threescore Galleys, with munition and men in number competent,
to make incursions into the bordering Islands, then under the State of Venice.
These two Turkish Captains land their forces before Curzala, a City that gives
name to the Country, with purpose invest themselves before it: which Antonius
Contarinus (then Governor of the City) understanding like a time^ous and
fearful coward, taking the advantage of the night, fled with his soldiers
thence, not leaving the Town any way de^ensible; which the Citizens
understanding, all or the most followed after. The Town thus left to the weak
guard of some twenty men, and about fourscore women, the Turks give them a
bold and fierce assault: when these brave viragoes choosing rather to die like
soldiers, then like their husbands run like cowards; some maintain the Ports,
others defend the walls, and with that noble resolution, that what with fire,
stones, sc^lding water, and such like muniments then readiest at hand, so
opposed the assailants, that many of the Turks in that conflict were slain, and
all repulst, retiring themselves with purpose (some rest given to the
soldiers) to salute them with a fresh alarm. But fortune was so favorable to
these Amazonian spirits, that a mighty tempest from the North, so cost and
distressed the Turks Galleys, that they were forced to abandon the Island to
dishonor, leaving to the besieged, a memory worthy to outlive all posterity.

Of Dido, Cesara, Gumilda, and Ethelburga.
OF Dido Queen of Carthage, all Authors agree to have fallen by the sword, and
to have died by her own bold resolute hand; but about the cause that moved her
thereto, diverse differ. Ausonius is of opinion, That her husband Sychaeus being
dead, she did it to preserve her viduall chestity, and so free her self from
the importunities of Hyarbus King of Getulia: of his mind is Marullus, and of
these Remnius, or as some will have it, Priscianus in the Geography of
Dionysius, writing, De scitu orbis, i. the Situation of the world: Contrary to
these is the Prince of Poets (he whom Sca^ger calls Poeta noster) Pub Virgilius,
who ascribes her death to an impatience of grief conceived at the unkind
departure of Aeneas; which though it carry no great probability of truth, yet
all the Latin Poets for the most part (in honor of the author) have justified
his opinion: as Ovid in his third book De f^stis, his Epistles, Metamorph. and
others works, so likewise Angelus Politianus in his M^nto, with diverse others.
Just ne in his eighteenth book of Histor. speaking of the first erecting of
Carthage, The building of Carthage.
says, That where they began to dig with purpose to lay the first foundation,
they found the head of an Ox: by which it was predicted, that the City should
be futurely fertile and commodious, but withal full of labor and subject to
perpetual servitude: therefore they made choice of another piece of earth,
where in turning up the mould, they chanced upon the head of a horse, by which
it was presaged, their Collony should in time grow to be a warlike nation,
fortunate and victorious In what manner she died, I refer you to Virgil, and
will speak a word or two of her sister Anna, the daughter of Belus. She, after
the death of her sister, forsaking of the City of Carthage, then invested with
siege by Hyarbus, fled to Battus King of the Island M^lita, but making no long
sojourn there, she put again to sea, and fell upon the coast of Laurentum,
where being well known by Aeneas, she was nobly received, but not without
suspicion of too much familiarity betwixt them: insomuch, that jealousy
possessing Lav^nia the wife of Aenea, she conceived an i^reconcilable hat^ed
against A^na, insomuch, that fearing her threatened displeasure, she cast her
self headlong into the river Numicus, and was there drowned, for so Ovid
reports to his book De fast^s. But touching the illustrious Queen Did^, under
her statue were these verses or the like, engraven in a Greek character,
interpreted into Lati^e by Auso^us, and by me in the sacred memory of so
eminent a Queen thus Englished: I am that Dido look upon me well,
And what my life was* let m^ vi^age tell:
(...) far and smooth, what wrinckle can you find
In this plain Table, to express a mind
So sordid and corrupt? Why then so uneven
And black a soul should to a face be given
That promises all virtue? (...), where
Begott'st thou those all thoughts that brand me here
With lust and incest? Never (I protest)
Was that Aenaeass whom thou call'st the best
Of men in Lybia: Never saw I land
One Trojan on the Carthaginian strand.
Because Sychaeus (my first husband) dead,
To keep my sacred vows to him, I fled
The embraces of Hyarbus; am I made
A prostitute to nothing, to a shade:
He came in arms to f^rce me, and compel
Me a chaste widow, to another hell,
A second marriage: "'It Is the gods advice,
"No woman can be chaste that marriet^ twice.
To avo^d that sin I sl^w my self; O why
Could thou (O Ma^o) th^^ comment a (...),
With lust to (...) my memory? When heaven knows,
To save mine honor, I my life did lose,
Give faith to History, you that Readers are,
Before this fabling Poesi^, since that far
Transcends the bounds of truth: so Poets can
Make the high gods much more corrupt then man.


So much touching Queen Dido, and as far as probability can, to acquit hero of
^ll incontinen^e. One Paulus an histo (...), Cesara.
in his fi^^h book, remembers us of Cesara, a Queen of Persia, who having some
light of the Gospel, traveled as far as Constantinople in G^eece, to be
further instruct^d, only attended by a few private followers: who being
satisfied in all the fundamental points of her faith, she with her small
^^aine was ch^istened. The Persian Sophy having notice thereof, sent
Ambassadors to the Emperor, to know the reason why he detained (...) Queen,
wishing him to return her safe upon such easy summons. Cesara being in
p^esence when this embassy was delive^ed, desired the Emperor that she might
give them their answer, which granted; Return (said she) my humble du^y and
vassalage to my Lord the King, and tell him withal, That unless he receive my
faith, and renouncing his false idols, believe in the only true God, he can
claim no interest al in me. The messenger dispatched, and this short answer
returned to the Sophy, he levied an army of forty thousand men, and coming
into Greece, the Emperor and he came unto a peaceful interview: at which, by
the mediation of this royal and religious Empress, the S^phy with all his
Princes and Soldiers there present, received the Christian Faith, and after
the interchange of many Princely and magnificent gi^ts, returned with his wife
into his own Country. Another noble history, I think not amiss to be here
inserted, which is recorded by one Willielmus de reg. lib. 20. Gunnilda the
daughter of Canulus and Emma, Gunnilda.
who being accused of adulte^y by her husband, Henry the Emperor, who to
justify his accusation, had provided a Champion, in stature a Giant, and for
his presence and potency much feared; she notwithstanding relying upon God and
her own innocence, put her life upon the valor of a private young gentleman of
England, whom she brought with her to the same purpose. These Champions
adventuring their lives, fought a brave and resolute combat, but in the end the
victory inclined to the Empress; her adverse Champion being vanquished,
confessed his treasons, and she was nobly acquit: but after, by no entreaties or
intercessions made by the Emperor or others, she could be won unto his
embraces, but abju^ing his bed, and vowing an austere and sequestered (...) she
retired her self into a Monastery. Three royal presidents of three
unmatchable Queens, the first for magnanimy, the second for Religion and
devotion, and the last for Chastity. To these I will add yet another Willi^lmus
de R^gibus, in his first book writes, th^^ King Ive betook his Kingdom of the
West Saxons to his Cousin Ethelardus, and undertook a pilgrimage to Rome; the
occasion of his journie was this, The Queen Ethilburga had often counseled her
husband the King, to forsake the pride and riches of the world, and to have a
respect to his soul^ health, especially now in the latter days of his life;
but not able to prevail with him, she bethought her self of a quaint
stratagem: after they had left their royal Palace where they had but lately
feasted in all ^omp, pleasure and delicacies, and removed into another house,
she caused him to whose charge the place from whence they departed was
committed to take down all the hangings, make soul and filthy every room and
chamber, nay, in the very place where the King had but the other day sported
with his Queen, was lodged a sow and pigs, withal the loathsomeness that could
be devised: this done according to her command, she by a wile, enticed the King
to the place thus strangely di^guised. The King wondering at this sudden
change, stood amazed, To whom she thus spoke, I pray you my Lord, where be now
these rich hangings and curtains, either for state or ornament? Where is all
the glittering pomp and rich array, tending to nothing else save gluttony and
luxury? Alas, how suddenly are they all vanished? Shall not (my Lord) this
beauty of ours so fade, and this frail flesh even so fall away? This with
other her words to the like purpose, took such impression in the Kings breast,
that he resigned his Kingdom to his Nephew, and betook himself to a religious
and Monastic lite, after his vowed pilgrimage. The Queen Ethelburga went to
the Abbey at Berking, in which place her sister had been before Abbess, and
there spent the remainder of her life in devotion and penitence.

Polycrita.
THere arose great wars between the Milesians and Naxians, kindled by the
adulterate practice of the wife of Hypsicreon a Milesian, who violating her
conjugall vows, by throwing her self into the lustful embraces of Promedon a
Naxian, then her guest, and fearing the just anger of her husband, and withal
the punishment due to her adulterate sin, fled with him into Naxos: from whence
being again demanded, but denied, this private wrong turned to a public ruin:
for devouting war accompanied with many calamities, preyed upon both their
Countries. But as this Beacon was first fired by a woman's lewdness, so was it
last extinguished by a woman's virtue: Diognetus who had the command of those
Erythraeans, which came in aid of the Milesians, had committed to his custody a
certain strong hold, situated against the City Naxos: who having taken from
the Naxians a prize of women and free virgins, he was deeply struck in love
with one Polycrita, whom he led with him not as a captive, but as his wife. It
chanced that the Miletians celebrated a general festival day, Polycrita
besought Diognetus to make her so far indebted to h^s favor, as to suffer her
to send her brothers part of those juncates then at the table, which willing he
granted: she secretly writ upon the leaden table of the Marchpane, what she had
projected, withal charging the bearer to entreat her brothers not to let any
participate thereof save themselves; when they had heard the writing, which
contained thus much in effect, Take hold upon the opportunity which occasion
thrusts into your hands: this night you may sense the Castle, for the enemy
will lie down in wine, and sleep in a presumptuous security. They show it to
the chief Commanders of Naxos, who uniting themselves, give the affrightned
and unweaponed Miletians, a sudden and unexpected a^laule, and having
slaughtered many, possess themselves of the Castle: But by Polycritas
intercessive entreaties, surprised Diognetus scapes with life And for this
noble exploit of hers, the glad Citizens running to meet her with shouts and
acclamations, every one bearing in his hand a Garland to receive her with those
wreaths of honor; Polycrita was so far extafi'd, that her sudden joy ashe^ed a
sudden death, for as she stood amassed at the gate, she instantly tell down
exanimated; in which gate she was buried, and her sepulcher called The Tomb of
Envy, because it is supposed that Fortune grew so envious of her merits, that
thus she robbed her of her life, that so she might (...) of her deserved
honors. And thus much speaks the history of the Naxians. Aristotle affirms.
Polycrita was no captive, but only that Diognetus having seen her, he grew so
far enamoured of her, that to enjoy her he p^o^e^ed her any thing that was in
his power to give. She promises to yield to his desire, if he will grant her
the fruition of one boon, which when he had confirmed to her by oath, she
demanded Delium to be surrendered up (for the Castle was so called.) Diognetus
being so much enchanted with her beauty, and ^oreover bound by the religion of
his vow, delivered up to her and the Citizens, the Castle Delium.

Of Queens and other Ladies for diverse virtues memorable.
WE read of other women for diverse noble actions Illustrious. Dominica
Dominica.
the wife of the Emperor Valens, when the Goths had threatened the utter
subversion of Constantinople, by her wisdom and discretion mediated with the
enemy, and was the sole means of the safety both of the people and City. (...).
S^x. Aurelius reports of Pompeia Plantina, when her husband Julian the
Emperor, had with intolerable exactions oppressed the people, insomuch, that
their discontents were ready to break out into rebellion; this virtuous
Princess so far temporised with the Emperor, that by her means they were
released from all exactions and tributes. Placidia.
Diaconus makes mention of Placidia the sister and wife of Honorius, who (in
the year 412. when Ataulphus King of the Goths, presented himself with an
invincible army before the walls of Rome, threatening utterly to subvert the
City, and after rebuild it again, and instead of Rome, to call it Gothia) so
wrought with the barbarous King by persuasions and promises, that she turned
his pride to pity, and his immanity to mercy, so that he departed thence
without any assault made against the City, or the least spoil do^e unto the
Country. Vollateranus speaks of Inguldis Inguldis.
the sister of Childebert, who being married to Hermagellus, son to Lemigildus
King of the Goths, persuaded her husband (then an infidel) to be a true and
constant professor of the Christian faith. Cleotilda.
The like we read of Cleotilda Q of France, who did the like good work upon her
husband Clodoneus the son of Childerick. Nor has our own Nation been barren of
good examples, since Helena Helena.
the mother of Constantine, may in that kind claim equality, if not preced^^cy
before any. As Rome afforded a Volumnia, mo^her to Martius Corinlanus, so
England yielded as eminent a Lady in all points, the mother to Brennus and
Belinus. The first, when her son had worthily deserved of his Country, even to
the attaining of all military honors, and as an addition to the rest, for his
(...) service against the City of Coriolorus, had the denomination of
Coriolanus bestowed upon him by the public suffrage of the Senate: yet
notwithstanding for all his merits and unmatchable exploits, by which he
purchased to himself the honor to be called Pater Patriae, yet after, by the
ungrateful multitude (who were ever emulous of any man's deserved greatness)
he was not only degraded from all his titles of dignity, but had the doom of
everlasting banishment denounced against him, in revenge of which ingratitude,
having raised an army, and invaded the Towns of the Roman Empire, ready to
invest himself before the quaking and affrighted City, when they had first
sent to him (to make their atonement) their Priests, who by reason of their
sacred offices, were held in much reverence, next their Augurers and
South-sayers, then the Aeditiae, which were the Keepers of their Temples, and
last, their Prophets; but none of these prevailing, as their last refuge, the
Roman matrons presented themselves before Volumnia, the mother of Martius,
humbly entreating her to make intercession betwixt her sons rage and the
imminent calamity. This reverend Lady moved with their tears and acclamations,
accompanied with Virgilia the wife of Coriolanus, and many other Noble matrons
and damsels, having before promised to plead in their behalfs, as far as a
miserable mother could claim interest in an injured son; repaired to his Tent,
and casting themselves down at his feet, humbly besought him of compassion: the
rear expressed in their faces, and the sorrow in their habits, cast upon the
enemy a sudden reverence and silence, when Volumnia with such feeling accents
and moving Oratory mixed with tears, besought the peace of the City, that they
made a reverent impression in the heart of Coriolanus: who supporting his
mother, and advancing his wife from the earth, brake out into this ecstasy,
Vicistis, you have overcome me. Thus by these excellent women, all combustions
of war were appeased, a threatened misery prevented, and a general and safe
peace settled in the commonweal. Of no less remark was the wife of Mulmutius
Dunwallo, the son to Cloten, Duke of Cornwall, who as Fabian remembers of him,
having in great peace and tranquillity governed the Kingdom for the space of
forty years, and was after buried in a place by him before erected, called the
This some think to be Paul's Chu. others Blackwell hall.
Temple of peace; leaving the land equally divided betwixt his two sons,
Belinus and Berennus: to Belinus the elder, was allotted England, Wales and
Cornwall; unto Brennus, all the North parts beyond Humber: who being a young
man and desirous of honor, not content with the Principality appointed him,
commenced against Belinus a fearful war. But as the two brothers were ready to
join battle, the mother presented her self betwixt the armies, exposing her
body to their opposite weapons, showing the breasts that gave them suck, and
with noble admonitions and motherly persuasions, so mollified the hearts of the
incensed Princes, that all civil and seditious war laid aside, they entered a
friendly and brotherly league; which was so established in the reverend virtues
of the mother, that it was never after violated in all their life times after.
With what condign honors is Queen Marcias Marcia.
memory worthy to be celebrated? who being the wife to Guinthetinus King of
Britain (the son of Gurgunscius) was in those days of that excellent learning
and knowledge, that she devised many profitable and wholesome laws to the
benefit of the Commonwealth, which were much esteemed amongst the Britains,
and carefully observed, being called after her name, The Mercean laws, many
ages ensuing. But being loath to instance too many to one purpose, lest I
should rather seem tedious then delightful to the Reader, I will add only one
English Lady in another kind memorable, and worthy for her goodness an
everlasting character. There was a Noble man of England created Earl of
Coventrie, this man was so austere to the Citizens, that he had injuriously
w^rsted from them all their ancient franchises and privileges, insomuch, that
by his oppressions, and insufferable exactions, the City was much decayed, the
people disabled in their power, and weakened in their fortunes: A Lady of
Coventry.
These petitioned to the Countess, a Noble and well disposed Lady, to mediate
for them to the Earl, That their customs and former liberties might be
restored. The Lady undertakes their suit, and with much importunity solicited
her Lord in their behalf; but he being of a haughty and insolent disposition
still persisted immovable; but she commiserating their estate, as daily moved
with their complaints, without cess^tion still solicited for them, and with
such urgence, that he had neither peace at board, nor quiet in bed; he at
length as much wearied with her importunity, as she tired with their petitions,
she wrested from him this churlish and indefinite answer, Cease Lady, further
to persuade me, for I protest, and that with an unaltered resolution, that
there is but one only means by which their franchises are to be recovered,
which if thou will undertake (as I presume thou will not) I will surrender them
up entirely, if not, I will continue them in the same estate that I now hold
them. The Lady gently demanding what imposition he would enjoin her, he thus
replied, Thou shall strip thy self stark naked, and mounted on horseback, at
midday ride in that manner through the City, from one gate to another, and by
this exploit only, their desire and thy suit is to be granted. The modest Lady
after some little pause, promised her Lord, that for their general good she
would do it. This being sealed by an oath from him, and a vow from her, she
acquainted the Citizens with her purpose, and appointed a day in which she
commanded them to lock all their doors, and shut in their windows, and not to
leave any small cranny open toward the street, nor suffer any living thing to
be abroad: This being faithfully and punctually performed by them, she as
effectually accomplished her promise, and rid in that manner with no more touch
of immodestie, then when she shifted her smock in her private chamber. Some may
say, Yet what might the people apprehend in their conceits, to think upon a
naked Lady so mounted? I answer, They could not m^re immodestly conceive of
her, then a man that sees any beautiful woman well habited, may do in his
Ebidinous imaginations, by comprehending every naked lineament before she put
on her apparel. ^f this Noble Lady, there is in the City both monument and
memory unto this day.

In speaking of so many chaste, Of the name Cuckold.
worthy and eminent Ladies. I wonder how the name of Cuckold came to be so
frequent amongst us: might it be held no ridiculous digression, I would tell
you an old tale to that purpose, which though I dare not warrant it for truth,
I am willing to make it yours, as fre^ly as it was made mine. I speak not of
the woman, that when her husband come home to her in have, and brought news
there was a new edict come out, that all Cuckolds should be cast into the
river; presently asked him, why he did not learn to swim: nor of her, that when
her good man came to her in like manner with acclamation, and said, Wot you
what wife, such a woman (naming one of his neighbors) is found to be false,
and he branded for a notorious cuckold: answered, Lord, husband, you are such
another man, But my discourse is at this present of a disputation in hell, what
this thing Cuckold should be, or what kind of creature; since all sorts of
people of what estate or degree soever, examined by Lucifer, or any of the
^h^ee infernal judges denied themselves to be the same. It was therefore
agreed amongst them, to send up some one of the most ingenious devils amongst
them, by surveying the Earth, to discover this strange unknown creature: and if
it were possible to bring him thither alive, to make them spectetors of an
object they so much desired to see. With this commission away goes the devil
shows himself upon the earth, and taking the shape of a Gallant, thrusts
himself into the society of all kind of people: he comes to the Country man,
asks it he be a Cuckold, who answers, he knows not what it means, The Citizen
denies himself to be the man. The soldier with oaths outface^h the name. The
lawyer will arrest any man upon an action of slander, that shall call him by
that name. The Courtier (indeed) con^^sseth himself to be a Cuckold maker, but
to be a Cuckold he can endure by no means. Insomuch, that the poor devil,
altogether disappointed of his purpose, was ready to retire again into his
black house of darkness: as he was meditating with himself to the same
purpose, he happened into an Ordinary, where a C^tizen being at game amongst many
Gentlemen, the dic^ so favored him, that he got a great hand, blew up two or
three gallants, and so gave over play; which one above the rest taking not
well, importuned him still to hold game, which the other absolutely denying,
the Gallant told him, A Cuckold he found him, and so would leave him, and with
that language he bad him farewell. This the devil hearing, grew joifull in
himself, thus intimating; I have found him at length whom I so long have
sought this is my prize, and shall be my purchase. He presently provides
himself of a large bag able to contain^ so great a burden, and desiring the of
Citizen more familiar acquaintance (to cut off circumstance) drew him out of
the Town to take a turn or two in the fields. Together they walk, and coming
to a remote place, the devil discovering himself, appears unto him in a rough
black haired shape, and tells him to what purpose he was come, and to what place
he was injoined to bear him: therefore wished him p^tiently and quietly to
creep into his bag. The man at these words amazed, began to struggle with the
devil, who laid violent hands upon him. It happened, that near to this wrestling
place, a poor laboring man was digging of gravel, there lay by the edge of
the pit a lusty mastiffe (that had been a Bear-dog) to keep the poor man's hat
and jerkin, whilst he was at work below: this dog seeing the man and the devil
contend, took (it seems) the fiend, by reason of his rough skin, to be a beast
of the game; up skips he to take the devil by the throat, who presently lets
go his hold to secure himself from the dog, and away he flies. The Citizen by
th^^ means secured from the present danger, and willing to be grateful to his
preserver, comes to the labourer, and bargains for the mastiffe; the price is
made, and both parties agreed. It is to be presupposed, that the devil in this
fear, had lef^ (for have) his bag behind him, and fled out of sight: which the
Citizen apprehending, and being emboldned with so valiant a second, thinks to
put a new trick upon his adversary; for he imagins that (ten to one) he will
come back again for his bag, therefore he entreats the poor man to help him to
put the dog into the sack, and tie the mouth of it fast with the strings. All
is done, and they retire themselves apart, when just as they imagined, out
comes the devil peaking from the place where he lay hid to see i^ the coast
was clear, and casting his eyes timerously about him, as fearing the like
assault, he came softly treading to the place where he left his sack, and
gently feeling finds somewhat to stir therein: upon which he presently imagines
that it was the supposed Cuckold, who for fear had crept into the same; and
being wondrous jocund with this conceit, snatcheth him up upon his back, and
with his glad purchase sinks himself down among the infernals. His return was
rumored in hell, and a Synod called, in which Lucifer seated himself in his
wonted state with all his Princes, Judges and Officers about him, all in great
expectation of the object so much desired: the messenger is summoned, who
appears before them with his bag at his back, or rather upon his neck; he is
commanded to discover his strange creature so often spoken of, but till then in
that place not seen; the sacks mouth is opened, out flies the mastiffe amongst
them, who seeing so many ugly creatures together, thought (it seems) he had
been amongst the Bears in Paris garden: but spying Lucifer to be the greatest
and ill-favored amongst them, first leaps up into his face, and after flies at
whomsoever stood next him. The devils are dispersed, every one runs and makes
what shift he can for himself, the Sessions is dissolved, the Bench and Bale
dock cleared, and all in general so affrighted, that ever since that accident,
the very name has been so terrible amongst them, as they had rather encertein
into their dark and sad dominions ten thousand of their wives, then any one man
who bears the least character of a Cuckold. But having done with this sporting,
I proceed to what is more serious.

Of Women remarkable for their love to their Husbands.
IT is reported of the wives of Wynbergen, a free place in Germany, that the
Town being taken in an assault by the Emperor, and by reason the Citizens in so
valiantly defending their lives and honors, had been the overthrow of the
greatest part of his army; the Emperor grew so inplacable, that he purposed
(though mercy to the women) yet upon the men a bloody revenge. Composition
being granted, and articles drawn for the surrender of the Town, it was lawful
for the matrons and virgins (by the Emperors edict) to carry out, of their own
necessaries, a burden of what they best liked. The Emperor (not dreaming but
that they would load themselves with their jewels and coin, rich garments and
such like) might perceive them issuing from the Ports, with every wife her
husband upon her back, and every virgin and damosel her father or brother: to
express as much love in preserving their lives then, as the men had before,
valor in defending their liberties. This noble example of conjugall love and
piety took such impression in the heart of Caesar, that in recompense of their
noble charity, he not only suffered them to depart peaceably with their first
burdens, but granted every one a second, to make choice of what best pleased
them amongst all the treasure and wealth of the City. Michael Lord Montaigne in
his Essaies, speaks only of three women for the like virtue memorable; the
first perceiving her husband to labor of a disease incurable, and every day
more and more to languish, persuaded him resolutely to kill himself, and with
one blow to be rid of a lingering torment; but finding him to be somewhat
faint-hearted, she thus put courage into him by her own noble example: I (quoth
she) whose sorrow for thee in thy sickness, has in some sort para^leld thy
torment, am willing by one death both to give date unto that which has (for
thy love) afflicted me, and thy violent and unmedicinable torture. So after
many persuasive motives to encourage his fainting resolution, she intended to
die with him in her arms, and to that purpose, lest her hold by accident or
affright should unloose, she with a cord bound fast their bodies together, and
taking him in her loving embraces, from an high window which overlooked part of
the sea, cast themselves both headlong into the water. As pious affection
showed that renowned matron, Arria (vulgarly called Arria matter, Arria matter
because she had a daughter of the name) she seeing her husband Poetus
condemned, and willing that he should expire by his own hand, rather then the
stroke of a common hangman, persuaded him to a Roman resolution; but finding
him somewhat danted with the present fight of death, she snatched up a sword
with which dog into the sack, and tie the mouth of it fast with the strings.
All is done, and they retire themselves apart, when just as they imagined, out
comes the devil peaking from the place where he lay hid to see i^ the coast
was clear, and casting his eyes timerously about him, as fearing the like
assault, he came softly treading to the place where he left his sack, and
gently feeling finds somewhat to stir therein: upon which he presently imagines
that it was the supposed Cuckold, who for fear had crept into the same; and
being wondrous jocund with this conceit, snatcheth him up upon his back, and
with his glad purchase sinks himself down among the infernals. His return was
rumored in hell, and a Synod called, in which Luciser seated himself in his
wonted state with all his Princes, Judges and Officers about him, all in great
expectation of the object so much desired: the messenger is summoned, who
appears before them with his bag at his back, or rather upon his neck; he is
commanded to discover his strange creature so often spoken of, but till then in
that place not seen; the sacks mouth is opened, out flies the mastiffe amongst
them, who seeing so many ugly creatures together, thought (it seems) he had
been amongst the Bears in Paris garden: but spying Luciser to be the greatest
and ill-favored amongst them, first leaps up into his face, and after flies at
whomsoever stood next him. The devils are dispersed, every one runs and makes
what shift he can for himself, the Sessions is dissolved, the Bench and Bale
dock cleared, and all in general so affrighted, that ever since that accident,
the very name has been so terrible amongst them, as they had rather encertein
into their dark and sad dominions ten thousand of their wives, then any one man
who hears the least character of a Cuckold. But having done with this sporting,
I proceed to what is more serious.

Of Women remarkable for their love to their Husbands.
IT is reported of the wives of Wynbergen, a free place in Germany, that the
Town being taken in an assault by the Emperor, and by reason the Citizens in so
valiantly defending their lives and honors, had been the overthrow of the
greatest part of his army; the Emperor grew so inplacable, that the purposed
(though mercy to the women) yet upon the men a bloody revenge. Composition
being granted, and articles drawn for the surrender of the Town, it was lawful
for the matrons and virgins (by the Emperors edict) to carry out, of their own
necessaries, a burden of what they best liked. The Emperor (not dreaming but
that they would load themselves with their jewels and coin, rich garments and
such like) might perceive them issuing from the Ports, with every wife her
husband upon her back, and every virgin and demosel her father or brother: to
express as much love in preserving their lives then, as the men had before,
valor in defending their liberties. This noble example of conjugall love and
piety took such impression in the heart of Caesar, that in recompense of their
noble charity, he not only suffered them to depart peaceably with their first
burdens, but granted every one a second, to make choice of what best pleased
them amongst all the treasure and wealth of the City. Michael Lord Montaigne in
his Essaies, speaks only of three women for the like virtue memorable; the
first perceiving her husband to labor of a disease incurable, and every day
more and more to languish, persuaded him resolutely to kill himself, and with
one blow to be rid of a lingering torment; but finding him to be somewhat
faint-hearted, she thus put courage into him by her own noble example: I (quoth
she) whose sorrow for thee in thy sickness, has in some sort paralleld thy
torment, am willing by one death both to give date unto that which has (for
thy love) afflicted me, and thy violent and unmedicinable torture. So after
many persuasive motives to encourage his fainting resolution, she intended to
die with him in her arms, and to that purpose, lest her hold by accident or
affright should unloose, she with a cord bound fast their bodies together, and
taking him in her loving embraces, from an high window which overlooked part of
the sea, cast themselves both headlong into the water. As pious affection
showed that renowned matron, Arria (vulgarly called Arria matter, Arria matter*
because she had a daughter of the name) she seeing her husband Poetus
condemned, and willing that he should expire by his own hand, rather then the
stroke of a common hangman, persuaded him to a Roman resolution; but finding
him somewhat danted with the present fight of death, she snatched up a sword
with which she transpierc'd her self, and then plucking it from her bosom,
presented it unto her husband only with these few and last words, Poet non
dolet, Hold Poetus it has done me no harm, and so fell down and died: of whom
Martial in his first book of Epigrams has left this memory, Casta suo gladium
cum traderet Aria Poeto,
Quem dedit visceribus traxerat illa suis,
Si qua fides vulnus quod seci, non dolet inquit,
Sed quod tu facies, hoc mihi Poet dolet.
When Aria did to Poetus give that steel,
Which she before from her own breast had taken:
Trust me (quoth she) no smart at all I feel,
My only wound's to think upon thy pain.


The third was Pompeia Paulina, Pompeia Paulina.
the wife of Seneca, who when by the tyrannous command of Nero, she saw the
sentence of death denounced against her husband (though she was then young and
in the best of her years, and he aged and stooping) notwithstanding, so pure
was her affectionat zeal toward him, that as soon as she perceived him to
bleed, caused her own vein to be opened, so to accompany him in death; few such
presidents this our age affords. Yet I have lately seen a discourse,
entitled, A true Narration of Rathean Herpin, Rathean Herpin.
who about the time that Spinola with the Bavarians first entered the
Pallatinate, finding her husband Christopher Thaeon, Appoplext in all his limbs
and members, with an invincible constancy, at several journies bore him upon
her back the space of 1300 English miles to a Bath for his recovery. These and
the like presidents of nuptial piety make me wonder, why so many Satyrists
assume to themselves such an unbridled liberty to inveigh without all
limitation against their Sex. I happened not long since to steal upon one of
these censorious fellows, and found him writing after this manner: I wonder
our forefathers durst their lives
Hazard in days past with such choice of wives,
And (as we read) to venture on so many:
Methinks he has enough that has not any.
Sure either women were more perfect then,
Or greater patience does possess us men,
Or it belongs to them since Eve's first curse,
That (as the world) their Sex grows worse and worse,
But who can teach me, Why the fairer, still
They are more false? good Oedipus thy skill,
Or Sphinx thine toresolve me, lay some ground
For my instruction: good, the like is found
Amongst birds and serpents; did you never see
A milk white Swan (in color like to thee
That wast my mistress once) as white, as fair,
Her downie breasts to touch, as soft, as rare;
Yet these deep waters that in torments meet,
Can never wash the blackness from her feet.
Who ever saw a Dragon richly clad
In golden scales, but that within he had
His go^ge stufe full of venom? I behold
The woman, and methinks a cup of gold
Stands brim'd before me; whence should I but sip,
I should my fate, and death, taste from thy lip.
But henceforth I Will beware thee, since I know,
That under the more spreading Misceltow,
The greater Mandrake thrives, whose shrieke presages
Or ruin, or disaster. Who ingages
Himself to beauty, he shall find dependants
Contempt, Disdain, and Scorn; with their attendants,
Inconstancy, and Falsehood: in their train,
Wait loosnesse and intemperance. But in vain
Before the blind we glorious objects bring;
Lend armor to the lame, or counsel sing
To them will find no ears: be it then approved,
"None ever fair that has sincerely loved.
If beautiful, she is proud: if rich, then scorn
She thinks becomes her best. But 'ware the horn
Thou man if she be crossed once: bright or black,
Well shaped or ugly, does she fortunes lack,
Or be she great in means, haunts she the Court,
City or Country; They all love the sport.


Further he was proceeding when I stayed his pen, and so stopped the torrent of
his poetical raptureo and so laid before him so many noble histories of
glorious and illustrious women, some already in this tractate, and others
hereafter to be remembered; that he forsook his late apostasy, confessed his
error, and apprehended a new belief, professing himself futurely to be a
constant champion of their honors and virtues. The like impression I wish they
may make in the hearts of all such, whose Poems have been too lavishly bold,
and still persist in the like peevish ^bstinacy. Now if any man tax me, Why I
have not equally suited my books in length? to excuse my self, I will tell
them a short tale, and so conclude, this being the third in number. A gentleman
of a suspected wit, amongst many other crotchets that came often into his brain,
having a new suit to be made, sent to his Tailor to give him directions about
the fashion, charging him above all things not to forget to make one sleeve
longer then another, because he would have a garb peculiar to himself: the
Tailor loath to offend so good a customer, brings home his doublet made just
according to his direction. The Fantastic Gentleman the first thing he does,
measures the sleeves, and finding their inequality, in great choler calls to his
Tailor, and to him thus says, What a blockhead art thou? did not I charge thee
to make the one sleeve longer then the other? and see if (like a botcherly
fellow as thou art) thou have not quite mistook, and made the one sleeve
shorter thou the other. Gentle Reader, this is easy to apply.

Explicit lib. tertius, Inscriptus Thalia.
THE FOVRTH BOOK inscribed MELPOMENE.
Of Women incestuous, of Adulteresses, and such as have come by strange deaths.
NEver did my hand more compulsively direct my pen, nor my pen with less
willingness blot paper, then at this present, being forced in this tractate,
to lay open the frailties of this Sex, before so much commended. But his is my
encouragement to proceed, because I can produce nothing out of History, to the
disgrace of the bad and vicious, which adds not to the honor of the good and
virtuous. Were none soul, what benefit were it to be fair? and if none
deformed, what grace could it be to be well featured? There were no honor to
be ascribed to modesty, but that we see the dishonor of immodesty depending;
nor to the temperate, but that we daily find the inconveniences inherent to
riot and excess. Besides, were all alike fair, what praise were it to be
beautiful? or if all alike chaste, what admiration could be attributed to so
rare a Virtue? As we see in the trying of metals there is the gold and the
dross; in the progress of time, there is day and night, comprehending light
and darkness; in the creation of man, there is the immortal soul and the
corruptible flesh. And as it has pleased the divine Providence, to provide a
heaven and a hell, the one to crown the virtuous, the other to condemn the
wicked: so there is a necessity of number to people both, nor are the torments
of the one more feelingly apprehended, then in contemplating the joies and
felicities of the other. Amongst artificers, vessels are made some for honor,
and some for dishonor; in all estates there are the noble and the base;
amongst Princes, the good King and the Tyrant; amongst subjects, the true
liegeman, and the traitor; in schools, the learned and the ignorant; amongst
Magistrates, the wise and the foolish; if one be bountiful, another is
ava^itious and griping; if one pious and religious, others atheistical and
profane; neither is the vileness of the one any a^persion or blemish to the
other, but rather as a foil to set it off with more luster and beauty. Those
therefore that are before presented, are to imitate: the rest that in this next
book succeed, to beware and shun. For who so foolish, that seeing shelves and
sands on the one side, and safe harbor on the other, will forsake the part of
security, willingly to swallow himself up in the quick sands: therefore I wish
you all to strive, that the beauty of your mind may still exceed that of your
bodies; because the first apprehends a noble divinity, the last is subject to
all trailey: and as the higher powers have bestowed on you the fairness above
man, to equal that excellency of judgment and wisdom, in which man claims
justly a priority before you, so it is both behoofefull and becoming your Sex,
that your outward perfections should altogether aim at the inward p^l^hritude
of the mind; since the first is accidental and casual, the ^ast stable and
permanent, Besides, if beauty be once branded with the name of impudence or
inchastity, it makes that which in it self is both laudable and desired,
rejected and altogether despised. For virtue once violated b^ings infamy and
dishonor, not only to the person offending, but contaminates the whole
progeny; nay more, looks back even to the injured ashes of the ancestors, be
they never so noble: for the mind, (...) the body, in the act of adultery being
both corrupted, makes the action infamous and dishonorable, dispersing the
poi^on of the sin even amongst those from whom she derives her birth; as if
with her earthly being, they had given her therewith her corruptions, and the
first occasion of this her infamy. It extends likewise to the posterity which
shall arise from so corrupt a seed, generated from unlawful and adulterate
copulation. How chary then ought a fair woman to be, to strengthen her bodily
beauty with that of the mind? Of what small continuance it is, and how nature
has disposed of your age, you should consider: the beauty of your Cradle you
cannot apprehend, nor of your Childhood, and therefore in it you can take
neither pride nor delight, or if you could, it is not yet perfect When you grow
ripe for marriage, and that it begins to attract you suitors and servants, it
grows to bud, and is then commonly in the blossom, when you have made choice
of a husband: as you begin to be the fruitful mother of children, so one by
one the leaves fade and fall away. Alas, how swiftly does Age with wrinkles
steal upon you, and then where is that admiration it before attracted? neither
is that small season free from the blastings of disease, and canke^ worms of
sickness, able to make the fairest amongst you to look aged in her youth. Then
may the choicest of you with beautiful Lais, who when she saw the Lillies in
her brow faded, and the Roses in her cheeks withered the Diamonds in her eyes
lose their luster, and the Rubies in her lips their color (as being n^w grown
in years) in these words, give up your looking glasses back to Venus.

Nunc mihi nullus in hoc usus, quia cernere talem
Qualis sum, nolo, qualis eram, nequ^o.
Now there is nouse of thee at all,
Because I have no will
To see what I am now; and what
I was, I cannot still.
If then this rare ornament be of such small permanence, even in the best; How
much then is it to be underprized, when it is contaminated and spotted with
lust and unlawful prostitution? since it is a maxim, That things common are
so far from begetting appetite and affection, that they rather engender the
seeds of contempt and hatred: for how should any thing festered and corrupt,
please the eye? or that which is rotten and unsound, give content unto the
palate? But to return to my first Apology: needful it is, that to the Tragic
Muse Melpomene, I should suit Tragical history, wherein if any women be
personated for Inconstancy, Intemperance, Adultery, Incest, or any such vile
and abominable action; she has in that disgraced her self, not her sex, as
stretching no further then the delinquent. It any man object and say they are
bad presidents, to him I answer, they are examples of horror to be eschewed,
not imitated, which in their own natures beget a loathing, not liking: and for
placing them next to and so near to the women Illustrious, I will excuse my
self in this short Epigram.

A skillful Painter having limm'd a face
Surpassing fair, of admirable feature,
Sets by the same, to give it the more grace,
The pourtrait of some foul deformed creature.
No doubt, as much art in the last is shown,
As in the first, albeit that pleases most
How ever to the workman it is (...)
They both to him ar^ of lik^ care and cost.
It Is so with me, I have set before you many
B^ave Ladies, of the^ all to take full view,
Pleasing to the eye (...)
Whom a more willing workman (...))
Should these appear rough hewed or of bad savor,
And whose aspect cannot so well (...) you,
Perhaps the next of more delight (...)
And grinding other colors I Will pre^^^ you
A smoother piece, and li^^^ (if I be able)
A fairer face in a more curious fable.
Of women incestuous, and first of Q. Semiramis.
IT is questioned by some authors, concerning this potent and mighty Queen,
whether she be more renowned for her brave and magnanimous exploits, or
notorious for her ignoble and infamous actions? some willing, that for her
virtues sake, her vices should be utterly buried in oblivion; others in regard
of what was bad in her, that nothing good or commendable might of her to
posterity be remembered. I purpose to give you a taste of both. Some say she was
called Semiramis, of the birds, named The name of birds common in (...) Coun^^^*
Semiramides, by which it is said she was fostered in her infancy: but that
bearing no show of truth, others derive her denomination from Samir, which in
the Hebrew and the Syrian dialect imports as much as Adamant; because her noble
and brave achievements, attracted the hearts of that barbarous rude Nation, to
her admiration and love, as the Adamant draws iron. Plutarch in libro Amator.
says, she was a damsel of Syria, and concubine to the King of that Country,
with whose love Ninus being after besotted, took her to his wife; of whom she
had that predominance, that though before he had conquered all the Eastern
parts, subjugated his neighbor Kings, and subdued Zoroastres Monarch of the
Bactrians (he that was the first inventor of the Art magic, that devised the
principles of Astrology, and found out the true motions of the stars)
notwithstanding she so far prevailed with him, that for one day she might sit
in the royal throne, and for that space have the regal jurisdiction in her
full power, with entire command over the whole Empire. In the morning of her
sovereignty, she imposed upon the subjects such modest and mild injunctions,
that ere noon she had insinuated into their bosoms so far, that she found them
so pliable and conformable to her desires, that she presumed there was nothing
so difficult and impossible, which for her sake they would not boldly and
resolutely undertake. Upon this presumption, she stretched her usurpation so
far, that she commanded them to lay hands upon the King her husband before
night, and committing him to prison, caused him within few days to be put to
death. She had by Ninus one son, called Ninus junior, who should have succeeded
his father, that for fifty two years space, had swaied the Babylonian Empire:
but whether in her own ambition desirous of the principality, or finding her
son too effeminate to be Lord over so great a people, and uncertain withal,
whether so many men, and of so many sundry Nations, would submit themselves to
the sovereignty of a woman, all these suppositions being doubtful, certain it
is, that instead of the mother of Ninus, she assumed the person of Ninus her
son, changing her woman's shape into the habit of a man's; for they were of one
stature, proportioned in lineaments alike, semblant in voice, and in all
accomplements difficultly to be distinguished, insomuch, that never mother and
child could have more true resemblance: having therefore lulled her son in all
effeminacy, and at^i^^d him in her Queen-like vesture, the better to shadow her
own proportion, she suited her self in long garments, and commanded all her
subjects to do the like; which habit has been amongst the Assyrians,
Bactrians, and Babylonians in use even to this day. Upon her head she wore a
Turba^^ o^ Myter, such as none but Kings used to adorn their heads with: so
that in the beginning; she was known for no other then the Prince, in whose
name she accomplished many notable and noble achievements, at whose amplitude,
Envy and Emulation stood amazed, confessing her in all her attempts
supereminent; neither did her heroic actions any way derogate from the honor
of the Empire, but rather add to the splendor thereof, admiration, in regard a
woman had not only excelled all of her sex in valor, but might claim a just
priority over men. She built the mighty City Babylon, and the stately walls,
reckoned amongst the seven wonders. Herod. l 1. These walls the Queen Nicocris
who after some years succeeded her, made much more stately, exceeding her in
all her (...).
She not only conquered all Aethiopia, and made that Kingdom to her state
tributary, but invaded India, being the first that durst attemptie; and saving
her, no (...) but Alexander, who was the second and the last. Thus (...) Justin
out of the history of Trogus Pompeius. Berosus affi^ms as much, these be his
words: Nemo unquam huic seminae comparandus est virorum, tanta in ejus vita
scribuntur cum ad vituperationem, tum maxim ad laudem. No man was ever to be
compared with this woman, such great things have been written of her, partly to
her disgrace, but chiefly to her praise. He proceeds further: She was the
fourth that reigned in Assyria (for so it is approved) Nim^o^ was the first,
being father to Belus, and grandfather to Ninus, which Ninus was the first
that made war upon his neighbors, and usurped their dominions, in whom began
to cease the Golden world: whom his widow Queen succeeded, counterfeiting the
shape of man. She was after slain by her son Ninus the second of that name,
who as Eusebius writes, after her death swai'd the Scepter thirty and eight
years. One memorable thing is recorded of her by Diodorus S. culu^, lib. 3. as
also by Vitruvius. This Qu^en being making her self ready in her Palace
royal, when the one part of her hair was bound up, and the other half hung
loose upon her shoulders, suddenly news was brought her, That the Citizens of
Babylon were revolted, and all or most of them in mutiny and uprore. She
presently posted into the City, and what with her presence and persuasion,
atton'd the discord, and before she had leisure to put her disordered curls in
form, reconciled the hearts of that innumerable people to her obedience: for
which her statue was erected in the City, being pourtraied half ready, half
unready, in memory of that noble and magnananous adventure. Something of the
best that was in her, though not all, you have heard, the worst is to come.
Juba apud Pli. relates that she imitated the fashions of men, neglecting the
habit of her own Sex, and in her latter years grew to that debauched effeminacy
and sordid lust, that she did not only admit but allure and compel into her
goat^sh embraces, many of her soldiers, without respect of their degrees or
places, so they were well featured, able and lusty of performance, whom when
they had wasted their bodies upon her, she caused to be most cruelly murdered.
She was slain by her own son, because most incestuously sought his bed: but,
which of all the rest is most prodigious and abominable, she is reported to
have company with a horse, on whom she unnaturally doted. But these things
whether related for truth, or recorded of malice, I am altogether ignorant, and
therefore leave it to censure. Herodotus, Plutarch, and others. wr^t, that she
caused these words to be inscribed upon her Tomb. Quicunque Rex pecun^^ indiget
ap^^to monumento, quod voluerit accipiat, that is, What (...) has need of
coin, search this monument. and (...) find what (...) desires. This when King
Darius (...) thinking some magazine of treasure had been therein included, he
caused the Tomb stone to be removed; where he found upon the other side
thereof, these words engraven, Nisi Rex avarus esses and pecuniae insatiabil^s
mor^uorum mon^menta non violassis, i. Had thou not been an avaritioas King,
and insatiable of co^n, thou would not have ransacked the grave of the dead.
Thus, as Franciscus Patricius Pontifex says, the excellent Lady in her death
^^unted the (...) avarice of the living. That the monuments of the de^d are no
way to be violated or detaced. Sertor^us has taught us, who having subdued the
City Tigenna, situate in the Country of Maurusia, in which a noble sepulcher
was* which the inhabitants said belonged to Antaeus (which was the giant slain
by Hercules:) when the greatness of the grave exceeded all belief, Sertorius
caused it to be ruined, and there dug up a body (as Plutarch witnes^e^h) of
seventy cubits in length; which beholding and wondering at, he caused it to be
repaired with greater beauty then before, lest by diminishing that, he might
have ruined a great part of his own honor. Tagenna a women of seventy cubits
high.
Some think it was the body of Tagenna the wife of Antaeus, whom Hercules
prostituted after the death of her husband: of her he begot Siphax who after
erected that City, and in memory of his mother, called it by her name.

Pasiphae.
THis Lady, though I cannot fitly introduce her within the number of the
incestuous, yet for that horrid act which the Poets have reported of her, I
shall not impertinently place her next to Semiramis Apollodorus Grammaticus in
his book, de Deorum origin (as Benedictus Aeginus Spoletinus interprets him)
thus sets down her history: Ninus King of Creet, espoused Pasiphae, daughter of
the Sun and Perseis, or (as Asclepiades calls her) Creta, the daughter of
Aterius, she had by him four sons, Cretaeus, Deucalion, Glaucus and Androgeus,
and as many daughters, Hecate, Xenodice, Ariadne, and Phaedra. This Minos
peaceably to enjoy his Kingdom, had promised to offer such a bull to Neptune;
but having obtained his desires, he sent that Bull before marked out, back to
the herd, and caused another of less value to be sacrificed: at which Neptune
enraged, knew not with what greater punishment to afflict him for the breach of
his faith, then to make his wife most preposterously and against nature, to
dote on that beast which he had so carefully preserved. She therefore
confederated with Dedalus, a great Artsmaster (one that for murder had fled
from Athens, and with his son Icarus there secured himself) he devised by his
mischievous skill, a wooden Cow, hollowed within with such artificial
conveyance, that the Queen enclosed, had satisfaction of her desires, to the
glutting of her libidinous appetite. Of this congression she conceived and
brought forth a son called Asterion, or (as the most will have it) Minotaurus,
shaped with a bulls head and a man's body. About this monstrous issue, Minos
consulted with the Oracle; which advised him to shut him in a Labyrinth, and
there see him safely brought up and kept. This Labyrinth (the first that ever
was) was built by Dedalus, being a house so intricated with windings and
turnings, this way and that way, now forward, then backward, that it was scarce
possible for any that entered therein, Lib. 1.
to find the direct way back; thus far Apollodorus: But Palephatus in his
fabulous Narrations, reduces all these commented circumstances within the
compass of mere impossibility; and thus delivers the truth concerning
Pasiphae. Minos being afflicted with a disease in his secret parts, with which
he had been long grieved, was at length by Crides, who belonged to Pandion,
cured. In the interim of this his defect and weakness, the Queen cast an
adulterate eye upon a fair young man called Taurus, whom (Servius says) was
the scribe or secretary to the King; she prostituting her self to his
embraces, when the full time was expired she produced her issue: which Minos
seeing, and taking a true supputation of the time, comparing the birth with his
discontinuance from her bed (by reason of his disease) apprehended the
adultery; notwithstanding he was unwilling to kill the bastard, because it had
a resemblance to the rest of his children, though an impression of the fathers
face, by which the adulterer might easily be known. Minos therefore to conceal
his own discontents, and as much as in him lay, to hide his wives shame, whom
no endearedly affected, caused the infant to be carried into a remote mountain,
and there by the Kings herds men to be fostered. But growing toward manhood,
he likewise grew intractable and disobedient to those whose charge he was
committed. The King therefore confined him into a deep cave dug in a rock of
purpose, not to curb his fierce and cruel disposition, but rather encourage
it; for whosoever at any time he feared, or whatsoever he was that had offended
him, he sent him to this Minotaur, on some impertinent or other, by whom he was
cruelly butchered. The cave was called Labyrinthus, and therefore described
with so many intricate blind Meanders, in regard of the difficulty of his
return with life, who was seen to enter there. Therefore when Theseus came to
Minos, he sent him to be devoured by this Minotaur: of which Ariadne having
notice, being enamoured of Theseus, she sent him a sword by which he slew the
monstrous Homicide; and that was the clew so often remembered by the Poets,
which guided Theseus out of the Labyrinth.

Canace, Canusia, Valeria Tusculana.
MAcareus and Canace were brother and sister, the son and daughter to Aeolus
King of the winds (for so the Poets feigned him, because the clouds and mists
arising from the seven Aeolian Islands, of which he was King, always pretended
great gusts and tempests) he is reported to be the son of Jupiter and Alceste,
daughter to Hyppotes the Tyrian, of whom he had the denomination of Hippotides.
This Macareus and Canace, having most lewdly and incestuously loved one
another, covering their bedding and bosoming under the unsuspected pretext of
consanguinity and neernesse in blood: It could no longer be concealed by reason
Canace at length brought forth a son, which as she would secretly have conveied
out of the Court by the hands of her trusty Nurse, who had been before
acquainted with all their wicked proceedings; the infant by crying betrayed it
self to the grandfather, who searching the Nurse, examining the matter,
finding the incest, and miserably distracted with the horridness of the fact:
instantly in the heat of his incensed anger, caused the innocent infant to be
cut in pieces, and limb by limp cast to the dogs, and before his face devoured.
This Macareus hearing, took sanctuary in the Temple of Apollo; but Canace by
reason of her greenness and weak estate, not able to make escape, and shun the
violence of her fathers threatened fury: he sent her a sword, and withal
commanded her to punish her self according to the nature of the fact. Which
she receiving, writ a passionate letter to her brother, in which she first
besought him to have a care of his safety, and next to cause the bones of the
slaughtered infant to be gathered together, and put into an urn with hers: this
having done, with the sword sent her by her father, she transpierc'd her self,
Canusia.
and so expired. The like weread of Canusia, daughter of Papirius Volucris, who
being found with child by Papirius Romanus her own natural brother, when the
heinousness of the fact came to the knowledge of the father, he sent to either
of them a sharp sword; with which they as resolutely slew themselves, as they
had before rashly offended. The like success of her incestuous affection had
Valeria Tusculana, Valor. Tus.
who as Plutarch relates, by the counsel of one of her handmaids coming
privately in the night into the arms of her father, and the deed after made
known to Valerius, he in detestation of the act slew her with his own hand.

Julia, the Empress.
THese abominable sins that have been punished in inferior persons, have in
great ones been countenanced. Sextus Aurelius, and Aelius Spartianus, both
testify, That Antonius Caracalla Emperor, doting upon his stepmother Julia,
was often heard to say in her presence, I would if it were lawful; at length
apprehending his purpose, to these his words, she made this reply: What you
list to do (O Emperor) you may make lawful, Princes have power to make
Laws, but are not tied to keep any: by which words imboldned, he took her to
his bed, whose son Geta but a while before he had caused to be slain. Herodotus
remembers us of one Opaea the stempmother to Scithes King of the Scythians,
Opaea.
who likewise took her to his bed, and made her his Queen. So Berenices
Berenices.
the sister of Ptolomaeus Evergetes was made partner both of his bed and
Kingdom. Arsinoe Arsinoe.
the sister of Ptolomaeus Philadelphus became his concubine. The like did Herod
Antipas unto Herodias Herodias.
the wife of his brother Philip. We read also of one Leucon, who slew his
brother Oxilochus King o^ Pontus for the love of his wife, whom he after
married. Faustina Faustina,
the sister of Marcus Antonius Emperor, became her brothers paramour; on whom
he begat Lucilla, Lucilla.
whom he after gave in marriage to his brother L. Antonius. Theodoricus King of
the Frenchmen, married the daughter of his own brother, whom he before had
slain. And Pontanus remembers us of one Johannes Ariminensis, who espoused his
own sister. Philip the brother of Alphonsus the tenth King of Spain, forcibly
married Christiana, Christiana.
daughter to the King of Dacia, his own brothers wife, all Christianity and
Religion set apart. Volaterranus remembers us of one Stratonice, Stratonice.
who being devishly doted on by Antiochus Soter King of Syria, his own father
at his importunity gave her up into his sons incestuous embra^es. Virgil in his
tenth book speaks of Casperia, Casperia.
stepmother to Anchemolus the son of Rhaetus, King of the Mar^ubians, who was
by him adulterated. These prodigious acts have been encouraged by Kings,
drawing their presidents from Jupiter, who vitiated Ceres, and married his
sister Juno; when in my opinion, the industry of the Poets in illustrating the
escapes of Jupiter and the other gods, was aimed at no other end, then to
manifest unto all men, That such deities were not worthy adoration, that were
calumnized with so many whoredoms, adulteries and incests.

The sisters of Cambyses.
THese might seem fearful enough before related, but I will give you a short
taste of some more abominable: I have showed the examples of Lust, but these
following are besides lust, polluted with unheard of Tyranny. Herodotus in his
third book speaking at large of the life and acts of Cambyses the great Persian
King, and son of Cyrus, relates, that having showed his puissance abroad in
Egypt, Greece, and other places, to the terror of the greatest of the world: he
caused his innocent brother Smerdis, to be secretly made away by the hand of
his most trusted Praxaspes. The next inhumanity which he purposed to exemplify
unto the world, was the death of his sister, who followed him in his Camp to
Egypt, and back again: being not only his sister by parents, but his wife also.
The manner how she came to be his Queen, was as follows; Before his time it
was not lawful, but punishable amongst the Persians, to marry into that
proximity of blood: but Cambyses surprised with the love of his sister, and
having resolved by what means soever, to make her his wife, yet to color his
purpose, he sent for those honorable persons who were styled the Kings Judges,
being selected men for their wisdoms, and of great place and quality, as
those that enjoy their offices Durante via, unless some capital crime be
proved against them; besides, they are the expounders of the Laws, and to
their causes all matters of doubt and controversy are referred. These being
convented, The King demanded of them, Whether they had any one law amongst so
many, which licensed a man (that had a will so to do) to contract matrimony
with his sister? to whom the Judges thus ingeniously answered: We have indeed
no Law which gives license for a brother to marry with a sister, but we have
found a Law (O Sovereign) which warrants the King of Persia to do whatsoever
likes him best. Thus they without abrogation of the Persian Laws, soothed the
Kings humor, and preserved their own honors and lives, who had they crossed him
in the least of his designs, had all undoubtedly perished: This he made the
ground for the marriage of the first, and not long after he adventured upon the
second The younger of these two who attended him into Egypt, he slew, whose
death, as that of her brother Smerdis, is doubtfully reported. The Graecians
write, that two whelps, the one of a Lion, the other of a Dog, were brought
before Cambyses to sight and try masteries, at which sight the young Lady was
present: but the Lion having victory over the Dog, another of the same ^itter
broke his chain, and taking his brothers part, they two had superiority over
the Lion. Cambyses at this sight taking great delight, she then sitting next
him, upon the sudden fell a weeping: this the King observing, demanded the
occasion of her tears, she answered, it was at that object to see one brother
so willing to help the other, and therefore she wept to remember her brothers
death, and knew no man then living that was ready to revenge it; and for this
cause (say the Greeks) she was doomed to death by Cambyses. The Egyptians
report it another way; That she sitting with her brother at table, out of a
sallet dish took a lettice, and plucked off leaf by leaf, and showing it to
her husband, asked him, Whether a whole lettice or one so despoiled, showed the
better? who answered, a whole one: then (said she) behold how this lettice now
unleaved looks, even so have thou disfigured and made naked the house of King
Cyrus. With which words he was so incensed, that he kicked and spurned her
(then being great with child) with that violence, that she miscarried in her
child birth, and died ere she was delivered: and these were the murderous
effects of his detestable incest.

Of Livia Horestilla, Lollia Paulina, Cesonia, etc.
IT is reported of the Emperor Caligula, that he had not only illegal and
incestuous converse with his three natural sisters, but that he after caused
them before his face to be prostitued by his ministers and servants, thereby to
bring them within the compass of the Aemilian Law, and convict them of
adultery. Livia.
He vitiated Livia Horestilla, the wife of C. Pisonius, Horestilla.
and Lollia Paulina, whom he caused to be divorced from her husband C. Memnius,
Lollia Paul.
both whose beds within less then two years he repudiated, Caesonia.
withal interdicting the company and society of man for ever. Caesonia he
loved more affectionately, insomuch, that to his familiar friends (as boasting
of her beauty) he would often show her naked. To add unto his insufferable
luxuries, he defloured one of the vestall virgins. Commod. born the same day
that Calig. vitiated the Vestall virgin.
Neither was the Emperor Commodus much behind him in devilish and brutish
effeminacies, for he likewise strumpeted his own sisters, and would wittingly
and willingly see his mistresses and concubines abused before his face, by such
of his favorites as he most graced: he kept not at any time less then to the
number of three hundred, for so Lampridius has left recorded. Gordianus junior
(who was competitio^ with his father in the Empire) kept two and twenty
concubines, Capitolin.
by each of which he had three or four children at the least, therefore by
some called the Priamus of his age, but by others in derision, the Priapus. The
Emperor Proculus took in battle a hundred Sarmatian virgins, and boasted of
himself that he had got them all with child in less then fifteen days: this
Vopiscus reports, and Sabellicus. But a great wonder is that which Johannes
Picus Mirandula relates of Hercules, as that he l^y with fifty daughters of
Lycomedes in one night, and got them all with child with forty nine boys, only
failing in the last, for that proved a girl.

Jocasta.
APollodorus Atheniensis in his third book, De deorum origin, records this
history. After the death of Amphion King of Thebes, Laius succeeded, who took
to wife the daughter of Menocoeas, called Jocasta, or (as others write)
Epicasta. This Laius being warned by the Oracle, that if of her he begat a son,
he should prove a Parricide, and be the death of his father; notwithstanding,
forgetting himself in the distemperature of wine, he lay with her; the same
night she conceived, and in process brought forth a male issue, whom the King
caused to be cast out into the mountain Cytheron, thinking by that means ^o
prevent the predicted destiny Polybus the herdsman to the King of Corinth,
finding this infant, bore it home to his wife Periboea, who nursed and brought
it up as her own, and causing the swelling of the feet (with which the child
was then troubled) to be cured, they grounded his name from that disease, and
called him Oedipus. This in^ant as he had increased in years, so he did in all
the perfections of nature, as well in the accomplishments of the ^ind as the
body; insomuch, that as well in capacity and volubility of speech, as in all
active and generous exercises, he was excellent above all of his age, his
virtues being generally envied by such as could nor equal them, they thought
to disgrace him in something, and gave him the contemptible name of counterfeit
and bastard: this made him curiously inquisitive of his supposed mother, and
she not able in that point to resolve him, he made a journey to Delphos, to
consult with the Oracle, about the true knowledge of his birth and parents,
which forewarned him from returning into his own Country, because he was
destined not only to be the deaths-man of his father, but to add misery unto
mischief, he was likewise born to be incestuous with his mother. Which to
prevent: and still supposing himself to be the son of Polybus and Peribaea, he
forbore to return to Corinth, and hiring a Chariot, took the way toward
Phocis. It happened that in a strait and narrow passage meeting with his father
Laius, and Polyphontes his Charioter, they contended for the way, but neither
willing to give place, from words they fell to blows: in which contention,
Polyphontes killed one of the horses that drew the Chariot of Oedipus: at which
enraged, he drew his sword, and first slew Polyphontes, and next Laius, who
seconded his servant, and thence took his ready way toward Thebes.
Damasistratus King of the Plataeenses, finding the body of Laius, caused it to
be honorably interred. In this interim, Creon the son of Menecoeus in this
vacancy, whilst there was yet no King, invades Thebes, and after much
slaughter, possesses himself of the Kingdom. Juno, to vex him the more, sent
thither the monster Sphinx, born of E^hidna and Tiphon; she had the face of a
woman, the wings of a foul, and the breast, feet and tail of a Lion: she
having learned certaing problems and aenigmas of the muses, disposed her self
in the mountain Phycaeus, The riddle that she proposed to the Thebans, The
riddle of Sphinx.
was this, What creature is that which has one distinguishable voice, that
first walks upon four, next two, and lastly upon three feet, and the more legs
it has, is the less able to walk? The strict conditions of this monster, were
these, that so often as he demanded the solution of this question, till it was
punctually resolved, he had power to choose out any of the people where he best
liked, whom he presently devoured: but they had this comfort from the Oracle,
That this Aenigma should be no sooner opened, and reconciled with truth, but
they should be freed from this misery, and the monster himself should be
destroyed. The last that was devoured, was Aemon son to King Creon, who fearing
lest the like sad fate might extend it self to the rest of his issue, caused
proclamation to be made, That whosoever could expound this riddle, should marry
Jocasta the wife of the dead King Laius, and be peaceably invested in the
Kingdom: this no sooner came to the ears of Oedipus, but he undertook it, and
resolved it thus: This creature (says he) is man, who of all other has only a
distinct voice, he is born four footed, as in his infancy crawling upon his
feet and hands, who growing stronger, erects himself, and walks upon two
only, but growing decrepit and old, he is fitly said to move upon three, as
using the help of his staff. This solution was no sooner published, but Sphinx
cast herself headlong from the top of that high Promontory, and so perished,
and Oedipus by marrying the Queen, was with a general suffrage instated in the
Kingdom. He begot of her ^wo sons and two daughters, E^eocles and Pol^n^ces,
Ism^ne and Antigone (though some write that Oedipus had these children by
Rurigenia, the daughter of Hyperphantes) These former circumstances after some
years, no sooner came to light, but Jocasta in despair strangled her self;
Oedipus having torn out his eyes, was by the people expulsed Thebes, cursing at
his departure, his children for suffering him to undergo that injury: his
daughter Antigone lead him as far as to Colonus, a place in Attica, where there
is a grove celebrated to the Eumenides, and there remained, till he was removed
thence by Theseus, and soon after died. And these are the best fruits that can
grow from so abominable a root. Of the miserable end of his incestuous issue,
he that would be further satisfied, let him read Sophocles, Apollodorus and
others. O^ him Tyresias thus prophesied: -- Neque hic laetabitur
Calibus and eventis suis: nam factus, etc.
No comfort in his fortunes he shall find,
He now sees clearly, must at length be blind,
And beg, that is now a rich man, who shall stray
Through foreign Countries for his doubtful way
Still gripping with his staff* The brother, he,
And father of his children (both) shall be:
His mothers son, and husband: first strike dead
His father, and adulterate next his bed.


Crithaeis.
SHE was wife to one Phaemius a schoolmaster, Plutarh de Homero.
and mother to Homer, Prince of the Greek Poets. Ephorus of Coma, in a book
intiteled the Cumaean Negotiation, leaves her story thus related: Atelles,
Maeones, and Dius, three brothers, were born in Cuma; Dius being much indebted,
was forced to remove thence into Ascra, a village of Boeotia, and there of his
wife P^cemed^, he begot Hesiodus. Atelles in his own Country dying a natural
death, committed the pupillage of his daughter Crithaeis, to his brother
Maeones: but coming to ripe growth, she being by him vitiated, and proving
with child, both fearing the punishment due to such an offense, she was
conferred upon Phaemius, to whom she was soon after married: and walking one
day out of the City to bath her self in the river Miletus, she was by the
stood side delivered of young Homer, and of the name thereof called him
M^lesigines. But after losing his sight, he was called Homer, for such of the
Cumaeans and Ionians are called Omouroi. De re Poet. lib. 3.
Aristotle he writes contrary to Ephorus, that what time Neleus the son of
Codrus was President in Ionia of the Collony there then newly planted, a
beautiful Virgin of this Nation was forced and de^^oured by one of the
Genius's which used ^o dance with the Muses, who after rem^ved to a place
called Aegina, and meeting with certain forragers and robbers that made sundry
incursions into the Country, she was by them surprised and brought to Smyrna,
who presented her to Meonides a companion to the King of the Lydians; he at the
first sight inamoured of her beauty, took her to wife, who after sporting her
self by the banks of Mil^rus brought forth Homer, and instantly expired. And
since we had occasion to speak of his mother, let it not seem altogether
impertinent, to proceed a little of the son: who by reason of his being hurried
in his childhood from one place to another, and ignorant both of his Country
and parents, went to the Oracle to be resolved concerning them both, as also,
his future fortunes; who returned him this doubtful answer, Foel^x and miser
ad sortemes quia natus utramque,
Perquiris patrians, matris tibi non patris c^^tat, etc.
Happy and wretched, both must be thy fate,
That of thy Country do desire to hear;
Known is thy (...) clime, thy fathers not
An Island in the sea, to Creet not near,
Nor yet far ^ss, in which thou shall expire,
When (...) a riddle shall to thee propose,
Whose dark Aenigma thou can not acquire.
A double Fate thy life has, thou shall lose
Thine eyes: yet shall thy lofty Muse ascend,
And in thy death, thou life have without end.


In his later days he was present at Thebes at their great feast called
Saturnalia, and from thence coming to Ius, and sitting on a stone by the water
port, there landed some fishermen, whom Homer asked what they had taken, but
they having got nothing that day, but for want of other work only lousing
themselves, thus merrily answered him: Non capta afferimus: fuerant quae capta
relictis.
We bring with us those that we could not find,
But all that we could catch we l^ft behind.


Meaning, that all such vermin as they could catch they cast away, but what
they could not take they brought along. Which riddle when Homer could not
unfold, it is said that for very grief he ended his life. This unmatchable
Poet whom no man regarded in his life, yet when his works were better
considered of after his death, he had that honor, that seven famous Cities
contended about the place of his birth, every one of them appropriating it unto
themselves: Pindarus the Poet makes question whether he were of Chius or
Smyrna; Simonides affirms him to be of Chius; Antimachus and Nicander of
Colophon; Aristotle the Philosopher to be of Ius; Ephorus the Historiographer
that he was of Cuma. Some have been of opinion that he was born in Salamine, a
City of Cipria; others, amongst the Argives; Aristarchus and Dyo^isius Thrax,
derive him from Athens, etc. But I may have occasion to speak of him in a
larger work, entitled. The lives of all the Poets, Modern and Foreign, to
which work (if it come once again into my hands) I shall refer you, concluding
him with this short Epitaph: An Epitaph upon Homer the Prince of Poets.
In Colophon some think thee (Homer) borne,
Some in fair Smyrna, so^e in Ius isle,
Some with thy birth rich Chius would adorn,
Others say, (...) a first on thee did smile.
The Argives lay claim to thee, and aver
Thou art their Country man, Aemus a hill in Thessaly where same say Homer was
born.
Aemus says no.
Strong Salamine says thou tookest life from her.
But Athens, thou to her thy Muse do owe,
(As there first breathing.) Speak, how then shall I
Determine of thy Country by my skill,
When Oracles would never? I will try,
And Homer (well thou give me leave) I will
The spacious Earth then for Country choose,
No mortal for thy mother, but a Muse.


(...) the sister of Nereus the Sea-god, was by him stuprated^ of whom he begot
the Nymphs called Nercides; Ovid in his sixth book Metamorph, tells us of
Philomela daughter to Pandion King of Athens, who was forced by Tereus King of
Thrace, the son of Mars, and the Nymph B^stonides, though he had before married
her own dear and natural sister, Progne: the lamentable effects of which
incest, is by the same Author elegantly and at large described: as likewise
Beblis the daughter of Miletus and Cyane, who after she had sought the embraces
of her brother Caumus, slew her self. Mirrha daughter to Cyniras King of the
Cyprians, lay with her father, and by him had the beautiful child Adonis.
Europa the mother, and Pelopeia the daughter, were both corrupted by Thyestes.
Hypermestra injoied the company of her brother, for whom she had long
languished. Menephron most barborously frequented the bed of his mother;
against whom Ovid in his Metamorph. and Quintianus in his Cleopol. bitterly
inveigh. Domitius Calderinus puts us in mind of the Concubine of Amintor, who
was injoied by his son Phaenix. Rhodope the daughter of Hemon, was married to
her father, which the gods willing to punish, they were (as the Poets feign)
changed into the mountains, which still bear their names. Caeleus reports of
one Policaste, the mother of Perdix a hunts-man, who was by him incestuously
loved, and after injoied. Lucan in his eight book affirms, that Cleopatra was
polluted by her own brother, with whom she communicated her self as to a
husband. Nictimine was comprest by her father Nictus, King of Aethiopia.
Martial in his twelfe book, writing to Fabulla, accuses one Themison of incest
with his sister. Plin. lib. 28. cap. 2. speaks of two of the Vestals, Thusia
and Copronda, both convicted of incest; the one buried alive, the other
strangled. Publius Claudius was accused by M. Cicero, of incest with his three
sisters Sextus Aurelius writes, that Agrippina the daughter of Germanicus had
two children by her brother Claudius Caesar, Cornalius Tacitus says, that she
often communicated her body with her own son Nero, in his cups and heat of
wine: he after commanded her womb to be ripped up, that he might see the place
where he had laien so long before his birth; and most deservedly was it
inflicted upon the brutish mother, though unnaturally imposed by the inhumane
son. Ansilaena is worthily repoved by Catullus for yielding up her body to the
wanton embraces of her uncle, by whom she had children. Gidica the wife of
Pomonius Laurentius, doted on her son Cominus even to incest, but by him
refused, she strangled her self. The like did Pheora, being despised by her
son Hippolitus. Dosithaeus apud Plutarch, speaks of Nugeria the wife of Hebius,
who contemned by her son in Law Firmus, prosecuted him with such violent and
inveterate hate, that she first solicited her own sons to his murder; but they
abhorring the vileness of the fact, she watched him sleeping, and so slew him.
John Maletesta deprehending his wife in the arms of his brother Paulus
Maletesta, transpierc'd them both with his sword in the incestuous action.
Clepatra daughter to Dardanus King of the Scythians, and wife to Phinaeus, was
forced by her two sons in law: for which fact their father caused their eyes to
be plucked out. Plutarch reports of Atossa, that she was doted on by
Artaxerxes, insomuch, as that after he had long kept her as his strumpet,
against the Laws of Persia and of Greece, to both which he violently opposed
himself he made her his Queen. Curtius writes of one Si simithres a Persian
soldier, that had two children by his mother. Diogenian also speaking of
Secundus the Philosopher, says, that he (unawares to them both) committed
incest with his mother, which after being made known to them, she astonished with
the horror of the fact, immediately slew her self, and he, what with the
sorrow for her death, and brutishness of the de^d, vowed never after to speak
word, which he constantly performed to the last minute of his life. A strange
Incest.
Manlius in his common places reports from the mouth o^ D Martin Luther, that
this accident happened in Erph^rst in Germany: There was (says he) a maid of an
honest family, that was servant to a rich widow, who had a son that had many
times importuned the girl to lewdness, insomuch, that she had no other way to
avoid his continual suggestions, but by acquainting the mother with the
dissolute courses of the son. The widow considering with her self, which was
the best course to child his libidirous purpose, and divert him from that lewd
course, plotted with the maid to give him a seeming consent, and so appoint him
a place and time in the night, of meeting, at which he should have the fruition
of what he so long had sued for: she her self intending to supply the place of
her servant, to school her son, and so prevent any inconvenience that might
futurely happen. The maid did according to her appointment, the son with great
joy keeps his hour, so did the mother, who came thither on purpose to reform
her son; but he being hot and too forward in the action, and she overcome,
either by the inticements of the devil, the weakness of her Sex, or both,
gave her self up to incestuous prostitution, the young man knowing no
otherwise but that he had enjoied the maid. Of this wicked and abominable
congression, a woman child was begot, of whom the mother (to save her
reputation) was secretly delivered, and put it out privately to nurse, but at
the age of seven years, took it home. When the child grew to years, the most
unfortunate son fell in love with his sister, and daughter, and made her his
unhappy wife: what shall I think of this detestable sin, which even beasts
themselves abhor? L. 9. c. 47. Incest abominable in beasts.
of which I will give you present instance. Aristotle in his history Animal.
who was a diligent searcher into all natural things, affirms, that a Camel
being bli^ded by his keeper, was brought to horse his dam, but in the action,
the cloth falling from his eyes, and he perceiving what he had done, presently
seized upon his keeper and slew him, in detestation of the act he had
committed, and to revenge himself upon him that had betrayed him to the deed.
The like the same author reports of a horse belonging to a King of Scythia, who
could by no means be brought to cover his dam, but being in the same fashion
beguiled, and the cloth falling away, and perceiving what he had done, never
left bounding, flinging and galloping, till coming unto an high rock, he from
thence cast himself headlong into the sea. If this sin be so hateful in
brute beasts and unreasonable creatures, how much more ought it to be avoided
in men and women, and which is more, Chrisioans.

Cyborea, the mother of Judas Iscariot.
THis that I now speak of is remembered by Ranulphus, Monk of Chester, Jerome,
and others. There was a man in Jerusalem, by name R^uben, of the Tribe of
Isachar, his wife was called Cyborea: The first night of their marriage, the
women dreamed that she was conceived of a son, who should be a traitor to the
Prince of his own people: she told it to her husband, at which they were both
sad and pensive. The child being born, and they not willing to have it slain,
and yet loath to have it prove such a monster to his own nation, they in a
small boat cast it to sea to try a desperate fortune: This vessel was diven
upon an Island called Iscariot, where the Queen of that place had then no
child. This babe being found, she purposed to make it her own, and put it to be
nobly nursed and educated, calling his name Judas, and Iscariot of the Island
where he was taken up. But not long after, she was conceived of a son, who
proving a noble and hopeful Gentleman, Judas (whose favor in Court began to
wane, and his hope of inheritance, which but late flourishe now quite to
wither) he plotted against his life, and privately slew him: but fearing lest
the murder in time might be discovered, and he compelled to suffer according to
the nature or the fact, he fled thence to Jerusalem where he got into the
service of Pontius Pilatus, and found means to be protected by him, being then
in the City, Deputy Governor of the Romans. Judas (because their dispositions
were much of one condition) grew into his especial familiarity and favor. The
Palace of Pilat having a fair bay window, whose prospect was into R^ub^ns
Orchard, he had a great appetite to eat of some of those ripe Apples, which
showed so yellow and fair against the Sun. This Judas understanding, promised
him to fetch him some of that fruit, and mounting over the Orchard wall, he was
met by his father, who rebuking him for the injury, Judas with a stone beat out
his brains, and unseen of any, conveied himself back. Reubens death was
smothered, and the murderer not known. Cyborea being a rich widow, Pilate made
a march betwixt her and his servant Judas, who being married to his mother, was
now possessed of his own fathers inheritance. Not long this incestuous couple had
lived together, but Cyborea being upon a time wondrous sad and melancholy, and
Judas demanding the cause, she began to relate to him her many misfortunes;
First, of her dream, them of her son in what manner he was put to sea, then how
she lost her husband being slain, and the murderer not found; and lastly, how
by the authority of Pilat she was now compelled to match against her will, who
had protested to her self a lasting widdowhood. By these circumstances, Judas
most assuredly knew that he had slain his father, and had married his mother;
which acknowledging to her, she persuaded him to repent him of these great
evils, and to become a Disciple of Jesus, who was then an eminent prophet
amongst he Jews. It shall nor be amiss to speak a word or two or Pilat. It is
said that a King whose name was Tyrus, begat him on a Millers daughter, Lyla,
whose father was called A^us, (...).
who from his mother and grandfather, was called Pylatus, at four years of age
he was brought to his father, who by his lawful wife had a Prince just of the
same age. These were brought up together in all noble exercises, in which the
Prince having still the best, Pilat awaited his opportunity and slew him: loath
was the King to punish him with death, lest he should leave himself altogether
issulesse, therefore he sent him an hostage to Rome, for the payment of certain
tribute which was yearly to be tendered into the Roman treasury. Living there as
hostage, he associated himself with the son to the King of France, who lay
pledge in Rome about the like occasion, and in a private quarrel was also
slain by Pilat. The Romans finding him of an austere brow and bloody
disposition, made him governor of the Island called Pontus: the people were
irregular and barbarous, whom by his severity he reduced to all civil
obedience, for which good service he was removed to Jerusalem, bearing the name
of Pontius from that Island; there he gave sentence against the Savior of the
world. Tiberius Caesar being then Emperor, was sick of a grievous malady, who
hearing that in Jerusalem was a Prophet, who with a word healed all infirmities
whatsoever, he sent one Volutianus to Herod, to send him this man; but Christ
was before condemned and crucified. There Volutianus acquainted himself with
one Veronica a noble Lady of the Jews, Veronica.
who went with him to Rome, and carried with her the linen cloth, which still
bore the impresse and likeness of Christ's visage, upon which the Emperor no
sooner looked, but he was immediately healed. The Emperor then understanding
the death of this innocent and just man, caused Pilat to be brought to Rome,
who being called before Caesar (the history says) he had at that time upon him
the robe of our Savior, which was called Tunica insutilis, a garment without
seam, which whilst it was about him, nothing could be objected against him to
his least damage or disgrace; this was three times proved, and he still came
off unaccused; but when by the advice of this Veronica and other Christians,
the garment was took off, he was then accused for causing guiltless men to be
slain, for erecting statues of strange nations in the Temple, against the
ordinances of the Jews; that with money wrested and extorted from the holy
treasures, he had made a water-conduit to his own house, that he kept the
Vestments and sacred robes of the Priests in his own house, and would not
deliver them for the service of the Temple, without mercenary hire: of these
and other things being convicted, he was sent to prison, where borrowing a
knife to pare an apple he slew himself, his body after was fastened to a great
stone, and cast into the river Tiber.

Of Adulteresses.
FRom the Incestuous, I proceed to the Adulteresses: Aulus Gellius in his first
book de Mortibus Atticis cites these words out of Varro's Memppea, Cap. 17.
The errors (says he) and vices of the wife are either to be corrected, or
endured; he that chastises her makes her the more conformable, he that suffers
her, makes himself the better by it: thus interpreting Varro's meaning, That
husbands ought to reprove the vices of their wives, but if they be perverse and
intractable, his patience though it prevail not with them, yet much benefits
himself: yet are not their insolences any way to be much encouraged, because
it is a duty exacted from all men, to have a respect to the honor of their
houses and families: Besides, such as will not be reformed by counsel, are by
the laws to be punished. Caesar sued a divorce from his wife, because she was
but suspected of adultery, though no manifest guilt could be proved against
her. Lysias the famous Orator, declaimed against his wife in a public
oration, because he was jealous of her spouse-brea^h. But much is that inhumane
rashness to be avoided, by which men have undertook to be their own
justifiers, and have mingled the pollution of their beds, with the blood of the
delinquents. Cato Censorius reckons such in the number of common executioners,
and counts them little better then bloody hangmen; For (says he) impious and
abominable it is for any man to pollute his hands in such unnatural murder, he
may with as much justice violate the ordinances of the Common weal, or with as
great integrity propha^e the sacreds of the gods. Sufficient it is that we have
laws to punish, and judges to examine and sentence all such transgressors.
Nero the most barbarous of Princes, after that by kicking and spurning, he had
slain his wife Poppaea in his anger, though he was altogether composed of
mischief, yet when he recollected himself, and truly considered the vileness
of the fact he had not only with great sorrow bewailed her death, to make what
amends he could to the dead body before outraged, but he would not suffer her
course to be burned in the Roman fires, but caused a funeral pile of all sweet
and odoriferous woods (fetched from the furthest parts of the world) to be
erected, sending up her smoke as incense offered unto the gods, and after
caused her ashes in a golden ^urn to be conserved in the famous sepulcher of
the Julian family: Neither is this discourse aimed to persuade men to too much
remissness in wincking at, and sleeping out the adulteries of their wives. A
most shameful thing it was in Antonius, Faustina the wife of Claudius.
the best of the Caesar's, to extol his wife Faustina for the best of women,
and most temperate of wives, when it was most palpably known to all men, how in
Caje^a she commonly prostituted her self to Plaiers and Ministrels. L. Sylla,
that was surnamed Happy was in this most unfortunate, because his easy nature
was persuaded that his wise Metella was the chastest of matrons, when her known
looseness and notorious incontinence, was ballated up and down the City.
Disgraceful it was in Philip King of Macedon, who having conquered diverse
nations, and subdued many Kingdoms, yet could not govern one wife at home; who
though he had manifest probability of her loosnesse and riots, yet suffered
with all patience her insolences, and being violently thrust out of her
bedchamber by her, and her maids, dissembled the injury to his friends,
excusing the wrong, and seeming to laugh at the injury. In like manner Clodius
the Emperor excused his wife Messalina, being taken in adultery: this liberty
grew to boldness, and that boldness to such an height of impudency, that from
that time forward she took pride to commit those luxuries in public, which at
first she not without blushes adventured on in private. It is related of her,
that before the faces of her handmaids and servants, she dissolutely (I might
say brutishly) cast her self into the embraces of one Sylius; not content with
secret inchastity, unless she had a multitude to witness her abominable
congression: of whom the most excellent of the Satyrists thus speaks, Qid
privata domus, quid fecevit Hippa curas
Respice rivales divorum, Claudius audi
Quae tulerit --
Do thou thou take care what is done at home,
Or Hippa do thou fear?
Behold the rivals of the gods,
What Claudius he does hear:


The sacred institution of marriage, was not only for procreation, but that man
should make choice of a woman, and a woman to make election of a husband, as
companions and comforters one of another, as well in adversity as prosperity.
Aristotle confers the cares and businesses that lie abroad, upon the husband,
but the domestic actions within doors, he assigns to the wife; for he holds it
as inconvenient and uncomely for the wife to busy her self about any public
affairs, as for the man to play the cotquean at home.

Marriage (as Franciscus Patricius says) becomes the civil man, Lib. 4.
to which though he be not compelled by necessity, yet it makes the passage of
life more pleasing and delightful, not ordained for the satisfying of lust,
but the propagation of issue. Aelius Verus one of the Roman Emperors, a man
given to all voluptuousness, when his wife complained unto him of his
extravagancies, as never satisfied with change of mistresses and concubines, he
thus answered her, Suffer me O Wife, to exercise my delights upon other women,
for the word Wife, is a name of dignity and honor, not of wantonness and
pleasure. The punishment of adultery.
The punishment of a woman taken in adultery (as Plutarch in his Quaest. Graec.
relates) was amongst the Cumaeans after this manner: She was brought into the
market place, and set upon a stone in the public view of all the people; when
she had certain hours sat there as a spectacle of scorn, she was mounted upon
an Ass* and led through all the streets of the City, and then brought back
again and placed upon the same stone, ever after reputed notorious and
infamous, and had the name of Onobatis, i. riding upon an Ass, end the stone on
which she was seated, held as polluted (...). Aelianus in his twelfe book, thus
sets down the punishment of an adulterer amongst the Cret^ns: (...) brought
before the judgment seat, and being convicted, he was crowned with wool to
denote his effeminacy, (...) with an extraordinary mulct, held infamous amongst
the people, and made incapable of office or dignity in the Commonweal. Amongst
the Parthians, no sin was more severely punished then adultery. Carondas made a
decree, That no Citizen or matron should be taxed in the comedy, unless it
were for Adultery or vain curiosity. Plutarch remembers two young men of
Syracusa, De reip. Gerevi. praeceptis.
that were familiar friends the one having occasion to travel abroad about his
necessary occasions, left his wife in charge of his bosom companion whom he
most trusted, who broke his faith, and vi^iated the woman in his friends
absence; he returning and finding the injury done him, concealed his revenge
for a season, till he found an opportunity to strumpet the others wi^e, which
was the cause of of a bloody and intestine war, almost to the ruin of the whole
City. The like combustion was kindled betwixt Pardalus and Tyrrhenus, upon
semblant occasion. Livy in the tenth book of his Decades relates, that Q.
Fabius Gurges son to the Consul, amerced the matrons of Rome for their
adulteries, and extracted from them so much coin at one time, as builded the
famous Temple of Venus near to the great Circus. So much of the same in
general, now I come to a more particular survey of the persons.

Of many great Ladies branded with Adultery amongst the Romans: and first of
Posthumia.
THis Posthumia was the wife of Servius Sulpitius, as Lollia the wi^e of Aulus
Gabinus, Tertullia of Marcus Crassus, Mutia the wife of C. Pomp^ius, Servitia
the mother of Marcus Brutus, Iulia the daughter of Servitia, and the third wife
of Marcus Crassus, Furies Maura, the Queen of King Bogades, Cleopatra of
Egypt, and after beloved of Marcus Antonius, and of the Triumvira^e: all these
Queens and noble Matrons, is Julius Caesar said to have adulterated. Livia the
wife of Augustus Caesar, was by him first strumpetted, and being great with
child, to recompense her wrong, he hastened the marriage. This was objected to
him in an oration by Antonius. Tertullia, D^usilla, Salvia, Scribonia,
Tilisconia: with all these noble matrons he is said to have commerce. An
impudent whoredom.
Likewise with a great Senators wife, whose name is not remembered, Augustus
being at a public banquet in his own palace, withdrew himself from the table
in the public view, and before the cloth was taken up, brought her back again,
and seated her in her own place with her hair rufled, her cheeks blushing,
Messalina.
and her eyes troubled. Messalina the wife of Claudius Tibezius, first
privately, then publicly prostituted her self to many, insomuch, that custom
grew to that habit, that such as she affected, and either for modesties sake or
for fear, durst not enter into her embraces, by some stratagem or other, she
caused to be murdered (as Claudian says) her insatiat desires yet stretched
further, making choice of the most noble virgins and matrons of Rome, whom she
either persuaded or compelled to be companions with her in her adulteries. She
frequented common brothel houses, trying the abilities of many choice and able
young men by turns, from whence (it is said of her) she returned wearied, but
not satisfied: if any m^n refused her embraces, her revenge stretched not only
to him, but unto all his family. And to crown her libidinous actions, it is
proved of her, that in the act of lust, she contended with a mercenary and
common strumpet, which in that kind should have the priority, and that the
Empress in the 25 action became victor. Of her, Pliny, Iuvenal, and Sex.
Aurelius, speaks more at large; a strange patience it was in an Emperor to
suffer this. A Country fellow and his mistress.
I rather commend that penurious fellow, who having married a young wife, and
keeping her short both in liberty and diet, she cast her eyes upon a plain
Country fellow, one of her servants, and in short time grew with child; the old
churl mistrusting his own weakness, being as much indebted to his belly, as
to his servants for their wages (for his parsimony made (...) g^d to both) and
now fearing a further charge would come upon him, he got a warrant to bring
them both before a Justice. They being convented, and he having made his case
known, the Gentlewoman being asked upon diverse interrogatives, modestly excused
her self, but not so cleanly, but that the complaint sounded in some sort
just, and the case apparent. The Country fellow was next called in question, to
whom the justice with an austere countenance, thus spoke, Syria, (...), resolve
me truly (says he) and it shall be the better for thee, Have thou got this
woman with child, yea or no? to whom the plain fellow thus bluntly answered,
Yes Sir, I think I have; how (quoth the justice) thou impudent and bawdy knave,
show me what reason thou had to get thy mistress with child; to whom the
fellow replied, I have served my master (a very hard man) so many years, and I
never got any thing else in his service. How this business was compounded I
know not certainly, only of this I am assured, that our English women are more
courteous of their bodies, then bloody of their minds. Fabia.
Such was not Roman Fabia, who as Plutarch in his Parallels relates, was the
wife of Fabius Fabricanus, and gave her self up to a young Gentleman of Rome
called Petroniu^ Valentianus, by whose counsel she after slew her husband,
that they might more freely enjoy their luxuries. Salust and Valerius Maximus
both report of Aurelia Oristilla, who suffered her self to be corrupted by
Catalin (against whom Cicero made many eloquent Orations) who the freelier to
enjoy her bed, caused her son to be poisoned. Comparable to Fabia, Thimen.
saving in murder, was Thimen the wife of King of Agis, who forsaking the
lawful bed of her husband, suffered her self to be vitiated by Alcibiades of
Athens. Martial in his Epigrams writes of one Nevina, Nevina.
who going chaste to the Bath, returned thence an adulteress: of her thus
speaking: Incidit in Flammam, veneremque secula relicto
Conjuge: Penelope venit, abitque Helena.
Which is thus Englished.
She fell in fire, and followed lust,
Her husband quite rejected,
She thither came Penelope chaste,
Went Hellen thence detected.
Paula, Thelesina, Proculina, Lectoria, Gellia, all these are by some authors
branded for the like inchastities.

An Egyptian Lady.
I Have heard of a young Citizen, A young Citizens wife.
who having married a pretty wanton l^sse (and as young folk love to be
dallying one with another) set her upon his knee, and sporting with her, and
pointing one of his fingers at her face, now my little rogue (says he) I could
put out one of thine eyes: to whom with her two longest fingers stretched forth
right, and aiming at him in the like fashion, she thus answered: If with one
finger thou put out one of mine eyes, with these two I will put out both yours.
This was but wantonness betwixt them, and appeared better in their action,
then in my expression: and though I speak of a blind King, he lost not his eyes
that way. Herodotus relates, that after the death of Sesostris King of Egypt,
his son Pher^nes succeeded in the Kingdom, who not long after his attaining to
the principality, was deprived of his sight: The reason whereof some yield to
be this, Thinking to pass the river Nilus, either by inundations, or the force
of the winds, the waters were driven so far back, that they were flowed
eighteen cubits above their wonted compass, at which the King enraged, shot an
arrow into the river, as if he would have wounded the channel. Whether the
gods took this in contempt, or the Genius of the river was enraged, is
uncertain: but most sure it is, that not long after he lost all the use of
sight, and in that darkness remained for the space of ten years. After which
time (in great melancholy) expired, he received this comfort from the Oracle,
which was then in the City Butis, That if he washed his eyes in the urine of a
woman who had been married a full twelve month, and in that time had in no
ways falsified in her own desires, nor derogated from the honor of her
husband, he should then assuredly receive his sight. At which news being much
rejoiced, and presuming both of certain and sudden cure, he first sent for his
wife and Qu. and made proof of her pore distillation, but all in vain; he sent
next for all the great Ladies of the Court, and one after one, washed his eyes
in their water, but still they smarted the more, yet he saw no whit the better;
but at length when he was almost in despair, he happened upon one pure and chaste
Lady, A strange cure.
by whose virtue his sight was restored, and he plainly cured: who after he had
better considered with himself, caused his wife withal those Ladies (saving
she only by whose temperance and chastity, he had reobtained the benefit of the
Sun) to be assembled into one City, pretending there to feast them honorably
for joy o^ his late recovery. Who were no sooner assembled at the place called
Rubra Gleba, apparelled in all their best jewels and chiefest ornaments, but
commanding the City gates to be shut upon them, caused the City to be set on
fire, and sacrificed all these adulteresses as in one funeral pile, reserving
only that Lady of whose loialty the Oracle had given sufficient testimony, whom
he made the partaker of his bed and Kingdom. I wish there were not so many in
these times, whose waters if they were truly cast by the doctors, would not
rather by their pollution put out the eyes quite, then with their clearness
and purity, minister to them any help at all.

Laodice.
JVstine in his 37. book of History, speaks of this Laodice, the wife and
sister to Mithridates King of Pontus: After whose many victories, as having
overthrown the Scythians and put them to flight, those who had before defeated
Zopyron, a great Captain of Alexanders army, which consisted of thirty thousand
of his best soldiers, the same that overcame Cyrus in battle with an army of
two hundred thousand, with those that had affronted and beaten King Philip in
many oppositions, being fortunately and with great happiness still attended,
by which he more and more flourisht in power, and increased in majesty. In
this height of fortune, as never having known any disaster, having bestowed
some time in managing the affairs of Pontus, and next such places as he
occupied in Macedonia; he privately then retired himself into Asia, where he
took view of the situation of those defenced Cities, and this without the
jealousy or suspicion of any. From thence he removed himself into Bythinia,
proposing in his own imaginations, as if he were already Lord of all. After
this long retirement he came into his own Kingdom, where by reason of his
absence, it was rumored and given out for truth, that he was dead. At his
arrival he first gave a loving and friendly visitation to his wife and sister,
Laudice, who had not long before in that vacancy, brought him a young son. But
in this great joy and solemnity made for his welcome, he was in great danger of
poison: for Laodice supposing (it seems) Mithridates to be dead as it before
had been reported (and therefore safe enough) had prostituted her self to
diverse of her servants and subjects: An unnatural wife.
and now fearing the discovery of her adultery she thought to shadow a mighty
fault with a greater mischief, and therefore provided this poisoned draught
for his welcome: But the King having intelligence thereof by one of her
handmaids, who deceived her in her trust, expiated the treason with the blood
of all the conspirators. I read of another Laodice, the wife of Ariarythres,
the King of Cappadocia, who having six hopeful sons by her husband, poisoned
five of them, after she had before given him his last infectious draught; the
youngest was miraculously preserved from the like fate, who after her decease
(for the people punished her cruelty with death) succeeded in the Kingdom. It
is disputed in the Greek Commentaries, by what reason or remedy, affection once
so devilishly settled in the breast or heart of a woman, may be a^ered or
removed; or by what confection adulterous appetite, once lodged and kindled in
the bosom, may be extinguished. The Magicians have delivered it to be a thing
possible; so likewise Cadmus Milesius, who amongst other monuments of history,
writ certain tractates concerning the abolishing of love (for so it is
remembered by Suidas in his collections.) And therefore I would invite all women
of corrupted breasts, to the reading of this brief discourse following. A
remarkable example was that of Faustina, Faustina ^ife to Marcus Philosophus.
a noble and illustrious Lady, who though she were the daughter of Antonius
Pius the Emperor, and wife to Marcus Philosophus, notwithstanding her fathers
majesty, and her husbands honor, was so besotted upon a Gladiator or common
fencer, that her affection was almost grown to frenzy: for which strange
disease, as strange a remedy was devised. The Emperor perceiving this
distraction, still to grow more and more upon his daughter, consulted with the
Chaldeans and Mathematicians in so desperate a case, what was best to be done:
after long consideration it was concluded amongst them, that there was but only
one way left open to her recovery, and that was, to cause the fencer to be
slain; which done, to give her a full cup of his lukewarm blood, which having
drunk off, to go instantly to bed to her husband. This was accordingly done,
and she cured of her contagious disease. The birth of Commodus.
That night was (as they sad) begot Antoninus Commodus, who after succeeded him
in the Empire, who in his government did so afflict the Commonweal, and
trouble the Theater with fensing and prizes, and many other bloody butcheries,
that he much better deserved the name of Gladiator, then Emperor. This that I
have related, Julius Capitolinus writes to Caesar Dioclesianus. Were all our
dissolute matrons to be cured by the like Physic, there would (no question) be
amongst men less offenders, and among women fewer patients that complained of
sick stomachs.

Phaedima.
CAmbyses having before unnaturally slain his brother Smerdis, by the hands of
his best trusted friend Praxaspes: but after the death of the King (for the
horridness of the fact) the Regicide not daring to avouch the deed to the
people, A notable Imopster.
lest it might prejudice his own safety; one Smerdis a Magician (whose ears
Cambises had before caused to be cut off) took this advantage to aspire to the
Kingdom: and being somewhat like in favor to the murdered Princes, who was by
the Soldiers generally believed to live) it purchased him so many abettors
(such as were deluded with his impostures) that he was generally saluted and
crowned Emperor. This was done whilst the greatest part of the Nobility were
absent, and none since admitted into the Palace, much less into the presence,
lest the Magician might be unvizarded, and the deceit made palpable. The
greater fears and doubts still invironing the Princes, because Praxaspes not
daring to justify the murder, kept it still locked in his own breast. The
Magician in this interim, was not only possessed of all the Kings Palaces and
treasures, but he enjoied all his wives and concubines; amongst which was a
beautiful Lady called Phaedima, Phaedima.
the daughter of Otanes, a man of great power amongst the Persians. This Lady
first (of all the rest) most indeared to Cambyses, and now since to the
counterfeit Smerdu, Otanes apprehends to be the first instrument, by which to
discover the truth: He therefore by a secret messenger sends to his daughter,
to know by whom she nightly lay, whether with Smerdis the son of Cyrus, or
with some other: to whom she answered, that it was altogether unknown to her
who was her bedfellow, because she yet had neither seen Smerdis the son of
Cyrus, nor that man (whatsoever he was) into whose embraces she was commanded.
He then sent her word, that if she her self could not come to the sight of
him, to demand of Atossa the daughter of Cyrus, and brother to Smerdis; who
doubtless could decipher him in every true lineament. To which the daughter
returns him, That she was separated both from the society and sight of Atossa,
for this man whosoever he is, as soon as ever he had possessed himself of the
Empire, commanded all the women into several lodgings, neither could they have
any discourse or intercourse at all together. This answer made Otanes the more
and more suspicious, and desirous with any danger to find out the truth, he
adventured a third message to Phaedima to this purpose: It behooves you (O
daughter) being descended from noble ancestors, to undergo any hazard,
especially at the request of your father, when it aims at the general good of
the Commonweal or Kingdom; if that impostor be not Smerdu the brother of
Cambyses (as I much fear) it becomes him neither to prostitute and defile your
body, nor to mock and abuse the whole estate of Persia unpunished: therefore I
charged you as you tender my love, your own honor, and the Empires weal,
that the next night when you are called unto his bed, you watch the time when
he is soundliest asleep, and then with your fingers gently feel both the sides
of his head; if thou perceivest him to have both his ears, presume then thou
lodgest by the side of Smerdis the son of Cyrus, but if on the contrary thou
find his cors wanting, then thou lie in the bosom of Smerdis, that base
Magician. To this she replied by letter, Though I truly apprehend the danger,
should I be taken seeking of such things as he perhaps knows wanting (which
can be no less then death) yet for your love and the common good, I will
undergo the peril: and with this brief answer gave satisfaction to her
father. But greater content he received from her, when having discovered and
laid open whatsoever her father suspected, she sent him a faithful relation of
every circumstance. ^^^ceit discovered.
These things discovered by Phaedima, Olanes makes a conjuration amongst the
Princes, all vowing the supplantation of this usurper: who in the interim, the
more to confirm the people in their error, he sent to Praxaspes, promising him
honors and treasures, but to pronounce him once more before the people to be
the true and legitimate heir. This charge Praxaspes undertakes, the multitude
from all parts of the City were by the Magi assembled, and he mounted unto the
top of an high Turret the better to be heard, silence being made, and attention
prepared, Praxaspes begins his oration, in which he remembers all the noble
acts of Cyrus, with the dignity of his blood and progeny: and passing over
Cambyses to come to speak of his brother Smerdis (contrary to the expectation
of the Magician) with tears began to commemorate the death of the Prince,
murdered and made away by his unfortunate hand. Then told them whom in his
stead they had voiced into the sacred Empire; namely, a groom, and one of low
and base descent, one that for cozenages and forgeries had lost his ears, a
Magician, a Conjurer, one that had long deluded them with his devilish
sorceries, a slave not worthy at all to live, much less to reign and govern so
noble a people: and as a further confirmation, that dying men speak true, these
words were no sooner ended, but he casts himself off from the top of the
Turret, and slew himself. After this, the Palace was assaulted by the
Princess, the imposter slain, and all his adherents put to massacre: Of the
sequel of the history, the succession of Darius, etc. you may further read in
Herodotus. But concerning Phaedima, only for whose sake I have introduced the
rest, I know not whether I have indirectly brought her into this catalogue,
because she was so a noble a means of so notable a discovery: yet considering
she was one of the wives of Cambyses, and he being dead, so suddenly changing
her affection to another; and after being injoied by him (of what condition
soever) to betray him; all these circumstances considered, I give her free
liberty to be ranked amongst the rest.

Begum, Queen of Persia.
ABdilcherai, a brave and valiant Prince of Tartaria, taken prisoner by
Emirhamze Mirize eldest son to the King of Persia, in a battle betwixt the
Persians and Tartarians, was sent to the King into Casbia; where his captivity
in regard of his birth and valor was so easy, that he rather seemed a de^ison
then a forreiner, Adultery:
a Prince of the blood then a Captive: he not long so journed there, but he
insinuated himself into the love of the Queen Begum, wife to the then King of
Persia, who spent their time together in such public dalliance (not able to
contain themselves within the bounds of any lawful modesty (that their
familiarity grew almost into a byword, as far as his just taxation, the Queens
dishonor and the Kings scorn; insomuch, that both Court and City made them not
only their argument of discourse, but theme of table talk. Yet in all this
banding of their reputation, and the Kings infamy, nothing ever came within the
compass of his ear, knowledge or suspicion: insomuch, that seeing him to be so
well a featured Gentleman, knowing the Tartar to be so brave a soldier, and
approving him to be so complete a Courtier; and withal acknowledging from what
high lineage, he was descended (as boasting himself to be the brother of the
great Tartar Chan* The King of Persia therefore determined to marry him to his
daughter, hoping by that means to unite such a league, and confirm such an
amity betwixt the Tartarian Precopenses and himself, that they might not only
deny all aid and assistance to Amurath the third of that name, and then the
sixth Emperor of the Turks; but also, if need were, or should any future
discontent arise, oppose him in hostility. But this politic purpose of the
Kings, arriving almost at the wished period, seemed so distasteful to the
Sultans of Casbia, that they first attempted by arguments and reasons to divert
the King from this intended match: but finding themselves no ways likely to
prevail, to make the King see with what errors he was maskt, and with what
sorceries deluded, They diligently awaited when in the absence of the King, the
T^^ta^ and the Queen Begum kept their accustomed appointment; of which the
Sultans having notice, they entered that part of the Palace, brake open the
doors, and rushed into the Queens bedchamber, where finding Abdilcherai in
suspicious conference with the Queen, they slew him with their Sables, and
after cutting off his privy parts, most barbarously thrust them into his mouth,
and after (as some report) slew the Queen. Though this history show great
remisness in the King, most sure I am, it was too presumptive an insolence in
the subject.

To this Persian Queen, The wife of Otho the 3.
I will join the wife of Otho the third Emperor of that name. This lustful
Lady (as Polycronicon makes mention) was of somewhat a contrary disposition
with the former: For neglecting the pride and gallantry of the Court, she cast
her eyes upon an homely hushand; better supplied, it seems, with the lineaments
of nature, then the ornaments of art, but with an honesty of mind exceeding
both: for when this libidinous Lady could by no tempting allurements abroad,
nor fitting opportunity sorted private, insinuate with him, ei^sie^ to violate
his allegiance to his Prince, or corrupt his own virtue; her former affection
turned unto such rage and malice, that she caused him to be accused of a
capital crime, convicted and executed. But the plain honest man knowing her
spleen, and his own innocence, he called his wife to him at the instant, when
his head was to be cut off: and besought her as she ever tendered his former
love (which toward her he had kept inviolate) to meditate upon some course or
other by which his guiltless and unmerited death might be made manifest to the
world: which she with much sorrow and many tears having promised, he gently
submitted to his fa^e, and his body was delivered to the charge of his widow.
Within few days after, the Emperor kept a day solemn, in which his custom
was, bring mounted upon his ^oia^ll throne, to examine the causes of the
fatherless and widows, and to (...) where^n they were oppressed, and by
whom, and in person to do them justice. Among the rest came this injured
widow, and brings her husbands head in her hand, humbly kneeling before the
Emperors Throne, demanding of him, What that inhumane wretch deserved, who had
caused an innocent man to be put to death? to whom the Emperor replied,
Produce that man before the judgment seat, and as I am royal he shall
assuredly lose his head. To whom she answered, Thou art that man (O Emperor)
for by thy power and authority this murder was committed* and for an infallible
testimony, that this poor husband of mine perished in his innocence, command red
hot irons to be brought into this place, over which if I pass bare footed and
without any damage, presume he was then as much injured in his death, as I am
now made miserable in his loss. The irons being brought, and her own
innocence, together with her husbands being made both apparent, the Emperor
before all his nobility, submitted himself to her sentence. But at the
intercession of the Bishop, the woman limited him certain days in which he
might find out the murder, he first demanded ten days, after eight, then
seven, and last six, in which time by inquiry and curious examinations, he
found his wife to be the sole delinquent; for which she was brought to the bar,
sentenced, and after burned. Noble justice
This done, Otho to recompense the woman for the loss of her husband, gave her
four Castles and Towns in the Bishopric of Beynensis, which still bear name
according to the limit of those days: First the Tenth, second the Eight, third
the Seventh, fourth the Sixth.

Olimpias.
OThas of Persia, having defeated Nectenabus, King of Egypt, and expelled him
from his Kingdom; he, the better to secure himself from the Sophies tyranny,
shaved his head and disguising himself, with all such jewels as he could
conveniently carry about him, conveied himself into Macedonia: the authors of
this history, a^e, Vincentius and Trevisa. There (as they say) he lived as a
Chalde^n or Cabalist, where by his Negromancie and Art Magic^, he wrought
himself so deeply into the breast of Olympias, that taking the opportunity
whilst Philip was abroad in his foreign expeditions, he lay with her in the
shape of Jupiter Hammon, The birth of Alexander
and begot Alexander the Great. After the Queens conception, many fowls used
to fly about Philip when he was busied in his wars; amongst others, there was
a Hen that as he sat in his Tent, flew up into his lap, and there laid an egg,
which done, she cackling flew away; The King rising up hastily, cast it upon
the ground and brake it, when suddenly a young Dragon was seen to leap out of
the shel, and creeping round about it* and making offer to enter therein
again, died ere it had quite compassed it. The King at this prodigy being
sta^^led, called all his Astrologers together, demanding of one Antiphon the
noblest Artist amongst them, What the omen might be of that wonder? who
answered him, That his wife Olympias was great with ason, whose conquests
should fill the world with a stonishment, aiming to compass the whole universe
but should die before he could reduce it into one enti^e Monarchy; the Dragon
being the (...) of a ^oiall conqueror, and the round ov^ll circum^ erence, the
symbol of the world. With this answer Philip was satisfied. When the time came
of Olympias her travel, there were earth^qua^es, lightnings, and thunders, as
if the last dissolution had been then p^esent, when were seen two Eagles
pearched upon the top of the Palace, presaging the two great Empires of Europe
and Asia. Young Alexander being grown toward manhood, it happened that walking
abroad with Necten^bus, in the presence of his father Philip, the young Prince
requested the Astrologian to instruct him in his art. To whom Nectenabus
answered, that with all willingness he would; and coming near a deep pit,
Alexander thrust the Magician headlong into that descent, by which sudden fall
he was wounded to death: yet Nectebanus calling to the Prince, demanded for
what cause he had done him such outrage? W^o answered, I did it by reason of
thy art, for ignoble it were in a Prince to study those vain scien^es, by which
men will undertake to predict other men's fates, when they have nor the skill to
prevent their own. To whom Necten^bus answered, Yes, Alexander, I calculated
mine own destiny, by which I knew I should be slain by mine own natural son.
To whom the Prince in derision thus spoke; Bas^ Negromancer, how can thou be
my father, seeing that to the mighty King Philip here present, I owe all
fili^ll duty and obedience? to whom Nectenabus rehearsed all the circumstances
(before related) from the beginning, and as he concluded his speech so ended
his life. How the husband upon this information behaved himself toward his
wife, or the son to his mother, I am not certain, this I presume, it was a kind
of needful policy in both, the one to conceal his C^coldry, the other his
Bastardy: so much of Olympias, concerning the birth of her son Al^xander. I
will proceed a little further to speak of her remarkable death, being as
majestically glorious* as the process of her life was in many passages
thereof, worthily infamous. Justine in his history relates thus, Lib. 14.
Olympias the wife of Philip, and mother of Alexander the Great, coming from
Epirus unto Macedonia, was followed by Aeac^d^^ King of the Molossians, but
finding her self to be prohibited that C^untry, By Euridice and King Aristaeus.
whether annimated by the memory of her husband, encouraged with the greatness
of her son, or moved with the nature of the aff^ont and injury, as she received
it, I am not certain, but she assembled unto her all the forces of Macedoni^,
by whose power and her command, they were both sla^^. About seven years after
Alexander was possessed of the Kingdom: neither did Olympias reign long after,
for when the murde^^ of many P^i^ces had been by her committed, rather after an
eff^minate then ^egall manner it converted the favor of the multitude, into an
irreconcilable hatred, which ^ea^ing, and having withal intelligence of the
approach of Cassander (now altogether distrusting the fidelity of her own
Countrymen) she with her sons wife Roxana, and her Nephew young Hercules,
retired into a City called (...) or Pictua^; in this almost forsaken society,
were Deidamia daughter to King Aeacidus, Thessalonice her own daught^^ in law,
famous in her father King Philip's memory with dive^^ other Princely matrons, a
small train attending upon them ^ather for show and state, then either use or
profit. These things being in order related to Cassander, he with all speed
possible hastens toward the City Pictua, and invests himself before it,
compassing the place with an invincible siege. Olympias being now oppressed
both with sword and tamine, besides all the inconveniences depending upon a
long and tedious war, treated upon conditions, in which her ^a^e conduct, with
her trains, being comprehended, she was willing to submit her self into the
hands of the conqueror: at whose mercy, whilst her wavering fortunes yet
stood, Cassander convents the whole multitude, and in a public oration,
desires to be counseled by them how to dispose of the Queen; having before
suborned the parents of such whose children she had caused to be murdered, who
in sad and funeral habits, should accuse the cruelty and inhumanity of
Olympias. Their tears made such a passionate impression in the breasts of the
Macedonians, that with loud acclamations they doomed her to present slaughter,
most unnaturally forgetting that both by Philip her husband, and Alexander her
son, their lives and fortunes were not only safe amongst their neighbor
nations, but they were also possessed of a foreign Empire, and (...) from
Provinces, (...) their times scarce heard of, but altogether unknown. Now the
Queen perceiving armed men make toward her, and approach her to the same
purpose, both with resolution and obstinacy, she, att^^ed in a Princely and
majestic habit, and leaning in state upon the shoulders of two of her most
beautiful handmaids, gave them a willing, and undanted meeting: which the
soldiers seeing, and calling to mind her former state, beholding her present
majesty, and not forgetting her royal offspring, illustrated with the names of
so many successive Kings, they stood still amazed, without offering her any
(...) violence: til others sent thither by the command of Cass^nder, thoroughly
pierced her with their weapons, which she (...) with such constancy, that she
neither offe^^d (...) avoid their wounds, or express (...) by any (...)
clamor, but after the man^^ (...) men, submitted her self to (...) her (...),
(...)
expressing the invincible spirit (...) Alexander, in which she likewise showed
a singu^^r (...), for with her disheveled hair she shadowed her (...), le^t in
s^rugling between life and death, it might (...) and with her garments covered
her legs and (...) lest any thing abo^^ her might be found uncomely. (...)
Cassander took to wife Thessalonice the the daugh^^^ (...) Aridaeus, causing
the son of Alexander with his (...) Roxane, to be keep prisoners in a ^ower
called ^^^^phipositana.

(...).
ABout the time (...) the Huns came (...) into Italy, and expoiled the
Long^hards, (...) laid (...) to the City (...), and in a hot assault having
slain the Duke Oysulphus, his wife ((...) R^milda) (...) the Town defensible,
bravely and resolutely maintained it against the enemy. But as Cacana King of
the Anes approached near unto the walls, encouraging his soldiers to hang up
their scaling ladders and enter; Romilda at the same time looking from a
Citadel, cast her eye upon the King, who as he seemed unto her, with wondrous
dexterity behaved himself, and with an extraordinary grace became his arms.
This liking grew into an ardency in love, for she that at first but allowed of
his presence, now was affected to his person: insomuch, that in the most fierce
assaults, though her self danger of their crosse-bows and slings, she thought
within the secure, so she had the King her object. This fire was already
kindled in her breast, which nothing could qualify, insomuch, that impatient
of all delay, she sent unto her public enemy private messengers, That if it
pleased the King (being as she understood a bachelor) to accept her as his
bride, she would without further opposition, surrender up the Town peaceably
into his hands: these conditions are first debated, next concluded, and lastly
confirmed by oath on both sides. The Town is yielded up, and Cacana according
to his promise takes Romilda to wife, but first he makes spoil of the Town,
kills many, and leads the rest captive. The first night he bedded with his new
reconciled bride, but in the morning abandoned her utterly, commanding twelve
Huns, and those of the basest of his soldiers, one after another to prostitute
her by turns: that done, he caused a sharp stake to be placed in the middle of
the field, A miserable death.
and pitched her naked body upon the top thereof, which entering through the
same made a miserable end of her life, at which sight the Tyrant laughing said,
Such a husband best becomes so merciless an harlot. This was the miserable end
(as Polycronicon says) of Romilda. But better it happened to her two beautiful
and chaste daughters, A rare example of chastity.
who fearing the outrage of the lustful and intemperate soldiers, took
purrified flesh of chickens and colts, and hid it raw betwixt their breasts:
the soldiers approaching them, took them to be diseased, as not able to come
near them by reason of the smell; by which means they preserved their honors
for the present, and they for their virtues sake were after bestowed upon
Gentlemen of noble quality. The ^ame Author puts me in mind of another
Adulteress, who to (...) guilt of inchastity, added the bloody sin of murder.
Our modern Chroniclers remember us of one Ethelburga, Ethelburga.
daughter to King O^^a, and wife to Brithricus King of the West Saxons, who
aiming at nothing so much as her own libidinous delights, that she might the
more freely and securely enjoy them, by many sundry treasons conspired the
death of her husband: but having made many attempts, and not prevailing in any,
the devil (to whom she was a constant votaresse) so far prevailed with her,
that she never gave over her dammable purpose, til she had not only dispatched
him of life by poison, but was the death also of a noble young Gentleman, the
chief favorite of the King, and one whom in all his designs he most trusted.
These mischiefs done, and fearing to be questioned about them, because she had
incurred a general suspicion, she packt up her choicest jewels, and with a
trusty squire of hers, one that had been an agent in all her former
brothelries, fled into France, where by her counterfeit tears and womanish
dissimulations, she so far insinuated into the Kings breast, that the wrinckles
of all suggestions were cleared, and she freely admitted into the Kings Court,
and by degrees into his especial favor: so rich were her jewels, so gorgeous
her attire, so tempting her beauty being now in her prime, and withal so
cunning and deceitful her behavior; that all these agreeing together, not
only bated the hearts of the Courtiers, but attracting the eyes of the great
Majesty it self, insomuch, that the King sporting with her in a great Bay
window, the Prince his son then standing by him, he merrily demanded of her,
If she were instantly to make election of a husband, whether she would choose
him or his son? to whom she rashly answered, That of the two she would make
choice of his son. The King at this somewhat moved, and observing in her a
lightness of behavior, which his blind affection would not suffer him before
to look into, thus replied, Had thou made election of me, I had possessed thee
of my son, but in choosing him, thou shall enjoy neither. So turning from her,
commanded her to be stripped out of her jewels and gay ornaments, and presently
to he shriven and sent to a Monastery: where she had not long been cloistered,
but to her own infamy, and the disgrace of the religious house, she was
deprehended in the dissolute embraces of a wanton and lewd fellow, for which
she was turned out of the cloister, and after died in great poverty and misery.
In memory of whom there was a law established amongst the West Saxons, which
disabled all the Kings wives after her, either to be dignified with the name of
Queen, or upon any occasion to sit with him on his regal throne: yet this
woman though she died poorly, yet died (as it is said) penitently, therefore
methinks I hear her leave this or the like memory behind her.

En Epitaph upon Ethelburga Queen of the West Saxons.

I was, I am not; smiled, that since did weep;
Labored, that rest; I waked, that now must sleep;
I played, I play not; sung, that now am still;
Saw, that am blind; I would, that have no will.
I fed that, which feeds worms; I stood, I fell;
I bad God save you, that now bid farewell.
I felt, I feel not; followed, was pursued;
I warred, have peace; I conquered am subdued.
I moved, want motion; I was stiff, that bow
Below the earth; then something, nothing now.
I caught, am caught; I traveled, here I lie;
Lived to the world, that to the world now die.
This melancholy is not amiss to season with a little mirth. A merry accident.
In some other Country it was, for I presume ours affoords none such, but a
common huswife there was, who making no conscience of spouse-breach, or to
vitiate her lawful sheets, had enterteined into her society a swaggering
companion, such a one as we commonly call a Roaring boy. This lad of metal,
who sildome went with fewer weapons about him then were able to set up a
trade-falne cutler, had (to maintain his mistresses expenses and his own riots)
committed a robbery, and likewise done a murder, and being apprehended for the
fact, judged, condemned, and (according to the law in that case provided)
hanged in chains: the gibbet was set near to the common hi^-way, and some miles
distant from the City, where this sweet Gentlewoman with her husband then
inhabited, who because in regard of the common fame that went upon them, she
durst neither give her Love visitation in prison, be at his arraignment, or
public execution, her purpose was (as affection that breeds madness, may
easily beget boldness) unknown to her husband or any other neighbor, to walk
in the melancholy evening, and to take her last leave of him at the gallows.
Imagine the night came on, and she on her journie. It happened at the same time,
a traveller being a footman, whose journey was intended toward the Town, as
purposing to lodge there that night; but being alone, and darkness overtaking
him, he grew doubtful of the way, and fearful of robbing, therefore he
retired himself out of the road, and lay close under the gibber, still
listening if any passenger went by to direct him in the way, or secure him by
his company: as he was in this deep meditation, the woman arrives at the place,
and not able to contain her passion, breaks out into this ecstasy, And must I
needs then go home again without thee? at which words the traveller starting up
in have. No by no means (quoth he) I shall be glad of your company; and with
what speed he can makes toward her; away runs the woman, thinking her sweet
heart had leap^ down from the gibbet and followed her, after speeds the man as
loath to be destitute of company, still crying, Stay for me, stay for me: but
the faster he called, the faster she ran, fear added to both their have, down
they tumbled often, but as quickly they were up again, still she fled, still he
pursued But contrary was the issue of their fears, for she never looked back
till she came to her own house, where finding the doors open, and her husband
set at supper, for have tumbled him and his stool down one way, and the table
and meat another: he rising with much ado, asked what the pox she ailed, and if
she brought the devil in with her at her tail? long it was ere she could make
him any answer, or come to her right senses: how she excused it I knew not, the
traveller when he found himself near the City, and saw light, slackned his
pace, and went quietly to his Inn, whether they ever met after to reconcile
their mistake, or no, I know not, neither is it much pertinent to enquire.

A Modern History of an Adulteress.
THE King of Scythia observing a man to go still naked (whereas the coldness
of the clime enforces them to enquire after fables, Aelian l. 7.
furs, and the warmest garments can be found) in a violent and continued snow,
meeting him, demanded of him whether he were not cold? Of whom the fellow asked
another question, Whether his forehead were cold or not: neither can I be cold
(O King replied he) where custom has made me all forehead. This may aptly
allude to many as well in these our days, as the former, in whom sin has
begot such a habit, that where it once possesses it self, it compels all the
other powers and affections of the body and mind to become ministers and
vassals; for sin wheresoever it does usurp, does tyrannize, and as we see the
dier when he would stain white cloth, and put it into another hew, does it
with a small mixture, being nothing comparable either in weight or quantity to
the stuff he would have changed; so be the mind never so chaste, or the body of
never so white and unblemished a purity: yet if the devil once come to put in
his ingredients, with great facility and easiness he will change the whole
piece into his own color and complexion, and of this we have both daily and
lamentable experience: and therefore custom is called a second nature; for
alas, how easily we see boldness grow to impudence, and satiety into surfeit.
This puts me in mind of seven short questions asked of the seven wise men of
Greece, and by them as briefly answered: What Is the best thing in man? Bias
Prianaeus.
the mind that is pure.
What Is worst? A man within himself unsure.
Who Is rich? Pittacus*
He that naught covets. What Is he poor?
The covetous man that starves amids his store. Matilaenus.

Woman's chief beauty what? Cl^obulu^.
Chaste life is such:
Who Is chaste? Lindius.
She only whom no fame dares touch.
Who Is wise? Pe^tand^.
The man that can but acts no ill.
The fool? Corint^^*
That cannot, but intends it still.
They that can contain themselves within these few prescriptions, (...)
may undoubtedly store up a good name to themselfs, and honor to their
posterity: (...)
But what the neglect of those may grow unto, L^cedem^.
I will in some sort illustrate unto you in a modern History, Thales M^^eliu^.
lately happening, and in mine own knowledge. A true discourse.
An ancient Gentleman, as well grown in reputation as years, and in those parts
where he lived, having purchased to himself a general respect for both,
married a beautiful young Gentlewoman of good parts and parentage: But having
no issue by her, he selected unto his acquaintance, a Noble young Gentleman,
one that had traveled France, Italy, Spain, and had been at the Sepulcher;
making that happy use of his travel, that he was able to discourse properly
and without affectation either of the situation of Cities, o^ the conditions
and customs of people; and in oneword, to give him his own deserved character,
there was nothing i^ him wanting that might become a perfect and a complete
Gentleman. This young man's father was a (...) and familiar neighbor to this
old man before spoken of, who had observed his modesty and courteous behavior
even from his infancy, and therefore was the more affected to his discourse and
company; his affection grew so far that he purposed to make him a piece of his
heir. Whilst they continued in this familiarity (and the young man still
frequented the house) the^^^ grew great acquaintance betwixt him and the
Gentlewoman: No marvel, for they had been both play-fellowes and
school-fellowes, and by reason of their parity in years, used through an
honest, yet a kind of suspected familiarity; insomuch that it grew to a
calumny, still passing from one man to another, it arrived (...) length to the
cars of the young man's father, who so^ted opportunity to talk with his son,
demanding of him how that fire was kindled, from whence this smoke grew; who,
notwithstanding many protestations of his own innocence, in which he derogated
nothing from truth, was charged by his father (to avoid all rumor and
aspersion) to forbear the occasion and absent himself from the house, and this
he imposed him upon his blessing* To this the young man with great modesty
assented; as unwilling to contradict his fathers counsel, as to increase that
injurious suspicion concerning the Gentlewomans honor, which was undeservedly
called in question. It is to be understood, that many friendly and modest
courtesies had past betwixt this young couple, insomuch, that having all
liberty granted both of society and discourse, he pressed her upon a time so far
to know if it should please God to call away her husband (being very old and by
the course of nature not likely to live long) how she purposed to dispose of
her self. To whom she protested, that though she wished her aged husband all
along life and happiness, yet if it pleased the higher powers to lay the cross
of widdowhood upon her, she would, if he so pleased, confer upon him her youth,
her fortunes, and whatsoever she was endowed with, before any man living, if it
pleased him to accept of them, and this she bound with an oath: This the
Gentleman (betwixt honoring and loving her) could not choose but take wondrous
kindly at her hands, and vowed to her the like. The conditions on both sides
were accepted, only as she had bound her self by one oath, she imposed upon
him another, namely, that till that time of her widdowhood, he should neither
associate himself privately, converse nor contract matrimony with any woman
whatsoever. These things thus accorded betwixt them, yet the fathers
conjurations so far prevailed with the sons obedience, that notwithstanding
many urgent and important messages from the good old man the husband (who
wondered what distaste might breed his sudden discontinuance, as suspecting
nothing from either) he still excused his absence and forbore the house. It
happened that some months after riding to a market Town not far off, equally
distant betwixt his own fathers house and the old gentleman's, to give a meeting
to some Gentlemen of the Country, by chance he happened upon a chambermaid that
belonged to his betro head mistreste, whom he well knew; he saluted her, and she
him, and after some complement past betwixt them, he asking how every body did
at home, and she on the other side wondering at his strangeness, telling him
how long he had been expected, and how much desired of all the house* these
things over he entreated her to drink a cup of wine, which the maid willingly
accepted. They being alone, and falling into discourse of many old passages
well known to them both, the young man began to speak how much he respected her
mistress, and how dea^ly tendered her honor: she on the other side began a
contrary discourse, as that for his own part she knew him to be a noble
Gentleman, and well parted, one whom her old master affected above al men;
proceeding, that she was not altogether ignorant what familiarities had past
betwixt him and her mistress, who only bore him fair outwardly and in show,
when another enjoied both her heart and body inwardly and in act* and that upon
her own knowledge; and to confirm he accusation, nominated the man (who was his
nearest and most familiar friend.) At this report the Gentleman was startled,
but better considering with himself, told her he thankt her for her love, but
could by no means believe her relation; first, by reason he knew her Ladies
breeding, and was confirmed in her known modesty and virtue, as having himself
made trial of both to the uttermost, having time, place and opportunity, all
things that might beget temptation. Lastly, for his friend, in all their
continual and daily conversation, he never perceived either familiar
discourse, wanton behavior, or so much as the least glance of eye to pass
suspitiously betwixt them. To which she answered, it was so much the more
cunningly carried; for her own part she had but done the office of a friend,
and so left him, but in a thousand strange cogitations: yet love persuading
above jealousy, he began to interate and call to mind, with what an outward
integrity she had still borne her self toward him, and with a purity by no
woman's art to be distembled. Next he bethought himself, that perhaps the maid
might be fallen in love with him, and by this calumny might seek to divert him
from the affection of her mistress; or else she had taken some displeasure
against her, and by this means thought to revenge her self. In the midst of
these apprehensions, or rather distractions, came another letter from the
husband, complaining of his absence, wondering at the cause, and urgently
desiring his company, though never so private, where he would reconcile
himself touching any unkindnesses that might be conceived, and withal resolve
him what he should trust to concerning some part of his lands. The Gentleman
still remembering his fathers charge, yet thought a little to dispense with it,
and writ back word (knowing every part of the house by reason of his long
frequenting it) That if he pleased to leave his garden door open at such a time
of the night, he would accept of such provision as he found, and be merry with
him for an hour or two, and give good reason for his unwilling discontinuance:
but thus provided, that neither wife, friend, nor servant (saving that one whom
he trusted with his message) might be acquainted with his coming in or going
out. This was concluded, the time of night appointed, and every thing
accordingly provided: They met, he old man gave him kind and freely
entertainment, seeming overjoied with his company, and demanding the reason of
his so great strangeness, He answered, that notwithstanding his own innocence,
and his wives approved Temperance, yet bad tongues had been busy to their
reproach, measuring them by their own corrupt inte^^ts, and therefore to avoid
all imputation whatsoever, his study was, by taking away the cause to prevent
the effect; his reason was approved, and the old man satisfied concerning both
their integrities. Time calls the old man to his bed, and the young Gentleman is
left to his rest, purposing to be gone early in the morning, before any of the
household should be awake or stirring. Being now alone and not able to sleep in
regard of a thousand distracted fancies that were pondering in his mind and
brain* he arose from his bed, and walking up and down the chamber, after some
meditation, as of her beauty, her vows, her protestation, her oaths, all
pleading together in behalf of her innocence so far prevailed with him, That
considering he was now in the same house, and that by reason of the old man's
age, they very often lay asunder, that he was acquainted with every
staire-case, and knew the ready way to her chamber; Love conquering all
suspicion, he purposed once more to visit the place where he had (but ever
honestly) (...) with her at all hours, and where their intended marriage was
by interchange of oaths at first confirmed. With this purpose stealing softly
up the stairs, and listening at the door before he would presume to knock, he
might hear a soft whispering, which sometimes growing louder, he might plainly
distinguish two voices (hers, and that Gentleman's his supposed friend, whom the
maid had had before nominated) where he might evidently understand more then
protestations pass betwixt them, namely, the mechall sin it self. At this
being beyond thought ext^si'd, scarce knowing how to contein himself for the
present, he remembered him of his sword in his chamber, whither he went
instantly with intent to return, and breaking open the door, to transpierce
them both in the adulterate act: but better judgment guiding him, considering
what murder was, and the baseness to become a personal executioner, withal
remembering her beauty, their often meetings, kisses and embraces; his heart
became too tender to destroy that goodly frame, in which nature had showed her
best of art, though the devil his worst of envy. Therefore he instantly made
himself ready, left the place, and without the knowledge of any man, or
discovering to any what had past, returned to his fathers: where pondering at
full with himself, the nature of his abuse (being beyond example) the
strictness of his oath, being not only debarred from marriage, but as it were
banished from the society of women; that she only reserved him as a stale or
shadow, whilst another carried away the substance; that she kept her self to
be his wife, and another whore; and that from all these no safe evasion could
be devised to come off toward her like a Gentleman, or toward God like a
Christian, all these injuries jointly considered, drove him into a sudden
melancholy, that melancholy into a doubtful sickness, and that sickness into
a dangerous distraction, insomuch, that his life was much feared, and he with
great difficulty recovered; but by the help of good Physicians being cured, and
the counsel of his best friends comforted, he at length gathered strength, and
prepared himself for a second travel, with purpose never more to revisite his
Country, where such an unnatural monster was bred. But before his departure,
the old man hearing what he intended, sent for him to his house to take of him
an unwilling leave: at the importunity of his own father he was forced to
accompany him thither, where he must of necessity take another view of his
betrothed mistress, and his treacherous friend. Dinner being past with his
much impatience, it was generally imputed to his loath to depart; when his
sadness was merely grounded upon her impudence. Parting growing on, she
singles him for a farewell, weeping in his bosom, wringing him by the hand,
beseeching him to have a care of his safety but especially of his vow and
promise, all which proceeded from such a (...) felt passion, as he almost began
to question, what in his own notion he knew to be infallible. But instead of a
reply he delivered her a letter, which he entreated her to vouchsafe to peruse
in his absence, in which his mind was fully signified. Imagine them with the
rest of the company divided, every one wishing the Gentleman good speed and
safe return: when she retyring her self, opens the letter, wherein was laid
open every passage concerning her lust, what he himself personally had heard
and known, the place where, the time when, the very words whispered, with every
undeniable circumstance, and these expressed with such passionate efficacy, in
which he labored to make known his injuries, and her treacheries (the sole
occasions of his voluntary exile;) all these (I say) were so feelingly set
down, that they struck her to the heart, insomuch, that she fell into a present
frenzy, and despairingly soon after died. Which news came to the Gentleman
before he had past Gravesend, by which he understood himself to be quite
released of all his intricate oaths and promises: whose noble disposition the
old Gentleman understanding, instated him in a great part of his land, which he
enjoies to this day, and in my opinion not altogether undeservedly.

A homely tale I am next to tell you, were it of one of our own Countrywomen,
The wife of Gengulphus.
I would conceal it, but since it concerns a French woman, out it shall to the
full, the rather for the authority of the author who affirms it. In the time
that King, Aethelwold reigned in Mercia, and Stephanus Paulus was Pope, one
Gengulphus a good and devout man lived in Burgoign, It is said that he bought a
well in France, and at his prayers it sunk there, and rose again in Burgoign.
But the greater miracle is behind (for thereby hangs a tale) This man sued a
divorce, and was separated from his wife (upon whom, the story vouchsafes no
name) she confederated with a Clerk (who was the adulterer) to take away his
life: he being dead (as (...) testat^s) there were many miracles seen about his
grave. This being told to his wife sitting at a banquet, and being in her
jollity, she fell into a loud laughter, and thus said. When my husband
Gengulphus does any such miracles, then do you all take notice that my tail
shall sing. These words (as my author says) were no sooner uttered, but
instantly there was heard from under her a filthy foul noise, and so often as she
spoke, so often it was heard, and that continued until her dying day.

The history of Italy remembers us of one Isabella the wife of Luchinus,
Isabella.
a Viscount, who was the strumpet of Vgolinus Gonsaga, Prince of Mantua,
Corumbona.
as also of Vittoria Corumbona* who slew her husband to enjoy the Duke
Brachiano. Friga was the wife of Othimus King of the Danes; Friga.
and as Saxo Grammaticus affirms, prostituted her body to one of her servants.
So Baptista Egnatius informs us of the Empress Zoe, Zoe.
who slew Romanus Arg^ropilus, that she might freelier enjoy the company of
Michael Paphlagon, who after succeeded in the Empire. Lewis, Seneshall of
Normandy, taking his wife in adultery, Carlotta.
(named Carlotta with Johannes Laverinus, slew them both in the act. Gregory
Turonensis nominates one Deuteria, Deuteria.
a beautiful French Lady, who was adulterated by King Theobert: as Agrippina
the mother of Nero, was corrupted by the Emperor Domitian. Macrobius speaks of
one Julia a Greekish woman, who being suspected of adultery by the great Orator
Demosthenes; Julia Grec^
his servant ^sopus who was conscious of all their meetings, could neither by
fair means be won, nor torments compelled to betray hers or his masters
secrets, till Demosthenes himself made of it a voluntary confession. Blondus,
Martinus, Platina, Robert Berns, and others, writ of Maud the Duchess of
L^rrein, who was after wife to a second husband. Aooron, Marquess of Esten,
from whom she was divorced by Pope Hilde^^and, betwixt whom and her it is said,
there were Furtivae Complexus, i. Embraces by stealth: she was after called the
daughter of Saint Peter, because in her last will and Testament, she bequeathed
to the Church of Rome a great part of Hetruria, which is called unto this day
the Patrimony of Saint Peter Trevisa reports, that in the time when Marcus
Commodus was Emperor, he sent into Egypt one Philippus, as President over a
Province, then in the jurisdiction of the Romans. This Philippus had a
beautiful young daughter called Eugenia, Eugenia.
who being wholly devoted to the Christian faith, but not daring to profess
it, because of her father, who protested all rigor to those of that Sect, she
disguised her self in man's habit, stealing from her fathers house, and made
such means, that she was baptized by the name of Eugenius, and after became a
Monk. In process the old Abbot being dead, she had so well demeaned her self
in the Monastery, that she had the voice to be made Abbot in his stead; Being
possessed of the place, a lewd and an adulterous woman called Malentia,
Malentia.
by all allurements possible would have tempted Eugenius to lust, but not
prevailing, she with loud acclamations pretending the other would have forced
her against her will, caused her to be apprehended and brought before the
Judge, which was the President Philip the father to Eugenia, who being an enemy
to all of Religious Orders, was easily induced to give belief to any
accusations commenced against them, and punished even slight faults with the
extremest severity. Eugenius is accused, the circumstances examined, and carry
great show of truth: The Judge is ready to proceed to sentence, when Eugenia
falling upon her knees discloseth her self to her father, and humbly entreated
his pardon. To whom (notwithstanding her disguise) her face is easily known,
his fellow Monks stands amassed, Malentia the accuser confounded, but all in
general wonder-strook, till Philippus raising his fair daughter from the
earth, embraces her lovingly, as extasi'd with her recovery beyond all
expectation; for whose sake he renounced all his false heathen gods, and was
christened with his whole household and family. Thus the wickedness of one
woman, turned to the blessedness and pro^^^ of many.

Elfritha.
RAnulphus Monk of Chester tells this story: King Edgar (says he) being, in his
youth much addicted to the love of fair women, Elfritha.
had intelligence that one Elfritha daughter to Orgarus, was for (...),
feature, and accomplish^^^^s (...) surpassing all the Virgins of her time;
insomuch, that he not only greatly desired to see her, but purposed that if her
beauty were any way answerable to that which fame had blazoned her to be, to
make her his Queen. This secret apprehension he communicated to one Earl
Ethelwold a Noble Gentleman, in his great favor and best acquainted with his
privacies, commanding him to make a journey to the Earl of Devonshire her
father, and there to take of her a free and full surveigh, and finding her
answerable to the public rumor, not only to demand her of the Earl Orgarus,
but to bring her along with her father, roially attended like the bride of a
King, to partake with him all regal honors. This journey Ethelwold with great
willingness undertakes, without disclosing to any the secrets of his message:
and coming to the place where the damsel with her father then sojourned, he
was nobly enterteined, as a fellow peer, and an especial favourit to the King.
No sooner came the Lady in presence, but Ethelwold began to conceive that
report had been too niggardly in her praise, for he had not in his life time
seen a Lady of so incomparable a feature, to whom all the Court-beauties
appeared scarce good Crystal to that unmatchable Diamond. What cannot love
work in the heart of man, when such a beauty is his object? it makes the son
forger his father, and the father not remember that he has a son, but either
has made the others bed incestuous: It has subjected Cities, and depopulated
Countries, made the subject forget his allegiance to his sovereign, and the
sovereign most unnatural and inhumane to his subject, as may appear by this
history. This Earl surprised with the love of this Lady, has either quite
forgot the message he was sent about, or else is not pleased to remember it.
Not speaking of the King at all, but counterfeting some occasions into that
Country, and as if he had happened upon that place by accident, or come to give
him visitation in noble courtesy; at supper finds discourse concerning the
Lady, and at length prevailed so far with the old Earl, that they were
contracted that night, and the next morning married. After some few days
journie there, the Kings impositions enforced him to take an unwilling farewell
of his new married bride, only at parting he earnestly entreated them for
diverse reasons which much imported him, to keep the marriage as secret as
possibly might be, and so posted back to the Court. He was no sooner arrived,
but the King inquisitive concerning the beauty of the Lady, how tall, how
strait, of what hair, what complexion, whether her looks were cheerful or
sad, her behavior sober or suspicious. To all which he answered in few, she
was indeed a Lady, and that was her best, an Earls daughter and therefore
flattered, for what in a private woman is commendable, is in such excellent;
and what in the former praise worthy, in the latter (...) and admirable: but
for this Lady Elfritha, she was a course home spun piece of flesh, whose
nobility and dower might make her capable of being wife to some honest Justice
of peace, or Sheriff of the Shire, but not becoming the bed of any of the
nobility (unless some one whose estate was decaid;) indeed a mere Rook, and
most unworthy the eye of the Princely Eagle. With this answer the King was
satisfied, and for the present disposed his affection elsewhere, imagining
these praises might be divulged abroad as well in scorn of her person as
otherwise, so for some few weeks it rested: in which interim Ethelwold was often
mist in the Court, and discontinued his wonted service, no man could scant tell
or inform the King how he disposed himself, and still when he came to present
his service, he would excuse his absence with some infirmity or other, which
was the reason of his enforced retirement: besides, he was often observed to
entreat leave to recreate himself in the Country, and take the benefit of the
fresh air, as commodious for his health, in all which liberty he past his
limits. This bred some jealousy in the King, and the rather, because the fame
of this Ladies unmatched beauty more and more increased. Therefore to be more
punctually informed of the truth, he sent another private messenger, who
brought him intelligence how all things stood, with the certeinty of every
accident how it befell. The King not knowing how to digest such an injury from
a subject, smothered his grievance for a space, and at length caused the gests
to be drawn, for he purposed a progress into the West. Ethelwold yet nothing
suspecting, was the foremost man to attend the King upon his journie: but when
they came almost to Excester, he began to mistrust the Kings purpose, the
rather because he sent to the Earl Orgarus, that at such a time he meant to
feast with him. Now must Ethelwold bestir himself, or instantly hazard the
Kings high displeasure: he therefore posts in the night to his wife, and to his
father in law, reports the truth of every circumstance from the beginning, how
he was sent by the King, and to what purpose, how her beauty had so enflamed
him, that he was compelled by violence of affection, to deceive the Kings
trust; and lastly, to secure his own life, which for the love of her he had
hazarded* he was forced to disparage her feature, dissemble her worth, and
disgrace her beauty: and therefore besought her, as she tendered his safety
being her husband, either not to appear before the King at all, or if she were
called for and so compelled, to be seen in that fashion as he had described her
to his sovereign, namely, with a smodged face, counterfeit hair, uncomely
habit, and in her behavior to put on such a garb of folly as might rather
breed loathing then liking in his majesty. The first of his speech she heard
with patience, but when he came to deliver to her how he had disparaged her
beauty, and, to the King too; nay more, would have her derogate from her own
worth, and be accessory to the blasting of that beauty which nature had made so
admirable, this her womanish spleen could hardly digest; yet she soothed him
up with fair and promising language, and told him she would better consider of
it, and so dismissed him in part satisfied. In the morning he presented
himself early to attend the King, who was that day to be enterteined by the
Earl his father in law. All things were nobly provided, and Edgar roially
received and set to dinner (some write that Ethelwold had caused a kitchen maid
to put on his wives habit, and sit at the Kings table, but I find no such
matter remembered in my author) the truth is, the King about the midst of
dinner called for the Earl Orgarus, and demanded of him whether he had a wife
or no, if he had, why he might not have her company, knowing it was a general
observation in England, that without the wives entertainment, there could be no
true and hearty welcome? The Earl replied, that at that time he was an unhappy
widdower: he then demanded whether he had any children to continue his
posterity? to which he answered, Heaven had only blessed him with one daughter,
a plain damsel, yet the sole hope of his future memory. The King was then
importunate to see her, and commanded her to be instantly brought unto his
presence; which put Ethelwold into a strange agony, yet still hoping she had
done as he had lately enjoined her, when she (contrary to his expectation) came
in apparalled like a bride, in rich and costly vestures, her golden hair
fairly kembed, and part hanging down in artificial curls, her (...) stuck
with jewels, and about her neck a chain of Diamonds, which gave a wondrous
addition to that beauty, when (...) of it self without any ornament, was not
to be (...): A contrary effect it wrought in the King and (...) husband. To
Edgar she seemed some goddess, at least a miracle in nature; to Ethelwold (in
regard of his fear) a fury, or what worse he could compare her to. O frail
woman, in this one vanity to appear beautiful in the eyes of a King, thou have
committed two heinous sins, Adultery and Murder, for accordingly it so fell
out. Edgar was as much surprised with her love, as incensed with hate against
her Lord, both which for the present he dissembled, neither smiling on the one,
nor frowning on the other. In the afternoon the King would needs (...) the stag
in the forest of Werwelly, since called (...)-wood. In the chase, by the
appointment of Edgar, Earl Ethelwold was struck through the body with an arrow,
and so slain, the King after made Elfritha his bride and Queen. The Earl had a
base son then present at the death of his father, of whom the King asked how he
liked that manner hunting, to whom he answered, Roial Sir, what seems good to
you, shall be no way offensive: from that time forward he was ever gracious
with the King. And Elfritha (...) to make atonement with heaven for the murder
of her husband, or ^^ther (as Ranulphus says) for causing Edward ((...) whom
she was step mother) to be slain (...) her own son Egelredus might reign,
builded an Abbey for Nuns at Worwell, where she was after buried.

Gunnora.
IN the time that Agapitus was Pope Lewis King of France, the son of Charles,
caused William Longa Spata the Duke of Normandy to be treacherously slain: this
William was son to Rollo. The Lords of Normandy with this murder much incensed,
watched their advantage, and surprised the King in Rhothemage, where they
committed him to safe custody till he had promised and sworn to yield up
Normandy to Richard son and immediate heir to William the late murdered Duke,
and moreover, in what place soever the King and the young Duke should have
meeting to confer, that Richard should car his sword, but King Lewis neither to
have sword nor knife about him. This Richard being young, was called Richard
the Old; he had besides another attribute given him, which was, Richard without
Fear, because he was never known to be dismayed at any thing; but a third above
these was, that he pretended to be wondrous religious. He was Duke two and
fifty years, and took a Lady to his bed from Denmark, whose name was Gunnora,
by whom he had five sons and two daughters, the eldest of which was married to
Etheldredus King of England, Emma.
her name was Emma, and she was called the flower of Normandy. Concerning this
bold, yet religious Duke, it is reported by Marianus, lib. 2. Henricus,
Ranulphus, and others, that besides many other testimonies of his sanctity,
this one made him most eminent, A Monk of Andoenus in Rothomage a Town in
Normandy, going one night to meet with his Sweet heart, his way lay over a
bridge, A strange Tale.
and under that bridge was a deep foord or river, it so happened, that mistaking
his footing, he fell into the water, and there was drowned. He was no sooner
dead, but there came to carry away his soul, an Angel and a Fiend, these two
contended about it, the one would have it, so would the other, great was the
controversy betwixt them; at length they concluded to put the case to Duke
Richard, and both to stand to his arbitriment: much pleading there was on both
sides, at length the Duke gave sentence, That the soul should be restored again
to the body, and be placed again upon that bridge from whence he had fallen, and
if then he would offer to go from thence to his Sweet heart, the Devil should
take him; but if otherwise, he (because he was a Churchman) should be still in
the Angels protection. This was done, and the Monk left his way to the woman,
and fled to the Church, as to a sanctuary, whither the Duke went the next day,
and found the Monks cloths still wet, and told the Abbot every circumstance as
it fell out; therefore the Monk was shriven, did penance, was absolved and
reconciled. This I have read, which I persuade no man to believe. This Duke
lived with the fair Gunnora long time dishonestly, and without marriage, had
by her those children aforesaid, but at length by the persuasion of the
nobility, and intercession of the Clergy, he took her to wife. The first night
after the marriage, when the Duke came to her bed, she turned her back toward
him, which she had never done till that time: at which he marvelling, demanded
of her the reason why she did so. To whom she answered, before I was your
strumpet, and therefore as a servant was tied to do your pleasure in all
things, but now I am your wife, and made part of your self, therefore
henceforth I claim with you an equal sovereignty, and will do what me list,
bearing my self now like a Princess, not like a prostitute. This I am easily
induced to believe, for how soon do honors change manners. Juvenall in his
sixth Satyr speaking of marriage, thus says, Semper habet lites aeternaque
jurgia lectus, etc.
The marriage bed is seldom without strife,
And mutual chidings: he that takes a wife,
Bargains for mighty trouble, and small rest;
Sleep grows a stranger then, whilst in her breast
She lodges Passion, Self-will, Anger, Fear,
And from her (...) drops many a feigned tear, etc.


Somewhat to this purpose spoke Terentius in his Adelp^^s.

Duxi uxorem, quam ibi non miseriam vidi, etc.
I made choice of a wife, with judgment sound,
What misery have I not therein found?
Children are born, they prove my second care;
They should be comforts, that my corfives are,
For her and them, I study to provide,
And to that purpose, all my time's applied:
To keep her pleased, and raise their poor estate,
And what is my meed for all, but scorn and hate?
And so much for Gunnora. It seems the Emperor Valentinianus was neither well
read in Juvenal nor Terence. He, when his wife commended unto him the beauty of
the Lady Justina, Justina.
took her to his bed, and for her sake made a law, That it should be lawful for
any man to marry two wives. It is read of Herod the Great, that he had nine
wives, and was divorsed from them all, Mariamnes.
only for the love of Mariamnes niece to Hir^anus, for whose sake he caused
himself to be circumcised, and turned to the faith of the Jews: he begot on
her Alexander and Aristobulus; Dosides.
on Dosides Antipater; on Metheta, Metheta.
Archelaus; on Cleopatra, Philip, and Herodes Antipas he that was afterward
called Tetrarch, Cleopatra.
one of the four Princes:) Beronica.
Aristobulus that was Herodes son, begotten on Beronica the daughter of his own
Aunt called Saloma; Saloma.
he begot the Great Agrippa, Herodias.
Aristobulus and Herod that was struck by the Angel: also on the aforesaid
Beronica he begot two daughters, Mariamnes and Herodias who was after Philips
wife, that was Uncle to Aristobulus: nevertheless whilst Philip was yet alive,
Herodias became wife to his brother Herod. At length there fell debate betwixt
her, Mariamnes, and Saloma, Herod's sister* Herod by the instigation of Saloma,
^lew Hyrcanus the Priest, and after, Jonathas the brother of Mariamnes, who
against the law he had caused to be consecrated Priest at the age of seventeen
years. After that he caused Mariamnes to be put to death, with the husband of
his sister Saloma, pretending that Hyrcanus and Jonathas had adulterated his
sister. After these murders, Herod grew mad for the love of Mariamnes, who was
held to be the fairest Lady then living, and innocently put to death. He then
took again his wife Dosides, and her son Antipater to favor, sending Alexander
and Aristobulus the sons of Mariamnes to Rome to be instructed in the best
literature, whom after he caused to be slain. And these were the fruits of
Adulterous and Incestuous marriages.

Of women that have come by strange deaths.
THere are many kinds of deaths, I will include them all within two heads,
Violent, and Voluntary: the Violent is, when either it comes accidentally, or
when we would live and cannot: the Voluntary is, when we may live and will not;
and in this we may include the blessedest or all deaths, Martyrdom. I will
begin with the first, and because gold is a metal that all degrees, callings,
trades, mysteries, and professions, of either Sex, especially acquire after: I
will therefore first exemplify them that have died golden deaths.

Of the Mistress of Brennus. Of Tarpeia, and Acco a Roman Matron.
OF Midas the rich King, and of his golden wish, I presume you are not
ignorant, and therefore in vain it were to insist upon his history, my
business is at this time with women. Brennus an Englishman, and the younger
brother to Belinus, both sons of Donwallo, was by reason of composition with
his brother, with whom he had been competitor in the Kingdom, disposed into
France, and leading an army of the Gals, invaded foreign Countries, as Germany,
Italy, sacking Rome, and piercing Greece: Insomuch, that his glory was
stretched so far, that the French Chroniclers would take him quite from us, and
called him Rex Gallorum, witness Plutarch in his seventeenth Parallel. This
Brennus spoiling and wasting Asia, came to besiege Ephesus, where falling in
love with a wanton of that City, he grew so inward with her, that upon promise
of reward she vowed to deliver the City into his hands: the conditions were,
that he being possessed of the Town, should deliver into her ^ate custody, as
many jewels, rings, and as much treasure as should countervaile so great a
benefit; to which he assented. The Town delivered, and he being victor, she
attended her reward; The reward of Covetousness.
when Brennus commanded all his soldiers from the first to the last, to cast
what gold or silver or jewels they had got in the spoil of the City, into her
lap; which amounted to such an infinite mass that with the weight thereof she
was suffocated and pressed to death. This Clitiphon delivers in his first book
Rerum Gallicar* to answer which, Aristides Melesius in Italicis, speaks of
Tarpeia, Tarpeia.
a Noble Virgin, or at least nobly descended, and one of the Keepers of the
Capitol: she in the war betwixt the Sabines and the Romans, covenanted with
King Tatius, then the public enemy, to give him safe access into the mountain
Tarpeia, so he would for a reward but possess her of all the gold and jewels
which his soldiers the Sabins had then about them. This she performing, they
were likewise willing to keep their promise, but withal loathing the
covetousness of the woman, threw so much of the spoil and treasure upon her,
that they buried her in their riches, and she expi^ed admist a huge Magazin.
But remarkable above these is the old woman Acco or Acca, Acco.
who having done an extraordinary courtesy for the City of Rome, they knew not
better how to require her then knowing her a varitious disposition, to give her
free liberty to go into the common treasury, and take thence as much gold as
she could carry. The wretched woman overjoied with this donative, entered the
place to make her pack or burden, which was either so little she would not
bear, or so great she could not (...), and swetting and striving beneath the
burden, so exp^^ed. The like though something a more violent death, died the
Emperor Galba, who in his life time being insatiate o^ gold, as being covetous
above all the Emperors before him, they poured molten gold down his throat to
confirm in him that old Adage, Qualis vita, finis ita. The like was read of the
rich Roman Crassus.

Of such as have died in childbirth.
THough of these be infinites, and daily seen amongst us, yet it is nor
altogether amiss to speak something though never so little, Tulliota.
which may have reference to antiquity. Volaterranus remembers us of Tulliota
the daughter of Marcus Cicero, who being first placed with Dolobella, and after
with Piso Crassipides, died in Childbed. The like Suetonius puts us in mind of
Junia Claudilla, Junia. Claudilla.
who was daughter to the most noble Marcus Sillanus, and wife to the Emperor
Ca^us Caligula, who died after the same manner H^ginus in his two hundred
threescore and fourth Fable, tells this tale: In the old time says he, there
were no midwives at all, and for that cause many women in their modesty, rather
suffered themselves to perish for want of help, then that any man should be
seen or known to come about them. Above all, the Athenians were most curious
that no servant or woman should learn the art of Surgery. There was a
damsel of that City, that was very industrious in the search of such
mysteries, Agnodice.
whose name was Agnodice, but wanting means to attain unto that necessary
skill, she caused her head to be shorn, and putting on the habit of a young
man, got her self into the service of one Hierophilus a Physician, and by her
industry and study, having attained to the depth of his skill, and the height
of her own desires, upon a time hearing where a Noble Lady was in childbirth,
in the midst of her painful throws, she offered her self to her help, whom
the modest Lady (mistaking her Sex) would by no persuasion suffer her to come
near her, till she was forced to strip her self before the women, and to give
evident sign of her woman-hood. After which she had access to many, proving
so fortunate, that she grew very famous. Insomuch, that being envied by the
College of the Physicians, she was complained on to the Areopagitae, or the
nobility of the Senate: such in whose power it was to censure and determine of
all causes and controversies. Agnodice thus convented, they pleaded against her
youth and boldness, accusing her rather a corrupter of their chastities, then
any way a curer of their infirmities; blaming the matrons as counterfeiting
weakness, purposely to have the company and familiarity of a loose and
intemperate young man. They pressed their accusations so far, that the Judges
were ready to proceed to sentence against her; when she opening her breast
before the Senate, gave manifest testimony that she was no other then a woman:
at this the Physicians being the more incensed, made the fact the more heinous,
in regard that being a woman, she durst enter into the search of that
knowledge, of which their Sex by the law was not capable. The cause being ready
again to go against her, the noblest matrons of the City assembled themselves
before the Senate, and plainly told them, they were rather enemies then
husbands, who went about to punish her, that of all their Sex had bin the most
studious for their general health and safety. Their importancy so far
prevailed, after the circumstances were truly considered, that the first decree
was quite abrogated, and free liberty granted to women to employ themselves in
those necessary offices, without the presence of men. So that Athens was the
first City of Greece, that freely admitted or Midwives by the means of this
damsel Agnodice.

Of women that suffered martyrdom.
ANd of these in brief. Corona.
Corona was a religious woman who suffered martyrdom under the Tyranny of
Antonius the Emperor, Her death was after this manner, she was tied by the arms
and legs betwixt two trees, whose stiff branches were forced and bowed down
for the purpose, the bows being shackned and let loose, her body was tossed
into the air, and so cruelly dissevered limb from limb. Anatholia a virgin, by
the severe command of Faustinianus the President, was transpierc'd with a
sword. Felicula (as Plutarch witnesses) when by no persuasion or threats,
promises or torments, she could be forced to renounce the Christian Faith, by
the command of Flaccus Comes, she was commanded to be shut up in a jakes, and
there stilled to death. Murita had likewise the honor of a Martyr, who being
banished by Elphedorus a certain Arrian, oppressed with cold and hunger, most
miserably died. Hyrene the virgin, because she would not abjure her faith and
religion, was by Sisimmius shot through with an arrow. The like death suffered
the martyr Christiana under Julian the Apostata. Paulina a Roman Virgin, and
daughter to the Prefect Artemius, was with her mother Candida stoned to death
by the command of the Tyrant Dioclesian* Agatho virgo Catanensis was strangled
in Prison, by the command of the Consul Quintianus. Theodora, a virgin of
Antioch, was beheaded by the tyranny of Dioclesian. Julia Countess of Eulalia,
suffered the same death under the President Diaconus. Margarita, a maid and a
martyr, had her head cut off by Olibrius. Zoe the wife of Nicostratus, was
nailed unto a cross, and so ended her life, partly with the torture of the
gibbet, and partly with the smoke (that the executioner made at the foot of the
gallows) suffocated. Julia Carthagensis, because she would not bow to idols,
and adore the fal^e heathen gods, but was a constant professor of the Christian
Faith, was martyred after the self same manner. Emerita the sister of Lucius
King of England (who had the honor to be called the first Christian King of
this Country) she suffered for the Faith by fire. Alexandria was the wife of
Dacianus the President, who being converted to the Faith by blessed Saint
George, was therefore by the bloody murderer her husbands own hands strangled
Maximianus the son of Dioclesian, with his own hands likewise slew his natural
sister Artemia, because that forsaking all Idolatry, she proved a convert, to
the true Christian Faith. Flavia Domicilla, a noble Lady of Rome, was banished
into the Isle Pon^ia in the fifteenth year of the reign (...) D^n^tian, for no
other reason but that she constantly professed her self to be a Christian
These two following suffered persecution under Antonius Verus in France:
Blondina who is said to weary her tormentors, patiently enduring more then they
could maliciously inflict, insomuch, that before she fainted, they confessed
themselves overcome, she ready still to suffer and bear, when they had not
blows to give, for as often as she spoke these words, I am a Christian neither
have I committed any evil, she seemed to the spectators of her martyrdom, to
be so refreshed and comforted from above, that she felt no pain or anguish in
the midst of her torture, and in that patience she continued without
alternation even to the last ga^^. Bi^^is, one that before through her womanish
weakness had fai^^ed for fear o^ torments, coming to see her with others
ex^^uted, was so strengthened to behold their constancy, that as it were
awakened out of her former dream, and comparing those temporal punishments
(which lasted but a moment) with the eternal pains of hell fire, gave up her
self freely for the Gospels sake. Dionysius in an Epistle to Fabius Bishop of
Antioch, reckons up those that suffered martyrdom under Decius the Emperor.
Quinta a faithful woman, was by the Infidels brought into a Temple of their
Idols, unto which because she denied divine adoration, they bound her hand and
foot, and most inhumanely dragged her along the streets upon the sharp stones;
but when that could not prevail with her, they beat her head and sides, and
bruised them against Mil^stones, that done, she was pitiously scourged, and
lastly, bloodily executed. The same L^ctors laid hands on Apollonia, a Virgin,
but something grounded in years, and because she spoke boldly in the defense of
her Faith first with barbarous cruelty they beat out her teeth, then without
the City they prepared a huge pile, threatening to burn her instantly unless
she would renounce her Christianity, but she seeming to pause a little, as if
she meant better to consider of the matter, (when they least suspected) leapt
suddenly into the fire, and was there consumed to ashes. Ammomarion, a holy
Virgin, after the suffering of many torments under the same Tyrant, gave up her
life an acceptable sacrifice for the Gospel. Mercuria* a virtuous woman, and
one Dionysia a fruitful and childbearing martyr, after they were questioned
about their faith, and in all arguments boldly opposed the Judges, were first
rackt and tortured till they were past all sense of feeling, that done, they
caused them to be executed. Theodosia was a virgin of Tyrus; about the age of
eighteen years, she coming to visit certain prisoners at Cesarea who were
called to the bar, and because they stood steadfastly in the defense of the
Gospel, prepared themselves to hear the most welcome sentence of death
pronounced against them: Theodosia.
which Theodosia seeing, gently saluted them, comforted them, and persuaded
them to continue in their constancy, withal, humbly desired them to remember
her devoutly in their prayers, which she knew would be acceptable to him, for
whose love they so freely offered up their lives. The Officers this hearing,
dragged her before the President, who at first despising her youth, began to
talk with her as to a child, but finding her answers modest and weighty, began
further to argue with her; but seeing himself unable to hold argument as being
convinced in all things, he grew into such a malicious rage, that he first
caused her to be scourged before his face, even till the flesh gave way to
discover the bones; but this not prevailing, he commanded her instantly to be
dragged from thence, and from an high place to be cast headlong into the sea. I
will conclude this discourse of Martyrs, with one of our own modern stories:
Our English Chroniclers report, that Maximus the Emperor having held long war
with one Conon Meridock a re^olute and bold Britain, having in many bloody
conflicts sped diversely, sometimes the victory inclining to one side, and then
to another, but in conclusion to the loss of both; their hostility was by
mediation at length attoned, and a firm peace established betwixt them: that
done, Maximus made war upon the Gals, and invading a Province then called
America (but since Little Britain) he won it by the sword, and after
surreendered it to Conon to hold it for ever as of the Kings of Great Britain.
How Welchmen come to be called Britains.
This Conon Meridock was a Welsh man, and from these it may be, That all that
Nation assume to themselves the name of Britains. This eminent Captain being
only furnished with soldiers for the present wars, but wanting women to
maintein further issue, to him was sent S. Vesula, with eleven thousand virgins
to be espo^to Conon and his Knights. But being met at sea by Pagan Pirates,
because they would neither change their faith, nor prostitute themselves to
their barbarous and beastly lusts, they were all by these inhumane wretches cut
to pieces, and cast over boo^d, and therefore in mine opinion not unworthily
reckoned amongst the Martyrs. From these I will proceed to others.

Aristoclaea.
OF all the deaths that I have read of; this of Aristoclaea methinks exceeds
example, with which, howsoever her body was tormented, Plutarch in Amator^.
narrat.
(...) soul could not be grieved, for never woman died such a loving death.
Plutarch in his Amatorious narrations, has thus delivered it: Aliartes is a
City of Boeotia, in which was born a virgin so beautified and adorned with all
the gifts and perfections of nature, as she seemed unparalleld through Greece;
her name was Aristoclaea, the sole daughter of Theophanes. To her there were
many suitors, but three especially of the noblest families of the City, Strato,
Orchomenius, and Calisthenes Aliartius: Of these Strato being the richest, he
seemed the most endeared to her in affection* for he had first seen her at
Lebedaea, bathing her self in the fountain Hercyne, from whence having a
basket upon her arm, which she was to use in the sacrifice to Jupiter, he took
a full view of her in her way to the Temple: yet Callisthenes he sed himself
with the greater hopes, because he was of more proximity, and virgin in in
alliance: betwixt these two Orchomenius stood as a man indifferent. Her father
Theophanes upon their importunities doubtful, and not yet having determined on
which to confer his daughter, as fearing Strato's potency who in wealth and
nobility equalled if not anteceded the best the in the City, he therefore put
it off to one Trophonius to be decided: but Strato most confident in his own
opinion and strength, took the power of her disposing from Trop^onius, and gave
it up freely into her own will. The damsel in a confluence of all her kindred
and friends gathered for that purpose,and in the sight of he^ suitors, was
publicly demanded, of which of them she made choice? who answered, of
Callisthenes. Strato taking this in an i^^econcilable disgrace, and in the
greatness of his spirit not able to digest an injury (as he took it) of that
(...) his spleen, and some two days after meeting with Th^ophanes and
Callisthenes, he gave them a friendly and an unexpected salutation, (...) still
a continuance of their ancient love and friendship; that since what many covet
one can but enjoy, he could content himself with his own lot, howsoever
de^^^ing that their amity might remain perfect and unchanged: these words came
so seemingly from the heart, that they with great joy did not only enterteine
his love and voluntary reconcilement, but in all courtesy gave him a solemn
invitation to the wedding, which he as complementally enterteined; (...) upon
these terms they pa^ted. (...) a crew (...) as he might best trust, and add,
them to the number of his servants, these he ambushes in diverse places,
selected for his purpose, but all to be ready at a watchword. Callisthenes
bringing Aristoclaea toward the (...) called (...), the^e to perform the first
sacreds belonging to marriage, according to the custom of her ancestors;
Strato with his faction arises, and with his own hands selfeth upon the
virgin; on the other side Callisthenes he catches the fastest hold he can to
keep her; Strato and his pull one way, Callishenes and his another: thus both
contending in the heat of their affection, but not regarding her safety whom
they did affect, she as it were set upon the rack of love, plucked almost to
pieces, betwixt them both expired. Which seeing Callisthenes, he was suddenly
lost, neither could any man ever after tell what became of him, whether he
punished himself by some extraordinary death, or betook himself to voluntary
exile. Strato openly before his own people, transpierc'd himself, and fell
down dead before the body of Aristoclaea. Of no such death died Democrita whose
history next ensues.

Alcippus the Lacedemonion, Democrita.
had two daughters by his wife Democrita. He having with great justice and
integrity managed the weal public, more for the common good, then any
peculiar gain or profit of his own, was affronted by an opposite faction, which
emulated his goodness; and being brought before the Ephori, it was delivered
to them in a scandalous and lying oration, how and by what means Alcippus
intended to abrogate and annihilate their laws: for which he was confind from
Sparta, neither could his wife and daughters (who willingly offered themselves
to attend upon his adversity) be (...) to associate him, but they were detained
by the power and command of the Magistrate. Moreover an edict was made, That
neither the wi^ was capable of inheritance, nor the daughter of dower out of
their fathers goods, notwithstanding they had many (...) of such noble
Gentlemen as loved them for their father virtues. It was likewise by the enemy
most enviously suggested to the Senate, that the two Ladies might be debarred
from (...) their reason was that Democrita was heard often to wish, and withal
to presage, that she should see children born of her daughters, who would in
time revenge the wrongs of their grandfather. This being granted, and she every
way circumscribed both in her self, her husband and issue, every way confined;
she expected a public solemnity, in which according to the Custom, the women
of the City with the Virgins, household servants, and intent, (...) meeting, but
the matrons and wives of the nobility (...) night-festivall in a conclave or
parlor by themselves (...) she (...) her self with a sword, and with her two
daughters secretly conveied her self into the Temple, (...) the time when all
the matrons were most busy about the ceremonies and mysteries in the conclave:
then having made fast the doors and shut up the passages, and heaped together a
great quantity of billets with other things combustible, provided for the
purpose, but especially all that sweet wood that was ready for the sacrifice of
that solemnity she set all on fire: which the men hastening to quench in
multitudes, she before them all with a constancy undaunted, first slew her
daughters, and after her self, making the ruins of this Temple their last
funeral fire. The Lacedaemonians having now nothing left of Alcippus against
which to rage, they caused the bodies of Democrita and her daughters to be cast
out of the confines of Sparta. For this ingratitude, it is said by some, that
great earthquake happened which had almost overturned the City of Lacedemon: from
Democrita I come to Phillus.

Demophron the son of Theseus and Phaedra, the half brother to Hippolitus,
returning from the wars of Troy toward his Country, by tempests and contrary
winds being driven upon the coast of Thrace, was gently received and
affectionately enterteined by Phillis, Phillis.
daughter to Ly^urgus and Crustumena, then King and Queen of that Country, and
not only to the freedom of all generous hospitality, but to the liberty and
access unto her bed. He had not long sojourned there, but he had certain
tidings of the death of Muesthaeus, who, after his father Thes^us was expulsed
Athens had usurped the principility: pleased therefore with the news of
innovation, and surprised with the ambition of succession, he pretending much
domestic business, with other negotiations pertaining to the public
government, after his faith pawned to Phillis, that his return should be within
a month, he got leave for his Country: therefore having calked and moored his
ship, making them serviceable for the sea, he set sail toward Athens; where
arrived, he grew altogether unmindfull of his promised faith, or indented
return. Four months being past, and not hearing from him by word or writing,
she sent him an Epistle, in which she complains of his absence, then perswads
him to call to mind her more then common courtesies, to keep his faith engaged
to her, and their former contract to make good by marriage; the least of which
if he refused to accomplish, her violated honor she would recompense with some
cruel and violent death; which she accordingly did, for knowing her self to
the despised and utterly cast off, she in her fathers Palace hanged her self.
From Phillis I proceed to Deianeira.

Jupiter begat Hercules of Al^mena, in the shape of her husband Amphitrio,
joining three nights in one; whom Euristius King of Micena (at the urgence of
his stepmother Juno) imploid in all hazardous and fearful adventures, not that
thereby he might gain the greater honor, but by such means sooner perish: but
his spirit was so great, and his strength so eminent, that from forth all these
swallowing dangers he still plunged a victor: amongst these difficulties was
that combat against Achelous, a Flood in Aetolia (who transhaped himself into
sundry figures for the love of Deianeira daughter to Oeneus and Althaea King
and Queen of Calidon, and sister to Meleager) he, whom no monsters nor earthly
powers could came, by the conquest of Achilous won Deianeira for his bride. But
he whom all tyrants and terrors were subject to, submitted himself to
effeminacy, and the too much dotage upon women: for when Euritus King of
Oechalia had denied him his daughter Iole (before promised him) the City taken
and the King slain, he took her freely into his embraces; with whose love he
was so blinded, that her imperious command he laid by his club and Lions skin
(the trophies of his former victories) and, which was most unseemly for so
great a conqueror, par^on a womanish habit, and blushed not with a distasse in
his hand to spin amongst her damsels. In brief, what slavery and servitude
soever he had before suffered under the tyranny of Omphale Queen of Lydia, of
whom he begot Lamus, he endured from her: which Deianeira hearing, in a letter
she ^aies open to him all his former noble act and victories, that by comparing
them with his present (...), it the better might encourage him to (...), the
first, and deter him from the last. But having receved news of Hercules
calamity, by reason of the poisoned shire sent him by her servant Lychas dipped
in the blood of the Centaur Nessus, in which she thought there had been the
virtue to revoke him from all new loves, and establish him in his first (for so
Nessus had persuaded her, when in her transwafcage over the flood Evenus, he
was slain by the arrow of Hercules dipped in the poison of Lerna) when the (I
say) heard of the death of her husband, and that (though unwilling) it happened
by her means, she died by a voluntary wound given by her own hand. Joannes
Wyerius, lib. 1.
Nor such as that which follows. The Ionians through all their Province being
punished with a most fearful and horrible pest, insomuch, that it almost swept
the City and Country, and had it longer continued would, have left their places
and habitations desolate, they therefore demanded of the Oracle a remedy for so
great a mischief, which returned them this answer, That the plague should
never cease till the young man Menalippus and the fair Cometho were slain,
Cometho.
and offered in sacrifice to Diana Tryclaria (and the reason was, because he
had strumpeted her in the Temple) And notwithstanding their deaths, unless
every year at the same season, a perfectly featured youth and a virgin of
exquisite beauty (to expiate their transgression) were likewise offered upon
the same Altar, the plague should still continue; which was accordingly done,
and Menalippus and the fair Cometho were the first dish that was served up to
this bloody feast* The same author speaks of the daughter of Aristodemus in
this manner. The daughters of Aristodemus.
The Messenians and the Lacedaemonians have continued a long and tedious war, to
the great depopulation of both their Nations, those of Missen^ sent to know of
the event of the Oracle at Delphos, and to which party the victory would at
length incline. Answered is returned, That they shall be conquerors, and the
Lacedaemonians have the worst: but upon this condition, To choose out of the
family of the Aepitidarians, a virgin pure and unblemisht, and this damosel to
sacrifice to Jupiter. This Aristodemus hearing (a Prince and one of the noblest
of the family of the Aepitidarians) willing to gratify his Country, chused
out his only daughter for immolation and sacrifice, which a noble youth of that
Nation hearing, surprised both with love and pity; love in hope to enjoy her,
and pity, as grieving she should be so dismembered; he thought rather to make
shipwreck of her honor then her life, since the one might be by an aftertruth
restored, but the other by no earthly mediation recovered. And to this purpose
presents himself before the Altar, openly attesting that she was by him with
child, and therefore not only an unlawful but abominable offering in eyes of
Jupiter. No sooner was this charitable slander pronounced by the young man, but
the father more enraged at the loss of her honor now, then before
commiserating her death, b^ing full of wrath, he usurps the office of the
Priest, and wash his sword hewes the poor innocent Lady to pieces. But not many
nights after this bloody execution, the Idaea of his daughter bleeding, and
with all her wounds about her, presented it self to him in his troubled and
distracted sleep; with which being strangely moved, he conveied himself to the
tomb where his daughter lay buried, and there with the same sword slew
himself.

Herodotus in Euterpe speaks of one Pheretrina Queen of the B^cchaeaus,
Pheretrina.
a woman of a most inhuman cruelty, she was for her tyranny struck by the hand
of heaven, her living (...) up with worms and ^^ce, and in that languishing
misery gave up the ghost. Propert* in his third book, speak^ of one Dyrce,
Dyrce.
who much grieved that her husband Lycus was surprised with the love of one
Antiopa, Antiopa.
caused her to be bound to the horns of a mad bull; but her two sons, Z^^bus
and Amphtoa coming instantly at the noise of her loud acclamation, they
released her from the present danger, and in revenge of the injury offered to
their mother, fastened Dyrce to the same place, who after much affright, and
many pitiful and deadly wounds, Consinge.
expired. Consinge was the Queen of Bithinia, and wife to Nicomedes, whose
gesture and behavior appearing too wanton and libidinous in the eyes of her
husband, he caused to be worried by his own dogs. Pyrene.
Plin. lib. 7. Pyrene the daughter to B^br^x, was comprest by Hercules in the
mountains that divide Italy from Spain, she was after torn in pieces by wild
beasts, they were called or her Montes Pyreneae. i. The Pyrenean mountains.
Antipater Tarcenses apud Vollateran. speaks of one Gatis, Gatis.
a Queen of Syria, who was cast alive into a moat amongst fishes, and by them
devouted, she was likewise called Atergatis* Atergatis.
Sygambis. was the mother of Darius King of Persia, Sygambes.
as Quintus Curtius in his fourth book relates, she died upon a vowed
abstinence, for being taken prisoner by Alexander, yet nobly used by him,
whether tired with the continual labor of her journie, or more afflicted with
the disease of the mind it is not certain: but falling betwixt the arms of her
two daughters (after five days abstinence from meat, drink, and light) she
expired. Semele.
Semele the mother of (...), a Theb^n Lady* and of the roial race of Cadmus,
(...) thunder. Pliny in his second book writes of one Martia great with child,
Martia.
who was struck with thunder, but the (...) in her womb struck dead only, she
her self not suffering any hurt or damage: in which place he remembers one
Marcus Herennius, a Decurion, who in a bright and clear day, when there
appeared in the sky no sign of storm or tempest, was slain by a thunderclap.
Pausanias apud Voll^teran. Helena.
says, that Helena after the death of her husband Mentlaus, being banished
into Rhodes by Megapenthus and Nicostratus the sons of Orestes, came for rescue
to Polyzo the wife of Pleopolemus, Polyzo.
who being jealous of too much familiarity betwixt her and her husband, caused
her to be strangled in a bath: others write of her, that growing old, and
seeing her hairs grown gray, that face grown withered, whose luster had been
the death of so many hundred thousands; she caused her glass to be broken, and
in despair strangled her self. The like Caelius lib. 6. cap. 15. remembers us
of one Acco, Acco.
a proud woman in her youth, and grown decrepit through age, finding her brow
to be furrowed, and the fresh color in her cheeks to be quite decayed, grew
with the conceit thereof into a strange frenzy: some write that she used to
talk familiarly to her own image in the myrrhor, sometimes smile upon it, then
again menace it, promise to it, or flatter it, as it came into her fancy: in
the end with mere apprehension that she was grown old, and her beauty faded,
she fell into a languishing, and so died. Jocasta.
Jocasta the incestuous mother to Aeteocles and Polynices, beholding her two
sons perish by mutual wounds, struck with the terror of a deed so facinorous,
instantly slew her self, Bisalcia.
So Bisal^ia a maid, despised by Calphurnius Crassus, into whose hands she had
betrayed the life of her father, and freedom of her Country, fell upon a sword
and so perished. Zoe.
Zoe the Empress, with her husband Constantius Monachus, both about one time
died of the Pestilence. Gregorius Turonensis, Austrigilda.
writes of one Austrigilda a famous Queen, who died of a disease, called
Disenteria, which is a fl^x or wringing of the bowels. Of the same grief died
Sausones, son to Chilperick. Serena.
Serena the wife of Dioclesian, for very grief that so much Martyrs blood was
spilt by her husbands remorselesse tyranny, Glausinda.
fell into a fever, and so died. Glausinda daughter to the King of the Goths,
and wife to Athanagildus, was slain by Chilperick, the son of Clotharius, at
the instigation of the strumpet Fredegunda, Fredegunda*
so says Volateranus. Sextus Aurelius writes, that the Emperor Constantius,
son to Constantius and Helena, Fausta.
caused his wife Fausta (by whose instigation he had slain his son Crispus to
die in a ho^scalding bath. Lysides.
Herodotus speaks of Lysides otherwise called Melissa the wife of Periander,
Melissa.
who at the suggestion of a strumpet, caused her to be slain, which makes
Sabellicus amongst others to wonder, why for that deed only he should be
numbered amongst the wise men of Greece. (...) Cecilius in his seven and
twentieth book upon Pliny accuses Calphurnius Bestia for poisoning his wives,
sleeping. Pliny in his fourteenth book, nominates one Egnatius Melentinus, who
slew his wife for no other cause, but that she had drunk wine, and was
acquitted of the murder by Romulus. Auctoclea.
Auctoclea the daughter of Sinon, and wife of Lae^^es King of Ithaca, when by a
false messenger she heard that her son Ulysses was slain at the siege of Troy,
suddenly fell down and died. The mother of Antista seeing her daughter forsaken
by Pompey the Great, Antista.
and Aem^l^a received in her stead, overco^e with grief, Perimela.
slew her self. Perimela a damsel, was vitiated by Achelous, which her
father Hippodamus took in such indignation, that from an high promontory he
cast her headlong down into the sea. Hyppomanes a Prince of Achens, Lymone.
deprehending his daughter Lymone in adultery, shut her up in a place with a
fierce and cruel horse, but left no kind of food for one or the other,
insomuch, that the horse oppressed with hunger, devoured her; hence came that
Adage (...) upon Diogineanus, More cruel then Hyppomanes Gregorius Turonensis
remembers one Deuteria, Deuteria.
fearing lest her young daughter now grown ripe and marriageable, who might be
defl^ured by King Theodebertus, cast her headlong into the river that runs by
the City Viridunum, where she was drowned. Orchamus finding his daughter
Leucothoe to be vitiated by Apollo, Leucothoe.
caused her to be buried alive. Lucilla.
Lucilla the daughter of Marcus Antonus and Fausta, as Herodian reports, was
slain by the hand of her brother Commodus, against whom she had before made a
conjuration. Lychione.
Lychione the daughter of Dedalion, because she durst compare her self with
Diana, was by the goddess wounded to death with an arrow; at the celebration
of whose exequies, when her body was to be burnt, her father likewise cast
himself into the fire. Hylonome the she Centaur, seeing her husband Cillarius
slain in the battle betwixt the Centaurs and the Lapithes, fell upon his
sword, and so expired. Anmianus, and Marcellus lib. 16. have left recorded,
that Mithridates King of Pontus, being overcome in a battle by Pompey,
Dyraptis.
committed his daughter Dyraptis, to the safe custody of the Eunuch Menophilus,
to be kept in a strong Citadel called Syntiarium, which when Manutius Priscus
had straightly besieged, and the Eunuch perceived the defenders of the Castle
dismayed and ready to submit themselves and give up the fort, he drew out his
sword, and slew her, rather then she should be mode a captive to the Roman
General- Sextas Aurelius writes of the Empress Sabina the wife of Adrian,
Sabina.
who having suffered from him many gross and servile injuries, gave her self
up to a voluntary death, when she considered she had supported so inhumane a
tyrant, and such a contagious pest to the Common weal. Pontus de Fortuna,
Neaera.
speaks of a virgin amongst the Salattines, called Neaera, who grieving that a
young man to whom she was betrothed, had forsaken her and made choice of
another, caused her veins to be opened, Cleopatra.
and bled to death. Cleopatra after the death of Anthony, lest she should be
presented as a Captive, to grace the triumphs of Augustus, gave her arm to the
biting of an Asp, of which she died; for in that manner was her picture
presented in Rome, of whom Propertius lib. 3. thus speaks,

Brachia spectavi sacris admorsa colubris.
Neaera and Charmione, Neaera and Charmione.
were the two handmaids of Cleopatra. These (as Plutarch and others report of
them) would by no persuasion survive their Queen and mistress, who perceiving
(as they were gasping betwixt life and death) the Crown to be fallen from the
temples of their dead Lady, raised themselves from the earth with the small
strength they had left, and placed it right again on her forehead, that she
might the better become her death; which they had no sooner done, but they both
instantly fell down and breathed their last; an argument of an unmatchable zeal
to the Princess their Lady Monima Miletia, Monima. Milesia.
and Veronicha Chia, Veronica. Chya.
were the wives of Mithridates, who understanding of his tragical fall and
miserable end, gave up their lives into the hands of the Eunuch Bochides.
Monima first hanged her self, but the weight of her body breaking the cord, she
grew somewhat recovered, and fell into this sad acclamation, O execrable power
of a diad^^, whose command even in this small sad service I cannot use: which
words were no sooner spoke, but she offered her (...) to the sword of the
Eunuch, who instantly dispatched (...) both of life and torment. Veronica drank
often a (...) of wine tempered with person, which dispersing into her veins, and
keeping her in a languishing torment, her death was likewise hastened by the
Eunuch Bochides. The Milesian Virgins.
A strange madness possessed the Virgins of Milesia: these, as Aeltanus and
others have writ, gave themselves up to voluntary deaths, many or the most
strangling themselves; this grew so common amongst them, that scarce one day
past in which some one or other of them were not found dead in their chambers.
To remedy which mischief, the Senators of the City made a decree, That what
maid soever should after that time lay violent hands upon her self, the body so
found dead, should be stripped naked, and in public view dragged through the
streets, freely exposed to the ^ies of all men: The impression of which shame
more prevailing then the terror of death, none was ever after known to commit
the like outrage upon themselves. Phaedra.
Phaedra the stepmother to Hippolitus her son in law, and wife of Theseus,
when she could not corrupt a young man her son in law, to make incestuous the
bed of his father, despairing, hung her self: yet before her death she writ
certain letters in which she accused Hippolitus to his father, of incest, which
after proved the speedy cause of his death. Two mothers.
Amongst many strange deaths, these of two mothers are not the least
remarkable: most strange it is, that sudden joy should have much power to
suffocate the spirits, as the power of lightning. The rumor of the great
slaughter at the Lake of Thrasimenes being published, one woman when beyond all
hope she met her son at the City gate, safely returned from the general
defeats, cast her self into his arms, where in that ecstasy of joy she
instantly expired. Another hearing her son was slain in the battle, after much
sorrow for his death, sitting in her own house and spying him unexpectedly
coming toward her safe and in health, she was so overcome with sudden joy,
that not able to rise and give him meeting, she died as she sat in her chair.
Most strange it is that joy should make speedier way to death, then sorrow:
these mothers Zoe remembered by Valerius Maximus, lib. 9. cap. 12. So much I
hope shall suffice for women that have died strange deaths, for I had rather
hear of many to live well, then that any one should die ill. I only entreat
patience of the courteous Reader, that as I have begun this book in sadness,
so he will give me leave to conclude it in jest. Some no doubt (though not
justly) will tax me for my too much intermixtion of history, and say there be
many things inserted, not pertinent to my project in hand, which might better
have been left out then put in: They in my conceit do but dally with me, and
put such a trick upon me, as a Gentleman did upon a Country hostler. My tale is
but homely, but it has a significant Moral. This traveller often using to a
thorowfare Inn, was much annoied by reason that betwixt his chamber and the
stable, The Hostlers Tale.
where he commonly used to see his horse dressed and meated, there lay great
heaps of pullens dung in his way, which much offended him, and being willing
either to be rid of that inconvenience, or punish him that might remedy it, he
took occasion to ask the hostler what d^nghill that was which was so offensive.
He answered him, his master kept great store of pullen about the house, and
that was all Hens dung. Hens dung says the Gentleman, I have a piece of land
at home, I would it were all there, if thou can help me to any quantity of it
(being sure that is such) I will give thee twenty shillings a load for as much
as thou can provide, and fetch it away with my own carriage. The fellow
hearing this, promised within a month to furnish him with twenty load at least
at the same price. The match was made, and the Gentleman after breakfast took
horse and departed. The hostler bespeaks all such soil as the Town could
affoard, or the next Villages by, and made such a huge heap as annoied the
whole yard (knowing the Gentleman to have been ever a man of his word) who came
according to the time appointed. The hostler is glad to see him, and tells him
he has provided him of his commodity, and withal brings him to the place
where it lay like a laystall. The Gentleman seems wondrous glad of this new
merchandise, and drawer out certain pieces out of his pocket, as if he meant to
give him present payment, but withal asked him, Art thou sure all this is hens
dung? upon my life it is, says the hostler, expecting still to finger the
gold. But (replied the Gentleman) art thou sure there is no cocks dung amongst
it? O lord yes (says the hostler) how can it be else? why then quoth the
Gentleman, I pray thee make thy best of it good friend, for i^ there be the
least ^^cks dung amongst it, it will do me no pleasure, I will not give thee
three farthings for it all. Thus was the bostler, notwithstanding his former
cost, forced to ^^move all that muckhill, and make the yard clean at his own
charge, with much addition of mockery and laughter. I^ for a little quantity of
cocks dung you (...) at all the rest here included, the better judgment I hope
will imput^ it, as to my simplicity, so to your over (...). Another main thing
is to be feared, wherein I must of force (...) the censure of some or other,
namely, Why amongst (...) histories I have inserted Mortyrs, and to confirm
their truth have brought Authors that have been held superstitious? I answer to
all in general, I have only specified such things as I have read, and for my
own opinion I keep it reserved. But because I now come to a conclusion, I will
end this book thus briefly, in regard that women die, and so do many die, and
that they die at all, I will give you a woman's reason why it is so, Because
they can live no longer.

Explicit lib. quartus. Inscriptus Melpomene.
THE FIFTH BOOK inscribed TERPSICHORE
Entreating of Amazons: and other Women famous either for Valor, or for Beauty.
A Question may be demanded, Why under the Muse (...) I personate the Bold and
the Beautiful, the Warlike and the Fair, she being the Muse to whom measure^
and dances are solely peculiar, as being of them the only and first
inventresse? I (...), (and I hope not impertinently) that considering every
circumstance, I know not how to comm^nd them to a more fit Mecaen^^ or Patron
for what does all your martial discipline consist; but upon (...), number,
measure, distance, and order? and all these in Cho^eis, (...) ((...) dance^)
especially we obse^ved. In dances we keep time to the music; so in marching or
dr^lling, our ears are attentive to the voice of the Captain or General. In
the figures of the one, and files of the other, number is necessarily observed,
so is measure, distance, and order, for in these they have an equal
correspondence. Now concerning fair women, whom in all masks at the Court,
City, or elsewhere, do your gallants pick out, but the Virgins or Ladies most
beautiful? nay, even at Wakes or Weddings in the Country, the fairest less is
continually called out to dance, be it but to the harp, taber or bag pipe.
Amongst the soldiers were celebrated the Pyrrhick dance in armor, first
instituted by King Pyrrhus of Epire; so likewise the Matachine or sword dance:
what measures have been devised for the exercise of fair Ladies, Custom
derived from all Antiquity still makes frequent amongst us. It was used amongst
the Jews, witness Herodias, and is still continued in Spain, France, and
England. A second doubt is, whether the magnanimous, or the exquisitely
featured, whether Fortitude, or Pulchritude, ought to have precedence and first
place. It is a maxim amongst the Physicians. Plus necat, gula quam gladius, i.
surfets have been the destruction of more then the sword: so I am of opinion,
That beauty has been the ruin of more Cities, the depopulation of more
Kingdoms; and destruction of more men then the sword. But in this place, since
the courage of the mind, and excellence of form contend for the upper hand, I
take it from Feature, to bestow it on Magnanimity and spirit, since the deeds
of the one live to all posterity, but the frailty of the other is subject to
every small infirmity; Therefore Ovid in his book de art amandi thus writes,
Forma bonum fragile est, quantumque accedit ad annos
Fit minor, and Gradu carpitur ipse suo, etc.
Form's a frail good: as time runs on, it wastes,
And the more spends it self, the more it hasts.
Nor always can the purple violet smell,
Or Lillies bloom, in whiteness that excel.
The fragrant rose whose beauty we desire,
The leaves once fallen, shows but a naked brier.
O thou most fair, white hairs come on a pace,
And wrinckled furrows which shall plow thy face.
So likewise Petronius Arbiter in one of his Satyrs.
Quod solum formae decus est, cecidere Capillae.
The only beauty of her shape (her hair)
Fell from her head, her beauty to impair.
Summer succeeds the Spring, her Autumn chaceth,
And them sad Winter with his snow disgraceth.
Deceitful Nature, all these youthful joies
Thou gav'st us first, thou art the first destroies.


Now the fruits and effects of this frail beauty, especially where a fair face
meets with a corrupted mind, I will next show you by history. Ahab by the
persuasion of his fair wife Jesabel was the death of many of the Prophets of
the Lord. Jesabel.
Dalila was the confusion of Sampson the strong. Dalila.
Strange women brought Solomon the Wise to idolatry, and to forget God. Joram,
a King of Israel, at the instigation of Athalia, Athalia.
committed many horrible outrages. Helena's beauty was the occasion o^ that
infinit^ slaughter betwixt the Greeks and Trojans. Helena.
P^lops succeeding in the Kingdom of Ph^ygia made war upon O^nomaus the
fat^er of Hyprodamia, Hippodam.
because being surprised with her beauty, she was denied him in (...) Another
Hyppodamia, (...) wife of Perithous, was the occasion of that great (...), or
battle betwixt the (...) and the L^pithes; for which P^^pertius calls her
Ischomache of the (...) Isco. which signifies Habeo, Ischomach.
and Mache P^gna; his words are these, Qualis and Iscomache Lapithae genus
Heroinae,
Centaur^s m^d^o grata rap^^a me^o.
Such as Iscomache that was,
Of the L^^y (...)
She whom the Centaurs would have rapt
Am^dst their cups of wine.


Per^^les for his love to Aspasia made was against the Samians. Aspasia.
For Chrysaeis the daughter of Chryses (Priest to Apollo, Chrysaeis
(...) by (...)) a plague was sent amongst the the Greekish host, which ceased
not till she was returned back to her father* Lavinia.
for so writes Tortellius Lavinia's beauty, the daughter of King Latinus and
the Queen Amata, was cause of the comb^^ion betwixt Turnus and Aeneas: so says
(...) lib. 4. de S^^llis. Lysimach^^ the son of Agathocles poisoned his own son
Agathocles, by whose fortunate hand he had received the honor and benefit of
many glorious victories, Arsinoe.
at the instigation of his wife Arsinoe, the sister of Prolomaeus, (...). Iphis
a youth of exquisite feature, strangl^^ himself, because he was despised by
the fair, but cruel Anaxarite. Anaxarite.
Archelaus King of Macedon, was slain by a young man called Cra^^na, because
having first promised him his fair daughter he after bestowed her upon
another. The Poet Archilocus called Iambographus, because Lyc^^bes denied him
his daughter in marriage, writes against him such bitter Iambicks, that he
despaired and hanged himself* therefore Ovid thus writes: Post modo si p^ges,
in te mihi liber Iambus
Tincta Licambaeo sanguine ^ela dabit.
If thou pursu'st me still, my book
Just vengeance shall implore,
And in Iambick weapons yield
Dipped in Lycambes gore.


Justine in his twenty seventh book relates, That Seleucus Callinicus King of
Syria, Berenice.
for exiling Berenice his stepmother, sister to Ptolomaeus, was by the same
Ptolomaeus invaded and prosecuted by arms. Deip^^bus after the death of Paris,
having married Hell^n, to which unfortunate match her beauty had invited him,
was by her treachery not only murdered, but his body hackt and mangled, being
almost made one universal wound. Tortellius reports of one Evander the nephew
(...) Pall^s King of the Arcadians, at the persuasion of his mother Nicostrate
sl^w his own father, Nicostrate.
Orestes the son of Agame^^^n slew Pyrrhus the son of Achilles, being surprised
with the beauty of Hermione daughter to Mene^eus; Hermione.
and Helena (...) King of the Thebans, was slain by King Cr^eon, being betrayed
by his own Polydices. Polydices.
Cleopatra was the cause of that bloody war betwixt Ptolomaeus Phil^pater, and
her own father Alexander, King of Syria. Idas and Lyncaeus the sons of Aphareus
and Arbarne fought a great battle near to Sparta, about the two fair daughters
of Leu^ippus, Phebe and ^^aira against Castor and Pollux, Plebe.
both which were slain in that battle and perished not by shipwreck, Ilairae.
as some write, in the pursuit of Paris by sea, for the rape of their sister
Hellen. Li^y lib 36. writes of Antiochus, who warning against Rome, was so
taken with the beauty of a (...), that neglecting all warlike discipline, to
spend his (...) with his wanton, he became a (...) to the enemy. Octavia.
Octavia the sister of Aug^lius, being repudi^ted by Anthony, was the (...) of
a civil and intestine war. The Poet Lucretius grow^^^ (...) for the love of a
(...) damsel, drank poison, and so died. Tullia.
Tullia incited ^^rquinius S^perbus to kill her own father Servius Tullius.
Martia.
Martia the strumper, caused Antonius Commodus the Emperor (whose Concubine she
was) to (...) slain by a soldier, with whom she had many times lustful
congression. Titus Corrancanus being sent on Embassy to Teuca Queen of the
Illyrians, Teuca.
because he spoke to her ^reely and boldly, she caused him to be put to death,
against the laws of Kingdoms and Nations, Livius and Florus. Volla^eranus
writes of one Rhodoricus King of the Goths, who because he stup^ated the
daughter of Iulianus who was Prefect in the Province or Tingitana, the father
of the ravished virgin brought in the Moo^s, and raised a war, which before it
was ended, was the death of seven hundred thousand men. Chilpericus the son of
Cloth^rius was slain by the instigation of his wife Fridegunda in his return
from hunting. Fridegund.
Luchinus a Court of Italy wa^ied upon Vgolinus Gonzaga, because he had
adulterated his fair wife Isabella. Volla^^ran Otratus King of Bohemia, accused
of sloth and cowardice by his wife Margarita, Margarita.
for entering league with Rodulphus Caesar raised war betwixt them, in which her
husband was defeated. Gandulphus the martyr, for but counselling his wife to a
more chaste and temperate life, was murdered betwixt her and the adulterer. Of
wars and many other mischiefs, of which fair women have been the original,
Ovid elegantly delivers in 2 Eleg. thus concluding: Vidi ego pro nivea
pugnantes conjuge tauros
Spectatrix animos, ipsa (...).
For a white He^fer I have seen (...) ^ight,
Both gathering rage and cou^age fr^^ her sight.


At the building of Rome, R^m^lus to people the City and get wives for his
soldiers, caused them to ravish the Sabin women and demosels: for which, wa^
grew betwixt the two Nations. Of which Proper, lib. 2.

Cur exempla (...) Graecum? Tu criminis author
Nutribus (...) lact^ lupae, etc.
What need I from (...) Greek^ example ask?
Thou (...) by (...) she-wo^fe nursed
To rape the (...) m^d'st thy soldiers task
Rape* Rome still love^, because thou taught'st it first.
Since men the form at best (...) ^oon fades, and the beauty has been the came
of so much bloodshed, Why should women be so proud of that which rated (...)
the highest, is no better then in excellent evil, or a wretched wonder; that
had beginning, therefore subject to end; created from earth, and therefore
consequently trans^^^ry? but on the contrary, since the virtues of the mind
^^ely acquire after (...) and glory, conquer oblivion and survive envy, and
Ph^nix-like recover fresh youth from forgotten ashes: To such I yield the first
place, and so begin with the Amazons.

Of the Amazons.
AND first of their Country. Cappadocia is a land that breeds goodly and
brave horses, it has on the East side Armenia, on the West Asia the less, on
the North Amazonia, on the South Mount Taurus, by which lies Sicilia and
(...), as far as the Cilicke Sea that stretches toward the Island of Cyprus.
The less Asia (called Asia minor) joineth to Cappadocia, and is closed in with
the great sea, for it has on the North the mouth and sea that is called
Euxinus, on the West Propontides, on the South the Egyptian sea. This less
Asia contains many Provinces and Lands, (...) the North side Bythinia butting
upon the sea against Thracia, and is called Phrygia the greater. The chief
City of Bythinia is Nicomedia. Galathia takes name of the (...) that assisted
the King of Bythinia in his wars, and therefore had that Province given them to
inhabit. It was first called Gallograecia, as being people mixed of the Gals and
Grecians, but now they be called Galathians, and these are they to whom Saint
Paul writ his Epistles, Ad Galatas. The third part of Asia minor is called
Phrygia, and took name of Phrygia daughter to Europa, the daughter of Ae^^nor:
that Phygia was likewise called Dardania of Dardanus the son of Jupiter; It
has on the East side Lydia, and on the West the sea H^lle^pon^us, so called of
Helles the sister of Phrixus, who was ^^ere drowned. Lydia is on the East side
of East Phrygia, there sometimes reigned the rien King Croesus. There were two
brethren Kings of that Country, the one called Liddus, the other Tyrrhenus: but
the land being too little for both, they cast lots which should abide there,
and which should seek abroad to plant a Colony elsewhere; which lot ^ell to
the younger, Tyrrhenus: He touched upon a land then called Gallia, which after
he caused to be named Tyrrhia, of him also the sea Tyrrhenus took denomination,
as the Land of Lydia of his brother Lyddus. Of Lydia, the chief City in
Smyrna, to which City St. John the Evangelist writes in his Apocal. The chief
river of that Country is P^ctolus, which as the Poets Fable, has golden lands.
The fifth part of Asia minor is called (...), and (...), the chief City is
Seleucia, built by (...) Antiochus; (...) to that is Cilicia, and (...) Lycia,
which is called likewise Licaonia, in which are the two noble Cities, Lystris
and Derbe, spoken of in Actib. Apostol. By these Cities they sail out of Syria
into Italy: but the chief of all these Cities is Tharsis, downwards toward the
Amazonian sea, and that land is part in Asia, and part situate in Europe. Now
touching the original of the Amazons, and why they were first so called,
diverse authors have diversely writ. Palaephatus in his fabulous narrations, Lib.
1. cap. de Amazonib.
says, The Amazons were not women, but certain barbarous men who used to
wear long garments, and loose, reaching below their ancles after the manner of
the Thracian women, who shaved their chins, and wore the hairs of their head
long, but covered with miters: These Amazons were a warlike people, and did
many brave and remarkable deeds of arms. But there is no likelihood (says he)
that such should be women, because of that nation there is at this day no
memory: but this was but his opinion. Trogus Pompeius, from whom Iustine
extracts his history, thus speaks of their original. Scythia toward the East,
is of one side embraced by the sea, on the other part hemmed in by the Ryphaean
mountains, the longitude and latitude thereof lies open to Asia and the river
Tan^is: These Scythians have no portions of land amongst them, The custom of
the Scythians.
which any man can call his own, they manner no fields, they build no houses,
ignorant both of Agriculture, and Architecture, their riches are their herds
and their cattle, they delight in unfrequented solitudes, and inhabitable
deserts; when they remove from one place to another, they carry their wives
along with them in Chariots and Wagons, these are covered with leather and
skins of beasts, to ^h^ound them from summers showers, and defend themselves
from winters tempests, they know no houses else, and for no others care.
Justice is maintained by the modesty of their manners, nor by the severity of
their laws. There is no offense so grievous to them as their, because their
flocks lie open without folds or sheep-coats; Gold and silver they despise as
much as other Nations covet it, esteeming it rather an unusefull burden then a
profitable merchandise: Their food is for the most part milk and honey, the
benefit of wool or cloth is to them altogether unknown, though the climate
oppress them with continual cold, their habit is fu^s and (...) of beasts;
their con^inence teaches them that justice, That they covet nothing but what
is their own: for where there is desire of riches, there must necessarily be
usury and oppression. Were the like moderation and abstinence used amongst all
nations, war and sur^et would not (as they do now) destroy more then age or
nature. Admirable it is, that custom in them should attain to as much true
moral humanity, as the wise men of Greece have reached to by the learning of
arts, or study of Philosophy, and that untaught Barbarians should excel them,
that profess to (...) others in manners; more eminent far in their ignorance
of vice, then the others in their knowledge of Virtue. The brave acts of
Scythians.
Three times these Scythians attempted the Empire of Asia, in all their
expeditions remaining unfoil'd, at least unconquered. Da^ius King of Persia
they put to shameful ^light. Cyrus with a supposed invincible army, they slew
in the field. Z^^pyrus the great Captain of Alexander, they victoriously
defeated. Of the Romans they only heard their power, but never felt their
strength. The Parthian and Bactrian Empire they established. A nation in labors
unwearied, in dangers undismaied, not seeking to get what they cared not to
lose, in all their victories preferring the glory before the spoil. The first
that made war against this Nation, was Vexores King of Egypt, who by his
Ambassadors sent them word to prepare themselves for defense: by whom they
returned to the King this answer, We wonder that the Captain of so rich a
people, will wage war against us that are known so poor, considering the
success of war is doubtful; and howsoever the event prove, the reward of the
victory is nothing, but the damage arising from the sight, manifest. Their
answer went before, which their resolution as sudde^ly and swiftly pursued
after, for their army and their answer almost arrived together, whose celerity
in match, and resolution in purpose, when Vexores understood, he forsook his
tents and all provision for war, and betook himself to a base and
dishonorable flight. A base slight*
They pursued him to the Egyptian sens, but by reason of the marshes and
uncertain ground, their further passage was prohibited Rety^^ng tu^nce they
overran Asia, and subdued it under their pred^minance, imposing on the Nations
a small triba^e, rather in acknowledgement of the title, then to be gainers by
the victory, the enemy rather suffering disgrace then oppres^^n: fifteen years
they continued in Asia, rather to settle the (...), then to extort from the
inhabitants. From thence they we (...) by the wickedness of their wives, from
whom they ^eceived word, That unless they (...) repaired home, they would seek
issue from the neighbor nations, for they would not suffer the posterity of
the ancient Scythians to be in the women extinct. Asia was for many years
tributary to the Scythians; Trogus and Justine say, for a thousand and five
hundred years, which ended in Ninus King of Assyria: In this interim, two
Princely youths among the Scythians, Plinos and Scolopitus, being by the
optimates and chief of the people expulsed from their families, drew to their
society a mighty confluence and invaded Cappadocia, planting themselves near to
the river The^medon; and being by conquest possessed of Themisciria, there
having for many years made spoil of the neighbor nations by the conspiracy of
the multitude who were oppressed with their insolences, The first beginning of
the Amazons.
they were betrayed and slain. Their wives by reason of their exile half in
despair, boldly took arms, and first retiring themselves and making their own
confines defensible, after grew to the resolution to invade others. Besides,
they disdained to marry with their neighbors, calling it rather a servitude
then Wedlock. A singular example to all ages. Thus they augmented their
seigniories and established their Commonweal without the counsel or assistance
of men, whose fellowship they began now altogether to despise: and to
communicate their loss, to make the widows of equal fortune with the wives,
they sl^w all the men that yet remained amongst them, and after revenged the
deaths of their husbands formerly slain, upon the bordering people that
conspi^ed against them. At length by war having settled peace, lest their
posterity and memory should perish, they had had mutual congression with their
neighbor Nations* The men children they slew, the (...) they (...) and brought
up, not in sowing and spinning, but in hunting and practice of arms and
horsemanship; and that they better might use their lances, and with the more
ease, at seven years of age they scared or rather burnt off their right
breasts, Whence the name of Amazons was derived. Marthesia. Lampedo.
of which they took the name of Amazons, as much as to say Vnimammae, or
Vrimammae, i. those with one breast, or with a burnt breast. There were of them
two Queens that jointly held the sove^^ignty, Marthesia and Lampedo; these
divided their people into two armies, and being grown potent both in power and
riches, they went to war by turns, the one governing at home whilst the
other forraged abroad; and lest their should want honor and authority to their
successes, they proclaimed themselves to be derived from Mars: insomuch, that
having subdued the greatest part of Europe, they made incursions into Asia, and
there subdued many fortresses and Castles, where having built Ephesus with many
other Cities, part of their army they sent home with rich and golden spoils,
the rest that remain to maintein the Empire of Asia, were all with the Queen
Marthesia or as some write, Marpesi^) defeated and sl^^n. In whose place of
sovereignty her daughter Oryth^^ succeeded, Orythia.
who besides her singular (...) and fortunate success in war, was no less
admired for her constant vow of virginity, which to her death she kept
inviolate. The bruit of their glorious and invincible acts ^eaching as far as
Greece, Herculis with a noble assembly of the most heroic youths, furnished
nine ships, with purpose to make proof of their valor: two of four sisters at
that time had the principality, Antiope and Orythia* Orythians was then
employed in foreign expeditions. Now when Hercules with the young Hero's landed
upon the Amazonian continent, Queen Antiope, not jealous of the least
hostility, stood then with many of her Ladies unarmed on the shore, who being
suddenly assaulted by the Graecians, were easily put to rout, and they obtained
an easy victory; in this conflict many were slain, and diverse taken, amongst
whom were the two sisters of Antiope, Menalippe. Hyppolite.
Menalippe surprised by Hercules, and Hippolite by Theseus, he subdued her by
arms, but was captivated by her beauty, who after took her to his wife, and of
her begot Hippolitus. Of her S^^eca in Agamemnon thus speaks: Vid^ Hippolite
ferox pectore e medio rapi
Spo^^um and sagittas.
The bold Hippolite did see that day
Her breast despoiled and her shafts taken away.
Of Menalippe, Virgil thus:
Threicean s^xto spoliavit Amazona Baltheo.
Having relation to the golden belt of Thermedon, which was numberd the sixth of
Hercules his twelve labors, He received that honor, and she her liberty.
Orythia being then abroad and hearing of these outrages and dishonours done at
home, that war had been commenced against her sister, and Theseus Prince of
Athens born thence Hippolite, whom she held to be no better then a ravisher;
impatient of these injuries, she convented all her forces, and incited them to
revenge, inferring, that in vain they bore Empire in Europe and Asia, if their
dominions lay open to the spoils and rapines of the Grecians. Having encouraged
and persuaded her own people to this expedition, she next demanded aid of
Sagillus King of the Scythians, to him acknowledging her self to be descended
from that nation, shows the necessity of that war, and the honor of so brave
a victory: hoping that for the glory of the Scythian Nation, his men would not
come behind her women in so just an enterprise, the success of which was
undoubtedly spoil for the present, and fame for her. Sagillus with these
motives encouraged, sent his son Penaxagoras with a great army of horsemen to
aid Orythea in this war; but by reason of a dissension that fell in the camp,
the Prince of Scythia withdrew all his auxiliary f^^ces, and with them retired
into his Country, by reason of which defect the Amazons were defeated by the
Grecians, yet many of them after this battle recovered their Countries.
Penthisilaea.
After this Orythea succeeded Penthisilaea, she that in the aid of Priam (o^ as
some say, for the love of Hector) came to the siege of Troy with a thousand
Ladies, where after many deeds of chivalry by her performed, she was slain by
the hands of Achilles, or as the most will have it, by Neoptolemus; she was the
first that ever fought with Poleax, or wore a Targer made like an half Moon,
therefore she is by the Poets called Peltigera and Securigera, as bearing a
Targer, or bearing a Poleaxe: Therefore Ovid in his Epistle of Phaedra, Prima
securigeras inter virtute puellas.
And Virgil in his first book of Aeneid.
Ducit Amazo^^dum lunatis Agmina peltis
Penth^silaea ^urens m^^iisque in millibus ardet,
Penthisilaea mad, leads forth
Her Amazonian train,
Armed with their moon^d shields, and fights
M^dst thousands on the plain.


These Amazons endured till the time of Alexander; and though Isiodorus. Ephesians.
14. says, that Alexander the Great quite subverted their Nation, yet Trogus,
Justine, Q. Curtius, and others, are of a contrary opinion, and affirm, that
when Alexander sent his Ambassadors to demand of them tribute, otherwise his
purpose was to i^vade their territories: their Queen Minithra (or as some
writers term her, Minithra or Thalestris
Thalestris) returned him answer after this manner: It is great wonder of thy
small judgment, O King, that thou have a desire to ^^age war against women; if
thou being so great a conqueror should be vanquished by us, all thy former
honors were blemished, and thou perpetually branded with shame and infamy; but
if our gods being angry with (...) should deliver us up into thy mercy, what
addition is it to (...) honor, to have had the mastery over weak women? King
Alexander (it is said) was pleased with this answer, g^anting them freedom,
and said, Women ought to be counted with fair wo^ds and flattery, and not with
rough steel and hostility. After this she sent to the King desiring to have his
company, as longing to have issue by him to succeed the father in (...) and
virtue, to which he assented. Some write, she staid with him in wondrous
familiarity fourteen days: but Trogus in his second book says forty days,
and when she found her self with child by him, took her leave and departed
into her own Country. Virgil amongst these Amazonians, Harpalice.
numbers Harpalice, Aeneid. lib. 1.

-- Vel qualis equos Therissa fatigat
Harpal co --
Such as the Thracian Harpalice was
That horses tired --
Valerius Flaccus lib. 6. speaks of one Harp. Harp.

-- Qua (...) vaca^ jamque ibat in Harpea.
He aimed at Harp where her shield lay void.
These Amazons were by the Scythians called Aeorpata, which is as much as
Viricidae, or man killers. For Aeor signifies Vir, a man, and Pata, Occidere,
to kill. Their habits and manners Curtius thus describes, lib. 5. degestis
Alexandri. Their garments cover not their bodies round; their right side is
still bare toward their breast; their upper robe which is buckled or buttoned
above, descends no lower then the ^^ee; one of their breasts they reserve safe
and untouched, with which they give suck to their infants; the right breast
they burn off, that with the more facility they may draw a Bow, thrill a Dart,
or charge a Lance. Stephanus Byzantius writes* that they are called by the
Greeks Sauropa^idae, because they are said to feed upon Lysards, which in their
language they call Saurae Herodotus writes of them many thing needless here to
insert, only one is worth the observation. To encourage their valor, and that
there should be no coward amongst them, A law among the Amazons.
they have a law, That no Virgin shall be capable of a husband, or enter into
familiar congress with man, before she has brought from the field, the head of
an enemy slain with her own her hand; which has been the cause that so many of
them have died old wrinckled Beldames, that never knew what belonged to the
interchange of carnal society* Of other Scythian women that had a purpose, it
seems, in some kind to imitate these Amazons, it is thus remembered by Strabo,
and others* The warlike Scythians in their third Asian expedition, being absent
from their wives the space of seven years, they supposing their husbands rather
to have been defeat and lost, then detained with the tediousness of so long
and lingering a war, married themselves to their slaves and servants, such as
were only left at home to keep their herds, flocks, and other cattle. The
Scythians after the expiration of their war, returning into their Country, were
opposed by their own vassals, and repelled from their territories as strangers
and invaders, and not such as came to repossesse their own wives and fields:
after many skirmishes and conflicts, the victory still remained doubtful and
uncertain, the Scythians were advised to change their manner of fight, and
because their opposition was against the basest of slaves, not the noblest of
enemies, therefore to suit their weapons according to the persons, and laying
by the noble arms of a soldier, to encounter them not with weapons but with
whips, not with steel, but with scourges and other like instruments of the
terrors of b^se and servile fear. This counsel was generally approved and
followed, so that the next time their slaves affronted them in battle, they
met them with the commanding looks of masters, not of equal enemies, and
shaking these whips and scourges, with the sight thereof their servants were so
terrified, that instantly they b^^^oke themselves to servi^^ and ignoble
^light, conquering them as slaves, whom they could scarce oppose as enemies,
all such of them as they took, they put to tortures and death. Their wives
knowing themselves guilty both of adultery to their beds, and trea^^^ to their
lives, some slew themselves with (...) sword* others stangled themselves with
the halter, all (...) conclusion (...) and resolutely with self hands finished
their own lives, leaving their husbands lusty widows, with ^^ee liberty to
make ch^ice of honester wives. After this accident the Scythians had peace even
to the time of King (...) adds (...) number of tho^ Amazons these following,
(...) Iph^nome, Xanthe, Hypotho^, Orthrepts, or (...) mache, Glauce, Agave,
Theseis, Climene, and Polidora. Calaber beside these reckons up twelve, but by
diverse and doubtful names. Of the name of these Amazons, Ovid writes in the
latter end of his second book, de Art amandi, having writ his two first books,
wherein he has ingeniously proposed all the ways, plots and stratagems by
which men may captivate women to their wishes, and attract them to their
desires, as if he had done his work as worthily as wittingly (which indeed he
has) he thus insultingly concludes.

Me vatem celebrate viri, mihi dicite lauds,
Cantetur toto nomen in orb meum, etc.
Call me your Poet, crown my head with baies,
And let the whole world descant on my praise.
I gave you arms, god Vulcan gave no more
To Thetis son: conquer as he (before)
And h^ there shall his Amazon subdue,
Struck with the darts he from my quiver drew,
Upon his warlike spoils thus let him write,
" Naso my Master taught me first to fight.
Behold young Wenches likewise trace my skill,
They are the next charge of my laboring quill.
In his third book as having prepared and armed men against unarmed women, he
proposes to them the like precepts and instruction, with all the defensible
weapons needful against the ambushes and inticements of men, and thus begins:
Arma dedi Danais, in Amazonas arma supersunt
Quae tibi them and turbae Penthisilaea tuae.
The Greeks I have given arms to, who now stand
Ready to encounter the Amazonian band.
Others within mine armory remain
For thee Penthisilaea and thy ^raine:
Go equally accoutred to the war,
And let such conquer as most savoured are
Of Carine, Venus.
Dione, and the Cupid.
Boy that flies
Round 'bout the world, still hudwinckt of his eyes,
It were no justice to arm men in steel
Against naked women, bare from head to heel,
Oh too much odds there were in combat then,
And so to conquer a great shame for men.


And so much of the Amazons, I now proceed to other Magnanimous and brave
spirited virgins.

Of warlike Women, and those of Masculine virtue.
I Know not better how to express the boldness of women, then by showing you
the fear of men, nor can I more plainly illustrate the valor of one sex, then
by putting you in mind of the cowardice of the other. It is well observed of an
Italian (who writes himself of Lucca) concerning the passion of Fear, Of
Fear.
of which there are three sorts commendable; the first is natural fear, by
which we avoid the enjuries of men, prevent the inconvenience of pestilent
sickness, with such like casua^ties, and (...) our selves against want,
dearth, and necessity. The second is civ^^ Fear, wherein we fear to
transgress the Law or ^^cur p^nalty, are timorous to do ill because it is ill,
when we da^e not deprave what is good, or derogate from our own reputation. The
third is a more supernatural Fear, in which by our love toward God and our
neighbor, we fear to offend the higher Majesty, and next that, fear the
terror of eternal death and dammation; by the first we pre^ev^ our bodies, by
the second our honors, by the last our souls. But those other ^bject fears, I
purpose ^ere to exemplify, only such as proceed from Effeminacy and Coward^^^.
It is read of Pysander of Greece, Examples of Fear.
that being alive, he ^eared le^t his soul had already forsaken his body.
Likewise, of one Artemon who was of that ha^^-hearted disposition, (...) he
moved not abroad without Targers of b^asse borne over him like Canopies, lest
any thing should ^^ll from aloft and ^eat out his brains; or if he rid, it was
(...) horse-litter ceiled and crosse-bar^'d with gad^ o^ steel and plates of
iron, for which he was called Peripharetes. S^bellicus writes, that Cassander
so feared Alexander that long time after his death, coming to Delphos to
behold the good^y statues there erected, at the very sight of his old maste^s
e^^igies, he fell into such a timorous fe^ver, that his very (...) danced in
his skin, and long time it was ^re they could constantly settle themselves in
them own places. This was that Cassander who had caused Olympias the mother of
Alexander to be so cruelly butchered. It is (...) of St Valle^^ Duke of
Valentinois in France, that being condemned to death for not disclosing the
treasons of the Duke of Burbon, just at the instant when the executioner should
have struck off his head, the King sent him his gracious pardon, but all in
vain, the fear of the blow before it came, had dispatched him of life. Hereof
has grown a proverb, to any man that has a strong apprehension of fear, they
will say he has La fieure de Saint Vallier, i. the fever of Saint Vallier
Another thing is recorded, of a fellow that was so afraid of the name of
Hercules, that he hid himself in caves and rocks, though he knew not of any
quarrel betwixt them, at length stealing from the obscure cavern where he had
denned himself, to see if the coast were clear, casting his eye by chance on
the one side, and espying Hercules who came that way by chance, his life blood
sinking into his heels, she shook them a little and died in that fever, I
could recite terrors and vain fears which have arisen from nothing, that have
terried whole Cities of Grecians, armies of Romans, and multitudes of other
nations, but these particulars shall suffice, for my purpose is not too far
to esteminate men, nor too much to embolden women: since the most valiant man
that is, is timorous enough, and the modestest woman that is, may be made
sufficiently bold. But to the purpose in hand: Deborae.
Debora a warlike woman, was a Prophetess and judged Israel; by whose counsel
and courage, they were not only freed from the inroads and incursions of the
neighbor nations, but many times returned from the field with rich spoils and
glorious conquests: of her you may read more at large in the Judges. Janus was
an ancient King of Italy, he enterteined King Saturn, when by his son Jupiter
he was ch^ced out of Creet: Because he was a provident and wise Prince, the
Romans pictured him with two faces, and received him into the number of their
gods, they attributed to him the beginning and end of things, celebrating to
his honor the first month January, which took the denomination of Janus from
his name one face looked upon the year to come, the other looked back on the
year past; in his right hand he had a golden key which (...) the Temple of
Peace, in his left, a staff which he struck upon a stone, from whence a spring
of water seemed to issue out; he is thus described by Albricus the Philosopher,
in his book de Deorum Imaginibus. This Janus left behind him a beautiful fair
daughter, whose name was Helerna, Helerna.
she succeeded her father in his Kingdom, which was (...) by the river Tiber,
and was a woman of masculine spirit and virtue: she reigned over men without
the counsel or assistance of men, she subdued Nations by her valor, and
conquered Princes by her beauty, of whom may be truly spoken as Propertius lib.
2. writes of the Queen Penthisilaea: Ausa ferox ab equo quondam oppugnare
sagittis, etc.
Penthisilaea from her steed,
When her high courage rose,
Durst with her sha^^s and warlike darts,
The Darnish fleet oppose:
No sooner was her beaver up,
And golden caske laid by:
But whom by force she could not take,
She captived with her eye.


Camilla and others.
THis Camilla was Queen of the Volscians, who even in her cra^le gave manifest
tokens of her future virtue and valor, for in her infancy she was neither
swathed in soft clothing, nor wrapped in silken mantle, not attended by a tender
nurse, nor ^ed with curious dainties or ^arre fetched delicates, Me^abus.
but fostered by her father Me^abus, with the milk of hinds and wild goats; her
court was a forest, and her palace a dark and obscure cave. Having somewhat
outgrown her infancy, she took no pleasure in rattles, puppets or timbrels, in
which children for the most part delight, neither did she inure her hands to
spinning or any such like womanish chares: her clothing was the skins of wild
beasts, her exercise hunting, her practice shooting, her arms the bow and
quiver, her drink the fountain water, and her food Venison. To this ^bste^^ous
life, she vowed the strict vow of chastity. At length war being commenced
betwixt Turnus and Ae^eas, she adhered to the Ru^ilian faction, and to those
wars brought a regiment of gallant horse, which she in person (...). Her
magnanimity Virgil in the latter end of his (...) book thus sets down. Hos
super (...), volsca de gente Camilla,
Agmea (...) equ^um and florentes aere catervas,
To their supply Camilla came,
The gallant Volscian Less,
Who bravely did command the horse
With troops that shined in brass.
Of the like condition was Maria Puteolana, Maria Puteolana.
so called of Peu^eolum a City of Campania; she was of a warlike condition, and
an invincible courage, and flourisht in the age of Franciis Pitrarch: she is
described to be most patient of labor, and untired with travel, moderate in
diet, but altogether abstinent from wine, sparing of words, (...) boasting, but
always daring: The needle, the wheel, and the (...) horse, armor, the bow,
the (...) and the target above all other delights she embraced; she used to
walk whole nights without the least sleep, and travel whole days together
without rest; if necessity at any time compelled her eyes to wink, or her body
to lie down, the earth was her bed, and her shield her pillow; she abandoned
the society of women, her continual conversation was with Captains and
Commanders, which though (...) a face of boldness and (as some term it)
impudency, yet his apparent to all men in what a sovereign respect she held her
chastity and honor, which she maintained without the least blemish unspotted
to the end; from (...) talk and discourse that tended to immodestly, she
refreined, all affected habit (...) favored of pride, or might be imputed to
lightness, she detested; she was only addicted to C^ivalry, to be accounted
valiant and virtuous that was her honorable aim, and such her memorable and
Bona was a Lady of Lomba^dy, Bona Longabarba.
and was surnamed Longabarba, and not (...) ^anked with these, she was a woman
warrior, and lived in the year of grace, 1568. she was the wife of B^unorius
Parmensis, a worthy and rerenown^d sould^er, her vi^gin youth was continually
exercised in hunting and the chase, she attended her husband in all (...)
expeditions, not as a partner of his pleasures, but a companion in his dangers,
she kept not the City when he was in the camp, nor lodged in tent when he lay
in the field, no^ crept she more close to him in bed, then she stood last by
him in battle; after many great services performed, and glorious victories
achieved, he fell into the displeasure of Alexander King of Sicily, who cast
him into prison; But this noble Lady Bona, good both in name and conditions,
never l^ft soliciting the Emperor and other Christian Princes, both by
petitions and friends, till she had purchased him a safe an honorable release.
The next Virago that comes in place, Atalanta.
is Atalanta, Apollodorus Atheniensis, lib. 3. de deorum origin, thus compiles
her history: Of Lycurgus and Cleophile (or as some will have it, Eurinome) were
born Ancaeus, Epochus, Amphidamus and Idaeus; of Amphidamus, Melamian a son,
and Antimal^e a daughter, whom Euristhaeus married: of Jasus and Clymene the
daughter of Mimia, was Atalanta born, whose father desirous of masculine issue,
cast her out to a desperate fortune, whom a she-Beare finding, fed her with her
milk, till certain ^untsmen coursing that way, and chancing upon so sweet and
beautiful an infant, took her home, and saw her fairly and liberally educated.
She being grown to mature age, notwithstanding she was solicited by many
suitors, took upon her the strict vow of virginity, and arming her self after
the manner of Diana, solely devoted her self to hunting and the chase; and
increasing in beauty as she did in years, she was ambushed by two Centaurs,
Rhaecus and Hyllaeus, who insidiating her virgin chastity, she with two shafts
transpierc'd them and left them dead in the place. The next heroic action
which made her famous, she came with all the noble youths of Greece to the
hunting of the Calidonian Boar, and was the first that drew blood of the beast
in the presence of Meleager, Prince of Aetolia, and all the other brave Heroes,
of whom Putanus lib. 3. de Stellis, thus speaks: Qualis in Aetolum campis
Meleagria virgo,
Stravit aprum, etc.
As did the Meleagrian girl,
Who in the Aetolian plain,
Laid flat the foaming Boar, and was
The foremost of the train
That gave him bold encounter, and
As ignorant of fear,
Noct her sharp arrow, and the string
Plucked close up to her care:
The first that day in field that blood
From the stern monster drew:
Bearing the honor, spoil and palm.
From all that Princely crew.


Of the love of Meleager to her, and of his death, I either have, or shall find
occasion to speak elsewhere. Her next a^chievement by which she purchased her
self honor, was her contention in the sports of Peleus. It shall not be
amiss to tell ^ou what these sports and pastimes were; They were the twelve in
number that were celebrated amongst the Greeks, Acastus the son of Peleus
instituted them in honor of his father. Z^thas the son of Aquilo overcame in
that which was called Doli^hodromus, which signifies a race of twelve furlongs.
Calais his brother had the best in the Diantus, which was a race of two
furlongs. Castor the son of Jupiter was victor in the Stadium, which was a
place of running or exercise, as well for men as horse; the word signifies a
furlong or a measure of ground; there be of them three sorts, Three sorts of
Furlongs.
one of Italy, containing 615 feet, which amounts to 125 paces; the second is
called Olympicum, which exists of 600 feet, which is an hundred and twenty
paces; the third Pythicum, containing 1000 feet, which comes to 200 paces.
About these Stadia, ^liny and Diodorus differ: in the description of Sicily,
eight of these furlongs make an Italian mile, containing 1000 paces, and every
pace five feet. Pollu^ carried away the prize called Cestus, which signifies a
married belt or girdle, which the husband used to tie about the wast of his
bride, and unloose the first night of their wedding. Telamon the son of Ajax,
had the praise in Disco, or casting the bullet or the stone. Peleus in
wrestling. Me^^ager the son of Oereus in casting of the dart. Cignus the son of
Mars, slew Pilus the son of D^odatus. Bellerophon was the most eminent for
riding the horse. And Iolaus the son of Iphicles, for managing the Chariot.
Hercules overcame in many things, but Atalanta in all. No^ long after this
coming, to the knowledge of her parents, and being by them persuaded to marry;
to prevent the loathed embraces of a husband, trusting to her own incomparable
swiftness, she devised a race, in which she proposed her self the prize of
the victor, but the vanquished were mulcted with the loss of their heads: after
the slaughter of many Princes, Melanion (before spoken of) inflamed with her
love, received of Venus three golden apples, which he let fall one after
another in the swiftness of their course, she by stooping to take them up,
slackned her speed, and by losing the race became his prize and bride. Some
write that they ran in Chariots and armed, trusting to the swiftness of their
steeds, not the velocity of their own feet. The manner of their running is
elegantly described in Ovid, of which I will give you present expression.
Hesiod, Naso, and others, will not allow Atalanta to be the daughter of Jasus,
but Schoeneus; Euripides derives her from Menelaus, making her the bride of
Hyppomanes the son of Megaraeus, grandchild of Neptune, not of Melamion. The
manner of their course is thus set down, Metamorph. lib. 10.

Signa tubae dederunt, etc.
The signal given, The race of Hippomenes and Atlanta.
whilst both prepared stand
Now, on they go: their heels but kiss the sand,
And leave no print behind, you would suppose
They might pass seas, and yet their nimble toes
Not mingle with the billows: or extend
Their course o'r ripe ears, yet the stalks not bend.
On all sides the young men (spectators) cry,
Well run Hippomenes (who seems to fly
More swiftly then their voices) if thy meed
Be worth thy toil, now, now, it is time to speed.
Clamor and shouts encourage both: her pace
She sometimes slacks to look back on his face,
His labor made it lively on the way,
Which forced her often when she might pass him, stay;
She outstrips him though, but half against her will
And feels his dry breath on her locks play still,
Which her speed cast behind. The course is long,
He seems to faint, and she appears more strong.
The bold Neptunian Hero from his hand
One of those golden apples on the strand
Before her bowls; she stoops amazed, and won
With the riches of the ^^well, is outrun,
Stooping to take it up: he now gets ground,
Whilst loud applausive shouts the people sound:
At which, her slacknesse she redeems, and time
Lost in that small delay, she as a crime
Now in her spend corrects, and like the wind
Flies toward the goal, and leaves the youth behind.
Again he drops another, and again
She for the second stoops, whilst he amain
Strives for the start, and gets it; but her pac^
She still maintains, being foremost in the race.
The last part of the course lies plain before.
He now begins fair Venus to implore,
And the third fruit plucked from the golden tree,
He further casts, yet where she needs must see
The apple shine, 'twas thrown out of the way,
The ground uneven, to move the more delay:
The warlike ^asse though tempted with the show,
Doubts in her self to take it up or no.
Venus pe^rswades in favor of her Knight,
And made it weighty, which before seemed light:
Which as from the earth she labors to divide,
He gains the goal and her for his fair bride.
It is said by Palephatus, Apollodorus, Ovid, and others, That for their
ingratitude to Venus, he was turned into a Lion, and she into a Lioness. The
probability is, that being in the chase they retired themselves into a cave
which proved to be a den of Lions, were they were torn to pieces and devoured.
They being mist by the people, who after saw two Lions issue from that place,
the rumor grew that they were transformed into beasts of that shape. This
Atlanta had by Metamion or Hyppomanes, or as some write by Mars, Parthenopaeus,
who after made war upon the Thebans.

Of other warl^ke Ladies.
ABout Meroe reigned the Queen Candaces, Candaces
and had principality over the AE^hiopians a woman of a mighty spirit, who in
all their conquests in person, led her people to the field, amongst whom she
obtained that dignity and honor, that as amongst the Kings of Egypt from the
first of that name that was renowned and beloved, they were for many
successions called Pharaos, and after Ptolomies, and since the time of Julius,
all the Roman Emperors have in memory of hi^^ taken upon them the surname of
Caesar; so for many years after her decease, the Queens of Aethiopia were
called Candaces. Lacena.
The women of Lacena imitated the men in all things, in schools, in hunting,
and in arms. These in the war commenced against the Messenians, adventured
equally in the battle with their husbands: by whose assistance they purchased
a noble victory. It is reported of Valasca, Valasca.
a Queen of the Bohemians, that having made a conjuration with the women of her
Country, to take away all the prerogative and jurisdiction from the men, she
instructing them in Military exercises, levied an army of her own Sex, with
which they met their husbands and overthrew them, by which means they atteined
the sovereign principality (as the Amazons had before times done) for many
years space managed all affairs as well for offense as defense, without the
help or counsel of men. The women of Bellovaca being long and fearfully
besieged by Charles the Great, Bellovacae.
Duke of Burgundy, most resolutely defended the walls, rumbling the assailants
from their sealing ladders into the ditches, to the everlasting honor of their
Sex, and the reproach of the enemy. Lesbia a virgin being besieged by the
Turks, hazarded her self to discover their works and mines, and when the
Citizens were deliberating to surrender up the Town to the merciless enemy,
she opposed their purpose, and presented her self upon the wa^s to the
violence of their arrows and engines, by whose only valor and encouragement,
the City was preserved, and the assailants repulsed with dishonor. Amalasuntha.
Amalasuntha Queen of the Goths, kept her principality near to Ravenna, and as
Volateran has left recorded by the help of Theodotus (whom she made competitor
in the Empire) the expelled from Italy the Burgonians, Teuca.
Almains, and Ligurians. Teuca the wife of Argon, took upon her the
sovereignty, she was Queen of the Illytians, a warlike nation, whom she wisely
governed, by whose valor and fortitude, she not only opposed the violence of
the Romans, but obtained from them many noble victories. Hasbites.
Hasbites was a warlike Virago, and lead armies into the field, of her Sylvius
lib. 1. thus speaks: Haec ignara viri, vacuoque, assueta cubili
Venatu, and silvis, primos defenderat annos, etc.
She knew not man but in a single bed
Upon an empty pillow cast her head,
Her youth she spent in hunting, to the alarm
Of the shrill bugle: on her sinowie arm
She ware no O^^er basket, would not know
Or teach the fingers how to spin or sow:
To trace Dictinna she did most desire,
And in swift course the long breathed stag to tire, etc.


The same author, lib 2. speaks of one Tiburna Saguntina, the wife of one
Mu^^us, Tiburna:
a brave and bold female warrior. Zenobia Queen of the Palmyrians, Saguntina.
after the death of her husband Odenatus took upon her the imperial regency,
Zenobia.
and made tributary the Kingdom of Syria; neither feared she to take arms
against the Emperor Aurelianus, by whom she was overcome and led in triumph:
but when it was objected to Caesar as a dishonor and reproach, that he had
triumphed over a woman; he answered, It was no disgrace at all, being over such
a woman as excelled most men in Masculine virtue. Of whom Pontanus thus speaks:
Qualis and Aethiopum quondam sitientibus arvi^
In fulvum regina gregem, etc. --
As did the Ethiopian Queen
In the dry fields of old,
Encounter with the yellow herds
whose rough hairs shined likegold,
Opposing the stern Lions paw
Alone and without aid:
To see a whom wrestle, men aloof
stood quaking and afraid,
Such ^^ween two warlike hosts appears
this Amazonian Queen,
Zenobia, with her strong bow armed
And furnished with shafts keen.


Hypsicrataea the wife of Mithridates was still present with him in battle,
and left him in no danger, Hypsicrataeae
cutting her hair short, lest it should offend her when she put on her beaver.
Artimesia Queen of Caria, after the death of her husband was admired through
Greece, Artimesia.
who not only in a navall expedition overcame the invading Rhodians, but
pursued them even unto their own coasts, and took possession of the Island,
amidst whose ruins she caused her own glorious statue to be erected; of whom
Herodotus thus writes: I cannot wonder sufficiently at this warlike Queen
Artimesia, who unforced and uncompelled, followed the expedition of Xerxes
against Greece, out of her own manly courage, and excellency of spirit. She was
the daughter of Lydamus, her father was of Halicarnassus, her mother of Creet:
she furnished five ships of her own charge with Halicarnassaeans, Coeans,
Nisirians, and Calidnians, in the great seafight near Salamine, to behold which
battle Xerxes had retired himself and stood but as a spectator. Justine lib.
2. says, There was to be seen in Xerxes, womanish fear; in Artimesia, manly
audacity: for she demeaned her self in that battle to the admiration of all
men; of whose ships the King taking especial notice, but not knowing to whom
they belonged, nor in whose management they then were; one spoke to the King
and said, Great Lord, behold you not how bravely the Queen Artimesia bears her
self this day? the King would not at first believe that such resolution could
be in that Sex: (...) when (notwithstanding her brave service) he perceived
(...) and put to flight, he sighing thus said, All my men this day have showed
themselves women, and there is but one woman amongst them, and she only has
showed her self a man Many of the most illustrious persons died that day, as
also of the Meads, amongst whom was the great Captain Aria Begnes, the son of
Darius, Cleopatra.
and brother of Xerxes. Cleopatra Queen of Egypt, the daughter of Dionysius
Auleies, after the death of Julius Caesar, having taken Antonius in the
bewitching (...) of her beauty, she was not contented with the Kingdoms of
Egypt, Syria and Arabia, but she was ambi^ious to sovereignize over the Roman
Empire; in which though she failed, it showed as invincible a spirit in (...)
as she expressed an unmatched (...) the (...) of her voluntary death. (...) the
Persian invading the Messagers and Scythians, Tomyris.
of which (...) then reigned Queen; she sent against him her only son (...)
with a puissant army, to beat him back again beyond the river Araxes, which he
had (...) with a mighty host rejected. But the young man not (...) to the (...)
and policies of war, suffered his soldiers in (...) to be invaded, his (...)
rifled, his army defeated, and himself taken prisoner (...) the Queen sent to
this purpose, (...) (...) in a Prince.
This message being delivered to (...) he regarded (...) but held it at the vain
boast of a (...) woman. (...) being awa^^d fromthe drinking (...) wine, and
perceiving (...) Cyrus that he might be released from his bands to which the
Persian granted; (...) sooner found his legs unbound, and his hands (...)
cathct hold of a weapon and slew (...) The Queen having intelligence of the
death of the (...) of her son, and withal, that (...) gave no heed to her
admonition, collected a puissant army of purpose to give him battle, who
enticed him by a counterfeit (...) straights of her Countery, where having
(...) her men, she fell upon the Persians, and made (...) the slaughter, even
to the defeating of their whole (...) strange and bloody execution, Cyrus
himself fell, whose body T^myris caused to be sercht for, and being found,
filled a vessel full of blood, into which commanding his head to be thrown, she
thus insultingly spoke, Of humane blood in thy life thou were insatiate, and
now in thy death thou may drink thy fill. The fashions of the Messagets are
after this manner described by Her^dotus: A description of the Messagets.
Their habit and their food is according to the Scythians, they ^ight as well
on horseback as on foot, being expert in both, they are both A^chers and
Lanciers, in all their weapons armor or caparisons, using gold and brass; in
the heads of their spears, their quivers, their daggers, and other armor, they
wear brass; but whatsoever belongs to the head, or to the breast, is of the
purest gold; the breast places of their horses, and what belong to their
trappings and caparisons, are buckled and stud^ed with brass, but that which
appertains to the head-stal or reins is of gold: of iron and silver they have
small use or none (as being rare in their Country) ^ut gold and brass they
have in abundance. Every man marries a wi^e, but not to his own peculiar use,
for they keep them in common, for what the Greeks in this kind remember of the
Scythians they do not; it is customable only amongst the Messagets, if any man
have an appetite to a woman, he only hangs his quiver upon the next bough, and
prostitutes he in public without taxation or shame. There is no (...)
proposed to terminate their lives; when any grows old, his neighbors about
him make a general meeting, and with great ceremony (after the manner of a
sacrifice) cause him (...) slain, with other cattle in number according to
(...), with whose ^lesh ^oil'd together, they make a (...) him to dye in the
most blessed estate (...) slain and eaten; such as die of consumption or
disease they eat not, but ^ury in the earth, accounting all (...) that suffered
not immolation, and whose (...) was not ^easted with. They neither sow nor
reap, but (...) their cattle and fish, o^ which the river Araxes yields them
plenty, they drink milk, and honor the Sun: and to the gods whom they most
^eare, they sacrifice such (...) beasts as they hold most fearful; and (...)
for the customs of the M^ssagets. Now lest it might (...) almost against
nature, that amongst so many fighting women, there should be no scolding at
all, let it not be taken amiss, if I put you in mind of two or three shrowes
by the way, and so return again to my former argument.

Xantippe and Mirho.
HIeronymo writ a book against Iovinian, in which he copiously discourses of
the praise of Virginity, reckoning a Catalogue of diverse famous and renowned in
that kind amongst sundry Nations, Petr. Crinit. lib. 1. cap. 11
besides the discommodities and inconveniences of scolding and contentious
wives: and amongst other husbands much troubled in that kind, he speaks of
Socrates, who having two cursed queans, and both at once (for the law of Athens
did allow duplicity of wives) could endure their scoldings and contumacie with
such constancy and patience; for having Zantippe and Mirho the daughters of
Aristides, the house was never without brawling and uprore. One Euthidemus
coming from the wrestling place, and Socrates meeting him by chance, compelled
him home to supper; and being sat at board, and in sad and serious discourse,
Zantippe spoke many bitter and railing words of disgrace and contumely against
her husband; but he nothing moved therewith, nor making her the least answer,
she tipped up the Table and flung down all that was upon it. But when
Euthidemus being therewith much moved, arose to be gone and instantly depart,
Why what harm is there (quoth Socrates) did not the same thing chance at your
house when I dined with you the last day, when a cackling hen cast down such
things as were upon the board, yet we your guests notwithstanding left not your
house unmannerly. Another time in the market, she snatching his cloak from his
back, the standers by persuaded him to beat her; but he replied, so whilst she
and I be tugging together, you may stand by laughing, and cry, O well done
Zantippe, O well done Socrates. Another time she with her much loquacity had
made him weary of the house, therefore he sat him down upon a bench before the
street door; but she at his patience being the more impatient, and much more
angry because she was not able to move in him the least anger, she mounts up in
a garret window, and from thence pours a full pispot upon his head: such as
came by, extremely moved, as much in derision of his person, as at the
suddenness of the action; he took up a laughter as high and as loud as the
best, expressing no more anger then in these words, Nay I thought verily in my
mind, and could easily judge by the weather, that after so great a thunder, we
must necessarily have rain. Aulus Gel.
Aulus Gellius writes, that Alcibiades demanding why he would keep two such
scolding queans in his house, and at once, who never ceased brawling, when
either of them both were sufficient to put any man of the gentlest temperance,
quite beyond his patience? he thus answered him: These women (O Alcibiades)
teach me at home that sufferance which I ought to practice when I am abroad,
for being (as you see I am) well exercised and broken with the factions of
these two, I shall be the more gentle to deal withal in the socety of other
men: and so much for Zantippe and Socrates. But since I am fallen into a
discourse of Shrowes, let it nor seem much impertinent to insert what mine own
opinion was, when a Gentleman demanded of me the difference between a shrow and
a sheep. I considering with my self that there were so many of the one party,
and so few of the other, thought it the most generous to take the weaker side:
and therefore because some speak too much for themselves, and the modesty of
the others will not give them boldness to say what is sufficient, I thus
determined in their behalf.

What Is he can teach me by their seeming show,
Whether's the best to choose, A Sheep.
a Sheep or Shrow?
A Sheep, what is that? A beast of gentle kind,
Harmless in nature, and of modest mind,
(If mind may be in beasts) she is of voice low,
Afraid of the least clamor: A Shrow.
when the Shrow,
In calmes makes tempests, and to all men's wonder,
Speaks in the fairest weather, fire, and thunder.
What Is he that is wise and would in warmth compare
To the English wool, the Barbary Lions hair?
The Hircanian Tigers, or the Musco Bears,
The Spanish Jinnets trapt in all his gears,
The Lapland Heart, or the swift Finlands Dow,
The Arabian Panther (spotted for the show?)
Does not the Indian Dromedary want
Her riches? or the jointlesse Elephant?
Or can the Italian Fox, or German Bore,
The Danish Elke, or Cammell, boast her store?
Who that loves warmth, and would desire to pull
The Irish Woolf and leave the English wool?
When as the first would aim to tear thy throat,
The latter gently cloth thee in her coat.
Yet were it best a modest medium keep,
Choose neither complete Shrow, nor perfect Sheep,
I would have my wife neither tongue-ti'd quite,
Nor yet all tongue; so much as could accite
To affability and amorous prate,
So much I Would have her use, and more I hate.
But with a voice like Steutors should she rail,
Or like Xantippe, scold, and when words fail,
Be sullen, dogged, pout and lour, and whine,
Or chide, or be still d^mb; if such were mine,
From her I Would wish my self remote as far,
As such from virtue and true goodness are.
She of the two ex^reams, if you demand
With which I would be troubled, understand,
I Would take the gentlier beast, the harmless Sheep,
Whose calmnesse would not fright me from my sleep,
Or make the down within my bed appear
L^ke knotted ^tocks, or (...) of a rough Bear^,
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
I will now trouble my patience gentle Reader, (...)
with a discourse that has in it more mirth then murder, and more spirit then
might, and yet a touch of both. A mad fellow newly married, had only one young
child by his wife, of some quarter old, whom he deerly and tenderly loved, as
being his first; but he was much given to goodfellowship, and she altogether
addicted to sp^^ing and good (...) sti^l when he used to come merry from the
tavern, where he had been frollick with his boon companions, she being as
sparing of his purse, as prodigal of her tongue (for she was little better
then a scol^) would often upbraid him with his expenses, (...) what he wasted
at the Tavern, were better bestowed at home, that he spent both his money and
(...), it was so prejudicial to his body and estate, with many such matron
like exhortations: but always concluding her admonitions with a vow, That if
ever he came home again in that pickle, she would (happen what would come)
fling the child into the moat (for the house was moted about.) It happened about
some two days after, that he revelling till late in the evening in a cold
frosty winters night, an she having intelligence by her scouts, where he was
then drinking, and making no question but he would came home flustred; she
commanded her maid to conveigh the infant to the further part of the house, and
to wrap the cat in the blankets, and put it in the cradle, and to sit and rock
it; presently home comes the husband, she falls to her old lesson, and begins to
quarrel with him, and he with her: (...) words begot worle, and much lewd
language there was betwixt them, when the woman on the sudden stepping to the
cradle (having spied her advantage) I have long says she threatened a
mischief, and that (...) I cannot work on thee, A pretty revenge.
come dogs come devils I will inflict upon the brat in the cradle; and
instantly snatching it up in her arms, ran with it to the moat side and slung
it into the middle of the water: which the poor affrighted man following her,
and seeing, leaving to pursue her, and crying, save the child, O save the
child; in that bitter cold night leapt up to the elbowes in water, and waded
till he brought out the mantle, and with much pain coming to the shore, and
still crying, alas my poor child, opened the cloths, at length the frighted cat
crying mew, being at liberty leaped from betwixt his arms and ran away the
husband was both amazed and vexed, the woman laughed at her revenge, and retired
her self: and the poor man was glad to reconcile the difference, before she
would allow him either fire or dry linen. Considering this, methinks it was
not amiss answered of a Gentleman, who being persuaded by a friend of his not
to marry with such a (...) to whom he was a suitor, his reasons alleged (...),
because she had no quick and vo^uble tongue, (...) or capacity: to whom he
instantly (...) have a woman to be my wife that (...) answer me to a question,
then (...) more wit then to distinguish her (...) from another man's.

Another woman having a husband, who customably (...) home, and shrinking from
his stool or chair would (...) fall upon the floor, and there lie along: and
still when she called him to bed, he would answer her, Let me alone, the
tenement is mine own, and I may lie where I list, so long as I pay rent for the
house. Some few nights after coming home in the like tune, and sitting asleep
in a chair before the chimnie, his wife being gone to bed, presently the man
falls into the fire: the maid cries out to her Mistress, O mistress, my Master
is fallen and lies in the fire, even in the midst of all the fi^e; she lay still
and turning her on the other side, said, so long as he paies rent for the
house, he may lie where he please. But to more serious business, for I have
done sporting.

Of English Viragoes. And of Joan de Pucil.
OF Guendoline the wife of King Locrine, Guendoline.
and daughter to Corinaeus Cuke of Cornwall, I shall take more occasion to
speak more at large in the discourse of the beautiful Estreld. Elphleda.
Elphleda was sister to King Edward before the conquest, sirnam'd the fourth,
she was wife to Etheldredus Duke of Mercia, who assisted her husband in the
restoring of the City, of Chester, after it had been destroyed and demolished
by the Danes, encompassing it with new walls: he was General to the King in all
his expeditions against the Danes, in the last battle that he fought against
them at a place called Toten Hall
Toten Hall in Stafforshire, he gave them a mighty overthrow, but a greater at
Wooddensfield where were slain two Kings, two Earls, and of the soldiers many
thousands which were of the Danes of Nothumberland. In this battle were the
King and Elphleda both present. Soon after this victory Etheldredus died, and
she governed many years after him in all Mercia or middle England, except the
two Cities of London and Oxford, which the King her brother reserved to
himself. She builded many Cities and Towns, and repaired others, as Thatarn,
Brimsbury, the B^idge upon S^vern, Tamworth, Liechfield, Stafford, Warwick,
Shrewsbury, Watrisbury, Edisbury in the Forest besides Chester, which is since
utterly defaeced and destroyed. Also she built a Cily and a Castle in the North
part of Mercia, which then was called Runcofan, and after Runcorn. Thus far
Ranulphus William de regib. with others give her this noble Character, This
Lady having once assaid the throws of childbirth, would never after be drawn
to have any carnal society with her husband, alleging that it was not sitting
or seemly for a woman of her degree being a Princess, a Kings daughter, and a
Kings sister, to (...) self to such wanton embraces, whereof should (...) so
great pain and sorrow. She tamed the Welchmen, and in many conflict, chased the
Danes: after whose death the King took the province of Mercia entirely into his
own hand, Elswina.
(...) her daughter Elswina, whom he led with him into West Saxon. Henricus
lib. 5. has left this Epitaph as a memorial over her Tomb: Oh Elphlede mighty
both in strength and mind,
The dread of men, and victoresse of thy kind.
Nature has done as much as nature can,
To make thee maid, but goodness makes the man:
Yet pity thou should change ought save thy name,
Thou art so good a woman: and thy same
In that grows greater, and more worthy, when
Thy seminine valor much out shines men.
Great Caesar's acts thy noble deeds excel,
So sleep in peace, Virago maid farewell.


Much to this purpose has Trevisa expressed these verses in old English. Maud
the daughter of Henry the fourth Emperor of that name, after the death of her
husband she bore the title of Maud the Empress: Maud.
her father in his life time swore all the nobility to her succession, but he
being dead, many fell from their oaths of Alleagiance, adhering to Stephen Earl
of Bullein, who by the sisters side was Nephew to the deceased King. He
notwithstanding he had before sworn to her homage, caused himself to be
crowned at London upon St Stephens day, by William Archbishop of Canturbury,
one that had before past his Oath of Alleapiance to the Empress. Much
combustion there was in England in those days betwixt Maud and Stephen, and
many battles fought, in which the success was doubtful, the victory sometimes
inclining to the one, and again to the other, the circumstances rather would
become a large Chronicle then a short tractate: I will therefore come to that
which sorts best with my present purpose. This Lady took the King in battle,
and kept him prisoner at Bristoll, from Candlemas day to Holyrood day in
harvest: for which victory the people came against her with procession, which
was approved by the Popes legate. From Bristol she came to Winchester, thence
to Wilton, to Oxford, to Reding, and St Albans, all the people acknowledging
her their Queen and sovereign, excepting the Kentish men only: she came thence
to London to settle the estate of the Land, whither came King Stephen for her
husbands delivery, upon condition that Stephen should surrender the Kingdom up
entirely into her hands, and betake himself ever after to a sequestered and
religious life: But to this motion the Empress would by no means assent, the
Citizens likewise entreated her that they might use the favorable laws of S
Edward, and not those strict and severe Statutes and Ordinances devised and
established by King Henry her father; neither to this would the bold spirited
Lady agree. For which the people began to withdraw their affections from her,
and purposed to have surprised her, of which she having notice, left all her
household provision and furniture, and secretly conveied her self to Oxford,
where she attended her forces, who were by this time dispersed and divided But
taking with her her Uncle David King of the Scots, she came before Winchester,
laying a strong siege to the Bishops Tower, which was defended by the brother
of King Stephen. Another English Vi^ago.
But now observe another another female warrior: The wife of the imprisoned
King being denied his freedom, now takes both spirit and arms, and associated
with one William Iperus, came with such a thundering terror to raise the siege,
that the hardy Empress (to give way to her pre^ent ^ury) was from strength
forced to s^e to stratagem: for finding her powers too weak to withstand the
incensed Queen, she counterseited her self dead, and as a Corse caused her
body to be conveied to the City of Gloucester, and by this means escaped. But
Robert her brother was there taken prisoner, and committed to safe custody.
Then the Queen employed her self on the one part for the release of her
husband, and the Empress on the other, for the enfranchisement of her brother:
at length after long debating of the business, it was determined by the
mediators on both sides, that Stephen should be restored to the Kingdom, and
Duke Robert to his Lordship and Earldome; and both as they had disturbed the
peace of the Land, so now to establish it. To this the Earl would not assent:
so that all that year there was nothing but spoil, manslaughter, direptions,
and all manner of violence, robbing of the rich, and oppressing of the poor.
The King upon Holy-Rood day was released, and besieged the Empress in the City
of Oxford, from Michelmas day to mid winter: where being oppressed with famine,
she took the advantage of the Frost and Snow; and attiring her self all in
white, escaped over the Fens, and came to the Castle of Wallingford. And so
much shall suffice to express the magnanimity and warlike dispositions of two
noble and heroic English Ladies. A French Lady comes now in my way, of whom I
will give you a short character. Joane de Are, or de Pucil.


In the minority of Henry the sixth, when France (which was once in his entire
possession) was there governed by our English Regents, the famous Duke of
Bedsord, and others; Charles the Dolphin, styled after by the name of Charles the
seventh (being a Lord without land, yet at that time maintaining what hostility
he was able) whilst the English forraged through France at their will, and
commanded in all places at their own pleasure (the French in utter despair of
shaking often the English yoke) there arose in those desperate times, one Joane
Are, the daughter of James Are and his wife Isabel, born in D^mprin. This James
was by profession a Shepherd, and none of the richest. Joane (whom the French
afterward called Joane de Pucil) whilst she was a young maid and kept her
fathers sheep, would report to diverse, That our blessed Lady, S. Agnes and S.
Katharine, had appeared unto her, and told her, that by her means, France
should regain her pristine liberty, and cast off the yoke of English servitude.
This coming to the ear of one Peter Bradicourt, an eminent Captain then
belonging to Charles the Dolphin, he used means that she should be sent to have
conference with his master, who sojourned then in Chynon, in his lowest of
dejection and despair of hope, supply or comfort. In her journie thither, she
came to a Town called Faire-bois, where taking up her Inn (a place which she
had never before seen) she desired a soldier to go to a secret by-corner,
where was a heap of old iron, and from thence to bring her a sword. The
soldier went according to her direction, and searching the place, amidst a
great quantity of old tongs, shovels, hand irons, and broken horse shoes,
found a fair bright sword with five Flower-Deluces upon either side engraven:
This sword (with which she after committed many slaughters upon the English)
she girt to her, and so proceeded to Chynon to give the Dolphin meeting Being
there arrived, Charles concealed himself amongst many others, whilst he was
brought into a fair long gallery, where he had appointed another to take his
place, and to assume his person: she looking upon him gave him neither respect
nor reverence, but sought out Charles among all the other in that assembly, and
picked him from amongst the rest; to whom making a low obeisance she told him,
that to him only was her business. The Dolphin at this was amazed, the rather
because she had never before seen him, and was somewhat comforted, by reason
that she showed cheer and alacrity in her countenance: they had together long
and private conference; and shortly after she had an army given him to be
disposed and directed by her. She then bespake her self armor, Cap a Pe,
bearing a white Ensign displaid before her, in which was pourtraied the picture
of the Savior of the world, with a Flower-de-luce in his hand; and so marched
to O^leance. Her first exploit was fortunately to raise the siege and ^elieve
the Town. From thence she passed to Reams, took the City and caused the Dolphin
there to proclaim himself King, and take upon him the Crown of France. She
after took Jargueux a strong Town, and in it the Earl of (...) with many other
brave English Gentlemen. She ^ought the great battle of Pathay with good
success, in which were taken prisoners the Lord Talbot (the scourge and terror
of the French Nation) the Lord Scales, the Lord Hungerford, with many others
both of name and quality: she took in Benveele, Mehun, Trois, and diverse other
Towns of great import and consequence; at length in a ca^^^ado or skirmish, she
was taken prisoner by Sir John of Entenburch a Burgonian Captain, and sent to
Roan. The French Chronicles affirm that the morning before she was surprised,
she took the Sacrament, and coming from Church told to diverse that were about
her, that she was betrayed, her life sold, and should shortly after be delivered
up unto a violent death, For Sir John gave a great sum of money to betray her.
The English coming to invest themselves before Mondidier, Joan was advised to
issue out by Fla^y, and skirmish with them; who was no sooner out, but he shut
the gates upon her: being taken, she was sent to Peter Bishop of Bevoise, who
condemned her to the fire for a forceres^e, which judgment was accordingly
executed upon her in Roan, in the Market place. Twenty six years after, Charles
the King for a great sum of money procured an annihilation of the first
sentence from the Pope, in which she was proclaimed a Vi^ago inspired with
divine instinct: in memory of whose virtuous life and unjust death, he caused a
fair cross to be erected just in the place where her body was burned. I
return again to the English. Emma.
F^b^an and Harding speak of Emma sister to the Norman Duke called Richard, who
for her extraordinary beauty, was called The flower of Normandy, she was
married to E^hel^ed King of England. By (...) heroic spirit, and masculine
instigation the King seat to all parts of the Kingdom secret and strict
commissions, That upon a day and hour assigned, all these Danes which had
usurped in the Land, and used great cruelty, should be slaughtered; which at
her behest and the Kings command was accordingly performed, which though it
after proved ominous, and was the cause of much misery and mischief, Queen
Margaret.
yet it showed in her a noble and notable resolution O^ Queen Margaret the wi^e
of Henry the sixth, her courage, resolution, and magnanimity, to speak at large,
would ask a Volume rather then a compendious discourse, to which I am strictly
tied. And therefore whosoever is desirous to be further instructed in the
success of those many battles fought against the house of York, in which she
was personally present, I refer them to our English Chronicles, that are not
sparing in commending her more then woma^ish spirit, to everlasting memory.
With her therefore I conclude my female Martialists: And now me thinks I am
come where I would be, and that is amongst you fair ones.

Of fair Women.
IT is reported of a King, that for many years had no issue, and desirous to
have an heir of his own blood and begetting to succeed in the throne, upon his
earnest supplication to the divine powers, he was blessed with a fair son,
both of beauty and hope. And now being possessed of what he so much desired,
his second care was to see him so educated, that he might have as much comfort
of him in his growth, as hope in his infancy: he therefore sent abroad to find
out the most cunning Astrologians to calculate his nativity, that if the stars
were any way malevolent to him at his birth, he might by instruction and good
education (as far as was possible) prevent any disaster that the Planets had
before threatened. A meeting to that purpose being appointed, and the
Philosophers and learned men from all parts assembled: after much consultation
it was concluded amongst them, That if the infant saw Sun or Moon at any time
within the space of ten years, he should most assuredly be deprived the benefit
of sight all his life time after. With this their definitive conclusion, the
father wondrously perplexed, was willing father to use any fair means of
prevention, then any way to tempt the cross influence of the stars: H^
therefore caused a Cell or Cave to be cut out of a deep rock, and conveying
thither all things necessary for his education, he was kept there in the charge
of a learned tutor, who well instructed him in the Theory of all those Arts
which best suited his apprehension. The time of ten years being expired, and
the fear of that ominous calculation past over, the day was appointed when his
purpose was to publish his son to the world, and to show him the Sun and Moon,
of which he had often heard, and till then never saw entire: and to present
unto his view, all such creatures of which he had been told, and read, but
could distinguish none of them but by hearsay. They brought before him a
Horse, a Dog, a Lion, with many other beasts of several kinds, of which he
only looked, but seemed in them to take small pleasure. They showed him Silver,
Gold, Plate and Jewels; in these likewise be appeared to take small delight or
none, as not knowing to what purpose they were useful: yet with a kind of dull
discontent, he demanded their names, and so p^st them over. At length the King
commanded certain beautiful virgins, gorgeously attired, to be brought into
his presence: which the Prince no sooner saw, but as recollecting his spirits,
with a kind of alac^ity and change of cheer, he earnestly demanded, What kind
of creatures they were, how bred, how named, and to what use created? To whom
his tutor jeastingly replied, These be called Devils, of which I have often ^old
you, and they are the great tempters of mankind. Then his father demanded of
him, To which of all these things he had beheld, he stood affected, and to
whose society he was most inclined? who presently answered; O Father, I (...)
to be attended by these Devils. Such is the atractive (...) which women cannot
fully appropriate to themselves, since it is eminent in all other creatures.
Who (...) at the (...) of the Sun, the glory of the (...) the splendour of the
Stars? the brightness of the morning, and the fair shutting in of the
evening? Come to the flowers and plants; what artificial color can be
compared to the leaves of the Marigold, the Purple of the Violet, the curious
mixture of the Gilly flower, or the whiteness of the Lilly: to which Solomon
in all his glory was not to be equalled? You that are proud of your hair,
behold the feathers of the ^ay, or Parret, with the admirable variety of the
Feasant and Peacock: What Rose in the cheek can countervail the Rose of the
garden? or what azure vein in the temples, the blew flower of the field? Come
to outward habit, or ornament; what woman does better become the richest attire
(though fetched from the furthest parts of the world) then the Panther in his
stains, and the Leopard his pleasing and delightful spots? Are not the fishes
as beautiful in their silver shining scales, and the terrible Dragon as
glorious in his golden armor, as women apparelled in cloth of Bodkin or (...)?
What is she that exceeds the Dove or Swan in whiteness, or the Pine or Cedar
in straightness? Let me hear her voice that can compare with the Nightingall
in sweetness, or behold that eye that can look upon the Sun with the Eagles.
Why should you fair ones then be proud of any thing, that are by other
creatures exceeded in all things? Besides, even the choicest beauty amongst you
being once enjoied, is the less esteemed; Soldiers having vanquished their
enemies, hang up their arms; Seamen that have attained their harbor, fold up
their sails. The choicest dainties are loathsome to such as have filled their
stomachs, and Wine is a burden to him that has satiated his thirst. Nobility
of birth is a thing honorable, ^ut you are not beholding to your selves for
it, but your ancestors: Riches and Plenty are excellent, but they are the gifts
of fortune, therefore subject to change and casualty: Praise and honor is
venerable, but withal unstable: Health is precious, but subject to sickness
and infirmity: Strength an excellent gift and blessing, but neither free from
age, nor disease: Beauty is admirable above all, and yet subject to all: only
Learning, Knowledge, Art, and Virtue, are above the envy of change, or malice
of Fortune. Neither are you women solely beautiful: We read in Marcial lib. 1.
of a boy called Achillas, of admirable feature; of Acanthus, whom the gods at
his death, in memory of his exquisite form, changed into a flower, that still
bears his name. Amongst the Romans, Scipio (surnamed Demetrius) and amongst the
Greeks, Alcibiades carried the Palm from women; who (as Plutarch in his life
reports of him) was not only wondered at in his youth, but admired in his age,
his grace and comeliness still growing with him.

Formosum pastor Coriden ardebat Alexim:
The shepherd Coridon doted on the fair Alexis.
Sax^ Grammaticu^ speaks of Alphus the son of Gygarus, whose hairs exceeded the
brightness of Silver. Amaratus was changed into a sweet-^^elling flower after
his death. ^alentiu^ speaks of Amphimedon thus: Formosum Phiale prius (...)
Amphimedenta,
Amphimedon Phia^es maxima cura (...):
Phiale was enamoured of Amphimedon the fair,
Amphimedon of Phiale became the greatest ^are.
(...) Bithinicu^, was a youth of that admirable beauty and feature, that
Ad^^an the Emperor was enamoured of him, in whose memory he erected a Temple in
(...), and built a City by the river Nilus, he caused his (...) to be stamped
upon his own coin, therefore (...) (as Volaterranus reports) calls him the
Emperor (...) con^^bine. Asterius was the son of Ceres, a young man of a
singular form, but altogether abstemious from the love of women, whom Ovid in
(...) remembers. As^ur is celebrated by Virgil: -- Sequitur pul^herrimus Astur
Astur ^quo si^^ns and versie loribus armis.
The fairest Astur follows (...) in field.
Astur that (...) unto his horse and parti-colored shield.


At^s the ^^rygian youth was for his fairness beloved of the mother of the
gods. Virgil speaks of Aventinus in these words: (...) ostentat equos satus
Hercule pulch^o
(...) --
Fair Avent^^^^ he that of fair Hercules was born,
(...) of his conquering ste^ds --


(...) was the favorite or sweetheart of Anacrcon the Poet, of whom (...) de
Stellis: -- Amatum a vate Batillum
Pictum oculis suscumque coma roseumque labellis,
-- The Poet of Batillus was en^moured,
With (...), brown hair, and lips like Roses red.
(By the way.) Sure there was a great dearth of beauty in those days amongst
women, when boys and catamites were so doted on by men. Bellerophon was not
only affected by Sthenoboea the wife of Pretus, Sthenoboea.
King of the Argives, but doted on by V^nus. Of Castor and Pollux the two fair
Tindarides, Ovid. l^b. 6 thus writes: At gemini nondum Coelestia sidera fratres
Ambo, conspi^u^, nive caendidioribus ambo,
Vectabantur equis --
The two twin brothers, not as yet accounted
Amongst the celestial stars, conspicuous both
Upon two steeds whiter then snow were mounted, etc.


The young boy Cest^us, Martial thus commends.

Quanta (...) est probitas, etc.
How great ^hy honesty? thy same as rare
(O sweet child Cestus) thou that mai'st compare,
With The^eus son, did bright Diana see
Thee naked once, enamoured she would be,
And 'tice thee to some pleasant rivers brim,
There strip her self, and teach thee how to swim.
Demo^les an Athenian youth was of that pulchritude, that he was called by all
men Pul^her D^mocles, and (that which seldom meets with beauty) of that rare
temperance, that when King Demetrius plucked him to have made him a prostitute
to his unlawful and beastly lusts; to shun his embraces, he leaped into a
caldron of seething hot liquor, and there drowned himself: Plutarch in
Demetrio. D^adumenu^ the cup bearer to Augustus, was of that admirable feature,
that in the contention which was made Elis, he carried the palm both from men
and women: Volaterran. For no other caus^ was G^^ymede said to fill Nectar to
Jupiter then for his eleg^ncy o^ form. G^letes was a youth of that excellent
feature, and so endeared to P^olomaeus, that when diverse malefactors (and for
great crimes) were led to execution, only at his entreaty he spared their
lives. Hypoclides the son of Thysander, as Herodotus relates, was excellent
above all the Athenians for wealth and beauty. Of Hyas the son of Atlas and
Aethra, Ovid. 5. de Fast.

Nondum stabat Atlas humeros oneratus Olympo,
Cum satus est forma, conspiciendus Hias.
Olympas weight did not as yet
Great Atlas back adorn,
When as the lovely Hyas of
Conspicuous shape was born.
^ylas the son of Hyadamus, was not only endeared to to Hercules, but doted on
by the nymphs called Driades. Iulus the son of Aeneas and Cre^sa, was taken for
Cupid the son of Venus. Juven^us was the minion of Catullus, as Lygurinus was
to H^^ace; so likewise Lycus, of whom he thus speaks.

Et Lycum nigris oculis nigroque
Crine decorum.
Lycus rare,
Both for his black eyes and his black sleek hair.
Some thing more freely he speaks of the Pulch^^tude of Nearchus in Carm^ and
his Odes. O Nireus the son of Caropus and Alaga, Homer speaks at large: as
Horace likewise in Carm. and (...) Tibullus commends his Marathis Maximinus,
that his head being m'ngled and bloody, yet notwithstanding in death it looked
admirable. Marcellus the son of (...) and Lyriope, was so fair, that the
numphs were surprised with his beauty. E^dimion was beloved of the Moon, Val
Flaccus lib. 8.

^^tmius Aestiva resid^t venator in umbra
D^gnus amore D^ae --
The (...) in the Summer shade,
Worthy the love of that (...) maid.
In (...) was the majestic (...) beauty, that the wife of King D^^rius saluted
him for Alexander: for his exquisite form he was especially beloved of
Alexander. Virgil commends the shape of (...) the son of Ny^us. So Nysus King
of the Megarenses was said to have hairs of gold, they were of such splendor.
S^a^ius commends (...) the son of (...) and Atalanta, or as some write of Mars
and (...). Caelius, Ovid, and others, celebrate Phaon the beloved of Sapp^o the
Poetesse, for the fairest of the world. (...) who was the familiar of Socrates
and Plato was for exquisite shape compelled to be prostituted by the ^aud his
Master. Of Pyramus, Ovid thus speaks, Metamorph. lib. 4.

Pyramus and Thisbe Juvenum Pulcherrimus alter.
Young Pyranius and Thisbe, he
Of all the young men fairest,
And she of all the Eastern world,
Of lovely girls the rarest, etc.
Spurinae was a youth of such an alluring beauty, that when he could neither
reserve himself from suit of men, or importunities of women, he deformed his
own beauty with scratches and wounds to preserve his own chastity, Valor Max.
de Verecundis. Magnes Smyrnaeus was the most beautiful of his age, and so
acceptable to Gyges King of Lydia, that when his pa^ents cut off his delicate
and fair hair (somewhat to tak^ off the Kings affection) the King was so
incensed, that for that cause alone he made war against the Magnesians;
Pausan, apud Volater. The Poet Musaeus celebrates the rare form of Leander, a
youth of Abidos and beloved of Hero As Virgil does the like of Lausus the son
of (...) lib. 7 Herodotus speaking of (...) says, that he had in his army
sixty eighty (...) of men, yet amongst them all he was the beautifullest of
face, and tallest of (...). I could reckon up others as Pelops Idas, Jason,
(...). Hymene, the least of them a Prince, the (...) or the dearly beloved of
some Queen or goddess. This is only to put you in mind, O (...). That though
you have engrossed a great portion^ beauty, ye^ you are not possessed of all,
since not only men, but diverse other creatures share with you; neither have
(...) suced these to der^gate any thing from your worths, only to abate some of
that ambition or self-love which is commonly attendant upon beauty: One thing
for your grace I have read in the Spanish Chronicle of an exquisi^e (...) like
I did never of any excellent man) Queen I^abel the wife of Henry surnamed the
Humble, being (...) her self in her window, against which the Sun shined
somewhat (...), it is credibly reported, that the beams of the Sun set her
curled locks on fire: some held it as a prodigy, others alluded it to her
miraculous beauty, some though^ that one pane or other in the window, was of
the nature of a burning glass, and that was the cause, others imputed it to
certain o^les and sweet unguents, with which the Queens and great Ladies use to
dress their hair: howsoever, if their Chronicle speak truth, most certain it
is, that her lust made greater combustion in the land, then the Sun had power
to commit upon her hair. I have one thing more to instance to your grace, and
so I will conclude my discourse. An Ambassador being to be enterteined in the
Court of Queen Elizabeth (where the greatest state was still observed) he first
passed through a lane of the guard in their rich coats; next through the
Gentlemen Pensioners, and so through all the greater Officers, the Lords, Earls
and Council: The Queen sat then in state at the upper end of a long gallery,
which when the Ambassador should enter, the great Ladies of either side richly
attired were placed, through the midst of whom as he passed along, he as
amazed at the state, or admiring at their beauties, cast his eye first on one
side, then on the other, and that not without some pause, as if he had been to
take a particular survey of all their features, but by degrees coming up
toward the Queen, who sat like Diana amongst her nymphs, or Ariadne in her
crown of stars, instated above the lesser lights, to give him entertainment:
and observing his eyes still wander, she thus bespake him, Averte oculos ne
videas vanitatem^. Turn away your eyes least you behold van^ty: to whom he
suddenly replied, Imo potius miribilia opera Dei^^^. Nay, the wonderful works
of God. Since then you are such, rather let your virtuous actions beautify,
then your vicious deeds any way disgrace his so great and glorious workmanship.

Of Fair Women.
OF these, Herodica.
Herodica shall have the first place. Niceus in his book de Rebus Arcad.
relates, That one Cypselus purposing to raise a new Colony, erected a fair and
goodly City in a spacious Plain bordering upon the river Alphaeus, to which
place multitudes of the Parrhasians came to inhabit. At the same time was a
Grove and an Altar celebrated (with much pomp and solemnity) to Elusina Ceres,
with annual feast: at this public meeting was a contention, Which of all the
women was censured to be the fairest? The first that had the priority and Palm
for beauty bestowed upon her, was Herodica, the wife of Cypselus. Zenophon apud
Coelium, Panthaea.
lib 7. cap. 53. speaks of one Panthaea, the wife of Abraditus, a Noble man of
Persia, whom Cyrus (having defeated the army of the Aslyrians and spoiled their
tents) took captive; Abraditus at that time being absent, as not long before
employed upon an Embassy to the Bactriaus, in which interim, Panthaea was in
the custody of a Noble man of Media, called Araspes, who affirmed of her to the
King with great admiration of her feature and beauty, That in all Asia her like
was not to be seen or found. P^ulus D^aconus writes of Theodole, Theodole.
a Roman Lady, of that admirable splendor, that she attracted the eyes of all
men that but glanced that way, to dwell upon her with wonder: her hair was
bright and yellow, which when she pleased to unloose, and le^ fall about her
shoulders, it covered her from the crown to the heel. A large description he
makes of her perfections, howsoever most certain it is, that the King,
Cambe^les was ex^^eamly entangled in the snares of her beauty. Saxo Gramma^icus
in his Danish history, commemorates one Suabilda, Suabilda,
a Queen, in (...) the lineaments both of body and face, to be of that rare
pulchritude, that being doomed unto a wre^ched and miserable death, and bound
with thongs of leather, to be trod upon by the hoofs of wild horses, her beauty
struck such an impression even in those unreasonable creatures, that they could
not be forced with their rude (...) to leave the least character of violence
upon lambs so fair and exquisitely fashioned. The same Author remembers us of
Seritha and Signis, Seritha. Signis.
the first a virgin of incomparable splendor, to whom one Otharus was a (...);
the other was the daugher to one Sygarus, who paralleld the first, and was
importunately solicited by (...) Bryseis.
Brysaeis was so fair, that she endea^ed (...) of all the Greeks, Achilles;
(...) or handmaid, yet he (...) of her above all his other women: of whom
Horace, (...) Insolentem
Serva Brysaeis niveo color
(...)
His (...), with her color white,
Iasolent (...) moved to delight.
Of (...), Ovid likewise speaks, lib. 2. de Art Amandit:
(...) ut in capta Lyrn^side magnus Achilles
Cum premeret (...) lossus ab ho^te torum.
This, (...) of his Love (...),
When with the slaugh^er of his enemies tired,
He doff'd his Cushes, and unarmed his head,
To (...) with her on a soft day bed:
It did rejoice Bryseis to embrace
His braised arms, and kiss his blood stained face.
Those hands which he so often did imbrew
In blood of warlike Trosans, whom he slew,
Were now implo^'d to tickle, touch and feel,
And shake a Lance, that had no point of steel.


Thargelia Molesia Thargelia Molesia.
was of that excellent aspect, that as Hyppias the Sophist testifies of her,
she was married by course to fourteen several husbands (for so he writes in a
Treatise entitled De inscripta Congregatione:) in which, besides her character
of beauty, he gives her a worthy attribute for her wisdom, in these words,
Perpulchra and sapiens. Anutis was the wife of a noble person called Bogazus,
Anutis.
and sister to Xerxes by the fathers side. She as Dinon writes (in his Persick
history, in the chapter entitled De prima Coordinatione) in these words, Haec
ut pulcherrima fuit omnium mulierum, quae fuerant in Asia, etc. She (says he)
as she was the fairest of all women in Asia, so of them all she was the most
intemperate. Timosa.
Timosa, as Philarchus in his Lib. 19. contends, was the mistress of Oxiartes,
who in the accomplishments of nature anteceded all of her age: she was for her
beauty, thought worthy to be sent as a present from the King of Egypt, to the
most excellent Queen of King Statyra, but rather for a wonder of nature, then a
president of chastity. Theopompus in his fifty sixth book of History records,
Zenopithia.
That Zenopithia, the mother of Lysandrides, was the fairest of all the women
in Peloponnesus. She, with her sister Chryse, were slain by the Lacedaemonians,
at the time when Ages^laus (in an uprore and mutinous sedition raised) gave
command, That Lysandrides as his public enemy, should be banished from
Lacedemon. Patica Cipria.
Patica Cipria was born in Cyprus: Philarchus remembers her in his tenth book
of history. She attending upon Olympias, the mother of Alexander, was demanded
to marriage by one Monimus the son of Pythioa. But the Queen observing her to
be of more beauty in face, then temperance in carriage: O unhappy man (said
she) that chusest a wife by the eye, not by counsel; Violentilla.
by her beauty, and not behavior Violentilla was the wife of the Poet Stella:
she for all accomplishments was much celebrated by Statius; of her, lib. 1.
Syll. thus speaks: -- Al tu pulcherrima forma,
Italidum tantem casto possessa marito:
Thou of our Latium Dames the fairest and best,
Of thy chaste husband art at length possessed.


Agarista, Agarista.
as Herodotus calls her, was the daughter of Clisthenes the Syconian: she was of
that unexpressable form, that her beauty attracted suitors from all par^s of
Greece, amongst whom, Hypocledes the son of Tisander, is numbered. From Italy
came Smyndrides, Sibarites, Syritanus, and Damnasus. From the Coast of Ionia,
Amphimnestrus, Epidamnius, Aetolus, and Meges. From Peloponnesus, Leocides,
Amianthus, A^^has, H^leus, Laphanes, and Phidon, son to the King of the
Argives. From Attica, Megacles the son of Alcmenon. From Etruria, Lysanius.
From Thessaly Diacrides, and Cranomius. From Molossus Alcon, in number 20.
These came into Greece to express themselves in many noble contentions, because
Cl^sthenes the son of Aristonius and father of Agarista had made proclamation,
that he only should enjoy the virgin, who could best express himself in noble
action and valor. Hyppodami^
Hyppodamia was daughter to Oenemaus King of Aelis, and of such attractive
beauty, that she likewise drew many Princely suitors to her fathers Court,
though to the most certain danger of their lives. Caelius writes that Marmax
was the first that contended with her in the Chariot race, and failing in his
course, was slain by the tyrant; the Mares with which he ran (as some write)
were called Parthenia and Eripha, whose throats Oenemaus caused to be cut, and
after buried. After him perished in the same manner, Alcathus the son of
Parthaon. Eurialus, Eurimachus, Crotalus Acrius of Lacedemon, Capetus,
Lycurgus, Lasius, Cha^codus, Tricolonus, Aristomachus, Prias, Pelagus, Aeolius,
Chromius, and Eritheus the son of Leucon. Amongst these are numbered, Merimnes,
Hypotous, ^elops, Opontius, Acarnan, Eurilachus, Antomedon, Lasius, Chalcon,
Tricoronus, Alcathus, Aristomachus, and Croc^lus, Sisigambis.
Sisigambis as Q. Curtius relates, was inferior to no Lady that lived in her
age, yet notwithstanding, Alexander the Great having overcome her husband
Darius in battle, was of that continence, that he only attempted not to
violate her chastity, but became her guardian, and protected her from all the
injuries that might have been done to a captive. Praecia.
Plutarch writes of a F^man Lady called Praecia, of that excellent shape and
admired feature, as she endeared Cethegus unto her so far, that he enterprized
no design, or managed any affair without the advice and approbation of the
beautiful Praecia. So precious likewise was the fair Roxana in the eyes of
Alexander, Roxana.
that having subdued all the Eastern Kingdoms, and being Lord of the world;
yet from being the daughter of a mercenary soldier, and a Barbarian, he took
her into his bosom, and crowned her with the Imperial Diadem. Aegina.
Aegina the daughter of Aesopus, King of Boetia, for her excellent pulchritude
was beloved of Jupiter; of whom Ovid, Aureus in D^naen, Aesopida luserit ignis:
In Gold fair Dana^ had her full desire,
But with the Aesopian (...) he played in ^ire.


So likewise Antiopa, Antiopa.
the daughter of Nycteis and wife of Lycus King of Thebes, was for the
carenesse of her form comprest by him, of whom he begot Zethus and Amphion. O
what a power is this beauty? It made the ^yclops Polyphemus turn Poet; who (as
Ovid in his lib. 13.) thus writes in the praise of his mistress Galataea:
Galataea.
Candidior solio nivei Galataea ligustri, etc.
Oh Galataea, thou art whiter far
Then leaves of Lillies: not green Meadows are
More flourishing, thy stature does appear
Straighter then the Elmes; then glass thou art more clear*
More wanton then the young Kid, and more light
Then those loose shells the h^llowes have made white
Still tumbled with the waves: more grace th 'hast won,
Then is in Summers shade or Winters Sun,
Lovelier then is the Apple, when his side
Turns yellow, then the Plane tree, of more pride;
Transparent then Isicles, that meet
With rising Phoebus; then ripe Grapes, more sweet:
Thou art of all choice things the gene all Theme,
Soft as Swans plumes, and fair as clowted cream.


Therefore you fair ones, the more choice your heauey is, you ought of it to
be more chary: the sweeter the flower is, the sooner it loses the smell, the
fairer the color, it the sooner fades; and the purer the blood, the apter to
take putrefaction. Take heed then, lest by unlawful prostitution, you ^^ar
that by which in outward appearance you come nearest to your Maker, who as he
is the Summum bonum, so he is the sovereign and only pe^fect beauty. A Tyrant
having studied many fearful and terrible deaths, to inflict upon such as his
malice would punish; when he thought none grievous enough, at length (as his
masterpiece of Tyranny) he devised to bind the living to the body of the dead,
that the stench and corruption of the one might sti^^e and suffocate the other.
In what greater torment then is that man, who shall marry a fair false one,
that shall bed with sin, and bosom diseases? The dead body to which the living
is bound, as the blood dries and the flesh consumes, so does the loathsomeness
of the smell, till in time it wast to ashes, and so to participate of the same
earth from whence it came: but your catching and infectious loathsomeness, from
lust grows to leprosy, still increasing in you, to the impairing of his
health and the impoverishing his estate, consuming his purse, and contaminating
his person. O miserable man, whom thy rash choice shall cause to die of this
wretched consumption. But this is but a caveat or admonition by the way: I
proceed now with history.

The fair Mistress of Pisistratus.
PHilarchus speaks of a beautiful woman (on whom he has vouchsafed no mame)
who first brought Pisistratus from a private man to a government Monarchical.
Pisistrat^. amica.
She took upon her the name and habit of Pallas, as paralleld with her both in
state and beauty, being thought by the people in all accomplishments to
resemble the goddess: she is said to have dealt Scepters, and made sale of
Crowns, distributing them where she pleased, and to whom she affected.
Pisistratus after gave her to his son in marriage, who was called Hypparchus;
for so Clidemus in his eight book, entitled, Redditionum, leaves recorded in
these words: He gave unto his son Hypparchus, a woman, by whom he was overcome,
who was a Pallas for her State, and for Wisdom, might be called the daughter
of Socrates: and where beauty and counsel meet, there cannot choose but be a
sweet concordance and harmony. It shall not be amiss in the next place briefly
to discover unto you, what pl^ces have been the most eminent for the breeding
of the rarest beauties, and which by the ancient Authors have been most
celebrated.

Hesiodus in his Melampodia nominates the City Chalcides in Euboea, Lib. 3.
to breed the choicest beauties, as that the most exquisite women are there
born. Of the same opinion with him is Theophrastus: but Nympho^orus in his
navigation and travels through Asia, affirms, That the most incomparable
features above all others whatsoever, (...) in Tenedos, an Isle belonging to
Troy. Dionysius Leuc^ricus has left recorded, That for many years continuance,
there was an annual contention of beauty held amongst the Elians in the City
of Elis, and that she that p^ov^d victoresse, was honored with the Arms
consecrated to Pallas. Others in other places, as Mysilus in his historical
Paradoxes has left remembed, were crowned with wreaths of My^^le. In other
places, as Theophrastus writes, there were meetings and solemnities kept to
censure women for their temperance and good huswifery, as among the Barbarians;
but for the form and feature, they were most frequent amongst the inhabitants
of Tenedos and Lesbos. Heraclius Lembus writes, That in Sparta with great
admiration and reverence they observe the fairest man or woman, and commonly
the Spartane beauties are the most illustrious. Therefore of the King
Archidamus it is left registered; That being to make choice of a Queen, when one
singularly beautiful, but of small dowe^ and another wondrous, rich, but
extraordinary deformed, were placed before him, he cast (...) upon the goods of
Fortune, and neglecting the treasures of Nature, preferred bondage before
beauty: For which, the Ephori (which in Athens were the same Officers that The
Tribunes were in Rome) called him to account, and put him to an extraordinary
great (...), saying, This man in stead of Sovereigns would beget subjects, and
for Princes leave peasants to succeed and reign over us. Eu^ioides says, That
beauty has the first place in the claim of Empire: therefore those that in
Homer were admirers of Helens beauty, spoke to this purpose: Indignum nihil est
Tro^s sorts and Achivos
Tempore tam longo perpessos esse labores;
Ob talem uxorem cui praestantissima so^ma,
Nil mortale refert superisque simillima d^vis.
The Greeks and Trejans, who can say were base?
So long and so great labors to endure
For such a wife, whose most excellent face
Shows nothing mortal, but all God like pure.


This made the Spartans (the place from whence Helen was ravished) as the
greatest (...) to entertain a stranger, Athenae. lib. 13. cap. 7.
to show unto them their Virgins naked. A custom they had likewise in the Isle
of Ch^os in certain times of the year, after the same manner to behold the
young men and maids in public wrestle together.

Nitetis.
CAmbyses hearing that the Egyptian women did much differ from other nations
in manners and behavior, Athenae. lib. 13. cap. 4.
especially from the custom of the Persians, sent to Amasa King of the
Egyptians, to demand his only daughter in marriage. The King something
troubled at this Embassy, as fearing he would rather keep his daughter as a
concubin then to give her the right of her birth, and to honor her with the
titles of a Queen and Bride, he devised this policy to delude Cambyses, and
still to conserve her chastity: he had there in his Court a young Lady, called
Nitetis, the daughter of Aprias an Egyptian, whom because he had been defeated
in a battle against the Cyrenaeans, Amasa had caused to be slain. This Nitetis
being the prime and choice beauty of the Court, in all her lineaments so
exquisite, that he presumed she would not only content, but much delight the
King: he instructed her how to take upon her the name of his daughter, and in
every circumstance and complement, how to demean her self, so with a Princely
train accommodates her for the journie. Being arrived in Persia, she was
reially enterteined by the King, her behavior and beauty more pleasing him
then any of his choice damsels selected out of his many Provinces: insomuch,
that he hastened the marriage, which was with no small pomp, according to the
manner of the Persians Nitetis lying in the Kings bosom, and knowing how much
she was endeared to him, as now not casting his eye or affection upon any
other, began to call to remembrance her fathers death, and what a plain and
smooth way lay open to her, to be revenged on him that slew him; and forgetting
the honors she had received by Amasa's means, in preferring her to be Queen of
Persia; not rating that good, equal with the ill she received in the shedding
of her fathers blood: she opened to Cambyses all the whole imposture, withal
importuned him to revenge the death of her father Aprias. The King as much
pleased with her plain and seeming simplicity, as incensed with so great an
injury done to him by Amasa, as well to revenge her father, as his own wrongs,
with an invincible army invaded Egypt. Dinon in his book of the Persian
History, and Lynceas Naucratica in his Egyptian History, they agree that
Nitetis was sent to Cyrus, and that by him she was the mother of Cambyses, and
that after the death of Cyrus, the Army with which he went against Amasa and
invaded Egypt, was to revenge the wrongs of a mother, and not a wife.

Bersane.
SHe as Curtius and Gellius both assent) was the widow of one Da^aseus, Lib. 3.
of that singular aspect that Alexander the great became enamoured of her above
all other, Lib. 6. and 8.
so that when neither the rare beauty of Darius his wife and daughters could
tempt him, nor the whorish blandishments of Tha^ and others corrupt him (indeed
where his in desty and temperance is pre^^rred before many other Princes,
almost all) yet with her he was entangled. For those that write of him affirm,
that he was never known to enter into the familiar embraces of any save his own
wife and this Bersane; whom he made one of the Queens women.

It is not to be questioned, Berseba.
but that Berseba she was a goodly fair woman, and of extraordinary f^^rure,
which pierced so deep into the breast of that wise King and Prophet, David, that
all religion and sanctity set apart, he for her love committed the two most
heinous and horrible sins of adultery and murder, for he caused her husband
Vriah to be slain, and after married her, a great blemish to his former
holiness, of whom Strozz^ Pater thus writes.

Ille sacri vates operis Jess^^a proles,
Prafecit populo quem Deus ipse suo,
Bersabeae captus forma --
The Psalmisl born of the Jesseian Line,
The famous Author of that work Divine,
Whom God made Ruler (...) his people, he
Dotes on the feature of fair B^^sabe.
Lycaste, one of the daughters of Priam. was fair above measure, insomuch that
Polydamus the son of Anthenor, whom he begor of Theano the sister of Hecuba,
of a Concubine made her his wise. There was another Lycasle that we read of,
who for her perfection in all degrees of comeliness, had the name of Venus
bestowed upon her.

The wise of Candaules.
THis Candaules, whom the Grecians call Myrsilus, was King of the Sa^dians,
Herodotus in Clio. ^^lat. 2. de Repub.
and descended from Alcaeus the son of Hercules; having a wise whom he
affectionatly loved, and therefore judging her to be the fairest of women,
could not contain his pleasures, but coming to one Gyges, the son of Dascylus
(a servant of his, to whom he vouchsafed his greatest familiarity) he to him
ex^ols the beauty of his wife above measure; and because (says he) I would
have thee truly know that she is no otherwise then I have reported her, and
that men's ears naturally a^e more incredulous then their eyes, I will devise a
means that thou shall see her naked. To whom Gy^es replied, O royal Sir, What
words be these? you speak thee which rather ^avours of a man distract, then
well co^^sulled and advised; women that put off their garments with them put
off their modesty: therefore it was well determined and provided by our
fathers, wherein they proposed unto us honest rules and examples, among which
this was one, That every man should have inspection into his own, and guide
himself by that compass. I verily believe she is matchless above all other
women, and deservedly to merit that character you have given her; but withal I
beseech you, that you will not persuade me to any thing which is not lawful.
At these words the King seemed to be displeased, and replied: Be confident, O
Gyg^s: and neither distrust me in so persuading thee, nor my wife, who is
altogether ignorant of what I intend, since from neither of us any damage or
detriment, no not so much as the least displeasure can arise: for first I have
devised, that she shall not know, nor once suspect that thou have beheld her;
for I will order it that thou shall be secretly conveied into the chamber, and
(unseen) behold every passage of her making unready and coming to bed: Now
when thou have freely surveied her in every part and lineament, and spiest her
back toward thee, convey thy self out of the room; only in this be careful,
that at thy removing she cast no eye upon thee. This done, the next morning
give me thy free and true censure. Gyges that could by no means avoid his
importunity, was prepared against the time. The King according to his
accustomed hour, conveys himself into his chamb^^, and so to bed: the Queen
soon after entering. ^^poils her self of all her (...) and ornaments, even to
her (...), all which Gyges was spectator of; who no sooner spied her back (...)
to go toward bed, but Gyges slips from the place where he was hid; which was
not so cu^^ingly done, ^ut he (...) espied by the Queen: she demanding the
reason of it from her husband, and ne certifying the truth (but (...) what
modesty he could excusing it) she neither seemed to be angry, nor a ^rogether
well pleased, but in her silence meditated revenge (for amongst the Lydians,
and almost all those barborous nations, it is held great incivility and
immodesty to behold a man, much more a woman, naked.) The next morning, by such
servants as she best trusted, she caused Gyges to be sent for, who (misdoubting
nothing that had past, as one that had many times free access unto her)
instantly came; she causing her servants to withdraw themselves, thus bespake
him: Two ways are proposed thee, O Gyges, and one of them instantly and
without least premeditation to make choice of; Either thou must kill Candaules,
and that done, be possessed of me, and with me the Crown of Lydia, or instantly
die; for thy doom is already determined of, because thou shall know that in all
things it is not convenient to obey the King, or search into that which thou
ought not to know: There is now a necessity, that either he that counseled
thee to this must perish, or thou that obeiedst him against all Law or Justice,
to behold me (against reason or modesty) naked. Gyges at these words was first
wondrously amazed, but after recollecting himself, entreated her not to
compel him to so hard an exigent, as to the choice of either. But finding that
necessity, that he must be forced to one or the other, to kill the King, or to
be slain by others; he rather made choice to survive, and let the other perish,
and thus answered her: Since (generous Lady) you urge me to an enterprise so
much opposite to my milder nature and disposition, propose some safe course how
this may de done. Even (says she) in the selfsame place where he devised
this mischief against himself (namely, his bedchamber) where to thee I was
first discovered. Therefore providing all things necessary for so determinate a
purpose, and the night coming on, Gyges (who knew no evasion, but to kill his
master or die himself) awaited his best advantage, and having notice when
Candaules was asleep, followed the Queen into her chamber, and with a Poniard
(by her provided for the purpose) stabbed him to the heart, by which he
attained both the Queen and Kingdom. Of this history, Archilochus Parius makes
mention in his Iambicks, who lived about the same time; affirming, that Gyges
was by the Oracle of Delphos confirmed in the Kingdom after the faction of the
Heraclides had opposed his sovereignty.

Rowan and Estrilda.
ROwan was a maid of wonderful beauty and pleasantness, Stowe.
daughter to Hengest a Captain of the Saxons. Of this Lady, Vortiger (then
King) grew so enamoured, that for her sake he was divorced from his wife, by
whom he had three sons; for which deed the greatest part of the Britains
forsook him: therefore he by the instigation of Rowan, still caused more and
more Saxons to be sent for, under pretense to keep the Land in subjection. But
the Britains considering the daily repair of the Saxons, came to the King, and
told him the danger that might ensue; entreating him whilst it was yet time,
and to prevent a future misery, to expel them the Land. But all in vain, for
Vortiger was so besotted in the beauty of his fair wife (by whose counsel he
was altogether swaied) that he would in no wife listen to the counsel of his
subjects. Wherefore they with one united consent, deprived him of his Crown and
dignity, making Vortimerus his eldest son, King in his stead: Who was no sooner
Crowned, Harding:
but with all expedition he raised an army, and pursued the Saxons, and in four
main battles, besides conflicts and skirmishes, became victorious over them.
The Saxons and their insolences thus suppressed, and the King now governing the
Land in peace (after he had reigned seven years) was by this Rowan (in revenge
of the disgrace done to her King, deposed, and her Countrymen disgraced) most
trecherously poisoned.

Locrin, Estrilda.
the eldest son of Brute, chased the Huns which invaded the realm of England,
and so hotly pursued the^^, that many of them (with their King) were drowned in
a river which parts England and Scotland; and after the name of the King of
the Huns (who there perished) the river is to this day called Humber. Harding
in Fabian.
This King Locrin had to wife Guendoline, a daughter of Corineus Duke of
Cornwall, by whom he had a son called Madan: He kept also a Paramour, called
the beautiful Lady Estrilda; by whom he had a daughter called Sabrina. Locrine
after the death of Corineus, of whom he stood in awe, divorced himself from
his lawful wife, and took to his embraces his fair concubine: moved with this
injury, Guendoline retired her self into Cornwall, where she gathered a great
power, fought with her husband, slew him in battle, and after caused him to be
buried in Troy-novant. That done, she caused the fair Estrilda with her
daughter Sabrina, to be drowned in a river, that which parts England and Wales,
which still bears the name of the young Virgin, and is called Severn. These her
designs accomplished, for so much as Madan her young son was but in his
pupillage, and not of capacity or age to govern the Land; by the common
sofferage of all the Britains, she was made Protectoresse and Lady Regent of
the King, which to the comfort of the Subjects, and the weal of the Kingdom,
she dis^r^^tly governed for the space of fifteen years; and therefore her
memory might fitly has been ranked amongst the most illustrious women. Her son
coming to age and years of discretion, she to him resigned the S^epter.

The fair Lady of Norwich.
AND now because we traffic altogether with history, it shall not be amiss
sometimes to mingle Ser^a Jocis, as shall appear by this discourse which I have
often heard related. A Knight both of fame and memory, and whose name is still
upon record, being eminent and of note with Henry the fifth, as personally with
him in all the wars in France; after the King had both conquered and quiered
the Land, this noble Englishman retired himself into his Country. He had a
Lady that was of such beauty, that she attracted the eyes of all beholders,
with no common admiration, in brief I cannot speak of her feature
sufficiently, as being far beyond the compass of my pen, and therefore I put
her into the number of my Fair ones. This Lady with her husband residing in the
City of Norwich, He, after so many troubles and torments, purposed a more
sequestered life, and (next the solace he had in the beauty and virtues of his
wife) to take a course merely contemplative: and thought out of the abundance
of his wealth, to do some pious deeds for the good of his soul: he therefore
erected in the City, and near to the place where his house stood, a goodly
Church at his own charge, and betwixt them a Religious house that entertained
twelve Friars and an Abbot, allowing them demeans competent for so small a
brotherhood: In this covent there were two, Friar John and Friar Richard;
these were still at continual enmity, and especial notice taken of it among
the rest, which by no mediation, could be truly reconciled: but omitting that,
it was the custom of the Knight and his Lady, daily to rise to morning
Mattins, and she being affable and courteous to all, it bred a strange incivil
boldness in Friar John, for she never came through the Cloister, but he was
still with ducks and cringes attending her, which she (suspecting nothing)
simply with modest smiles returned thanks to him again: which grew so palpable
in the Friar, that as far as they durst it was whispered in the covent.
Briefly after these encouragements (as he construed them) it bred in him that
impudency, that he presumed to write a letter to her, in which he laid open a
great deal of more then necessary love This letter with great difficulty came
to her hand; at which the Lady astonished, as not dreaming that such lewdness
should come from one that professed chastity, and not knowing whether it might
be a trick complotted by her husband to make trial of her chastity: howsoever,
lest her honor should be any way called in question, she thought it the best
and safest course to show the letter to her husband; of which he had no sooner
took a view, but he began to repent him of his former charity, in regard of
their so great ingratitude. But there yet wants revenge for so great a wrong,
the Knight concealing his ^age, causes an answer of this letter to be drawn to
which he commanded her to set to her hand; the contents to this effect, That
she was greatly compassionate of his Love, and that such a night her husband
being to ride toward London, he should be admitted, lodged and entertained,
according to his own desires. This letter was sealed, closely sent, received by
the Friar with joy unspeakable: against the night he provides him clean linen,
a perfumed night-cop, and other necessaries; he keeps the time, observes the
place, is closely admitted, and by her self without witness, and so conveied
him into a close chamber. Which he was no sooner entered, but in comes the
Knight with his man, and in great fury, without giving him the least time
either to call for help to the house or to heaven, strangled the poor Friar,
and left him dead upon the ground. The deed was no sooner done, and his rage
somewhat appeased, but he began to enter into consideration of the foulness of
the fact, and heinousness of the murder, withal the strict penalty of the law
due for such an offense, which would be no less then forfeiture of life and
estate; and now he begins better to ponder with himself how to prevent the
last, which may give him further leisure to repent the first. After diverse and
sundry projects cast betwixt him and his man, it came into his mind, by some
means or other to have his body conveied back into the Monastery, which being
divided from his house only with a brick wall, might be done without any great
difficulty: this was no sooner motioned, but instantly his man remembers him of
a ladder in the back-yard fit for the purpose; briefly, they both lay hand to
the body, and the man with the Friar on his back mounts the ladder, and sits
with him astride upon the wall, then drawing up the ladder to the contrary
side, descends with him down into the Monastery, where spying the house of
office, he set him upon the same as upright as he could there leaves him and
conveies himself again over the wall, but for have to getting the ladder, and
so delivers to his master how and where he had bestowed the Friar: at which
being better com^orted, they betook themselves both to their rest. All this
being concealed as well from the L^dy as the rest or the ho^shold, who were in
their depth of sleep; It happened at the same instant, that (...) R^chard being
much troubled with a loosnesse in his body, had occasion to rise in the night,
and being somewhat hastily and unhandsomely taken makes what speed he can to
the house of office, but by the light of the Moon discerning some one before
him, whilst he could and was able he contained himself, but finding there was
no remedy, he first called and then in ^eated to come away; but hearing no body
answer, he imagined it to be done on purpose, the rather, because approaching
the place somewhat nearer, he might plainly perceive it was Friar John, his old
adversary, who the louder he called, he seemed the less to listen; I loath he
was to play the sloven in the yard, the rather, because the whole covent had
taken notice of a cold he had late go^, and how it then wrought with him:
therefore thinking this counterfeit deasnesse to be done of purpose and spite,
to make him ashamed of himself, he snatched up a brick-bat to be revenged, and
hitting his adversary full upon the breast, down tumbles Friar John without life
or motion: which he seeing, thought at first to raise him up; but after many
proofs finding him to be stone dead, verily believes that he had slain him.
What shall he now do? The gates are fast locked, and fly he could not: but as
sudden extremities impress in men as sudden shitts, he espying the Ladder,
presently apprehends what had been whispered of Friar John's love to the Knights
Lady: and lifting him upon his shoulders, by the help of the same Ladder,
carries him into the porch of the Knights hall, and there sets him, and so
closely conveies himself back into the Monastery the same way he came, not so
much as suspected of any In the interim, whilst this was done, the Knight being
perplex^d and troubled in conscience, could by no means sleep, but calls up his
man, and bids him go listen about the walls of the Monastery, if he can hear any
noise or uprore about the murder. Forth goes he from his masters chamber, and
having past the length of the hall, purposing to go through the yard, finds
Friar John sitting upright in the porch; he starting at the sight, runs back
affrighted, and almost districted, and (scarce able to speak) brings this news
to his master: who no less astonished could not believe it to be so (but
rather his man's fantasy) till himself went down and became eie-witnesse of
the strange object. Then wonderously desp^i^ing, he intimates within himself,
that murder is one of the crying sins, and such a one as cannot be concealed
yet recollecting his spirits, he purposes to make trial of a desperate
adventure, and put the discovery theirof to accident: he remembers an old
stallion, that had been a horse of service, then in his stable, one of those he
had used in the French wars, and withal a rusty Armor hanging in his A^mory;
he commands both instantly to be brought, with strong new cords, a case of
rusty Pistols, and a Lance. The horse is ladled and capparison'd, the Armor put
upon the Friar, and he fast bound in the seat, the Lance tied to his wrist,
and the lower end put into the rest, his head piece clasped on, and his Beaver
up; the ski^ts of his gray gown served for Bases: and thus accountred, like a
Knight completely armed Cap-a^pe, they purpose to turn him out of the gates, he
and his horse, without any Page or Esquire, to try a new adventure. Whilst
these things were thus in fitting, Friar Richard in the Monastery, no less
perplexed in conscience then the Knight, about the murder, casting all doubts,
and still dreading the strictness of the Law, summons all his wits about him to
prevent the worst; at length sets up his rest, that it his best and safest way
to fly: he remembers withal, that there was belonging to the Frierie a Mare,
employed to carry corn to and fro from the Mil (which was some half a mile
from the Monastery) being somewhat fat, and therefore doubting his own
footmanship, he thinks it the safer course to trust to four legs then to two,
he therefore calls up the Baker that had the charge of the beast, and tells him,
he understands there was Meal that morning to be fetched from the Mill, which
was grinded by that time; therefore if he would let him have the Mare, he would
(it being now night) save him that labor, and bring it back before morning.
The fellow willing to spare so much pains, caused the back gate to be opened.
The Friar gets us, and rides out of the Monastery gate, just at the instant
when the Knight and his man had turned out the Friar on horseback to seek his
fortune, the horse presently seems the Mare, and after her he gallops. Friar
Richard looking back amazed to have an armed Knight pursue him, and by the
Moonlight perceiving the Friar armed (for he might discern his face partly by
the Moon, and partly by the breaking of the day, his Beaver being up (away
flies he, and takes through the streets: after ter him (or rather the Mare)
speeds the horse. Great noise was in the City, insomuch, that many awaking out
of their sleeps and morning rests, from their windows looked out. At length it
was Friar Richards ill fate to take into a turn-again-lane, that had no passage
through; there Friar John overtakes him: the Horse mounts the Mare, and with
his violent motion the rotten and rusty armor makes a terrible noise; Friar
Richards burdened conscience clamours out aloud for help, and withal cries,
Guilty of the murder: at the noise of murder the people being amazed, run out
of their beds into the streets. They apprehend miracles, and he confesses
wonders; but withal, that barbarous and inhumane fact, to murder one of his
Covent: the grudge that was betwixt them is known, and the apparent justice of
heaven the rather believed. Friar John is dismounted, and sent to his grave,
Friar Richard to prison; he is arraigned, and in process, by his own
confession condemned. But before the execution, the Knight knowing his old
guilty conscience, posts instantly to the King, makes his voluntary confession,
and has his life and goods (for his former good service) pardoned him* Friar
Richard is released, and the accident remains still recorded.

Of Callirhoe, daughter to Boethius.
I Now return to more serious antiquity: Plut. Amat. Narration.
Phocus Boethius, was born in the City Gl^san^es, and had a d^ughter called
Callirhoe, of such incomparable feature and beauty mixed, and withal so
inherent a modesty and virtue, all meeting in one center to make a perfect and
complete creature, that thirty of the noble youths of Boeotia were suitors to
her at once, and every one solicited her for marriage; but Phocus fearing
their importunities, and by inclining to one, to hazard the displeasures of all
the rest, delaid them for his consent: but they still more and more ^rging him,
he desired but respite till he sent to Delphos, there to demand the advice of
the Oracle, how to dispose of his daughter; but they taking this his pretended
delay in ill part, all i^aged, with (...) content ^et violently upon him and
his household; in which conflict Phocus was slain. It happened that in the m^ddest
of this tumult the virgin escaped and fl^d into the C^untry, whom the suitors
no sooner missed, (...) expedition pursued her; it so fell out (for such (...)
good fortune) that the light upon some Country (...) that were removing their
corn from the field into the (...) (for it was then harvest) whom she humbly
besought, to be her protectors from rape, and the preservers of her (...): they
having commiseration of her youth and (...) (both which are prevailing Orators)
hid her amongst the theaves, by which the pursuers were disappointed of their
purpose, and being at a loss, over run the game they chased. Amongst these
honest and simple people she lived for a time retired and unknown, till the
solemnity of a great feast day, which the B^oetians called Pam^oe^tia, at which
there was customably a mighty confluence of people of all sorts and degrees,
from the highest to the lowest. To this Feast she came, which was then
celebrated in the City Coranea, and prostrating her self before the Altar of
Itonia Minerva, in the face of that great congregation, complained of the
murder of her father, capitulating all their insolences and her own injuries;
which she did with such feeling words and passionate tears, that she not only
attracted the eyes of every one to behold, but moved the hearts of all to pity;
which perceiving, and how the multitude was affected toward her, she gave to
every of the murderers a particular nomination, both of the families from
whence they came, and the places where they had then their residence. The
rioters this hearing, and finding how the people were animated and incensed
against them, they fled to Orchomenus, but were not there admitted, but
excluded from forth the gates; from thence they fled to Hippota (a small City
near Hellicon, situate betwixt the Thebanes and the Corineans) and were there
received. To them the Thebans sent, that these murderers and ravishers might be
surrendered up to their justice. But being denied, they with other Booetians
made an expedition against them; of which forces, Phaedus then Praetor amongst
the T^ebans, was made Captain: the City Hippota was bravely besieged and
assaulted, so likewise as resolutely defended; but number prevailing, they were
compelled to yield themselves with their City. The murderers now surprised,
they were condemned to be stoned to death, and had the execution of their
judgment: the rest of the Hippotenses were brought under bondage and made
slaves, their walls and houses demolished to the earth, their fields and
possessions being equally distributed betwixt the Thebans and the Corineans. It
is said that the same night before the surrender of the City, that a voice was
often heard to call aloud from Helicon, Adsum, Adsum, i. I am here, I am here,
which the thirty suitors affirmed to be the voice of Phocus; as likewise the
same day of their executions, and at the instant when they were stoned, saffron
was seen to distill out of a monument which was erected in the City Glisantes.
Phaedus being newly returned from the ^ight, a messenger brought him news of a
young daughter that day born, whom for omens sake he caused to be called
Nicostrate.

The wives of Cabbas and of Phai^lus.
A Preposterous thing, Plutarch in Amatorio.
and almost against nature (at least humanity and good manners) it is that I
read of these two, who after the example of Domitian and Commodus, those
monsters of nature, have not only made their strumpets, but their own wives
(either for servile fear, or abominable lucre) prostitutes to other men. This
Cabbas, a Roman (worthy for ever to be branded with base Wittoldrie) had a Lady
to his wife of incomparable beauty, insomuch, that all men beholding her,
apprehended what happiness he was possessed of above others. The report of her
rare accomplishments, amongst many, attracted Mecenas (then a great favorite
of the Emperor of Augustus) to invite himself to his house, where he was nobly
feasted. Mecenas being of a corrupt and licentious disposition, and much taken
with her beauty, could not contain himself, but he must needs be toying with
her, using action of plain Incontinence in the presence of her husband; who
perceiving what he went about, and the servants (it seems) for modesty having
withdrawn themselves from forth the chamber (the table not yet being taken away)
Cabbas (to give Mecenas the freer liberty) casts himself upon the bed, and
counterfeits sleep. Whilst this ill-managed business was in hand, one of the
servants listening at the door, and hearing no noise but all quiet, with soft
steps enters the chamber, to steal away a flaggon pot that stood full of wine
upon the Table: Which Cabbas espying, casts up his head, and thus softly said
to him; Thou rascal, Do thou not know that I sleep only to Mecenas? A
baseness better becoming some Jeaster or Buffoon, then the noble name of a
Roman.

In the City of Argis grew a contention betwixt Nicostratus and Phaillus, about
the management of the Commonweal, Philip of Macedon, the father of Alexander,
coming then that way; Phaillus having a beautiful young wife (one esteemed
for the very Paragon of the City) and knowing the disposition of the King to be
addicted to all voluptuousness (and that such choice beauties, and to be so
easily come by, could not lightly escape his hands) presently apprehends, that
the prostitution of his wife might be a present Ladder for him to climb to the
principality, and have the entire government of the City: Which Nicostratus
suspecting, and many times walking before his gates (to observe the passage of
the house within) he might perceive Phaillus fitting his wives feet with rich
embroidered Pantoffes, jewels about her hair, rings on her fingers, bracelets
about her wrists, and carkanets upon her arm, in a Macedonian vesture, and a
covering upon her in the manner of a hat, which was only lawful for the Kings
themselves to wear: And in this manner habited like one of the Kings Pages, but
so disguised, that she was scarce known of any; he submitted her to the King.
There are too many in our age, that by as base steps would mount to honor; I
could wish all such to carry the like brand to posterity.

Chloris was the daughter of Amphion, Chloris.
and the wife of Neleus the son of Hyppocoon, as fruitful as beautiful, for
she brought twelve sons to her husband; of which, ten with their father were
slain by Hercules, in the expugnation of Pylus; the eleventh called
Periclemenes, was transformed into an Eagle, and by that means escaped with
life; the twelfth was Nestor, who was at that time in Ilos: He, by the benefit
of Apollo, lived three hundred years, for all the days that were taken from
his father and brothers by their untimely death, Phoebus conferred upon him,
and that was the reason of his longevity. Aethra.
Aethra, the daughter of Pytheus, was of that attractive feature, that Neptune
and Aegeus (both) lay with her in the Temple of Minerva: but Neptune
disclaiming her issue, bestowed it on Aegeus; who leaving her in Troezene, and
departing for Athens, left his sword beneath a huge stone, enjoining Aethra,
That when his son was able to remove the stone, and take thence his sword, she
should then send him to him, that by such a token he might acknowledge him his
son. Theseus was born, and coming to years, she acquainted him with his
fathers imposition; who removed the stone, and took thence the sword, with
which he slew all the thieves and robbers that interposed him in his way to
Athens. Danae.
Danae the daughter of Acrisius and Aganippe, had this fate assigned her by the
O^^cle, That the child she bore should be the death of her father Acrisius:
which he understanding, shut her in a b^^zen Tower, ^estraining her from the
society of men: but Jupiter enamoured of her rare feature, descended upon her
in a shower of Gold, of which congression Perseus was begot; whom Acrisius
caused with his mother to be sent to sea in a mast^^lesse boat; which touching
upon the Island Seriphus, was found by a fisherman, called Dyctis; who
presents the desolate Lady, with her son, to King Polydectes. He surprised with
her beauty, married her, and caused her son Perseus to be educated in the
Temple of Minerva, and after made atonement betwixt them and Acrisius. But
Polydectes dying, at the funeral games celebrated at his death, in casting of
a mighty stone (being one of the exercises then used) Perseus (whose hand
failed him) cast it unawares upon the head of Acrisius, and slew him, against
his own purpose making good the will of the Oracle. Acrisius being buried,
Perseus succeeded his grandfather in the City Argos.

Helena was first ^avished by Theseus, Helena^
and afterward by Paris, she had these suitors, Antiochus, Ascalaphus, Ajax
Oeleus, Antimachus, Aeceus, Blanirus, Agapenor, Ajax Telamonius, Clyrius
Cyanaeus, Patroclus, Diomedes, Penelaeus, Phaemius, Nyraeus, Poly^^tes,
Elephenor, Fumetus, St^nelus, Tlepolemus, Protesilaus, Podalyrius, Euripilus,
Idom^naeus, Telio^es, Tallius, Polyxe^us, Protus, Menestaeus, Machaon, Thoas,
Ulysses, Philippus, Meriones, M^ges, Philocletes, Laeonteus, Talpius, Prothous:
but she was possessed by (...).

Auge Auge.
was the fair daughter of Aleus, and comprest by Hercules, and delivered of
her son in the mountain Parthenius: at the same time, Atalanta the daughter of
Jasius, exposed her son begot by M^leager, unto the same place; these children
being found by the Shepherds, they called the son of Hercules, Telephus,
because he was nursed by a Heart which sed him with her milk; they called the
son of Meleager, Parthenopaeus, of the mountain. Auge fearing her fathers
displeasure, fled into Moesia to King Te^thrus, who for her beauties sake
(having himself no children) adopted her his heir. These following are the
fi^ty fair daughters of Danaeus, The daughters of Danaeus.
with the fifty sons of Aegiptus, whom the first night of their marriage they
slew: Idea killed Antimachus; Philomela, Pantheus; Scilla, P^oteus; Philomone,
Plexippus; Euippe, Agenor; Demoditas, Chrysippus; Hyale* Perius; Trite,
Enceladus; Damone, Amintor, Hypothoe, Obrimus; Mirmidone, Mineus; Euridice,
Canthus; Cleo, Asterius; Arcania, Xanthus; Cleopatra, Metalces; Philea,
Phylinas; Hyparite, Protheon; Chrysothemis, Asterides; Pyraule, Athamas; her
name is lost that slew Armoasbus; Glaucipp^, Niavius; Demophile, Pamphilus;
Antodice, Clytus, Polyxena, Egyptus; Hecabe, Driantes; Achemantes, Echominus;
Arsalle, Ephialtes; Monuste, Euristhenes; Amimone, Medamus; Helice, Evideus;
Amoeme, Polydector; Polybe, Iltonomus; Helicta, Cassus, Electra, Hyperantus;
Eubule, Demarchus; Daplidice, Pugones; Hero, Andromachus; Europone, Atlites;
Pyrantis, Plexippus; Critomedi^, Antipaphus; Pyrene, Dolychus; Eupheno,
Hyperbius; Themistagora, Podasi^us; Palaeno, Ariston; Itaea, Antilochus; Erate,
Endemon; Hyp^^^^nestra was the only Lady that in that great slaughter spa^ed
her husband Lyncaeus. What should I speak of Antigona, the sister of Polynices;
Electra, the daughter of Clytemne^t^a; Herm^^ne of Heten. Polyxena of Hecuba,
Iphigenia of Agameniaon; Erigone, Merope, Proserpina, Amimone, Oenone, Calis^e;
Alope, the daughter of Cercyon, and Theophane of Bysaltis, both stuprated by
Neptune; Theonoe and Zeutippe, the daughters of Thestor; Chione, otherwise
called Phil^nide, the daughter of Dedalion; Coramis, the daughter of Phlegia,
adulterated by Apollo; Nictimine, comprest by her father Epopeus? The very
Index or Catalogue of whose names only, without their histories, would ask a
Volume. For their number, I will refer you to Ovid in his first book de A^te
Amandi.

Gargara quot s^getes, etc.
Thick as ripe ears in the Gargarian fields,
As many green boughs as Methimna yields,
F^sh, Foul, or Stars, in Sea, Air, Heaven; there be
So many pretty wenches (Rome) in thee.
Aeneas Venus.
mother is still loved and feared
In that great City, which her son first reared.
If only in young girls thou do rejoice,
There Is scarce one house but it affoords thee choice:
If in new-married wives; but walk the street,
And in one day thou shall with thousands meet:
Or if in riper years; but look before,
Where ere thou go, thou shall find Matrons store.
If then one City, and at one time, could afford such multiplicity of all ages
and degrees; how many by that computation, may we reckon from the beginning,
amongst all the nations of the world? I doubt not then, but this draught of
water, fetched from so vast a fountain, may at least cool the palate, if not
quench the thirst of the insatiate Reader.

Manto.
ZEbalia, a man whose birth ranked him in the file of nobility, being employed
upon service in the Turkish wars, brought with him his most estimated and
greatest treasure, his dearest spouse styled Manto. But he dying in the crimson
bed of honor, the sinister hand of war gave her into the captivity of Bassa
Jonuses; who beholding with admiration a creature of so divine a feature, was
(though her conqueror) taken captive by her beauty: who having put her virtue
to the Test, found it to parallel, if not out shine her form. Wherefore being
covetous to engros^ so rich a booty to himself, he took her to wife, bestowing
on her a more honorable respect then on his other wives and concubines, and
she likewise endeavored to meet his affection with an answerable observance
and obedience. This fervent and mutual love continued long inviolate betwixt
them; insomuch, that they were no less honored for their eminence of state,
then remarkable for their conjugall affection: but that cursed fiend Jealousy
envying at their admired sympathy, st^aight usurp^ the throne of reason, and
sits a predominant tyrant in his fantastic brain; for he grew so strangely
jealous, that he thought some one or other to corrivall him, but yet knew no^
whom to ^aint with any just suspicion, nay, he would confess that he had not
caught the least spark of looseness from her that might thus fire this beacon
of distraction in him. Briefly, his wife as beautiful in mind as feature,
wearied with his daily peevish humors, and seeing all her studies aimed at his
sole content, were enterteined with neglect and insolent scorn; she resolved to
leave him, and secretly to fly into her native Country: to further which, she
unlocks this her secret intent, to an Eunuch of the Bassaes, giving him withal
certain letters to deliver to some friends of hers, whom she purposed to use as
agents in the furtherance of her escape: but he proving treacherous in the
trust committed to his charge, betrayed her to her husband, showing her letters
as testimonies to his allegations. The Bassa at this discovery swollen big with
rage, called her before him, whom in his desperate fury he immediately stabbed
with his dagger; thus with the cause of jealousy taking away the effect. But
this bloody deed somewhat loosened him (...) the peoples hearts, where he
before grew deeply and ^^st rooted: nor did he outrun vengeance, for at the
last her leaden feet overtook him, and in this manner. Selymus the first, at
his departure from Cairo, his soldiers whom he there left in garrison, made
suit unto his Highness, That in consideration of the great labors they had
already undergone, together with the many dangers they were hourly in
expectation of, that their wages might be enlarged; which he granted, and
withal gave this Bassa Jonuses the charge to see the performance thereof. At
last the pay day came, but their hopes proving abortive, the soldiers mutined:
to conjure down which spirit of insurrection, messengers are dispatched to the
Emperor, to certify him of the neglective abuse of his royal word, and fear
of sedition: this news overtook him at Larissea in Judea. Selymus enraged at
this relation, sends for Bassa Jonuses and examines the cause of his neglect in
such and so weighty a charge; Jonuses somewhat abashed, as being conscious (yet
withal high-spirited) gave the Emperor a peremptory answer; at which being
mightily incensed, he commanded his head to be cut off, which was forthwith
done: and thus justice suffered not innocent Manto to die unrevenged.

The wife of Agetus the Lacedemonian.
HErodotus, l. 6. thus writes of this Lady, the daughter of Aleydes the
Spartan, first wife to Agetus, and after to the King Ariston. She, of the most
deformed, became the excellentest amongst women. Her nurse to whose keeping she
was given (for the parents were ashamed of their Issue) went with her every day
to the Temple of Helena, which stands in Therapne (near to the Church of
Apollo) and kneeling before the Altar, besought the goddess to commiserate the
child, and free her from her native ugliness and loathsome deformity. Upon a
time returning from the Temple, a woman appeared to her of a venerable aspect,
and desired to see what she carried so tenderly in her arms: the nurse told her
it was an infant, but such an one as she was loath to show, and therefore
desired to be excused, the rather, because she was enjoined by the parents not
to expose it to the sight of any. The more the nurse put her off with evasions,
the more importunate the strange woman was to behold it. At length prevailing,
she gently with her hand stroaked the face of the child, and kissing it, thus
said: Go nurse, and bear her home to her parents, who shall in time become the
most beautiful of all the Spartan Ladies. From that time forward, her
deformity began to fall away, and a sweet grace and delightful comeliness to
grow as well in face, as every other lineament. Coming to marriage estate, she
was solicited by many, but only possessed by Agetus: yet after, by the craft of
Ariston, she was divorced from Agetus, and conferred upon him. Dion in Augusto
speaks of Terentia, Terentia.
the wife of Mecaenas, Mecenatis.
to be of that rare beauty, that she dared to contend with Livia, the wife of
Augustus Caesar, who was held to be the most amiable and exquisite Lady of
those days. Terentia.
Of Terentia the daughter of Cicero, I have thus read: Ciceronis.
Titus the son of Milo, and Appius the son of Clodius, were as remarkable for
their noble friendship, as their fathers notorious for their irreconcilable
hatred. Titus was for his fathers sake welcome to Cicero, but Appius much
hated, in regard of enmity betwixt him and his father Clodius, for Cicero was
of Milo's faction. Titus had long and dearly loved the fair Terentia, but
understanding that his friend Appius was likewise exceedingly enamoured of her,
he left his own suit, and earnestly solicited the Lady in his behalf, who was
easily persuaded to the motion, having long before cast an effectionat: eye
upon Appius, but durst make no expression thereof, much fearing the displeasure
of her father. Titus so well managed the business for his friend, that he
brought him privily into the house of Cicero, where the two lovers had mutual
conference: her father coming home by accident, and finding them together, in
the heat of his impatience excluded him, and locked her up in safe and close
custody. Which the poor Lady took so to heart, that she fell into an extreme
fever, and languishing daily, her father (now when it was too late) desired to
know what he might do to minister to her the least comfort: she only besought
him that before her death, she might take her last and loving leave of Appius;
who was instantly sent for: at his sudden coming in, she was extasi'd with his
sight, and expired in his embraces; which the noble youth perceiving, he drew
out a short dagger which he then wore about him, and in the presence of her
father and his own deer friend, slew himself. A more comicall conclusion has
that which I shall next tell you.

An old Vicar in the Country having a wondrous fair wench to his daughter, A
Vicar^ daughter.
it happened that a young scholar, that for want of means had left the
University, was preferred to the serving of a cure some what near him; by which
he had opportunity to woo the maid, and after had the parents consent to marry
her. It happened not long after, this young man had a Parsonage bestowed upon him
by his patron; the father and the son meeting upon a time at a Market Town,
with diverse gentlemen of the Country, being at dinner, amongst other discourse
cavilling about an argument, they fell into controversy which should be the
Better man; many rough words passed, insomuch, that the Gentlemen were forced
to come betwixt them to keep the peace. The old man stood upon his gravity, and
the name of father; the young man pleaded, That in regard he was a Parson, and
the other but a Vicar, he was the better of the two. This raised the uprore
afresh, which the Gentlemen had much ado to appease: at length the young man
demanded audience but for a few words, in which (says he) if I do not convince
him, and make it plain and palpable before you all, that I am the worthier of
the two, for name, place, and antiquity, I will yield him priority and
precedence for ever after. The words of Name and Antiquity, the old man heard
with much impatience; at length audience being granted, and silence obtained;
Now young knave (says the old Vicar) what can thou say for thy self? I only
desire (answered the young man) to be resolved in one question: propound it
says the other, Marry thus (says he) When the world was destroyed in the
general deluge, all save eight persons, tell me, where were the Vicars then?
The old man was blank, the Gentlemen smiled, and the young man carried it; so
that ever after the old man took place of the father, and the fair daughter of
the mother. I will only remember you of a fair young Gentlewoman, a Country
woman of mine, and so conclude with my Fair ones.

A Gallant newly come to his lands, A fair witty Wench.
became a suitor to a proper young Virgin, her fathers only child and heir: He
having had conference with her father, conditions on both sides were debated,
the match concluded, and the day of marriage appointed: the father and the son
in law riding abroad one morning to take the air, the ancient Gentleman was
mount^d on an easy paced Mare which he kept for his own saddle; this beast the
young Gallant was so enamoured of, that he (...) at any rate, though never so
unreasonable: but (...) man entreated him to hold (...) excused, because the
beast was (...) gentle, fitting his age, and being disfurnished (...) how to
come by the like, therefore his (...) neither to depart from her for love nor
money. The Gentleman grew so obstinate to have her, and the other so
s^lfe-will'd to keep her, that at length the son in law old him plainly, That
if he would not ^ell him his Ma^e, he would not marry his daughter. The father
(...) this grew into choler, and ^^ld him, If he respected his child no better,
but set her so slight, he had him come when he sent for him; and upon these
short terms they parted. A fortnight passed in this discontent; at length the
young gallant better advising with himself, and the Gentlewomans beauty still
sticking in his stomach, he began to recant his former obstinacy, and purposely
took horse to renew old acquaintance, and give her a fresh visitation: and
coming something near the house, it was the young Gentlewomans fortune to spy
him from a bay window, who instantly steps down to the gate, meaning her self
to play the porter. Three or four times he knocks at the Gate, but no body
answered; at length he rapt so loud, that she opened the wicket, and asked him,
Who he was, and what he would have? He seeing it was she, smilingly answered;
It is I, sweetheart, do you not know me? Not I indeed, replied she, for to my
remembrance I never saw you before: To whom he again answered, I am such a man,
and by these and these tokens I can put you in mind, that you cannot choose but
know me. Oh, I cry you mercy; it is true indeed (says she) I now very well
remember you, You are he that came a wooing to my fathers Mare: so clapped to the
Gate, and left him, and never after would give him the least entertainment.

Of Women Deformed.
IT is remembered of the Poet Hypponax by Pliny, Lib. 36. cap. 5. to be of that
unhappy shape, unseemly presence, and uncomely countenance, so deformed both in
face and feature, that he became a general scorn to all: insomuch, that two
famous Painters, Bubulus and Anterinus, drawing his Picture, and setting it out
to sale, and pencil'd him in such ridiculous and unfashionable manner, that the
Table begot laughter from all such as passed by and beheld it. Which Hypponax
hearing, he so persecuted the p^or Painters in his bitter lambicks, and
invective Satyrs, (...) despairing, they hanged themselves. Then blame me not,
if I be sparing in ripping up the deformities of women, lest (...) p^^secute me
as severely with their railing tongues, as the Poet did the Painters with his
Satirical pen. It is (...) therefore that I desire to be brief in.

(...) Anacharsis the Philosopher sitting (...) (who was a wondrous black and
(...) woman) one of the guests that sat with him at the Table being in his
cups, could not contain himself, but said aloud; O Anacharsis, you have
married a wife deformed enough: to whom the Philosopher (with great modesty)
replied; I have indeed: But boy (says he, calling to one that attended on the
Cup board) fill the Gentleman more wine, and she will then appear to him
sufficiently beautiful, more taunting his intempeperance, then be her
deformity. As Ovid speaks of the Night, so may it be said of Wine: Nocte latent
mendae --
The Night hides faults, the Midnight hour is blind,
And no mishap'd deformity can find.


Martial, Lib. 3. describes one Vetustina: Vetustina.
She has (says he) only thre^ t^eth, and three hairs, the breast of a
Grasshopper, the leg of an Ant, the belly of a Spider, a rough and rugged brow;
her mouth in smiling showed like the Crocodiles; her voice in singing, like the
Frogs and Gnats; her face like the Owls, and her s^vour like the Goats, with
other such like offensive imperfections. The same Author, lib. 1. speaks of
Philenis: Philenis,
O^ulo Philenis, semper altero plorat,
Quo fiat istud quaeris modo? Lusca est.
Philenis seems with one eye st^ll to moan;
Would thou the reason know* she has but one.


I see no cause why any man should mock such imperfections as come by nature:
therefore I commend the answer of a Gentlewoman, who being followed by a
gallant at the heels, and seeing her to be of an upright and straight body,
slender wasted, and clean legged, he commended her in his thoughts for an
exceeding proper and well-limb'd woman; who mending his p^ce to overtake her,
and spying her masked, entreated her in (...) to unpin her mask, with purpose
to kiss her; but seeing her face to be swarthy, and somewhat wrinckled, and
not according to his exp^ct^tion, answering to the other parts of her body:
Mistress (says he) I (...) purposed to have begged a kiss of you, had I liked
you before as well as did behind. Then Sir (quoth she) so please you you have
leave to kiss me where you best like. The (...) such as have hooked Noses
(those the Greeks call (...)) and such they hold to beautify the face best,
Plut. in Apo.
because (...) (to which Nation, no Kings memory was ever (...)) had his Nose
so fashioned. There are of those, two kinds; one, which in the d^scent from the
brow, instantly arises in the fashion of a Crows bill, and such (says (...))
is a mark of impudence; Caelius l. 24. c. 26. (...)*
the second has his bending separate from the brow, and the swelling in the
middle part of the Nose like a Hawks bill, and those are the marks of Courage
and Beauty, and such we term a Haws Nose or a Roman Nose. I know no^ which of
these it was the we^ch had, of whom Sir Thomas Moor compiled his Epigram, which
was after this manner.

A lovely Less, that had a Roman nose,
Meeting with Tyndarus, he would have kissed her:
But when he should have met her at the close,
I would (quoth he) but can not kiss you (sister)
For had not your egregi^us long Nose bin,
I would have kissed your lips, and not your chin.
The poor wencht blushed, and burnt with secret ire,
Which set her changing color all on flame,
And says to him; To furnish your desire,
Since that you fain would kiss, and crave the same;
Because my Nose no more shall let your will,
Kiss where is none, there freely t^ke your fill.
Thus you see the greatest scholars, and gravest men, will sometimes make
sport with the Muses. Many other things there are, which blast the brightest
beauties, making women loathed where they have been most liked; their number is
infinite: Amongst many I will give you a taste of one, borrowed from an Elegy
in Ovid (which bears Title, Ad Amicam) to his Mistress, that demanded hire for
her prostitution.

As fa^r as she that made two husbands jar,
Raising twixt Troy and Greece a Ten years war;
As bright as feathered Laeda, great Joves rape;
She that was changed into a Swar-like shape;
As fair as Amimone, even so bright
Were you my Mistress. That which Poets write
Of metamorphos'd Jove, how often love changed him,
And from his own celestial shape estranged him,
To an Eagle, or a Bull; I feared lest he
Would likewise from high heaven descend on thee.
I am jealous now, my fear is vanished,
And the hot ardor of Affection banished,
My fire is cooled, reason re-assumes his place,
And now methinks thou have not thine own face,
Do thou demand why I am changed? Behold,
The cause I Will tell thee, thou did ask me gold;
Thou look that for my pleasure I should pay,
And that alone does fright me still away.
Whilst thou were simple, and in all things kind,
I with thy sweet proportion, liked thy mind:
Thou now art cunning grown; what has that gained?
Thy bodies beauty by thy mind is stained, etc:
And after proceeds thus: Look on the beasts that in the medows stray,
Shall women bear more savage minds then they?
What gifts do Kine from the rude Bull enforce?
What price demands the Mare of the proud Horse?
O^ of the Ram, the Ewe? they will couple twice,
Before they once debate upon a price.
Women alone have learnt to bargain well,
Their pleasures borne with them, alone they sell;
Al^ne they prize the night, and at a rate
Ch^ss^r themselves to strangers: O vile state.
Alone for mutu^ll pastime, Coin they crave,
And ere they sport, ask first, what shall I have?
That which delights both, to which both run,
And but by joint assistance is not done,
The pleasures which we both on even hand try,
Why should one party sell, the other buy?
Why should the sweets which we alike sustain,
To me be double loss, thee double gain?
That which comes freely, much by that we set;
Thou giv^st (...) me, and I am still in debt.
The love that is har'd, is plainly sold and bought,
Thou have thy price, and then I owe thee naught.
Then, O you Fair ones, all such thoughts expel,
What Nature freely gives you, spare to sell:
Let not your bodies to base use be lent,
Goods lea^dly got, are ever loosely spent, etc.


And which this gentle admonition, I take leave as well of the Fair, as the
deformed.

Explicit lib. quintus, Inscriptus Terpsichore.
THE SIXTH BOOK inscribed ERATO.
Treating of Chaste Women, and of Women Wantons.
ERATO signifies Love; of which, there are but two kinds, that is, the love of
Virtue, or of Vice: then under what Muse could I more properly patronize the
Chaste and the wanton? But methinks I hear some of our C^iticks murmr and say,
Whither does this man purpose to wonder, that has lost his way and gone too
far already? He might do well to break off here, and leave it to some other
heads, either more ingeniously witty, or more gravely serious. To such, I make
the same answer that Bishop Bonner did once to Henry the eight. The King of
England, and Francis, the first of that name, King of France, being at ods,
Henry was much incensed, and appointed Bishop Bonner (his Ambassador) to
debate with him sharply about the designs then in hand: who having accommodated
all things fitting for the journey, came to take his leave of the King, his
Master, who uttered many bitter and disdainful words against Francis, all
tending to his opprobry and dishonor; and in these terms (says he) deliver
unto him thy Embassy. To whom Bonner replied; If it please your majesty, if I
should give him such harsh and despightfull language, and in his own Court too,
he can do no less then take off my head. Thy head (answered the King) If he
do, it is no matter: but tell him further, if he dares to cut off thy head, ten
thousand of his subjects heads shall be sent after it. To whom Bonner (after
some small deliberation) again replied: But I am doubtful (my Liege) whether
any of these ten thousand heads will fit my shoulders; in that short answer as
well taxing the Kings rash fury, as provident for his own safety. With which
the King somewhat satisfied, and better considering with himself, delivered
unto him a more calm and milder Embassy. So, though those heads may savor
both of more Judgment and Reading, I am doubtful whether they could more
naturally suit with my own method and style, though never so mean or barbarous:
Therefore, Deo adjuvante and Erato assistente, I proceed. Plutarch in Lacoa.
Apo.
The Spar^ans had a custom in their solemn Feasts, to have a long of three
parts, sung by three several Chorus's, The first was of weak old men, The
second of young able men, The third of boys and pretty grown children. The old
men began with this verse: Olim juventutem nos strenuam egimus.
We have been Strong, that now Decrepit are.


To whom the young men in a second quire answered: Fortes sumus nos, fac si vis
periculum.
We are both Young, and Strong, prove us who dare.


To them a third tone the children ecchoed: Nos ^rimus his praestantiore
plurimo.
With these in Youth and Strength we shall compare.


To this three fold age, I compare the triplicity of the Muses. The first three
books are by this, already spent in your judgments: The second three, of which
this is the last, are the pith and strength of my present work in hand; to
which the three succeeding (though yet in their infancy) I shall strive to
parallel, if not exeed the rest. And first of Chastity. It is reported of a
woman of L^cena, that a great man sending her rich gifts to corrupt her
chastity, she returned him this answer, Whilst I was a Virgin, I was taught to
obey my father, which I accordingly did; and being a wise, to submit my self
to my husbands will; if then you desire any (...) at my hands, get first his
consent, and you shall after understand my further pleasure. Plutarch. in
Lacon. (...) those Lucenaean Virgins were taken captives and (...) open market;
one of them being cheapned, was demanded what she knew? she answered, To be
faithful. Another being asked if he should buy her, whether she would prove
chaste? answered, Whether he bought her no, she would be chaste howsoever: her
master after seeking to corrupt her, she slew her self, uttering these her last
words, See what a treasure thou have lost, that knew not my worth whilst
thou wast possessed of me. There have been many men that have left unto women
strict rules of Chastity by their examples. Saint Augustine being asked why he
would not suffer his own sister to dwell in the h^use with him? answered,
Because such as may converse with her are not my sisters; intimating, that all
such as would avoid the sin, ought to shun the temptation: for he was wont to
say, It is not good to look upon a woman, it is worse to converse with her, but
worst of all to touch her. Therefore these senses of ours that are most subject
to danger, ought most to be suppressed and bridled, Marul. lib. 4. Capit. 7. and
Sabin. lib 5. Hierome repoots of the Abbot Hylarian, That when he found any
unchaste cogitations arise in his breast, he would bear himself upon the
bosom, as if with blows and buffets he would expel them thence (and thus
said) I will tame thee, O Ass, that thou shall no more kick and spurn against me
with thy heels, I will not henceforth feed thee with Barley but chaff, I will
abate thy wantonness with hanger and thirst, I will load thy back with grievous
burdens, I will inure thee to the Summers heat and the Winters cold. After
which time he used the spare diet of roots, and the juice of herbs; and these
only when necessity compelled him to eat: He enjoined himself (the time of
pra^er excepted) to strict and continual labor, to increase his appetite, but
not augment his diet. Therefore Hierom against Lust, prescribes these three
sovereign remedies; Fast, Prayer, and hard Labor: The examples are
innumerable, as well amongst Ethnic men, as Christians. Alexander supping with
Antipadres, there was brought to the table and see just against the King, a
wondrous beautiful woman, as excellent in voice as in face, Plut. Apo. Reg.
both tempting so far, that Alexander began suddenly to be surprised with her
love, and demanded of Antipadres, If she were a woman whom he any way affected.
To whom he answered, That she was endeared to him above all other creatures
living. Then thou fool (replied the King) cause her instantly to rise and be
conveied hence from the banquet. How far then was this temperate Prince from
adulterating another man's wife, that was afraid to do his host the least
injury in his strumpet? Therefore Julianus the Emperor having took the City
Nalaca, wherein were many women of rare and extraordinary feature, was so far
from corrupting their virtues, that he commanded, not any of them should be
suffered to come in his presence. Fulgos. l 4. cap. 3.
Caelius lib. 7 cap 27. tells us, that so great was the chastity of the Paduan
women in times past, that not any of them walked out of their doors but with
their faces covered. Therefore Caius Sulpitius Galla sued a divorce against his
wife, because she was met bare-browed in the streets, against whom he thus
pleaded, Thou art only to be governed and guided by the laws of mine eyes, thy
beauty is to be approved by them, and to please them alone, thou ought to
adorn thy self: but to desire to seem fair in the eyes of strangers, incurs the
imputation both of susp^tion and trespass. Erasmus l.
What should we think then of that fantastic attire and gaudy ornaments so
much in use now adays, 6. Apotheg.
which as well in youth as age, rather seem openly to pro^esse lust, then
inwardly to protect chastity. O^ these curiosities in vain and unnecessary
attire, Plautus in Pe^ulo thus speaks, Negotii sibi qui volet vim parare, navem
and mulierem
Hec duo sibi comparato, etc.
He that is idle and would business have,
Let him of these two things himself provide,
A Woman and a Ship: no two things crave
More care or cost, to suit the one for pride,
The other for tackles: they are both like fire.
For still the more they have they more desire.
And this I speak by proof, from morn to noon,
Their labors and their travels have no end,
To wash, to rub, to wipe, and when that is done,
To strive (where nothing is amiss) to mend:
To polish, and expolish, paint, and stain,
Unguents to daub, and then wipe out again, etc.


Now what general censures these fantastic garbs and mere importunities
incur, if any demand, I answer, What less then weakness of the brain, or
loosnesse of life: This jest following though it be old, yet me thinks it is
pity it should die unremembred. A Gentleman meeting in the streets with a brave
gallant wench and richly accommodated, seeing her walk with her breasts bare
almost down to the middle: laying his hand upon them, demanded of her in her
ear, whether that slesh were to be sold, who scornfully answered, No, to whom
he modestly replied, Then let me advise you to shut up your shop windows, I
will end this monitory counsel with an Epigram out of Ausonius, which bears
title of two sisters of unlike conditions: Delia nos miramur, and est mirabile
quod tam
Dissimiles estis* etc.
We wonder Delia, and it strange appears,
Thou and thy sister have such censure past;
Though known a where, the habit's chaste she wears
Thou (save thy habit) nothing whorish have:
Though thou chaste life she has chaste habit sought,
Her manners her, thy Habit makes thee naught.


In memory of virgi^ cha^tity, I will cite you one history out of Marullus,
lib. 4. cap. 8. Aegipta.
The monument of Aegypta (the daughter of Edgar King of England, a professed
Virgin in her life time) being opened after she had many years lain in the
grave, all her body was turned into dust, saving her womb and bowels; and they
were as fresh and fair without any corruption, as at the first day of her
interment. Those that stood by wondering at the object, one Clerk amongst the
rest broke forth into these terms: Wonder not to see the rest of the body taste
of putrefaction, and the womb still sound and perfect, which never was
contaminated with the least stain or blemish of lust. Of her, Bishop Dunstan
thus speaks: Worthy is her remembrance to be honored upon Earth, whose chaste
life is celebrated amongst the Saints in Heaven. O great reward, due to Virgin
chastity, by which such felicity is attained, that their souls are not only
glorified in Heaven, but their bodies are not subject to corruption on earth.
But because the Theme I am next to speak of, is of Virgins, give me leave to
begin with the best that ever was since the beginning, for Beauty, Chastity and
Sanctity; nor shall it be amiss to speak a word or two concerning her
Genealogy.

Mary the mother of Christ, was the daughter of Joachim, of the Tribe of Juda;
her mothers name was Anna, the daughter of Isachar, of the Tribe of Levi. Here
(as Saint Hierome observes) is to be noted, That Anna and Emeria were two
sisters: of Emeria came Elizabeth, the mother of John Baptist: Ranulphus.
also Anna was first married to Ioachim, and had by him Mary the mother of
Christ, and was after espoused to Clcophas, by whom she had Mary Cleophe, who
was married to Alphaeus. From them two cames James the less (surnamed
Alphaeus) Simon Cananaeus, Judas Thaddaeus, and Joseph, otherwise called
Barsabas. Eus^bius in his Ecclesiastical history, lib 2. cap. 2. says, That
James the less was called the brother of our Lord, because he was the brother
of Joseph, the husband of Mary: but his opinion is not altogether authentical.
Also Anna was espoused to Salome, and had by him Mary Salome, after married to
Zebedeus, and had by him James the greater, and John the Evangelist. Jos^ph the
husband of Mary, was the brother of Cleophas. It is also observed, Marian. l. 2.
That in the one and fortieth year of the reign of Augustus Caesar, in the
seventh month (which is September) in the eleventh day of the Moon (which is
the four and twentieth day of the month) on a Thursday, John Baptist was
conceived; and two hundred threescore and fifteen days after, on a Friday was
born: So that he was the forerunner of Christ, both in his Conception, his
Birth, his Baptism, his Preaching, and his Death. A woman goes with child two
hundred threescore and sixteen days (for so long by computation, was Christ in
the womb of the blessed Virgin) though all women go not so long with child, S.
Augustine observes, lib. 4. de Civitate Dei, cap. 5. So that Christ was longer
in the womb by a day, and more, then St John Baptist. John also was born when
the days began to shorten and wane; and Christ when they began to wax long.
Concerning these Antiquities, I conclude with a sentence of St Augustins:
Against Reason (says he) no sober man will dispute; against the Scripture, no
Christian man contest; and against the Church, no religious man oppose. And so
I proceed to the History.

Of Mary the blessed Virgin.
LEt it not be held unnecessary, or appear out of course, Johan. Wyerius de
Lamiis, lib. 3.
amongst these Virgins to insert a history memorable for the rareness thereof
to all posterity. Johannes Wyerius in his book entitled de Praestigi^s
demonum* has collected it out of Suidas. Suidas.
In the mean time that Justinian was Emperor, there was a Prince amongst the
Jews, whose name was Theodosius; He having great aequaintance and familiarity
with one Philippus a Christian, a bancker, or one that dealt in the exchange of
money (for he was called Philippus Argentarius) this Philip did often solicit
and exhort him to leave his Judaisme, and be a convert, and turn to the
Christian religion: to whom he answered, Indeed he must ingeniously confess,
he made no question but that Jesus whom the Christians adored, was the same
Messiah of whom the holy Prophets foretold, yet he could not be persuaded to
relinquish the honors and profits that he had amongst his own Nation, and give
himself up to a name which they knew not, or at least would not acknowledge:
yet that he believed so of Christ, he was not only persuaded by the Oracles of
the holy Prophets, but he found it approved by a certain mystery, namely, a
writing most charily still kept amongst the Jews, in a place most safe and
secret, where their choice records with the especiallest care and trust are
reserved; which was of this nature: It was a custom amongst the Jewish Nation,
at what time the holy Temple was yet standing in Jerusalem, to have continually
the number of 22 chief and selected Priests (just so many as there be letters
in the Hebrew language, or books of the old Testament) and so often as any of
these was taken away by death, immediately another was elected to succeed in
his place; and being chosen (in a book kept in the treasury for that only
purpose) expressly to write down his own name, and the names of both his
parents, with the days punctually set down of the decease of the one and the
succession of the other. Now in the time that Christ was conversant in Judaea,
and yet had not showed himself to the world, nor preached the Word openly to
the people, it happened that one of the Priests of the foresaid number died,
neither after many voices and sundry nominations was any agreed upon, or
thought fit to be ascribed into his place. At length was propounded JESUS, the
son of the Carpenter Joseph (for so they termed him) a man though young, yet
for the sanctity of his life, his behavior and doctrine, above all the rest
commended. This suffrage standing, as having general approbation from all, it
was convenient to send for his mother (for his father Joseph was late dead)
into the Consistory, only to know their names, and to register them in the
aforesaid book. She therefore being called, and diligently questioned of her
son and his father, thus answered, That indeed she was the mother of JESUS, and
brought him into the world; of which, those women are testates, that were
present at his birth; but that he had no father from earth: in which if they
desired to be further instructed, she could make it plainly appear: For being a
Virgin, and then in Galilee, the Angel of God (says she) entered the house
where I was, and appearing unto me (not sleeping, but thus as I am, awake) he
told me, That by the Holy Ghost I should conceive, and bring forth a son, and
commanded me that I should call his name JESUS: Therefore being then a Virgin,
by that Vision I conceived, I brought forth JESUS, and I still remain a Virgin
unto this day. When the (...) he^^d, this, they appointed faithful and trusty
Midwive^, with all diligence and care to make proof whether Mary were a Virgin
or no: they finding the truth most app^^ant and not to be contradicted,
delivered up to the Priests, That she (...) Virgin, pure and immaculate. Then
they sent for those women that were known to be at her delivery, and were
witn^sses of the Infants coming into the world; all which did attest and
justity* That she was the mother of the same JESUS* With these things the
Priests amazed and astonished, they presently entreated Mary, that she would
freely profess unto unto them what his Parents were, that their names
(according to custom) might be registered amongst the others. To whom the
blessed Virgin thus answered: Certain I am, that I brought him into the world,
but know no father that he has from the Earth; but by the Angel it was told
me, That he was the son of GOD; He therefore is the son of GOD, and me. This
the Priests understanding, called for the book; which being laid open before
them, they caused these words to be inscribed: Upon such a day deceased such a
Priest, born of such and such Parents; in whose place, by the common and unite
suffrage of us all, is elected Priest, JESUS, the Son of the living GOD, and
the Virgin MARY. And this book Theodosius affirmed (by the especial diligence
of the most noble amongst the Jews, and the chief Princes) was reserved from
the great sack and destruction of the City and Temple, and was transferred into
the City of Tiberias, and there kept a long time after. Suidas testifies, that
he has heard this discourse from honest men, who delivered it to him word by
word, as they themselves have heard it from the mouth of Philippus Argentarius.
This most blessed and pure Virgin Mary, the mother of our Lord and Savior, was
born of the holy Matron St Anne, in the year of the world, 3948, and in the
year before Christ, fifteen Of him, Claudian thus elegantly writes in one of
his Epigrams: Proles vera Dei, cunctisque antiquior Annis
Nunegenitus, qui semper eras --
True Son of God, older then time, that have
Thy birth but now, yet from beginning wast,
Author of Light, and Light before all other,
O thou that art the parent of thy mother,
And by th^ne equall-aged father sent
From Heaven unto this terrene continent:
Whose word was made Flesh, and constrained to dwell
In the straight* prison of a Virgins cell,
And in a narrow angle to remain,
Whose power, no limit can, no place contein;
Who being born, did now begin to see
All these great works created first by thee:
The work and workman of thy self not scorning
TO obey those weary hours of Even and Morning,
Of which the art Lord, and tell each minute o'r,
Made by thy Wisdom for man's use before.
And took'st on thee our shape, only to show
To us, that God we did (till then) not know, etc.


Petronilla.
When Peter the Apostle, had by his faith cured all infirmities and diseases,
and in all places, yet he suffered his daughter Petronilla to be grievously
afflicted with a Fever; and being demanded, why he that had cured others, did
not help her; he answered, Because he knew her sickness to be most behoofful
for her souls health; for the weaker she was in body, she was so much the
stronger in faith, settling her cogitations on the joies of heaven, and not the
pleasures of the world, desiring of God that she might rather die a chaste
Virgin, then to be the wife of the Counsull Flaccus, by whom she was at that
time most earnestly solicited: whose prayer was heard, for she died of that
sickness, and the Consul was prevented of his purpose, who had long
insidiated her chastity, Marul. lib 4 cap. 8. The like we read of Hilarious
P^ctaviensis Episcopus, who having long trained up his daughter App^a in
chastity and sanctity of life, App^a.
fearing lest time might alter her vows, and tempt her with the vain pleasures
of the world, he besought the giver of all graces, that he might rather with
joy follow her to her grave, then with sorrow to her marriage bed; which was
accordingly granted, as the same Author testifies. Eustochium
Eustochium the daughter of Paula a Noble matron of Rome, is celebrated by
Saint Hierom for the only president of Virginal chastity. Tora.
Tora the virgin was of that chaste and austere life, that having took a vow and
once entered her profession, she never put on her back any new garment, or so
much as changed her shoes. Maria. Egypt.
Maria Aegyptiaca, lived the life of an Hermit in the solitude of an
unfrequented desert: some write of her, that as aften as she was seen to pray,
she seemed to be lifted up from the Earth into the Air, the height of a cubit.
Columba.
Columba a Virgin of Perusina, is reported to be of that chastity and
abstinence, that she never tasted any other food then the bare fruits of the
earth, from the years of her discretion till the hour of her death. Amata.
Amata was a professed Virgin, who in forty ye^rs space never set foot over the
threshold of that Cloister, wherein she had confined her self, in which time
she never tasted food, save bread and roots. Sara.
Sara lived in the time of Theodosius the elder, she made a Vow, never to lodge
beneath any roof; but inhabiting the bank of a certain river, removed not from
that place in threescore years. The like is read of Sylvia, Sylvia.
a Virgin, the daughter of Russinus, a Prefect or Ruler in Alexandria, who
betook her self to solitude for the space of threescore years, in which time
she never washed any part of her body save her hands, nor reposed her self upon
any bed save the ground. It is reported by Edward Hall, John Leisland, S. Ebb.
John Sleyden, and others, of S. Ebb, Abbesle of Collingham, That to preserve
her own and her sisters chastities, and keep their vows inviolate (because
they would seem odible to the Danes, who had done many outrages both against
Law and Religion, and then tyrannized in the Land) she cut off her own nose and
upper lip, and persuaded all the other Nuns to do the (...): for wh^^h act, the
Danes burnt the Abbey, with all the (...) Fulgos. lib. 4. cap. 3. speaks of
Ildegunda, Ildegunda.
a Germane Vi^gin, born in Nassau; who after many temptations, to which she
feared her beauty might subject her, in the year 1128 she changed her habit,
and got to be entertein'd in a Priory near unto worms, called Scu^na beu Hiem:
in which she lived long by the name of Joseph, in singular continence and
modesty* still conversing amongst the learned and best approved scholars,
even till the time of her death* neither was she then known to be a woman, till
coming to wash her body, her Sex was discovered. In the same Monastry, and
amongst that Covent, lived Euphrosyna, Euphrosyna.
a Virgin of Alexandria, by the name of Smaragdus: as also one Marina, Marina.
who called her self Marinus, both dissembling their Sex Gunzonis, Gunzonis.
daughter to the Duke of Arboa, was possessed by an evil spirit; but after, by
the prayers of holy men being recovered, she vowed perpetual Virginity. And
after being demanded in marriage by Sigebertus, King of the French men, she was
delivered unto him by her father: who debating with her concerning his present
purpose, she humbly desired to be excused by his majesty, in regard she had
already past a pre contract: The King demanding, To whom? she answered, She was
a betrothed Spouse to her Redeemer: At which the King being startled, forbore
to compel her any further, but suffered her to take upon her a religious life;
she preferring her Virgin Chastity before the state and title of a Queen. And
these shall suffice for Religious Virgins; I now proceed to others, that
grounded their virtue on mere morality.

Baldraca was a Virgin, Baldraca.
but of mean parentage, and of a dejected fortune: yet to her never-dying
honor, and president to all ages to come (notwithstanding she was not able to
supply her self with things needful and necessary, either for sustenance or
ornament) neither by threats or menaces, promises of worldly honors or
promotion, she could not be tempted to prostitute her self to the Emperor
Otho. Scrytha.
Saxo Grammaticus writes of Serytha, the daughter of Synaldus King of the
Danes, to be of that modesty, that when the fame of her beauty had attracted a
confluence of many suitors to the Court of her father, yet she could never be
won either to converse with, or so much as to look upon any of them. Tara.
Tara was a French Lady, of a noble and illustrious family* she lived in the
time of Herac^ius* who when her father Hagerticus, and her mother Leodegunda
would have compelled her to marry she fell into that exces^e of weeping, that
with the extraordinary flax of ^eares she grew blind soon after. Dula.
Dula was ^ Virgin famous for her chastity, who chose rather to be slain by the
hand of a Soldier, then to be despoiled of her Virginity. Statyra.
Statyra and Roxana were the sisters of (...) King of Pontus, Roxana.
who for the space of forty years had kept their vow of Virginity inviolate;
these hearing the sad fate of their brother: and fearing to be ravished by the
enemy (at least, to fall into their captivity) by taking of poison, finished
both their days and sorrows. Plutarch writes of one Roxana, drowned in a Well
by Statyra. E^rusca V^rgo.
It is reported of an Het^urian Damsel (taken by a Soldier) who to preserve
her Virginity, leapt off from the bridge Ancisa into the Arnus: of whom,
Benedictus Varchius has left this memory in one of his Epigrams: Perderet
intactum ne Virgo Etrusca pudorem
In rapidas sese praecipitavit aquos, etc.
The Hetrurian Girl, her honor still to keep,
Precipitates her self into the deep;
And from the bottom three times being cast
Up into the air, as loath that one so chaste
Should there be swallowed, she as often sinks down
Her modest face, her martyrdom to crown,
And shame the lustful world. What shall we say
Of the chaste Lucrece, famous to this day?
She for one death, is called the Romans pride;
To save her Fame, this Tuscan three times di'd.


Bernardus Scandeonus, lib. 3. Class 34. Histor. Patavinae, writes, that when
Maximilian the Emperor made spoil of the Paduan territories, diverse of the
Country people leaving the villages empty, fled into the City; amongst whom was
one Isabella, Isabella.
a Damsel of Ravenna, who being seized on by some of the Venetian soldiers
that then had the charge of the City, and surprised with her beauty, drew her
aside, with purpose to have dishonored her* but finding no other means to shun
the violence of their lust, she from the bridge cast her self headlong into
the river Medoacus, where she was drowned: and afterward, her body being drawn
out of the river, was buried under a bank, without any other ceremony belonging
to a Funeral. Martia.
Martia, the daughter of Varro, was of that admirable continence and chastity,
that being most excellent in the Art of Painting, she not only alienated and
restrained her Pencill from limning any thing that might appear obscene, or
show the least immodesty, but she was never known to delineate or draw the face
of a man, Ravis. in Officin. The like is reported of (...), (...)
alike excellent in Painting, and as remarkable for her Virgin Chasti^y.
Britonia, a beautiful maid of Creet (giving her self wholly to H^nting, (...).
and the Chase) to shun the importunities of King Minos (who laid trains to
vitiate her) threw her self into a river, and was drowned. Daphne, Daphne.
the daughter of Amicla, retired her self both from walled Cities, and all
public society, and was at length enterteined into the fellowship of Diana,
frequenting the Laconian fields, and Peloponnesian mountains. Of her, Leucippus
the son of Oenemaus was enamoured; who having attempted diverse ways to
compass his will, but not prevailing in any, he bethought himself what course
Jupiter took to stuprate Calisto, the daughter of Lycaon; and attiring himself
in the habit of a female Huntresse, was entertained by Diana, and admitted into
their number: where he grew familiar with all, and especially endeared to
Daphne; insomuch, that she thought no hour well spent without him. Of which
acquaintance Apollo being jealous (in regard they had such convenience of time,
place, and opportunity) he put his own dearly beloved Daphne in mind, to entice
Leucippus to a river, where Diana with all their nymphs intended to both
themselves: Whither when they came, the Virgins disrobed themselves, even to
nakedness; and being all stripped to their skins, but finding Leucippus only to
move delays, they plucked off his garment by force, and so discovered him to be
one of the contrary Sex: at which Diana enraged, commanded all her Virgins to
take up their Bows and Quivers, and so they shot him to death with their
arrows. This is recorded by Parthen. de Amator. Theodor. Flaietes in Eleg. and
Philarchus, lib. 15.

Of Chaste Wives.
AN excellent president of Chastity was that in Rhodogune, Rhodogune.
the daughter of Darius; who caused her Nurse to be slain, because her husband
being dead, she persuaded her to a second marriage. A more admirable remark of
Nuptial Chastity it was of the wives of the Theutonicks, remembered Hieron. in
his Epistle to Gerontia; whose husbands being slain, and they taken captive by
Marius, humbly besought him on their knees, that they might be sent to the
Vestals in Rome, as a present; protesting they would be equally with them,
still from the society of men, and profess perpetual chastity, but their
request being denied by the Consul Marius, the next night following all of them
with an unite consent strangled themselves. Theoxena.
Theoxena was famous for her Chastity, who being environed at Sea by the Navy
of Philip King of Macedon, seeing her husband thrown over-boo^'d, leapt after
him to follow him in death; not only to express her love to her husband, but
her scorn to stand to the mercy of the conqueror. Baptista Pius, lib. 2.
Elegiar. Tyro.
speaks of Tyro, a woman of Thessalia, who (her husband being dead) could by no
counsel of friends, or persuasion of kindred, be won to survive him Plutarch
in Pompeio speaking of Hypsicrataea, Hypsicrataea
says, she was so endearedly affected to her husband King Mithridates, that
for his love she made a voluntary change of her most becoming womanish shape
and habit, into a man's: for cutting her hair, she accustomed her self to the
practice of Horse and Arms, that she might with the more facility endure the
labors and dangers of the wars. Her husband being subdued by C^. Pompeius, and
his Army quite dissipate and overcome, she followed him (flying) through many
barbarous Nations, where her life and safety were in hourly hazard; and these
she enterprized with a mind undaunted, and a body unwearied, her faith and
loialty in all his extremities being to him no small solace and comfort: for
though an Exile (being still in the society of his Queen and bed fellow) he
imagined himself (in what place soever he reposed) to have been in his own
palace, and amongst his household gods.

Of Penelope.
THE beauty of Penelope attracted a number of suitors, who from diverse
Countries came to adulterate the bed of* Ulysses. From D^lichim came two and
fifty, from Samos four and twenty, from Xacynthus twenty, from Ithaca two and
twenty; of which, these are nominated by Homer: Antinous, Eurinous, Eurimachus,
Leocritus, Neso, Pysander, Hesippus, Agatus, Leocles, Ampinomus,
Demotholomaeus, Medon, a common Crier, Euphemus a Minstrel, and Irus a Beggar;
all which, Ulysses (at his return from his years travels) slew in his own
house. Some of these, Ovids Penelope reckons up in these verse: Dulichii,
Samiique, and quos tulit alta Xacinthus, etc.
Dulichium, Samos, and Xacinthus Hill,
Throng me with troops of wanton suitors still:
What should I speak to thee of Medon fell?
Of Polibus, or of Pysander tell?
What of Antinous giddy head deplore,
Covetous Eurimachus, and others more?
These in thine absence cannot be withstood,
But still thou feed'st them with thy wealth and blood:
The Beggar Irus and Melanthius too,
The Herdsman, etc.


And since we are in the history of Penelope, Homer l. 1. Odyss.
It shall not be amiss to dilate it a little further out of Homer: who in his
first book entitled Odyssaea, of Phaemius the Harper, speaks to this purpose:
Phaemius the Harper to the board invited,
Where the bold suitors bid themselves to feast,
A doleful song to a sad tune recited:
Of the Argive fleet in their return distressed,
And cast in sundry exiles: on what coast
Such men miscarry, where such Princes perish,
Upon what rocks and shelves such ships were tossed:
Him, whilst Penelope, bold suitors cherish,
The discontented Queen, with Prayers, and Tears,
Wills him desist: the Harper soon forbears.


But to leap from the first, to the seventeenth book, and to omit all Ulysses
travels and adventures, till his meeting with his son Telemachus, who brought
him into his own Court in the disguise of a beggar, to see what revels were
kept there in his absence; Known only to his son and his friend Eumaeus, and
not yet to Penelope.

Jam Caelum roseis rutilat Tritonia bigis. Odyss. lib 17 Perioch.

Telemachus unto the Queen relates
The process of his long peregrination:
Eumaeus brings Ulysses amongst those states
That sought his bed; where they in courtly fashion
Were sat at a rich banquet with his wife,
There he begs meat, Antinous amongst the rest,
Threats with injurious words to seize his life,
But the mild Queen invites him as her guest.
Ulysses for that time forbears their sight,
But sends the Queen word he will come at night.
Irus adest populi per mendicabula notus. (...)

In his own Palace whilst Ulysses craves
Their Charity, Irus (that was indeed
One of that rank, and begged amongst ragged slaves)
Boldly thrusts in, amongst the rest to feed:
From words these grow to blows; the suitors they
Encourage both parts to maintain the Fray.
Proposing him that shall ^^^ome for prize
The intrails of a Goat. Ulysses he
Proves victor in his beggars base disguise,
And (half dead) I^us of the place does free;
For which he is guerdon'd, at the Queens request,
With a rich Gift from every unbid guest.
At part (...) domus secretus Ulysses. (...)

Ulysses with Telemachus conspires
The death of all those suitors, both devising
How to release the Queen to her desires,
And free the Palace from their ty^annizing:
And that they neither may offend, nor stand,
Compl^^ by night, their weapons how to steal,
Now by Humaeus to the Quee^s fair hand
Her Lo^d is brought (who will not yet reveal
Himself to her) but says he is of Creet,
To whom her husband (...) had been a guest.
They part; The Queen commands to wash his (...),
(And for that night betakes her to her rest.)
That (...) takes (his Nurse before)
She (...) upon his flesh espies,
O^ mount Parnassus given (...) by a Bore,
It was no sooner seen, but out she cries,
Ulysses, Are you come? Being thus desc^i'd,
He prays, and brikes, that she his name will hide.
-- Iamque procos genua amplexus orabat Ulysses.
The guest, at banquet, (...)
Eresippus casts
To (...) Ulysses, but he mist his aim,
((...) both time and banquet wastes)
(...) to the place Theoclemenus came,
Expe^t in Divination, who sore-spake
At table to them all, their eminent ruin:
But at his words they strange derisions make,
Abus^ng all that speak of things ensuing;
They (...) the high ^owers, and contemn the fates,
And thrust at length the Prophet forth the gates.
Unto Eumaeus and Philetius too, Perioch. 21.

In whom he trusts, the Prince himself makes known,
And what that night he had intent to do:
And how to make safe seizure of his own,
(which croft must do) be calls for that strong bow,
In which, what time he wooed his beauteous Bride,
All that were Rivals, must their vigors show,
Yet he achieved what many suitors tried:
This was proposed a second marriage prize.
And now the selfsame Bow before them brought,
All prove their strengths (save he in his disguise)
But (much unable) they prevailed naught.
The Bow the son unto his father gave:
Which they (deriding) no way would admit,
That such a needy and penurious slave
(It being a Kings) should once lay hand on it;
The rather, they being in their prime of years,
And he so aged: yet he needs must try.
And now his ancient potency appears;
They shame to see it done, and they stand by.
Squalentes H^meris habitus rejecit Ulysses. Perioch. 22.

Ulysses draws the string up to his ear,
The keen shaft flies, and stern Antinous pierces:
At this, the boldest stand amazed, and fear,
Whilst he enraged, strewes all the room with Hearses.
The Palace gates are shut, no man can fly;
Eumaeus and Telemachus proceed,
With bold Philetius, and aloud they cry,
Kill all, spare none, for now the bold'st must bleed.
The harmless Phemius, that but came in sport,
(Skilful in the Harp) their ruthlesse furies spare;
And Medon that did never offend the Court,
Or against Penelope the least thing dare:
But stern Melanthius. one of her own Train,
That did the suitors in their riots cherish,
He by their swords, amongst the rest, is slain;
Twelve strumpets likewise in their furies perish.
Chalcidicum gressu nutrix superabat anili. Perioch. 23.

From sleep Euriclia soon awaked the Queen,
Relating all that had that night been done,
What valor in her husband she had seen,
And what in her just servants, and her son.
In her distraction to believe, or no.
(By this) Ulysses to the Queens fair bed
Approaches, whom at first she did not know;
Till by some tokens he is acknowledged,
Received and lodged; be makes a full Narration
Of his Wars, Travels, Acts, and Navigation.
And so much, the better to illustrate the History of Penelope.

Capanaeus being dead, at the celebration of his funerals, his wife Evadne cast
her self into the flames, Evadne.
of whom Martial: A^serit Evadne flammis injecta mariti.

Of no less fame was Laodamia, Loadamia.
her husband Protesilaus (under whose jurisdiction were Antron, Philaca, and
Larissa, Cities of Thessalie) was the first Greek that was slain in the siege
of Troy, and (some write) by the hand of Hector: which sad news when his wife
understood, to comfort her sorrow, she only desired of the gods to see his
ghost or shadow; which she supposing to be granted her, in the imagination
thereof she expired. Of no less memory is Panthaea the wife of Abratidas a
noble Persian, Panthaea.
who no sooner heard that her husband was slain in battle, but with a poniard
stabbed her self to the heart, and so died. Sophronia.
Sophronia Romana, by some called Christiana, by others Lucretia; when she
could no longer put off the importunities of the Prince Decius, having before
besought the consent of her husband, slew her self. As great an honor to her
family was Antonia, Antonia.
who in the prime and flourishing time of her beauty, having buried her
husband, to prevent the temptation of suitors, married her self to the
strictness of one chamber, to which her younger sister being a vowed Virgin,
had confined her self; thus in one bed the heat of youth in the one was
extinct, and the solitude of widdowhood wasted in the other. Q. Curtius lib. 1.
remembers us of one Timoclea a Lady of Thebes, Timoclea.
who being forcibly adulterated by a Prince amongst the Thracians, dissembled
for a time both her hate and purpose; not long after she insinuated with him,
and told him she would conduct him to a place in which was hid much treasure;
of which he being covetous, she brought him to the brink of a deep Well being
in a remote place of the house, to which he presenting himself and bending his
body downwards, to satisfy his expectation concerning the treasure, she
apprehending that advantage, thrust him headlong into the Well, and casting
huge stones after him, revenged her self upon the ravisher. Brasilla.
Dyrrachina.
Brasilla Dyrrachina a prime Lady, as Ludovic. Viues lib. 1. de Instit. Tem.
Christian, relates, being taken prisoner, and seeing an immediate shipwreck of
her chastity threatened by her cruel victor: she covenanted with him, that if
he would but reprieve her honor for the present, she would give him an herb,
with whose juice if he would anoint any part of his body, it should preserve
it wound-free. The soldier accepts of the condition; she from a neighbor
garden plucking up the weed that came next to hand, with the sap or moisture
thereof, annoints her own neck and throat, bidding him to draw out his sword
and make trial of her self, whether she kept not with him faithful covenant.
The soldier giving cr^dit to her words, in regard of her constancy and
courage, with one strong blow dispatched her or life. O resolute and Noble Lady
says Nicephorus, lib. 7. cap. 15 to prefer death before the loss of her
honor. Francis Sforza, Prince of Mediol^num, being General of the Florentine
Army, A woman of Casanova.
having taken the City Casanova, certain soldiers brought before him a
beautiful captive, who with great vociferation called out, Bring me to your
Prince, Bring me to your chief General. The soldiers moved with her earnest
clamor, brought her before him, who demanded of the woman, Why she was (...)
importunate to be conducted into his presence? to whom she answered, For no
other reason, but to submit her self wholly to his pleasure; conditionally he
would secure her from the injury of the soldiers; to which he willingly
assented, and seeing her of such exquisite feature and so tempting a presence,
he purposed to make use of her libe^all and free proffer that night, therefore
he commanded a bed to be made ready, in which she was lodged, thither he
presently repairs, and being unclothed, casts himself by her naked side; but
reaching his arm to embrace her, her eyes being full of tears and her heart of
sorrow, she humbly besought him before he touched her body, but to grant her
the hearing of a few words; at which the Prince making a sudden pause: she
pointing with her finger to the picture of the blessed Virgin (for Sforza was
never without that or the like in his bed chamber) she entreated him, even for
the remembrance he bore to the person whom that Table presented, for the honor
due to her Son and his Savior, and for the dignity of his goodness, and for
the sacred memory of his noble ancecestors, not to infringe her matrimonial
Vow, nor violate her conjugall Chastity, but deliver her back an unspotted wife
to her unfortunate husband, who was then a prisoner amongst many other wretched
captives. Her words took such impression in the noble General, that
notwithstanding her tempting beauty (the motives to inchastity) his present
opportunity, and absolute power over her as she was his vassal and prisoner,
yet to show his miraculous temperance, he preferred a name of a chaste and
continent Prince, before the imputation of a Tyrant or an Adulterer, and
instantly leapt out of the bed, and left her to her modest and more quiet test.
In the morning he sent for her husband, to whom (after a great character of her
Chastity given) he delivered her, not only freeing them both without ransom,
but from his own coffers bountifully rewarding her virtue; in the subduing of
his own affections gaining more honor then in the conquest of so great a City.
In this act not only imitating but exceeding Scipto: She was the contracted
bride to the Prince Indi^ilis.
For that incomparable Lady that was presented unto him, was of high lineage and
princely parentage, besides he lived in a free City, and to have dishonored
her, he had not only incurred censure, but being then in a foreign nation
purchased to himself the (...) of tyrant, and hazarded a new revolt of the
people: but that was nothing to oppose Prince Sforza in the satis^ying of his
lust, save his own goodness; for what conqueror has not power over his
captive. Anastasias
Fulgos. lib 4 cap. 3. Anastatia Conflantinopolitana, when Theodora Augusta was
jealous, that she was not beloved of her husband Justinianus Augustus, and
having to that purpose received some taunting words from the Emperesse, to
approve her innocence, she fled both to Court and City, and retired her self
into Alexandria, where she lived obscured in the society of certain chaste
Virgins: But after, hearing of the death of Theodora* her fears were not
diminished but augmented, for the Emperors love appeared to her a greater
burden then the hate of the Empress; therefore to avoid that which many would
have sought with greediness, she changed her habit, and taking the shape of a
young man upon her, fled into the furthest part of Egypt, called by the name
of Anastasius; where she lived privately, austerely, and ended her chaste life
in great sanctity. Hieronym. writes, that Paula Romana, Paula Romana.
after the (...) of her husband, was so far from being persuaded to a second,
that she was never known from that time to eat or drink in man's company. Of a
contrary disposition was Barbara the wife of Sigismund Emperor, Barbara.
Aenaeus Silus relates of her, that her husband being dead, when diverse
persuaded her to continue still in her widdowhood, proposing unto her, that
wamen ought to imitate the Turtles, who if one be taken away by death, the
other will never choose other mate, but devote her self to perpetual chastity?
thus answered, If you have none else to bid me imitate but birds that have no
reason, why do you not as well propose me for example the Doves or the
Sparrowes? As contrary again to her was the daughter of Demotian Prince of the
Areopagitae, who no sooner heard that her husband Leosthenes was stain in the
Lamick war, but instantly slew her self, lest she should survive a second
marriage. Others there be that have kept a viduall chastity even in wedlock.
The Virgin Edeltrudis, Edeltrudis.
as Sigilbertus and Beda both witness, was the daughter of Annas a Christian
King of the East Angles, she was first delivered by her father in marriage to
Candibertus a great Prince, who were no sooner married, but by mutual consent
they vowed lasting virginity; at length he dying, she was by her father
compelled to a second nuptials with King C^phordus, with whom she lived twelve
years, yet never (as they could adjudge it) unloosed her Virgin girdle. After
which time, by her husbands consent she took upon her a religious life, and
entered a Monastery, where (as Marullus l. 4. cap. 8. says) she lived a more
secure, but not a more chaste life. Infinite to this purpose are remembered by
Fulgosius, Marullus, Albertus Cranzius, etc. as of Maria Desegnies, Margarita
Aegypta, Cecilia Virgo, K^n^gunda Augusta wife to Henry of that name the first
Emperor. (...) espoused to Julianus Anti^chenus, Stamberga the Niece of
clo^ovius, married to Arnulphus a noble Frenchman. (...) and others without
number (which is somewhat difficult (...) wedded, bended, boarded, lien and
lived together, yet went as pure Virgins to their graves as they came first to
their ^^adles. Of these I may say as Ovid (...).

(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Sh' abhorred the nuptial bed* and held it sin,
With modest blushes did the tender skin
Of her fair cheek; then to her father grows,
And her white arms about his neck she throws,
And says, Deer Sir, this one thing grant your child,
That I may live from lustful man exiled,
A voteresse. (...) Diana this desired,
And from her father had what she required.
I will produce one history or two at the most from our modern Histories, and
so cease further to speak of our married Virgins. Edithae.
It is reported in the Legend, That after Editha the daughter of Earl Godwin,
was married to King Edward (otherwise called St Edward) they mutually vowed
betwixt themselves perpetual chastity, and therein persevered to the end of
their lives. There continued in them (says the Legend) a Conjugall love,
without any conjugall act; and favorable embraces, without any deflowring of
Virginity; for Edward was beloved, but not corrupted; and Editha had favor,
but was not touched; she delighted him with love, but did not tempt him with
lust; she pleased him with discourse and sweet society, yet provoked him to no
libidinous desire. It is moreover in that Treatise recorded, That they used to
call marriage a shipwreck of Maidenhead, comparing it to the fiery furnace of
the Chaldaeans; to the Mantle that Joseph left in the h^nd of a strumpet, the
wife of Potiphar; to the lascivious outrage of the two wicked Elders, Susanna.
who would have oppressed and vitiated Susanna the wife of Ioachim; Judith.
and lastly, to the enticements of drunken Holo^ernes toward fair Judith, one
of the deliverers of her people. And so much for the Legend. But Richardus
Davisiensis says* That being awed by Earl Godwin* and for the fear of
hazarding his life and Kingdom, Edward was compelled by threats and menaces to
the (...) of Editha. Moreover, Polidore (...), That for the have he bore her
father (who had not long before most tr^iterously slain his brother Alphred) he
caused himself to be divorced from her, seizing her goods and dower to his own
use and pleasure. Ranulphus, and one that (...) himself Anonymos (as willing
to conceal his name) say, That she was disrobed of all her Queen-like honors,
and confined into the Abbey of Warnwel, with only one maid to attend her, and
so committed to the strict custody of the Abb^sse. William of Mal^sbury, and
Marianus Scotus have left remembered, That he neither dismissed her his bed, nor
carnally knew her; but whether it was done in hatred to her Kindred, or purpose
of chastity, they are not able to determine. Robert Fabian confesses as much
in his Chronicle, Part. 6. cap. 210. Howsoever, the effects of that abstemious
life were not only prejudicial, but brought lamentable effects upon this
distracted Kingdom, namely, Innovation and Conquest: for Edward dying without
issue, England was invaded and oppressed by the Normans, and the people brought
to that misery, that happy was that subject that could say, I am no
Englishman. And in this, agree Matthew Paris, Capgrave, Fabian, and Polydore.
As I hold it not necessary for married folk to tie themselves to this strict
kind of abstinence, so I hold it not convenient for any such as have to
themselves, and in their souls, taken upon them the strict life of Virginity*
to be compelled to an enforced marriage; as may appea^ ^y this discourse
following, recorded by Gulielm. ^^^sburien Simeon Danelmens. Matthew Paris,
Roger Hoved^^, Capgrave, etc. Henry the first of that name, King of England,
and crowned in the year of Grace, 1101, was by the instigation of Anselm (once
a Monk of Normandy, but after by William Ru^us constituted Archbishop of
Canterbury) married unto Maud, Maud.
daughter to Malcolm the Scottish King, she having taken a Vow, and being a
professed Nun in the Abbey of Winchester. Much ado had the King her father, the
Queen her mother, her Confessor, Abbess, or the Bishop, to alienate her from
her settled resolution, or persuade her to marriage: but being as it were
violently compelled thereunto, she cursed the fruit that should succeed from
her body; which after (as Polydore affirms) turned to the great misfortune and
misery of her children: for afterward, two of her sons, William and Richard,
were drowned by Sea. Besides, her daughter Maud (who was afterward Empress)
proved an untortunate Mother; and amongst many other things, in bringing forth
Henry the second, who caused Thomas Becket to the slain; it thus happened: All
foreign wars being past, and civil combustions being pacified, in the year of
our Lord 1120* Henry the first with great joy and triumph left Normandy, and
came into England. But within few days following, this great mirth and jollity
turned into a most heavy and fearful sorrow; for William and Richard (his two
sons) with Mary his daughter, Otwell their (...) and Guardian, Richard Earl of
Chester, with the Countess his wife, the Kings Niece, many Chaplains,
Chamberlains, Butlers and Servitors (for so they are termed in the story) the
Archdeacon of Hereford; the Princes play-fellowes, Sir Geffrey Rydell, Sir
Robert Maldvyle, Sir William Bygot, with other Lords, Knights, Gentlemen, great
Heirs, Ladies, and Gentlewomen (to the number of an hundred and forty) besides
Yeomen and Mariners (which were about fifty; all these saving one man, which
some say was a Butcher) were all drowned together, and not one of their bodies
ever after found. Many attribute this great Judgment to the heavy curse of
Queen Maud, others censure of it diversely: Howsoever, in this King (as Polydore
says) ended the Descent and Line of the Normans. Of this Anselm (before spoken
of) there are diverse Epistles (yet extant) to many women, in those days
reputed of great Temperance and Chastity: as, To Sister Frodelina, Sister
Ermengarda, Sister Athelytes, Sister Eulalia, Sister Mabily, and Sister Basyle;
To Maud Abbess of Cane in Normandy; and Maud, the Abbess of Walton here in
England. He writ a Treatise about the same time, called Planctus amissae
Virginitatis, i. e. A bewailing of lost Virginity. So far John Bale* And so
much shall serve for Chaste wives in this kind, being loath to tire the patience
of the Reader.

Of Women Wantons.
DIon the Historiographer in Tiberio, says, that Livia the wife of Augustus
Caesar beholding men naked, said to the rest about her; That to continent and
chaste matrons, such objects differed nothing from statues or images; for the
modest heart with immodest sights, ought not to be corrupted. The unchaste eye
more draws the poison of sin from beauty, which is Gods excellent workmanship,
from which the chaste and contrite heart derives the Creators praise and glory.
But my hope is, that in exposing unto your view, the histories of these fair
Wantons, you will look upon them (should I strip them never so naked) with the
eyes of Lyvia, that is, to hold them but as beautiful statues, or like Apelles
his woman, no better then a picture of white Marble. I have heard of a man that
living to the ago of threescore and ten, had led so austere a life, that in all
that in all that time he never touched the body of a woman, and had proposed to
himself to carry that virginal vow with him to his grave; but at length being
visited with sickness, and having a fair estate purchased with his small
charge and great husbandry, and therefore willing to draw out the thread of his
life to what length he could, he sent to demand the counsel of the Physicians;
who having well considered the estate of his body, all agreed in this, that
since the Physic of the soul belonged not to them, but only the physic of the
body, they would freely discharge their duties; and indeed told him, that his
p^esent estate was dangerous, and they found but only one way in art for his
cure and recovery, which was in plain terms, To use the company of a woman, and
so took their leaves and left him to consider of it. Loath was the old man to
lose his Virginity which he had kept so long, but more loath to part with his
life, which he desired to keep yet longer; and having meditated with himself
from whom he was to depart, and what to leave behind him; namely, his
possessions, his money, his neighbors, friends, and kindred, and whether he
was to remove, to the cold and comfortless grave; he resolved with himself to
prolong the comfort of the first, and delay (as long as he could) the fear of
the last: Therefore he resolved rather then to be accessory to the hastening his
own death, to take the counsel of the doctors. It was therefore so ordered by
some that were about him, that the next night a lusty young wench was brought
to his bed, one that feared not the robustious violence of youth, much less to
encounter the imbecility of sick and weak age. I know no^ with what squeasie
stomach the patient relished his physic, but early in the morning he gave
content to his she-Apothecary, who was conveied out of the house undiscovered.
The next day diverse of his friends coming to comfort him, they found him sadly
weeping, and by no means could they wean him from that ecstasy: at length the
one of them who was privy to the former nights passage, began to compassionate
with him, and told him he was sorry for his extreme heaviness, and (as knowing
the cause) said* No doubt but God was merciful, and wished him not to despair
but be of good comfort, and with ghostly council persuaded him to take nothing
to his heart, because he hoped all would be well. The old man told him he
understood not his meaning, but desired him to be more plain, that he might
know to what purpose his language did intend. His neighbor answered him again,
Sir, I have been acquainted with you long, have known your continence and
strictness of life, and withal, your abstinence from women; and I am sorry
that your last nights business should be the occasion of this melancholy and
these tears. To whom the sick (but pretty well recovered) man thus replied,
Neighbor you much mistake the cause of my sorrow* I neither grieve nor weep
for the good and wholesome physic I had the last night, but I now vex and
torment my self that I have so idly spent mine age, there being such a
pleasure upon earth (above all that I have hitherto enjoied) that I never had
the grace to know it sooner, and try what it was before this time. If then Lust
can strike this stroke, and have this efficacy in age, O how much should we
pity youth ready daily and hourly to run into this dangerous inconvenience.

Of these wantons there be two sorts, Meretrices and Scorta, that is, Whores
and common Women, such as either for Lust or Gain, prostitute themselves to
many, or all. The second are Concubina or Pellices, Concubines to Kings and
Princes, or such as we call the private mistresses to great men. The last are
as our Accidence teaches, like Edvardus and Gulielmus, proper names to this
man or that. The first like Homo common to all men: both degrees sinners, but
not in the like kind. I have read a third sort, but know not what consonant or
agreeing name to confer upon them. I have heard of some that have been called
honest whores, It may be those that I shall speak of were such, and because
they are the strangest, I will begin with them first. Dosithaeus, lib. 3.
Lydiacorum, tells us, that the Sardians having commenced war with the
Smyrnae^ns, invested themselves before the City of Smyrna, and having begirt
them with a straight and difficult siege, those of (...) (it seems being hot
fellows) sent their Ambassadors into the City to this purpose, That unless
they would send them their wives to adulterate at their pleasures, they would
not only raze their City, and level it with the earth, but kill man, woman and
child, and so extirp their memory. This message bringing with it not only
terror but horror, much perplexed the besi^ged: and betwixt the distractions of
perpetual infamy and most certain death, not able what to determine (and
having sat long in council, but nothing amongst them concluded) a young lusty
Virago (one that was handmaid or bondwoman to Philarchus) desired to be
admitted into the Senate. And being called in amongst them to know what she had
to say, she told them, That understanding to what miserable exigent they were
driven, she had d^^ised (so pleased them to be swaied by her direction) a ^eans
not only to deliver themselves from scorn, their wives from dishonor, and
their children from the reproach of bastardy, and their lives and goods from
spoil, but to subject the barbarous enemy into their hands, with a noble and
memorable victory. No marvel if to such a project they gave attention, when
greedily demanding, By what means the least of these proposed blessings might
be accomplished? she thus counseled them, Send (says she) to the ^e lustful
Sardinians, and tell them you will in all points satisfy their desires: At the
time appointed, let me with the rest of your slaves and vassals, be attired in
the habits of our L^dies and Mistresses; for (no question) being decked in their
ornaments and jewels, we shall appear not only free women, but sufficiently
beautiful. Now in the night, when we are fast lodged in their embraces, and
they dreaming of no further dangers then their delights, and that you think we
have sufficiently cooled their hot courages; arm your selves against the
Sardinians, whom (if they offer to ^ise and arm themselves at the Alarm given)
we will keep still ^ast lock in our arms, till what we have left of them being
naked, you your self dispatch being armed. This counsel was followed, and
accordingly took effect. In memory of this, the Feast called Elutheria, i. of
Free-women is yearly celebrated in Smyrna; in which the maidservants attired
in their mistresses habits, sit at the table, and are (...) on by them, whom
they attend all the year after. (...) lib 1. Italicorum, parallels this history
thus: (...) King of the Ga^ls, infesting the Romans with war, and having
compelled them to the like exigent, demanded the like horrible conditions of
peace, namely, to adulterate their wives: but being in the same manner advised
by their handmaids, and having intelligence given them by one Retana the chief
of that counsel, Retana.
when the Gauls were (...) in sleep and lust, they set upon them in the night,
and gave them a brave defeat: from whence the Feast of the Hand maids took
beginning, which is celebrated amongst the Romans even to this day.

A tale something like unto these, I have been told of a Mistress, that in
some sort did as much to save her maids honesty; but whether to the same
commendable purpose, of that I am somewhat doubtful. In some great City it was
(I cannot say London) that a Citizen of good reckoning having a fair wife, kept
diverse prentices and maidservants in his house: one of those busy young
fellows had cast a wanton eye upon her that ruled the roast in the Kitchen, and
longing as much to be in her books, as out of his time; and waiting many nights
for opportunity to find her in some remote place, or dark entry, it happened that
one night he dogged her at the heels: she hearing him to tread softly after
her, to escape him stepped up a pair of stairs just as her Mistress came down.
The prentice groping in the dark, caught hold upon his Mistress, and without
any word speaking, began to proportion his work according to the shortness of
his time. The Gentlewoman all this while let him alone to see what he would do,
and having made proof of him to the full, she might very well perceive what his
unchaste intent was, when clinging him close to her lest he should escape
undiscovered, She asked what bold saucy knave he was that durst offer her that
injury? the young fellow knowing her voice, and finding his mistake, down on
his knees and besought her to pardon him and not to tell his Master, for he
took her for one of the maids: The maids says she, which of the maids? he
answered, The Kitchin-maid: and is it so (says she) well ^irrha, I will
henceforth prevent the getting of Bastards in my house, without knowing who
shall father them, and for that night said no more: but the n^xt morning to
prevent all future danger, picked a quarrel with the Kitchin-wench, paid her
her wages and turned her away. It seems after, the young man did well, for she
made him (before his time was fully out) both her journeyman and foreman. It
follows next in course, that I should define unto you, what these prostitutes
and common women are; but what need I trouble my self so far, when in these
corrupt days, almost every boy of fifteen or sixteen years old, knows what a
strumpet is, better by his own practice, then I can illustrate to him by all my
reading. And for Concubines, we need not travel so far as the Turks Seraglio,
since but few Kings Palaces are without them. And for such as we call
Sweet-hearts, Friends, or good wenches, should we but search noble men's
Diaries, Gentlemen's Summer-lodges, or Citizens Garden^houses, and travel no
further, we should no question find plenty sufficient. It would also become
this place well, to persuade those loose and incontinent women with some
elaborate exhortation, to retire themselves from that abominable and wicked
course of life. But I am altogether discouraged, when I remember the positions
of one most notorious in that trade; word being brought her, as of a strange
and unexpected noveltie, that one who had been a famous strumpet, had retired
her self from all her lewd courses, and was lately turned honest woman. ^^ush
says she, tell me that as often as you will, I will never believe it, For once
a whore and ever a whore, I know it by my self* Of these Plautus thus speaks
in Truculento: Mer^tricem ego item esse reor
Mare ut est --
Strumpets are l^ke the sea which does devour
Rivers and brooks* and what so else you pour,
Into his vastness: neither has it been
Fuller by them, nor their great bounty seen.
So whatsoever thou spend'st upon a whore,
It does not make her rich, but thee still poor.
Terentius in Helyra says:
Nec pol istae metuunt Deos nec hos respicere
Deos opinor.
They fear not God, and he regards not them.


I could produce innumerable adages and sayings of wise men, both Poets and
Historiographers to the like purpose, but I desire to be prolix in nothing.
Petronius Arbiter in his Satyricon has left remembered, Panachis.
that when Panachis, a girl of seven years old, was brought to the fair youth
Gyton to be strumpeted, one wondering that so young a thing was capable of
prostitution; Quartilla.
to him Quartilla the bawd thus answered, Minor est illa quam ego fui ^um
primum virum possa sum, i Is she less then I was when I lost my Virginity? and
thus proceeded, May Juno ever be displeased with me, if I can remember since I
was first a maid; for being an infant I commixt my self and had congresse with
little ones like my self, and as I grew in years, so I picked out children of
equal age, even till I came unto this burden that you now see, and hereupon
(says she) I think came the Proverb, Such may easily be brought to carry an
Ox, that pract^sed at first to carry a Calfe. I think the name of Quartilla was
given her because she began to practice at four years and held on to fourscore.
From common Strumpets I should proceed to private mistresses: I will begin and
end with them in this Sonnet.

A Sonnet.
Though my Mistress seem in show,
Whiter then the Pyrene Snow:
Though I fitly might compare her
To the Lillies, or things rarer,
Crystal, or to ice congeald,
Be others given and kept from me,
What care I how fair she be.
Though her visage did comprise
The glorious wonder of all eyes:
Captive led she hearts in chains,
Killed or cured with her disdains:
Chus'd Beauty (that commands fate)
Her forehead where to keep her state:
Should another step in place,
I care not, I Would not love that face.
Imagine next her brain divine,
Or mansion for the Muses nine:
Did her bosom yield choice places
For the Charites and Graces:
Had she stately Junos style,
Pallas front, or Venus smile:
If he enjoy her, and not I,
For these virtues what care I.
Tra^^d she Loves queen in her treasure,
And could teach the act of pleasure,
Make Lais in her trade a fool,
Ph^ine or Thais set to school,
To Helen read; or could she do
Worth Io and Europa too:
If these sweets from me she spare,
I Will count them toies, nor will I care.
But if my Mistress constant be,
And love none alive save me,
Be chaste, although but something fair;
Her least perfection I Will think rare,
Her I Will adore, admire, prefer,
Idolatrize to none but her.
When such an one I find and try,
For her I Will care, I Will live, I Will die
Lais.
THis Lais (as Aristophanes Bizantius relates) was a strumpet of Corinth: she
was called Axine, for her ferocity and rudeness of manners. Her, all the prime
and noblest Heroes of Greece frequented, and extasi'd with her beauty, came
daily in troops to visit her. Athenaeus in his Dipsonoph: speaks of her
Country, behavior and sepulcher, reporting her to be so beautiful, that the
most exquisite Painters of Greece came frequently to her, and besought her to
bare her neck, breasts, and other parts of her body before them: For when they
were to limn any extraordinary Piece, (wherein was to be expressed Juno, Venus,
Pallas, or any well shaped goddess or woman) her fair feature or lineaments
might be their example. She had a great emulation with Phrine the Courtizan,
for they lived both in one age. Aristippus the Philosopher (surnamed
Cyrenaicus) about the season that the Feasts were celebrated to Neptune, did
yearly for the space of two months together, associate himself with this Lais.
Diogenes meeting him upon a time: O Aristippus (says he) thou keep company
with a common Strumpet, be rather a Cynick of my Sect, then a Philosopher of
such loose and dissolute behavior. To whom Aristippus answered, Appears it to
thee, O Diogenes, a thing absurd to dwell in an house which others have before
inhabited? who answered, No: Or to sail in the same ship (says Aristippus) in
which diverse passengers have before time put to sea? Again he answered,
Neither: Nor do I think it (replies he) O Diogenes, worthy thy just taxation,
to accompany with a woman with whom many others have had commerce. Again, being
by others calumniated for his often repair and public recourse to her (in
regard of her common prostitution, and therefore the greater blemish to his
more austere profession) he thus satisfied them: This is the difference betwixt
me and the rest of her Clients; I only enjoy Lais, all others are enjoi'd by
her. When Dem^sthenes (the famous O^ator of Athens) desired to have had company
with her, and she for one nights lodging demanded of him a thousand Drachmes;
affrighted with the name of so great a sum, he thus replied: I purpose not to
buy repentance so dear. A young man, much taken with her beauty, came to
Diogenes the Cinick, and asked him this question, What if a man should marry
with Lais? Who presently answered, For a young man it is much too soon, and for
an old man it were far too late Concerning her, I have read an elegant Epigram,
of an old man desirous of company with her at any rate, and her witty answer to
him: Canus rogabat Laidis noctem Myron,
Tulit repulsam protinus,
Causamque sensit, and caput fuligine
Fucavit atra Candidum, etc.
White headed Myron did of Lais crave
To have one night and be her price would pay:
Which she denied. But why he could not have
His purpose, he perceived, his head was gray:
He knew his age betrayed him, therefore ^e
Dies his hair black, and did his suit renew.
She seeing head and face to disagree,
And them comparing with considera^e view,
Thus says, Why do thou urge me thus? the rather,
Since but even now I did deny thy father.


Nymphodorus Syracusa in his book De admira^il. writes, That Lais came into
Sicily from Hycaris, the most defenced City of that Country: but Stratt^ in
Macedon. or Pausan. affirms her to be of Corinth* in these words: Dic unde sunt
ductae puellae
Ve^ere nuper ex M^gaera Corinthiae
Decus I ais Ingens.


Aelian de Var^a Histor. lib. 10. says, That Lais casting her eyes upon a
young man of Cyrenaea, called Eubatas, never left soliciting him by all
womanish enticements, till she had made him promise her marriage, but the
solemnization not to be performed till he had returned Victor from the Olympic
Games: in which having had good success, but fearing to h^zard the embraces of
a strumpet, he took her Picture only, and carried it to his City of Cyrena,
boasting by the way, that he had married and borne thence Lais; Which she
hearing, and enraged at the scorn thereof, writ to him this or the like Letter:

O false and perjured man,
Whose lust has no satiety,
Since nothing please thee can,
Save changes and variety:
O thou alone,
Constant to none,
In nothing settled save impiety.
Our Sex why do thou blame?
Term women sole offenders;
It Is you that past all shame,
Are still your own commenders;
That care nor fear
To whom you swear,
Cease judging, and be now suspenders.
Phillis was chaste and fair,
Demophoon false and cruel,
Sapho thought Phaon rare,
And he termed her his jewel:
But Traitors they
Their Loves betray,
Poor we, can often foresee, but not eschew ill.
Falser then either, thou
As foulely have betrayed me,
But I Will beware thee now
As Heaven I hope shall aid me,
All thy procurements,
And sly allurements,
Henceforth shall never more persuade me.
Thy Oaths I hold as Lies,
As scorn, thy crafty smiling,
Thy shape a mere disguise,
Thy practice but beguiling;
All thy protests,
As scoffs and jeasts,
And thy fair words no better then reviling
Poisons I Will think thy kisses,
And from mine keep thee fasting;
Thy torments, count my blisses;
Thy breathings fear as blastings.
And thank my fate,
I now can hate
Thee, whom I now abandon everlasting.
It is moreover reported of her, That being of purpose conveied into the bed of
Xenocrates, by the means of his scholars, whom he had instructed in all
austerity and strictness of life: but she by no whorish blandishments able to
corrupt his temperance, his scholars asking her the next morning, How she
sped? she told them, They had lodged with her a Statue or an Image, but no man.
Tymaeus in his thirteenth book of histories says, That she was beaten to death
with wooden foot-stools, by certain women of Thessaly, in jealousy and
madness, because she was beloved of a beautiful young man called Pausanias,
on whom some of them doted: This was done at a sacrifice in one of the Chapels
of Venus: for which cause the place was ever after called, The Grove of wicked
or unjust Venus. Her Sepulcher was near unto the river Paeneus in T^essaly,
which runs betwixt the two great mountains of Ossa and Olympus; and upon her
Tombstone this inscription was graven: Roboris invicti, ac animi sit Graeciae
quamvis
Victa tamen, formae paruit illa suae,
Laidis, ipse parens Amor est, aliuitque corinthus
At nunc ipsa tenet, inclita Thessalia*
Though Greece of unmatched strength and courage be,
It obei'd Lais to thy shape and thee:
Love was thy father, thee Corinthus bred,
Who now in stately Thessaly lie dead.


(This notwithstanding) some will not allow her to have been educated in in the
Cranaeum, which is a place of exercise in the City of Corinth.

Phrine.
SHE for her beauty was emulated by Lais, and was a prostitute in Thespis, a
City of Booetia: who being for some Capital crime convented before the Senate,
and (notwithstanding she had a famous Advocate to plead in her behalf) fearing
some harsh and severe censure, she trusting to her beauty, bethought her of
this project; before the sentence was pronounced, she cast off her loose and
upper garments, and without any word speaking, as far as womanish modesty would
suffer her, exposed her body naked to the Judges. (O Beauty, thou can more
prevail then a thousand Orators.) With her rare form and extraordinary feature,
the old gray-beards were so taken, that where before their purpose was to
inflict upon her some severe punishment, they changed their austerity into love
and pity, and dismissed her without mulct or fine. Therefore the famous Orator
and Grammarian, Quintilian, thus speaks: The admirable beauty of so complete a
Fabric, more prev^iled with the Senate, then all the Rhetorical eloquence of
her Advocate Hypparis. Upon this occasion an Edict was published, That from
thence forward no Client whatsoever should be in presence whilst their Cause
was in pleading, lest either pity or affection to the person should sway the
balance of justice and equity. It is further remembered of her, That Praxitiles
the most excellent Painter of his time (for some courtesies she had done, or
some favors graced him with) promised to give her the best and most curious
Table in his workhouse: but she by no persuasion or cunning, able to wrest
from him which (amongst so many) had the priority, she bethought her of this
slight; watching a time when the Painter was abroad in the City, she hired a
messenger to run to him in all have, and counterfeiting a sudden passion, to
tell him his house was on fi^e, and many or most of his elaborate pieces burnt
to ashes: At which Praxitiles amazed, and strangely moved, broke forth into
this language, But is the Picture of Cupid safe and reserved from combustion?
by which, she found that to be his Masterpiece, and therefore due to her by
promise. This Phrine never used the hot Baths, as other of her profession
accustomed to do: only at the Feasts of Ceres and Neptune, she would in the
sight of all the Grecians (in her loose garment, and hair dishevelled about her
shoulders) walk down to the Sea side, and there wash her self. And from her,
as Athenaeus in his Dypnos. lib. 13. cap. 22. affirms, Apelles drew that
admirable and unmatched piece, called Venus Emergeus, i. Venus swimming or
rising ou^ of the waters: Of which, Ausonius composed an Epigram, with this
inscription, In venerem Andiomenen.

Emersam Pelagi nuper genitalibus undis
C^pria Apellaei, Cerne laboris opus.
Behold fair Cipria from her native Brine,
Plunging (Apelles a brave work of thine)
Who shaking off her golden curls, late drowned,
Rains the salt sea-drops from her shoulders round:
Her hairs, yet dank 'bout her white wrists she winds,
Which wreathed, she in her silken hair lace binds.
Pallas and Juno said (this having seen)
We yield the Palm to thee, fair beauties Queen.
Praxitiles, the Statuary before spoken of, drew from her the Picture of Venus
Cnidia, and under the Table of Love (which was given to adorn the Theater) he
caused these verses to be inscribed: Praxitiles pinxit, prius est quem passus
amorem,
Deprompsit proprio pectore qui A chetipum.
Love which himself has suffered, and best knew,
From his own breast (this piece) the Painter drew.


This Picture of Love, some say was placed in Thespia, a free Town in Boetis,
nere Helicon, and dedicated to the Muses, which others take to be a City in
Magnesia, near Thessaly: but her golden Picture, made by Praxitiles, was hung
in Delphos above the Marble Statue of Mercury, and betwixt that of Archidamus
King of the Lacedaemonians, and Philip of Amyntas, having this inscription,
Phrine Epicleis Thespia. This, when Crates Cinicus beheld, he said, This Table
is dedicated to express the intemperance of the Grecians, as Alcaetus
witnesses, lib. 20. depositorum in Delphis. Apollodorus in Lib. Amicarum,
speaks of two Phrines, the one was called Sap^rduis, the other Clausig^los, of
Kleo, i. Lugeo, to mourn; and Gelos, i. Risus, Laughter. Herodicus says, lib.
6. Objurgatorum. That she was called by the Orators, Sestus, because she rifled
and despoiled her Clients; and the other Thespica. This Phrine grew exceeding
rich, and made offer to begirt Tnebes with a new wall, so that upon the chief
gate they would make this inscription: This Alexander the Great demolished,
which Phrine the Courtesan at her own charge erected; for so writes
Callistratus in his book Amicarum. Timocles Comicus writ of her infinite riches
in his Neaera, as likewise Amphis in Novacula. Aristogiton in an Oration
against Phrine affirms, That her proper name was M^nesarete Of her, Posidippus
Comicus writ more at large in Ephesia.

There was one Timandra, Timandra.
daughter to Tyndarus and Laedia, the sister to Clitemnestra. but Pliny speaks
of a notorious strumpet of that name, beloved of Alcibiades the Athenian, for
whom (being dead) she erected a famous Sepulcher: she was, with her friend
A^cis, oppressed in battle by Lysander. Campaspe.
Equal to her in beauty was Campaspe, by some called Pancasta, a wanton of an
extraordinary feature, and much affected by the excellent Painter Apelles; she
was prisoner to Alexander the great, and at his earnest intercession, bestowed
on him by the Macedonian Conqueror.

Glicerin or Glicera, and others.
THis Glicera was surnamed Thespiensis of the City where she was born. Satyrus
in vitu.
Praxitiles the Painter much doted on her beauty, and gave her a Table in which
Cupid was most curiously pourtraied: which, after her death she bequeathed as a
legacy to the City. Satyrus reports, That Stilpo being at a banquet with her,
and reproving her as a great corrupter of the young men of Thespis, she
answered, we are, O Stilpo, of one and the same error guilty alike: For it is
said of thee, That all such as converse with thee, and participate of thy
precepts, thou corruptest with thy amatorious and unprofitable Sophisms: small
difference then there is to be traduced by thee a Philosopher, or by me a
professed Prostitute. She was a great favorite of the Poet Menander.
Hipperides in an oration against Manlithaeus, as also Theopompus affirms, That
Harpalus after the death of Pythonice sent for Glicera to Athens, who coming
to Tarsus was received into the Kings Palace, whither much confluence was
assembled, bowing their knees to her, and saluting her by the name of Queen;
neither would they suffer Harpalus to assume the Diadem till she were likewise
crowned; and in Rhossus where his statue was erected in brass, she caused hers
to be placed, for so Clearchus writes in his history of Alexander, as likewise
Catanaeus: Clearchus observes of her, that when any fair young Lad appeared
before her, she used to say, Then do boys appear most beautiful, when they
most resemble the looks and gestures of women. Plin lib. 21. cap. 2.
She was affected by Pansia Sicionius a famous Painter.

Harpalus the Macedonian having robbed Alexander the Great of much treasure,
flying to Athens solicited there Pythonica, Pythonica.
and by many great gifts won her to his embraces; she dying, he profusely
lavished many talents upon her obsequies, and as Possidonius in his Histories
affirms, not only with the artificial skill of many of the best artists and
workmen, but with Organs, Voices, and all kinds of musical harmony, Dicaearch.
de discensu, ad Trophonium
decorated her funeral. Dicaearchus writes, That whosoever shall travel
toward Athens, by the sacred way called Elusinis, there he shall behold a
goodly Temple built, in state, height, and compass, exceeding all others, which
who so shall considerately peruse, he shall guess it either to be the cost of
Miltiades, Pericles, Cimon, or of some other Athenian equally with them
illustrious, and especially of such a one that for merit toward the
Commonweal, might command a voluntary contribution from the public treasury.
Theopompus in an Epistle to Alexander, thus carps at the intemperance of
Harpalus, Consider (quoth he) and enquire of the men of Babylon, with what
superfluous charge he had interred his strumpet Pythonica, who was but handmaid
to Bachis the she-musitian, and Bachis the servant of Synope Threissa, who from
the City of Aegina, transported her Bawdries into Athens, she being not only of
the third rank and degree of servants, but of Bawds; for with more then two
hundred Talents charge, he has dedicated unto her two sumptuous monuments, to
the admiration of all men; when it has not been known the like honor or cost
to have been bestowed (by him or any other) in memory of any brave soldier, or
of such as perished in Cilicia for the Empire and liberty of whole Greece; she
only having perdurable monuments raised to her as well in Babylon, as in
Athens, Temples and Altars with sacrifices offered her by the name of Venus
Pythonica. With other such upbraidings he complained on him to Alexander, of
whom Al^xis in Licisca likewise speaks, as also that after her death he took to
his bed the before named Glicera. Next her follows Irene. Irene.


That Ptolomaeus that placed garrisons in Ephesus, Athenae.
and was the son of King Philadelphus, Dipr. lib. 13.
had a beautiful mistress called Irene; she, when Ptolomaeus was assaulted by
the Thracians in the City of Ephesus, and to shun their violence fled into a
Chapel consecrated to the goddess Diana, would not in that distress forsake
him, but entered the place together, and when the soldiers broke open the gates
upon them to kill the King, she removed not her hand from the ring of the door,
but with her own blood sprinkled the Altar, till the soldiers likewise falling
upon her, she expired in the arms of the slaughtered King. As noble was that of
Danae.

Philarchus remembers one Sophron of Ephesus to have had in his delights Danae,
Lib. 12. Danae and Laodice.
daughter to Leontius, of the Sect of the Epicures, a man well seen in the
speculations of Philosophy. To her trust were all the domestic affairs of the
house committed, even by the consent of his wife Laodice; who at length
perceiving his love to incline to Danae, she purposed at her next best
opportunity to make away with her husband. This being found out by Danae, and
in great secrecy revealed to Sophron, he gave at the first no credit to the
report; yet at her importunacy, he promised within two days to consider of the
matter, and in that time to deliberate what was best to be done in the
prevention of such a mischief, and in that interim conceals himself in the
City: by which, Laodice finding her purpose to be discovered, she accused Danae
for his murder, and instantly (without further process) by the help of her
friends and servants, hurried her to the top of a high Promontory, from thence
to throw her headlong; who seeing imminent death before her eyes, fetching a
deep sigh, she thus said: I marvel not now that the gods have so small honor
done to them, in regard of their injustice, since I am thus punished for saving
the life of my friend, and th^s Laodice is thus honored, that would have took
away the life of her husband.

Agathoclaea.
Wars having been long continued betwixt Ptolomey of Egypt and Antiochus of
Syria, Just. l. 30.
insomuch, that Ptolomaeus was by his Ambassadors, rather by fear then
necessity, as it were enforced to solicit a peace; notwithstanding, Antiochus
invading Egypt, took from him many Towns and Cities of consequence: which
proffer drawing Ptolomey to the field, be gave him a brave affront and foil;
and had he taken the advantage of a present fortune, had paid him home with an
irrecoverable overthrow: but Ptolomey wholly devoted to effeminacy and luxury,
only contented with what he had recovered of his own, and pursuing no further
advantages, made choice of a dishonorable peace, before a just war, and so
concluded all dissension with an unalterable league. And being free from all
foreign invasions, he began domestic troubles at home: For being given over to
his own appetite, and besotted to his insatiate pleasures, he first began with
Laodice (both his sister and wife) causing her to be slain, that he might the
more freely enjoy the society and fellowship of his most rare and beautiful
mistress, Agathoclea: so that the greatness of his name, and the splendour of
his majesty both set apart, he abandoned himself solely to whoredoms by
night, and to banquets, and all profuseness of riot by day. And now liberty
being grown to law, the boldness of the strumpet (for no better my Author
styles her) cannot be contained within the walls of the Kings house, which the
overdotage of the King, the extraordinary grace: and honors conferred for her
sake on her brother Agathocles, together with her own ambitions (growing every
day more and more to greater insolence) made still more manifest. N^x^, there
was her old mother, called Evanthe, a cunning H^g^l may term her, who by reason
of her double issue, Agathocles and Agathoclea, had a great hand with the King,
or rather a great power over him. Therefore not contented with the King alone,
they possess the Kingdom also: They ride abroad in all state to be seen; are
proud to be by all saluted, and with such great trains to be attended.
Agathocles (as if ^owed to the Kings elbow) was not seen without him, but with
a nod or word swaied and governed the City. The gifts of all military honors,
as the Tribunes* Prefects, and Captains, all these were appointed by the women,
neither was there any in the Kingdom that had less power then the King
himself: who long sleeping in this dream of majesty (having given away all
that was essential in a King) he fell sick and died, leaving behind him a
child of five years old by his before murdered wife and sister, Laodice.
Laodice. But his death was by these favorites long concealed, whilst they had
by all covetous Rapine, snatched what they might out of the Kings treasury, by
this to strengthen a faction of the most base and dissolute subjects; that by
money thus ill got, and debauched soldiers thus levied, they might set safe
footing in the Empire: but it fell out far otherwise, for the Kings death and
their design was no sooner discovered, but in the rude Concourse of the
multitude, the Minion Agathocles was first slain, and the two women, the mother
and the daughter, were in revenge of murdered Laodice, hanged upon gybets,
being now made a scorn to every man, that was before a terror to all: the
pupillage of the infant and the s^fe^y of the Realm to his use, the Romans most
nobly (after) took to their protection.

Cleophis.
ALexander the Great after many conquests entering into India, Justin. Hist.
lib. 12.
that he might contermine his Empire with the Ocean, and the utmost parts of
the East, and, to which glory that the ornaments of his army might suit, the
trappings of his horses, and the armor of his soldiers were all studded with
silver; and his main army of their Targets of silver (as Curtius writes) he
caused to be called Argyraspides. In process, by gentle and pleasurable
marches they came to the City Nisa, the Citizens making no opposition at all,
trusting to the reverence due to Liber Pater, by whom they say the City was
first erected, and for that cause Alexander caused it to be spared: passing
those fruitful Hills) where grapes grow in abundance, naturally and without the
help of ai^, or hand of man) he thence passed the Dedalian mountains, even to
the Provinces and Kingdom of the Queen Cleophis, who hearing of his victories,
and fearing of his potency, thought rather to affront him by fair means then by
force, by policy then power; for knowing her self to be a woman of
extraordinary state and beauty, the by her Ambassadors solicited an enterview;
which Alexander granting, she appeared before him of such a Queen-like majesty,
and her accomplishments of nature so helped with the ornaments of art (for she
was adorned with the richest and best shining stones of India) that her glory
so captivated the heart of the conqueror, that they came to treat of
composition. she proposing to him, That it were no honor for so magnificent a
victor, so famous through the world for his conquests over men, to insult upon
the weak spoils of a woman, inured to no other arms then the arms of a sweet
and loving bedfellow; yet if for the ransom of her Empire he would accept of
her love and service, in that kind she was there in person at his command, his
subject and servant. Her beauty, with this submission wrought such impression
in the King, that it was concluded betwixt them, and by both parties agreed,
That at her honor should be the ranson of her Empire. In conclusion, they
lovingly lay together, and so ended these threatened hostilities in an amorous
peace; her body he left tainted, but her Kingdom untouched. She was that night
with child by him of a son, whom after his fathers name she called Alexander;
he inherited the Kingdom after her: but by the Indians from that time forward,
in regard of her prostitution, she was called the Kings whore.

Callipyge.
SO much were the Grecians given to all voluptuousness and pleasure, A^^enaeus.
that (amongst others) diverse Chapels and Temples were dedicated to Venus
Callipyga, the word importing, Quasi pulchras habens nates, i. She that has
fair buttocks; the original of that superstition (as Aegenaeus relates) was
this, A Country Farmer being the father of two beautiful young Virgins, these
two concluded betwixt themselves which should have the priority in beauty: But
modesty forbidding them to dispute it with open faces, they concluded between
themselves to come to a place adjoining to the highway, and there to expose
their backparts naked to all such as passed by, and so by the most voices to be
censured. Amongst many others, a noble young young Gentleman of the next City,
by accident passing that way, and somewhat astonished at so unwonted an object,
enquired the reason thereof, and by one of the spectators being presently
resolved, ^e as suddenly gave the Palm to the elder; and intimating by that he
saw, what the rest might prove, grew greatly enamored, and returning to his
fathers house, surprised with melancholy, was of his brother demanded the
cause; he after some few bashful denials, still urged with the others
importunacies, discovered to him the whole circumstance of the business. The
brother desirous to be further instructed, was by the lover conducted to the
place and object which made him first grow enamoured; whither he was no sooner
brought, but he grew presently inflamed with the love of the younger, and gave
his censure on her part. These two had an old Senator to their father, who much
observed his children: of him they demanded these virgins in marriage; but he
proposing to themselves matches more honorable, they would no way assent. But
won at length with their importunacies, he sent in their behalf to the Farmer,
to demand his daugters in marriage. An enterview was granted, the parties
agreed, a marriage concluded, and after comsummate, with satisfaction on all
sides. From which time, ever after, the two young married wives were called
Callipyga. Of these, Cercidas Megapolitanus in his lambicks to this purpose
speaks, These two lived in Syracusa, who by their marriage having attained to
wealth sufficient, erected a famous Chapel to Venus, whom they styled Dea
Callipyga. These, diverse other Cities of Greece (after them) imitated. This
History Archelaus likewise in his Lambicks records.

Alogunes, Cosmartidenes, Andia.
YOU shall read in the History taken out of Ex Ctesiae Persicis, That
Artaxerxes being dead, Xerxes his son succeeded, the legitimate heir by his
wife Damaspia (who died the same day with her husband, therefore to be
registered, amongst the women most illustrious:) after their deaths the Eunuch
Bagorazus caused both their bodies to be born into Persia, and there to be
entombed amongst their ancestors. It is remembered of this Emperor Artaxerxes,
that he had by several concubins, seventeen bastards, amongst these was
Secundianus born of Alogunes, he by treason succeeded Xerxes (having before
slain his brother:) this Alogunes was born in Babylon. By another concubine in
the same City called Cosmartidenes, he had two sons, Ochus and Arsi^es: this
Ochus by supplanting his brother Secundianus reigning some few months)
succeeded him in the Empire. Xerxes had issue likewise by one Andia, a Lady of
the same Nation, Bagapaeus and Parisatis, who was the mother of one Cyrus, and
another Artaxerxes. Xerxes the Persian Emperor (yet living) gave to his second
son Ochus, the Prefectship over the Hircanians: Likewise Parisatis to wife,
daughter to Xerxes, and natural sister to Ochus. This Ochus was ^^ter called
Dariaeus, who in all his counsels and projects, ^^er did any thing without the
advice of his sister Queen; ^^fore his aspiring to the Empire, he had issue by
his wife ^^risatis, two children, a daughter called Amistris, and a (...)
Arsaca, who after changed his name to his grandfa^^^rs, and was called
Artaxerxes: after his instalment she ^^ght him a son called Cyrus, after him
Artostes, and so the ^^^ber of thirteen, of all which, only the fourth son
called ^^^dras survived, the rest perished in minority. These (...) concubins
of Persia.

Julia.
IT is remembered of Augustus Caesar, whose daughter this Julia was, that he
established a Law which was called (...) Julia, concerning adulteters, after
what process persons so offending should be punished, being convicted and
^ound guilty. It happened that a young Gentleman of Rome being accused of the
same fact with the Emperors daughter Julia before named, Augustus grew into
such a fu^y, that not able to come in himself, he fell upon the Gentleman, and
gave him many violent and sound buffe^s, till the supposed offender cried out,
O Emperor where is your Justice? you have made a law concerning these matters,
why am I not then judged by that? At which words it so repented him of his
rashness, that all that day and night he forbore to taste any food. At a
certain sword-playing of such like pastime solemnized in the great Roman
Theater, Livia the mother, and Julia the daughter, had turned the eyes of the
multitude upon them twain, and that by reason of the difference of their habits
and their attendants; Lyvia being matronlike attired, was accompanied with aged
Senators, and Ladies of approved modesty and gravity; Julia on the contrary,
loos^ly and wantonly habited, had in her train none but butterflie-pages, wild
fashion-mongers, and fantastic gallants: which observed by Augustus, he the
next day admonished her by letters, To observe what difference and ods there
was in the appearance of two such high and noble persons: which having read,
she returned him only this short answer, Well, and these people about me shall
be old likewise when I am. This Julia, to a noble Senator of sta^ed gravity,
giving her counsel to frame her self after her fathers grave and sober
behavior, she presently replied. Though my father does not remember that he is
an Emperor, yet I cannot forget that I am an Emperors daughter* It is further
remembered of her, that beginning to have gray hairs with the soonest and before
she was old, as her maids and gentle women were kembing her head the Emperor
came in suddenly upon her, and espied them picking and plucking the white hairs
up by the roots, which still stuck upon their garments; the Emperor for that
present said ^^^ning, (...) ^ut long after amongst many other discourse^ taking
occ^si^n to speak of old age, he demanded of his daughter, Whether she had
rather in the process of a few years, have a reverent white head, or to be
directly without any hair at all? she answered, She had rather to have a white
head: Why then (said he) do thy damsels all they can to make thee clean bald
before thy time? Augustus much grieved with her licentiousness, and seeing it
subject to no reformation, he banished her the Court, and with her, her
daughter Julia his grandchild, who took something too much after the mother;
and after that Agrippa whom he had once adopted his heir, but after for his
intemperance and br^tish and luxurious riots cast out of his favor. Whenever
mention was made of any of these three, he would recite a verse out of Homer,
which imports thus much: What Is now my sorrow, would have been my pride,
If I (as some) might issuelesse have di'd.


He used not to call any of those three by any other names then Ulcers or
rotten Imposthumes, Cankers, and such like: for he used much more patiently to
take the deaths of his friends then their dishonours. He further provided by
his last will, That whenever either Iulia his daughter, or Iulia his
grandchild, expired, their bodies should not rest beneath his monument. One
thing of her I had almost forgot; Upon a time coming to visit and do her
duty to her father, she perceived his eyes to be much offended with the
gawdinesse of her attire, as savering of immodest^; the next day taking
occasion to revisi him, she changed her habit into a comely, civil, and
matronly garb, and in that sort came to embrace her father: Caesar who had the
day before suppressed his grief, was not now able to contein his joy, but brok
out into these terms, O how much more decent and seemly are these ornaments for
the daughter of Augustus? to whom she instantly replied, Indeed this day I
apparelled my self to please the eyes of a father, but my yesterdaies habit
was to content the eyes of a husband. She, when some that knew of her frequent
inchastities, demanded how it was possible she should bring forth children so
like her husband, considering her so often prostitution with strangers?
answered, Because I never take in passenger till my ship have her full fraught
and lading, Macrob. l 2. cap. 5 Satur. And so much for Iulia.

Phileterus speaking of those wantons that lived before his time, In Conegide.
and were now dead, scoffs them thus, Nonne C^^cope jam egit annorum tria
millia? etc. i. Has not Cercope already lived three thousand years? (and
proceeding) and rough haired Diopeth^^, and a second Telesis ten thousand: for
Theolite none knows or can remember when she was born; Was not Thais dead when
she should have prostituted her self and come under? Io^nas and Neaera are now
dead and rotten, so is Phila^e. Or Siphas, G^linas, and Coronas, I speak not.
Of Nais I hold my peace, because her teeth are now no grinders.

Sinope and Phanostrate with others are remembered by Demosthenes in his Oration
against Androtiones. Herdicus Crateticus speaks of this Sinope in his
Commentaries, and says, That when she grew into years she was called Ab^dus;
she was no question of a famous strumpe^ in her youth, for Ant^phanes speaks of
her in many of his Comedies, in Arcade, in Horlicomo, in Medicatrice, in
Piscante, in Neottide, in Neottide: So likewise Alex^s in Cleobulina, and
Calicrates in Moscione. Of Phanostrate, Apollodorus writes, That she was a
prostitute in Athens (and that of her rank were many others) and was called
Phttherophile of Phther, Pediculus, and Paele Porta, Propter quod pediculos cum
staret in limine Portae querit^bat. Menander in A^^ulatore he numbers these
wantons, Christ's, Coronis, Ant^cy^^ Ischades, and Nanniculum, whom he calls
Form^su^^ va^de, Exceeding fai^.

Quintius Curt^us in his tenth book of the life of Alexander the Great, writes,
That after many honorable Conquests, having already subjected sundry Nations
to his jurisdiction (being now in India, where all his attempts were
prosperous, and his designs successful) proud of his victories, and thinking
himself to be Fortunes minion, insomuch that despising the offspring from
whence he came, he caused himself to be called the Son of Jupiter. Being
puf^ed up with these thoughts, and swelling up in all ambitions, he betook
himself to all voluptuous delic^cies, and of them, to the most tempting riots
of wine and women; insomuch, that lulled in all effeminacy, he so far forgot
both his high majesty, and that commendable temperance, for which he was before
all his predecessors renowned, that he sent as far as Athens for a notorious
strumpet (branded in her life, though famous for her beauty) called Potonice,
on whom the King was so much besotted, that he not only gave her most Princely
and magnificent gifts in her life time, but after her death caused a Tomb to be
erected over her body, on which structure the King bestowed thirty talents. It
were strange if our English Chronicles should not afford some or other to have
correspondence with these.

Harlotta, or Arlotta.
THis History is recorded by an Historiographer of ancient times, who writes
himself Anonymus, or without name, by Gulielm. Malmsbury, Vincentius,
Ranulphus, Fabian, Polydore, and others. As Robert Duke of Normandy, and father
to William the Conqueror, rid through the Town of Falois, he beheld a
beautiful Virgin (a Skinners daughter) playing and dancing amongst other
Virgins: with whose feature being on the sudden surprised, he so far prevailed
by his secret messages and gifts, that she was privately conveied into the Dukes
Chamber, and there lodged and put in a bed to await his coming: who glad of
such a purchase, without much circumstance made himself ready for the
business intended. The chamber cleared, and the place voided, and he ready to
accomplish his desires, she rent her smook from the chin to the foot, to make
the freer way for the Prince: and he demanding the reason of her so doing, she
made him this pretty and ready answer; It were neither fit nor comely, that the
neither part of my smock should be turned up, and kiss the lips of my Lord: at
which the Duke was much delighted. And (...) night was begot William the
Bastard, whom our Chronicles honor with the name of Conqueror: whether at
(first in memory of this least, or since in disgrace of the Wanton, it is not
decided. But from that Harlotta or Arlotta, our prostitutes and common wenches
are to this day in our Vulgar Tongue called Harlots.

In the year of our Lord 1036, Joan Bal.
Henry the second Emperor of that name, Act Eng.
was married to Guinilde* the daughter of Canutus a Dane, Votar.
and King of England. This Emperor had a sister, Guliel.
a professed Nun, whom he loved so entirely, that often times he would have her
lie in his own Palace, (...). l^b. 2. de reg. etc*
and near to his own privy chamber. It happened in a cold Winters night, a
Chaplain belonging to the Court (it seems to keep her the warmer, and one that
had been before much suspected) lay with her: and in the morning, lest both
their f^oting^ should be seen in the Snow (newly fallen that night) she took
him up, and carried him out of the Court toward his chamber. The Emperor
chancing (as his custom was) to rise just at the same hour, was spectator of
this close conve^ance, and beheld how all the business happened. Not long after
fell a Bisopwrick, which the Priest expected, and a Nunnery which the Nun much
desired: Whereupon the Emperor calling them before him the one after the
other, Take that Benefice (says he to the Priest) but faddle no more the Nun;
And you the Abbess (says he to his sister) saddle no more the Priest, or look
thou never more bear Clerk riding upon thy back. It is said, that this served
after for a modest chiding betwixt them, and that they were parted upon these
friendly terms.

Of diverse Wantons belonging to sundry famous men, and others.
ARistophanes, Athen. in Dypnos.
Apollodorus, Ammonius, Antiphanes, and Georgia Atheniensis, of your Athenian
strumpets writ at large: as also of the like argument, Theomander, Cyrenaeus,
El^us, Amasides, Theophrastus in l^bro Amatorio, Polemon de Tabellis, lib. 3.
Ovid, and infinite others, out of whom may be collected many famous wantons in
their times O^ymus is the name of a strumpet, much beloved of a skillful
Sophist in Corinth; Thalatra of D^ocles; Corianno of Ph^recrates; Antea, of
Philillius, otherwise called Eunicus, Thais and Phannium, of Menander; Opora,
of Alexis; Clepsydra of Eubulus: for so A^clepiades, the son of Arius, reports
in his Commentary upon Demetrius Phalareus; where he affirms her proper name to
be rather Methica, In Agrestis.
which Antiphanes writes to be the name of a wanton. The Poet Timocles speaks
of Cin^, Nannium, Plangon, Lyca, Pithionica, Myrhina, Christis, Covallis,
Ieroclea, Lopadium: Of these, likewise Amphis makes mention. Anaxandries in his
description of the madness of old men, In Novaculis.
amongst others he reckons up Lagisca and Theolyte Polemon the H^storiographer
speaks of one Cottina, whose S^atue is erected in the City of Lacedemon, not
far from the Temple of Dionysius; she is mounted upon a brazen Bull. Alcibiades
was beloved by a woman of Aegida, Athen in Dypnes.
of whom he was likewise amorous: after (relinquishing Athens and Lacena) of
one Medontide of Abidos, and with her sailed through the Hellespont with
Axiochus a friend of his, and much devoted to his fellowship; for so the Orator
Lysias witnesses of him in an Oration made against him. He had two other
mistresses with whom he was conversant, Damasandya the mother of La^s Junior,
and Theodota, by whom he was preserved, when remaining in Melissa, a City of
Phrygia, Pharnabazus laid trains to entrap his life. Abrotonax was the mother
of Them^stocles, a strumpet, as Amphicrates relates. Neanthes Cyzicenus (a
Greek Historiographer) calls him the son of Euterpe. Hist. li^. 3.
The second Philadelphus, King of Egypt, had many famous Concubines, as
Ptolomaeus Everges in his Commentaries witnesses; Lib. 3.
Didima and Bilisti^he: besides these, Agathoclea and Stratonica, whose
monument was erected in the sea; Elusina, Myrtium, with many others. Polybius
in his fourteenth book of Histories, remembers one Clino, that was his
Cup Bearer, in whose honor many Statues were erected in Alexandria: Mnesides
(a she musician of the City Mnesis) and one Pothinae: his most delicate houses,
in which he took much delight, he was wont to call after the name of two of his
Para^ors, either Myrtiae or Pothinae. Timothaeus, the great Captain of the
Athenians, was known to be the son of a common woman of Threissa: which being
objected to him as an aspersion, he answered; I am glad to have been born of
such a mother, that had the wisdom to choose Co^on to be my father. Caristius
in his historical Commentaries, avers. Phileterus (who soveraignized in
Pergamus, and the new Region called Boca) to be the son of a wanton she
Minstrel, born in Paphlagonia. Aristophon the Orator, who in the reign of King
Euclides published a Law, That all such as were not born of civil and free
women, approved for their modesty and temperance, should be held as bastards;
yet he himself is mocked by the Comic Poet Calliades, for being the son to
the prostitute Chorides, as many appear in the third book of his Commentaries.
Of Lamia the strumpet, the King Dmetrius had a daughter called Phila: Polemon
affirms Lamia to have been the daughter of Cleonor the Athenian. Polemon de
Var. Porticu
Machon the Comic Poet numbers Leaena amongst this Kings Mistresses, with many
others. Ptolomaeus, the son of Agesarchus, in his history of Philopater
speaking of the Mistresses of Kings, bestows Philinna, a Dancer, upon Philip
of Macedon, by whom he had Aridaeus, who succeeded after Alexander. Hera^l.
Damo was the delight of Antigonus, Lambus Histor. l. 33
by whom he had Alcyonaeus. Mysta and Nysa were the beloved of Seleucus Junior:
and Mania, most famous for her wit and ingenious discourse, of Demetrius
Poliorcetes. Of her, Machon the Poet writes much, as also of Gnathaena, who
with Dep^thaea were said to be two Lasses much beloved of the Poet Diphilus.
The City of Athens was so full of famous strumpets, that Aristophanes Byzantius
reckoned up at one time 135. but Apollodorus more, so likewise Gorgias; as
these, Parenum, Lampride, Euphrosine (the daughter of a Fuller of Cloth)
Megista, Agallis, Thaumarium, Theoclea (otherwise called Corone) Lenetocistus,
Astra, Gnathena, with two necces by her daughter, Gnathenum, and Siga; Synoris,
surnamed Lichnus; Euclea, Grammea, Thriallis, Chimaera, Lampas, Glicera, Nico
(sinamed Capra) Hippe, Lynce^s Comicus.
Metanira, of whom many things worthy observation are remembered. One Sapho is
likewise numbered amongst these loose ones; not Sapho the Lyrick Poetresse, but
another born of a strumpet. Many Roman wantons may here likewise not unfitly be
inserted (as some related) others beloved and celebrated by them in their
Poems; as Ipsithilla, of Catullus, Quintilia, of Calvus Licinius; Lyde, of
Ca^^machus; Bathis, of Phileta, Lycinea and Glicera, of Horace, Leucadia, of
Terentius Varro Arecinus: Delia, Sulpitia, Sulpitia, N^mesis, Neaere, all these
affected by Tibullus; Hostia, otherwise called Cinthia, Prop. lib. 1.
by Propertius; Melenus, of Domitius Marsius Martialis; Cesennia, by Caius
Getulicus the Epigramma^st, Bissula, by Ausonius Gallus; Metella, of Tycida
Epigramma^^^ta; C^theris (who was also called Licoris) of Cornelius Gallus;
Pamphilia, of Valerius Aedituus; Chrisis, of Q. Trabaea the Comic Poet;
Martia, of Hortensius; Terentia of Marcus Tulluss Cicero; Calphurnia, of Pliny;
Prudentilla, of Apuleius; Neaera, of Licinius Imbrex, a writer of Comedies;
Aeme, of Septimius; Aufil^na, of Quintius; Lesbia, whose true name was Claudia,
of Catullus, Argentaria, of Lucanus; D^lia, of Tibullus; Beatriae, of the
Italian Poet Dante; Aureta, of Petrarche; Pandemus, a famous C^rtisan, cited by
Coelius, and therefore may claim a place in this Catalogue. Aegyptia was doted
on by Th^o^; M^nulia, a prostitute, spoke on by Gellius; Barine, the name of a
famous Roman wanton, deciphered by Horace; Spatale, by Martial called Mammosa;
Chione, the name of a common woman, expressed by the same Author. Licisca, not
only remembered by him, but by Iuvenal, in these words: Nomen mentila Licis^a.
Coelia is taxed in Martial for one that would for gain prosticute her self to
all men. Hermia was a loose woman, so do^ed on by Aristotle, that he was said
to sacrifice unto her, and dedicate sundry Hymns to her praise: Origines.
for which, being upbraided by Eurimidon and Demophilus, he forsook Athens
(where he had taught the space of thirty years) and removed himself to
Chalcides. Martial in one of his Satyrs, reproves Philenis, who was much
beloved of the Greek Philocrates. So far have these wantons prevailed even with
Princes, that some (to gratulate them, and continue their loves) have not
spared to rob the Altars of the gods, Bromia a shee-minstrel, so much delighted
Phiallus, Athenae. Gimos. lib. 13. cap. 18.
that he rewarded her with a rich bowl taken out of the Temple, which was a
gift presented by the Phoceans. To one Pharsalia, a Thessalian she-dancer,
Philometus gave the golden Crown of Daphnes, the Offering of the Lampsacens.
This Statue of Daphnes was in Merapontus, erected in the peregrination of
Aristaeus Proconnensis. In this place Pharsalia appearing, and strutting in her
new honors, the Priests surprised with a sudden fury, and in the presence of
all the people, tore her to pieces, dismembring her limb from limb: and being
demanded the reason, it was answered, It was the just anger of the Nymph, for
being so despoiled of her Crown. Lyda is remembered to have been the mistress
of Antimachus. There was likewise another of that name, Clearch. in reb. Amator.
beloved of Laminthius Milesius. Clearchas affirms either of these Poets to
have been be sotted on that name, the one expressing himself in Elegies, the
other in a Lyrick Poem. Manno the Minstrel was doted on by M^^llermus as
Leontium by Hermosinax Colophonius, both Greek Poets. Na^crates produces one
Do^ica (amongst many other fair and beautiful wantons) whom Sapho writes to be
the sweet heart of her brother Charaxus, when as a Merchant he touched
Naucrates; where she complains That by her, her brother was despoiled of all or
the greatest part of his goods and fortunes. Herodotus (though ignorantly) calls
her Rhodope; not knowing that this is diverse from her, who erected those
famous Obelisks in Delphos, of whom Cratinus makes ample mention. Of this
Dorica, Posidippus speaks often in his Aethiopia, and of her composed this
Epigram: Dorica te capitis ornarunt Mollia vincla,
Et late unguentum pallia quae redolent,
Quae quondam periu^undum complexa Charaxum, etc.
Thy hair ti'd in soft knots, become thee well;
Thy robes, that distant, of sweet odouis smell,
(Fair Dorica) do thee no common grace;
In which thou erst Charaxus did embrace.


Archedica; a very beautiful Girl, was likewise of this City: for as
Herhdotus affirms, this place much gloried in he^ fair ones. Sapho of Eressus
(who was enamoured of lovely Phaon) was here famous, as she her self
expresses to her Nymphs, in her peregrination through Asia. No ignoble wench
was Nicarete the Megarensian, both for the antiquity of her blood, and for her
practice in the best disciplines, as well to be beloved, as admired, being a
professed hearer of the Philosopher Stilpo. To her we may compare Bilistiche the
Argive, who derived her birth from the ancient Family of the Atrides; for so
they relate of her, that composed the Grecian Histories. Nicol.
Bittiles was the mistress of the Poet Euripilus. Damascen.
Samia was the beloved of Demetrius Phalareus: he was used jeastingly and in
sport to call her Lampito, as Diyllus reports: She was also called
Charitoblepharus, which signifies Gratia Cilium, From the beauty of her
eie-browes. Nicareta was enjoied by Stephanus the Orator, and Metanira by
Lysias the Sophist. Of their familiarity were Antea, Aratola, Aristoclea,
Phila, Istmias, and Neaera (who was mistress to Stratoclides) Zenoclides the
Poet, Hypparchus the Plaier, and Phrisoninus Paeaneius, the son of Damon, and
by his sister the nephew to Democharis. It is said, That by arbitration
Stephanus the Orator, and one Phrynion, enjoied Neaera by turns, and several
days. These called her youngest daughter Sirobyla by the name of Phano,
acknowledging her to be their own. But lest with this multiplicity of H^stories
I should grow tedious, here (though abruptly) I will pawse for the present.

Of Famous Wantons.
OF some of these, something more at large. It is a Maxim, Amor ubique in
natura; Love is every where in Nature. The Poets (as Euripides and others)
called him,

The Great and most mighty of the gods: and grave Aeschilus in Danais
introduced his mother Venus, thus saying: Ferire purus Ether, arva concupit
Amorque terrae, consequi vult Nuptias, etc.
The pure air ever loves to stroke the fields,
And to the nuptials of the air, the earth yields;
The shours drop from the clear heavens, and rain down
To kiss the Earth, and give her a fresh Gown,
Whose garments were late threadbare: even these prove
In senseless things, congresse, and marriage love;
Whose birth we look for: where the Country Swain
The Midwife pla^es; and Apples, Fruits, and Grain
Returns us in their time. Then Ceres takes
These infants to her charge, nor them forsakes;
But (whilst she can) from all corruption saves,
Till being ripe for death, we find them graves.
If you would know who first prescribed these laws
Of this free birth, I (Venus) am the cause.


The like Euripides speaks in Hyppolitus. If then this universality of Love be
in senseless creatures, no marvel if it be so frequent in such as pretend to
understand. Herodotus lib. 1 says, The manner of the Babylonians.
it was a Law amongst the Babylonians, That all women freeborn, and Denizens
of the City, were enjoined once in their life times to make repair to the
Temple of Melitta (for by that name the Assyrians called Venus) and sitting in
the Porch, to subject themselves to the embraces of any stranger. But some of
the noblest and richest not willing to publish themselves to open prostitution,
were drawn thither in Chariots covered, leaving their train and attendants
behind them: many sitting in the Temple in Pues, or places allotted them, with
garlands upon their heads; of which, whilst some are called apart, others still
return (for their passages to and fro are distinguished by small cords or
strings, which direct strangers unto such woman to whom they are most
addicted.) But of these not any return to their houses (after they have once
took up their seats) till some client has cast some coin or other into her lap
(be it never so small or great) and have had carnal company with her in a
sequestered place of the Temple: which done, he is to say So much I did owe
thee, O goddess Melitta. Nor was any woman to refuse the money that was
offered her (whatsoever it were) because it was to be employed in their
supposed pious uses. Neither was it lawful for a woman to refuse any man, but
she was compelled to follow him that cast the first coin into her apron. This
being done, it was lawful for her to mingle her self in prostitution with
whom she pleased. The fairest and most beautiful, were for the most part
soonest dispatched, but others that have been ugly and deformed, have been
forced to sit in the Temple, some one, some two, some three years, and upwards,
before they could meet with any by whose help they might give satisfaction to
the Law, return to their own houses, and make use of their free liberty. The
like custom (though not in every particular) was in Cyprus.

Amongst the Ca^nians (a people in Coria) there was a yearly convention of
young men and women to the like purpose, as the same Author in the same book
affirms. Aelianus de var. Histor. lib. 4. says, That the Lydian women before
their marriage presented themselves for gain, till they had purchased to
themselves a competent dowry; but having once selected a husband, they from
that time lived in all continence and chastity. From this generality I come to
particulars, and first of Thau. She was a strumpe^ of Corinth, whose beauty
bewitched all the Attick youth. Her the Greek Poet Menander in his works most
celebrated, of whom she was called Menandraea. Clitarchus specifies unto us,
That she was much beloved of Alexander the Great: at whose request (after the
conquest of Cyrus) all the Imperial Palaces of Persepolis (with the greatest
part of the City) were ^et on fire, and burned down to the earth. This strumpet
(after the death of Alexander) was married to the first Ptolomey of Egypt, by
whom she had two sons, Leontiscus and Legus, with one daughter called Irene,
whom Solon King of Cyprus, after took to wife. Lamia was a Courtizan of Athens,
and entired to Demetrius, a Lord of many Nations, insomuch, that in his Armor
and Crown, with his Imperial Diadem, he was often seen publicly to enter her
roof, to converse with her, and eat at her Table. It had been less dishonor
for so great a person, to have given her meeting more privately. In this one
thing Diodorus the minstrel was preferred before Demetrius: who being diverse
times sent for to this Courtizans house, refused to come. This Lamia was wont
(as Aelianus lib. 1. reports) to compare the Greeks to Lions, and the Ephesians
to Wolves. Gnathaena was of the same Country, and born in Athens, of whom it
is thus remembered: A noble fellow drawn as far as the Hellesport by the
attractive fame of her beauty, she gave him both meeting and entertainment: of
which he growing proud, and somewhat insolent, using much loquacity and
superfluous language (being in the heat of wine and lust) she asked him.
Whether (as he pretended) became from the Hellespont? To whom he answered; He
did: She replied, And do you know the name of the chief City there? He told
her, Yes. She then desired him to give it name? He told her, it was called
Sygaeum. By which she ingeniously reproved his verbositie; since Sygae (of
which Greek word the City takes denomination) signifies silence and
taciturnity. Of her prompt and witty answers the Poet Machon sets down many:
for she was held to be wondrous facetious and sco^^ing, and exceedingly beloved
of the Poet Diphilus. Lynceus likewise remembers many things concerning her.
Pausonius Lacus being dancing in her presence, in doing a lofty trick above
ground, and not able to recover himself, he fell headlong into a vessel that
stood by: See (says she) Lacus in cadum incidit, i. The Pool has powered
himself into the Vessel: Lacus not only signifies a Pool, but a Vessel which
receives the wine when it is pressed. Another, offering her a small quantity
of wine in a great and large bowl and told her withal, That it was at least
seventeen years old, Truly (answered she) it is wondrous little of the age. Two
young men in the heat of wine quarrelling about her, and going to buffers, to
him that had the worst she thus said, Despair nor youth, Non enim Coronarium
est certamen sed Argenteum, i. This was a prize for money only, not for a
Garland. When one had given her fair daughter (who was of the same profession)
a piece of gold valued at a pound, and had received no more then labor for his
travel, and bare looks for his money, to him she said, Thou for this pound art
made free of my daughter, as those that are admitted into the school of
Hyppomachus the Master-wrestler; who often times see him play, but seldom prove
his strength; admire his skill, but never try his cunning. Many such (with
great elegancy) came frequently from her; for (as Lynceus says of her) she was
Concinna admodum and urbana. Aristodemus in his second book Ridiculorum
memorab. relates, That when two men had bargained for her at once, a soldier
and a mean fellow, the soldier in great contumely called her Lacus, or Lake:
Why do you thus nickname me? says she, because you two floods fall into me,
Lycus and Liber: Lycus is a river not far from Laodicea, which sometimes
runs under the earth, and in many places bursteth up again. She writ a book
which she called Lex Convinalis, imitating the Philosophers of those times, who
had compiled works of the like subject: The project of her book was, how her
guests ought to behave themselves at Table toward her and her daughter. The
like Law Callim^chus composed in three hundred and three and twenty Verses.

Rhodope was a Courtisan of Egypt, one that by her prostitution came to such a
mass of wealth, that she of her own private charge, caused to be erected a
magnificent Pyramid, equalling those that there raised by the greatest Princes.
Sapho calls her Dorica, and makes her the mistress of her brother Charapus,
upon whom he spent and consumed all his fortunes, even to the utmost of penury:
of whom Ovid thus writes, Arsit inops frater, etc. Aelianus and others report
her for a woman most beautiful, who bathing her self in a pleasant and clear
fountain in her garden, her handmaids attending her with all things necessary,
upon a sudden an Eagle sowsing down, snatched up one of her shoes, and flying
with it as far as the great City Memphis, let it fall from above into the lap
of the King Psamneticus, then sitting in public judgment: who much amazed at
the strangeness of the accident, but most at the riches, proportion, and
curiosity of the shoe, instantly commanded that all Egypt should be
through-sought, till they could find the owner thereof, by matching it with the
fellow: which happened soon after. Being brought before the King, he was so
infinitely surprised with her feature, that the same hour he contracted her in
marriage, and consequently made her his Queen. Some say she was first a
Thracian Damosel, and servant to Iadmone of Samos; she was after carried into
Egypt by the Philosopher Zanthus Samius. She was a friend and patroness of
Aesopus, so famous for his Fables still frequent amongst us.

Metra was the daughter of Erisic^thon a Thessalian, who having spent all his
fortunes, and wasted even his necessary means (as brought to the lowest exigent
of penury) was forced to make merchandise of his daughters Chastity; but she
would not yield her self to the embraces of any man, without the gift and
tender of a horse, an ox, a cow, a sheep or a goat, or some such like
commodity, to the supply of her fathers necessity: (for it seems that coin and
jewels were not then in use) For the exchange aforesaid the Thessalians fabled,
That she could transhape her self into all creatures presented unto her by her
lovers. And hence came that old ^dage, More changeable then Erisicthons Metir^,
Much of the like continence was Cy^ene, a notious strumpet, who as Erasmus
reports, explaining of that old proverb, Duodecim artium nemo, i. A man of
twelve Arts or Trades, could use her professed Venery twelve several ways.
Archianasse was surnamed ^^^phonia, as born in the City of Colophon, and was
beloved of Plato the Divine Philosopher, of whom he himself thus protested.

Archianassam ego teneo Colophonis amicam,
Cujus in rugis, mollia ludit amor.
Archianasse I still hold
Mistress, and I say
There is no wrinckle in her face,
In which love does not play.
Thus we see the deepest Philosophers and the wisest men, have made themselves
the captives of beauty and vassals lust. Dem^sthenes the Orator was guilty of
the like aspersions, and subject to much intemperance. It is said, that having
children by a noted strumpet, when both the mother and the children were cited
before the judgment seat (to avoid calumny) he presented the children without
the mother, though it were against the custom of the City: for as Idomeneus
says, notwithstanding he were outwardly of a modest disposition and carriage,
yet inwardly he was profuse and incontinent. It is reported of him that he was
wandrous prodigal and expensice in banquets and women, insomuch, that the
public scribe speaking of him in an Oration, thus said, What shall we then
think of the Orator Demosthenes, when what he has by his great travel and
industry purchased in a whole year, he will dissolutely spend in one night upon
a woman? The like Nicolaus Damascenus writes of Demetrius, the last of that
succession, who so much doted on Myrina Samia, That she commanded from him all
things save his Diadem; so that not only Philosophers, but even Kings have made
themselves subject to all kind of voluptuousness and luxuries; and what has
been the lamentable success, but shame and dishonor, the wasting of private
estates, and the miserable subversion of Kingdoms. Therefore Claudian in his
third book in Stiliconis Lauds, thus says: -- Nam caetera regna
Lu^eur^^ viti^ edusque superbia vertit, etc.
Of other Kingdoms the imper^^l state
Last does subvert with vices; P^^e with hate
So by the Spartons A^thens was subdued;
And so (...) fell: The Medes did first intrude
Into the Assyrian Monarchy: their lust
Burted their towering honors in the dust.
From the luxurious Medes, the Persians reft
Their proud dominion: they grown lustful, left
Their Empire to the Macedonian sway,
Who kept it till they wanton grew: then they
Their honors to the temperate Romans sold,
For so the ancient Sibils had foretold.


The effects of this will more plainly appear in the History ensuing. Aspasia,
otherwise called Socratica, is numbered amongst the fairest women of her time,
insomuch, that she had several suitors from all the Provinces of Greece, as
Aristophanes delivers in his discourse of the Peloponnesian war: insomuch, that
Peri^les (for the love of this Aspasia, and for some servants of hers, taken
from her by force) begun and established that terrible decree against the
M^garenses, remembered by Stesombrotus Thasius. She about her private and
necessary occasions sending her bawd Symaetha to the City of Megara, the young
men of the City detained her: upon which restraint she sent two others, who not
being suffered to return, from these strumpets did arise a war, almost to the
depopulation of the greatest part of Greece. It is likewise spoken of that
Cyrus (who warred against his brother) to have had a Mistress of great wisdom
and wonderful beauty, bred in the City of Phocis, who as Zenophanes says, was
first called Milto, and after, Aspasia. Of these in general, Juvenal with
great elegancy speaks in his Satyrs: Nil non permittit mulier, sibi turpe putat
nil
Cum vir^des gemmas collo circumedit, and cum
Auribus extentis magnos committit elenchos.
There Is nothing that a woman will respect,
Nothing so vile or odious that she fears,
So she with glistring Jewels may be dect,
And have great pendant Pearls weight down her ears.


Of Mista, and others,
PHilarchus observes this Mysta to be much favored by the King Seleucus: who
being expelled by the Galathians, and hardly escaping with life, when his
Palace was seized and surprised, she casting aside all her Princely ornaments,
put on a servile habit, and mingled her self in the society of her handmaids
and servants, having so disguised her self, that she remained unknown, and by
that means was sold amongst the rest at a small rate, and bought by the Rhodian
Merchants, to whom after she disclosed her self. They to insinuate into the
favor of Seleucus (who had recovered his former fortunes) sent her to him
nobly attended in great state and magnificence, of whom she was accordingly
received, and they most bounteously rewarded. Antecyra as (Caelius, lib. 13.
cap. 6. reports) was a famous (or rather infamous) strumpet, so called, because
she yielded up her body to lunaticks and mad men; or else because the Physi^ian
Nicostratus, at his death, left her such a quantity of Hellebore. Colvia
Crisalpina is called by Tacitus, lib. 17. the stale mistress of Nero's lust,
an apt pupil for such a tutoresse. Apollodorus and Caelius write of two
sisters, called Stragonium and Anthis, both of the veneral profession: These
were by a nickname called by some Aphiae, because of the smalnesse of their
statures, and the greatness of their eyes. Cynna, Saluacha, and Casauria, were
three famous strumpets or Athens, many times remembered by Aristophanes in his
Comedies. Hemippus lib. 1. de Aristot. speaks of Herpillides the Paramour of
Aristotle, he had by her a son called Nicomochus. Melissa the daughter of
Proclaeis (as Pythenetus in his third book de Aegina relates) was beloved of
Periander ex Ep^dauro King of Corinth, and numbered amongst the seven wise men
of Greece: He seeing her attired after the manner of the Peloponnesians (that
was, almost naked, save a garment next to her skin) and in that manner
ministering wine to his servants and workmen; he was suddenly so surprised with
her beauty, that he first enterteined her as his friend and familiar mistress,
and shortly after in great state and public solemnity received and
acknowledged her his Queen and wife. Xenophon reports of Socrates to have had
familiar conference with Theodata, whose speech was to this purpose, Be^^^e
thee O Socrates (says she) I claim a just precedence, and held my self the
worthier person of the two: he demanding the reason, she thus proceeded.
Because thou with all thy gravity and austerity of discipline can not
alie^^te from me and my society any one of my suitors and clients, but I when I
please can draw from thee the best of thy scholars and pupils, both such as I
like and at what time I best please. To whom Socrates replied, It is no wonder,
O Theodota, since the way to thy house is merely to naughtiness, and lies down
the hill; but the path to my school is solely tending to nobleness and virtue;
and is the way up hill, therefore the passage sublime and difficult. It is said
that Apelles espying Lais (when she was a young Virgin) drawing water from the
Pyrenaean fountain, admiring her beauty, which was not yet grown unto
perfection, he conducted her by the arm home to his shop, and presented her to
his fellow Painters; but they deriding his folly that he would entertain a
virgin, one not capable of prostitution: he said, doubt you not, for within
this three years I will deliver her up to the game the most beautifullest of
any Virgin living. The like Xeaophon i^ Mirabil. testates, That Socrates
presaged of this Theodata in her childhood, Quod pulcherrima esset dicebat,
pectusque quovis ratione haberet formosius, i. He said, That she would not only
prove outwardly fair, but her breast within, every way more beautiful. Demades
the Orator had a son called Demeas, by a she-minstrel, one that played upon the
Flate, or the Shaum; this young man puffing and blowing, and being as our
English phrase says) in a pelting chafe, Hyperides then standing by, Peace
(says he) young man, and be patient, for thy cheeks began to swel bigger then
thy mothers. Nicaeus in Successionis Philosoph* says, That the Philosopher
Doristhenites, was the son of a strumpet called Olympia Lacena. Sophocles the
Tragedian had in his delights one Theorides, in his age and decaying strength:
therefore in his prayer to Venus he thus says, O nutrix juvenum exaudi, mihi
da mulierem
Abnuere hanc, etc.
Hear me thou nurse of youth, I thee entreat,
And grant that she to whom my love's so great,
May shun the beds of young men, and despise
Their hot affection: only cast her eyes
On aged men, whose heads are snow'd by time,
Who though decaid in strength, have minds sublime.


Stasimus says, that this Theorides was the first friend of Theoris. Sophocles
after forsaking her, made election of another, called Archippe, whom as
Hegesander writes, he made his heir. Isocrates the modestest of all Orators,
was taxed with two wantons, namely, Metanira, and Calls, for so Lysias affirms
in his Epistles. Demosthenes in an Oration against Neaera, confers Metanira
upon Lysias, who had another mistress called Lagis, whose Encomium was writ by
the Orator Cephalus, as Alcidamus L^ites (the scholar of Georgius) most
eloquently penned the praises of his beloved Nais. This Nais Lysias gave
description of in an Oration against Philonides, her proper name was Archias:
of her Aristophanes makes mention in Geritade and in Pluto, where he says,
Amat ne Lais, number tua Philonidem causa?

Which should be writ Nais, not Lais, as Athenaeus is of opinion. Hermippus
speaking of Isocrates, says, That he enterteined into his house the Strumpet
Lagisca, by whom he had a daughter. Lysias in an oration reckons up diverse
other prostitutes, Philyra, Scione, Hyppaphesis, Theoclea, Psamathe, Lagisca,
Anthaea, Aristoclea, and Dagnista. Alce was the name of a famous Curtizan, as
may be gathered out of the words of Laberius, Petrus Crinitus, and others.
Pythagoras the Samian Philosopher, in speaking of his transformations,
reports himself first to have been Euphorbus, then Pyrander, then Calidena,
and after a strumpet of admired feature called Alce: with this Pythagorean
Metamorphosis, Laberius the Mimick Poet thus sported, -- Vt n^s olim mutant
Philosophi
Et nunc de mulo hominem, de muliebere colubrum,
Faciant --


i. As the Philosophers of old change us, making of a Mule a Man, and of a
woman a Snake. Petrus Crinitus calls her Famoso nominus Alce. In the threescore
and fourth Olympiad, in the time that Hippias and Hipparchus tyrannised in the
City of Athens (as Eusebius relates in his Annals) Harmodius and Aristogiton
with others (but those of the most note) made a conjuration against the two
Princes, and in this conspiracy was Hypparchus slain. Leaena a famous strumpet,
being known to be affected to some of that faction (as being endeered to them
for some former courtesies) was called into question, and being commanded to
discover the Regicides, and obstinately refusing it, she was adjudged to the
rack, where with wondrous patience enduring many almost insufferable torments,
and still being urged to discover what she knew concerning that confederacy;
she with a noble and memorable resolution, bit out her tongue, and cast it into
the face of the tyrant Hyppias: which act, Pliny and others record as a
president of admirable patience in a woman. Let Leaena (says he) the strumpet
be memorized for her inconstancy, who by no tortures could be enforced to
discover Harmodius and Aristogiton, by whose hands the tyrant Hypparchus fell.
For the like resolution is Anaxarchides renowned amongst men by Zeno and
others. Erasmus in Chiliad. speaks of Sinope before named, a famous strumpet of
Corinth, to be so extremely given over to lust, that from her came the Latin
word Sinopissare, which signifies, to be in the highest degree libidinous or
voluptuous. Suidas says, That Nannium the whore was called Capra, because she
devoured a Vintner (or made him break) called Thallus, which word sometimes
signifies Germen, i. A bough or sprig on which Goats love to feed. Acca
Laurentia, the wife of Faustulus the Kings shepherd, who being a beautiful
woman, prostituted her body for gain: she was surnamed Lupa, and from her even
to this day all brothel-houses are called Lupanaria. She nursed and brought up
Romulus, and Remus, Live. lib. 1. Decad. 1. Plutarch in Vita Romuli. Flora the
strumpet, who was likewise called Laurentia, constituted the people of Rome her
hei^; from her came the yearly feasts celebrated, called Floralia: of her,
Gellius lib. 6. cap. 7. and Vollat. lib. 16. speaks more at large. Manilia was
a Roman Cur^esan, whom Hostilius M^ncinus called into question, because a stone
was cast upon him from one of her galleries: Gellius. Phebe was a freed woman
to Julia the daughter of Augustus Caesar, and a companion with her in all her
lusts and brothelries; who when she beard that her mistress was confined by her
father, earing some severe censure from the Emperer, slew her sel^ to prevent
further torture: Dion in Augusto. The immoderate lust of Caelia, Martial, lib.
7. thus reproves:

Das Cattis, das Germanis, das Caelia Dacis,
Nec Cilicum spernis Cappadocumque toros, etc.
To the Catti, Germans, and the Dacians thou
Caelia giv'st welcome, and thou do allow
The Cappadians and Cilicians bed:
Besides, from Pharo thou art furnished
With Memphian whorers, from the red sea sails
The swarthy Indian, and he brings thee vails,
And thou take all, neither will thou refuse
The offer of the circumcised Jews, etc.
Catullus of his Lesbia thus speaks:
Nulla potest mulier tantum se dicere amatum,
Vere, quantum a me Lesbia amata mea est.
No woman truly can report to be,
So well beloved, as Lesbia thou of me.
So Quintus Frabaeus Comediographus of his (...)
De improviso Chrysis ubi me aspexerit,
Alacris obviam mihi veneit, etc.
Wheu Chrysis on the sudden me espied,
She looked upon me with a cheerful face,
Wishing withal, that me she might embrace,
To whom she owes her self: this I have tried.
It is fortune I have seldom known,
And such as I prefer before mine own.
Dion, Nicaeus* and X^philinus, in the life of the Emperor Commodus, besides
the strumpet Martia whom he took to wife, remembers one Damostrata, whom he
after bestowed upon Cleander, him whom from a bondsman he raised to be of his
privy chamber. Time, Paper, and Leisure would fail me before example, and I
desire not to be tedious. I have hitherto showed you what whores are, I now
desire to express unto you what they should be. Mary Magdalen the daughter of
Syrus and Eucharia, and sister to Lazarus and Martha, for some years gave her
self up to all voluptuousness and pleasure, insomuch that she had incurred
the name of a common strumpet; but after, when she cast her self prostrate and
washed the feet of our Savior with her tears, and dried them with the hairs of
her head, and anointing him with costly ointment in the house of Simon the
Leper, her sins were forgiven her. We read likewise of Aphra who was born in
Creet, her mothers name was Hylaria a notorious bawd: This Aphra with her three
servants, Dimna, Eugenia, and Eutropia, for money prostituted themselves to all
men; but she her self being after converted to the Faith, by Narcissus Bishop
of Jerusalem, abjured all incontinence, and adhering to the Christian Religion,
proved so constant in the same, that for the true Faith she suffered martydome.
Nicaeta and Aquilina, were two beautiful strumpets, and made gain of their
bodies; these were employed by King Dagnes to tempt and traduce the blessed
Saint Christopher, and to upbraid him of false Religion, but it fell out the
contrary to the purpose of the tyrant; for those two being by him converted to
the true faith, and not to be removed by meanaces or torments, were after by
the same King both caused to be slain. Faucula Clavia is remembered by the
Historiographer Livy, who though she was of that wanton and loose behavior,
yet highly commended for her piety; she to her great charge ministered food and
sustenance to many of the distressed Roman soldiers, all the time that
Hannibal was possessed at Capua. Marullus lib. 2. cap. 12. and Sabin. lib. 5.
cap. 5. speak of Thais an Egyptian strumpet, who by the often admonitions of
the Abbot Pannutius, repented her of her wicked and lewd life; and to give the
best satisfaction to the world that she was able, she caused a great fire to be
made, and all that wealth which she had gathered by her prostitution she cast
therein, and caused it to be burned before her face; and from a common
Brothel-house, retired her self to a private Monastery, where after three
years penitential solitude, she expired. Pelagia Antiochena, so called because
she was born in Antioch* exceeding in wealth, and excelling in beauty, was
wholly given over to immoderate luxuries, insomuch, that no woman appeared in
public more gawdily apparelled, or more voluptuously minded then her self;
but being drawn by some religiously disposed friend of hers, to hear the
Sermons of Nonius Bishop of Heliopolis, she acknowledged her error, cast off
her gay and gaudy attire, bewailed her sins, and lamented her lewd course of
life, distribiting her wealth amongst the poor and as a farewell to all
looseness and intemperance, builded a poor Cottage in the mount of Olives. And
lest any violence in such a solitude might be done unto her, in the way of
prevention she changed her habit, and called her self Pelagius, proceeding in
that sanctity of life that where before of Pelagia she was called Pelagus
Vitiorum, i. A sea of Vices, she was after styled Pelagus Vertutum, amarissimus
Marath aquas in dulces convertens, i. An Ocean of Virtues, turning the most
bitter Waters of Marath into sweet. And thus I conclude with these Wantons,
wishing all such whose lives have been us ill, and infamous, that their ends
might prove as good and glorious.

Explicit lib. Sextus, Inscriptus Erato.
THE SEVENTH BOOK inscribed POLYHIMNIA, or MEMORY.
Entreating of the Piety of Daughters toward their Parents, Women to their
children, Sisters to their Brothers, Wives to their Husbands, etc.
THere is no gift (according to Reason) bestowed upon man, more sacred, more
profitable, or availing toward the attaining of the best Arts and Disciplines
(which include all general Learning) then Memory, which may fitly be called
the Treasure-house or faithful Custos of Knowledge and Unstanding. Therefore
with great wisdom did the Poets call her the mother of the Muses, and with no
less elegancy did they place Oblivion below in Hell, in regard of their
opposition and antipathy. Our Memory (as Sahellicus says) is a benefit lent us
from above, that has her existence in Nature, but her ornament and beauty from
Art. Alexand. ab Alex. Lib. 2. cap. 19. That the Egyptians in their
Hieroglyphics, when they would figure any man of an excellent memory, they
would do it by a Fox, or a Hare, with upright and erected ears: But when they
would represent one dull and blockish, they did by a Crocodile. That Nation, of
all others, has been remarkable for their admiral retention; who, before they
knew the true use of Letters, had all the passages of former ages by heart, and
still the elder delivered them to the younger, keeping no other Records then
their own remembrances. Themistocles in this was eminent; insomuch, that
S^monides the Poet promising by Art to add something unto that which he had
already perfect by Nature, he told him, he had rather he could teach him the
Art of Forgetfulness, because he was prone to remember such things as he
desired to forget, but could not forget such things, as he gladly would not
remember. Cic. lib. 2. de Finibus* It proceeds from a moderate temperature of
the brain, and therefore may be numbered amongst the necessary good things which
belong unto mankind. Many men have in this been famous, but few women, unless
for remembering an injury. Most necessary to a good Memory, is Meditation; for
as Ausonius says, in Ludo septem sapient^um: Is quippe solus rei gerendae est
efficax,
Meditatur omne qui prius negotium.
He only squares his deeds by measure true,
That meditates before what shall ensue.
And again:
N^hil est quod Ampliorem Curam postulat, etc.
Nothing there is that greater care should ask,
Then to sore-think ere we begin our task:
All humane actions justly are derided.
That are by Chance, and not by Counsel guided.


There is a Proverb frequent amongst us, Oportet mendacem esse memorem, It
behooves a Liar to have a good memory. Neither is the sentence more common, then
the practice is in these corrupt days: insomuch, that one speaking of the
generally of it, thus said, or to the like effect; Young men have learnt to lie
by practice, and old men claim it by authority: Gallants lie oftener to their
mistresses, then with them; nay, even women's aprons are stringed with excuses.
Most of our Tradesmen use it in bargaining, and some of our Lawyers in their
pleading. The Soldiers can agree with the thing it self, but quarrels at the
name of the word. It has been admitted into Aldermens Closets, and sometimes
into States-mens studies. The Traveller makes the modestest use of it, for it
has been his admittance to many a good meal. At a meeting of Gentlemen about
this Town, whether in a Tavern, or an Ordinary, I am not perfect, but amongst
other discourse at the Table, one amongst the rest, began thus:

It is recorded (says he) by a Spanish Nobleman who had been Ambassador in
Russia, that in the time of his residence there, a strange accident befell,
which was after this manner: A poor man of the Country, whose greatest means to
live was by gathering stricks and rotten wood in the forest, A poor man a Bear.
and after to make merchandise thereof amongst the neighbor Villages; he
climbing a hollow tree, much spent with age, and that Country (above many
others) being full of Bees, as appears by their traffic of Wax and Honey; of
which, in the bulk and concavity of the Tree there was such a quantity, that
treading upon a broken branch, and his f^ot-hold failing, he sell into the
trunk thereof, where presently he was up to the armpits deep in Honey, besides
the emptiness above his head, not being able to reach to any thing by which he
might use the help of his hands. In this sweet pickle he continued the space of
three days, feeding upon the relief the place affoorded, but altogether
despairing ever to be released thence, as not daring to cry or call out for
help, fearing the danger of wild beasts, of which in those wildernesses there
are infinite plenty. But it so fell out, that a mighty great Bear coming that
way, and by reason of the poor man's moving and stirring himself up and down
the Tree, smelling the Honey (which they say Bears have appetite unto above all
other things whatsoever) he mounts the Tree, and (as their custom is) not
daring to thrust in their heads first, as fearing to fall headlong, provident
Nature has allowed them that foresight, as catching fast hold upon the top
with their fore-feet, with one of their hinder legs (as with a plummet) they
sound the depth of the place, and how far it is to the commodity for which they
come to search. All this the Bear did, at such time as the miserable poor man
was casting his arms abroad to catch hold of any thing by which he might raise
himself out of that pitiful Purgatory, who meeting with such an unexpected
Pulley or Crane, catch fast hold upon the Bears leg: at which, the beast being
suddenly affrighted (fearing to leave one of his limbs behind him) drew it up
with such a mighty strength, that he plucked out the man withal to the top,
where he first fell in, by which means the poor wretches life was preserved,
and the affrighted Bear (as if the Devil had been at his tail) never looked
back, till he had got into the thickest part of the wilderness.

His discourse being ended, and every one admiring the strangeness of the
accident, a Traveller that sat next affirmed it for truth, as being then in the
Country at the same time: and thereupon took occasion to discourse of the
Cities, the Rivers, the Manners, and Dispositions, of the people; and withal
the coldness of the Clime, which in some places (says he) I protest is so
extreme, that one of my Country men and I talking together one morning in the
fields, A cold country.
our words still as we spoke them, froze before us in the air, and that so
hard, that such as the next day past that way, might read them as perfectly and
distinctly, as if they had been texted in Capital Letters: to which one of the
Gentlemen with great modesty replied. Truly, Sir, methinks that should be a
dangerous Country to speak treason in, especially in the depth of winter.
Something before this discourse was fully ended, came up the Gentlewoman of the
house to bid her guests welcome, and taking her chair at the upper end of the
table: It seems Gentlemen (says she) your discourse is of Russia; my first
husband (God rest his soul) was a great Traveller, and I have heard him in his
life time speak much of that Country, but one thing amongst the rest, which I
shall never forget whilst I have an hour to live, My Hostesses Lie.
That riding from Mosco the great City, to a place in the Country, some five
miles off, in a mighty great Snow, and the high way being covered, and he
mistaking the path, he happened to tumble horse and man into a deep pit, from
which he could not find any possible way out, either for himself, or for his
beast; and lying there some two hours, and ready to starve with cold; as
necessity will still put men to their wits, so he bethought himself, and
presently stepping to a Village, some half a mile off, borrowed or bought a
spade; with which coming back, he fell to work, and first dug out himself,
and after his horse; when mourning, he (without more (...)) came to the end of
his journey: And this (says she) (...) told to a hundred and a hundred
Gentlemen (...) own hearing. To end this discourse in a word (which by examples
might be exemplified into an infinite) one of the guests sitting by, said, I
can tell you a stranger thing then all these being demanded what? he answered, I
believe all these things related, to be true. Plutarch in his book De educandis
liberis, says, Praeter haec omnia adsuefaciendi sunt pueri ut vera dicant,
etc. Above all things, children ought to be accustomed to speak the truth, in
which consists the chief sanctimony: but to lie, is a most servile thing,
worthy the hate of all men, and not to be pardoned in servants. Homer, Iliad.
1. to show the difference betwixt Truth and Falsehood, has these words: Poene
mihi est orci portis invisior ipsis,
Cujus verba sonant aliud quam mente recondit.
He Is to me hateful, as the doors of hell,
That when he ill does mean, does promise well.


Juvenal in his third Satyr gives it a more full and ample expression, after
this manner: Quid Romae feciam? mentiri nescio; librum
Si malus est, nequeo laudare, etc.
What should I do at Rome? I cannot lie:
If a bad Book be laid before me, I
Nor praise it, nor desire it; I have no skill
In the Stars motions, neither can nor will
I make deep search into my fathers fate,
To know when he shall die, nor calculate
From the Frogs entrails by inspection: never
Was it my study, how by base endeavor
To panderize, or close conveiance hide
Betwixt the Adulterer and another Bride.
These practices, seek they (that list) to attain,
Such as I have been, I will still remain.


This Muse Polyhimnia, under whom I patronize this seventh Book, as she is the
Mistress and Lady of Memory, and consequently of the multiplicity both of
Hymns and Histories, so from her I assume a kind of liberty to continue my
variety of discourse, and from Mendacia come to Sales, or Dicteria, i. From
Lies to Jeasts, or ingenious witty answers. For which, Athenaeus in his Dypnos.
lib. 13. remembers these women famous; Lamia, Gnathena, Lais, Glicera, Hyppo,
Nico, Phrine, Thais, Leontium, and others. Yet lest women should not be content
to equal men only, but to antecede them; I will here commemorare some things,
wittily and facetiously spoken by Princes and others. ^ Physician.
Auton. in Melissa, Part. 1. Sermon. 56. speaks of an unskilful Physician
coming to visit an old friend of his (or at least an acquaintance) saluting
him in this manner: Sir, God be thanked you have lived to a fair age, and are
grown an old man; Yes, Sir (said he) and you have my health too, for I never
made use of any Physician Cicero thus played upon Vatinius, who was but a few
days Consul: A great prodigy (says he) there happened in the year of his
Consul-ship, That there was neither Spring, Summer, Autum nor Winter; one
asking him, Why he had neglected to visit the Consul in his honor? he
answered, He had purposed it, but the night prevented him He sported in the
like kind upon Caninius, of him (says he) we had a most vigilant Consul, who
never so much as slept in his Consulship. Lucilius Manilius, an excellent
Painter, had drawn wondrous beautiful faces, but his children were exceedingly
deformed. A friend of his supping with him one night, taunted him in these
words, Non similiter ^ingis and pingis: as much to say, Thou do not get thine
own children, as thou do paint others; No wonder, answered he, For I get
those faces in the dark; but when I paint others, I do them by the light of the
Sun. The Christian Princes having united their forces to redeem the Holy Land
from the oppression of the Infidels, Santius of Spain.
Santius brother to the King of Spain was made General of the Christian
forces; a man of great sanctity, and of an austere life, and withal a noble
soldier: he amongst other Princes sitting in Council with the Pope, but not
understanding the Roman Tongue, in which the business was then debated, only
having his interpreter placed at his feet; upon the sudden (after their Decree)
there was a great acclamation and clamor, with flinging up their caps, etc. At
which Santius demanded of his interpreter what that sudden joy meant? he told
him, It was because the Pope and College of Cardinals, had by their public
sustrage created him King of Egypt (for the Saladine then usurped in the Holy
City.) Is it so (says he) then arise and proclaim the Pope Caliph of
Baildacha. Thus with a Princely liberty modestly taxing their forwardness; who
as they gave him a Kingdom without a Country, he to requite the Popes
gratitude, gave him a Bishopric without a Diocese. Pacuvius Taurus having for
his former service sued to Augustus Caesar for some great and gross sum of
money, and the rather to induce the Emperor to bounty, told him, That it was
voiced in the City, and was frequent in every man's mouth, how he had already
received a large donative from Caesar: to whom he answered, Let them say what
they will, but donot thou Pacuvius believe it. To another that was removed from
his command, and sued for a pension, yet insinuating with the Emperor that it
was for no covetous intent, or any hope of gain, but because it should be
thought, that for no criminal cause he was put out of his place, and dismissed
his office, that he desired an annual fee from the treasury: to whom Augustus
replied, Do thou then report openly that thou have a pension, and if any shall
ask me about it, I will not deny but that I have given it. The same Augustus
going into a shop to buy Purple or Scarlet (for in those days the Emperors
were not so curious as some gentlemen are now) he cheapning a piece of cloth,
but not liking the color of it, because it was not bright enough, and the
Draper having (it seems) a dark shop (such as are common amongst us in our
days) says the Draper to him, So please your Majesty but to hold it up into
the light, and you shall the color more perfect. Gramercy for that (says he)
so when I purpose to show my self amongst my subjects, to show the true color
of my garments, I must l^kewise be tied to walk upon the Tarresses and tops of
houses. Many other things are remembered of him, worthy to be commended to
posterity. Philip of Macedon.
Philip, the father of Alexander the Great, had a custom when his army was in
the field, to leave his own Tent, and come into the private Hals and Cabbins of
his soldiers, and observe how they spent their idle hours: The Poet Calliniad.
then following the Camp, to whom the King had a particular love; he stole upon
him one day, and found him busily seething a Conger, stirring up the fire,
skimming the Kettle, and doing other such Cook-like offices, for his particular
diet: the King clapped him upon the shoulder, and said; I never read, O Poet,
that Homer, when he was writing his famous work called the Ilia^ls, could ever
find so much spare time, as to kindle a fire, set on water, and skimm a Conger.
To whom he presently answered: Neither remember I O King, that I ever read in
Homer, the Prince of Poets, that Agamemnon, in all the time of the ten years
siege of Troy, had such vacancy as thou have now to pry into the Booths of his
soldiers; and neglecting the public affairs, to busy himself to know how
every private man cookt his own diet. This was a modest passage betwixt him
that contended to art noble deeds, and him that the King knew could give them
full expression. Erasmus, lib. 6. Apoth. speaks of the Orator Crassus, That
when one Piso (being accused by Sylus for some words speaking) had incurred a
Censure, and Crassus being then the advocate of Piso, found that Sylus his
testimony proceeded merely from malice and envy; after the Sentence was past,
Crassus thus spoke to Sylus: It may be (says he) this Piso (notwithstanding
this accusation) was moved, or angry, when he spoke those words: who answered,
(as reverencing his authority) Sir, It may be so. It may be too Sylus (said he)
thou did not at that time rightly understand him: who again answered, It was
like enough. And it may be (said Crassus again somewhat hastily) That Piso
never spoke those words which thou say thou heardest; who answered
unadvisedly, and it may be so too. At which the auditory fell into a great
laughter, Piso was acquit, and Sylus punished, by the reversement of judgment.
It pleased a King of France, who had heard a great fame of the learned Scotus,
to send for him, and to seat him at his Table (which was a grace not common)
with expectation (it seems) to hear from him some extraordinary rare discourse,
answerable to the fame was given him. The scholar seeing such rarity and
variety set before him, only intended that for which he came, and eat with a
good ^ound stomak: Which the King a pretty while observing, interrupts him
thus; Domine, quae est d^sserentia inter Scotum and Scotum? i. Sir, What is the
difference betwixt a Scot and a Scot? To whom he without pause replied, Mensa
tantum, i The Table only: the King playing up in his name, and be taxing the
Kings ignorance. A great Earl of this Kingdom was sent over by Queen
Elizabeth, to debate concerning State-businesse, and joined with him in
commission one Doctor Dale, a worthy and approved scholar: to meet with these,
from the Spaniard were sent (amongst other Commissioners) Richardetti, that was
Secretary to K. Philip. These meeting about State Affairs, question was made,
In what Language it was most fit to debate them? Richardetti standing up (and
belike having notice that our Ambassador was not well practiced in the French
tongue) thus said. In my opinion, it is most fit that this business about
which we are met, be discoursed in French; and my reason is, because your Queen
writes her self Queen of France. At which word, up start the Doctor, and thus
replied: Nay then rather let it be debated in the Hebrew tongue, since your
King writes himself King of Jerusalem.

These may appear digressions: I will only, because this is a woman's book, end
this argument with the answer of a woman remembered by Petrarch. Azo, The wife^
the Marquess of Este*
the Marquess of Este, was eminent for many extraordinary blessings both of
Nature and Fortune: But as these were never perfectly enjoied without some
difficulty and trouble, so it proved in him; for having a beautiful to his
wife, he grew extremely suspicious of her faith and loialty. He having by her a
young son and heir then in the Cradle, looking earnestly upon him, he (...) a
deep sigh; of which she demanding the cause, he thus said, I would God wife
this child were as certainly mine, as it is assuredly thine, to confirm which
to mine own wishes and desires, I would willingly part with the greatest moity
of my means and fortunes. To whom she answered. Let this be neither grief to
your heart, nor trouble to your mind, for of this doubt I will instantly
resolve you: and taking the infant from the Cradle, and holding it in her arms,
she thus said, No man, Sir, I hope, makes question but this child is mine: to
which words he assenting, she thus proceeded, Then to clear all former doubts
and suspi^ions, Receive him freely from my hands as my gi^t, and now you may
presume he is only and absolutely yours. Whether she equivocated or no, I am
not certain, only this I am most sured of, That she has left a precedent
behind her to all succeeding wives, how their jealous husbands may be best
confirmed in their suspected issue. I fear I have been somewhat too long in the
Preamble, I will therefore now proceed to the matter. And first of Filial piety,
ascending from daughters to their Parents.

Of Pious Daughters.
OF Sons that have been remarkably grateful to their Parents for their birth
and breeding, the histories are (...), and the examples infinite: as of
Coriolanus to his (...) in Lelio, Dionysius Ha^icarn^ssru^, (...), Appianus,
etc. as likewise of (...), of M Cotta, Caius Flaminius, Cimon, remembered by
^ustine, lib. 2. Cleobis, and Bithon; Amphinomus, and Anapus, recorded by
Herodotus and Solinus; the son of Croesus, etc. Yet should I undertake to write
them all at large, they cannot exceed that piety of which I have read in women.
Suetonius and Cicero in an Oration pro Caelio, speaking of Claudia one of the
Vestall Virgins, thus report of her: She seeing her father in his triumphant
Chariot, riding through the streets of Rome, and by the Tribunes of the people
(who envied his glory) plucked and haled from his seat, she with a wondrous
dexterity, and a masculine audacity, freed him from the hands of their Tribunes
and their Lictors, and maugre all their opposition, lifted him up into his
chariot; nor sook him, till she saw him in all magnificent pomp received into
the Capitol: insomuch, that it was questioned amongst the Romans, which of them
merited the greater triumph, he for his virtue and valor in the Forum, or she
for her zeal and piety in the Temple of Vesta: nor can it yet be decided which
may claim a just prioritie, the Father for his victory, or the Daughter for her
goodness. Plin. lib. 7. cap. 36. and Solinus, speak of another Roman Lady, The
History of a Pious Daughter.
of a noble Family, who when her mother was condemned at the judgment seat by
the Praetor, and delivered up to one of the Triumviri to be committed to strait
prison, and there for her offense to be privately executed. But the keeper of
the Goal commiserating the Matron so sentenced (either because he pitied her
gravity, or suspected her innocence) did not cause her to be instantly
strangled, according to the rigor of her sentence. At the importunacy of the
daughter, he gave her leave to visit and comfort her mother, but narrowly
searched before her entrance into the prison, lust she should carry with her any
food or sustenance to her relifefe; rather desiring she should perish by
famine, and die that way, then himself to have any violent hand in her
execution. The daughter having daily access to the mother, who now had past
over more days then the keeper thought was possibly by nature, and wondering in
himself how she should draw her thread of life out to that length, without any
means to maintein it; he casting a more curious eye upon the young woman, and
watching her, might perceive how she first drew out one breast, and after
another, with her own milk relieving her mothers famine. At the novelty of so
strange and rare a spectacle, being amazed, he carried news to the Triumvir,
he to the Praetor the Praetor related it to the Consuls, they brought it before
the Senate; who to recompense what was good in the daughter, pardoned all that
was before thought ill in the mother: For what will not love devise? or whither
true zeal not penetrate? What more unheard or unexpected thing could be
apprehended, then for a mother to be fed from the breast: of her daughter? Who
would not imagine this to be against nature, but that we see by proof, true
natural piety transcends all bounds and limits? The like of this we may read
^f in Pliry, of another young married woman, who when her father Cimon was
afflicted with the same sentence, and subject to the like durance, prolonged
his life from her breasts, for which she deserves equally to be memorised. Our
parents in no danger or necessities, are to be by us abandoned, and that by
example of Aeneas, in whose person Virgil thus speaks, as to his father
Anchises, Aeneid 2.

Eia ag^ chare pater cervici imponere nostrae,
Ipse su^^bo numeris, nec me laboriste gravabit, etc*
Come my dear father, and get up, for see,
No burden to my shoulders you can be,
No weight at all; and hap what can betide,
One danger, or one safety we'll abide.
Sabell^^. lib. 3. cap. 6. remembers us of Rusticana, a noble Matron of Rome,
and the daughter of Synnarchus, who with his brother Boethius (the famous
Philosoher) being put to death by Theodoricirs, King of the Got^s. She* after
the Tirants miserable end, was the cause that all his Statues in Rome were
demolished and ruined, purposing utterly (if it were possible) to extirp his
memory, that was the imhumane murderer of her father; for which fact of hers
being called in question before King Totila who succeeded him, she was so far
from excuse or denial, that she approved the deed with all constancy; whose
not le magnanimity and resolution, proved more available to her safety, then
any timorous evasion could have done, for he not only dismissed her unpunished,
but highly applauded and commended. Fulgos. Sabellicus and Egn^tius writing of
Alboinu^ King of the Longobards, who at his first entrance into Italy, having
subdued and slain T^rismundus (whom some call Cunimundus) son to Cunimundus
King of the Gepidanes, and after taken his daughter Rosamunda to wife; the
History faith, he made a bole of her fathers scul, in which one night having
drunk somewhat lavishly, he caused it to be filled with wine, and sent to
Rosamunda, then in her chamber, with this message, Commend me to thy Queen, and
^ay, I command her to drink with her father. (...) though she knew him to be
slain by the (...) gobards, receiving his death by a common casualtie and
chance of (...) by this assuring her self that he ^ell by the ^and o^ her
husband; betwixt (...) and conjugall love (being for a time distracted) the
bond of her affecti^n toward her father, prevailed above those nuptial setters
in which she was tied to her Lord; insomuch, that to revenge the death of the
one, she resolved to take away the life of the other: to bring which about, she
devised this project, she had observed one Hemeg^ldus a noble man amongst the
Lambard, to be surprised with the love of one of her waiting Gentlewomen, with
whom she dealt so far, that when her maid had promised to give this Hemegildus
meeting in a private and dark chamber, she her self supplied the place of her
servant; after (...) congression she caused lights to be brought in, that he
^i^ht know with whom he had had carnal company, and what certain prejudice he
had the (...), incurred, protesting (...) that (...) he would join with her in
the dear (...), she would accuse him of rape and outrage. The Lamb^^d to
prevent his own disaster, undertook his sovereign ^eath, which was accordingly
betwixt them performed. The murder done, they sled together to Ravenna, she
preferring the revenge of a slaughtered father, before the life of a husband,
the title of a Queen, State, Sovereignty, o^ any other worldly dignity
whatsoever.

Something is not amiss to be spoken in this place concerning the love of
mothers to their children, The love of mothers to their children.
which as Plutarch in his (...) says, was excellently observed in (...) Prince
of the Athenians, who was wont to say, That he ^new no reason but that this
young son (whom his mother most dat^ngly affected) should have more power and
command th^n any one man in Greece whatsoever, and being demanded the reason*
he thus answered: Athens (says he) commands all Greece, I Themistocles have
predominance ever Athens, my wife over swaies me, and my son overrules his
mother Olympias the mother of Alexander, caused Iollas grave to be ^ipt up (who
was Butler to her son) and his bones to be scattered abroad, raging against him
in death, on whom in his life time she could not be revenged on for the death
of her son, to whom this Iollas was said to have minstred poison. Agrippina,
the mother of Domitius Nero, by all means and industry possible laboring to
confirm the Empire unto her son, enquired of the Chaldaeans and Astrologers,
Whether by their calculations they could find if he should live to be created
Caesar? who returned her this answer, That they found indeed by their Art that
he should be Empe^our, but withal, that he should be the death of his mother.
To whom she answered, Inter ficiat modo Imperet, i. I care not though he kill
me, so I may live to see him reign, Sab. lib. cap. 4.

The same Author tells us, Loving Mothers.
that in the second Punick war, the Romans being overthrown with infinite
slaughter, in the battles fought at Thrasymenus and Cannas, many that were
reported to be assuredly dead escaping with li^e, after their funerals had been
lamented, returning home unexpectedly to their mothers, such infinite joy
oppressed them at once, that as if sinking beneath too great a burden, betwixt
their kisses and embraces, they suddenly (...) the Roman being proscribed by
the Trium^irate, his wife would need^ have him take her dearly beloved son
along with him, to associate and comfort him in his travels, who when they were
gone a ship-boord intending for Sicilia, and crossed by an adverse tempest, could
neither proceed on in their voyage, not return to any safe landing; such was
their fa^e that they perished by ^amine; which the mother understanding, more
^or the g^iefe of her son (whom she her self proscribed) then for her husband
^xiled by the Triumvirate, The mothers of Carthage.
sl^w her self. The (...) Carthage in the third Punick war, when the (...) of
all the Noble young men of the City were selected to be sent as hostages into
Sicilia, with weeping and (...) followed them to the water ^ide, and kept them
hugged in their strict embraces, not suffering them to go aboard; but when they
were forcibly plucked from them, and sent unto the ships, they no sooner ^oi^^d
sai^e, but many of these woeful and lamenting mothers, oppressed with the
extremity of sorrow, cast themselves head long into the sea, and there were
drowned, Sabel lib. 3. cap. 4. The wife of Proclus.
The wife of Proclus Naus^ati^es, having a wild and misgoverned son, addicted
merely to voluptuousness and pleasure, and withal to Cocks, Horses, Dogs, and
such like pastimes; his mother did not only not (...) in this licentiousness,
but would be still present with him to feed his Cocks, diet his Horses, and
ch^rish his Dogs: for which being reproved by some of her friends, as an
incourager of his unstaid and irregular courses, to whom she answered, No such
matter, he will sooner see then into himself and correct his own vices, by
conversing with old folks, then keeping company with his equals. Niobes sorrow
for her children, Auctoliaos death at the false rumor of her son Ulysses his
Tragedy, Hecuba's revenge upon Polymnestor, for the murder of her young son
Polydore, and Tomir^s Queen of the Massagers against Cyrus, for the death of
her son Sargapises, are all rare presidents of maternall piety; nay, so
superabundant is the love of mothers to their children, that many times it
execeds the bounds of common reason, therefore Terence in Heuton, thus says:
Matres omnes filiis
In peccato adjutrices, and auxilio in patres
Solent esse --


^. All mothers are helpers in their childrens transgressions, and aid them to
commit injuries against their fathers: Therefore Seneca in his Tragedy of
Hippolitus breaks out into this ecstasy: -- Oh nimium potens
Quanto parents sanguinis v^do tenes
Natura? quam te colimus invi^^ quoque
-- Nature oh
Too powerful, in what bond of blood thou st^ll
Bind'st us that parents are: commanding so,
We must obey thee though against our will.


So great was the love of Parisatis the mother of Cyrus the less, to her son,
that he being slain, her revenge upon the murderers exceeded example: for she
caused one of them, whose name was Cha^etes, to be ten days togethe^
excruciated with sundry tortures, after commanded his eyes to be put out, and
then moulten lead to be p^n^ed down into the hollow or his ears; the second,
Metro^ates, for the same treason she commanded to be bo^nd ^ast betwixt two
boats, and to be sed with figs and honey, leaving him there to have his guts
gnawn out by the worms, which these sweet things bred in his en^rails; of which
lingering torment, he after many days perished; the third, Metasabates, she
caused to be slayed alive, and his body to be stretched upon three sharp pikes
or stakes, and such was his miserable end, a just reward for Traitors. Fulgos.
lib. 5. cap. 5. tells us, That Augustus Caesar having subdued Cappadocia, and
taken the King Adiatoriges prisoner, The wife of Adiatoriges.
and his wife, and two sons; after they had graced his triumphs in Rome* he
gave command, That the father with the eldest son, should be put to death: now
when the ministers designed for that execution, came to demand which of the two
brothers was the elder (for they were both of a s^ature) they exceedingly
contended, and either affirmed himself to be the eldest, with his own death to
rep^^e^e the others life, this pious strife continuing long, to the wonder and
amazement of all the beholders. At length (...), at the humble intercession of
his mother (who, it seems, loved him some deal above the other) gave way
(though most unwillingly) for the younger to perish in his stead Which after
being known and told to Augustus, he did not only lament the innocent young
Princes death, but to die elder (who was yet living with his mother) he gave
great comforts, and did them after many graces and favors; so great a
reverence and good opinion does this (...) love be get even amongst enemies.
Neither was this Queen to be taxed of sever^y or rigor to the youngest, since
it was a necessity that one must die; it was rather a Religion in her, hoping
to leave her firstborn to his true and lawful inheritance. Now lest I should
leave any thing unremembred that comes in my way, that might ^end to the grace
and honor o^ the Sex, there is not any virtue for which men have been famous,
in which some women or other have not been eminent; namely, for mutual love,
amity and friendship. Friendship in women.
Marul. lib. 3. cap. 2. tells us of a chaste Virgin called Bona, who lived a
retired (...) in a house of religious (...): She had a bedfellow, unto whom
above all others she was entired, who lying upon her deathbed, and no possible
help to be devised for her recovery, this Bonae being then in perfect health of
body (though sick in mind for the infirmity of her sister) full upon (...), and
devoutly besought the Almighty, that she might not so vively love, so their
chaste bodies might not be separated in death. As she earnestly prayed, so it
futurely happened, (...) died in one day, and were both buried in one S^pulchre,
^^ing ^ellowes in one House, (...) bed, and Gra^^, and now (no question) (...)
and (...) Kingdom. Thus (...). But now to return (...) have been kind to their
paren^^ (...) Sicilia, when the mountain Aetna began first to burn, Damon
snatched his mother from the (...) Aeneas in the fatal massacre of Troy, took
his father upon his back, his son Ascanius in his hand, his wife C^^usa
following him, and pas^ed through the sword and fi^e. We read like wise in
Hyginus, of Cleops and Bilias (whom Herodotus calls Cleobis and (...)) who when
their mother C^d^ppe, the Priest of Juno Are you, should be at the Temple at
the appointed hour of the Sacrifice, or failing to furfeit her life: but when
she came to yoke the Oxen that should draw her Ch^rior, they were found dead,
her two sons before named laid their necks under the yoke, and supplying the
place of those beasts, d^ew her in time convenient unto the place where the
sacred Ceremonies were (according to the custom) celebrated. The Oblations
ended and she willing to gratify the^^ filial duty, besought of the goddess.
That it ever with chaste and undefiled hands she had observed her sacrifice, or
i^ her sons had born themselves prou^ly and religiously toward her, that she
would grant unto them for their goodness, the greatest blessing that could
happen to any (...) or humane creatures This Prayer was heard, and the two
zealous sons, drawing back their mother in her chariot from the Temple, unto
the place where she then sojourned, being weary with their travel, laid them
down to sleep. The mother in the morning coming to give her sons visitation,
and withal, thanks for their extraordinary and unexpected pains and travel,
found them both dead upon their Pallers: by which she conceived, That there is
no greater blessing to be conferred upon man, then a fair death, when Love,
good Opinion, and Honor, attend upon the Hearse. These (I must confess) are
worthy eternal memory, and never dying admiration: But has nor the like piety
toward their parents been found in women? I answer, Yes. How did Pelopea, the
daughter of Th^estes, revenge the death of her father? Hypsile the daughter of
(...) ^ave her father life, when he was utterly in despair of hope or comfort.
Calciope would not lose her father, o^ leave him, though he had lost and left
his opinion. (...), the daughter of Harpalicus, restored her father in battle,
and after defeated the enemy, and put him to slight. Er^gon^, the daughter of
Icarus, hearing of the death of her father, strangled her self. Agave, the
daughter of Cadmu^ slew the King (...) in Illy^i, and pastest her father of his
before usurped Diad^m. Xantippe fed her father Ny^onus (or, as some will have
it, Cimonus) in prison with milk from her breasts. Tyro the daughter of
Salmoneus to relieve her father, slew her own children. Who will be further
resolved of these, let him search Hyginus. And so much shall suffice for
filial duty toward their P^^e^ts.

Of S^sters that have been kind to their Brothers.
THE Poets and Historiographers, to impresse into us the like natural piety,
have left diverse presidents to posterity. Innumerable are the examples of
fraternall love betwixt Brother and Brother. To illustrate the other the better
I will give you (...) of some few. Volater. lib. 14. cap. 2. d^ A^ropo,
relates, how in that war which Cai. Cornelius Cinna, Tribune, (being expelled
the City with Calus Marius, and others) commenced against the Romans, there
were two brothers, Examples of fraternall piety.
one of the Pompey's army, the other of (...), who meeting in the battle, in
single encounter, one slew the other: but when the victor came to rifle the
de^d body, and found it to be his own natural brother, after infinite sorrow
and lamentation, he cast himself into the fire where the sloughtered carcas^e
was burned M. Fabius the Consul, in the great conflict against the He^rutians
and Ve^entians, obtained a glo^ious victory: when the Senate and the people of
Rome had with great magnificence and cost, at their own charge, prepared for
him an illustrious triumph; he absolutely refused that honor, because Q.
Fabius his brother (fighting manfully for his Country) was slain in that
battle: What a fraternal piety lived in his breast may be easily conjectured,
who refused so remarkable on honor, to mourn the loss of a beloved brother?
Valor cap 5. lib. 5. We read in our English Chronicles of Archigallo, brother
to Gorbomannus, who being crowned King of Britain, and extorting from his
subjects all their goods to enrich his own Coffers, was after five years
deposed and deprived of his royal dignity, in whose place was elected
Elidurus, the third son of Morindus, and brother to Archigallo, a virtuous
Prince, who governed the people gently and Justly. Upon a time being hunting in
the Forest, he met with his brother Archigallo, whom he lovingly embraced, and
found such means, that he reconciled him both to the Lords and Commons of the
Realm; that done, he most willingly resigned unto him his Crown and Scepter,
after he himself had governed the Land five years. Archigallo was re-instated,
and continued in great love with his brother, reigning ten years, and was
buried at York; after whose death, Elidurus was again chosen King. What greater
enterchange of fraternall love could be found in brothers? To equal whom, I
will first begin with the sisters of Phaeton, called by some Heliades, by
others Phaetontides; who with such funeral lamentation bewailed the death of
their brother, that the gods in commiseration of their sorrow, turned them into
trees: whose transformations, Ovid with great elegancy expresses, lib. 1.
Metamorph as likewise Virgil in Cutice, their names were, Phaethusa, Lampitiae,
Phebe, etc. Antigone, the daughter of Oedipus, when her brother Eteocles was
slain in battle, she buried his body, ma^gre the contradiction of the Tyrant
Creon: of whom Ovid, lib. 3. Tristium.

-- Fratrem Thebana peremptum
Supposuit tumulo rege vetante soror.
The Theban sister to his Tomb did bring
Her slaught'red brothers Corse, despite the king.
Hyas being devouted of a Lion, the Hyades (his sisters) deplored his death
with such infinite sorrow, that they wept themselves to death; And for their
piety, were after by the gods translated into stars; of whom, Pontanus, Fratris
Hyae quas perpetuus dolor indidit as^ris.

Thus you see how the Poet did strive to magnify and eternize this Virtue in
Sisters. No less compassionate was ^lectra, the daughter of Agame^n^, on her
brother O^estes; and Iliona, the issue of Priam, when she heard of the death of
young Polydore Stobaeus, Sermon. ^2. out of the History of Nicolaus de morib.
gentum, says, That the Aethiopians above all others, have their sisters in
greatest reverence: insomuch, that their Kings leave their succession not to
their children, but to these sisters sons; but if none of their issue be le^e
alive, they choose out of the people the most beautiful, and warlike withal,
whom (...) create their Prince and Sovereign. Even amongst the (...), M.
A^relius Commodus, so dearly affected his sister, that being called by his
mother to divide their (...) patrimony betwixt them, he conferred it wholly
upon her, contenting himself with his grandfathers revenue. Pontanus de lib.
cap. 11.

I will end this discourse concerning sisters with one History out of
Sabellious, l. ^. cap. 7. the same confirmed by ^^^gosius, The wife of
Intaphernes.
lib. 5. cap. 5. Intaphernes was (say they) one of these confederate Princes,
who freed the Persian Empire from the usurp^tion of the Magician brothers, and
conferred it upon Darius: who now being established in the supreme dignity,
Intaphernes having some business with the King, made offer to enter his
chamber, but being rudely put back by one of his grooms or waite^^, he took it
in such scorn, that no less revenge would satisfy his rage, then to cut off
his ears and nose of which the King having present notice, his indignation
exceeded the others rage; for he gave commandment, That for his insolence and
outrage done in she Palace, and so near his presence, that not only
Intaphernes the D^linquent but all the male issue of his stock and race
whatsoever, should be laid hold upon and after, to the dread and terror or the
like offenders, by merciless death cast the terror of the Kings incensement.
The sentence of their apprehension was performed, and their execution hourly
expected: when the wife of Intaphernes cast her self grovelling before the
Court gate, with such pitiful ejaculations and clamours, that they came even to
the ears of Darius, and much penetrated him; being uttered with such passionate
and moving acce^ts, able to mollify the Flint, or soften Marble. Impressed
therefore with her pitious lamentations, the King sent unto her, That her
tears and clamours had so far prevailed with him, that from the condemned
society they had ransomed one, and one only, to continue the memory of their
Name and Family choose amongst them all, whose life she most favored, and whose
safety with the greatest affection desired, but further then this to grant her
his sentence was unalterable. None that heard this small (yet unexpected)
favor from the King, but presently imagined she would either redeem her
husband or at least one of her sons, two of them being all she had then groaning
under the burden of that heavy sentence. But after some small meditation
(beyond the expectation of all men) she demanded the life of her brother. The
King somewhat amazed at her choice, sent for her, and demanded the reason, Why
she had preferred the life of a brother before the safety of such a noble
husband, or such hopeful children? To whom she answered, Behold (O King) I am
yet but young and in my best of years, and I may live to have another husband,
and so consequently by him more children: But my father and mother are both
aged, and stricken in years; and should I lose a Brother, I should for evermore
be deprived of that sacred Name. At which words the King exceedingly moved, to
see with what a fraternall zeal they were spoken, he not only released her
brother, but added to his unexpected bounty, the life of her eldest son.

Of Matrimony, or Conjugall Love.
IT was inserted in Plato's Laws, That what man soever lived a Bachelor above
five and thirty years of age, was neither capable of Honor of Office, Alexand.
ab, Alex. lib 4. cap. 8. Licurgus, the Lawgiver amongst the Lacedaemonians, (as
the same Author testifies) to show the necessity of marriage, made a Decree,
That all such as affected singleness and solitude of life, should be held
ignominious. They were not admitted to public Plays, but in the winter were
compelled to pass through the Marketplace naked, and without garments. The Law
of the Spartans set a fine upon his head best, that married not at all; next,
on him that married not till he was old; and lastly, on him they set the
greatest mulct, that married an evil wife, or from a strange Tribe, Stobae
Sermon. 65. Fuigosius calls the Judgments Cacogamia, and Opsigamia, lib 2. cap.
1. So laudable and reverent was Marriage amongst the Lacedaemonians procreation
of Children, and fertility of issue, That whosoever was the father of three
children, should be free from Watch or Ward by day or night; and whosoever had
four, or upward, were rewarded with all Immunities and Liberty: This Law was
confirmed by Q. Metellus Numidicus, Censor; after, approved by Julius Caesar;
and lastly, established by Augustus. Memorable are the words of Metellus in a
public Oration to the people. If we could possibly be without wives, O Romans
(says he) we might all of us be free from molestation and trouble: but since
Nature excites us, and necessity compels us to this exigent, That we can
neither live with them without inconvenience, nor without them at all; more
expidient it is therefore that we aim at the general and lasting profit, then
at our own private and moment any pleasure. ^ruson. lib 7. cap. 22. The
Athenians, the Cretans, the Thu^^ans, all in their Statutes and Ordinances
encouraged Marriage, and punished the obstinary of such as took upon them the
(...) of (...) and sollitaude, either with amercement or disgrace. To that
purpose was the Law Julia instituted, that incited young men in their prime and
flourishing age to the marriage of wives, propagation of issue, and education
of children; and that such should be encouraged by rewards, and the opposers
thereof to be deterred with punishments. Tiberius Caesar deprived one of his
Quaestorship, because he divorced himself from his wife, having been but three
days married, alleging, That he in whom there was such lightness, could not
be profitable for any thing. Claudius Caesar caused the Law Papia to be
abrogated, giving men of threescore years and upwards, the free liberty to
marry, as at those years of ability to have issue. Theodoretus, lib. 1. cap. 7.
and Sozomenus, lib. 1. cap. 10. both write, that in the Nicene Council, when
certain of the Bishops would introduce into the Church a new Decree, before
that time not known, namely, That all Bishops, Prelates, Priests, Deacons, and
Spiritual or Religious men, should be made incapable of Marriage; as also all
such as in the time of their (...) (before they took the Ministry, or any
service of the Church upon them) should be separated from (...) wives, of whom
they were then possessed: One Paphnutius Confessor (who was likewise Bishop of a
City in the upper Thebats) stood up, and with great fervency opposed the motion
yet a man of approved chastity, and great austerity of (...): who though he
were mightily opposed, yet at length so far prevailed with the Synod of the
Fathers, that it was definitively concluded, That though the marriage of
Priests were ^^^dicted and singleness of life in joined them, yet all such as
had wives were dispensed withal till death made a separation betwixt them.
Pius, the second Pope of that name (being a (...) unquestioned prudence and
gravity weighty in his words, and discreet in all his actions) was often heard
to say, That he held it more convenient and consonant both to reason and
Religion, that their wives should be restored to Priests, then taken from them.
For the wise Bishop well understood that the restraining them from lawful
marriage, was the occasions of their falling into many great and grievous sins,
which by the former legal and regular course might be prevented: and if the
liberty of marriage were again admitted, peradventure many of those sins might
in time decrease and be forgotten, into which by that restraint they were
subject hourly to fall. Fulgos lib. 2. cap. 2. This short discourse shall serve
for the necessity of Marriage, which is ever the most pleasing and contented,
when it is made betwixt equals. Therefore Ovid. lib. Epist. Heroid. thus
writes: Quam male inequales veniunt ad aratra juvenci
Tam premitur magno conjuge Nupta minor,
Non honor est sed onus, etc.


Which though not verbum verbo, yet the intent of the Author I give you thus in
English: Unsightly do the unmatcht Herfers draw,
Nor can the Plough go even then: such the Law
Of Wedlock is; to prevent the nuptial stri^e,
There must be parity 'tw^xt man and wife.
Then needs the one the other must oppress.
The husband great in power, the wise much less:
It is no honor, but a burden rather,
To join, and not be equ^^: this we gather
From the uneven yeak, for so you cannot strike
The surrow straight; if match, match with thy like.


From the convenience or rather necessity of marriage, Times forbidden in
Marriage.
I will speak briefly of the times granted and allowed for the ceremony, or
limited and forbidden amongst other Notions; as also of some proems or
preambles, before the consummation. It was religiously observed among the
Romans, that no marriage was sustered to be celebrated in the month of May, in
which the Lemuria were kept solemn, which were in remembrance of Remus, and to
the pa^ification of his ghost or shadow; nor whilst the Feralia nor the
Parentalia were solemnized. The first was to appease the gods for dead souls,
(as our All Souls day) the others were feasts made at burials of their fathers,
brothers, or ancestors; neither any day that was held impure, nor when the
Ancylia were observed, nor upon any festival or holy day, nor in the month of
June til after the Ides, neither did the Romans in their espousals neglect
Auguries and Presages, if either there were earth quake or a troubled
firmament, they held it fatal; and therefore deferred it to a more quiet
Earth, or less turbulent Heaven. A Crow they hold to predict a fortunate Omen,
and an inviolate league of future ^aith and loialty betwixt the Bride and
Bridegroom for such is the society of Crows, for if one die, the other which
is widowed never chooses other mate: the like ^s remembered of the beast called
a Loz or Lynx, above all other the quickest sighted, as also of the Turtle.
Alex. ab Alex. lib. 2. cap. 5 No betrothed Virgin could marry amongst them,
upon any of their holydaies, or such as they called festival; but a widow had
that liberty, so it were done in private, and without any solemn ceremony: the
reason pretended was, Because to a widow there could be no force offered as to
a Virgin, and therefore it was no violent but a mere holy day labor: Upon this
Verrius Flacchus took occasion apud Verronem in these words, Fossas veteres
festis diebus licet tergere
Novas facere non licet.
Old ditches on the feast-daies they might scour,
But to dig new the law admits no power.


The Persians were only permitted to contract matrimony in, Ceremonies before
Marriage.
or before the Summer equinoctial, but not after: The Dapsolites once a year
make a solemn convention of all the men and women that are disposed to
marriage, in one day, in which after their great feast, the women retire
themselves, and lay them down upon their several pallets, the lights being all
put out, the men according to their number are admitted in the dark, where
without any premeditate choice, but mere lot and chance, every man chooses her
whom he first lights on and divirginates her; and be she fair or foul, ever
holds her as his wife, Stebae Sermon. 42. Amongst the Carmanians no man is
suffered to marry, before he has presented the head of an enemy to the King.
About the Lake Meotes, there is a people called Laxamatae, amongst whom no
Virgin contracts matrimony before she has subdued an enemy. There is a law
amongst the Armenians, that Virgins are first prostituted in an old Temple,
dedicated to the goddess Anetes, whose picture was of solid gold; which
Antonius after sacrilegiously (as they held it) took away: according to the
gain of their compression, it was lawful for any man to choose a wife where he
pleased. Amongst the Ciprians, the Virgins before marriage daily repair to the
Seashore, and there company with strangers, till they have got such a
competent sum as may make up their marriage dower. The Phoenicians do the like
in the City of Syca, but their prostitution is in the Temple of Venus; but the
surplusage that arises above the dower, returns toward the repairing of the
Church. The Carthaginians observe the like custom. The Lydian Virgins before
they were suffered to lie with their husbands, made themselves for a certain
time common to any man, til tired with saciety they came gentle and quiet to
their beds, and from that time forward vowed chastity, but if any one was found
ever after to transgress the bounds of temperance, she was punished with all
rigor and cruelty, Aelian lib. 4. de Var. Hist. Lycurgus having prescribed a
certain age, before which time it was not lawful for young men and maids to
have carnal company, being demanded the reason, answered, Because the issue
that proceeds from those of ripe years and grown strength, is likewise able and
perfect; but the hasty and untimely generation is still subject to weakness
and infirmity. Plutarch in Lacon.

Of Contracts before marriage, and of Dowries, amongst whom they were allowed,
and by whom forbidden.
IT was a custom amongst the Grecians and Lacedaemonians, Of Contracts.
when a young man and a Virgin were contracted, to eat of bread together that
had been divided by a sword. Romulus the first erector of the City Rome, caused
the covenant of marriage to be performed betwixt them by a reciprocal receiving
of bread and water. There was after his time no stipulation or nuptial league
folly confirmed, without fire and water placed at the threshold of the door
where thy should enter, both these they were both enjoined to touch; with the
water the new Bride was after sprinkled, as if by that ceremony they were
coupled and joined in an expiable conven^nt, and inseparable bond of affection;
these two being the chief elements of nature, on which the life of m^n in our
common food, most essentially exist. Amongst the Indians, unless both the
husband and wife anointed their bodies all over with a certain gum or oil
distilling from certain trees growing by the River Phasis, the matrimony was
not to be allowed. The Persians and the Assyrians, only joined their right
hands in contract: so likewise the ancient Germans, accounting that the only
fi^m pledge of their love and loialty. Amongst the Galathians in their (...)
the bridegroom drunk to the bride a cup of Greekish wine; in other places of
milk, which she pledged him; by this ceremony intending that their nuptials
were not only firmly contracted, by that mutual love, equal society,
conjugall loialty, marriage concord, but like food and diet should always be
common betwixt them. Alex. ab Alex. lib 2 cap. ^. Of Nuptial Dowries.
Concerning nuptial Dowries, by some Nations approved, by others interdicted.
Lycurgus and Solon because they would not have the Virgins oppressed by the
coverousnesse of men, forbad by their Laws that any man should demand a dower
with his wife (a necessary and profitable decree;) by which he was condemned,
that being a long suitor to the daughter of Pysander, and promising her
marriage in her fathers life time, rependiated the Contract after his death,
because he dying poor, her dower did not answer his expectation, Aelian. lib.
6. de Var. Histor. Amongst the Hetrurians it was held base and ignoble, and
absolutely forbidden by their inscribed statutes, for a man to send tokens or
gifts to her whom he affected; accounting them no better then bribes or
mercenary hire, not fit to be thought on in such a sacred commixion, where
nothing should be meditated save sincere love and conjugall piety. The
Egyptians were so opposite to demanding of portions with their wives, that
they called all such as received them, no better then slaves to them and their
dowries. Of Nuptial Gifts or Presents.
Now touching bridal gifts and presents. It was an ancient custom among the
Greeks, that the father, the day after the solemnization of the marriage, sent
to the Bride some spousall offerings, which they called Epanlia dora, they were
ushered by a beautiful young lad attired in a long white vesture reaching to
his heel, bearing in his hand a bright burning taper: in order followed after
him all such young men and maids youthfully attired, that brought the presents;
one presented Gold, another Gems, a third a Basin and Ewre, with other Plate
dishes, a fourth Boxes of Alabaster full of sweet oils and unguents, a fifth rich
Sandals or Slippers, with other necessaries belonging as well to the whole
house, as to their private bedchamber, Alex. ab Al x. lib. ^. cap. 5. Solon to
this marriage offering allowed only three sorts of garments for the Bride to
bring with her, besides such small gifts as were tendered by the kindred,
friends, and household servants. A damosel of Lacaena being poor, and demanded,
What Dower she had to bring to her husband, and to marry her with answered,
That which was left me as an inheritance from mine ancestors, namely, Virtue,
and Modestly; Ingeniously inferring, that there is no more commendable Dower to
be expected in marriage, then chastity and incorrupt manners. The daughters of
C. Fabritius, Cn. Scipio, and Manius Curious, because their fathers left them
not portions sufficient to bestow them according to their birth and quality,
had their dowers allotted them from the common treasury. There was a Law among
the Romans, That no virgins Dower should exceed the sum of ten thousand pieces
of silver: But after, that limitation was taken away, and brought to forty
thousand and upward. Insomuch that Metulia (because the Dower of which she
possessed her husband, amounted to five hundred thousand pieces) had a surname
bestowed upon her, being ever after called Dotata. In ancient times the
husbands wooed their Brides with a Ring of Iron, without any Stone or Gem, but
merely circular and round; by that denoting the parsimony of diet, and
frugality in living. Homer (the Prince of Poets) having no wealth with which to
bestow his daughter upon a thrifty Citizen, gave her only an Epithalamium, with
certain Cyprian Elegies; for so Pindarus and Aelianus, lib. 9. affirm. The
Carthaginians gave no Portions with their Virgins, but were only at the charge
of the Nuptial Feasts, which grew to be immoderate and wasteful. Amongst the
Indians none can claim a greater Dower with his wife, then the price of a yoke
of Oxen; neither can he marry out of his own Tribe. The Assyrians brought their
noblest Virgins into the market place, and their prices there publicly
proclaimed by the Crier, whosoever wanted a wife, and would reach to the sum
propounded, might there be furnished; and he that had had not ready money, if he
could put in good security, it was held sufficient. The like custom was
amongst the Babylonians; in which they observed this order; They first set out
to sale the most ingenuous and beautiful, and those at an high rate; and when
they were put off, they brought forth the worser featured, even unto the degree
of deformity, and then the Crier proclaims, That who will marry any of them, he
shall have so much, or so much, to recompense her foulness or lamenesse. And
this money which sels them, is collected from the overplus of the price of the
other: so that the beauty of the fair ones, helps to bestow and dispose of the
foul. The Massilienses would not suffer any man to receive with his wife more
then an hundred pieces of Gold. Amongst the Cretans, half the brothers estate
was conferred upon the sister, to make her a Dowry. The ancient Germants when
they had made choice of such with whom they meant to marry, at their proper
charge provided them of Dowries. Which custom even to these letter times has
been continued amongst the Celriberians, who dwelt in a part of the Pyrenes, a
Province which his now called Biskay, Fulg^s. lib 2. cap. 1. And with the Dower
which he sent, he was tied to present her likewise with a Horse bridled, a
Sword, a Target, and an Armor, with a yoke of Oxen. And these were held to be
the most assured pledges of Conjugall love, without which no nuptials were
legally solemnized. Alexand. ab. Alex lib. 2. cap. 5. Idem lib. 4 cap 8.

Of Nuptial Ornaments, Pomp, Feasts, Epithalamions, etc.
AMongst the Greeks, Nuptial Ornaments.
the Bride was crowned with (...)-Mints, or Cresses: her head was kembed with a
piece of a Lance or Spear of a Fencer, with which some man had been slain; it
is was called Caelibaris, which imported, that the new-married Bride should be
as can joinedly commixt with her husband in mutual affection, as that spear
was inward in the transp^erced body, when it was drawn from the w^^nd. A
strange Aenigma it appears to me; howsoever it is so recorded. Her hair was
parted the one way and the other, leaving a seem in the midst, that her
forehead and face might be the plainer discovered. Some interpret it (...)
Emblem, that she might be the breeder of a warlike and valorous issue; or else,
that by that ceremony she should ever acknowledge her self obsequious to the
will and pleasure of her husband, Alexand. ab Alex. lib. 2. cap. 5. In other
places of Greece the Brides heads were covered with a Veil, to signify her
bashfulnesse and modest shame: It was of Clay-colour: Six, by which the color
the Matrons of the most temperte like and modest carriage, denoted unto the
world (...) and virtue. Amongst the Athens as, the Bridegroom (...) his bride
concealed and covere (...) in the place where ^he was after to be devirgined
the door or the house were adorned with white wool, and crowned and beautified
with Laurel, which were first touched by the Bride, who (...) the posts and
daubed the threshold with Swines great, or the fat of Wolves, to prevent all
Pest, or pernicious diseases, from ever having entrance into that house. Some
used to sprinkle their heads with a rough kind of herb called Carix, much like
unto Broom, with the fruits of Palm Trees, with Pulse or Pease, and with a kind
of powder which belongs to painting: this office was still performed by new
servants, at their first entrance into the houses of their Masters. The Law of
Lycurgus amongst the Spartans was, That the Bride should cut her hair, and
putting her self into man's habit, be brought into her chamber by the
Bride-maids, who had before prepared it; and being left by them, the Bridegroom
then entered, and first unloosing her Virgin Girdle, he had free liberty of
congression. In Boeotia their Virgins were crowned with a wreath made of the
herb called Sperage. In the Isle Cous the husbands were compelled to enter the
Bride-chamber, attired like women. It was an use amongst the Locrenses, for the
Matrons to pick and gather selected flowers to make garlands for the Brides;
but such as were bought for money, were held vile and contemptuous. The ancient
Latins, as well the Bride as Bridegroom, wore Ribbands and Laces party-colored,
White and Purple: so likewise they are apparelled in checkred garments, of the
same colors; or else their necks are put into one yoke (a ceremony they have)
of which Juno, the goddess of Marriage, is called Jugalis; intimating, that
with concordant minds and equal sufferance, they should bear all distresses
and disasters. All marriages amongst the Lusitanians were celebrated in
Rose-coloured garments, or else not permitted. The Chelidonian women that had
prostituted themselves to strangers, went with half of their faces open, the
other half covered, else it was not lawful for them to be seen abroad. They
wore girdles of Sheeps wool woven, about their Wastes, which was fastened about
them with an Herculean Knot, which was not lawful for any to unloose, but
either in the Bride-bed, or in the celebration of the Sacreds; in which they
observe a kind of Omen, that they should prove as fruitful in the propagation
of issue, as Hercules was in the getting of children. The German Virgins, when
they prepared to give meeting to their betrothed, and so to proceed to the
Conjugall ceremony, put on a straight or plain garment, such a one as they in
some places call a Huke, and over that a Cloak without spot or stain, bearing a
garland woven of Vervaine, an herb dedicated to Venus, with other selected
flowers intermixed. And so much for their Hab^t and Nuptial Ornaments used
amongst foreign Nations: I will now give you the description of a Bride, in her
way to the Bride-chamber.

Descriptio egredientis Sponsae.
At length comes forth the Bride (in all parts rare)
Full ripe for man (of Venus the just care:) The Bride coming out of her
chamber.

A Virgins face, a Virgins chaste attire
She wears. Now modest blushes kindle fire
Within her bashful cheek, which by degrees
Grows still more hot, and warms all that she sees.
The youthful fry, dispersed here and there,
On tip-toe move, to see this star appear,
And rise with such refulgence: on each hand
The aged Fathers and the Matrons stand,
And make a reverend Lane for her to pass:
She makes them think upon the time that was,
Their prime, their youth, their strength (now gone and wasted)
And Nuptial sweets, which they before have tasted.
On still she goes, and by the arms her lead
Two Ganymedes: where she vouchsafes to tread,
The earth would have her feet still to insist,
As loath to part with what so late it kissed.
Still further she proceeds upon the way,
With her loose locks the winds delight to play,
And Boreas (as of once again turned lover)
Blows off her Veil the better to discover
So rare a Beauty; and amazed, dare swear
A new Orythea does in her appear:
He wantons with her garments, to behold
Her pictured Vesture clouded late in gold;
Did not her modest hands her coats keep down,
He Would blow her bare, then seize her as his own.
Thus habited was Argive Hellen seen,
When Menelaus made her Sparta's Queen.
The Goldesses celestial, when they trace
The milky path to Joves high Palace, grace
Their rich attire no better, scarce so well:
They in some one thing 'bove the rest excel,
But she in youth, strength, state majesticall,
In untoucht purity, pulchritude, all
That beautifies the Sex. Thus is the Bride
Brought to the place, where she must now reside.
Egrediens Sponsus.
See from another part the gates set wide, The Bridegrooms first appearing.

From whence the Bridegroom issues toward the Bride,
A youth of the first hair, whose tender skin
Yet never razor felt, his budding chin
(Save Down) can nothing show: upon him flows
A curious mantle, which he careless throws
About him with neglect, as scorning pride,
The ground thereof in Tyririan (...),
And mixed with golden (...); for understand,
'Twas woven with his careful mothers hand;
About the edge double meander run:
'Twas long in work, but against this day done:
His countenance lofty, and his shoulders spread,
As sometimes we have seek go^s figured:
In whose bright eye the ^words of youth does shine,
And as the day star from the Oceans (...)
Where he has newly w^sh himself, appears,
And as he moves, the place about him clears;
So he, his sta^l eyes arm at the place
To which he hasts, his de^r love to embrace:
Love troubles him, whilst she attends him still,
Till ent^ng, he finds time to gaze his fill,
And feasts his (...) upon his sovereign bless,
That done, they first take hands, embrace, then kiss.
Oblatio munerum, or the Offering.
The young men with their Presents next proceed, The Nuptial offering.

With an affected ga^e, they neither speed,
Nor does their pace seem tard, but on a row
In order march, to make the goodli^ show.
(Their parents set about them) now behold,
The first a rich roob offers stained with gold,
Figured with beasts and birds and creeping things.
Talents of gold and ivory the next brings,
One an embroidered Chair, and then another
A Cabinet which for the time does smother
Jewels and Gems. The Tables seem to bend
And swell with golden heaps the offerers send,
Of Coin and Plate, the next before them throws
Chaplets, set round with stones to deck their brows.
To her a handmaids given, at either breast
A sucking babe; the moral is expressed,
In fertile marriage, as he would have sed,
"Lo here the fair fruits of a Nuptial bed.
Four young men, and as many Virgins stand
Obsequious all to hers and his command.
Their hairs alike (as it is the custom) shorn,
And all their necks rich chains of gold adorn.
The Epithalamium, or Nuptial song.
The mothers then with more then common care
Make business, and bestir them; who prepare
To lead them to their rest, whom as they bring
Near to the chamber door, the Quirers thus sing:
"O you most Fair, The Nuptial Song.
most Chaste, and meriting Bride,
"Of a like Husband; now to sports untri'd
"Apply your selves: and may your Nuptial sheets
"Flow and abound with all delicious sweets:
"O may Lucina when her childing grows
"Be present, and release her painful throws:
"Prove fruitful as the Vine, let Bacchus fill
"Her cup to the brim, with juices that distill
"From his choice grapes: the husband in all places
"Scatter ripe Nuts, A ceremony for them to cas^ Nuts about, used amongst the
Romans.
with Ribbands and with Laces;
"The Altars hang and deck, since he has got
"To lodge with him, a Virgin without spot;
"A Flower, a Virtue, Glory of mankind,
"And of her Sex the pride, O may you find
"Long days of joy, nights shortened in your rest,
"And as your parents are in you, live blessed
"In your fair Issue, you are happy then,
"Hark, hark, to this, the Fates cry all, Amen.
Ingressus in cubiculum, i. Their entrance into their bedchamber.
Being entered, Their going (...)
and the bed with all things fit,
Upon 'the side thereof a while they (...),
When (left alone) they talk and toy and smile,
She whilst she can, the time seeks to beguile,
Till suddenly her cheeks are all bewept,
To lose so soon what she so long has kept,
And often she casts her eye upon the place
Where she is to wrestle, and she hides her face,
But think^ng (...), nor dares to enter in,
Doubting what is lawful, still to be a sia:
He with such gentle force compels the less,
As would not break her, were she made of glass,
So loath he is to hurt ^er, yet he throws
Her softly down and to her side then grows,
Venus begins to teach them a new trade,
The marriage Queen here plays the chambermaid;
Juno her self, who is now effi^^ous grown,
And there attends to teach them wars unknown,
The whilst he seeks for (...),
Feels her white neck and ivory breasts that rise
Like two white sn^wie Hills, and st^ll does praise
All ^^at he feels or touches, then thus (...)
O (...) Virgin, now my Bride,
And are you grown at length thus near my side?
Of all my hopes the Storehouse and the treasure,
My ^ong expected now my latest pleasure:
My sweet and dearest wife, this could not be,
Nor happen thus but by the gods decree,
And (...) you now the power of Love withstand?
(...), and stays his forward hand,
(...) to think on that which was t'ensue.
Or prove the thing which yet she never knew.
'Twixt Hope and Fear, she thus replies, O fair
And lovely Youth, list to a Virgins prayer,
By (...) I intreatby those which got thee, such
(...) (lo) I only big thus much,
Pity my tears, put me to no affright,
(...) reprieve but for this night.
With that she seems intranc'd, and prostrate lies,
Has not one word to u^ter more, nor eyes
To see her self unvirgi^'d, winks, lies still,
And since he needs must, lets him act his will:
Betwixt them two they quench their amorous fires,
She, what she fears, he has what he desires.
I dare proceed no further with the Author, whose conceit I have borrowed, but
his words not altogether imitated; those that have read him, I make no
question, will say I have broke off and shook hands with him in good time, and
as far as I have gone hand in hand with him, rather added to his invention,
then any way derogated from his style, or detracted from his conceit; therefore
I now pause and proceed to the Nuptial Pomp, used amongst foreign Nations,
according to my promise.

Pausonias has le^t related. Nuptial Pomp.
That it was the custom amongst the Grecians, for the Bride to be placed
betwixt her betrothed husband, and one of her next kind^ed, and so in a Chariot
(which was called by them Parochus) to be drawn (...) the streets*. the
Axel-tree thereof at her coming (...) was taken off, and burned before the
gates of her house to signify, that she must ever after be an huswife and keep
within, as a faithful and industrious overseer of their domestic affairs and
business. It was the fashion in other (...) of Greece, that those of lower
degree (I mean the Brides) when they were conducted home to their husbands, a
young boy went before them hung round with Oaken leaves and Acorns, bearing on
his arm a wicke^ basketful of bread; who all the way cried aloud, Effugi malum,
and juvent bonum, i. I have shunned the bad, and found one made choice of the
good. As the enters the doors, there the Bridegroom stands ready to receive
her, the child em demand wall-nuts, which are cast unto them in abundance.
Amongst the Rhodians, the Bride is called from her fathers house by the common
C^yer, and by him conducted to the bed of her betrothed. The Romans observed
another custom: Their Brides were not to touch the ground or pavement with
their feet, but were snatched up in their arms, and born upon their shoulders,
and as if she were rapt and forcibly against her will burried to her
bedchamber: so Plutarch affirms, others add, that their hair was braided and
combed with a piece of a soldiers spear intimating that they were now
valiantly and resolutely to enter a new war and skirmish. Amongst the
Lusitanians, she was not permitted either to talk her self, or be led to her
nuptial chamber, but the young men came, and with pretended rudeness and
force snatched her from the arms of her mother, as if according to the Roman
custom she were ravished thence; before them went a piper, and one that sung
an Hymenaean song, all her alliance and kindred attended her, of whom one bore
a distaffe with Tow, another a Spindle, next her a young man and a maid, that
had their parents living, one lighting them with a taper, whose staff was made
of a Pine Tree; and with these Ceremonies she was conducted to her Bride-bed.

Sacred Auguries and Nuptial Expiations, etc.
THE Auspices or Auguries, were Southsayers, and such as used to handfast or
contract marriages, and these were still consulted with, as well in undertaking
wars, as propounding Nuptials, as also in most of their public enterprises or
private imploiments: these divined either from the voices, or by the flying of
birds. The women supped with their husbands the first night in their beds as
they lay together, which seemed to be an invitation of the gods, because
Jupiters banquets are (as some report) after the same manner celebrated, for he
(...) feasted in his bed, and Juno and Minerva sitting in chairs or upon
benches, Valor. lib. 2. cap. 1. The Athenians at their Bridals had the room
fumed with the skin of a black dog, burned in the fire, his privy parts were
buried under the threshold of the door; at the outward gate was hid in the
earth, the snout of a Wolf, and these they held to expel all Eff^cinations
and Witch-crafts from the house: other use a fish called Stella Marina, Alex.
ab Alex. lib. 1. cap. 24.
or the Sea star, which sprinkled with the blood of a Wolf, preserved the
marriage couple from all dangers or disasters. Cynxia and Gamelia Juno were
devoutly celebrated in Hymenaean contracts. In all their sacrifices they took
from the entrails the Gal of the beast, and buried it in an obscure and remote
place not far from the Altar, thereby signifying, that all marriage ought to be
without gall or bitterness. Amongst the Boeotians and Loerenses no contract
was held firm unless they had before offered at the Altar of the Virgin
Euclia. In Rome there was a custom of old, that all maids before marriage
should kneel some certain hours in the Temple of the god Futinus (whom we may
term the god predominant in the act of Copulacion) and of him entreat happy
success in their future congression. The Etrurians in their Hymenaean bargains
from the noblest to the less qualified, slew hogs in their sacrifices, by that
calling the gods to witness, That their league and covenant was thenceforth,
inviolable, not to be altered but by lawful Divorce, Death, Captivity or
Slavery and loss of freedom. Many other are reckoned up by Alex. ab Alex. too
tedious here to insert: a word or two of their Hymns and Nuptial Invocations

The ancient Greeks used a kind of Verse, Hymns and Invocations.
which they called Amboeum carmen, the same which (they say) was sung by the
gods at the Brydals of Peleus, the father of Achilles and Thetis. Aristophanes
in Avibus (...), That they were wont to cry aloud, Humin Ho Humenai Ho Humin.
In other places, at marriages, the Matrons held the Tapers and Torches, at
which time were sung Fesc^vini, which were broad and bawdy Verses: and they
being ended, that which they call the solemn and sacred Hymn in the Athenian
Espousals, was sung: Bonos ama, timidos repelle, etc.
Love these that good are, and the f^a^full shun;
Observing those, thou (...) to be done.


Plato in Gorgia affirms, That at Nuptial Feasts was used to be sung this short
Hymn following: Formosum esse divitem and been valere,
Summum existimari bonum.
To attain the sovereign bless, let us implore
Health, wealth, and Beauty, then we need no more.


The Romans (as Live. lib. 1. Decad. and Plin cap. 2. de viris illustribus,
affirm) in all their celebrations called aloud upon the name of Thalassius,
which they held as an Omen to their future success and prosperity. Their
Brides, when they entered into the houses of their husbands, whilst their feet
were yet upon the threshold, invoked the name of Ca^a Cecilia, by another name
called Tanaquilla, continuing and not surceasing to iterate that name from the
door, till she came into the Bride chamber. Tanaquilla was the wife of
Tarquinius Priscus, King of the Romans, for temperance, modesty, virtue, and
all the accomplishments that best grace a woman, most eminent; thus intimating,
that by remembering her name, they might imitate her life. All other ornaments
laid apart, there was only borne before them a Distaffe and a Spindle: and thus
the mothers of Martia, of Portia, of Lucretia, were first ushered to their
Nuptial Chambers.

Touching their diet, Nuptial Diet.
Solon published a Law, That no Virgin might be permitted to enter the
Bride-bed, if at supper her husband and she had not before tasted of a
Quince-Pear, which they call Malum Cydonium. The Naucratians in all such Feasts
forbid both eggs, sweet meats, or any confection in which there was Honey:
Amongst them no service was admitted saving Skallions, or such roots as were
divided into cloves, Pineapple Nuts, the juice of the herb, called Rochet, and
Pepper, and these were in the place of a Banquet. Amongst the Persians, the
husband was not permitted to come to visit his Bride, unless he had first
eaten an Apple, or else tasted a sweet Rush called Squinanthum, or Camels meat;
neither might he eat of any thing else for that day. Amongst the Babylonians
they bedded not, without red Storax first tasted. The Carthaginians in their
Hymenaean Festivals sliced the fish called a Tunny, without the eating of which
there was no perfect and absolute celebration. Alex. ab Alex. From their Feasts
I come to ceremonies observed concerning the copulation in or before marriage;
and of that briefly.

Amongst that Trogloditae, Nuptial Copulation.
their betrothed Virgins were first brought forth by their nearest kinsmen and
allies, and by them promiscuously prostituted. After which time, they betake
themselves to all civility and continence, which whosoever was known to violate
or digress from, was most severely chastized, without all commiseration or
pity. The same custom is observed amongst the Gymnesians, the Lydians, and the
inhabitants of the Baleares. The Andrimachides (a people of Africa) before they
can bestow their daughters, offer their Virginities to their Princes first, and
such as he best affects he vitiates at his pleasure, and then they are
permitted to marry. The like custom was held in Scotland: but since the
Christian Religion was there professed, that Law has been there abrogated;
only the maids redeem their Virginities with a certain piece of money, and by
that Tenure their lands are held to this day. The Volcinienses are tied to a
more base servitude, because they are compelled before marriage to prostitute
their free daughters to their slaves and servants. Alex. ab Alex. lib. 1. cap.
24. Herodotus writes, That the Adyrmachidae present their daughters maidenheads
first to their King, ere their betrothed husbands can be admitted any congress
with them. The Babylonians never have company with their wives, but they before
sitting about a fire, make a fume of a strong scent, which they snuff up at
their nostrils; by the Authors description, it should not much differ from that
which we have now in such frequent use, and call Tobacco: In the morning they
both wash, before they touch any Vessel whatsoever. The Spartans (by the
Decrees of Lycurgus) in all their Bridals, the man still came into the woman's
chamber, the Light being first extinct; where (with bashful fear, and a
religious kind of modesty) they performed the Offices of Nature, Love, and
Custom.

The Conjugall Love of Women toward their Husbands.
HAving done with the superstitious ceremonies of the Gentiles concerning
marriage, as far as Polyhimnia or Memory will help me; I will now proceed with
some few remarkable examples of Conjugall Love, being an argument that cannot
be too often remembered, nor overmuch handled, Indian women.
I begin with the women of India. These, according to the custom of the
Country, being many married unto one man, he is no sooner dead, but they all
contend together which of them was of him in his life time best beloved; and if
it cannot be determined amongst themselves, they bring the controversy before
the Judges, and plead as earnestly to accompany him in death, as for some great
fortune and honor: she amongst the rest that prevails, exults with joy, as
having attained a great victory, when being led by her best friends and nearest
of kindred (partakes with her in the same triumph) unto the place where her
husbands body is to be consumed; with a pleasant and merry countenance she
casts her self into the fire, and is there burned with him together; the rest
that survive, and were deprived of this last honor, consume the remainder of
their lives in great discontent, sorrow, and anguish. Of this custom Cicero
remembers us. Tus^. Quaest. lib. 5. Valor. Maxim. lib. 2. cap. 1. Alex. a^
Alex. Alianus, Egnatius, and others. This funeral ceremony, as Fulgos. lib. 2.
cap. 6. is continued amongst them unto this day: alluding to this purpose, is
that of Propert lib. 3.

Foelix co^s lex funeris una maritis, etc. Which I thus paraphrase in English.

You Eastern Husbands, in your funeral Laws
Most happy, and their first inventors wise,
In which you are more famous then, because
On you the blushing morning first does rise,
When Death has with his last mortiferous wound
The Husband struck, his last Rites to prepare,
A pious troop of wives engirt him round,
Drying their moist cheeks with their scatt'red hair,
Who strive which shall associate him in fate,
And bed with him, together in the flame,
To live beyond him is a thing they hate,
And he once dead, life is to them a shame:
She that can die with him, has her desire,
And leaps with joy into the funeral fire.
The like is observed by a people of Thrace, Thracians.
that inhabit a little above the Crestonaeans. They likewise are delighted with
plurality of wives; who after the decease of their husbands enter into the like
contention, as the women of India; and she that is Victoresse (as if glorying
in some great conquest, adorned in her best and richest ornaments) is with
great ceremonious pomp (amongst all her kindred and allies) conducted unto the
place where his body is to be interred: where being slain by her next of Kin
(as the best office he can do her) she is buried in the same grave with her
husband. Geates.
Herod, lib. 5. The wives amongst the Geates repair to their husbands
sepulcher, and holding al life tedious and burdensome without them, other
their bodies willingly either the sword, or to the fire. The Custom of the
Catheoreans was, Catheoreans
That when the Bride choose her husband she made a covenant with him, at his
death to be burnt in the same Pile, Alex. ab Alex. lib. 1. cap. 25. The women
amongst the Herulians Herulians.
(a people that inhabit beyond the river of Danubius) repair to the graves of
their husbands, and just over against them, strangle themselves. Which
marriage-love appears the more strange because the men are of that barbarous
and inhumane incontinence, that they hold it no shame to leave the society of
their women, and have congression with brute beasts. Bonifacius in his Epistle
unto King Ethelbalaus, as Ga^^elm. Masmsbur. lib. 1. cap. 64. de Anglia, Winedi.
relates it, says, That the Winedi are the worst and the most nasty people
among the Germans; yet their wives are of that incomparable ze^i and piety
toward their husbands, that she is held to be the most laudable and
praiseworthy, that with her own hand kills her self, to burn with him to his
last funeral fire. From the generality of women, I descend to particulars.
Admirable was the love of Phila toward her husband King Demetrius, and haughty
and magnanimous her spirit; who receiving news of his defeat in battle, and
that his whole army being dispersed and scattered, he was retired into
Cassandria, drank poison, and so died. The wife of Straton, Prince of Sydonia,
when the City was straightly besieged by the Persians, her greatest care was,
lest the person of her husband should fall into the hands of the merciless
enemy, which she purposed to prevent by death. When therefore she heard they
had scaled the walls, and were ready to be instantly possessed of the Town, and
seize upon the person of her husband, she snatched from him his sword, with
which she first slew him, and then (laying out his body with as much comeliness
as the shortness of the time would permit) after fell upon the same sword;
thus by voluntary death preventing the dishonor of captivity. Fulgos. lib. 4.
cap. 6. Fannia, the daughter of Arria the younger, wife to Poetus Patavinus
(before remembered in her brave and heroic death with her husband) was the
spouse of Helvidius Priscus, who followed him in all his exile, even to his
unfortunate and most unjust death: she was the third time confined, from the
reign of Tiberius Nero. to the death of Domitian. Pliny with infinite praises
applauds the incomparable virtues of this Fannia, with both the Arrias in Lib.
9. in his Epistle to Quadratus, and in his seventh to Genitor and Priscus.
Triaria was the noble and chaste wife of L. Vitellius, brother to Aul. Vitellius
the Emperor, who as Hypsicrataea followed Mithridates in all his combustious
wars, so she never forsook her husband, but was present with him in all those
civil dissentions against Vespasian. And the night when Vitellius her Lord with
a great army of Soldiers invaded and entered the City Terecyna, she presented
her self in the midst of the slaughter, not only daring but doing equally
with the most valiant, killing on all sides, till she had hemmed her self in
with dead bodies, slain by her own hand; so bold and magnanimous a spirit had
the conjugall love to her husband impressed in her: Her memory is made famous by
the same Author, Antonia Flaxilla (by) some called Archona) when her husband
Priscus was found guilty of the Pysonian Faction, and for that cause exiled by
Nero, and when she might have enjoied all the plenty and abundance in Rome,
left all the pleasures and delights of the City, to accompany her desolate Lord
in his penurous and uncomfortable banishment. Her example Egnatia Maximilla
imitated, who likewise associated her husband Gallus, guilty of the same
conspiracy with Priscus. Fulgos. lib. 6. c. 7. From Jacobus, the son of Vsson
Cassannus, amongst many other Captains that revolted, there was one eminent in
that rebellion, called Pandoerus, who had a most beautiful young wife (her age
exceeded not sixteen years) to whom he was ardently and in conjoined love
affected. He being by her often earnestly entreated to forbear all conflicts
with the enemy, but by no means, either moved by her tears, or persuaded by her
intercessions and prayers (persisting resolute for a present encounter) she
then begged of him. That before he hazarded himself to the extremity of
danger, he would first take away her fears, by transpiercing her with his
sword: which when he likewise denied, he presently left her, and gave signal
of battle, in which conflict he was vanquished and slain, his Tent rifled, his
wife surprised, and committed into the hands of one of the chief Captains
belonging to the King: who pitying her tears and sorrow (to which her feature
and beauty gave no common luster) made instant suit unto her, to make her his
wife. She (whilst she could) put him off with all possible delays: but after
perceiving, that what he could not compass with her good will, he purposed to
attain unto by compulsion and force, she craved only some few hours of
deliberation privately to her self: which granted, and being retired, she
first writ in a short Scedule these words, Let none report, that the wife of
Pandocrus harbored so little love, as to outlive him. Which Note leaving upon
the table, she took a sword then hanging in the chamber, with which she
immediately dispatched her self of life, and so expired, following him in
death, with whose life she could be no longer delighted. Ibidem. Equal in all
Matrimonial piety with this Lady, was Cecilia Barbadica Veneta, who after the
death of her husband Philippus Vedraminus, by no counsel, comfort or
persuasion, could be won (either by her kindred or friends) to taste the least
food whatsoever, or give answer to any word that was spoken to her; in which
silence and consumption, she (after some few days of unspeakable sorrow)
breathed her last, Egnat. lib. 4. cap. ^. Petrus Candianus, after the decease
of his first wife, espoused a second, called Walberta, the daughter of Vgon,
one of the Princes of Italy, who lived with him in all obedience, with a
religious observation of true love and piety, never forsaking him in any
disaster, but attending him with her young son in law, Vitalis. The Duke her
husband being after slain by the Venetians in a seditious mutiny, Vitalis
escaped the fury of the (...), and fled, but she stayed to abide the utmost
danger, with the body of her dead husband, meditating all possible means to
revenge the death of her husband upon the conspirators: but her womanish
inability not prevailing, she likewise secretly left the City, and followed her
son Vitalis; in whose society she fled to Adeleta, the wife of Otho the German
Emperor, who at the same time resided in the City Placentia; but after long
vain intercession (seeing her hopes and purposes quite frustrate) she retired
again into her own City, where she lived a sad and solitary life, still
invoking the name of Petrus Candianus, with whose name in her mouth, she not
long after deceased. Egnat. (the remembrance^ of the former History) speaks
likewise of Fran^scus Fos^arus, another Duke of Venicewho married a second wife
out of the Noble Family of the Nanae, with whom he conjoinedly lived long, and
had by her hopeful issue: But the Senate in his age depriving him of the
Principality, with the g^iefe thereof he retired himself into the most ancient
house of his own family, and there (after three days) died. Whose body, when
the Fathers would have had brought forth to a solemn and Princely Funeral,
because he had once been their Duke and Sovereign, she shut her gates against
them, blaming their former ingratitude, alleging, she had both wealth and will
sufficient (without them) to bestow upon him the latest ^^tes due to a worthy
and to all husband: And though the Fathers were instant upon her first with
entreats, and after menaces; yet she constantly (...) in her resolution not
suffering them once to approach the place, much less to take thence the body
(...) carefully bestowed it, still exclaiming on the Senates (...), and the
Commonweals (...) gratitude, who to (...) wrongs (...) new injury, not (...),
whom they had so perjuriously (...) forsaken. Notwithstanding these
exclamations, they (...) her up in her chamber, and pe^fore took thence the
body, all the Fathers attending upon the Hearse, upon which they bestowed a
solemn and a pompous funeral The greater their counterfeit sorrow was
outwardly, the greater was her essential grief, still more and more weeping,
every succeeding day adding to her tears, to think that her Princely Husband
should in his death be for any courtesies at all beholding to his enemies,
desiring, that he (whom for his principality they had degraded, and compelled
to a private life) might only by her and from her have had a private Funeral:
with whose choice affection, and rare conjugall piety, I have broke off to
enter upon a new Project.

De Laenis, Or of Bawds.
FRom the honor of Women, I now come to the disgrace and shame of their Sex, in
which I will be as brief, as I know the very name to be to all chaste minds
odious. Sot^des Marionites Cinedus, that is, one abused against nature, or
addicted to preposterous Venery, was a Poet, and writ most bawdy and beastly
Iambicks in the Ionian tongue, which he entitled Cinaedi; in which were
described the forms and figures of several new devised Lusts (and before that
time) unheard of prostitutions: Of whom Martial thus ^aies, Nec retro lego
Sotadem Cinaedum.
Neither do I read Sotades Cinaedus backward.
For as Voleterran lib. 17. Antropoph. relates, his verses were all to be read
backward, lest their included nastiness might appear too plain and palpable.
Tranquil. reports of Tiberius Caesar, That he built Cellars and Vaults, in
which all kind of lusts and monstrous congressions were practiced in his
presence, which would offend modest ears but to hear related. The Emperor
Domitian succeeded, if not exceeded him in those detestable and devilish
abominations, He as Suetonius affirms, devised that which was called
Clinopales, i. The wrestling in the bed; he was often seen to bath himself and
swim in the company of the basest and most common strumpets, he stuprated his
brothers daughter yet a Virgin, after she was contracted to another man
Cratinus Atheniensis the Comic Poet, was so dissolutely addicted both to Wine
and Venery, that he hung his chamber round with Glasses, the better to discover
himself in his own unnatural and beastly prostitution. The like some of our
scandalous Gramma^^^ most falsely would asperse upon Horace. Suet. confers the
like upon Tiberius, as likewise Gyrald. Dial. 6. Historiae Poctarum, Elephantis
Philaenis and Astianassa, writ books of the several ways of Congression, with
the pictures of them inserted; but of them I shall speak further in the title
of the Poetesses, but before I come to these shemonsters in particular, I will
remember some few men infamous in the like kind. Erasmus in Chiliad^b. speaks
of one Clobulus a most wicked He-bawd, who kept in his house two most infamous
strumpets, whose bodies he prostituted for money to all strangers, and what the
whores could not extort from them, he himself would r^b them of, from whence
came the Proverd, Clebuli ignum, which was still in use when two knaves of like
dishonesty were seen to have friendship and society together. Timaeus apud
Erasmum, speaks of one Cymarus a Selenusian Bawd, who all his life time
promised to leave his ill gotten goods to the Temple of Venus, in whose service
he had got them; but at his death they were all squandred and lost, by the
direption of the multitude. One Cippius counterfeited himself to sleep and
short, that others with the less fear or doubt might have free inter course
and carnal society with his wife; an argument that he was not ^^^nted with the
fiend called jealousie^ from him grew the ^dage which Cicero used in an Epistle
to Fabius Gallus. Non omnibus dormio, i I sleep not to all men. (...) apud
B^ro^ldum. (...) remembers us of the (...), and (...) of one (...), that made
his wife basely (...). Cai. Ticinius Minte^nensis, provoked his wife to
inchastity for no other reason then to defraud her of her (...) Gem^llus one of
the Tribunes of Rome, a man of a noble family, yet was of that corrupt and
degenerate conditions, that he made his own Palace no better then a common
(...), that in the Consulship of Metellus and (...) suffered two great Ladies,
Mutia and Fulvia (innobled both (...) families) with the noble child Saturmus
to be (...) in his own house. Clemens Alex indrinus lib. (...) and lib. 4. have
left remembered, that the Arch Heretic Nicolaus having a fair wife* and being
reproved of jealousy by me Apostles, Of him cam^ the Nicola^^^
to show himself no way guilty thereof, he brought her into the public
assembly, (...) her freely up (...) of any man whatsoever; (...) (in my mind)
(...) his too much (...) in his over great (...) Nay (...) should (...) even
from loialty (...) in his Theater (...) Humane life, tells us of Hen^icus Rex
Castalioensis, who shamed not to be a Bawd to his own Queen, you may read
further of him in the Spanish History by the title of Henry the Unable. Now of
She-Bawds, and of them briefly. Plutarch in the life of Pericles, reports, That
Aspasia his sole delight, made her house a Stews, in which the bodies of the
fairest young Women, were made common for money. It is reported that
Callistion, surnamed Proche, being hired to lie with a common fellow or
bondman, and by reason of the hot weather being naked, she espied the marks
and ska^s of blows and stripes upon his shoulders: to whom she said. Alas poor
man, how came these? he willing to conceal his base condition answered, That
being a child he had scalding hot Pottage poured down his neck, I believe it
(says she) but sure they were Calves Pottage, made of Calves flesh, promptly
reproving his quality, because slaves eat pottage made of Veal, and the things
with which they were lashed and scourged, were made of Calves skins. Erasm
Apophtheg. 6. Dipsas is the name of an old Bawd in one of Ovid's Elegies, whom
for instructing his mistress in the veneriall trade, he reproves in these
verses: Est quaedam (quicunque volet cognoscere lenam
Audiat) est quaedam nomine Dipsas anus.
If any man an old Bawd list to know,
It Is the crone Dipsas she is titl'd so.


Of the Bawd Quartilla I have before given you a true character from Petronius
Arbiter. Tacitu^. lib. 17. puts us in mind of Calvia Crisalpina, who was the
School-mistresse of Nero's Lures, a fit tutoresse for such an apt and forward
Pupil. In my opinion to be wondered at it is, that these being past their own
actual sins, wherein too much saciety has bred suffer, or the infirmity of
age, or disease, a mere disability of performance; yet even in their last of
days, and when one foot is already in the grave, they without any thought of
repentance or the least hope of grace, as if they had net wickedness enough of
their own to answer for, heap upon them the sins of others; as not only
enticing and alluring Virgins and young wives, to that base veneriall trade,
and the infinite inconveniences both soul and body depending thereupon, but to
wear their garments by the prostitution of others, and eat their Bread, and
drink Sack and Aqua-vitae by their mercenarie sweat; and so base an usury and
uncomely a travel of their bodies, as is not only odious in the eyes of man,
but abominable in the sight of Angels This apprehension puts me in mind of what
Cornelius Gallius writes in a Periphasis of old Age, Of Age.
which I hold not altogether impertinent to be here inserted. These be his
words: Stat dubious tremulusque senex semperque malorum
Credulus, and stultus quae facit ipse timet,
Laudat praeteritos, prae entes despicit annos
Hoc tantum rectum, quod facit ipse, putat, etc.


What he speaks of the old man, may be as well appropriated to the aged woman,
his Verses I thus English: The trembling old man he is doubtful still,
And fearful in himself of that known ill,
Of which he is author, and in this appears
His fully, to because of what he fears.
Past years he will praise, the present he will despise,
Naught save what is his, seems pleasing in his eyes.
It after follows.
Hae sunt primitiae, etc.
Of Death these the first fruits are, and our fathers
Declining toward the Earth, she her own gathers
Into her self, though with a tardy pace.
We come at length; the color of the face,
Our habit, nor our gate, is still the same,
Nor shape that was, yet all at one place aim.
For the loose garments from our shoulders slides,
And what before too short seemed, now abides
A trouble to our heels: we are contracted,
As if (of late) in a new world compacted,
Decreasing still; our bones are dried within,
As seem our flesh shrunk in our withered skin.
We have scarce liberty on Heaven to look,
For prone old age, as if it in some book
Meant to behold his face, looks down-ward still,
Prying where he the indebted place might fill,
From whence he first was borrowed, and the same
Matter return to Earth, from whence it came.
We walk with three feet first, as infants creep,
Next crawl on four, as if the ground to sweep,
We follow our beginning, all things mourn
Till to their generation they return,
And fall upon the breast where they were nursed,
"That goes to nothing, which was nothing first.
This is the cause that ru^^ous Age still beats
The E^^th with the (...) be leans on, and entreats
A place to rest in, as if he should say
(With (...) me way,
At length into thy (...) thy son,
Who fa^a would sleep now all his labor's done.


Let this (...) as a short admonition to these old corrupters or Youth.

De Gulosis and Vinolentis. i. Of wonton addicted to Gluttony and Drunkenness.
OF these there are not many left to memory, the reason (...) may be
conjectured) it, because to seem the more (...) are, bring invited to public
Feasts and (...), many of them will dine at home before they come, a^ing in
private, and drinking in corners. Of men for their incredible (...), there are
presidents infinite, I will give you only a taste of some few, and those not
altogether common, ^^d with them to compare fair women. I will pass over
(...) remembered by Ovid Cla^sias by the Port A^axilas, (...) by A^stophanes,
Meclanth^^ by Saidas, Treae^^e^ by (...) (who at one meal (...) up a whole But
in imitation (...), who devouted an Ox at a breakfast Pu^ Callonas by Laellus
surnamed Gorges, as also those Roman Emperors infamous for the insacieties of
their threat and ^ellies, as Tiberius Nero C. Caligula, Nero Galba. Vuell^^^,
(...) Verus Plault^^^, Severus, Auton, H^liogabolus, (...) minus Imperator,
(...), Galienus, Augustus, the most moderate in diet of them all, able to
ground a History. (...) remembers me of one H^gotio Fagi^lanus, a Prince, who
after many rough and tempestuous storm, of Fortune, as his last refuge, retired
himself into the Palace of Caius Magnus. Duke of Verona, Hugotio being then
an old man, were he was magnificently feasted and received, more like a father
reverenced, then a guest enterteined; upon a time discourse being commenced at
table concerning eating and devouring stomachs, where many of ravenous and
insaciate ap^etites were remembered; Hugot^o being a man fa^ gr^sse, and of an
extraordinary bulk, began to recite many unbeleevable things concerning his
appetite in his youth. One Petrus Navus sitting then at table, a man of a ready
and acute wit, thus replied, We wonder nor O Prince at these strange marvelous
things which you have already related, having concealed greater then you have
yet spoken of, for there is none here but knows, that at one dinner you
devoured the two rich Dukedomes of Luca and Pysa; in these few words
reprehending both his incredible voracity, and discommendable prodigality. As a
fit march to this great eater, Aelianus puts us in mind of Aglais the daughter
of Megacles a she-minstrel, who at one meal usually devoured twelve pounds of
flesh, four great loaves of bread, by the Grecians called Choe^ices panum (a
Choenix contained a measure of a quarter of a peck, which was as much as a man
was allowed to eat in one day) to which she usually drunk four Congiums of
wine, every one containing six Sextaries, and is according to our measure, a
Gallon and a Pint. Timocreon of Rhodes for his gulosity in meat and wine, was
called Helluo, which signifies an insaciable glutton, after his death this
Epitaph was inscribed upon his Tomb stone: Multa hibens, tam multa vorans, male
plurima dicens
Multis, hic jacco Tymocreon Rhodius.
Much drinking, eating much, and much ill speaking, I
(Of many) here beneath this stone Rhodian Tymocreon lie.


What shall I now think of Aga^isla the daughter of Clisthenes, who it seems
h^d an extraordinary good stomach, since Aelianus in his twelfth book tells us,
that when Smindrides of the City Sybarita came to visit her as a suitor, he
sent before him a thousand Cooks, a thousand Bird-catchers or Fowlers; and a
thousand Fishermen to catch fishes, and all to the furnishing of one table.
Astidamas Milesius, being invited to supper by the Persian Ariobarzanes, he
alone devoured what was provided for himself and all his other guests. It is
read likewise of Gathis Queen of Syria, to be so gluttonous, that she caused an
Edict to be published with a great penalty depending upon the breach thereof,
That it was not lawful for any subject to taste or eat fish, unless she were
invited to the feast. Ravisius. Philoxenus Eressius the son of Leucadius, a
Parrasite, for his gluttony was called Philodipnos, by others Philichthis, by
Aristotle, Pachemerus, and in his third book Ethicorum, Opsophagos, because (as
Melanthius before him did) he wished his neck so long as a Cranes, that he might
be the better delighted in the swallowing of his junkets. If any dish were set
before him that relished his Pallat, he would purposely cast therein some nasty
or noisome thing offensive to the guests, that they abhorring the taste
thereof, he might have the liberty to devour it alone he being set at Dionysius
his Table, and a small Muller being placed before him, when the greater were set
at the upper end of the boo^d, he took the little fish and held the mouth
thereof close to his ear, which Dionysius observing, asked what his reason was
so to do? who presently answered the King* that he was inquiring of that small
fish concerning Nercus and Galat^a, to be resolved of some seanewes; but the
young Mullet excused himself by reason of his youth and juniority, but
commended him to those his elders and greaters above, from whom he might be
better satisfied. Dionysius pleased with his jest, reached him down the bigger
fishes on which he fed to his content. This Philod^pnos died in Syracusa, after
he at one meal had devoured up a whole Po^p^ise of two cubit^ long, all save
the head. Girald. Dial. 9. Histor. Poctarum Though not for such voracious
devouring, yet for her profu^senesse and prodigality in diet, Cleopatra the
last Queen of Egypt, is remarkable, who as S^donius testifies of her, at one
supper to which she invited Marc. Antonius, bestowed an infinite mass of
treasure, one dish in the second course being valued at two hundred and fifty
pieces of Gold; more famous she was for her draught in which she drunk unto
him, in which she pownded a Pearl that was valued at no less then the ransom
of a King. From eating I come now to drinking. The Greeks in all their feasts
and celebrations used at first small cups and moderate daughts, but after, bowls
of greater receipt and deeper quassing healths, insomuch it grew to a proverb,
if any man took an extraordinary draught, he was said, Graeco more bibere, that
is, to drink after the manner of the Grecians, Alex. ab Alex. lib. 5. cap. 21.
says, There was a law amongst them established, that such as would not freely
take the round as it past, must depart the place. They used at those public
meetings, in their cups to salute the gods, and in turning up the bottom of the
bowl or glass at the end of every draught, The first drinking of Healths.
to nominate them. At the choosing of their Magistrates, or conferring any new
honors upon a man, they drunk to him in a cup brimmed with wine, as a
confirmation of his dignity: And from them it may be conjectured, these drunken
Healths (so frequent in these days) had their first original. I need not
reckon up any great Drinkers of old, or derive the custom from antiquity,
since this age in which we live, is not able to equal them only in deep
carowsing, and quaffing, but far to exceed them in strange and new devised
Healths: nay, there is now scarce any meeting without superfluity of wine, and
drinking, even to surfeit. Adrianus B^rlandus, Centuria primae, reports, That a
young man being at a Banquet, was accused for many scandalous and calumniated
words spoken against a Priest; for which being questioned and cited before the
Judges, a question was demanded him, Why he durst speak to (...) against a man
of his holy profession and sacred order? who answered, Should he invite me
again unto the like Feast, and ply me so fast with wine as he did then, I
should not only be apt to malign and revile, but beat out of the room (if they
were then present) the twelve Apostles. The Judges by this understanding, that
his contempt only proceeded from the excess of wine, dismissed him unpunished,
and upon the Priest that had first invited him, and after accused him; they
laid this penance, That he should taste no wine for four whole days together.
Old Ennius (notwithstanding these effects) never buckled himself to the
writing of any brave Heroic Verse, before his brain was moistened, and his Muse
kindled and awaked with the spirit of the grape: of whom Horace, Ennius ipse
pater nunquam nisi potus ad arma
Prosituit, etc.


They need no further explanation, the former words express them fully.
Tiberius was so addicted to immoderate cups, that bring in the camp, the
soldiers used to nickname him, and instead of clodius called him Caldus; for
Tiberius, Biberius; and for Nero, Mero; all of them reproving his intemperate
Vinosity. Juvenal in his Satyrs reports one Lanfella, a woman, for an
incontinent wine-bibber Martial taxes another, called Myrtale, for her
insacia^e drinking; but because her breath should not smell of the Grape, she
used to temter her wine with the leaves of Laurel: His words be these: Foetore
multo Myrtale solet vino
Sed fallat ut nos, folia devorat Lauri.
Myrtale drinks much wine: which to excuse,
Lest that her breath thereof should stink and smell,
To deceive us, she in her cups does use
To have her wine with Laurel temp'red well.


The like Epigram he has, lib. 1. of another called Fescenina, a great drinker
of wine, whom he brands for her intemperance. In so great a custom was this
rioting in drink grown, that when the great and sumptuous Espousals of
Hyppolita and Alphonsus were celebrated by King Ferdinand his father, where
every thing was carried with extraordinary magnificence and state, as well the
ma^tiall exercises abroad, as the Masks, Revels, and private sports within,
which extended not only to condign praise, but admiration of all the
spectators: and all these Pastimes, Feasts, and Banquets, kept to the end with
great plenty and abundance, yet without vain excess and (...). In the shutting
up all these solemnities, one amidst the multitude (by Nation a German)
clamoured out aloud (even to the hearing of the King, and all his Princely
guests) in these words; Oh valiant ludi quibus nemo bibit, i. Happy be those
sports, in which there is no excess in drinking. Pontanus. And thus for the
present I give over Healthing.

Of Women beloved of diverse creatures.
EGesidemus upon Pliny, tells us, That the child Hermias was so beloved of a
Dolphin, that she would come to the Seashore and suster him to get upon her
back, then swim with him into the sea; and having sported with him
sufficiently, bring him safe to land, and then attend him the next day. It
happened* that having long continued this love betwixt them, upon a time being
mounted on the Dolphins back, a sudden tempest arose, by the violence of which
the Lad was beaten off, and so perished in the sea. Which the Dolphin
perceiving, and having lost him whom she much loved, she left the water, and
casting her self upon the dry Continent, there gave up her self to a
voluntary death. Of the love of that kind of Fish to men and children, there
are diverse remembrances, as of Arion, and others. In Argis, the child Olenus
was affected by a Goose: so likewise Lycidas the Philosopher, who would never
depart from him, nor be driven out of his company, but was his continual
associate, in public and private, in the Bath, in the night, the day, without
any intermission. Plin. lib. 10. cap. 22. Glauce the Harper was beloved of a
Ram; a youth of Sparta by a Daw. Nicander apud Caelium witnesses, That one
Selandus, the Butler to the King of Bithynia, was beloved of a Cock, whom they
called Centaurus. A Cock doted likewise on a young Lad, whose name was
Amohilochus, by Nation an Olenian. Why may we not then as well give credit,
that Semiramis was affected by a Horse, and Pasiphae by a Bull? when Pliny tells
us, that in Leucadia a young Damosel was so beloved of a Peacock, that the
enamoured bird never left her in life, and accompanied her in death: for seeing
the Virgin dead, Gratitude.
she never would receive food from any hand, but so pined away, and died also.
In the City of Sest^s, a young Eagle (taken in a nest) was carefully brought up
by a Virgin: The Bird being come to full growth, would every day take her
flight abroad, and all such foul as she could catch, bring home, and lay them
in the lap of her mistress: And this she used daily, as it were to recompense
her for her fostering and brinking up. At length this Virgin dying, and her
body being borne unto the Funeral fire, the Eagle still attended: which was no
sooner exposed unto the flames, but the bird likewise cast her self, with a
voluntary flight, amidst the new kindled pile, and to her mistresses Hearse,
gave her self a most grateful sacrifice. Plin. lib. 10. cap. 5. Saxo Grammat.
in the tenth book of his Danish History reports, That certain young maids of a
Village in Swethland, playing and sporting together in the fields upon a
holy day, suddenly an huge he Bear rushed out of the forest, and snatched up
the fairest amongst them, and hurried her away to his Den; but gently, and
without any harm: where having bestowed her, long gazed on her face, as if with
a kind of admiration, he grew so enamoured of her on the sudden, that in the
stead of a murderer he became a lover, imparting unto her all the prey that he
got abroad. The sequel of this History (which is almost past belief) I am
loath (for many special reasons) to prosecute any further here: therefore
(though abruptly) I break it off.

Of Women excellent in the Art of Painting, Weaving, etc.
INnumerable are the men that have been excellent in the quality of Painting:
the Catalogue of their Names (without a Capitulation of their Works) would ask
much paper, but great pains to set down. Yet as of the rest, I will give you a
small taste of their exquisite dexterity in that Art. I have read, That Apelles
having made an excellent Piece, in which he had deciphered a Horse to the life,
he thought it then a Present worthy Alexander: and coming to present it to the
King, he only gave it a neglected look, neither praising it, nor discommending
it, but found other discourse. The Painter still holding it up, Bucephalus (on
whom the King was then mounted) casting his (...) upon the Table, fell a
neighing, thinking the lively effigies had been a living Beast. Which Apelles
observing, could no longer contain himself, but cried out aloud; O Alexander,
I now well perceive thy Horse has better judgment in Painting then thy self.
Zeuxes being almost with him equally famous, Apelles maligning that any Painter
should be named whilst he was yet alive, took occasion in an humor, to make a
purposed Journey to give him visitation, but especially to observe the manner of
his shop, and workhouse; and crossing an arm of the Sea, he came to the City
where Zeuxes then lived, and enquiring out his house, was directed thither,
where knocking; the maid came to the door, Apelles asked her for her master:
she told him, he was gone into the Town upon very serious occasions, and was
not then within; but I pray (Sir) when my master returns, who shall I say was
here to speak with him? Apelles spying a fair Table hanging in the shop, ready
to be wrought, but no work therein, and the Pensils and Colors all ready by
it, By thy leave maid (says he) and entering the shop, chused out a Pensill,
with which he only drew a curous small line cross the Table, almost of that
si^enesse to deceive the eye: which having suddenly ended, Tell thy master
(says he to the maid) That he that drew this line was here to have spoken with
him, and so away he goes: who was no sooner out, but Zeuxes returning, and
asking her, If any man had been there to ask for him in his absence? she told
him all, and showed the line drawn upon the Table; on which he looking with
admiration, suddenly broke into an exclamation, saying, This could never have
been done but by the hand of Apelles; and instantly sent up and down the Town
to seek him. In the interim (this president being still standing before him) in
a kind of emulation, it animated him to adventure on something worthy the sight
of Apelles; when choosing out another color, differing from that Apelles had
wrought, he with his Pensill cut the first line just in the middle with a kind
of miraculous steadfastness and evennesse: when glorying in his work (which
indeed was rare) Now tell the Painter (says he) if he come again to enquire of
me, that I have been since at home, witness that, and show him the Table; and
so retired himself into the inner part of the house. Soon after comes Apelles,
and asks the maid if her master had been yet at home? Yes, Sir (says she) and
bad me show you this, and asks you how you like it. Apelles wondered (as
thinking it had scarce been to be found in Art) and was startled at the first;
but as one that never had been equalled, and loath now to be exceeded, he again
took the Pencill, and altering the color, in the very life and spirit of Art,
he divided the (almost invisible) line of Zeuxes; parting it in the midst, in
such a constant proportion, that it seemed altogether to exceed the practice of
Science. Which having done, Now (says he) commend me once more to thy Master,
and ask him from me, if this last line has not made good the imperfections of
the former: at which word Zeuxes appeared, and before he had the power to give
him any salutation (looking upon what he had done) acknowledged him Victor, yet
held it no dishonor to him to be so overcome. This Table was after held as a
rare and an unparalled Masterpiece, and being sold for a great sum of money,
^s a choice Jewel hung up in the Capitol of Rome, where it was long preserved,
even till time had defaced the colors, and razed out the memory thereof.
Amongst thousand Excellencies both in their Works and Inventions, these shall
suffice in this place: I now come to my Women Painters.

Tymarete, the daughter of Mycon or Mycaon (a man eminent in that quality)
amongst other curious pieces (wrought by her own hand) made that admiral
picture of Diana, which was hanged up in the Temple of Ephesus, claiming
priority above many that proceeded from the best Artists: she flourished in the
time that Archelaus reigned in Macedonia, Plin lib. 35. cap. 11. Irene was the
daughter and scholar of the Painter Cratinus; she was famous for the
pencilling the Maid, whose effigies was kept as a Relike sacred to Memory, in
the City Eleusina. Calipso's excellency was expressed to the life, in drawing
the old Jugler Theodorus. Alcisthine limned a Dancer and she Minstrel, and by
that got her a name amongst the best. Aristarete was the daughter and scholar
of the Painter Marcus, and drew Asculapius. One Olympias professed the same
Art, and instructed many scholars; amongst whom (as Pliny says) was
Autobulus, Lala Cyzizena lived a perpetual Virgin, and was the sole daughter
of Marcus Varro: she practiced in Rome, and drew both with the Pencil, and with
a sharp pointed Qu^l called Cestrum she cut in ivory. She meddled not with the
Faces of men, but women only; she made her own picture from a Looking-glass:
she was commended for the nimblenesse and dexterity of hand, for none ever
equalled her in quickness; and for curiosity, she exceeded two of the greatest
and best practitioners in her days, Sopylon and Dionysius.

From Painting, I come to Weaving: The practice of which was held in great use
and estimation amongst Princsses, and the chief Matrons in which to be
excellent, was held as a prime honor. The exercise thereof was accounted a
commendable thing in Wives, and a great sign of womanish modesty in Virgins. It
was first brought from the Phrygians to the Romans. King From him al rich and
costly Arras Hangings are called Attalia.
Attalus was the first that devised to weave with threads of Gold. It grew to
that reverend and respected custom, that sisters for their brothers, mothers
for their sons, and women for their husbands, with their own hands, weaved
Cloaks and Gowns. And therefore the Romans in all their marriages, caused the
new married Virgins to present their husbands with a Distaffe, Thread and
Spindle: it is a custom which the Iberians still observe; as also, That
whatsoever their women first spin, and after weave, is brought to be viewed in
public, and rared, she that has done most, and best, has so much the more
respect and honor, Alex ab Alex. lib. 4 cap 8. Amongst the Phoeacenses, the
men mind only navigation, and the women Texture and weaving; but amongst the
women of Persia, it is held a great dishonor to lay her hand to the Web or
Needle. Penclope, by the testimony of Homer, and other Poets) in this Art was
excellently practiced, of which came the Proverb, Tela Penelopes and Icar^ntis,
The Web of Penelope or Icariotes (because she was the daughter of Icarus.)
Virg. Aeneid lib 5. nominates one Pholoe to be eminent in that exercise Plin
lib. 11 ca. 22 confers the invention of Weaving upon Pamphile, the daughter of
Plates, who devised it in the (...) Coo^. In this, A^caeus Pataren^^, and
Helicon Caristius, exceeded all (...): these two brothers wove and embroidered
a Vesture and (...) for Pallas Poliades, who was honored in the Temple (...)
Athens, which was done with such unimitable cunning, that thereupon came the
Adage in Greece, if any thing were curiously or exquisitely performed, it was
called, The work of Acecaeus, and Helicon. Above others most magnified by Ovid.
Metamorph. lib. 6. is Arachne Lydia, the daughter of Idmones, whose mother was
born in the small City Hypepis: she having by many degrees exceeded all mortal
women, and that without difficulty durst compare with Minerva her self, who
for her boldness and pertinacy she turned into a Spider. Her controversy with
Pallas, is with great elegancy expressed in Ovid. Alexander of Macedon, and
Octavius Augustus, the one wore a Garment woven by his Mother, the other a
Mantle by the hands of his Wife. These Ladies had sequestered places, in some
part of their Palaces, and kept their handmaids and damsels at work; of
which, these two potent and mighty Queens disdained not to be the daily
Directoresses and Overseers. Alex. ab Alex. cap. 4. lib. 8. Part of the Wool
which Tanaquil spun, with her Distaffe, Spindle, and Slippers, were long time
reserved as sacred Relics in the Temple of Ancus Martius, as also a Kingly
Garment or Imperial Robe, woven quite through with Rays and Flames of Gold,
wrought with her own hand, in which Servius* Tullius often went in state, and
sa^e in the high Judgment Seat, in the Capitol. Varro apud eundem. By the Law
called Pagana, all women were forbidden to spin or draw out any thread in the
streets or common high ways, because they held it ominous to the prosperity of
the Grain sown in the Earth, or the Fruits blossomed, or growing upon the
Trees, as the same Author testifies, Ausonius speaks af one Sabina, not only
excellent in this Science, but a Poet withal, which he left to posterity in
one of his Epigrams: Sive probas Tyrio textam sub tegmine vestra
Seu placet inscripti commoditus tituli, etc.
Which is thus Englished.
If thou affect'st a purple Robe,
Woven in the Tyrian stain,
Or if a Title well inscribed,
By which thy wit may gain;
Behold her works unpartially,
And censure on them well:
Both, one Sabina does profess,
And does in both excel.


And thus I take leave of weaving, for Memory now transports me to another
Argument.

Of Women Contentious and Bloody.
TExtor in his Ossicine remembers us of one Kailla, who was of that barbarous
and inhumane cruelty, that being at dissension with her husband Vazules, she
having banished all conjugall piety and pity, caused his eyes to be dug out
of his head, spending the remainder of his age in uncomfortable darkness,
These subsequent stories of flinty and obdure hearted women, though I could
willingly have spared them out of this work, that the world might almost be
induced to believe that no such immanities could ever have place in the smooth
and soft bosoms of women, yet in regard I have promised briefly to run over
all Ages, Features, Affections, Conditions and Degrees, though they might
perhaps have been thought well spared by some, yet I make no question but that
they might be challenged at my hands by others. The rather I present them, and
with the more confidence unto your view, because, though their actions to the
tender breasted may seem horrid and fearful, and therefore the hardlier to
purchase credit, yet the testimony of the Authors being authentic and
approved, will not only bear me out as their faithful remembrancer, but in the
things themselves fasten an inherent belief. I proceed therefore. Cyrce the
Witch, slew the King of Sarmatia to whom she was married, and usurping the
regal throne, did much oppress her subjects: of her Sa^^ll^cus writes more at
large. Clitemnestra was the wife of Agamemnon, Arch Duke or General of the
Grecians at the siege of Tr^y, she by the help of Aegistus (with whom she
adulterated) slew her husband, of this Virgil speaks, lib. 11. Seneca in
Ag^memnon. and Juvenal in Satyr. Danaus the son of (...), had fifty (...), who
were espoused to the fifty son of Aegustus, (...) made a eonjuration in one
night to kill all their husbands, which they accordingly did all save the (...)
who spared the li^e of her husband (...) Hercul. Fur. Alexander Phae^cus a
Tyrant of (...) when he had showed his wife (...) to a (...), it so
impatiently, that she cut his throat sleeping, Ovid in Ib^n. Vol^te^ranus
repo^e, that Albina daughter to a King of Syria, had two and thirty sisters,
who all in one night slew their husbands, who being exiled their Country,
landed in Britain; and that of this Albina, this kingdom first took the name
of Albion. Laodice was the wife of Antiochus King of Syria, who caused himself
to be called God the poisoned her husband because of his too much familiarity
with (...) the sister of Ptolomey. Fabia slew Fabius Fabricianue, that she
might the more freely enjoy the company of Petronius Volentanus a young man of
extraordinary feature, with whom she had often before accompanied. Agrippina
poisoned her husband Tiberius Claudius the Emperor. Lucilla the wife of
Antonius Verus Emperor, poisoned her husband because she thought him too
familiar with Fabia. Aa^^o^us Prince of Ferolivium, married with the daughter
of Joannes Bentivolus, of whom being despised, and finding her self neglected,
she hired certain cot-throat Physicians, who slew him in his chamber. Andreas
the son of Carolus King of Pannonia, was slain by his wife Joanna Queen of
Sicily, for no other reason but that he was i^le and held unprofitable to the
weal public. Althaea sorrowing that her two brothers Plexippus and Toxeus were
slain by her son Meleager she burned that Brand, of which the fattall Sisters
had made a prediction, That his life and health should continue as long as that
was preserved, Ovid Trist. lib. 1. Bocat in General. Agave a Theban woman, slew
her son Penthaeus, because he would not honor the feast of the Ba^hinals, with
the rest of the Menades; Virg. in Culice^^^ctha taking arms against Eumolpus,
and having an answer from the Oracle, That he should have a certain victory of
the would sacrifice his only daughter to the gods: by the persw^sion of his
wife Pr^xitha, gave her up to slaughter; Euripides apud Plutarch. Elearchus one
of the Kings of Creet, at the persuasion of his second wife Phro^^ma, commanded
is only daughter by the hand of one Themisones, to be cast into the river, and
there drowned, Herodot. Polidice betrayed her father King Pletera to Crocon
King of Thebes, and caused him to be slain; as likewise Ni^us being besieged by
Minos, by the treason of his daughter, lost that purple hair which was the stay
of his sovereignty, Ovid Metam. and Servius. Tiphon Aegyptius, as Berosus,
Seneca, Diodorus, and other relate, slew his brother Osiris, then reigning in
Egypt, and governing justly; which done, he caused him to be cut in twenty six
pieces, and to every one of the conspirators, gave a part, the better to secure
him of their fidelities: but Isis their sister, after she had lamented the
death of her brother Osiris, by the assistance of her son (who was called O^os)
flew Tiphon, and avenged his death. Draomitia was a Queen of Bohemia, she
caused Ludimillia (much devoted to Religion) to be slain: by her instigation
her son Boles^aus was the murderer of his brother Wenceslaus, Volaterran. The
nymph Lara was of that loquacity, that raising dissension betwixt Jupiter and
Juno, by telling her of his escapes, that in revenge thereof, he plucked out her
tongue. Talantia Spartana having intelligence that her son Pedaretes tyrannized
over the men of Chius, writ to him in this or the like language, Or govern
there better or remain there, if thou returnest to me, thou art not safe: thus
admonishing him of better government, or menacing him with death. Damariana was
a woman of Sparta, and with her own hands slew her son, because she found him
of a timorous condition, and would not be drawn to the wars. Amastris was the
wife of Xerxes, and did prosecute the wife of Massissa the President, with that
inhumane and barbarous cruelty, that having first slain her, she caused her
breasts to be cut off, and cast unto the dogs, dismembring her of her Nose,
Ears, Eyes, Lips, and Tongue, Ravis. Textor. Cisenis, the daughter of
Diogerides King of Thrace, was of that savage inhumanitie, that she took
pleasure to see living men dismembered and cut in pieces, causing young children
to be dressed, after commanding them to be served in to their parents, and to be
by them eaten. Solinus. Tullia, the wife of Tarquinius Superbus, she caused her
Chariot to be drawn over the face of her dead father Servius Tullius, presently
before murdered by her husband in the Capitol. Livy Irene the Empress was
wife to Leo the fourth, and caused her own son Constantius Sextus to be first
cast in Prison, and after to have his eyes dug out, because before she had
by him been expelled the Empire Fulvia was the wife of Marcus Antonius: and how
the excellentest of Orators, M. Tulli^^s, being dead, was tyrannized over by
him, many Authors have commended to posterity; whose sacred hands and head
being cut off, were nailed unto that Pulpit, where he had often most learnedly
declaimed. His head was first brought to Anthony, which he caused to be set
upon a table, and scarce in a whole day could he satiate his rancorous malice,
with so sad and pitiful a spectacle; but at length (as Applanus Alexandrinus
reports) he commanded it to be took thence: And (as it is gathered out of the
collections of Dion, Prusius, and Suidas) when Fulvia, the wife of Antoninus,
came to the sight of it, she took it in her hands, and after the breathing of
many fearful maledictions, execrations, and curses against it, spit in the
face thereof: then taking it into her lap, with a Bodkin or Penner which she
wore in her hair for an ornament, pricked his tongue, which she had caused
violently to be forced out of his jaws, lest there should be any thing wanting
that might add to an undiscreet woman's hate, and inhumane cruelty. This murder
and horrid act against so worthy a Senator, has been deploted by many, as well
in Prose, as in Verse; as Portius Lacro, Albutius Sylo Caestius Murrhedius, and
others: but none more elegantly then Severius Cornelius, in these Verses of
his, which we have by tradition from Annaeus Seneca: Oraque magnanimum
spirantia pene virorum
In rostris facuere sui, etc.
As they were at large remembered in Crinitus: Euridice the wife of Amyntas King
of Macedonia, who had by him three sons, Alexander, Perdicas, and Philip,
father to Alexander the Great; as likewise a daughter, called Euryones. This
Euridice not only polluted the bed of her husband, but sought his life, to
transfer the Principality into the hand of the adulterer: and lest her daughter
should discover either her whoredom or treason, she likewise plotted against
her life. The old man in the midst of these dangers died, leaving the
Kingdom to his eldest son Alexander; she after caused him to be slain: A
president of strange and unheard of cruelty in a mother. Justin. Histor. lib 7.

Spita^enes (a puissant Captain that bad long opposed Alexander the Great in
many battles and conflicts, with his competitor Dahae) so dearly loved his fair
wife, that he drew her to be a partner with him in his wars, and lodged her in
his Tent: But being put to many affrights and distresses (the common casualties
belonging to war) she grew so tired with alarums, tumults, mutinies,
affrights, slaughters, and such like, that she daily importuned him (being
before only used to feasts, banquets, and effeminate delicacies) to submit him
to the Macedonian Conqueror. So long and so urgently she solicited him to
peace, both by her children, her friends, and her self in person, that being a
blunt and plain soldier, traded in combustion (and to whom the very thought of
submission was more odious then death) though he entirely affected her, yet
upon a time he advanced his hand to have struck her, and had done it, had not
his brother come in by accident, and suppressed his incensed futy: yet he
concluded, That if ever after she persuaded him to peace, or troubled his ears
with that base word of submission, that Hand which so long had opposed
Alexander (all Conjugall amity set (...)) should be her sudden and assured
ruin. The Lady affrighted with the name of death, thought it no safety to
interpose so ^obustious and settled a constancy, especially in a soldier, daily
and hourly enured to blood and (...), therefore considering with her self what
was best to be done; in meditating for her own safety, she thought it better by
yielding, to conquer, then by contending against power and advantage, to be
overcome. After submission therefore made, and a new reconcilement established
betwixt them, she invited him to a banquet in her Tent (which was furnished
with all the dainties the Camp would yield, and whatsoever variety remote
places could affo^^d) where she carried her self with all humility and
obedience. At this feast she caused him to be plied with Healths, and lavish
Cups, till the Wine having got the pre-eminence of his better ^^nces, he grew
drowsy, and retired himself to his Pallat. The Tables were then withdrawn and
every man that was invited, repaired either to his charge in the Army, or to
his rest. They having disposed of themselves, and the place now private, she
had confederated with one of her serv^nts, by whose assistance, she in his
depth of sleep cut off the head of her husband, and gave it to him. This done
(having the Word) they past through the Watches and Guards, and by the break of
day came unto the Camp of Alexander, desiring to have conference with him about
affairs which concerned him nearly. The Prince understanding it was a woman,
commanded she should be admitted into his Tent; which was accordingly done, and
she appeared before him all stained and sprinkled with blood (for she had not
yet changed her habit) at which he grew so amazed, demanding the cause of her
repair thither? She desired her servant might be likewise admitted (who
attended (...) the door of his Tent) for be that about him by which he should
be better (...). His entrance was granted: but being suspected by the guard
(because they perceived him hide something f^lded up in his garment) they
searched him, and found a head cut off, but by reason of the palenesse of the
face (which was disfigured with the clottered and congealed blood) the
countenance thereof could hardly be discerned. The servant was brought in, with
the head (still dropping blood) in his hand. At which the King more wondering,
desired by her to be better satisfied concerning the Novel; to whom she boldly
replied, Lo here (O Alexander) the end of thy many troubles and fears, the head
of the great Captain Spitamenes, who though my husband, yet because he was
thine enemy, I have caused his head to be cut off and here present it unto
thee. At the horridness of these words, the King, with all that stood by were
abashed, every one glad of the thing done, but in their hearts detesting the
manner of the deed. The Lady still expecting an answer Alexander (after some
pause) thus replied* I must confess (Lady) the great c^urtesie and infinite
benefit received from you, in presenting me the head of an Outlaw, a Traitor,
and one that was to me a great obstacle and an hinderance in the smooth passage
to my intended victories; but when I understand it to be done by the hands of a
woman, nay a wife, the strange horridness of the fact t^kes away all the
thanks and reward due to the benefit I therefore command you instantly to
depart the Camp, and that with all speed possible; for I would not have the
savage and inhumane examples of the Barbarians, contaminate and infect the mild
and sort temper of the noble Grecians: With which words she was instantly
hurried from his presence. As noble a president of Justice in a Prince, as it
was an abhorred example of cruelty in a most unnatural wife. Q. Curt. lib. 8.
de Alexandri H^stor. From a remorselesse wife, I come now to as obdurate a
stepmother.

Pelops having married Hyppodamia, the daughter of Tanta^us and Eurianassa, had
by her two sons, Thiestes and Atreus, and by the nymph Danais a third son
called Crisippus, to which he seemed outwardly better affected then to the
former; on whom King Laius of Thebes casting an amorous eye, at length stole
him from his father. But Pelops with his two sons by Hyppodamia, made war upon
Laius, took him prisoner, and recovered Crisippus: and when he truly understood
that love was the cause of his rape, he was attoned with Laius, and an
inviolable league of amity combined betwixt them. Whilst the Theban yet
sojourned with Pelops, Hyppodamia persuaded with Atreus and Thiesles to
conspire against the life of Crisippus, as one that aimed at the succession of
the Kingdom: but not prevailing, she meditated with her self, how to despoile
him of life with her own hands, when having conveied the sword of Laius out of
his chamber, when he was fast sleeping she came to the bed of Crisippus, and
transpierced him as he lay, leaving the sword still in his body, and left the
place still undiscovered, accusing the Theban for his death: but the youth not
fully dead, recovered so much spirit as to discover the murtheresse; for which,
King Laius was acquitted, and she from her husband received condign punishment
for her imm^nity and murder, Dosythaeus in Peloped^s. Progne, to revenge the
rape of her sister Philomela upon her husband Ter^us, King of Thrace, feasted
him with the body of his own son, Ilis; of which, you may read at large in
Ovid's, Metamorphosis. Some women have been so unnatural, as to betray their
fathers. After Troy was utterly subverted and despoiled, King Diomede, (one of
the most valiant amongst the Kings of Greece) in the return toward his
Country, being by storms and tempests violently cast upon the coast of Thrace,
where Lycas the son of Mars (...) reigned and according to the bloody custom
of the Country, sacrificed all such strangers as landed upon his Continent; his
daughter Callirhoe surprised with the love of King Diomede, not only released
him from durance, but betrayed the life of Lycus her father into into his
hands; notwithstanding^ ^ne most ^^e^cherously left her: for which ingratitude
(and urged with remorse of conscience, for proving so unnatural to him from
whom she had her being) by strangling her self, she despairingly expired Juba,
lib. 3. Libicorum. Paralleld with this, is that which we read of Calph^nius,
Crassus, an illustrious Roman, and sent by M. Regulus against the Massilians,
to take in a most defensible Castle called Garaetium: but by the cross
disaster of fortune being surprised in the siege thereof, and reserved the next
day to be sacrificed to Saturn, being in despair either of rescue, or life*
Besa^ia daughter to the King (who was then possessed of the Fort) falling in love
with Calphurnius, not only delivered up unto him the Keys of the Castle, that
he might freely escape with life, but betrayed unto him the liberty and life of
her father: but after being degenerately forsaken by him, she desperately slew
herself, Hegesinax, lib. 3. rerum Africarum. I am weary with setting down these
immauities in women, and Polyhymnia invites me to a new argument.

Of Women strangely preserved from death, and such as have unwillingly been the
death of their fathers.
NIceas Maleotes (as Plutarch in his thirteenth Parallel testates) reports,
that when Hercules for the love of I^le the daughter of Cacus, invaded
Occhalia, and she abhorring the embraces of him who had before slain her
father, retired her self for safety into the strongest Cittadell in her
Country; in which being straightely besieged by Hercules, and the Fort ready to
be surprised and taken, she having no way to escape, and unwilling to stand to
the mercy of so loving an enemy, mounted up into the highest Tur^et of the
Castle, and from thence cast her self headlong down toward the Earth, but the
wind gathering under her loose garments so extenuated the fall, that she came
the ground without any hurt at all; by which miraculous fortune she enjoied a
desperate life, and Hercules a most desired mistress. Answerable to this, is
that which Theophilus Italicorum tertio relates: The Romans in the Etrurian
war, instituted Valerius Torquatus General of their forces, he having beheld
Clusia the daughter of the Tusoan King, grew enamoured of the Virgin, and sent
Ambassadors to demand her of her father: but she not willing to make any
contract with her Countries enemy, and her father as loath to contradict his
daughter, the motion and offer of Torquatus, was peremptorily denied; at which
enraged, he begitt the City with a strong and fearful siege, engaging the
defendants to all dangers and difficulties, insomuch, that Clusia timorous of
surprisall, and p^^ferring death before captivity, threw her self from the
highest part of the wall, to destroy her self in the open view and face of the
enemy* but either (as the former late mentioned) favored by the winds, or (as
my Author tells me) greatly supported by the hand of Venus; or whether the
pitious earth unwilling to hurt or harm such fair and wel-featured limbs, and
therefore with more then accustomed courtesy, favorably received her into her
into her lap, I am not certain, but the Lady (to the wonder of all the
beholders) was taken up whole and sound, without wound, or the least
astonishment, and from thence conducted to the Tent of the General, who
because he made but offer to violate her chastity, the ever nobly minded
Romans, not only took from him the charge of the Army (alleging that he that
could not govern his own affections, was not fit to command others) but
confined him into the Island Co^sica adjacent, near to the continent of Italy.
Not much less strange was that of Perhibaea, the daughter of Accathous, who
when Telamon the son of Aeacus and Eudeides, came into the City of (...), where
she then (...) with her father, and took her at that advantage, that she was by
him devi^gined and (...) his name or person not being known by her o^ any, and
so privily escaped and fled away by night. (...) after perceiving her by
assured tokens to be grown big with child, and suspecting it to be done by some
one of his Citizens or Subjects, he was thereat so incensed, that banishing all
piety or patenall pity, he delivered her into the hands of one of his Captains,
commanding him either to kill her with his sword, or cast her into the sea: the
soldier undertakes the imposition of his Sovereign upon him, with many vows
and protestations to perform his pleasure with all strictness and severity; but
by the way comm^^^^ting her wretched fortune, and loath to be the (...) of such
youth and beauty, created for better use: coming near the Seashore, and
spying a ship there at Anchor, he sold her to the chief merchant for a sum of
money, returning to the father with an assured relation of his daughters death*
The (...) presently with this fair purchase hoised sail, and a (...) and
gentle gale favoring them, they attained unto the Port of Salamine, and there
harbored, where purposing to make sale of their merchandise, they exposed them
to the public view, amongst the rest they set a price on the Princess
Perhibaea. T^lamon who was Duke of Salamine, and then resiant in the City, took
his attendants with him, and hearing of this new Merchant, went down to the
(...) to take the first view of his goods, and provide himself of such things
as he wanted; amongst all, the fair Perhibaea pleased him best, whose face he
well knew, and still remembered what had past betwixt them: he bargained for
her, paid down her price, conducted her to his Palace, and there acquainted
her with the true passage of all his former proceedings. Within few months she
brought him a son which he called Ajax: and this was that Ajax Telamon, who at
the siege of Troy betwixt the two armies combatted with bold Hector, in the
plain of Scamander: you shall read this History in Aretades Guidius, in his
second book inscribed Insul^. The next that insues, has correspondence with
this. Lucius Trocius had a beautiful young daughter called Florentia, she was
stuprated by the Roman Calphurnius, and when the act came to the knowledge of
her father, delivered to the trusty executioner to be cast into the Sea; who in
the same manner was by him pitied and sold to a Merchant, his ship being then
bound for Italy, where she being exposed to public sale, was seen, known, and
bought by Calphurnius, by whom he had a son called Contruscus. I proceed to
such as have unwittingly been the death of their parents.

Evenus, the son of Mars and Steropes, by his wife Alcippa the daughter of
O^nnemanus, had a beautiful female issue, whom he called Marpissa, who had
vowed perpetual virginity; her, Idas the son or Aphareus ravished and stole
away, which her father hearing, prosecuted him even unto his own Country, but
in vain, for not able to overtake them, and returning without her, in grief of
his lost daughter whom he so deerly loved, he threw himself into the river
Lycormus, and was there drowned; some think that by his death the stood lost
his name, and was ever after celled Evenus; D^sithae lib 1. rerum Italicarum.
Anius King of the Etruscious, having a rarely featured damsel to his
daughter, called Salia, whose virginity he had vowed to Diana, and therefore
admitted no suitors, though many great and rich offers made unto her: at
length, as she was spotting abroad amongst other Virgins she was espied by one
Calthetas, a hopeful young Gentleman, and ^^nobled by his family, who at the
st^st sight of her was so extasi'd with her beauty, that maugre all tear of
pursuit or danger, he snatched her up in his arms, and used such means, that he
got her safe within the walls of Rome. Her father following the ravisher, but
not overtaking him, was struck into such a deep sorrow, that desperate of all
comfort or counsel, he violently cast himself into the next Foord that parted
Rome and his own Kingdom, which ever since that time still bears the name of
Anius. Calihetus had by Salia two brave sons, Latinus and Salinus, who were
famous in their noble and flourishing issue, insomuch, that some of the best
and greatest Families in Rome, were proud from them to derive their ancestrie.
This history is recorded by Aristides Milesius, by Alexander and Polihistor,
lib. tertio Italicorum.

Of Clamorous Women commonly called Scolds.
GNeius Pompeius to make his faction the stronger, by his friend Munatius sent
to Cato, that he would be pleased, of his two Neeces to contract the one of
them to himself, the other to his son: by whom Cato sent word back to
Pompeius, That though he as a friend took gratefully the free proffer of his
friendship and alliance, yet being a man, he had ever kept himself from being
intricated in the snares of women; but he protested he would adhere unto him in
a more firm league of amity, than could be contracted by kindred, if he would
study any thing conducent and profitable for the Commonweal, but against the
public good he would neither give nor take hostages; calling his Neeces (who
as some write were his daughters, given so in matrimony) no better then
pledges, of much future inconvenience, especially in matters of State, where
the Commonweal is distracted and divided. Eras. 5. Apophtheg. Socrates was
wont to say, that he had patiently suffered three torments, Grammar, Poverty,
and a scolding Wife, Xintippe, two of which he had prettily well evaded,
namely, Grammar and Poverty, but the morosity of a scold he could never put
off. Anton. Parle. 2. Meless. Sermon. 34. The like may be said of Sausarion the
Comic Poet, equally tormented with a bitter and railing wife. Pittacus
Mitelenus having married the sister of D^aco the son of Penthilius, a proud,
insolent and railing woman, persuaded a deer friend of his to marry with the
other sister, for if he were never so much given to wrath and anger, she would
teach him sufferance and patience. Laertius when Georgias the Sophist at the
solemnity of the Olympic games, had made an elaborate Oration concerning
concord, and to persuade men to uninity: one M^lanthius in the conclusion or
catastrophe thereof spoke aloud, This man persuades all Greece to peace, who
having but one wife, and three maids at home, yet his house is never without
clamor and dissension, and with all his smooth filed phrases cannot make his
own peace, Eras. 6. Apophtheg. Mar. Pacuvius upon a time said (weeping) to his
familiar friend and neighbor Actius (alias) Arius, Deer friend (says he) I
have a tree in my garden, in my mind the most prodigious and unhappy that ever
the earth produced, or gave sap unto, for upon that my first wife hanged her
self, and after that the second, and now but this morning my third and last;
to whom Arius his neighbor replied, I wonder you being a learned man and
approved for your wisdom, should be any way grieved at these successes and
chances. D^i boni (inquit) quot tibi dispendia arbor iste suspendit? i. Oh you
gods, how many of thy damages and losses have thou hanged upon that tree; and
proceeded thus, Deer friend give me some of those grafts and syents, that I may
plant them in my Orchard or garden. Valerius records this in an Epistle to
Rufinus. As also Cicero reports the like of a Cicilian, in 2 de Orat. and
Gyraldus Dial. 8. Poetarum. Even Cato Ceasortus could not escape a brawling and
crabbed wi^e, though he married her from an ignoble stock and family. Guide
Bitturn says, That Hadrianus had a wife called Sabina, hard, perverse,
untoward, rude in her behavior toward her husband, and worthy to be
repudiated, and her bed and society abandoned. Alphonsus King of Naples,
demanding of one Antonius Panormita, What noble Neapolitan Gentlemen were
delighted in Hunting, or whether any late Writer had published any Treatise,
concerning the goodness and excellency of dogs? To whom Panormit^. answered, I
beseech thee (O King) rather ask this Knight (pointing to one that was then in
presence) who can better resolve you, who for the space of forty years has
been continually so conservant amongst such creatures, that every night he
beddeth with a Canicula (which word as it signifies a B^ach or Bitch, so it is
taken for a detractor or snarling slanderer, as also for a Dog-fish:) and
proceeded, Therefore he (O King) can best describe unto you their natures and
conditions. This Knight of Naples (whose name for his honors sake is concealed)
only smiled at the taunt given by Antonius, well apprehending that by Canicula
he intended his wife; a woman barkingly clamorous, most contentious and bitter,
Pontanus. Gregorius Hamburgensis, a famous and eloquent Lawyer (amongst all the
German practisers the most approved) when all his busy imploiments were ended
in the Court of Caesar, where he was stayed some two months, or thereabouts;
and (as we say in our English phrase) the Term being, and he returning home to
his own house, not far from the Town of Nurimburgh (where he then dwelled) he
met with a friend and neighbor, who after some familiar salutes past betwixt
them, told him, That his wife was living, and in good health at home to whom
shaking his head, he made this short reply, (...) vivit, saneob^^, (...) If my
wife be living, then am I but dead, thereby intimating, that the mo^osity of a
c^rst wife is no better then a daily death to her husband, Aeneas (...). reb.
Gestis Alphons^^ Thisponius the (...) of the learned Council to King Alphonsus,
having at one time three hundred pieces of Gold stolen from (...) which was part
of the Dower of a perverse and peevish (...) whom he had lately married, for
which being wondrous (...) and pensive in the presence of the King, Alpho^sus
looking upon him, and seeming to commiserate his sadness, broke out into these
terms, O how happy a man were Thisponius, if the thieves had stolen away his
wife, and left the Gold behind them P^normita, lib 1 de Gestis Alphons.
Euripides, the most excellent of the Greek Tragic Poets, had two wives; the
name of the first was Cher^le, or (as S^^das calls her) Chaerin^, the daughter
of M^n^sil^chus, by whom he had three sons, M^^siloches, the Actor or
Stage-plaier, Mnesarchides the Merchant, and the third, Eu^^pides the Orator:
yet partly for suspicion of adultery, and by reason he led with her an unquiet
life, after so hopeful an issue, she was divorced from him. After this
separation, he married another called Melitto, who being apprehended in
adultery with Ctesiphon the Plaier, he was so branded for a Cuckold, and so
taunted and jeasted at by the Comic Poets in the public Theater, that he was
forced to leave the City, and to remove himself into Macedonia, where he spent
the remainder of his life in the Court of King Archelaus, Gel. lib. 15. cap.
20. Athenaeus, lib. 13. Arnus, Tarquinius, and Tull^a, lived together in
perpetual discord and dissension, by reason of her unto (...) and crabbed
condition. Adrianus B^rl^ndus tells us of an Inn keeper or Host (a pleasant and
trolick fellow) who when a guest of his complained unto him, that he ^ould not
endure such noise and clamor, for his wives tongue never ceased walking,
finding fault with this thin^, then that; besides, there was no cessation of
her perpetual brawling and chiding with her maids and servants. To whom the
merry Host replied, And I pray (my friend) is this a just cause for your
impatience, or discontent? What do you think of me then, that for two and
thirty years space have had this noise and clamor continually in mine ea^s,
night and day, without ceasing, and yet you see with what sufferance I bear it;
and cannot you endure it for the space of a few minutes? By which words he not
only gave present satisfaction to his guest, but converted his wives anger into
laughter. Servius Tullius, King of the Romans, conferred upon his two daughters
upon the two Tarquins, Aruns and Superbus: of several dispositions were the
men, and of sundry conditions the women; as they were opposite in humor, they
were as unfitly disposed. To Aruns (a man of a quiet and ^^ld temper) Tullia
(Lady (...) and daring) was given: on Superbus (a Prince haughty and insol^n^)
the other (being a modest and ^eek Lady) was bestowed. Disparity of minds,
could not brook the inequality of manners: Therefore bold and bloody Tullia,
poisons her fair and gentle conditioned Aruns; the other modest and
mild-tempered sister is made away by the proud and ambitious Superbus: the best
are lost, the worst left They two contract an incestuous Marriage, Pride with
Cruelty, and Immanity with Ambition; Murder is the ground o^ cause, and
Treason and Usurpation the prodigious effect: she complots the death of her own
natural father; and he, the ruin of his liege, Lord, and Sovereign: she a
Par^icide, he a R^gicide. The King is betwixt them slain, over whose dead body
she caused her Chariot to be drawn. Her cheeks blushed not, when the wheels of
her Wagon were stained with her fathers blood. And so much to give Tullia a
short character, the most insolent of Wives, and the worst of Daughters. Of a
lower voice, softer spirit, and more temperate condition, were these wives
following. Chilonia the wife of Cleombrotus, King of Sparta, and daughter of
Leonides, who had before soverainised, when in those civil combustions the ^on
in law had expulsed the father, and compelled him into exile she never ceased
to importune her hnsband, till she had called him home from banishment, But in
process of time, when Fortune had turned her wheel, and Leo^ides in those
dissentions (having got the better) had confined Cleombrotus, she was an hourly
intercessor for the repeal of her husband; but finding her father to be obdure,
and her (...) by him not listened to, though she might in all pleasure and ^ase
have happily spent her age in her own City with her father, she rather made
choice to be a faithfu^l companion in all distresses with her husband, Fulgos
lib. 6. cap. 7. Anaxandr^des, the son of Leontias, married with his sisters
daughter, whom he exceedingly loved, but because she was (...) and that by her
he had no issue, the Ephori made suit unto him to be divorced from her, and
would have compelled him unto it: but when he had absolutely denied to
condescend with them in that point, they made another request unto him, That he
would take unto him another wife more fruitful, lest the most fortunate issue
of Euristaeus might in him be extingished. He therefore at their entreaties
took to him a second wife, namely Perinetades, the daughter of Demarmenus, and
so brought her home to his house; where (which is strange) the two women lived
together peaceably, without emulation or envy. His last wife brought him a son,
whom he called Cleomenes: and not long after, his first wife (before barren)
made him the fortunate father of three sons; the first Dorieus; the second,
Leonides; the third Cleombrotus: but Cleomenes (the eldest by the second wife)
succeeded in the sovereignty, Herodot. lib. 5. Thesca, the sister of Dionysius,
being married to Polixenus, who having entered into a conjuration with other
noble Gentlemen, to supplant the Tyrant, but fearing discovery fled for his
best safety: Upon whose flight, Dionysius calls his sister into question, as one
that must of necessity be privy to his escape. To whom she boldly thus
answered: Think thou (O Dionysius) thy sister to be a woman of that servile
and degnerate condition, that had she known the least purpose of his
retirement, she would not have made her self a companion in all his
Navigations and Travel? Erasm. Apophtheg. lib. 5. Caius Caligula the Emperor,
having found Herod (the husband to Herodias) Tetrarch of Galilee, engaged in a
revolt from the Empire, with Artabanus King of the Parthians, amerced him in a
great sum of money for that defect; and till it was levied and paid into the
Treasury, gave him in custody to King Agrippa, whom he had found loiall unto
him, and in whose fidelity he much trusted. He after banished Herod into a
Lions (a City of France) with an irrevocable doom of exile imposed upon him:
but understanding Herodias to be sister to the wife of Agrippa (whom he much
favored) out of Herod's mulct, or sine, he proportioned her a large Dower,
reserved in the hands of Agrippa to her use, as not dreaming she would have
been a companion with him in his confinement, To which extraordinary grace from
the Emperor she thus replied: You (O Emperor) as best becomes your Majesty,
speak like a royal and munificent Prince, but the Conjugal Bond of Love and
Piety, in which I am tied to a husband, is to me an impediment, that I am not
capable of this great Largess, and unmerited bounty. Unmeet it is, that I (who
have been a partaker with him in all his prosperous and flourishing fortunes)
should now forsake him, and not be a companion with him in the worst that
disaster or adversity can inflict. This noble answer Caeligula took in such
scorn and high displeasure, to see himself in magnanimity and greatness of
spirit to be exceeded by a woman, that he banished her with her husband Herod;
and the bounty (before bestowed on her) he conferred upon her brother in law,
Agrippa, Joseph. in Antiq. Cleomenes, the son of Anaxandrides and Perinetades
(but lately spoken of) being expulsed from Sparta by Antigonus, King of
Macedonia, fled for refuge to Ptolomeus, King of Egypt: whither his wife would
have followed him, but dissuaded by her parents (notwithstanding a strict guard
was set over her) yet in the night she beguiled her keepers; and having
provided a horse for the purpose, posted with all possible speed to the next
Port Town, that was least suspected; where hiring a ship, with all the Coin and
Jewels then about her, she sailed into Egypt, and there spent the remainder of
her days with him in his uncomfortable exile, Fulgos. lib. 6. cap. 7. I have
but one more (gentle Reader) to trouble thy patience with at this present.

Blanca Rubea Patavina, the wife of Baptista a Porta, betaking her self into
the same free privileged Town, of which Bassianus was then governor, and
whither her husband for his safety was retired in the year of our Redemption,
1253. when Acciolinus the Tyrant having lost Padua, when bending all his forces
to the surprisall of Bassianus, compassing that at length by fraud and
stratagem, which by opposition and violence he could never have accomplished;
in the entering of which Town Baptista was slain, and Blanca Rubea being armed,
and fighting boldly by his side till she saw him fall, was (notwithstanding her
masculine valor) taken prisoner by a soldier, and presented to the Tyrant;
who gazing on her rare feature (much more beautified by the rich armor she then
had on) grew exceedingly enamoured on this manly Virago, and first with fair
enticing blandishments he courted her love, but finding no possibility to
satiate his libidinous affections that way, where fair means failed, he
purposed force: which to avoid, and to prevent the dishonor intended her, she
cast her self out from an high Bay-window, two-stories from the gronnd; where
being taken up half dead, with much difficulty she was recovered* No sooner was
she well able to walk, but the Tyrant still prosecuted his beastly and brutish
desires; which she still opposing, with that small strength he had his left, he
caused his servants to bind her according to lustful direction, and not able
to stir hand nor (...), in that horrible manner ravished her. At length being
loosed from those hateful and unsufferable bonds, she (with what patience she
could) dissembled her grief, and wrought so far with some that compassioned
her miseries, that she had liberty to visit her dead husband in his Tomb, into
which with loud shrieks and passionate lamentation) she entered, still invoking
her husbands name, and with all the force she had, plucked the great and
ponderous Tombstone upon her, the weight whereof forced the breath out of her
bosom. And by this means she purchased the honorable name of a most chaste
wife, at which her life still aimed; and a common grave with her husband, which
even in death she most desired: one stone being the cover to both their
Hearses. Bernard. Scardeonus, lib. 3. H^stor. Patavin^.

Variety of discourse concerning Women.
APollo, or the Sun, is said to have five Daughters, which by their names
appear to be no other then the five Senses: The first is called Pasiphae, or
Sight, of (...), i. Omnibus apparens, ^. Visible to all; for the Sight is a
Sense that has inspection into all the rest: for the eye sees him that calls,
or clamours, beholds him that feels, observes those that taste, and intend such
as smell. The Suns second Daughter, is Medea, or Hearing, of the Greek word
(...), i. Nullam visionem. The the third, Phaedra, or Odoratus, of (...),
Afferens suavitatem, i. Affoording sweetness and pleasantness D^^ce is derived
of (...), i. Sap^^is Judex, To judge by taste; or Acre Judcare, that is, To
censure ac^^ely. The Sirens we^e the daughters of the flood Achelous, and the
Muse M^lp^mene, so says Hyginus: others derive them from Calliope. They are by
the Greeks called Tractatoriae, as attracting or insinuating into the ears of
man by their several illecebrations, or enticements; by Song, by Sight, by
Custom. They are three in number; the first excels in Voice, the second in the
Harp, the third in the Pype: it was so ordered by the Fates, that whosoever
listened to their music should instantly perish, but when any one escaped their
incantations, they themselves should live no longer; which destiny of theirs
was made good in Ulysses. For stopping his own ears and the ears of his
sailers, with wax (by the counsel of Mercury) and causing them all to be tide
to the Masts of the ship, when these Sirens perceived that they were prevented
they tumbled themselves from the Rocks headlong into the Seas, and were so
drowned. The place still bears their name, and is called Syrenides, it lies
betwixt Cicilie and Italy. Some think that by these Syrenes, were intended no
other then strumpets, who by their enchanting insinuations and luxurious
flatteries, have been the ruin of many eminent and excellent men, as likewise
of others meanlier degreed and qualified; but whatsoever he be that by his
wisdom can prevent them, is his own preserver, and their destroier. Their
bodies upward were feminine, withal fair; and from the navel downward beastial
or fishie, denoting unto us the ugliness of sin and deformity of lust. Diverse
differ about their number; These are reckoned unto us, Aglaosi, Telsipoi,
Pisno, Iligi: some think the City Parthinope to take denomination from
Parthenopaea, once numbered amongst these Mermaids, because she was there
buried: Others reckon amongst them the two Nymphs, Leucosia and Lygia. Plutarch
in Amator speaks of Oenanthe a she-minstrel, and a dancer, as also Aristonica,
Aglais, and others. These and the like of their alluring profession, to these
Sirens may not unfitly be compared.

Some women have to honest purposes changed their garments, Women that have
dissembled their shape.
and dissembled themselves in men's habits; laudable it was in Theodora a Virgin
of Antioch, who when a rude and rough hewed soldier was sent unto her into
prison, forcibly to despoile her of her virgin chastity, she with her modest
looks and becoming tears mixed with passionate persuasions, not only mollified
his obdurate heart and deterred from his wicked purpose, but won him to change
habits with her, by which fortunate stratagem she escaped out of prison, and so
prevented the threatened slaughter intended her by the tyrant Dioclesian,
Ambros. lib. 2. de Virgin. Euphrostna a maid of Alexandria, took upon her a
man's habit, and for the space of thirty six years dissembled her S^x unknown to
any, all which time she spent in a religious mon^stery only for devotion sake.
Valaterran. Dicearchus apud Caelium testates, That only for the love of
learning, and to be truly instructed in the grounds of Philosophy, Lasthenia,
Martinea, Ax o hoa, and Phliasia came disguised in men's habits into Plato's
School, and were his daily auditors, into which place women were not to be
admitted. Pelagia a woman of Antioch, being in her youth solely given over to
voluptuousness and pleasure, at length was so retired from all wordly delights
and vanities, that abandoning humane society, she assumed the shape of a man,
lest her S^x might be discovered, and so betaking her self to the sollitude of
a most desolate wilderness, led a contemplative and devout life till she
expired her last. The like I have before related of Marina, who with her habit
changed her name to Marinus, and Eugenia to Eugenius. Here I might fi^ly
introduce Johanna Anglicana, but I have reserved a place for her amongst the
learned. Not to the like commendable purpose, we read how Semiramis bet^aid her
Sex, and for many years together beguiled the eyes of her people, took upon her
the style of a King, and reigned in the person of her son.

A^ those before remembered have dissembled their shape, Women that h^ve changed
their Sex.
so there be some recorded in history, that have miraculously changed their
Sex. In Phestus a City of Creet, lived one Lict^^ or Lignus of a noble family,
who being married to Telethusa, a L^dy of equal birth, both nobilitated as well
in wealth as parentage, he as an addition to the rest, being honorable above
others by his place and office; his wife being great with child, and something
near her delivery, ^e ^ot only besought her at the first, but after injoined
her upon her life of two things, the one was that she should bring him a male
child to inherit, the other, that if it proved to be a girl, she should
instantly b^reave it of life. Hard was the imposition to a mother, and i^
somewhat penetrated the heart of the father, for he no less wept to speak it,
then she moistened her che^ks to hear it; it drew tears from both, yet by reason
of a vow solemnly m^de to the gods, notwithstanding all her passionate
intercessions, he stood obstinate from being removed, and she altogether in
despair, because he would be no further entreated. All her small hope was now
in the hazard, as not knowing what her issue would prove; if a male, the joy of
her life, if a female her double death, as not intending to survive her infant.
The night before her delivery, she was comforted in her dream, in which a
Vision appeared to her, to command her to save the child howsoever, for the
gods would take it into their protection; this somewhat cheared (...): A girl
is born, the Sex is concealed betwixt her (...), the father is proud of his
young (...) the mother, and performs the ceremonies of the vow before (...)
does the countenance of the infant any way betray the Sex, for as Ovid
Metamorph. lib. 9. says of it: Cultus erat (...), facies quam sive puellae
Sive dares pueri ^icrat formosus uterque.
The habit of a B^y she wore,
And it had such a face,
As whether she were Boy or Girl,
It either Sex would grace.
Lictus gives it the name of the grandfather, and calls it Iphis, a name that
may belong equally either to man or woman; the mother holds it as a fortunate
Omen. The infant grows to be ripe for marriage, and the father is as ready to
provide a wife for his supposed son: Ianthe is found, the daughter of Dyctaeus
and Thaleste, a young damosel of large dower and commendable beauty; Iphi^ and
Ianthe were of equal years and alike in feature, they were bred together,
brought up and schooled together, and as they had like instructions, so they
had like affections, they were paralelled in love, but not in hopes, Ianthe
expected to be possessed of Iphis, Iphis was in despair ever to enjoy Ianthe,
as her fear still grows greater, so the marriage day approaches nearer, the
fathers joy and comfort is the mothers dread and grief, the ones exaltation to
bliss, the others dejection to sorrow. The Contract is past, the Nuptial day
come; there are two Brides, and no Bridegroom: notwithstanding, Hymen is
present, Juno at hand, V^nus not far off, and Lucina (the goddess of
Childbirth) in hope of future imploiment. The mother retires to her prayers,
the daughter to her tears: Where humane hope fails, and Nature opposes (or at
least helps not:) whither should we sly but to the gods, for assistance? So
they repair to the Altar, where they humbly kneel, and as devoutly pray.
Prayers are said to be the daughters of Jupiter, and have at all hours access
to the ears of their father. Their Orisons ended, the mother and the daughter
returned; if not helped, yet in their resolutions armed against hurt. In the
way back, as Ovid my Master tells me, it thus happened; Matter abit Templo,
sequitur Comes Iphis euntem
Quam solita est majore gradu, etc.
The mother from the Temple, Iphis guides,
She follows her, but yet with larger strides
Then when she thither went; and thinks it strange
To find within her self such sudden change,
Because she feels about her something grow,
The like she never saw, nor yet does know.
The whiteness in her cheek begins to fade,
She seems more swart; besides, more breadth is laid
Upon her spreading shoulders; she is now
More strong then erst, and in her modest brow
A look more manly: her fair hair, that hung
Below her Waste, still shortens; and her Tongue
Has got a bigger tone: nor marvel, when
Iphis the Maid may now be ranked amongst men.


What, and how great joy this prodigious change was, I leave to them that can
truly apprehend the happiness of such a hopeless and unexpected fortune
betwixt two Lovers: but whether this was done merely by the miraculous work of
the gods, or were possible in Nature, might be disputed. To this purpose, he
that collected the Memorable Histories of these times, has quoted an Author,
in many things beleevable, That the like has been known in our later ages:
yea, children have been born, that by the Midwives, Nurses and Parents, have
been mistaken for daughters, and so continued for some years. But growing to
the age of twelve, or thereabouts, and are able to distinguish of good or evil
(being capable of passions, and subject to affections) whether Love or Time
has produced these strange effects, I am not certain: but those manly parts
that were before inverted, and concealed within the body, have burst forth, and
been made apparent; insomuch, that they have been forced to change their women's
names into men's, with the exchange of their habits; and after made choice of
wives, and as this Iphis to Ianthe, have been joifully married. Ovid in his
twelfth book of Metamorphosis, remembers the like transhape from the mouth of
Nestor. Caenis (says he) the daughter of Elataeus, one of the most beautiful
virgins of Thessaly, and of such fame, that even Peleus, the father of Achilles
(amongst many others) was an earnest suitor unto her to have made her his Bride
and Queen: but the proud Girl despising both his proffers and person, gave him
a like repulse with the rest, pretending a perpetual vow of Chastity. At length
Neptune grew enamoured of her, and encountered her at such opportunity and
advantage, that ma^ger all resistance, she was by him vitiated and devirgined.
To recompense which injury, he bad her ask whatsoever was in his power (being a
god) to grant, and she should be recompensed to the fullness of her wishes and
desires. She fearing lest the temptation of her incomparable beauty might bring
her in danger of the like violence, and to base prostitution (which she above
all things hated) to him she thus answered: Magnum (Caenis ait) facit haec
injuria votam
Tale pati, jam posse nihil, da femina ne sim,
Omnia praestiteris, etc.
My injury does make me (Caenis said)
To ask a mighty (...), which grant I pray,
(That I no more in this kind be betra^'d)
Make me to be no woman from this day;
It Is all I beg. The last words that she spoke,
Seemd to be uttered with more manly sound
Then were the first: Great Neptune for her sake
Had granted it (which in her self she found)
And added more; to recompense this deed,
Never shall that smooth skin by weapon bleed.


After which time she proves invulnerable, changed her name to Caneus,
practiced arms, and proved a famous soldier. She was in that great battle
betwixt the Centaurs and the Lapithes, where fell by her hand, Stiphilus,
Bromus; Antimachus, Helimus, and Pyrachmon, five valiant Centaurs. Now though
this may seem somewhat to savor of fabulous Poetry, may not she (leaving out
the compression of Neptune, or being made wound free) by the former probability
so late remembered (being born of a warlike race, and having in her the inherent
seeds of hereditary valor) though she was first thought a damosel, yet when
time produced her virility, make show of that, imperfect Nature had not til
then ripened, and practice A^ms, agreeable with the brave spirits of her
ancestors? And because either her good fortune assisted her, or (...) her, that
she never received any apparent wound in battle; may she not therefore (and
without any palpable absurdity) be thought invulnerable; And so much to Apology
(in the way of discourse) for those supposed impossibilities; only producing
these Histories least any thing (that savors not of immodesty) that can be
spoke of women, should be left unremembred.

(...) Polyhimnia.
FINIS.
THE EIGHTH BOOK inscribed URANIA.
Entreating of Women every way learned* of Poetresses, and Wi^ches, etc.
POlyhimnia remembers me to look up to her Sister Urania, whose contemplation
is in the Stars and Planets; where me thinks I behold the t^^lve Signs, as
Mani^us (in his first book Astronomicon) thus describes their order: Aurato
Princeps A^ies in vellere fulgens
Respicit, admira^s adversum surgere Taurum, etc.
The Princely Ram clad in his go^den wool,
Looks back, admiring to behold the Bull
Against him rise; who with a cheerful face
Calls to the Twins to bid them mend their pace:
The Crab these follows, and the Lion than;
Next, the Celestial M^id, not known by m^n:
Libra comes after, who (lest Time should fail)
Weighes out the Nights and Days in equal scale,
And calls the Scorpion on, who in his train
Bears a bright fulgent star, at which (in vain)
The Centaur (with his string drawn to his ear)
Aims his keen shaft: the Goat does next appear,
That's Capricornus called, who often times lowers,
Because to quench his star, Aquarius powers
His Laver forth: next after him, are placed
Pisces, that of the twelve Signs are the last.


And now whilst mine eyes are yet fixed upon the stars, let it appear no
unprofitable digression, to speak something concerning Astronomy. Atlas for his
skill in that Art, the Poets fabled him to support Heaven on his shoulders; and
Endimion for observing the course of the Moon, was therefore said to be her
friend and lover. The Babylonians are reported to be the first observers of the
Stars and Planets, by whom the Grecians being instructed, ^^und out the two
^^les, devised the Dial, and distinguished the Day and the Night into four and
twenty hours Zoroastres that flourished in the time that Ninus reigned in
Assyria, was in this Art famous. Palamides the son of Nauplius and Climene was
the first amongst the Greeks that accommodated the Weeks, Months, and Years,
and proportioned them to the true course of the Sun; he observed the terrible
eclipse of the Sun, and taught it to be a mere natural cause, and not
pr^digious, as it was then seated. Philostratus in Hero^cis. Thales Milesius
one of the seven Wise men of Greece, applied himself to this study, and as
Calimachus witnesses of him, was the first that disputed upon Visa major, as
Eudemus predicted the Eclipse of the Sun to the Ionians* which happened in the
time that Haliattes was King of Lydi^, and fought a great and terrible battle
against A^axaris King of the Medes Hero^otus in Clio. Laertius, lib. 1.
Anaximander Milesius the Scholar of Thales, first taught that the Moon shined
only by a borrowed light, and that the Sun equalled in bigness the compass of
the whole frame of the Earth, and was the purest fire; he made the first Sun
dial in Lacedemon, and placed it where it might best give a shadow from the
reflection of the Sun; he observed the Equinoctial, and made Spheres and
Horoscopes, Laert. lib. 2. Anaxagoras Cl^zimonius taught, That the Sun was a
fire perpetually burning greater in the circumference then the Island of
Pelop^n^esus, he called it a fiery Stone; he predicted that a stone should fall
from the Orb of the Sun, which happened near to Aego^ a flood in Thrace, in the
second year of the seventy eight Olympiad. This made Euripides his scholar in
Phaetontide, to call the Sun a golden Turfe; and that the Moon contained within
her Sphere, Houses, and Dwellings, Hills, Valleys, Forests, Beasts, and People.
He affirmed the Galaxia or Milky path, to be a mere reflex of the Sun, and no
inter-light arising from the Stars; Comets he taught to be a concourse of the
wandering Stars, and the flames or beards which proceed from them loose sparks
shaken by the air: Being asked for what end he was born into the world, he
answered, Only to have inspection into the Sun, the Moon and the Planets,
Laert. lib 2. Plin. lib. 2. cap. 60. In this were eminent Parmenides Eleates,
the scholar of Xenophon, Leucippus Eleates, Democrates Abderites, Xenocrates
Chalcidonius, who writ six books de Astrologia, as Laertius witnesses, lib. 4.
Eudoxus Guidius, Theophrastus Erisius, Oenopides Chius, Meton Lacedemonius
(both remembered by Aelianus) Protagorus Astrologus, with infinite others: and
among these Hyppatia a learned woman of Alexandria, daughter of Theon the
famous Geometririan, and wife to the Philosopher Isiodorus; she writ of
Astronomy, kept school in Alexandria, where she was frequented by many worthy
scholars, she flourished in the time of Arcadius the Emperor, and was after by
such as envied her fame in learning, pitifully slain and massacred. From the
professors of this Art, I come to the effects thereof. It is related of Meton
the expert Astrologian, when the Athenian forces were to be shipped into Sicily
to fight against the Syracusans, he foreseeing by his Art the lamentable
success of that battle, which after proved accordingly, to avoid the danger
thereof, being a man of especial imploiment in that business, and to come off
without suspicion of fear or cowardice, he counterfeited madness; which the
better to confirm, he fired a Summer house of his own which stood nere Pyceta,
by which act he was judged to be distracted in his senses, and for that reason
dismissed from his charge. Plutarch in Alc^biad P. Nigidius Figulus was of the
Pythagorean Sect, excellent both in the Mathematics and Physic, of whom
Lucian. lib. 1. At Figulus cui cura deos secretaque mundi
Nosse fuit.
But Figulus, whose chief care was to find
And know the gods, with secrets from mankind
Concealed, etc.
He flourished in the time of Caesar, he was skilful in the revolutions of the
Heavens, above all that lived in his t^me: amongst other notable effect of his
Art, he predicted to Augustus being an infant, the Imperial purple. X^ph^lin
in Augusto. Scribonius Mathematicus told Lyvia, the mother of Tib^rius Caesar
being with child, that she was great with a male infant, not a female, adding
(wherein his Art failed) Verum sine D^^demate, i. But without a Diadem, as
ignorant then to what height the majesty of the Caesar's were to ascend,
Sabell^cus lib. 1. cap. 1. It is reported of the Astrologian Thrasillus, that
when Tiberius was banished by Augustus into the Island of Rhodes, and in his
greatest melancholy and discontent, had been often comforted by Thrasillus his
schoolmaster, as promising some speedy good news apprehended from his Art. But
on a time they two walking together upon the banks of the Sea, Tiberius still
fretting and ch^fing inwardly with himself, that he had been so long ^ooled
with vain and idle promises, by the Mathematician his Master, he rated him with
bitter and harsh terms, reviling his Art, and was ready to have cast him
headlong (in this extremity of rage) from the pro^o^^ory; when Theafillas
in^eating his patience but a few hours, espied a ship with full sails making
toward the harbor, when suddenly rejoicing, Be of good comfort Tiberius (says
he) for in yon ship is brought thee what thou most desire; which proved
accordingly, for they attending their landing, letters were delivered to
Tiberius from Augustus and Lyvia, of his repeal from exile, and his calling
back to Rome; at which time was laid the foundation of his Empire, Fulgos lib 8
cap 1^ Dion. in August. reports i^ thus, Tiberius walking with Thra^illus, and
privately intending to cast him from the rock, without any appearance of an^er,
on the sudden he grew wondrous melancholy and sad, upon which Tiberius
demanding the cause, Thrasillus answered, because I find there is now a pr^sent
mischief intended against me; upon which words the purpose of Tiberius was
altered, and the othe^s prescience by him much commended. Even Tiberius himself
was studious and expert in Astrology, Astronomy, and other mystical and hidden
Arts, insomuch that he caused many noble Gentlemen of Rome to be innocently put
to death, for no other reason then by calculating upon their nativity, he
presupposed them dangerous to the State; he observed the carriage and
conditions of all men, and whosoever excelled others in virtue, or entered into
the least popular love, him he cut off. It is said, that meeting with Galba,
upon his marriage day, he cast a steadfast look upon him, and withal uttered
these words, Et tu aliquando Principetum degust^his, i. And thou also shall in
time attain unto the Principality. The Emperor Hadrianus was not only
industrious in the attaining to the height of perfection in the knowledge of
all other general learning, but also in the Mathematics, insomuch that Marius
Maxim, affirms of him, That he assuredly knew all things that were spoken of,
or by him; he writ down every morning with his own hand, the chances and
successions that should follow the same day, and thus he continued to the hour
of his death. He was often heard to say of Verus whom he had adopted, O^^endent
terris hunc tantum fata, nec ultra
Esse sinent, etc.
The fates will to the earth but show him, then,
E^e fully seen, snatch him away again.
Volaterran Anturo lib. 23. says, That he continued the writing down daily of
those predictions, even to the last month of the year, in which he died, and
then gave over; speaking openly, that within the compass of that month he
should be gathered to his fathers, Fulgos. lib. 8. cap. 11. Severus Pertinax
having buried his wife Martia, made choice of a second called Julia, born of
obscure parents; for no other reason, but that by the inspiration into those
Stars that were predominant at her birth, he found that she was born to
participate of Imperial honors, Polaterran lib 23. An Astrologian in the Court
of Frederick the second ^mperor, with great ceremony and dili^^nce observed
Rodulphus Earl of Hausburch (a plain Gentleman of me^n fortunes, and lesser
hopes, and one whom all the other Courtiers despised) and still he was mocked
when he had neglected others of great place and office* to be only obsequious
to him: this being told to the Emperor, he commanded the Artist before him,
demanding the reason of his so doing; to whom he answered, Because O Frederick,
in this Rodulphus I see a succeeding Emperor, who when thy issue shall fail,
must repair the ^ignity of the Caesar's, and his noble memorable acts ^il all
Christendom with condign praises: neither was this presage frivolous or vainly
spoken, for in the year of our redemption, 1273, in the Calends of October,
this Rodulphus was by the princes of Germany confirmed in the Imperial
dignity, and crowned at Frankford, Caspinianus in Caesaribus. Marullus speaks
of one Byliotus an Astronomer, who died with eating of Mushroms, or such as we
call Toad-stools, his words be these: Dum cavet Astrologus prituris is sidera
amicis,
Dum sibi Boletos non cavet ipse perit.
Whilst to foresee his friends mishhaps,
His skill the Artist tried:
His own sad fate he could not find,
But eating Mushromes, di'd.
Rare effects of this Art were showed in Guido Bonatus for^ liviensis, who
lived under Martin the fourth, who sent to Guido Earl of Mountferrat, that if
such a day, and at such an hour he would issue out of the City, and by
stratagem invade his enemies posterity should remember him in that honorable
victory, in which he should give them a strange defeat, and assuredly overcome,
and himself receive a dangerous wound in the thigh. The Earl at the day
appointed issued from the City, and assaulted them, providing himself of all
things necessary about him for a wound* He wins the day, followed the victory,
was hurt in the same place, and after healed. Fulgos. lib 8 cap. 11. Egnat.
lib. 8. cap. 11. Paulus tertius Pope (Farnesius) was miraculously skilful in
Astrology: He sent to his son Peter Aloysius (who at that time with great
cruelty usurped in the Dukedom of Parma and Placentia) and warned him to
beware and take heed of his own safety the 10 day of September, in the year of
Grace, 1547. for that day was malignant to his life, and opposite to his good
above all others. The father (as my Author says) had power to forewarn his
son, but the son had not grace to prevent the danger; for the same day
predicted, he was slain in his own Castle by Augustinus Landus and Jacobus
Scotus, two Earls of Placentia, who pretended private conference with him.
Being dead, he was delivered to the long afflicted people; who first hanged him
up by the privy parts, and after (without all humane pity) tore him limb from
limb, to satisfy their malicious vengeance. Sleidanus, lib. 19. Comment. I
fear I have stayed too long amongst the Stars, and conferred so much amongst
those men, that some may fear I have forgot the Women: but it is otherwise, for
I now proceed with them. And first,

Of Women Orators that have pleaded their own Causes, or others.
Strange and admirable is the efficacy and force of Eloquence. It is writ of
the Poet Tyrtaeus, That when the Lacedaemonians had been in three sundry battles
defeated, and were in despair for ever reobtaining their pristine honors and
dignities, in this lowest of their dejectedness, he with his excellently
eloquent Verses so kindled and awaked their dull and drowsy courages, that they
the fourth time opposed the Messenians, their enemies; and wearing about them
the names of their noble ancestors (whose brave exploits he in his Poems had
celebrated) they reassumed their former forces and courages, with such an
addition and increase of fortitude, that they after grew unresistable.
Answerable to the facundity and eloquence of the Poet Tyrtaeus, was that of
Amesia, a modest Roman Lady, who being of a great crime accused, and ready to
incur the sentence of the Praetor, she in a great confluence stepped up among the
people, and without any advocate pleaded his own cause so effectually and
strongly, that by the public Suffrage she was freed and acquit from all
aspersions whatsoever* Which she did with such a manly yet modest constancy,
that from that time forward she was called Androgine. Val. Max. lib. 8. cap. 3.
Equal to her was Hortensia, the daughter of Q. Hortensius: she, when the Roman
Matrons had a grievou^ fine put upon them by the Tribunes, and when all the
Tribunes, Lawyers and Orators were afraid to take upon them the patronage of
their Cause* this discreet Lady in person pleaded before the Triumvirate, in
the behalf of the women; which she did boldly and happily; for as one
hereditary to her fathers eloquence, she prevailed so far that the greatest
part of the mulct imposed upon them was instantly remitted. Differing from
their Modesties, was that of Caia Affrania, the wife of Lycinius Bructio, a
woman prompt and apt for all contention and discord, and in all troubles and
controversies still pleaded her own Cases before the Praetor: Not that she
wanted the help of an Advocate, but rather to express her own impudence; whose
common railing and loquacity before the Bench, grew to that scandal, that it
almost stretched to the injury of the whole Sex: insomuch, that if any woman
were justly taxed with boldness or irregularity, she (in the way of a Proverb)
was branded with the name of Affrania. Her spleen extended even to Caius Caesar
Tertius; as likewise to M. Servillus the Consul. My Author leaves her with this
Character, That it is much better to enquire when such a Monster died, then
curiously to be inquisitive when or of whom she was ^orn. Val. Max lib. 8. cap
3.

From Orators I come to Sophists, and from Declamers to Disputants. It is
reported of Caecilia, the chaste Roman Virgin (being married against her will to
a noble Gentleman, called Valertanu^) when they were left together in the
Bride-chamber, she with her strong reasons and prompt arguments discoursed and
disputed with him in the patronage and defense of her Virginity proving unto
him from the Scriptures, how justly vowed Chastity is more acceptable in the
eyes of the great Maker, then Marriage: insomuch, that notwithstanding his heat
of youth, meeting with a tempting, provoking beauty, the convenience of
opportunity, time, and place (with the lawfulness of the act, established by
the Ceremonies of the Church) yet he (at her intercession) not only absteined
from that time to offer her any force or violence, but ever after betwixt
themselves vowing lasting Virginity. She, likewise when Tiburtius (the brother
to Valerianus) contended with her in disputation, refuted the opinions then
generally held, concerning the idolatrous worship of the false Pagan gods; so
that having convinced him with undeniable Propositions, he turned a zealous
convertite to the true Christian Faith. Catherina Alexandria, under the Tyranny
of Max^ntius, argued with all the best and cunningest Sophists of those days,
stout^y and constantly maint^ining the Faith of the Gospel, and sillogistically
refuting all their schismatical Opinions, causing many of them to deliver up
their names to the ^^cere profession of Christianity. In her appeared how the
wisdom of the world gave place, and submitted to the Divine knowledge;
insomuch, that notwithstanding all the (...) cunning, and sophistical dilemma's
(in which they were elaborately practiced) they were forced to yield and submit
to the authority of a plain Virgins tongue, her wit and reason being
illuminated with Divine knowledge from above, Marul. lib. 5. cap. 6. Guido Bit.
in his Catalogue of Philosophers, reports Diodor^^ Socrati^^^ to have had five
daughters, all Disputants, and skilful in Logic. Hypparchia, the sister o^
Megocles, and wife to C^ates Cynicus, she with one sophism put to silence
Theodorus (surnamed (...)) Quod faciens Theodorus non dicer^tur injuste facere,
(...) Hypp^rchia non diceretur injuste facere, i. That which Theo^orus doing,
he is not said to do unjustly, It Hypparchia do the same, she is not said to do
unjustly. To which when he granted, she added this: But Theodorus beating
himself, is not said to do unjustly, Erg^, If Hyppa^chia beat Theodorus, she
cannot do unjustly. To this Theodorus made no answer, but in snatching up his
cloak, and leaving the place, he ^aunted her in a Greek Iambick verse, which
was to this purpose, Why she being a woman, would trouble her self with such
Disciplines as are solely appertaining unto men? thus saying, Radios apud T^las
retiqui femina. To whom she replied; Think thou I have been ill councelled,
I that time which I might have past upon the Loom or Dist^ff* I have spent^n
the attaining of the liberal Arts and Disc^plin^s? Of Debora of the Tribe of
Ephraim, her wisdom, and her Prophesies (in which she excelled) the holy
Scriptures gives ample testimony; as likewise of Mary the sister of Moses, Anna
the Prophetess, and others. I proceed to such as have been studied and
practiced as well in Theology, as Philosophy.

Of Women studious in Divinity.
FAb^ola a Roman matron was very laborious in the reading and understanding of
the sacred Scriptures, she was frequent in the old Prophets, the Gospels, and
the Ps^lms of David, which she had almost ad unguem, and by roat; her
continual reading practiced her in a more perfect knowledge, she was of that
reverend respect amongst the learned, that Saint Jerome vouchsafed to dedicate
a book unto her, entitled de Vesta Sacer dotal^. Marcella Romana (...)
industry in the Scriptures, in which she was (...) traveled was in many of
Saint Jerome's Epistles (...) by name. H^ writ a book to he^ De mundi Contemptu,
^ Of the contempt of the world, another of the ten names by which God is called
amongst the Hebrews; a third of our faith* and the doctrine of the Heretics;
a fourth of blasphemy against the Holy Ghost; a fifth, of the study of
Theophilus Bishop of Alexandria, with others. The same Saint Jerome witnesses
of Eustochium the daughter of one Paula, a Roman Matron, who was excellently
practiced in the Greek and Latin Dialects, as also in the Hebrew Character,
insomuch, that she in her time was called The new Prodigy of the World: she
gave her study chiefly to meditation upon the Scriptures, insomuch, that she
read the Psalms of David familiarly, and without the least hesitation.
Anastasia the scholar to Crisogonus the Martyr, and wife of Publius Romanus
(who faining a counterfeit disease, sequestered himself from her and quite
abandoned her bed) she writ certain Epistles to her Master and Tutor,
Crisogonus, in which she complained that all her means and substance was
consumed and wasted by her impious and sacrilegious husband, who most
unnaturally detained her in prison. This devout woman for the Faith, and
ministering to the Saints, was arraigned and condemned to the fire, where she
publicly suffered a most glorious Martyrdom: of her Volaterran. makes mention.
Giliberta Anglica was born in Maguns or Men's in Germany, where she was beloved
of a young scholar, for whose sake, and least their private and mutual
affection should at length come to the ears of her parents, all virginal
modesty and womanish fear set aside, she put her self into a young man's habit,
fled from her fathers house, and with her dear friend and Paramour, came into
England, where as well as to his observance and love, she gave her self to the
practice of the Arts, and to attain to the perfection of Learning. At length
the young man dying (finding her self entered into some knowledge, and desirous
to be further instructed, as one having a wondrous prompt and accute brain) she
still continued her habit, and withal her laborious study, as well in the
Scriptures as other humane Learnings. At length coming to Rome, she read
publicly in the Schools, where she purchased her self a great and frequent
Auditory: And besides her singular wisdom, she was much admited and beloved
for her seeming sanctity and austerity of life, and after the death of Leo the
fifth, elected and confirmed in the papal Dignity, for thus writes Volaterran,
Sigebertus, Platina, and others that have writ the lives of the Roman Bishops:
she is remembered likewise to this purpose by Boccatius in his book de Claris
Mulierib^^. But Sabellicus, lib. 1. Aneadis, calls her Joanna Anglica, i. Joan
English, who in her minority dissembled her Sex; and so habited, traveled as
far as Athens, and there studied with infinite gain and profit: insomuch, that
coming to Rome, few or none could equal her in Disputation or Lectures; which
begot her such reverence and authority with all men, that she was by a general
Suffrage elected into the Papacy, and succeeded Leo the fourth, Ravisius in
Officina, tit. 6. Others will not allow, that ever any such woman was Pope, and
excuse it thus: There was one Bishop of Rome, who was a decrepit and weak old
man: He (by reason of age) not being well able to manage his temporal affairs,
and domestic business, received into his Palace as a guide and governesse, a
woman called Joanna, his sister or near kinswoman: this woman took upon her
great pride and state, and usurped upon the infirmity of her pride and state,
and usurped upon the infirmity of her brother: insomuch, that having the
command of all things, and being avaricious by nature, no business was
dispatched but by her, nor any thing concluded without her, for which she was
both hated and scorned; and therefore upon her that usurped the authority of
the Pope, they likewise bestowed his style, and nicknamed her Pope Joan. This
I have not read, but I have heard some report it. From her I come to Rosuida,
born in Germany, and by Nation a Saxon: she lived under Lotharius the first,
and was of a religious place called Gandresenses, in the Diocese of
Hildesemensis; she was facundious in the Greek and Roman Tongues, and practiced
in all good Arts: she composed many Works, not without great commendation from
the Readers, one especially to her fellow Nuns and Votaresses, exhorting them
to Chastity, Virtue, and Divine worship: She published six Comedies, besides a
noble Poem in Hexameter verse, of the Books and Heroic Acts done by the Otho
Caesar's. She writ the Lives of holy women, but chiefly a Divine Work of the
pious and chaste life of the blessed Virgin in Elegick verse, which began thus,
Vnica spes Mundiem. Cranzius, lib. 6. cap. 20. Metrapoleos. Fulgos. lib. 8.
cap. 3. Elizabeth, Abbess of Schonaugia, zealously imitated the practice and
studies of this Rosuida, which she professed in the City of Triers. She writ
many things in the Latin Tongue, of which she was divinely admonished and
inspired from above, besides many persuasive Epistles to her Covent of Sisters,
and others full of great conceit and elegancy: A Book also that was entitled, A
path to direct us the way to God; besides, a Volume of many learned Epistles,
full of great judgment and knowledge. Fulgos. lib. 8. cap. 3. and Egnat.
ibidem. Con^lantia, the wife of Alexander Sforza, is deservedly inserted in the
Catalogue of women, famous and excellent in Learning: She from her childhood
was so laborious in the best Disciplines, that upon the sudden, and without
premeditation, she was able sufficiently to discourse upon any argument, either
Theological or Philosophical; besides, she was frequent in the works of St
Hierom, St Ambrose, Gregory, Cicero, Lactantius. For her extemporal vein in
Verse, she was much admired; in which she was so elegantly ingenious, that she
attracted the ears of many judicious scholars to be her daily Auditors. And
this facility is reported to be innate and born with her, as proceeding with
such smoothness, and without the least ^orce or affectation. Her daughter
Baptista succeeded her both in fame and merit, being accepted and approved for
one equally qualified with her mother Constantia: Therefore Politianus in
Nutricia, doubts not to rank her amongst the best learned and most illustrious
women. Baptista Prima, the daughter of Galeatinus Malatesta, Prince of
Pisauri^, and after the wife of Guido Monteseltrensis, Earl of Urbin, made many
commendable proofs of her wit and learning; for she held many disputations even
with those that were best practiced and grounded in the Arts, from whence she
came off with no common applause. She writ a Volume in Latin, which she titled.
The frailty of man's Life; with other praiseworthy books, De vera Religione, i.
Of true Religion. Fulgos. lib. 8. cap. 3. Isota Navarula Veronensis devoted her
life wholly to the study of all humane knowledge, and withal, to the
contemplation of Divine Mysteries, to which she added the honor of perpetual
Chastity. She writ many eloquent Epistles to Pope Nicolaus Quintus, as also to
Piu^ the second, being sufficiently seen as well in Theology as Philosophy
Amongst other Works, she composed a Dialogue, in which it was disputed which of
the two of our parents, Adam and Eve* sinned first, or more offended in the
beginning. Egnat and Fulgos lib. 8. cap. 3. Alpiad^s a Virgin (who much ^^sired
to be instructed in the true Faith) was inspired from above (...) a miraculous
knowledge in the Scriptures. (...)

Of Women excellent in Philosophy, and other Learning.
FRom Theology I descend to Philosophy. Nicaula Queen of Saba traveled from
the farthest part of Aethiopia up to Jerusalem, to prove the wisdom of
Solomon in dark Problems, and hard Questions: which when he had resolved, and
satisfied her by his divine wisdom, inspired into him from above, she returned
into her Country richer by her gifts, more benefited by her knowledge, and
fruitful, as bearing with her in her womb, a child begot by Solomon. Lycosth.
in Theat. Human. vitae, lib. 1. cap. de Femin. doctis. Adesia, a woman of
Alexandria (a near kinswoman to the Philosopher Syrianus) both for her Chastity
and Learning is commemorated by Suidas, Vata. lib. 13. cap. 3. Antrop.
Nic^strata (by some called Carmentis) helped to make up the number of the Greek
Alphabet: she is also said to have added to our Roman Letters. Hermodica was
the wife of Midas, King of Phrygia: she is not only celebrated for her rare
feature and beauty, but for her wisdom: she was the first that ever stamped
Money, or made Coin amongst the Cimenses. Heraclides. Numa was the first that
made money amongst the Romans, of whose name it was called Nummus. Isiodor. lib.
16. cap. 17. It is likewise called Pecunia, of Pecus, which signifies Cattle:
for the first that was made to pass current betwixt man and man, was made of
the skins of beasts stamped with an impression. It has been current amongst
our English Nation; part of it may at this day be seen (as an ancient Monument)
in the Castle of Dover. Saturn made Money of Brass, with inscriptions thereon;
but Numa was the first that coined Silver, and caused his name to be engraven
thereon, for which it still retains the name in the Roman Tongue, and is called
Nummus. Aspasia was a Milesian Damosel, and the beloved o^ Pericles: she was
abundantly skilled in Philosophical studies; she was likewise a fluent
Rhetorician, Plutarchus in Pericles. Socrates imitated her in his Facultas
Politica, as likewise D^otima, whom he blushed not to call his Tutresse and
Instructresse. Of Lasthenea, Mantinea, Axiothaea, and Phliasia (Plato's
scholars in Philosophy) I have before given a short Character. Themiste was the
wife of Leonteius Lampsucenus, and with her husband was the frequent Auditor of
Epicurus: of whom Lactantius says; That save her, none of the Ancient
Philosophers ever instructed any woman in that study, save that one Themiste.
Arete was the wife of Aristippus the Philosopher, and attained to that
perfection of knowledge, that she instructed her son in all the liberal Arts,
by whose industry he grew to be a famous professor. He was called Aristippus,
and she surnamed Cyrenaica. She followed the opinions of that Aristippus, who
was father to Socrates. She (after the death of her father) erected a School of
Philosophy, where she commonly read to a full and frequent Auditory. Genebria
was a woman of Verona, she lived in the time of Pius the second, Bishop of
Rome: Her works purchased for her a name immortal. She composed many smooth and
eloquent Epistles, polished both with high conceits and judgment: she
pronounced with a sharp and loud voice, a becoming gesture, and a facundious
suavity. Agallis Corcyrua was illustrious in the Art of Grammar, Caelius
ascribes unto her the first invention of the play at Ball. Leontium was a
Grecian Damosel, whom Gallius calls a strumpet, she was so well seen in
Philosophical contemplations, that she feared not to write a worthy book
against the much worthy Theophrastus. Plin. in Prolog. Not. Hist. Cicero, lib.
de Nature. Deorum. Dama the daughter of Pythagoras, imitated the steps of her
father, as likewise his wife; Theano her husband, the mother and the daughter
both proving excellent scholars. Laert. Themistoclea, the sister of Pythagoras,
was so practiced a studient, that in many of his works (as he himself
confesses) he has implored her advice and judgment. Istrina Queen of
Scythia, and wife to King Aripithes, instructed her son Sythes in the Greek
Tongue, as witnesses Herodotus, Plutarch in Pericte, says, That Thargelia was
a woman whom Philosophy solely illustrated: as likewise Hyparchia Greca. Laert.
Cornelia was the wife of Africanus, and mother to the noble family of the
Gracchi, who left behind her certain Epistles most elaborately learned. From
her as from a fountain, (...) the innate eloquence of her children, therefore
Quintil. thus says of her; We are much bound to the Mother or Matron,
Cornelis, for the eloquence of the Gracchi, whose (...) learning in her
exquisite Epistles she has bequeathed to posterity. The same Author speaking
of the daughters of Laelius and Quint. Hortensius, uses these words, The
daughters of Laelius is said in her phrase to have refined and excelled the
eloquence of her father; but the daughter of Q. Hortensius, to have exceeded
her Sex in honor. So likewise the facundity of the two Lyciniaes flowed
hereditarily from their Father, L. Crassus, as the two daughters of Mutia
inherited the learning of either parent. Fulvia the wife of M. Antonius was not
instructed in womanish cares and offices, but as Volater. lib. 16. Antrop.
reports of her, rather to direct Magistracies, and govern Empires: she was
first the wife of Curio. Statius Papinius was happy in a wife called Claudia,
excellent in all manner of learning. Amalasuntha Queen of the Ostrogoths, the
daughter of Theodoricus King of those Ostrogoths in Italy, was elaborately
practiced in the Greek and Latin Tongues, she spoke distinctly all the
barbarous languages that were used in the Eastern Empires, Fulgos. lib. 8. cap.
7. Zenobia (as Volateran. speaks from Pollio) was Queen of the Palmirians, who
after the death of Odenatus, governed the Kingdom of Syria under the Roman
Empire: she was nominated amongst the thirty Tyrants, and usurped in the time
of Gallenus; but after being vanquished in battle by the Emperor Aurelianus,
was led in triumph through Rome, but by the clemency of that Prince, she was
granted a free Palace situate by the river of Tyber, where she moderately and
temperately demeaned her self: she is reported to be of that chastity, that
she never enterteined her husband in the familiar society of her bed, but for
issues sake and procreation of children, but not from the time that she found
her conception, till her delivery: she used to be adored after the majestic
state and reverence done to the great Sophies of Persia. Being called to the
hearing of any public Oration, she still appeared with her head armed, and her
helmet on, in a purple mantle buckled upen her with rich jems; she was of a
clear and shril voice, magnanimous and haughty in all her undertakings, most
expert in the Egyptian and Greek Tongues, and not without merit numbered
amongst the most learned and wisest Queens. Besides diverse other works, she
composed the Oriental and Alexandrian History. Hermolaus and Timolus her two
sons, in all manner of disciplines she liberally instructed, of whose deaths it
is not certain, whether they died by the course of nature, or by the violent
hand of the Emperor. Olympia Fulvia Morata, was the ornament and glory of our
later times, the daughter of Fulv. Moratus Montuanus, who was tutor in the Arts
to Anna, Prince of Ferrara, she was the wife of Andreas Gunthlerus, a famous
Physician in Germany, she writ many and elaborate works in either tongue; at
length in the year of our Lord 1555 in the month of October, being of the age
of twenty nine years she died of Hedelburgh. Saint Helena may amongst these be
here aptly registered; for thus Stow, Harding Fabian, and all our modern
Chroniclers report of her: Constantius a great Roman Consul, was sent into
Britain to demand the tribute due unto Rome, immediately after whose arivall,
before he could receive an answer of his Embassy, Coil who was then King died,
therefore the Britains the better to establish their peace, dealt with the
Roman Ambassador to take to wife Helena, the daughter of the late deceased
King, a young Lady of an attractive beauty, adorned with rare gifts and
endowments of the Mind, namely, Learning and Virtue; the motion was no sooner
made, but accepted, so that Constantius having received the British tribute,
returned with his new Bride to Rome, and was after by the Senate constituted
chief Ruler of this Kingdom. After twenty years quiet and peaceful
government (which was thought her wisdom) Constantius died, and was buried at
York: in his time was S^ Albon married at Verolam, since called St. Albons, as
John L^dgate Monk of Buty testifies, who in English heroical verse compiled his
History: Constantius (says he) the younger succeeded his father Constantius, as
well in the Kingdom of England, as diverse other Provinces, a noble and valiant
Prince, whose mother was a woman religious, and of great sanctimony; this young
Prince was born in Britain and proved so mighty in exploits of war, that in
time be purchased the name of Magnus, and was styled Constantine the Great, a
noble protector and defender of the true Christian Faith. In the sixth year of
his reign he came with a potent Army against Maxentius, who with grievous
tributes and exactions then vexed and oppressed the Romans: and being upon his
match, he saw in a vision by night, the sign of the Cross in the air like fire,
and an Angel by it, thus saying, Constantine, in hoc signo vinces, i.
Constantine, in this sign thou shall conquer and overcome; with which being
greatly comforted, he soon after invaded and defeated the army of Maxentius,
who flying from the battle, was wretchedly drowned in the river Tiber. In this
interim of his glorious victory, Helena the mother of Constantine being on
pilgrimage at Jerusalem, there found the Cross on which the Savior of the
world was crucified, with the three nails on which his hands and feet were
pierced. Ranulphus amplifies this story of Helena, somewhat larger after this
manner, That when Constantine had surprised Maxentius, his mother was then in
Britain, and hearing of the success of so brave a conquest, she sent him a
letter, with great thanks to heaven, to congratulate so fair and wished a
Fortune; but not yet being truly instructed in the Christian Faith, she
commended him that he had forsaken idolatry, but blamed him that he worshipped
and believed in a man that had been nalled to the Cross. The Emperor wrote
again to his mother, That she should instantly repair to Rome, and bring with
her the most learned Jews and wisest Doctors, of what faith or belief soever,
to hold disputation in their presence concerning the truth of Religion. Helena
brough with her to the number of seven score Jews and others, against whom
Saint Silvester was only opposed. In this controversy the misbeleevers were
all nonplust and put to silence. It happened that a Jewish Cabalist among them
spoke certain words in the ear of a mad wild Bull that was broke loose and run
into the presence where they were then assembled; those words were no sooner
uttered, but the beast sunk down without motion, and instantly died; at which
accident, the judges that sat to hear the disputation, were all astonished, as
wondering by what power that was done. To whom Silvester then spoke, What this
man has done is only by the power of the devil, who can kill but not restore
unto life, but it is God only that can slay and make the same body revive
again; so Lions, and other wild beasts of the Forest can wound and destroy,
but not make whole what is before by them perished: then (says he) if he will
that I believe with him, let him raise that beast to life in Gods name, which
he has destroyed in the devils name. But the Jewish Doctor attempted it in
vain, when the rest turning to Silvester, said, If thou by any power in Heaven
or Earth can call back again the life of this beast, which is now banished
from his body, we will believe with thee in that Deity, by whose power so great
a miracle can be done. Silvester accepted of their offer, and falling devoutly
on his knees, made his prayers unto the Savior of the world, and presently the
beast started up upon his feet; by which Constantius was confirmed, Helena
converted, and all the Jews and other Pagan Doctors received the Christian
Faith, and were after baptized: and after this, and upon the same occasion,
Helena undertook to seek and find out the Cross. Ambrose and others say she was
an Inne-keepers daughter at Treverent in France, and that the first Constantius
traveling that way, married her for her beauty; but our Histories of Britain
affirm her to be the fair, chaste, and wise daughter of King Coil, before
remembered. The perfections of the mind are much above the transitory gifts of
Fortune, much commendable in women, and a dowry far transcending the riches of
gold and jewels. Great Alexander refused the beautiful daughter of Darius, who
would have brought with her Kingdoms for her Dower, and infinite treasures to
boot, and made choice of Barsine, who brought nothing to espouse her with, save
her feature, and that she was a scholar; and though a Barbarian, excellently
perfect in the Greek tongue, who though poor, yet derived her pedigree from
Kings: And upon that ground, Lycurgus instituted a Law, That women should have
no Dowers allotted them, that men might rather acquire after their Virtues,
then their Riches, and women likewise might the more laboriously employ
themselves in the attaining to the height of the best and noblest Disciplines.
It is an argument that cannot be too much amplified, to encourage Virtue and
discourage Vice, to persuade both men and women to instruct their minds more
carefully then they would adorn their bodies, and strive to heap and accumulate
the riches of the Soul, rather then hunt after pomp, Vain glory, and the
wretched wealth of the world; the first being everlastingly permanent, the
last, daily and hourly subject to corruption and mutability. Horace in his
first Epistle to Mecaenas says: Vitius Argentum est Auro, virtutibus Aurum.
Silver is more base and cheap then Gold, and Gold then Virtue. To encourage
which in either Sex, Plautus in Amphit. thus says: Virtus praemium est
optimum, virtus omnibus
Rebus anteit profecto, etc.
Virtue's the best reward, and before all
Justly to be preferred. That which we call
Liberty, Life, our Parents, Children, Wealth,
Our Country, Reputation, Honor, Health,
By this are kept (though by the bad despised)
"All that is good, in Virtue is comprised.


Moreover, all that are Noble, Virtuous, Learned, Chaste, and Pious, have their
places allotted them above; when on the contrary, their souls are buried lower
in the local place of torment, then their souls, that are laid to sleep i^ the
grave. At the blessedness of the good, and future glory assigned unto them,
Lucan most elegantly aimed at, lib. 9. de bello Civili, where he thus writes:
Ac non in Pharia manes jacuere favilla,
Nec cinis exiguus tantum compescuit umbram, etc.
Which I thus English.
In the Pharian flames the bright Soul does not sleep,
Nor can so small a Dust and Ashes keep
So great a Spirit: it leaps out of the fire,
And leaving the half burnt menbers, does aspire
And aims up to the place where Jove resides,
And with his power and wisdom all things guides.
For now no air his subtle passage bars,
To where the Axle-tree turns round the stars,
And in that vast and empty place which lies
Betwixt us and the Moon (the visible skies)
The half godded Souls inhabit: such are named
There, whom bright fiery Virtue has inflamed,
And were of pious life: their hopes are fair,
Made Citizens and Freemen of the air,
And such redeemed from all that was infected,
Are now within the eternal Orbs collected.


This somewhat more illustrated by the Tragic Poet Seneca in Hercule Oeteo,
thus saying: Nunquam Stigias fertur ad undas
Inclita Virtus, etc.
To the dark and Stigian shades,
Virtue (when it seeming fades)
Is never born. Then, O you chaste
And valiant, though your years may wast,
No limit (Time) to that can give,
It Death survives; then ever live,
The cruel Fates can claim no due,
Nor the black Stigian waves in you:
But when wasted Age has spent
The utmost minute Time has lent,
Then glory takes in charge the Spirit,
And guides it to the place of Merit.


Let these serve for an encouragement to Virtue, and the attaining unto all
commendable Arts and Disciplines, by which the Body is honored, the Soul
glorified. And thus I take leave of the Female Students in Theology and
Philosophy, and now consequently come to the Poetesses: may the Muses be
favorable to me in their relation.

Of Poetry.
HOrace says, Et prodesse solent and delectare Poetae, In Poets there is both
pleasure and profit, who are for the most part (I mean the best) studious for
the pleasingest phrase, and most moving eloquence. From hence it grew that
those of the first age, first instroduced common civility, and humane morality
amongst men, reducing them from irregular and brutish conditions, into a
mutual and well governed society: for by pleasant and delightful language
refined upon the vulgar Barbarism, they first drew the ears of the ruder
people to attention, from attention to instruction, and by instruction to
practice; so that in process of time, by their smooth and gentle persuasions,
illustrated with facundity and eloquence, they brought them from
voluptuousness to temperance, from the fields into houses, from living in
villages, to walled Cities, and by degrees, from edifying of houses for
themselves, to erect Temples to the gods, by whose adoration it impressed a
reverend fear to offend them: and so consequently reduced them from rudeness
to a more formal regularity. They were the first that taught them shame and
fear; shame, to seem brutish to humauity; fear, to appear inhumane before a
deity. They moderated the ferocity of their minds, by smooth Orations,
profitable documents, and learned writings; and the more to insinuate into
their dull underwanding, when prose seemed unto them less delightful, they
devised verse, and still as one kind grew stale or common, they apprehended new,
and thus that eloquence that before lay loose and scattered, was first
contracted within feet and number. Then when the vulgar seemed less capable of
deep Sophisms, tending to morality and civil government, and therefore their
graver doctrines appeared to their ears harsh and unpleasant, they dealt with
them as careful fathers use to do with their untoward children; when things
profitable will not still them, they seek to still them with toies: so the
Poets, when wholesome food would not taste their mouths, they devised sweet
meats to relish their pallats, finding out merry and delightful tales, best
agreeable with their itching ears: comprehending notwithstanding, golden truths
in leaden fables. They after instituted good and wholesome laws, to encourage
the good, and deject the bad; to raise the virtuous and well disposed to honor,
and to punish the evil doer either with penance or shame: then came the
industrious man to be first distinguished from the sloathful, and the thrifty
from the prodigal: things were no more made common, every man eat of his own
labor, and what he earned he might call his own. Hence first grew industry,
without which no Common weal nor public State can stand. And these and much
greater were the first fruits of Poetry, now in this age so much despised; the
use whereof was ancient, the apprehension divine, the practice commendable, and
the name rerevrent. There is a sympathy and correspondence betwixt Poetry and
Rhetoric: Apollo is god of the first, and Mercury the Mecenas of the second;
which ^he ancient writers the better to signify unto us, say, That Apollo
acquainted Mercury with the Muses, and Mercury in requital first invented the
Harp, and gave it to Apollo, being the instrument to which the M^ses most
delighted to sing* as if they more plainly would have said, A Poet cannot be
excellent unless he be a good Rhetorician, nor any Rhetorician attain to the
height of eloquence, unless he has first laid his foundation in Poetry. They
are two excellencies, that cannot well exist one without the other: Poetry is
the elder brother, and more plain in his condition: Rhetoric the younger, but
more crafty in his profession: hence it comes, Poets are so poor, and Lawyers
so rich; for they have made a younger brother of the elder, and possess all
the Land. Besides, as much as Apollo is excellent above Mercury, as being God
of Light, of Music, of Physic, of Arts, etc. and the other God of Bargaining,
Buying, Selling, of Cozening, Theeving, and of Lies; so far does the first
claim due priority above the second. They may be thus distinguished: Poets in
that which outwardly appears fabulous, color and shadow golden truths, to
their own painful studies and labor, and to the pleasure and profit of others:
But many Orators, under seeming truths, apparel scandalous fictions, aimed only
at their own benefit, to the impoverishing of others, and many times stripping
them out of a fair inheritance: I speak of some, not all; and I honor the Law,
because I live under it. Poets, they were the first teachers and instructers;
the people held them to be inspired from above, and to speak as from the mouths
of the gods: some were holy, as Ennius; some Divine, as Homer; others Prophets,
as having the name of Vates conferred upon them: and amongst these, may be
numbered the Sybils, the Priests of Apollo, and such as belonged to all the
other Oracles. Of the Poets there were many sorts, and such as writ in diverse
kinds, yet all these imitated at least (if not equalled) by women. There were
such as were called Physiologi, that Poetised in Physic as Palephatus
Atheniensis, Pronopides, Xenophanes, Coliphonius, and others; there were Poetae
Mathematici, that writ of the Mathematics, as Ma Manilius, Thales Milesius,
Aratus, Solensis, etc. Poetae Medici, as Thaletas Cretenses, Damocrates,
Servilius, Andromachus Cretensis, etc. Poetae Vates, or Prophets, as Moses,
David, Jeremias, Isaiah, etc. Poetae Theologi, as Solomon, Dantes, Alegerius
Florentinus; and amongst the Heathens, Linus Chalcedensis, Pyerius, Thamyras,
Amphion, Orpheus, etc. There are besides, Ethici, Impudici, Historici,
Mechanici, Epici, Heroici, Eliogeographaei, Satyrici, Epigrammatographi,
Comic^, Tragici, Mimographi, Histrionici, Melopaei, Lyrici, Melisi, ^ambiei,
Himnographi: and amongst these, not any whom some ingenious women, in one age
or other, has not facetiously imitated. I am loath to dwell too long in the
Proem, I will now give you their names, with a particular of their works, who
have been in many or most of these eminent.

Poetriae, Or Women Poets.
OF the Sybils, the Muses, Priests, and Prophetesses (included amongst those
whom we called Vates) I have already spoken at large; I now proceed to others.
Theano Locrensis was so called, as born in the City of Loc^is: she writ Hyms
and Lyrick Songs; she was also a musical Poetesse, such as were called
Melicae. There was a second of that name, the wife of Pythagoras, a Poetesse;
besides a third, called Thuria, or Metapontina, daughter of the Poet Lycophron,
a Pythagorist, and wife of Caristius, or Brantinus Crotoniata, Test Suida.
Nicostrata was otherwise called, Carmentis, skilful both in the Greek and
Latin Dialect; of a quick and nimble wit, and conversant in diverse kinds of
Learning. Sulpitia lived in the time of the Emperor Domitianus, her husbands
name was Galenus, or Gadenus, with whom she lived in most conjoined wedlock for
the space of fifteen years. Some fragments of her Poetry I have read, inserted
amongst the Works of Ausonius. Of her, Martial in one of his Epigram, lib. 10.
thus writes: Oh molles tibi quindecim Calene
Quos cum Sulpitia tua jugales
Indulsit Deus and peregit annos, etc.
O those soft fifteen years, so sweetly past,
Which thou Calenus with Sulpitia have
In jugall consociety (no doubt
A time by the gods favored and picked out)
O every Night, nay Hour marked by thy hand
With some rich stone, fetched from the Indian strand,
What wars, what combats have betwixt you been
(But to your Bed and Lamp) not known or seen
Of any. Happy Bed, and Tapers grace,
Made of sweet Oils, whose smoke perfumes the place.
Thrice five years thou have lived (Calenu^) thus,
Reckoning by that account thine Age to us:
So to compute thy years, is thy great'st pride,
No longer to have lived then with thy Bride.
Were Atropos at thy entreats content
To give thee back one day so sweetly spent,
Thou at a higher rate would prize that one,
Then four times Nestors Age, to live alone.


This Epigram has expressed the love of Calenus to Sulpitia, the husband to
the wife: but in 35 of the same book, her pious Love, chaste Muse, and Beauty,
the same Author has most elegantly illustrated, his words be these: Omnes
Sulpitiam legant puellae
Vno quae cupiunt viro p^acere,
Omnes Sulpitiam legant mariti,
Vnae qua cup^unt placere nuptae, etc.
All women (...) Sulpitia, such as can,
In their desires betake them to one man;
All husbands read Sulpitia, such whose life
Can be contented with one single wife.
She never spoke of mad Medeas sin,
Nor why Thyestes Banquet was served in;
It never with her pure thoughts could agree,
A Scilla or a Biblis there could be:
Save chaste and pious Loves she did not write,
Yet mixed with modest pleasures and delight.
Her Verses who shall read and read again,
And sift them well, shall find them without slain:
Such were the words divine Egeria spoke
(The wife of N^ma) when she did betake
Her self to solitude. Had S^pho been
Tutored by her, her Poems read and seen,
More chaste sh' had been, with greater Art endu'd:
Or had rude Phaon these together viewed,
And both their beauties well observed and noted;
He that left her, had on Sulpitia doted, etc.


Seneca speaks of one Michaele, a she Centaur, who in an ^legant Poem,
instructed the Thessalians in the Remedy of Love whom Ovid in his Remedium
Amor^s, is said to have imitated. Aristophanes (as also Suidas) speak of one
Charix^na, the Author of many excellent works: amongst others* she writ a Poem
called Crumata. Caelius, lib. 8. cap. 1 speaks of Musae^ an Epigramma^ist, in
which kind she was eminent; besides, she composed sundry Lyricks. Textor
remembers us of one Moeroe, who (besides her other works) is most celebra^ed
for a Hymn to Neptune. Manto was the daughter of Tyresia, the Propheresse; of
her, the famous City Mantua took name she was not only a Poetesse, but famous
for her D^vinations, for by the entrails of beasts, she could foretell things to
come, Textor. Cornisicia was the sister of the Poet Cornisicius, and famous for
many excellent Epigrams. Luccia (...) (as Pliny reports of her) was a writer of
Comedies, in which practice she continued no less then an hundred years.
Amongst the Poets, Cassandra the Prophe^esse (daughter to ^riam and Hecuba) is
also numbered. (...) Hermonaicus ((...) Camelion says) writes of a Poetesse
called Megalostrate, beloved of the Poet Al^mon, he that first devised the
amatorious Verse, in which was expressed all lascivious intemperance (which
some attribute to Thamyris, as their first inventor;) she, Amatores vel ipsis
colloquiis ad se trahere potuit, i. She with her very discourse could attract
lovers: she was termed Flava Megalostrate. Athenae. lib. 13 cap. 16. Polla
Argentaria was wife to the famous Poet, Lucan, and has a merited place in this
Catalogue; of whom Martial thus speaks: Haec est illa dies, quae magni conscia
partus
Lucanum populis, and tibi Polla dedit.
This day of that great birth made conscious is,
Which gave him to the world, and made thee his.
She was reputed to be of that excellent learning, that she assisted her
husband in the three first books, entitled, Pharsalia. Her, Stasius lib. 2.
Sylv. thus remembers: Hae^ Castae titulum decusque Polla. She likewise writ
excellent Epigrams. As much as Statius of her, Plin. Secundus speaks of his
wife Calphurnia, Fulgos. lib. 8. cap 3. Aspasia Milesia, the beloved of
Pericles, as she was otherwise learned, she is likewise numbered amongst the
Poet; some of whose Verses are remembered by Athenaeus. Hedyle was the mother of
Hedylogus Samius (who by the same Athenaeus, lib. 4. Dypnoph. has allotted him
a place amongst the Poets, she was the daughter of Moschina Attica, that writ
lambicks. This Hedyle composed a Poem, inscribed Scylla; she made another,
called, The Loves of Glaucus. Sosipatra (as Eugapius Volaterran. relates) was a
woman practiced in many kinds of Disciplines, and so excellent in all her
studies, that she was said to be educated by the gods. Thymele was a Poetesse
that first introduced Dances into the Scene, which the Greeks from her call
Dumelin, i. The place which is only free for the Actors. Of her, Martial thus
speaks: Quae Thymele spectas derisoremque Latinum. Suidas writes, That Thymele
was an Altar frequently used in the Theaters, which from her borrowed the name.
Hildegardis Moguntina was eminent both for Learning and Piety; insomuch, that
from her very childhood she seemed inspired from above. Eugenius the third, in
the Council held at Tryer (where Doctor Bernard was then present) approved her
Works: she flourished in the year of Grace, 1188. Of Clitagora Lacedemonia,
Aristophanes speaks much; but Stravo in Homerica Iliade, more of Hesteia
Alexandria. Avyle writ Epigrams against Themistocles, with verses upon Birds,
which are read unto this day. Myrtis Authedonia in a Poem, expressed the death
of the Damosel Ochne, who had been before the destruction of the Hero
Ennostus. Praxilla Siconia, flourished in the 32 Olympiad, whom Antipater
Thessatus give: the first place unto, amongst the nine Lyrick Poets: She writ
Dithycambi, and a Work which was called by her Metrum Praxillium. She called
Adonis from Hell, to demand of him what was most beautiful in Heaven: who
answered, The Sun, the Moon, Figs, Apples, Cucumbers: That and such like was
the Subject of her Poem; of which grew a proverb against Lunaticks and mad men,
every such was called Praxilla's Adonis. Nossis the Poetresse was the composer
of Greek Epigrams, and is by Antipater numbered with Praxilla amongst the
Lyricks. Myro Bizantia, she writ Elegies, and such as the Greeks call Melae, or
Musical Poems: she is said to be the mother of Homer, and reckoned one of the
seven Pleiades, the daughters of Atlas: she was the wife of Andromachus, an
illustrious Philosopher. Pamphilus her Statue was erected, which (as Facianus
witnesses) was made by Cephisiodotus. Damophila was the wife of the
Philosopher: she was a friend to Sapho, and lover, whom in all her Poems she
strived to imitate. Her Hymns were sung at the sacrifices which were celebrated
to Diana Pergaea, after the manner of the Aetolians and Pamphilians. She writ
moreover certain books, which she titled, Libri Amatorii.

Of Minerva, etc.
MInerva the daughter of Jupiter, was for no other reason numbered amongst the
gods, but for her excellency and cunning in Poetry and other good arts, of
which she is said to be the first inventresse. From her the ancient Athenians
have borrowed the immortality of their name. Next her we reckon the Corinnas.
There were three of that name: The first, called Corinna Thebana, or Tanagraea;
she was the daughter of Archelodorus and Procratia, and scholar to Myrt^s: she
in several contentions five sundry times bo^e away the Palm from Pindarus,
Prince of the Lyrick P^ets* she moreover published five books of Epigrams: of
her Propertius speaks. The second was called Corinna Thespia, she is much
celebrated in the books of the ancient Poets, especially by Statius. The third
lived in the time of Augustus, and was to Ovid much endeared, but of her
wantonness than her Muse, there is more memory extant. I come to speak next of
Erinna, who was surnamed Teia, or (as some will have it) Telia of the Island
Telos, not far distant from Gnidon, she flourished in the time of Dion of
Syracusa, and published an excellent Poem in the Dorick Tongue, comprised in
three hundred Verses, besides diverse other Epigrams, her style was said to come
near the majesty of Homers, she died when she was but nineteen years of age.
Damophila was a Greek Poetesse, and the wife of Pamphilus, she was
Cousin-german and companion with Sapho, Lyrica Po^tria, she writ many Poems
that were called Poemata Amatoria, because their argument was merely of love:
one Poem she writ in the praise of Diana, for so much Theophrastus in the life
of Apollonius, remembers of her* Hyppatia was a woman of Alexandria, the
daughter of Theon the Geometrician, and wife to Isidorus the Philosopher, she
flourished in the time of the Emperor Arcadius, she writ certain books of
Astronomy, and was froquent in diverse kind, of Poetry: she purchased her self
much fame for her learning, insomuch, that she engrossed a great confluence of
Auditors in the City of Alexandria where she professed. Suidas apud Volaterran.

Sapho.
ELianus affirms her to be the daughter of Scamandroni^^; Plato of Ariston;
Suidas and other Greek writers deliver to us that there were two of that name,
the one called ^rixia, a much celebrated Poetesse (who flourished in the time
of the Poet Alcaeus, of Pittachus, and Tarquinius Priscus) who first devised
the use of the Lyre or Harp, with a quil; some give her the honor to be the
inventor of the Lyrick verse: the other was called Sapho Mitelaena, long after
her who was a singer and a strumpet, she published any rare and famous Poems
amongst the Greeks, and therefore had the honor to be called the tenth Muse;
the reason why she fell in love with Phaon, Pliny attributes to the virtue of
an herb, but Baptista Egnatius, a later writer, and exquisite both in the Greek
and Latin tongues, in tran^ferring this fable from the original into the Roman
tongue, as likewise others of his opinion, conclude, that Phao^ was of the
profession of such as get their living by transporting passengers from one side
of a river unto another, a plain Ferry-man, and that it happened upon a time that
Venus coming to the place where he kept his passage, without demanding any
hire, he gave ^ot free transportage, not knowing to whom it was he did that
courtesy, no way suspecting she had been a goddess: This, Venus took so
gratefully, that she thought to requite his freeness, with a bounty far
transcending the value of his pain^. She therefore gave him an alabaster box
full of a most precious unguent (teaching him how to apply it) with which he no
sooner anointed his face, but he instantly became of all mo^^^ll creatures the
most beautiful, of whom the Le^bian damsels grew enamoured, but especially he
was ardently and most affectionately beloved of Sapho. Saphon having occasion
to pass from Lesbos into Sicily, she was tortured in soul for his absence,
intimating that it was done in despite or disgrace of her; first purposed to
cast her self from Leucate, a high promontory in Epyre, down into the Sea,
which she after did; yet before she would attempt it, she first in an Epistle
thought by all the allurements of a woman's wit, to call him back again into his
Country, which Ovid in her behalf most feelingly has expressed. And since it
lies so fi^ly in my way for the opening of the History, I thus give it English,
Ecquid ut aspecta est, etc.

Is it possible as soon as thou shall see
My character, thou know it comes from me?
(...) not reading of the authors name,
Could thou have known from whom this short work came?
Perhaps thou may demand, Why in this vain
I court thee, that prof^sse the Lyrick strain?
My love's to be bewept, and that is the reason:
No Barbi^os, id est, Carmen Lyricum.
Barbit number suits this tragic season.
I burn as does the cornfieldsd set on fire,
When the rough East winds still blow high and higher,
Now Phaon the Typhoean fields are thine,
But greater flames then Aetnas are now mine.
No true (...) numbers flow from hence,
(The empty work of a distracted sense.)
The P^rhian girl, nor the Methimman less
Now please me; not the Lesbians who surpass.
V^le's Amithon, vile Cidno too, the fair,
So Atthis that did once appear most rare,
And hundreds more, with whom my sins not small:
Wretch, thou alone enjoy'st the loves of all.
Thou have a face, and youth, fit for play,
Oh tempting face that did mine eyes betray.
Take Phoebus Faith upon thee, and his bow,
And from Apollo who can Phaon know?
Take borns, and 'bout thy temples wreaths of vine,
What Is he can say but the art the god of Wine?
Phoebus loved Daphne, Bacchus G^osis bright,
Yet neither she, nor she, could Lyricks write.
The nine Muse-sisters of my verse dispose,
And what my numbers are the whole world knows, Alcaeus a Lyrick Poet of
My^elene.

Nor can my Countryman Alcaeus more
Then I, though he in age stand ranck'd before:
Nor though his name sound louder, can he raise
Or from his Lyre, or Country, greater praise.
If niggard Nature have denied things fit,
Yet what I want in shape, I have in wit:
My stature's low, but know my name is high,
And bruited through all regions far and nigh.
I am not fair, what therein do I lack?
Andromeda pleased Perseus, yet she black.
The whitest Doves with mingled colors make,
And the black turtle the Green-bird take.
If none can be thought worthy of thy love,
But such as shall thy like in beauty prove,
Young man despair, thou art for ever free,
None such ere was, none such shall ever be.
When first thou readst my Verses* thou did say
I only pleased, and I was fair that way,
That I became my phrase, and (none so well)
Then did I sing (we lovers, all must tell;)
And I remember, thou ('it is still my pride)
At every note did on my lips divide.
Nay, even those k^sses pleased thee wondrous well.
But most of all, when I beneath thee fell,
My wantonness contented thee 'bove measure,
My nimble motion, and words apt for pleasure,
Then when in confused rapture we both lay,
Fullness of joy deprived all use of play.
Now the Sicilian girls are thy new spoil,
I Will be of them, and leave the Lesbian soil.
You Nisea, a mountainous country near Aetna.
Nisean mothers, and fair daughters, bred
In Sicilie: let him be banished
From forth your earth, nor let the many lies
The smoothness of his false tongue can devise,
Beguile your simple truth; what to you he
Speaks uow, h' has spoken a thousand times to me.
And goddess Venus called so of Erix, a mountain Sicily, where she had a
famous Temple.
Erecina, thou that do
The barbarons rude Sicania honor most,
Advise thy Poet by thy wit divine,
And give me counsel, since thou know I am thine.
Can Fortune in this bitter course still run?
Vows she to end those ills she has begun?
Six years are past, since my abortive groans
Mourned, and my tears wet my dead Parents bones.
My needy Choranus, who doted on the famous strumpet, Rhodope, whom he bought
of Aesopus for a great sum of money.
brother (as a second cross)
Dotes on a strumpet, suffering shame with loss,
Turned Pirate, and proves the seas with sail and oar,
And badly seeks wealth, lost as ill before.
Because my faithful counsel (that course rated)
My guerdon is, that I by him am hated.
And lest my endless torments should find ease,
My young irregular Claeis, a wanton daughter to Sapho.
daughter adds to these:
The last and great'st cause why I thus miscarry,
Thou art; my Ba^k still sails with winds contrary.
Behold my erst well-ord'red Locks mis-plac'd,
And those that in times past my temples graced,
Neglected are, as if they were not mine,
No precious gems upon my fingers shine:
My habit's vile, my hair no crisp in wears,
Nor sm^ll my locks of sweet Arabian The tears of M^rrha, with which they used
to perfume their hair.
tears,
Whom should I seek to please, since he is absent,
That was sole author of mine ornament?
My soft heart is with easy shafts impressed,
There Is still new cause to lodge love in my breast,
Either because the Sisters three, had force,
When I was born, to spin my thread so course;
Or this, my studies in the Arts constrain,
Since (...) Thalia does infuse my brain.
What wonder if a youth of the first chin
Surprise me? years which man to man might win.
^was afraid, lest fair Aurora thou
For Cephalus would steal him, and I now
Am still in fear, for surely this had past,
But that thy first love holds thee still so fast.
If Phoebus (that (...) all things) thee had seen,
Phaon in lasting slumbers cast had been.
Venus had rapt him into heaven by this,
But that she feared Mars would have made him his.
Thou, that no child, yet scarce man appears,
(Best age) the pride and glory of thy years,
Return unto my bosom, since of thee
I beg not love, but that thou loved would be.
Lo as I write, tears from mine eyes amain
Still drop, behold how they my paper stain.
Thy parting had been gentler (in words few)
Had thou but said, Sweet Lesbian less, adue.
Thou took'st with thee no parting kiss, no tears,
I little dreamed I was so near my fears.
Of thine, save wrong, I nothing have, no more
Thou (let that move thee) all my love do store:
I gave thee no command, nor had that day,
Unless some such, Do not forget me, pray.
By Love that never can forsake that breast,
By our nine sacred sisters I protest.
He Is gone, when some (but who I know not) said,
For a long space both words and tears were staid,
Mine eyes had banished tears, and grief my tongue,
Through cold, my heart unto my ribs was clung,
(My grief retired) I began to beat my breast,
To tear my hair, nor blush to walk undrest;
Like careful mothers, who with loud exclaims
Bear their dead children to their funeral flames.
Charaxus walks by laughing to and fro,
And from my ecstasy his pleasures grow,
And (which more shame unto my sorrows gives)
Asks why this woman weeps, her daughter lives?
But Shame and Love are two, the people stare
To see my garments torn, and breasts unbare,
Thou Phaon art my care, and my dreams stay,
Thee fled (your dreams that have made night my day)
I find thee there, though absent many a mile,
But O, my dreams last but a little while.
Often think I that thy arms my neck infold,
As likewise these two are with thine like hold.
I know thy kisses, thy tongue-sport I know,
Which thou wast wont to take, and to bestow.
More pleased sometimes, words (like to truth) I spoke,
And to thy form, my senses are awake.
What Is more, I shame to tell, and blush to write,
Dreaming all done, may perfect our delight.
No sooner Titan dons his golden beams,
And with them all things sees, I curse my dreams:
Deserts and Dens I then seek, as if they
Could profit me (^^nce guilty of our play)
Madly, like her whom mad Erictho bears,
I thither ^un, my hair's fallen 'bout mine ears,
I see the Caver^s with rough gravel strewn,
To me they like Mygdonian Marble showed.
The shades I find that gave us often our rest,
And friendly Herbage, by our burthen^ pressed.
Thee (master of those Groves and me) no place
Can show me, therefore they appear most base.
I knew the very flowers where we have line,
Our weights have made their upright heads decline:
Where thou have fallen, I threw me in that place,
But first the grateful flowers drink from my face.
The boughs despoiled, a sadness seem to bring,
And on their top most branches no birds sing,
Only the Philomela.
Daulian bird her discontents
Chams out aloud, and Itis still taments;
Iris the bird laments, Sapho, the affright
Of Love forsaken: so we spend the night.
There is a perfect, clear, and Glasse-like Well,
Sacred, and where some thinks the gods do dwell,
O'r which the wa^rie Lothos, the daughter of Neptune, turned into a (...), so
called.
Lotos spreads her bows,
The ground a soft and gentle turf allows.
Here as I lay to rest me (drowned in tears)
One of the Nayades before m' appears,
And standing, thus spoke: Thou that scorcht do lie,
In flames unequal, to Ambracia, a City in Epire, so called of King Ambraces.
Ambracia fly;
Hence Phoebus from on high survives the sea,
Some, Actium calls the place, some Leueate.
Deucalion from this rock, his Pyrha craves
(First seen) and she (undanger'd) proves the waves.
Here Pyrha prostitutes to his desires.
Deucalion here first quenched his amorous fires.
The place the same law keeps: climb Leucats crown,
And from that high rock fear not to leap down.
This spoke, she vanished: I affrighted rise,
Whilst my wet cheeks are moistened by mine eyes.
Thither let us run Nymphs, till that Rock appear,
From Love distracted we should banish fear.
Prove how it can, much better than you see
It has yet chanced, it needs must fall to me.
And gentle Love, to me thy feathers lend,
Still to support me, as I shall descend,
Lest being dead, by my untimely fall,
Leucadia for my sake be cursed of all.
Then Phoebus, I Will bequeath into thine hand
My Harp, and by it shall this Distick stand:
Sapho, thy grateful Poetesse, does assign
This Lyre to thee, being hers as well as thine.
Why do thou send me to Actia hence,
When thou may call thy exile fool from thence?
Safer to me, than can those waters prove,
Thou mai'st, so Phoebus did he Sapho love.
Can thou (O harder then the Rocks) endure
It should be said, Thou did my death procure?
Thy Sapho's ruin? O, how better far
Were it these breasts, that now disjoined are,
Should friendly meet, and mutually please,
Than mine alone be swallowed in the Seas?
These are the breasts thou Phaon once did praise,
Which seen, they fire did from thy coldness raise.
O would I were as eloquent as then,
But sorrow takes all fluence from my Pen,
So might my brain have every ill withstood:
But now my passion makes nothing seem good.
My Verse is of her first power destitute,
Silent's my Quill, my Harp with sorrow mute.
You Lesbian Matrons, and you Lesbian young,
Whose names have to my Lyre been often times sung.
You for whose loves my fame has suffered wrong,
No more in troops unto my Music throng,
Phaon has stole all that you named Divine,
I was (O wretch) about to call him mine.
Make him return, my Muse shall then retire,
He duls my wits, or can my brain inspire.
Can prayers prevail? or such a stubborn mind
Be softened, or made rougber? Shall the wind
Disperse my words, as merely spoke in vain?
Would the same winds could bring thee back again,
That mock my sighs, and make thy sails to swell,
It were a work that would become thee well.
If so thou mean why do thou keep away
From all those vowed gifts that thy coming stay?
Why do thou with thy absence my breast tear?
Loose from the Haven, (...) and do not stear,
She Is Sea-born Venus called, and therefore still
She makes the waves calm to a lovers will,
The gracious winds shall in thy course prevail,
And bring thee safe when thou art under sail,
Even Cupid at the helm shall sit and stear,
He shall di^rct which way thy course to bear,
If so thou please thy Sapho shunned must be,
Yet thou shall find there is no just cause in me:
At lest, thy cruel answer she now craves,
To end her fate in the Leucadian waves.
From that Rock, she cast her self headlong into the Sea, and so perished. For
preposterous and forbidden luxuries which were imputed unto her, Horace calls
her Mascula Sapho; yet many are of opinion, this to be the same whom Plato
terms the Wise: of her, Antipater Sydonius thus writes: Dulcia Mnemosine
demirans carmina Saphus
Quesierit decima Pyeris unde foret.
Mnemosine.
When Sapho's Verse she did admiring read,
Demanded whence the tenth Muse did proceed.
As likewise Ausonius:
Leshia Pyeriis Sapho soror addita Musis.
i. Lesbian Sapho, a Sister added to the Pyerian Muses. Her, Papinius and
Horace, with many others, celebrate.

Of Cleobule Lindia, and other Poetesses.
SHe was the daughter of Cleobulus Lindius, one of the seven wise men of
Greece; she was called also E^mite, and Cleobulina: in her writing, she
imitated her father (...) was eminent for Aenigmaes, and Riddles; of which,
this one is redeemed from oblivion, and remembered of her: Est unus genitor,
(...) sunt pignora (...) sex,
His quoque trigima natae, sed dispar^ forma
Hae niviae aspectu, nig^^s sunt vultibu^s illae,
Sunt immortales omnes, mortuntur and omnes.
One father has twelve children, great and small,
They beget thirty daughters, unlike all,
Half of them white, half black, immortal made,
And yet we see how every hour they fade.


Elpis was wife of the famous Philosopher and Poet Boethius Se^verinus, a Roman
Patrician, she was by Nation a Sicilian of an elegan^ wit and capacious
invention. Many of her Hymns to the Apostles are yet extant: one began, Aurea
Luce; another, Foelix per omnes mund^ cardines, i. Thou Feast that are happy in
being celebrated (...) all the Countries of the world. Ranulphus calls her the
daughter to the King of Sicily, and the best Writers constantly affirm these
holy songs to be hers, witness Gyraldus Dialogo 5. Histor. Poe^. She writ her
Epitaph with her own hand, which was after inscribed upon her Tomb, which I
thus give you in English, something near to Trevisa's, as he translated it from
Ranulphus.

An Epitaph.
Elpis my name, me Sicily (...) bred;
A husbands love drew me from hence to Rome,
Where I long lived in joy, but now lie dead,
My soul submitting to the Almighties doom:
And I believe this flesh again shall rise,
And I behold my Savi^^, with these eyes.
Eudexia, or Eud^cia, was the wife of the Emperor Theodosius Junior: She was
excellently qualified, and her chief delight was to be conversant amongst the
Muses, for which she was styled (...). She was the daughter of Leontius, of no
higher degree then a Sophist of Athens: she was first called Athenais, but
after being married to the Emperor, he caused her to be baptized by Atticus,
the great Bishop of Constantinople, and for Athenais, gave her the name of
Eudocia, which much pleased the Emperor her husband. Some attribute a Centon
unto her, of Christ the Savior of the world; it was called (...), which others
would confer upon Proba. Cyrus Panopolita, she advanced unto the Praetorship,
Gyrald, ex. 5. Dialog. Philenis was a Strumpet of Leucadia, her Verses were as
impurely wanton, as her life was immodest and unchaste: she imitated Elephantis,
if we may believe Suidas, and they both Astianassa, one of Hellens maids, the
wife to Menelaus. She was the first that devised (...), in the Venereal Trade,
and left certain books behind her, of Venereall Copulation. This you may read
in Gyraldus in 30. Dialog Histor. Poet. Bocho, a penurious and needy woman of
Delphos, who composed Hymns, and pronounced Oracles; she is remembered by
Gyraldus, Dialog. 20. Elephantis or Elephantina, was a woman most wickedly
wanton, and of notorious intemperance. She (as Spinthria) described the
several ways and figures of Congresse and Copulation, from whose books,
^alage presents a gift to Priapus, in Priapaeis Poematibus: and Tiberius Caesar
builded that chamber, wherein were discovered the omnivarious shapes of beastly
and preposterous Luxuries, lest any president o^ dishonest brotherly, should be
left unremembred. P^oba Valeria Falconia, a Roman Matron (and wife to Adelphus
Romanus the Proconsul, a man of noble and religious carriage) flourished in the
reigns of Honorius and Theodosius the Junior, Emperors. She composed a Divine
Work, of the Life and Miracles of Christ, which she entitled Cento Virgilianum:
she dedicated it to the Empress Eudocia, wife of Theodosius. She also
paraphrased upon the Verses of Homer, and called the Work Home^oukentra, which
some would confer upon Eudocia. Her husband being dead, she is said to have
inscribed upon his Tomb this or the like Epitaph: To God, to Prince, Wife,
Kindred, Friend, the Poor,
Religious, Loiall, True, Kind, Steadfast, Deer,
In Zeal, Faith, Love, Blood, Amity, and Store,
He that so lived, and so deceased, lies here.


Amongst these (and not unproperly) are numbered the Sybils: but I have spoken
of them in their place, therefore I proceed to others, and next of Telesilla.

Telesilla Poetria.
THis incomparable Lady I know not where to equipage, or in what rank to place,
whether amongst the women illustrious for Virtue, or amongst the Warlike women,
imitating the Amazonians for their noble courage and valor, amongst the Chaste,
the Fair, or the Wise, as being a most famous and learned Poetesse; her History
I will give you in brief. Amongst the memorable and remarkable acts attempted
and achieved by women, there is none more glorious or better deserving a
Chronicle of perpetuity, than that performed by the Argive women against King
Cleomenes, by the persuasion and encouragement of Telesilla the Poetesse; she
was born of a noble family, and in her youth being subject to many infirmities
of the body, she asked counsel of the gods concerning her health, answer was
returned from the Oracle, That she should apply her self to the study of the
Muses, and employ all her industry in verse and harmony. Not long it was ere
recovering her health, she grew to that perfection of Art, especially in
Poetry, that she was only held in admiration amongst all other women. Cleomenes
King of Sparta, opposing the Argives with all the rigor hostility could make,
and having slain of them an infinite number, almost incredible to relate (for
so ^aith Plutarch:) in revenge of this loss, a notable courage and an
unspeakable boldness inspired the hearts of these Argive women, insomuch, that
under the conduct of Telesilla, whom they made their General, they took arms
to maintain their fortresses, guard and defend the w^ls, and issue out upon the
enemy, not without admiration and terror to the besiegers, insomuch that
Cleomenes was repulsed with the loss of many of his soldiers Another King (as
Socrates says) called Demaratus, who besieged Pamphiliacum, they sent thence
with loss and infamous retreat. The City thus by their valor preserved, all
such women as fell in the conflict, the inhabitants honou^^bly interred in a
place, called Via Argiva, i. The Argive way, and to the survivers as a
memorable gratitude to their virtues and valors, they granted a famous
solemnity called the dedication of Mars. This battle was fought (as some say)
in the seventh day (others in the new Moon) of the Month which is now called
the fourth, but by the Argives was of old called Herma^^ or Mercurialis; as
that day they yearly celebrate the great Feast styled Hybristica, in which the
women are habited like men, and the men are attired in vestures of women: And
And to make good the loss of so many men that perished in the late
combustions, the macrons did not (as Her^dotus affirms) matched with their
slaves and servants, but they joined themselves in marriage to the best and
noblest of the next adjoining Cities; upon whom notwithstanding they cast such
a contemptible neglect, that they enacted a law which enjoined all married
women still to put beards upon their faces, when they first went to bed to their
husbands.

Perhilla was a young Roman Lady who lived in the time of Augustus Caesar, it
seems of no great noble family, nor extraordinary riches, only of an admirable
wit and excellent facility in Poetry, she was scholar to Ovid, who enterchanged
with her, and she with him many Elegies and Epigrams, she flourished in the
time of his banishment. Her works it seems never came to light: but that she
was answerable to the Character I have given her, I refer you to his seventh
Elegy, in his third book de Tristibus, in which he gives her an approved
testimony: the title is, Mandat Epistolam ut Per^illam Adeat, which the better
to express of what condition she was (and that speaking of Poetesses, it will
not be amiss a little to Poetise) I thought thus to English: Vade salutatum,
etc,
My wandering Letter to Perhi^la go,
Greet her as one that does my mind best know.
Find her thou shall, or with her mother sit,
Or amongst her books and Muses, searching wit.
What ere she be adoing, when she knows,
Thee thither come, her work away she throws,
And without least delay, she will enquire
Wherefore thou come, or what thou can desire.
Tell her I live, but so* as life ^moning,
Mischiefs augment, but do not ease my groaning.
Though by the Muses harmed, I love their name,
And to even numbers how my words to frame.
Still do you to your common studies cling,
And your learned Verse to forr^ign fashions sing.
Nature that gave you beauty, though ^t fit*
To add rare Gifts, chaste Manners, and choice Wit.
I taught you first from Helicon to write,
Lest such a fertile Spring should perish quite.
I saw how far in youth it did extend,
I was your Father, Captain, and your Friend.
If the same fires within your breast still live,
To none save Lesbian Sapho the Palm give.
I fear my fate your forwardness may slack,
And from your course my fortunes pluck you back.
The time was when your Lines to me were read,
And when by me your Muse was censured,
'Twas lawful then with both: and in those days
You did me as your Judge and Tutor praise.
Either unto your Verses I gave ear,
Or made you blush when I forbore to hear.
Perhaps (by my example) since my Muse
Has done me hurt, that practice you will not use;
And fear, because I suffer in my Art,
That in my ruin you shall bear a part.
Fear not (Perhilla) for no woman shall,
Or man, by thy Muse learn to love at all.
Therefore (most learned) all cause of sloth adjourn,
And to these sacred Arts return.
That comely favor will in time decay,
And rugged furrows in thy cheeks display.
Age (without noise) will by thee stealing pass,
When some will say by thee, once fair she was:
Thou then wilt grieve, thy faded font despise,
Or else complaining, swear thy Steel glass lies.
Your Riches are not great (O worhty more:)
But say you wealth had in the amplest store,
Fortune bestows or takes at her own pleasure,
He Is Irus now, that late had Croesus treasure.
'Briefe, save corrupt things, here we nothing gain,
Except the Treasures of the Breast and Brain.
I, that my House, my Country, and you, lack,
In all they would take from me, suffered wrack.
My Brain I still keep with me to this hour,
For over that, great Caesar had no power:
Who though in rage he doom me to be slain,
When I am dead, my fame shall still remain.
Whilst warlike Rome on seven hills lifts her head,
To o'r look the conquered world, I shall be read.
And you (whom happier studies still inspire)
Preserve your name from the last coming fire.


Before many, or most of those, I may justly and without flattery prefer the
famous Queen Elizabeth. Of her Wisdom and Government, all the Christian
Princes that flourished in her time, can give ample testimony: Of her Oratory,
those learned Orations delivered by her own mouth in the two Academies, in the
Latin Tongue, bear record in her behalf. In the Greek Tongue she might
compare with Queen Istrina, before remembered amongst the Linguists. In the
French, Italian, and Spanish, she needed no Interpreter, but was able to give
answer to such Ambassadors in their own Language. Of whose pleasant Fancies,
and ingenious Ditties, I have seen some, and heard of many. Others there have
been likewise of our own Nation, of whose elegancy in these kinds, the World
has taken notice, and pity it were their memories should not be redeemed from
oblivion: as the Lady Jane Gray, daughter to the Duke of Suffolk; the unhappy
wife of as unfortunat a husband, L Guilford Dudley. Here likewise worthily may
be inserted, the excellent Lady, Arabella, who had a great facility in Poetry,
and was elaborately conversant amongst the Muses; as likewise the ingenious
Lady, the late composer of our extant Vr^nia. For others, let me refer you to
Sir John Harrington, in his Allegory upon the 37. book of Ariosto, where he
commends unto us the four daughters of Sir Athony Cook, the Lady Burleigh, the
Lady Russel, the Lady Bacon, and Mrs Killegrew, giving each of them in that
kind a worthy Caracter. In the same place the Author commends unto us a great
Italian Lady, called Vittoria, who writ largely and learnedly in the praise of
her dead husband: with whom (though not in that Funeral Elegick strain) I may
rank ((...) the comparison I underprise not) the beautiful and learned Lady
Mary, Countess of Pembrook, the worthy Sister to her unmatchable brother, Sir
Philip Sydney. But not to dwell too long on her praise (whom I never can commend
sufficiently) I will only bestow upon her Muse that Character which Horace
bequeathed to Sapho: Vivuntque commissi Calores
Aeoliae fidibus Puellae.


Of Witches.
Johannes Bodinus, Andegavensis lib. 3. cap. 3. de Magorum Demonomania writes,
That there is nothing which precipitates men or women to perdition, or more
allures and incites them to devote and give themselves up to the Devil, th^n a
sottish and mere Atheistical opinion settled in them. That he has power and
will to give to the needy, riches; to the afflicted, ^ase, to the weak,
strength; to the deformed, beauty; the ignorant, knowledge; the abject, honor;
grace (...) whom birth has nobilitated; and (...), to such as adversity has
dejected: when on the contrary, we see by common proof, then such miscreants,
none more miserably base, more penurious, more ignorant, more debauched and
contemned. Plutarch remembers us, that when Olympias the wife of Philip King of
Macedon, hearing that her husband was ensnared, and extremely besotted with the
beauty of a noble young Lady, she much desired to see her: who being brought
unto her presence, and beholding a woman with all the accomplishments of nature
so every way graced, one of so exquisite feature, she never beheld the like
till then, she grew astonished, and without offering her the least discourteous
violence, brake out into these ^earms, This rare and incomparable beauty which
has bewitched my husband, is likewise of force to ^ft^cinate the gods. Most
certain it is, nothing seems fairly featured and beautifully composed within
this large universe, but it shows to us the glory of the Maker, who is the
only true and perfect pulchritude; neither is there any thing lovely or
amiable, which proceeds not from his especial grace and miraculous workmanship.
But it was never found or known, that ever any Witch could by exorcisms or
incantations and any thing to Nature, to make her self in any part appear more
comely. It is further observed, that all such are for the most part
stigmaticall and ugly, insomuch, that it is grown into a common Adage, Deformis
ut Saga, i. As deformed as a Witch. Moreover, Cardanus who was not held the
least amongst the Magicians (as having his Art, or rather Diabolical practice,
from his father hereditary) confesses, that in all his life time, in his great
familiarity and acquaintance amongst them, he never knew any one that was not
in some part misshapen and deformed. The same Author (with whose opinion
Wi^rius, Hippocrates, and others assent) affirms that all those Demoniacks or
Witches, after they have had commerce and congresse with the devil, have about
them a continual nasty and odious smell, of which (by the ancient writers) they
were called Fatentes, by the Vasconians, Fetelleres a Faetore, i. Of stench;
insomuch, that women who by nature have a more sweet and refreshing breath,
then men, after their beastly consociety with Satan, change the property, of
nature, and grow horrid, putred, corrupt, and contagious: For Sprangerus
witnesses (who has taken the examination of many) they have confessed (a
thing fearful to be spoken) to have had carnal copulation with evil and
unclean spirits, who no doubt bear the smell of the invisible sulphur about
them. Now concerning this Magic, what reputation it has been in amongst men
(which in effect is no better then plain Witchcraft in women) we may read in
Nauclerus and Platina, That all the Popes inclusively from Silvester the
second, to Gregory the seventh, were Magicians: but Cardinal Benno, who
observed all the Bishops that way devoted, numbers but five, Silvester the
second, Benedict the ninth, John the twentieth and one and twentieth, and
Gregory the seventh. Of these, Augustinus Onuphrius, one of the Popes chamber
(that from the Vatican and the Lives of the Popes there registered, made a
diligent collection) speaks of two only, Silvester the second, and Benedict the
ninth; one of them was after expelled from the Papacy. Silvester lying upon his
death bed, desired his tongue to be torn out, and his hands to be cut off, that
had sacrificed to the devil, confessing that he had never any inspection into
that damnable Art, How the Devil rewards his servants.
til he was Archbishop of Rhemes. These are the best rewards that Satan
bestows upon his suppliants and servants: how comes it else so many wretched
and penurious Witches, some beg their bread, some die of hunger, others rot in
prisons, and so many come to the gallows or the stake. It is reported of a
Gentleman of Mediolanum, that having his enemy at his mercy, held his steeletto
to his heart, and swore that unless he would instantly abjure his faith, and
renounce his Savior, had he a thousand lives, he would instantly with as many
wounds, despoile him of all; which the other for fear assenting to, and he
having made him iterate over and over his unchristian-like blasphemies, in the
middle of his horrible abjuration, stabbed him to the heart, uttering these
words, See, I am revenged of thy soul and body at once; for as thy body is
desperate of life, so is thy soul of mercy. This uncharitable wretch was an apt
scholar to the grand Devil his Master, who in like manner deals with all his
servants, who after he has made them renounce their faith, blaspheme their
Maker, and do to him all beastly and abominable adoration (such as in their own
confessions shall be hereafter related) he not only leaves them abjects from
Gods favor, whose divine Majesty they have so fearfully blasphemed, but
delivers them up to all afflictions and tribulations of this life, and all
ex^^uciation and torments in the world to come. Horrible and fearful have been
the most remarkable deaths of many of the professors of this diabolical Art,
for whom the laws of man has spared (as a terror to others) the hand of
heaven has punished: I will only give you a taste of some few. The (...).
Abdias Bab. Episcopus lib. 6. Certam Apostol. writes, That Zaroes and Arphaxad
(two famous Magitians amongst the Persians) with their exorcisms and
incantations deluding the people, in the hour when Simon and Jude suffered
martyrdom, were struck with lightning from heaven, and so perished. Lucius
Piso, in the first book of his Annals, speaks of one Cinops, a Prince amongst
the Magitians, who at the prayer of St John the Evangelist, was swallowed up in
a river. Olaus Magnus lib. 2. cap. 4. de gentib. Septentrional. tells us of one
Methotis, who by his prestigious juglings, had insinuated into the hearts of
the people, and purchased that opinion and authority amongst them, that he was
called, The high and chief Priest to the gods, who was after torn to pieces by
the multitude: from whose scattered limbs such a contagion grew, that it
infected the air, of which much people perished. Hollerus the Magitian was
slain. Oddo the Dane was (besides his skill in Magic) a great pyrat, it is
written of him, Wierius lib. 2. cap. 4. that without ship or boat he would make
his transmarsne passage over the Ocean, and by his Enchantments raise storms to
shipwreck the vessels of his enemies: there most wretchedly perished. Dr John
Faustus, born at Kuneling, a Village near Cracovia, was found dead by his bed
side, his face blasted and turned backward, in the Dukedom of Wittenburgh, at
which time the house wherein he died, was shaken with a tempest and horrible
Earthquake. The Earl Matisconensis (a practitioner in the same devilish study)
sitting at dinner amongst many Lords, Barons, Captains, and others, was snatched
from the board by devils, and in the sight and view of all the people, three
times hurried swiftly round about the City, being heard to cry, Succurrite,
Succurrite, i. Help, Help: of him, Hugo Cluniacensis writes more largely. A
Priest at Noremburgh searching for hidden treasure in a place where the devil
had directed him, found it guarded by a spirit, in the semblance of a great
black dog; in the search of which, the earth fell upon him, and buried him
alive: And this happened in the year 1530. Wierius. A Magician of Salsburgh,
undertook to call all the Serpents together within a mile of the place, and
bring them into one pit dug for the purpose: in the train of which, came
(after the rest) a great Serpent (supposed to be the devil) and twining about
him, cast him in amongst the rest, where they together perished. The like
untimely death^ we read of Appion Grammaticus, Julian Apostata, Artephius,
Robertus Anglicus: amongst the Helvetians, Petrus Ax^nensis, surnamed
Conciliator, Albertus Teutonicus, Arnoldus de villa nova, Anselmus Parmensis,
Pycatrix Hispanus, Cuchus ascalus Florentinus. and many others. Commendable
therefore it was in the French King, who when one Friscalanus Cenomannus (a man
excellent in this Science) came to show diverse prestigious seats and tricks
before him, for which he expected reward; amongst others, he caused the links
of a golden chain to be taken asunder, and removed them to diverse remote places
of the chamber, which came of themselves to one place, and were instantly
joined together as before: Which the King seeing, and being thereat astonished,
he commanded him instantly from his sight, never again to behold his face, and
after caused him to be arraigned and judged. And these are the Graces, Honors
and Advancements, Offices and Dignities, to which the devil exalts his ^^ege
people.

Of these several sorts of Juglings, Several sorts of superstitious Juggling.
with which the devil deludes his scholars (besides such as I have before
spoken of, amongst such as predicted of things to come) I will nominate some
few One thing which is used now amongst our cunning Women and Witches, is so
ancient, that it was before the age of Lucian or Theocritus, it is called
Caskinomanteia, i. (...) saltatio, i. (as we call it) The Sive and the Shears,
and that is not shamed to be publicly used. Bodinus himself says that he
saw in Lutetia, a boy in a Noblemans house, and before many honest and
judicial spectators, by speaking of a few French words, make a Sive turn which
way he pleased: but the same words uttered by another, could not make it to
move at all. Another superstition is with a Knife or a Key. If any be suspected
of (...), read but such a Psalm* and name the party accused, if the Knive at
speaking of his name move to stir, he is then held guilty: and that (...) is
called Axinomanteia. That which is done by a Ring out over a Cruse of water, is
called Daktuliomanteia. And this is is a famous sorcery, much in use with the
Witches of Italy. Ioachimus Cameraccusis, had a speaking Ring, in which was a
familiar, or a devil; that kind is called Vdromanteia, as also
Dactyliomanteia, i. A Ring wherein Spirits are worn. Conjectures made from Wels
and^ Fountains, were called Idromanteia: these, Numa Pompilius was said to be
the first inventor of, which Varro otherwise interprets, i. Of a boy employed
by the Magicians to look upon Images in the wat^r, one of which pronounced
distinctly fifty verses of the wars of Mithridates, before any such rumor was
spread, or purpose of the like business intended. Aeromanteia is a
superstitious prediction by the air; but most certain when the wind is South.
Another was made from Meal or Chaste, and was called Alphitomanteia, or
Aleuromanteia, remembered by Iamblicus; but to what purpose it was, he
explaineth not: as Likewise of Lythomantea, which was practiced by Stones
Divinition by Laurel, was called Daphnomanteia. The praescience which they
gathered from the head of an Ass, Kephalcomanteia. Puromanteia and
Kapnomantesia were conjectures from fire. Rabdomanteia was used by a Physician
of Tholos^, in speaking of certain mystical words in a low and submisse voice.
The like unto that, was Zulomanteia, with loose chips of wood, much practiced
in Illyria. But of all these devilish and detestable practices, there is none
(says Bodinus) more Heathenish, irreligious and dangerous, then that so
commonly in use now adays, and by witches continually practiced, to the injury
and wrong of new married women, it is commonly called Ligare ligulam, or to tie
knots upon a point; which as it is usual, so it is not new: for Herodot. lib.
2 reports, That Amasis King of Egypt, was by the like Exorcisme, bound and
hindered from having any mutual congresse with his with Laodice, till those
ligatory spells were after uncharmed. Paulus Aemilius in the life of Clotharus
the second witnesses, That King Theodoricus was by the like ligaments
^^^ascinated by his Concubines, from having lawful consociety which his wife
Hermamberga. Bodinus reports, That he heard from the mouth of Roileius,
Ambassador gener^ll amongst the Blasenses, who affirmed, That it the marriage
of a young couple, just as they were ready to receive the benediction from the
Priest, a boy was seen by him tying one of these Magic knots in the Temple;
whom thinking to have deprehended, the boy fled, and was not taken Bodinus
further adds, That in the year 1567. he then being Procurator in Patavia, the
Gentlewoman in whose house he sojourned (being it seems a pregnant scholar in
this Art) related unto him in the presence of one Jacobus Baunasius, That there
were fifty several ways of tying this knot, to hinder copulation, either to
bind the Husband, or the Wife only, that one hating the others infirmity, might
the freelier pollute themselves with Adulteries. She said moreover, the man was
often so charmed, the woman seldom and difficulty: besides, this knot might be
tied for a day, for a year, for the present time, or for ever, or whilst the
same was unloosed: That it might be tied for one to love the other, and not be
again beloved, or to make a mutual and ardent love betwixt them; but when they
came to congression, to bite and scratch, and tear one another with their teeth
and nails. In Tholosia, a man and his wife were so bewitched, who after three
years being uncharmed, had a fair and hopeful issue; and which is more to be
wondered at, in that time there appeared upon some part of their bodies so many
tumors, or swellings, like small knobs of flesh, as they should have had
children, if that impediment had not happened. Some there are that may be charmed
before Wedlock, and some after, but those hardly. There are others, whom their
effascinations can keep from ejecting their U^ine; others, to make them that
they cannot rest^ain it all: but of the first, diverse have perished She
likewise told him sundry speeches belonging these Witcherie, the words whereof
were neither Hebrew, Greek, Latin, French, Spanish, Italian, nor indeed
deriving their Ecymology from any known Language whatsoever.

Erasmus in the explanation of the Adage, Pas^tis Semiobutus, writes of some
Witches, that by their incantations could command in any void room, Tables on
the sudden to be spread and furnished with meats and ju^kets of all varieties
to taste the palate, and when the guests had sufficiently ^ed and satisfied every
man his own appetite, with one word could likewise command all things away, as
if no such thing had been others also that when they had bought any commodity
of any man, their backs were no sooner turned, but the mou^e they laid out
would instantly forsake the seller, and return into the purse of the buyer. But
to begin with the ancient Poets, by their testimonies it is manifest, that the
practice of Witches and Witchcraft has been it great, that by their Charms
and Spells, they have had the power to transhape men into bruit beasts, to alter
the course of the Planets and Stars, have changed the Seasons, making the
natural course of the year preposterous: further, that their exorcismes have
extended to Herbs, Flowers, Fruits, and Grain, to infect men with Diseases, and
cattle with Murren, to delude the Eyes and weaken the Senses, bewitch the
Limbs, bind the Hands, gyve the Feet, and benumb the other Members, apoplex all
the vital Spirits, and raise up dead bodies from their Sepulchers; nay more,
to call the Moon down from her Sphere, with other most strange things, as
miraculous to relate as difficult to believe, of such in his first book,
Tibullus speaks.

Hanc ego de Coelo ducentem sidera vidi:
-- This Which I did epsy
To call the Stars and Planets from the sky.
Now, that women have been more addicted to this devilish Art, then men, is
manifest by the approbation of many grave Authors: Diodorus in his fi^t book de
Antiquorum Gestis, Speaks of Hecate, that she was the first that ever tempered
Acomtum (a venomous Herb, which some call Libbards bane, others, Wolve: bane)
applying her self to confections of sundry deadly poisons. This was frequent
among the Romans, nay, even among the noblest matrons, as their own writers
testify. Of the like, Saint Austin speaks in his book de Civitate Dei: so
Pliny affirms in his five and twentieth book and second chapter, That women are
most prone to these unlawful Arts; for so we read of Medea, Cyrce, and others,
whom the Poets fabled to be goddesses, of whom we shall find occasion to speak
of in their order. Suidas of women Witches cites an old proverb, Thessala
Mulier, by which he notes all of that practice as peculiar to that Sex, and not
to men. Therefore Quintilian speking of this argument, thus determines it.
Theft (says he) is much prevailing with men, and Witchcraft most familiar with
the Sex of women.

Of Cyrce, and others remembered by the Poets.
SHe was the daughter of the Sun, and the Nymph Persa and was said to be so
exquisitely cunning in these effascinations, that she changed men into several
shapes of beasts, and the companions and associates of Ulysses into Swine. She
inhabited not far from Caieta a City of Campania. The Marsians a people of
Italy, were said to be lineally descended from this Cyrce, who likewise
succeeded her in that devilish Art. Gellius writes of this Nation, That they
had skill in taming the most poisonous Serpents, and to make them gentle and
servile to their use; their Charms, Exorcisms and Incantations, by which they
had power in the transhapes of creatures, their mixture of herbs and tempering
of drugs, being to them left as hereditary by her. Who would read further of
her, I refer him to Ovid, who in his Metamorphosis gives her a full and large
character, so Homer in his tenth book of his Odysses, the argument of which,
for her better expression, I thus English: Aeoliam ventorum agimur patriamque
domumque.
Ulysses From the Il^nd of the ^velops, where he thrust out Polyphemus his eye.
thence into Aetolia past,
Where Aeolus the King of Winds then reigned
Who the four brothers gave him closed fast
In leathern bags (for so they were constrained.)
With prosperous speed he sails, and growing near
His native Ithaca whilst he was sleeping,
His men supposed some wealth enclosed there,
Within those bags given to their masters keeping,
And opening them, the imprisoned winds now free,
With adverse gu^^s, despite his helm and glass
Blow him quite back, so he is forced to see
Islands in the Sea so called.
Antiphates, and the Lestrigone's.
Some ships there lost, he attains the Cercian shore,
Where the most powerful goddess as she feasts,
Transhapes Eurilochus with many more
Of his companions, into sundry beasts,
The wytie Greek by Mercuries admonishment,
Alone escapes the Witches transformation,
Who failing in her Art, bred both astonishment,
And of his many virtues, admiration:
His wisdom so prevailed, him Cyrce adored,
And to his mates their pristine shape restored.


Medea was the daughter of Otes and Ispaea, King and Queen of the Colchians,
and sister to Cyrce: she found out the Virtues of many Herbs, Plants and Roots,
and tempered their juice to her devilish purposes, growing to that height of
cunning, that by their incantations she tamed the mad Bulls that from their
mouths and nostrils breathed fire, and bellowed terror, charming asleep the
ever-waking Serpent that kept the Golden fleece, lest they should hinder Jason
her beloved in the purchase thereof: for which courtesy he took her to wife,
and by long t^avel arriving in Thessaly, Aeson the father of Jason, now grown
decrepit through age, she restored to his former youth and strength:
nowithstanding, her husband forgetful of this great benefit done to his father,
forsook her bed, and married Creusa, daughter to Creon King of Corinth; with
which ingratitude Medea enraged (yet distembling her malice) she after some
insinuation, presents Creusa with a glorious Mantleto the eye, which she no
sooner saw put on, but her whole body was in a flame, and she consumed to
ashes: after the same sort perished King Creon with his Queen. This done, she
murdered her children had by Jason, and being openly hurried by winged dragons
through the air, she fled to Athens, and there was married to King Aegeus;
whose son Theseus, when she attempted to have poisoned in a cup of gold
tempered with Aconitum (gathered from an herb that grew from the some of
Cerberus) her treason being discovered and prevented, by her Magic skill she
shut her self within a cloud, in which with her young son Medus (whose father
Aegeus was) she escaped into Asia. Of her Ovid speaks, Propertius, Valerius
Flaccus, Pliny, and many others.

Vitiae were so called of an infamous Witch called Vitia, these (as some
Authors write) have power like the Basilisk to kill with the eye, especially
all such on whom they cast an envious and malicious look: of the selfsame
condition are a certain people among the Tribullians and Illyrians. Textor. in
Officin.

Mycale is the name of a Witch in Ovid, likewise Dipsas; of the one he writes
thus: Matter erat Mycale quem deduxisse canendo
Sepe reluctantis, constabat cornua lunae.
Her mothers name was Mycale,
Known to have had the skill,
By spells, to pull the horned Moon
From heaven, against her will.
And of the other in the first book of his Elegies: Est quaedam quicunque
volet, etc.

Locusta is numbered amongst the rest, and remembered by Cornelius Tacitus, for
making certain venomous confections with which Agrippina poisoned her husband
Claudius, from her many of the most of her diabolical practice, are called
Locustae, she is likewise spoken of by Juvenal in one of his Satyrs. Eriphila
was an inchantresse of that devilish condition that upon whomsoever she cast an
envious eye, that creature was sure to come to some extraordinary mischief; of
whom was raised a proverb* cast as an aspersion upon all such kind of women.
Anus Eriphus* Textor in (...). in. cap. de Veneficis Thracia was a Nymph famous
for her incantations, who for skill in herbs and cunning in exorcismes, was by
some adored as a goddess; of her came the people amongst whom she lived, to be
called by the name of Thracians. Gyge was the name of a Beldam, who was a
household servant to Parasatis, the mother of King Cyrus, and by the Queen
especially employed in all her sorceries, Herodotus. Canidia Neopolitana was a
confectioner of unguents, a Witch, and practiced in diverse kinds of sorceries,
excellently described by Horace. Erictho was the name of a notorious Witch of
Thessaly, deciphered by Lucan, whom who shall read and desire plainly to be
instructed in that horrible Art, he shall not find it more truly and punctually
discovered by any of the Latin Poets. Gunthrune was a Witch of a strange
devilish condition, who by her incantations was the death of many creatures, as
well beasts as men, yet being dead there was no wound or mark of death
appearing about them. Sagana, Veia, and Folia, were professors of the self
same devilish Art, and (...) remembered by Tacitus, Juvenal, and Horace, these
were said to have had hand in the death of the noble chil (...).

It shall not be amiss to insert amongst these, what I have heard concerning a
Witch of Scotland. (...).
One of that Country (as by report there are too many) being for no goodness
by the Judges of Assize arreigned, convicted, and condemned to be burnt, and
the next day according to her judgment, brought and tied to the stake, the
reeds and fagots placed round about her, and the executioner ready to give fire
(for by no persuasion of her ghostly father, nor importunity of the Sheriffs,
she could be wrought to confess any thing) she now at last cast, to take her
farewell of the world, casting her eye a tone side spied her only son, and calls
to him, desiring him very earnestly as his last duty to her, to bring her any
water, or the least quantity of liquor (be it never so small) to comfort her,
for she was extremely athiest: at which he shaking his head, said nothing; she
(...) importuned him in these words, Oh my dear son, help me to any drink, be
it never so little, for I am most extremely a dry, oh dry, dry; to whom the
young fellow answered, by no means dear mother will I do you that wrong: For
the drier you are (no doubt) you will burn the better.

Of Witches transported from one place to another, by the Devil.
THe difference betwixt Witches, or to define what Magae are, and what Lamiae,
were but time misspent, the rather because it has been an argument so much
handled in our mother tongue, I will only rehearse unto you some few particular
discourses concerning Witches, out of Danaeus, Bodinus, Wierius, Grillaneus
Italus, and others: all agree, that some have made express covenant with the
Devil by Bond and Indenture, sealed and delivered; others by promise and oath
only: as likewise that all such have secret marks about them in some private
place of their bodies, some in the inside of the lip, some in the hair of the
eie-browes, some in the fundament, some in the inside of the thigh, the hollow
of the arm, or the privy parts. Albertus Pictus an Advocate in the Parliament
of Paris, reported he had seen one in the Castle of Theodoricus, who had a
plain mark upon the right shoulder, which the next day was taken off by the
Devil. Claudius de Fagus the Kings Procurator, affirmed the like of one Joanna
Hervilleria. Concerning the transportation of Witches through the air, Paulus
Grillandus an Italian Doctor of the Law, that writ the Histories of many
Witches, says, That a Country Villager not far from Rome, upon a night
spying his wife daub her self with a certain ^nguent, and instantly leap out at
the window, after her stay from him some three or four hours, had provided
against her return a good cudgel, with which he so soundly enterteined her,
that he forced her to confess where she had been, but would not grant her free
pardon till she had made him promise to bring him to the sight of all these
novelties, and unbeleevable passages by her related: the match was concluded,
she forewarned him that he must in no wise use the name of God by the way,
unless it were in scorn or blasphemy, with other such horrible instructions.
The night came, they were both anointed, when presently two rough Goats
appeared at the window, upon which they being mounted, were instantly hurried
through the air into a place where were an infinite multitude of people, men
and women, and in the midst one that seemed to be Prince and Sovereign of the
rest, to whom every one of them did obeisance and adoration, she bid her
husband stand in a remote place till she had likewise done her worship, which
he she accordingly performed: This done, they all danced together in a circle
or ring not as our custom is face to face, but back to back, the rest may be
conjectured, lest if any should be apprehended, the one might appe^^h the
other. After their dance was ended, the tables were covered and furnished, she
calls to her husband to sit down amongst the rest, and bids him welcome, he
begins to feed, but finding the meat to have no relish, in regard it was not
well seasoned, he calls aloud for salt, and many times before it came, it was
brought at length, which he seeing, before he tasted it, he thus said, Hor
laudato sui Dio per e venuto questo sale, i. Now God be thanked that the salt
is come: these words were no sooner spoken, but Men, Meat, Tables, Devils,
Witches, all were vanished in an instant, he was left alone naked, almost
frozen with cold, ignorant in what place, or whither to travel for shelter; day
came, he spies shepherds, and asks them where he is? they tell him in the
principality of Benevent, under the jurisdiction of the Pope, above an hundred
miles from Rome. He was forced to beg rags to cover him, and bread to relieve
him, being eight days before he could reach to his cottage; he accuses his
wife, she others, who were all after delivered to the fire, and burnt alive.
The like history the same Author relates of a young damosel enticed by an old
Witch to this damnable assembly in the Duchy of Spoletum, in the year of
grace 1535. The like confession of these assemblies, dances, and banquets, and
after all, their common carnal society, women with he Devils, and men with
she-Spirits, was extorted from a Witch of Lochinum, another of Lions, both
suffered by fire; and their arraignments, confessions, judgments, and
executions, published by Danaeus in the year 1474. Of these meetings, banquets,
dances, and congressions, Friscalanus the before named Magician, gave ample
testimony to Charles the ninth, King of France. Salvertes the President speaks
of a Witch called Beronda, who being brought to the stake, accused a great Lady
of France, for being one of that damned society, but she obstinately denying
it, the Witch thus said, Have you forget since our last meeting, when you were
appointed to carry the Callice of poison? Olaus Magnus, lib. 3. cap 11. says,
that many of these conventicles are made in the North, and are freequent in the
mount Atlas; as likewise Mel lib. 3. Sulinus lib. 38. cap. 44. and Pliny lib.
5. cap. 1. Infinite are the Histories to this purpose. Antonius de Turquemadae
a Spaniard, A Spanish Magician.
says, That a Magician would needs persuade his friend to be a spectator of
this wicked assembly, all things being prepared for the purpose, in the midst
of which confluence was an huge ugly Goat, sitting upon a sublime throne, whom
every one came to kiss by (...), En la part ma senzia que tema, those that
understand the Spanish know it to be a place which cannot modelestly be named:
which when his companion beheld, as detesting such ^^eastiall adoration, he
left all patience, and with an acclamation said to his friend, Dios a mui
grandes bozs^i. Oh God with a loud voice; which was no sooner spoken, but all
things vanished in a tempestuous whirlewind, he was only left desolately
forsaking, being three years before he could come to visit his own fields and
gardens. Of their exportation after their unction, many Authors testify, as
upon a Goat, a Pegasus, a Night-crow, an enchanted st^ffe, A Witch of Brill.
etc. This puts me in mind of a discourse which was told by a great Lady, to
have happened at her being in the Brill, which was then one of the Cautionary
Towns in the possession of Queen Elizabeth's a Muscatier one night standing
sentinel upon the walls, a little before day, he heard a great noise of^a^ling
gossips, laughing and talking, their voices (as he thought) came from the air,
when casting his eyes about to know from whence this prodigy might proceed, he
might perceive a dusky cloud come sweeping close along by him, in which it
seemed to him they sat that were so merry; being first affrighted at the
object, and after taking courage, he gives fire, and shoots toward the cloud
at random, at the report of the musket the Town is up in arms, his Officers
leave the court of guard, and come to know the matter, he tells them an
incredible discourse, which he spares not to confirm with a vollie of oaths,
they seek further toward the place where he aimed his musket, and found an old
woman with a bunch of keys at her girdle, and a bullet in her buttock, dropped
out of the cloud, and the rest vanished; they seize her, she is after examined,
and confesses who had been to make merry in her company, some of them proved
to be rich burgers wives of the City. The L. Adrianus Ferreus vicar general
amongst the Laodunenses has left remembered, that one Margarita Bremontia the
wife of Noel Laveretus confessed unto him that she with her mother Mary upon a
monday night, not long before her examination, came into a like assembly at the
mil called Franquisenum, which stands in the meadow near unto Loginum, who
bestriding a broomstaffe, after some few words mumbled to her self, they were
presently transported thither, where they found Joanna Roberta, Ioanna
Guillemina, Mary the wife of Simon Agnes, and Gulielma the wife of one Grassus,
every one mounted upon the like wooden horse; there met them six spirits, or
devils, according to their number, in humane shape, but in aspect horrible,
etc. who after they had danced together, every Devil singled out his mistress,
and had with them mutual copulation; she says the Devil kissed her twice, and
had her company for the space of half an hour. Guillemina confessed the like, as
also, Perfrigidum semen ab eo Excreatum. The song used in those dances, was
this; Har, Har; Diabole, Diabole; Sali huc, Sali illuc; Lude hic, Lude illic:
Then answered the rest, Sabbath, Sabbath, i. The feast day of, etc. Johannes
Megerus the accurate writer of the Flanders History, relates that in the year
1459, a great number of men and women Witches were burned, who publicly
confessed their unguents, transuections, dances, feasts, and consociety with
Devils: so likewise Iacobus Sprangerus of German Witches, in the Cities and
Villages about Constantiensis and Ratisbone, in the year 1485, reports the
like. I could tire the Reader with infinite examples, authors, testates, and
adjurors, with the places, times, and circumstances, one or two at the most
shall suffice. Ioachimus Cameracensis in his book de Natura Demonum, tells us of
a traveller that passing by night through a forest, hear the like noise of
music, mirth, dancing, and revels, and approaching nearer to discover the
novel, espied the like convention, when on the sudden the Devils and Witches
all vanished, and left behind them certain bowls and cups of plate, with the
names of the owners engraven upon them, which he took and carried the next day
to the Magistrates, by which many of the Witches were known, these discovered
others, all which were condemned to the stake. In the year 1504, Salvertus
being President amongst the Pictavians, where he with Daventonius his fellow
President sat as Judges, three men and one woman were convicted, and after
doomed to the fire, all these confessed the ceremonies in the before named
nightly meetings: as also there was a Goat placed in the midst of them, whose
hinder parts they all kissed, every one holding a lighted candle in their hand.
At length with these lights the Goat was burned to ashes, of which every of
them received a quantity This dust they scattered upon the thresholds of
Houses, Stable doors, Ox-stals, or Sheep-coats, to destroy either Children,
Horses, Sheep, or such Cattle of their enemies. This being distributed amongst
them, the devil cried with a loud voice, Revenge your selves of your enemies,
or die your selves. At the next meeting, every one was particularly examined of
the mischiefs they had done; and such as could not give just account of some
or other ill, were publicly mocked and derided by the rest, and after
received so many stripes as were adjudged her by the Devil; insomuch, that one
Witch confessed she could never rest and be at quiet in her own thoughts,
unless she were doing some villainy or other; and if she had no worse work in
hand, she must break Pots, Glasses, pluck out the Spiggots, and let the Beer
run out of the barrels, into the Cellar floors, to keep her hand in ure. Of the
power of Witches, and Witchcraft, Virgil, who was held not to be the least
amongst the Magicians) speaks in many places; but none more amply then Ovid,
when he thus writ: Quam volui, ripis ipsis mirantibus, amnes
In Fontes rediere suos, etc.
When so I list, I make the banks admire
To see the floods back to their heads retire,
And stay them there: when standing on the shore,
I strike the Seas, I make the billows rore,
And calm them being angry, I beat back
The stormy Clouds, or can command the Rack
To bring in sweeping Tempsts: the four Winds
My Incantation does let loose, or binds.
I remove Woods, shake Mountains: when I speak,
The Vipers jaws I by my spells can break.
When I but please, the Earth beneath me groans,
And Sepulchers from the corrupted Bones
Send forth their Ghosts, before my face to appear.
I thee, O horned Moon, call from thy Sphere, etc.


Much more might be cited out of the ancient Poets, to illustrate these
collected out of our modern histories of later times, and almost every day
presented before our eyes. But this one shall serve for mauy.

Of Witches that have either changed their own shapes, or transformed others.
Whether this be possible in nature, or no, or whether it has any time been
suffered by the Divine permission, has been a Question as well amongst the
Theologists as the Philosophers: It is no business of mine at this time to
reconcile their Controversies, my promise is only to acquaint you with such
things as I have either read, or heard related: which if they err in any thing
from truth, blame not me, but the Authors. Concerning Lycantropia, or men that
change themselves into Wolves, Doctor Bordinus (general Procurator for the
King) relates, That a Wolf setting upon a man, he shot him with an arrow
through the thigh^ who being wounded, and not able to pluck out the shaft, fled
to his house, kept his bed, being found to be a man, and the arrow after known
by him that shot it, by the Lycantropies confession. Those that are the
diligent Inquisitors after Witches, report it in a book entitled Malleum
Maleficarum, That a Countryman was violently assaulted by three great Cats, who
in defense of himself, wounded them all dangerously; and these were known to be
three infamous Witches, who were after found bleeding, and by reason of their
hurts, in great danger of death* Petrus Mamorius in his book de Sortilegis,
affirms that he saw the like in Sabaudia. Henricus Coloniensis in Libello de
Lamiis, affirms for an undoubted truth, as also Vlricus Molitor in his book
dedicated to Sigismund Caesar, in a Disputation before the Emperor, confidently
witnesses, That he saw of these Lycantropi (which have transhaped themselves)
at Constantinople, accused, convicted, condemned, and upon their own confession
delivered unto death. These the Germans call Werwolff, the Frenchmen, Loups
Garous; the Picards, Loups Warous, i. diverse Wolves; the Greeks call them
Lukanthropous, or Mormolukias; the Latins (or the Romans) call them
Versipelles, i. Turn-coats or Turn-skins, as Pliny in these transmutations has
observed. Francis^^ Phoebus Fecensis Comes, in his book de Venatione, i. of
Hunting, says, That by the Garouz, is signified Gardezvous, i. Guard, or look
to your selves. Pomponatius and Theophrasius (the Princes of the Philosophers
in their age) most constantly affirm the transmigration of Witches into Wolves.
Gasper Peucerus (an approved learned man, and the Cosen german to Philip
Melancthon) held these things to be mere fables, till by Merchants of worthy
reputation and credit he was better informed (from certain proofs brought him
from Livonia) of such that for the same fault were (upon their own confessions)
adjudged to death. These, and greater, are confirmed by Languetus Burgundus,
Agent for the Duke of Saxony, with the King of France; as also by Herodotus
Neurios, who affirms these conversions and (...) shapes to be most frequent in
Livonia. In the History of (...) Tritemius you may read, Anno 970. of a Jew
called Baranus, the son of Simeon, who could transform himself into* Wolf at
his own pleasure. Of the like to these, Herodotus, Homer, Pomponius Mela,
Solinus, Strabo, Dionysius, Afer, (...) Virgil, Ovid, and many others have
written, long before these times; as likewise Epanthes, remembered by Pliny, and
Agrippas in his Olympionicis, who speaks of one Demaenetius Parrhasius,
translated into a Wolf. Or who so would be better confirmed, let him read
Olaus Magnus, of the Nations of Pilapia Narbonia, Fincladia, and Augermania; or
else Saxo Grammatius, Fincelius, and Gulielmus Brabantius. And therefore those
things are not altogether incredible, Lycaon, who was transformed into a Wolf.
which Ovid speaks of Ly^a^n who included much truth in many (...)) who in his
Metamorphosis thus says: Territus ipse fugit, noctuque silentia runis
Exululat (...) que loqui conatur, etc.
Frighted he fli^s, and having got
The silence of the shades,
Thinking to speak he ^owls, and then
The neighbor flo^ks invades.


So much for monstrous Wolves; I come now to mere Witches.

Saint Augustine in his book de Civitate Dei, lib. 18. cap^ 17. and 18. tells of
diverse hostesses or Ink^epers practiced in these diabolical Arts, who put such
co^^ections into a kind of Cheese they made, that all such travelers as
guested with them, and eat thereof, we ^^presently metamorphosed into laboring
beasts, as Horses, Asses, Oxen, all which they employed either in drawing or
bearing of burdens, or else let them out for Hacknies to gain profit by their
hire, and when their work was done, and they had made of them what benefit they
could, they restored them to their pristine shape; Ranulphus, and Gulielmus de
Regib. lib. 20. A strange Witchcrafte.
relates a History of two such Witches that lived in the road way to Rome. A
Minstrel or Piper traveling that way, tasted of this cheese, and was presently
changed into an Ass, who notwithstanding he had lost his shape, still retained
his natural reason, and (as one Banks here about this City taught his horse to
show tricks, by which he got much money) so this Ass being capable of what was
taught him, and understanding what he was bid to do, showed a thousand several
pleasures (almost impossible to be apprehended by any unreasonable creature) to
all such as came to see him, and paid for the sight, insomuch that he was sold
by these Witches to a neighbor of theirs, for a great sum of money, but at the
delivery of him says one of the Witches, Take heed neighbor (if you mean to
have good of your beast) that in any case you lead him not through the water:
The poor transhaped Piper this hearing, apprehends, that water might be the
means to restore him to his former humane figure, purposing in himself to make
proof thereof at his next best opportunity. Careful was the new Merchant of
the charge given, and watered him still in a pail, but would never let him
drink from the river; but the Master traveling by the way, and to ease his
beast alighting and leading him in his hand: the Ass on the sudden broke his
bridle, ran out of sight, and leaped into the next river he came near, where
leaving his saddle and furniture behind, he waded out in his own shape: the man
pursues him with all the speed he can, and follows him the way he took, the
first he meets is the Piper, and asks him if he saw not such a kind a beast,
and describes him to a hair. The fellow acknowledges himself to have been the
same Ass he bought of the Witch; the Master wondreth, and relates this to his
Lord, his Lord acquaints this novell to Petrus Damianus, a man of approved
knowledge and wisdom, and numbered amongst the greatest scholars of his age; he
examines the Master, the Piper, the Witches, and such as saw him leap into the
river a Beast, and return a man, and informs Pope Leo the seventh thereof. All
their examinations and confessions were taken, and a disputation of the
possibility thereof held in the presence of the Pope, before whom the truth
thereof was acknowledged and recorded. The same History is told by Viacentius
in Speculo, lib. 3. cap. 109. and Fulgentius lib. 8. cap. 11.

We read in Gulielmus Archbishop of Tyrus, Miraculous transformations.
whom Sprangerus the great Inquisitor cities to the same purpose: An English
soldier being in Cyprus, was by a Witch transformed into an Ass, and when all
his mates went on Shipboard, he following them as loath to lose their
fellowship, was by his own friends and Country men that gave him lost, beaten
back with clubs and staves. They put to Sea without him, he having no other
owner, returned back to the Witches house that had transhaped him, who employed
him in all her drugeries; till at length he came into the Church when the
Bishop was at divine service, and fell on his knees before the Altar, and began
to use such devout gestures as could not be imagined to proceed from a bruit
beast, this first bred admiration, and then suspicion. The Witch was called
before the Judges, examined and convicted, after condemned to the stake; having
before restored him to his former shape after three years transformation.
Answerable to this we read of Ammonius the Philosopher, of the Sect of the
Peripatericks, who has left recorded, That an Ass came usually into his
school at the time of reading, and with great attention listened to his Lecture.
Merchants have delivered, that nothing is more frequent in Egypt, then such
transhapes, insomuch that Bellonius in his observations printed at Lutetia,
says, That he himself in the suburbs of Cair (a great City in Egypt) saw a
Comedian that desired conference with the Ass, that he himself rode on, who
wondering what he then intended, gave him liberty of free discourse; where they
seemed to talk with great familiarity (as having been before acquainted) where
the Ass by his actions and signs seemed to apprehend whatsoever was spoken to
him; when the one protested with the hand upon his breast, the other would
strike the ground with his foot, and when the man had spoke as if he had told
some jest, the Ass would bray aloud as if he had laughed heartily at the
conceit, appearing to him, not only to apprehend and understand whatsoever was
spoken, but to make answer to such questions as were demanded him. These things
have been so common, that Saint Augustine himself, as he will not affirm the
transformation of Apuleius, so he does not deny it, but leaves it as a thing
possible to be done by Witch craft, De Civitate Dei, lib. 18. cap. 18. Of the
like opinion is Paulus Aegenita, Theophrastus, Paracethus, Pomponalius and
Fernetius, the excellentest Physicians of their age, Fern. lib. de abditis
rerum causis. You may read in the History of Saint Clement, That Simon Magus
transformed Faustinianus into his own shape, that he was not only unknown to
familiar friends, but denied and abjured by his own wife and children. This
Simon came likewise to Nero, and told him if he cut off his head, he would
within three days appear to him alive; which Nero having caused to be done in
a great confluence of people, he came to him after according to his promise,
for which Nero caused a Statut to be erected to his honor, and inscribed upon
the same, Simoni Mago deo* i. To Simon Magus the god. From which time Nero
wholely applied himself to that devilish Art. But Simon, as the History
relates, had deceived the eyes of the Emperor with the multitude, and had
caused a Goat to be beheaded in his shape. The like Apuleius relates of
himself, who when he had thought he had slain three sundry men with his own
hand, found them after, three Goats skins effacinated by the Witch Pamphila.
Among these Witches, it shall not be amiss to insert a she-devill or two.

Franciscus Picus Mirandulanus, She-Devils
in his book de Praenotione, tells of a Priest who was a Witch, called
Benedictus Berna, of the age of fourscore years, with whom he had conference,
he confessed unto him that for the space of forty years and upward he had
carnal consociety with a she, Spirit, who called her self Hermione, who
continually attended on him, but visible to no man save himself. He further
confessed that he had sucked the blood of many infants, with other most horrid
and ex^^^able commissions; and in this Wi^^ius and Bodin (though in many
opinions they were Antagonists) agree. They relate a further History confirmed
by Cardanus de varietat. lib. 15. cap. 80. of one Pinnetus who lived to the age
of seventy years and upward, and exercised the like congression with a Spirit
in a feminine shape, who called her self Florin^, and continued their
familiarity and acquaintance for the space of forty years. How true or false, I
know not, but I have heard the like (not many years since) by an English
Gentleman, whose name I am loath to use, who had the like company of a Spirit,
who called her self Cadua; the circumstances I cannot discover without
offense, though they be worthy both relation and observation.

Of Witches that have confessed themselves to have raised tempests in a most
serene Sky, with other things of no less admiration.
IN the book of Inquisitors, lib. 4. de Malific. it is recorded, that Anno Dom.
1488. in Constantiensis, there were terrible tempests, prodigious hail and
storms, the like not seen before, and these within the compass of four miles:
but the air or temperate heavens beyond that space seemed no way disturbed;
upon which the villagers laid hands upon all such suspected women as were
thought to be of that devilish practice: amongst which were two, the one called
Anna de Mindele, the other Agnes, who first obstinately denied themselves to be
so addicted; but after being called before the Magistrates, and strictly
examined apart, they confessed, that the one unknown to the other, went into the
fields, where either of them made a pit in the earth, into which they poured a
certain quantity of water, somewhat before noon, and by uttering certain words
not fit to be named, and invoking the name of the Devil, they were no sooner
got home to their cottages, but those miraculous storms and tempests happened.
The same author specifies the confession of another Witch of the same place,
who seeing all her neighbors and acquaintance invited to a solemn wedding,
where after dinner in a fair and temperate day, all the guests disposed
themselves into the fields to sport and dance, according to the custom, she
caused her self to be transported into the air by the Devil, in the open day
and sight of certain shepherds, to a certain hill near unto the Village, where
because she had no water ready, she notwithstanding dug a pit, and for
necessity (because it is a ceremony used in all these diabolical practices)
she made water, which stirring in the same pit, and speaking some blasphemous
words, instantly the air and sky which was then clear and unclouded, was
filled with storms, hall, and tempest, which poured with such vehemence upon
the guests of the Village, and upon them alone, that they were pitiously wet
and weather-beaten, till they had not any of them a dry thread about them; all
imagined this to be done by Witchcraft: the same woman was accused by the
shepherds, who confessing the fact, was adjudged unto the stake. In this is to
be o^served that the fruits, the grain, nor vines were blasted, though there is
a law extant in the twelve tables, Qui (...) poenas dato, i. They that shall
inch^^n^ or blast the fields, let them be punished. There was another edict
which prohibited any man from drawing the fertility and harvest of another man's
field into his own ground, in these words, Ne alienam segetem pellexeris
incantando, and in another place, Ne incantanto ne agrum defraudanto, which
has reference to the former. By the authority of these Roman Ordinances
specified in the twelve Tables, Turni^^ was accused by Sparius Albinus, because
when there was a dearth in the Country, his fields were only abundant and
plentiful, and where other men's cattle died of the (...) and murren, his were
fat, fair, and in good plight and liking: upon this accitement he caused his
horses, his oxen, his ^eems, cattle, and servants, all to appear with him
before the Senate, and there pleaded that the Masters eye made the cattle fat,
and his care and industry the servant thriving, sightly, and in good liking,
protesting he knew no other enchantments; and for that answer was acquitted by
the Senate. Notwithstanding this we may read in Spranger^^ of Hyppenes and
(...), two famous Magicians of Germany, who confessed that they could at any
time, steal the third part of the crop one of another field at their pleasure,
when by the most authentic judgments it is approved that no Witch or Conjurer
was ever known to (...) himself ^he value of one (...) by his Magic
documents. The like I could (...) of Pontanus, and other Authors, withal (...)
ancient verse borrowed by all the Magicians from Virgil: (...).
If to my (...),
I will (...) that mine.


In the Scottish-Chronicle it is related of King Dussus to be troubled with a
strange disease, that he could eat well, drink well, and in the constitution of
his body found no imperfection at all, only he could not sleep, but spent the
tedious night in (...) and cold (...), that there was despair of the Kings
(...) and safety. There was at length a (...) published, That the Moravians
(certain inhabitants of Scotland, once great rebels and enemies of the King,
but since made regular, and reconciled to their faithful obeisance) had hired
certain Witches to destroy King Dussus, upon which report, one Dovenaldus was
made Prefect to enquire after this business, and had authority to pass into
Mor^via, and if he found any such malefactors, to punish them according to
their offenses; he being careful of the charge imposed on him, had such good
intelligence, and withal used such providence, that he came just at the
instant when certain Witches were rosting of a Picture called by the name of
the King, and basted it with a certain liquor: Dovenaldus surprising them in
the act, examined them, who confessed the treason, and were condemned to the
stake; at which instant, by all just computation, the King recovered and was
restored to his pristine rest and health. After the same manner it seems
Meleager was tormented by his mother, the Witch Althaea, who in the fatal
Brand burned him alive, as it is expressed at large by Ovid in his Metamorph.
The like effascinations we have had practiced in our memory even upon the
person of Queen Elizabeth.

A woman of good credit and reputation, A Tale of a Witch.
whom I have known above these four and twenty years, and is of the same
parish where I now live, has often related unto me upon her credit with many
deep protestation^ (whose words I have heard confirmed by such as were then
passengers with her in the same ship) That coming from the Landsgraves Court
of Hessen (where she had been brought a bed) to travel for England, and staying
something long for a passage at Amsterdam (either her business or the wind
detaining her there somewhat longer then her purpose) an old woman of the Town
entreated her to lend her some of a Kettle; which she did, knowing it to be
serviceable for her, to keep a Charcoal fire in at Sea, to comfort her and her
child. When the wind stood fair, and that she with her servants had bargained
for their passage, and they were ready to go aboard, she sent for this woman,
to know if she would redeem her pawn, for she was now ready to leave the Town,
and depart for her Country. The old woman came, humbly entreating her she would
not bear away her Kettle, notwithstanding she had as then no money to repay of
that she had borrowed, but hoped that she was a good gentlewoman, and would
prove her good Mistress, etc. she answered her again, That she had lent her so
much money. and having a pawn sufficient in her hand, finding it necessary for
her purpose, she would make the best use of it she could, a ship-broad. The old
woman finding her resolute, left her with these words, Why then (says she)
carry it away if thou can. Marry and I will try what I can do, replied she
again; and so they parted. The Master called aboard, the wind stood fair, the
Sea was calm, and the weather pleasant: but they had not been many hours at
sea, when there arose a sudden, sad, and terrible tempest, as if the winds and
waters had been at dissension, and the distempered air at war with both. A
mighty storm there arose, insomuch, that the Master protested, that in his life
time he had not seen the like, and being in despair of shipwreck, desired both
sailers and passengers to betake themselves to their prayers. This word came
from them that labored above the hatches, to those that were stowed under:
their present fear made them truly apprehend the danger, and betake themselves
to their devotions; when suddenly one casting up his eyes, espied an old woman
sitting upon the top of the main mast: the Master saw her, and all those that
were above, being at the sight much amazed. The rumor of this went down; which
the Gentlewoman heating (who was then sitting with her child in her Cabin, and
warming it over a Charcole fire made in the Kettle) O God says she (remembering
her former words) then the old woman is come after me for her Kettle; the
Master apprehending the business, Marry, then let her have it, says he, and
takes the Kettle, coals and all, and casts them over-boord into the Sea. This
was no sooner done, but the Witch dismounts her self from the mast, goes
aboard the Brass Kettle, and in a moment sails out of sight, the air cleared,
the winds grew calm, the tempests ceased, and she had a fair and speedy passage
into England: and this the same Gentlewoman has often related. A Witch of
Geneva.
Nor is this more incredible then that which in Geneva is is still memorable. A
young wench instructed in this damnable science, had an Iron Rod, with which
whomsoever she touched, they were forced to dance without ceasing, til they
were tired, and lay down with weariness. She for her Witchcraft was condemned
to the fire, to which she went unrepentant, and with great obstinacy: and since
which time (as Bodinus says, who records this history) all dancing in memory
of her is forbidden, and held til this day abominable amongst those of Geneva.
Our most learned Writers are of opinion, that these Inchantresses can bewitch
some, but not all, for there are such, over whom they have no power. Another
kind of Witchcraft.
The same Author testifies, That he saw a Witch of Avern, in the year 1579. who
was taken in Luteria, about whom was found a book of a large Volume, in which
were drawn the hairs of Horses, Oxen, Mules, Swine, and other beasts, of all
colors whatsoever: She (if any beasts were sick, would undertake their cure,
by receiving some number of their hairs, with which she made her Spells and
Incantations; neither could she help any beast by her own confession, but by
transferring that disease or malady upon another; neither could she cure any
creature, if she were hired for money: therefore she went poorly, in a coat
made up with patches. A Noble man of France sent to one of these Witches, to
cure a sick horse, whom he much loved: she returned him answer, That of
necessity his Horse or his Groom must die, and bid him choose whether: The
Nobleman craving some time of pause and deliberation, the servant in the
interim died, and the horse recovered; for which fact she was apprehended and
judged. It is a general observation, That the devil (who is a destroier) never
heals one creature, but by hurting another, and commonly he transmits his hate
from the worse to the better. For instance, if a Witch cure a horse, the
disease falls upon one of a higher price; if she heal the wife, she harms the
husband; if helps the son, she infects the father. Of this I will produce one
or two credible instances: The first, of the Lord Furnerius Aureliensis, who
finding himself mortally (as he thought) diseased, sent to a Witch to counsel
with her about his recovery, who told him, there was no hope of his life,
unless he would yield that his young son then sucking at the Nurses breast)
should have his mortal infirmity confirmed upon it. The father to save his own
life, yields that his son should perish, of which the Nurse hearing, just at
the hour when the father should be healed, is absent, and conceals the child.
The father is no sooner touched, but helped of his disease; the Witch demands
for the child, to transfer it upon him: the child is missing, and cannot be
found: which the Witch hearing, broke out into this exclamation, Actum est, de
me, puer ubinam est? i. I am undone, where is the child? when scarce having put
her foot over the threshold to return home, but she fell down suddenly dead,
her body being blasted, and as black as an Aethiope. Example of the like.
The like remarkable Judgment fell upon a Witch amongst the Nanvetae, who was
accused of bewitching her neighbor: The Magistrates commanded her but to touch
the party distempered with her Enchantments (which is a thing that is used by
all the German Judges, even in the Imperial chamber it self) The Witch denied
to do it: but seeing they began to compel her by force, she likewise cried
out, I am then undone; when instantly the sick woman recovered, and the Witch
then in health, fell down suddenly, and died, whose body was after condemned to
the fire: And this, Bodinus affirms to have heard related from the mouth of one
of the Judges who was there present. In Tho^o^a there was one skilful in
Magic, who was born in Burdegall: he coming to visit a familiar friend of his
(who was extremely afflicted with a Quartane Ague, almost even to death) told
him he pitied his case exceedingly; and therefore if he had any enemy, but give
him his name, and he would take away the Fever from him, and transfer it upon
the other. The sick Gentleman thanked him for his love, but told him, there was
not that man living whom he hated so much, as to punish him with such a
torment: Why then (says he) give it to my servant; the other answering, That
he had not the conscience so to reward his good service Why then give it me
says the Magician; who presently answered, With all my heart take it you, who
it seems, best knows how to dispose it. Upon the instant the Magician was
stroke with the Fever, and within few days after died, in which interim the
sick Gentleman was perfectly recovered. Gregory Turonensis, lib. 6. cap. 35.
says, That when the wife of King Chilperick perceived her young son to be
taken away by Witchcraft, she was so violently incensed and enraged against the
very name of a sorceresse, that she caused diligent search to be made, and all
such suspected persons upon the least probability to be dragged to the stake,
or broken on the wheel, most of these confessed that the Kings son was
bewitched to death, for the preservation of Mummo the great Master, a potent
man in the Kingdom: this man in the midst of his torments smiled, confessing
that he had received such enchanted drugs from the Sorcerists, that made him
unsensible of pain: but wearied with the multitude of torments, he was sent to
Burdegall, where he not long after died I desire not to be tedious in any
thing: for innumerable Histories to these purposes, offer themselves unto me at
this present; but these few testimonies ^roceeding from authentic Authors,
and the attestations (...) such as have been approvedly learned, may serve in
this place, as well as to relate a huge number of unnecessary discourses from
writers of less fame and credit. Neither is it to any purpose here to speak of
the Witches in Lap-land, Fin land, and these miserable and wretched cold
Countries, where to buy and sell winds betwixt them and the Merchants, is said
to be as frequent and familiarly done amongst them, as eating and sleeping.

There is another kind of Witches that are called Extasists, Witches called
Extasists.
in whose discovery (...) strive to be brief. A learned Neapolitan (in a
history (...) since published that treats altogether of natural Magic) speaks
of a Witch whom he saw strip her (...) naked, and having anointed her body
with a certain (...), fell down without sense or motion, in which ecstasy she
remained the space of three hours; after, she came to her self, discovering
many things done at the same time in diverse remote places, which after enquiry
made, were found to be most certain. Answerable to this, is that reported by
the President Turetranus, who in the Delphinate saw a Witch burned alive, whose
story he thus relates: She was a maidservant to an honest Citizen, who coming
home unexpected, and calling for her, but hearing none to answer, searching the
rooms, he found her lying all along by a fire which she had before made in a
private chamber; which seeing, he kicked her with his foot, and bid her arise
like a lazy huswi^e as she was, and get her about her business: but seeing her
not to move, he took a tough and smart wand, and belabored her very soundly;
but perceiving her neither to stir nor complain, he viewing her better, A
strange kind of Witchcraft.
and finding all the parts of her body unsensible, took fire and put it to such
places of her body as were most tender, but perceiving her to have lost all
feeling, was persuaded she was dead, and called in his next neighbors, telling
them in what case he found her, but concealing unto them the shrewd blows he
had given her: the neighbors left the house, the master and mistress caused
her to be laid out, so left her and went to their rest; but toward the
morning, hearing some body to stir and groan in the chamber, they found their
servant removed, and laid in her bed, at which the good man much amazed, asked
her in the name of God, being late dead, how came she so soon recovered? to
whom she answered, Oh master, master, why have you beaten me thus? the man
reporting this amongst his neighbors, one amongst the rest said, if this be
true she is then doubtless a Witch, and one of these extasists: at which the
Master growing suspicious, urged her so strictly, that she confessed, though
her body was there present, yet her soul was abroad at the assembly of diverse
Witches, with many other mischiefs, for which she was held worthy of death, and
judged. At Burdegall in the year 1571, when there was a decree made in France,
against the strict prosecution of Witches, an old Sorceresse of that place,
amongst many horrid and fearful things confessed by her, she was convicted and
imprisoned, where D. Boletus visited her, desiring to be eie-witnesse of some
of those things before by her acknowledged: to whom the Witch answered, That
she had not power to do any thing in prison. But desirous to be better
satisfied concerning such things, he commanded her for the present to be
released, and brought out of the Goal to another lodging, where she in his
presence having anointed her body with a certain unguent, from the crown to
the heel naked, fell into a sudden apoplex, appearing to them as dead, deprived
of all sense or motion: but after five hours returning to her self, as if she
awaked out of a dream, she related many things done near and far off in that
interim; of which sending to know the truth, they found her to err in nothing:
This was confirmed to Codinus by an Earl of great honor, who was then present
when this thing was done, Olaus Magnus in his History, says, That those things
are common in the Northern parts of the world, and that the friends of those
Extasis diligently keep and safeguard their bodies whilst their spirits are
abroad, either to carry rings, tokens, or letters, to their friends, though
never so far off, and bring them answers back again, with infallible tokens of
their being there. Many I could here produce to the like purpose, I will end
with Saint Augustine, lib. de Civitate Dei 18. who affirms the father of
Prestantius has confessed himself to have been transported with such ecstasies,
that when his spirit has returned to him again, he has constantly affirmed
that he has been changed into an horse, and in the company of others carried
provision into the camp, when in the mean time his body was known to lie at
home in his chamber breathless, and without moving, and this has reference to
Liranthropia. i. The changing of men into beasts. So much spoken of by the
ancient writers, and now so frequent in the Oriental parts of the world. Some
observe, as Strangerus Danaeus, and others, that no Witch can weep or shed a
tear. Things observed in Witches.
Others (as the Germans in some parts) that a Witch cannot sink, nor drown in
the water, and therefore to try them being suspected, they cast them into
moats and rivers. They can do nothing in prison, neither will they confess any
thing till the devil has quite forsaken them (I mean in his power to help
them, not in his covenant to enjoy them.) They are all penurious and needy,
neither have they the least power of the Judges: they have (...) to hurt
others, but none any way to benefit themselves. There is not any of them but
wears the devils mark about her. They never look any man or woman steadfastly in
the face, but their eyes wander of the one side or other, but commonly they are
dejected downward: they answer pe^tinently to no question demanded them. They
all desire to see the Judges before they come to their arraig^ment, being of a
confident opinion, that if they behold them first, the Judges have no power to
condemn them: but if they be first brought to the place, all their Sorceries
are vain and of no validity. Others are remembered by D. Adamus Martinus,
Procurator of Laodunum, proved upon the famous Witch Beibrana, whom he
sentenced to the stake. But these shall suffice for this present, for Calliope
now plucks me by the elbow, to remember her.

Explicit lib. Octavus, Inscriptus Urania.
THE NINTH BOOK, inscribed CALLIOPE;
Entreating of Women in general, with the punishments appertaining to the
Vicious, and rewards due to the Virtuous.
WHen I enter into a true consideration of how many several Affections,
Dispositions, Actions, and passions in Women, I have had occasion to speak; of
the Good and Bad, Famous, and Infamous, Virtuous and Dishonest, Illustrious,
and Obscure; next, of all Ages, from the Cradle to the Grave, the Swathband to
the Winding sheet; then, of all Estates, Degrees and Callings, from the
Empress in the Court, to the Shepherdess in the Village: when I next ponder
with my self, that all these are gathered to the Earth from whence they came;
and that we (who are yet breathing) do but hourly tread upon our Graves,
lingering and prolonging a few uncertain minutes, and must necessarily follow;
and that our lives are but a Circular motion, or a Circle drawn by a Compass,
ending where it first began, being but as the wheels of a Clock wound up, and
(as we move in the passage of life) like the Hand of a Dyall, point first to
one hour, then a second, so to a third, still showing our years in our growth,
that any man may read what a Clock it is with us by our Age: but when the
Plummets and Weights have forced our Wheels so often about, till there is no
more Line left, then we cease both motion, noise, and being: Next, that all
know they must die, but none the time when they shall die, and that as Seneca in
Hercule Furente, says: Prima quae vitam dedit hora carpsit. i. That the first
hour of our life, takes an hour from our life. These considerations of human
frailty (as that there is but one Life, but many ways to destroy it; but one
Death, but a thousand means to hasten it) moves me to persuade all, as well men
as women, young as old, noble, as base, of both Sexes, and of what calling or
condition soever, to arm themselves with constancy to abide it, and courage to
entertein it: For as Ausonius in Perlandri Sententiae, says, Mortem optare
malum, timere peius, i. As it is ill to wish death, so it is worse to fear it:
besides, as it is base Cowardice dishonourably to shun ^t, so it is mere
Pusillanimity despairingly to hasten it. It is observed, such as live best,
dread it least. Let this then persuade you unto Virtue; since to the Vicious
only it seems terrible, why should we fear the Grave? since there the modest
and chaste Virgin lies fearless and secure, though by the side of the libidinous
Adulterer; there the true man may rest, and though he have twenty thieves about
him, sleep soundly, and never dream of Robbing; there the poor Tenant is not
afraid of his oppressing Landlord; nor trembles the innocent to lie next the
wicked and corrupt Judge: the Handmaid is not afrighted with the tongue of her
proud and cursed Mistress, nor quakes the young scholar at the terrible voice
of his Master. There is no Brawling, but all Peace; no Dissension, but all
Concord, Unity, and Equality: which Propertius in his third book, Eleg. 5.
elegantly illustrates.

Haud ullas portabas opes Acherontis ad undas,
Nudus ad Infernas stulte vehere rates, etc.
No wealth thou can bear with thee (O thou fool)
All naked thou must pass the Stigian Pool:
There is no strife in Weapons, or in Wits,
But now the vanquished with the victor sits.
The Captive Jugurth has an equal place
With Consul Marius; now in eithers face
Shines Love and Amity. There is no Throne
For Lydian Croesus, he is now all one
With poor Dulichian Irus: no regard
Of persons there; he dies best, dies prepared.
Then, since all things acquire and pursue their ends, that no earthly thing
has been made, that shall not be destroyed; why should we not with as much
cheer and alacrity welcome our newest and last hour, as the Laborer desires to
rest, or the weary Traveller to come to his Inn? To this purpose Seneca speaks
in his Tragedy of Agamemnon: Qui vultus Acherontis atri
Qui Stygia tristem non tristis videt,
Audetque vitae ponere finem
Par ille Regi, par superis erit.
Fearlesse who dare gaze upon
Black and grisly Acheron?
He that merrily dare look
On the gloomy stygian Brook.
Who so bears his spirit so hie
That he at any hour dares die,
A King he is in his degree,
And like the gods (in time) shall be.


Some may wonder why I have took this occasion to speak of death, I will give
them this satisfaction; The Muse Calliope, under whom I patronize this last
book, being no other then a redundance of sound, or one entire Music, arising
from eight several instruments, and therefore as she participates from every
one, so she exists of all; therefore in this succeeding tractate, I purpose by
the help of the divine assistance, to take a brief survey of what has passed
in the eight former books, to show you the punishments belonging to all such
vices as I have discovered in the frailty of the Sex, to deter the Vicious, and
expose unto the eyes of the Noble, Chaste, and Learned, the honor and reward
due to their excellent gifts, thereby to encourage the Virtuous. Then since
besides the Shame or Honor in this life, the one is punished, and the other
glorified in the life to come, what more necessary meditation then (that we may
live the better) hourly to think of death, and that is the scope I aim at: but
before I can arrive so far, I purpose to deliver to you the dispositions,
conditions, and qualities of diverse sorts of women by me not yet remembered.

Of Women Ravished, etc.
MArpissa the daughter of Euenus was ravished by Apollo, she was the wife of
Idas. So Proserpine the daughter of Jupiter and Ceres, by Pluto, therefore he
is called by Claudian, Ovid, and Sylus, lib. 14. the infernal Ravisher.
Perhibea by Axus the son of Oceanus, as Europa by Jupiter, and Auge by
Hercules. Castor and Pollux, who for their valor were called Dioscuri, which
imports as much as the issue of Jupiter; they from Messene raped the two
daughters of Leucippus, Phoebe and Ilaira, whom they after married: of Pollux
and Phoebe was begot and born Mnesilius; of Castor and Ilaira, Anagon. They
with their associats, Idas and Lynceas, the sons of Aphareus, had driven away a
great prey of Cattle; when they came to divide the booty, a motion was made
that an Ox should be divided into four, according to the number of the
brothers, with this condition, that he which could devour his quarter first,
should have the one half of the Cattle, and he that had next made an end of
his part, should possess the remainder. This was no sooner agreed upon, but
Idas suddenly eat up his own portion, and presently devoured that which
belonged to his brother, by which he claimed the whole herd, and being stronger
in faction then the Dioscuri, drove the prey back to Meffene. With which injury
the two brothers incensed, they levied fresh forces, invaded Meffene, and took
from thence a much greater booty then the former: the spoil being safely
disposed of, Castor and Pollux awaited the pursuers, ambushed themselves
beneath a broad spreading Oak, quick-sighted Linces espying Castor, showed him
to his brother, whom Idas slew with an arrow; whom Pollux pursuing,
transpierced Linceus with his javelin, and unadvisedly chasing, Idas was
brained by him with a stone; for which Jupiter stroke Idas with a thunderbolt,
and translated the two Princely brothers (the Dioscuri) into stars. Of these
Propert. lib. 1. thus says: Non sic Leucippi succendit Castora Phoebe
Pollucem cultu, non Ilaira soror*
Fair Phoebo did not so inflame
Her Castor with desire,
Nor Ilaira Pollux breast
Decked in her best attire.


Theseus rapt Ariadne daughter of King Ninus, as also Hellen the daughter of
Tindarus and Laeda, and sister to Castor and Pollux, long before Paris, but
returned her back unvitiated. Achilles forced Diomeda the daughter of Phorbas
from Lesbos, as Boreas the fair Orithea daughter of Erisicthon from Athens;
Hercules ravished the Nymph Pyrene of Bebritia, from her the Pyrenaean
Mountains took name, of whom Syllius: Nomen Bebricia duxere a virgin colles
Hospitis Alcidae crimen, etc.
From the Behrician maid these bills took name,
Of her guest Hercules, the fault and blame.


Pyrrhus surnamed Neoptolemus the son of Achilles and Deiadamia rapt Lanissa
the Niece of Hercules, Ajax the son of Telamon did the like to T^^messa, of
whom Horace: Movit Ajacem Telamone satam
Forma captivae dominum Te^m^ssae.
Captive Te^messas beauty gazed upon,
Ensnared her Lord, the son of Telamon.


Ajax Oilaeus ravished Cassandra, Nessus the Centaur, Deineira the wife of
Hercules, sister to Meleager, and daughter to Oeneus and Althea King and Queen
of Calidon. Tleoptolemus stole Axiothia from Ephira a City of Peloponnessus, he
was the son of Hercules and Astioche, he wa^ first a suitor to Hellen, and came
to the siege of Troy with nine ships, and was after slain by the hand of King
Sarpedon. Hypodamia the daughter of Atracius and wife of Perithous, suffered
the like violence by the Centaurs, being heated with Wine and Lust, especially
by Euritus, of whom Ovid lib. 12. thus speaks: Euritus, Hyppodamea, alii quam
quisque probabat
Aut poterat rapiunt --
Euritus rapt Hyppodame, and after him, the rest
By his example did the like, and snatched where they liked best.


The great enmity betwixt the Grecians and Barbarians, though it might seem to
arise by reason of the distance of Countries and difference of manners; yet
most probable it is that their inveterate hate and irreconcilable malice, took
first original from diverse rapes committed on either part: for first the
Phoenician Merchants, exposing their commodities to public sale in the City
of Argis, when Io the Kings daughters amongst other damsels came down to the
Key to take a view of what Merchandise she best liked, to furnish her self
according to her womanish fancy, the Merchants being extremely surprised with
her beauty, seized both her and the rest of her attendants, and stowing them
under hatches, hoised sail, and transported them into Egypt. Not long after,
the Cretenses awaiting the like opportunity, stole away Europa, the daughter of
the King of the Tyrians, and bore her into Creet, in requital of the former
rape. The Heroes of Greece next, sailed in the great Argoe to Cholcos,
pretending their journie for the golden fleece, and raped thence Medea the
daughter of Areta; after whom sending Ambassadors into Greece to redemand his
daughter, they returned him answer, That the barbarous Phoenicians had made no
restitution nor satisfaction at all for the rape of Io, neither would they for
Medea. After that, Paris the son of Priam, rather to revenge the injury done to
his Aunt Hesione, then for any love or affection to Spartan Hellen, stole her
from Lacedemon, and brought her to Troy in Asia. The Princes of Greece
redemanding her, answer was returned, That since they made no restitution of
Europa, nor of Medea, nor Hesione, neither would they of Hellena: which was the
original of that memorable siege of Troy, and the destruction of that famous
City, Herodotus, lib. 1. Thrasimenes being enamored of the fair daughter of
Pisistratus, and his affection daily more and more increasing, he gathered
himself a society of young men, and watching the Lady when she came with other
young damsels to offer sacrifice (according to the custom of the Country) by
the Sea side, with their swords drawn, they set upon the company that attended
her, and having dispersed them, snatched her up, and hurrying her aboard,
sailed with her toward Aegina. But Hyppias the eldest son of Pisistratus,
being then at Sea to clear those coasts of Pirates, by the swiftness of their
Oars, imagined them to be of the fellowship of the Sea-robbers, pursued them,
boorded them, and took them; who finding his sister there, brought her back
with the ravishers. Thrasimenes with the rest of his faction being brought
before Pisistratus, notwithstanding his known austerity, would neither do him
honor, nor use toward him the least submission, but with bold and undaunted
constancy attended their sentence, telling him, That when the attempt was first
proposed, they then armed themselves for death and all disasters. Pisistratus
admiring their courage and magnanimity, which showed the greater in regard of
their youth, called his daughter before him, and in the presence of his
nobility, to recompense his celsitude of mind and spirit freely bestowed her
upon Thrasymenes; by which men's he reconciled their opposition, and enterteined
them into new faith and obedience, no more expressing himself a Tyrant, but a
loving and bountiful father, and withal a popular Citizen, Polin. lib. 5. The
daughters of King Adrastus were ravished by Acesteneutrix, as Statius lib. 1.
has left remembered, Buenus the son of Mars and Sterope married Marpiss^
daughter to Oenemaus and Alcippa, whom Apharetas espying, as she danced amongst
other Ladies, grew enamoured of, and ^orcibly rapt her from her company,
Plutarch in Paral. Hersilia, with the Sabine Virgins, were likewise raped by
Romulus and his soldiers, at large described by Ovid. lib. de Art Amandi, 1.
Lucrece, the chaste Roman Matron, was stuprated by Sextus Tarquinius: of whom
Seneca in Octavia thus says, Nata Lucreti stuprum saevi passa Tyranni.

Eudoxia being left by Valentinianus, was basely ravished by the Tyrant
Maximus, who usurped in the Empire; for which she invited Gensericus out of
Africa, to avenge her of the shame and dishonor done unto her. Sigebertus in
Chronicu. The same Author tells us of Ogdilo, Duke of Boiaria, who forced the
sister of King Pepin: for which injury done to her, the King oppressed him with
a cruel and boody war.

Of Handmaids, Nurses, Midwives, and Stepdames.
PEecusa was a Handmaid to Diana, whom Martial. lib. 1. thus remembers: Et
^^eidit sectis I^la Pl^cusa Crinis.

Lagopice is another. lib. 7. remembered by the same Author. Cibale was the
maidservant to a poor man called Similus, remembered by Virgil in Morete.
Phillis Troiana was the Handmaid to Phoceus, as Briseis was to Achilles. Pliny,
lib. 36. cap. 27. makes Ocrisia the damsel to the Queen Tanaquil: so Horace
makes Cassandra to Agamemnon. Gyge (as Plutarch relates) was such to Parysatis
Queen of Persia, and mother to Cyrus. Thressa was maidservant to Thales
Milesius, who (as Theodoricus Cyrenensis affirms) when she saw her Master come
home dirty and miry, as being newly crept out of a ditch, chid him exceeding
for gazing at the Stars to find those hidden things above, and had not the
foresight to see what lay below at his feet, but he must stumble. Herodotus in
Euterpe calls Rhodope (the famous Egyptian) the Handmaid of Iadmon Samius, a
Philosopher. Elos was a damsel to King Athamas, from whom a great City in
Achaia took denomination, and was called Aelos. Lardana (as Herodotus affirms)
was at first no better then a servant, from whom the noble Family of the
Heraclidae derive their first orginall. Titula (otherwise called Philotis) was
a Roman Virgin of the like condition, and is remembered for such by Plutarch in
Camillo, as also by Macrob. lib. 1. Saturnalium. Proconnesia is remembered by
Pliny, who in one day brought forth two children, the one like her Master, and
the other like another man with whom she had had company; and being born,
delivered either child to his father. Lathris was the handmaid to Cinthia, so
much spoken of by Propert. as Cypassis was to Cersinna the mistress of Ovid:
of whom he thus writes, Eleg. lib. 2.

Commendis in mill modis praefecta capillis
Comere sed solas digna Cipasse Deas.
She rules her mistress hair (her skill is such)
A thousand several ways, to her desires:
O, worthy none but goddesses to touch,
To comb and deck their heads in costly Tires.
Chionia was Handmaid to the blessed Anastasia, so likewise was Galanthis to
Al^mena, the mother of Hercules; of whom, the same Author, lib. 9. thus says:
Vna ministrarium media de plebe Galanthis
Flava comas aderat faciendis strenua jussis.
Amidst them all Galanthis stood,
With bright and yellow hair,
A (...) that quick and nimble was
Things needful to prepare.


From Handmaids I proceed to Nur^es: Annius upon Berosus, and Calderinus upon
Statius, nominace Caphyrna or Calphur^^a, the daughter of Oceanus, to have been
the Nurse of Neptune, as Amalthea and Melissa were to Jupiter, who fed him with
the milk of a Goat in his infancy, when he was concealed from his father. Hence
it came, that the Poets fabled how Jupiter was nursed by a Goat, for which
courtesy he was translated amongst the stars: Others say he was nursed by
Adrastea and Ida, the two daughters of King Melisaeus; for so Erasmus teaches
in the explanation of the Adage, Copiae Cornu. Ino was the nurse of Bacchus, as
Ovid witnesses in Ib. where he likewise calls her the Aunt to Bacchus, in this
Verse: Vt teneri Nutrix eadem Matertera Bacchi.

Of the same opinion with him, is Statius, lib. 2. Silv. But Ammonius
Grammaticus makes Fesula the woman that gave him such: Pliny calls her Nysa, and
says she was buried near to the City Scythopolis Polycha was the Nurse of
Oedipus, who fostered him when his father Laius cast him out in his infancy,
because the Oracle had foretold he should perish by the hand of his son. Barce
was the Nurse of Sychaeus, the most potent and rich King of the Phoenicians,
and husband to Dido: Her, Virgil remembers, Aenead. lib. 4. Charm was Nurse to
the Virgin Scilla: of whom the same Author in Syri, thus says: Illa autem,
quid nunc me inquit Nutricula torques? i. Why, O Nurse, do thou thus torment
me? Beroe Epidauria was Nurse to Cadmeian Semele, the mother of Bacchus, as
Aceste was to the daughters of Adrastus. Stat. lib. 1. Theb. Eupheme is
memorated to be the Nurse to the Muses: she had a son called Erotus, who
inhabited the mountain Pernassus, and was wholly devoted to Hunting, and the
Chase. Spaco was Nurse to Cyrus, who because that word in the Median Language
signifies a Brache; for so says Herodotus in Clio. Archimorus (the son
Licurgus King of Thrace, whose Nurse was called Hypsiphyle, being left by her
in the fields, was fed by a Serpent, Test Statio Ericlia, or Euriclia, was the
Nurse to Ulysses. Homer. in Odyss. and Ovid. in Epist. Cajeta was Nurse to
Aeneas, lib. 7. Aenead.

Tu quoque ^^toribus nostris Aeneia Nutrix
Aeternam moriens famam Cajeta dedisti.
And thou Aeneas Nurse, Cajeta,
Unto our Shores have left
A never dying fame, because
(There) of thy life bereft.
Alcibiades had a Nurse, whose name was Ami^la, or as some would have it Amida;
his schoolmaster was Zopyrus, so says Plutarch in Lycurg and Alcibiad.
Hellanice was the Nurse to Alexander the great, witness Qu. Curtius. Acca
Laventia was Nurse to Alexander, so says Pliny lib. 18. cap. 2. so Statius
lib. 1. Sil. in this Disticon.

Jam secura parens Thuscis regnabat in agris,
Ilia, portantem lassabat Romulus Accam.
Our parent Ilia now secure
The Tuscan waters keeps,
The whilst in Accaes wearied arms
Young Romulus fast sleeps.
Yet Livy. and almost all the Roman Historiographers write, rhat Romulus and
Remus were nursed by Lupa, wife to the shepherd Faustulus; she was so called,
because she prostituted her self for gain: they were cast out by the King
Amulius, and was found by the bounds of Tyber. Pliny calls her Acca Laurentia.
Philix was Nurse to the Emperor Domitian, who when he was slain, and his corse
lay derided and neglected, took up his body, and putting it into a common Bear,
caused it by ordinary and mercenary bearers, to be carried to the suburbs
wherein she lived, and interred it in the Latin high way, Author Sueton.
Macrina was a pious and religious woman, the disciple and scholar of Greg.
Neocaesariensis, she was Norse and school mistress (in the first foundation of
Christian Religion) to the great Basilius, as he himself witnesses in an
Epistle to the Neocaesarienses. From Nurses, a word or two of Midwives.

Phaenarite was one, the mother of Athenean Socrates, she is remembered to be
the first that disputed of Morality (that which we call Ethick Instructions)
and taught the mystical Philosophy of the Stars and Planets, how it might be
made familiar and have correspondence with our humane and terrestrial actions.
The son imitated the mother, and proved as happy a Midwife of the mind, as she
of the body, both helping into the world ripe, timely, and fruitful issues.
Volaterran. lib. 19. Laertius in ejus vita, and Valerius Maxim. lib. 3. cap. 4.
Pliny, lib. 28. cap. 7. speaks of two Midwives, the one called Sotyra, the
other Salpe, whose opinions and rules he observes in the cures of many
diseases; of Salpe he speaks more largely, lib. 32. cap. 6. Lycosthenes speaks
of one Philippa Midwife to Iolanta, who endured many distresses and changes of
fortune.

Of Stepmothers I will only name some few and so pass them over, because where
they be, can be expressed nothing but malice and unnatural cruelty in women. The
histories must of force appear harsh and unpleasant; besides, some of their
bloody acts I have touched before under another title. Ino was Stepmother to
Phrixus, and Helles the daughter of Athamus; Hyppodamia, to Chrisippus;
Stratonice, to Antiochus Soter; Julia, to Anton. Caracalla; Gedica, to
Cominius; Juno, to Hercules; Opaea, to Scylis King of Scythia; Eribaea, to
Mercury; Alphriga, to Edward the second of that name before the Conquest, King
of England; Martina, to Constantinus Heraclius whom she slew by poison, etc.

Of Women for their Piety and Devotion remembered in the sacred Scriptures.
I Desire to leave nothing unspecified, or not remembered in this work, that
might not make the excellency of good Women oppose in all contradiction, the
excess of the bad; and to draw (if it were possible) the worst to the
imitation of the best. Hanapus, cap. 125. commemorates these: Rebecka, who when
she saw the servant of Abraham at the Well where she came to draw water, and
desiring to drink; answered cheerfully, and without delay, Drink, Sir, and I
will also draw water for thy Camels, till they have all drunk their fill,
Genes. 24. The Midwives feared God, and did not according to the command of
Pharaoh King of Egypt, but preserved the male-children whom they might have
destroyed, Exodus 1. The daughter of Pharaoh coming down to the river to wash
her self (with her handmaid) and finding the young child Moses in the Ark
amongst the bulrushes, she had compassion on the infant, and said, Surely this
is a child of the Hebrews; so caused him to be nursed, brought up in her
fathers Court, and after adopted him to be her son, Exodus 2. Rahab the
strumpe^, when she knew the spies of Joshua to be pursued, and in danger of
death, concealed them, and returned them safe to the army, Josh. 2. The
messengers that were sent to David in the wilderness, to inform him of the
proceeding of his son Absolon, were by a woman hid in a Well which she covered,
and by that means deluded their pursuers, 1 King. 2. 17. When two common women
contended before Solomon, about the living and dead infant, the one had a
tender and relenting breast, and could not endure to see the living child
perish, 1 Kin. 3. 3. The widow woman of Zarephath enterteined Eliah as her
guest, and by her he was relieved, 1 King. 17* 9. The Shunamitish woman,
persuaded with her husband, that the Prophet Elisaeus might have a convenient
lodging in her house, to go and come at his pleasure, 1 King. 4. 2. When wicked
Athalia had given strict command to destroy all the Kings seed, Josaba the
daughter of King Ioram took Ioas, one of the Kings children, and by hiding him
out of the way, preserved his life, 1 King. 4. and 11. Hester having
commiseration of her people (when a severe edict was published to destroy them
all, and sweep them from the face of the earth) she exposed her self (with the
great danger of her own life) to the displeasure of King Ahashuerosh,
purchasing thereby the freedom of her Nation, and her own sublimity, Hester 4.
5. Women ministered to the Savior of the world in his way as he went preaching
to the Towns and Cities, Luke 8. when he walked from place to place, preaching
and teaching, he is said never to have had more free and faithful welcome,
then in the house of Martha and Mary, Luke 10. John 12. When the Scribes and
Pharisees blasphemed at the hearing and seeing the Doctrine and Miracles of
Christ, a certain woman giving devour attention to his words, as extasi'd with
his divine Sermon, burst forth into this acclamation, Blessed be the womb that
bare thee, and the breasts that gave thee suck. Luke 11. Christ being in
Bethania, in the house of Simon the leaper, as he sat at the table, there came
a woman with a box of ointment of Spicknard, very costly, and she brake the
box, and poured it upon his head; and when some said, disdaining, To what end
is this wast, for it might have been sold for more then 300 pence, and given to
the poor: Jesus said, Let her alone, she has wrought a good work on me, etc.
and proceeded, Verily I say unto you, wheresoever this Gospel shall be
preached throughout the whole world, this also that she has done, shall be
spoken in remembrance of her. The woman of Canaan was so full of natural
pity, and maternall piety, that she counted her daughters misery and
affliction her own, when she said to Jesus, Have mercy upon me, O Lord, the son
of David, for my daughter is sore vexed with an evil Spirit, Mat. 15. The
women stood by to see the Lord suffer, and followed the cross when he was
forsaken of his Apostles, Luke 23. John 19. They were careful likewise to
visit him in his sepulcher, Mat. 28. Luke 24. The wife of Pilat had more
compassion of Christ, and more unwilling that he should suffer upon the cross,
then any man of whom the Scripture makes mention, Mat. 27. Mark 16. John 20.
For deeds of charity, and dealing alms to the poor and needy widows and
Orphans, they entreated Peter (weeping) that he would visit Tabitha being dead;
who moved with their tears, kneeled and prayed, at whose intercessions she was
restored to life, Acts 9. Herod having slain James the brother of John with the
sword, and seeing that it pleased the people, he proceeded further to take
Peter, and put him in prison, delivering him to the charge of four quaternions
of soldiers to be kept: but the Angel of the Lord appeared to him in the
night, took off his double chains, and led him out of prison, who having past
the first and second watch, the iron gate opened to the Angel and him; and
finding that which he thought to be a vision, to be a real truth, he came to
the house of Mary the mother of John, whose surname was Mark, where many had
separated themselves to prayer. Peter knocking, a maid (whose name was Rhode)
came to the door, who hearing and knowing Peter's voice, the Scripture says,
the opened not the door for gladness, but ran in and told them that Peter
stood without at the entry. In which are to be observed two memorable women for
their zeal and piety, (...), whose joy was so great at the very (...) from the
prison of Herod: and Mary (...) was a devout harboresse, and (...) disciples of
Christ into (...) persecution) to perform their zealous and (...), Acts 12.
Lydia (...) purple believing (...) which Paul preached, was baptized with her
(...), after which she entreated them in their words (...) think me worthy
(says she) to be a faithful servant (...) Lord and God, vouchsafe to enter my
house, (...) here and she compelled us, as Luke ^aith. By which is concluded,
that women have been the ready, willing, and devo^^ hearers of the word of God,
Acts 1^. Many ((...) question) zealous and religious ^omen have to their power
strived to imitate those with their best of industry. Amongst others I might
instance one, now of a great age, as having much past that number by which
David reckons the years of man, yet from her youth has lead a life without any
noted stain of blemish, devout in her zeal, remarkable in her charity, beloved
of all, hated of none, a Physician to the sick, and Surgeon to the wounded,
who with her own hands has sent more lame and diseased persons from her gate
whole and sound, then Lazarus had sores about him when he lay at the rich man's
gate unrelieved, she feeding with loaves, when that purple glutton would not
spare crumbs, she doing this out of a widows mite, when he would not do any
thing out of a Mammons treasures happy be her resurrection, as her birth was
hopeful, whose name at the Font was a future prediction to her blessedness
above; Felicity she is called on Earth, Eternal Felicity may she enjoy in
Heaven.

Peter de Loyre a French, in his book of Specters, Sights, and Appa^itions,
has very well observed, that the Sirens and Muses may be in some sort compared
together: for as there are three sorts of Nymphs, namely, of Air, Water, and
Earth, so there are of the Muses, some that take their being from the
continual moving and stirring of Waters; a second, made by the agitation of
the Air engendring sounds; a third from the Earth, which is called Voice, or
distinguishable words spoken to the capacity of the hearer. So of the Sirens,
Parthenope presented with a womanish, amiable, and enchanting face, imports
the Voice, and proceeds from the Earth, as of the three the most material
and weighty. Ligia denotes Harmony, arrising from the melodious sounds of the
Air. And Le^eosia called Alba dea, or the white goddess, is the Hieroglyphick
of the ebbing and flowing in the Sea, which begets the white froth or some
of which Venus is said to be engendered: so that by these three, the Nymphs, the
Muses, and the Sirens are comprehended: the art of Music existing of three
things, Harmony, Rythme, and Number; Harmony proceeding from the air; Number
from the Sea, bounded within his compass, yet as we see in Hexameter and
Pentameter, and other verse, ebbing and flowing, according to the growth and
wane of the Moon. To these is added the Voice, which the Greeks call Logos, the
French Romans Dictier. To Harmony are appropriated Sounds; to Number or Rythme,
Dances; and to the Voice, all kind of Verse. But to come to my present purpose,
all these including one general music, and Calliope as she participates from
every one, so comprehending all, I think it not impertinent, as in a consort
many Instruments make but one melody, so in this book to recollect my self,
and give you a taste of many or the most heads discoursed of in the former, the
better to put you in mind of the penalty due to the Vicious, and the guerdon
and reward stored for the Virtuous, and that in compendious History. The
Goddesses, Nymphs, Graces, Muses, Sybils, Vestals, etc. I omit, as sufficiently
spoken of, and apply my self to things more familiar and necessary to
instruction. I begin with the bad, because my desire is to end with the best,
and of Incest first.

The sister of Leucippus.
I Insist not of the several sorts of Incest, neither purpose I to stand upon
the multiplicity of History, let this one serve to remember you of the former.
Leucippus the son of Xanthius, who derived his Genealogy from Bellerophon, he
was excellent both in strength and valor above all that lived in his days,
not in private contentions only, but in foreign combustions, he demeaned
himself with such discretion and courage, that having subdued the Lycians, and
awed all the neighbor nations about him, having no enemy to invade, nor
opposite people to lift up a rebellious hand against him, he retired himself
into his Country, and laying aside his victorious arms which won him fame and
honor abroad, he abandoned himself to ease, and the private pleasures of his
fathers house, and now wanting other imploiment (as idleness is the greatest
corrupter of virtue) he began to entertein such unusual flames, and
unaccustomed cogitations, as before he had no time to feel, or leisure to think
on; for now he cast his incestuous eye upon his sister. His passions much
troubled him, at the first, and all possible means he used to shake them off,
but in vain: he lived in the same house with her, they dieted at one table, had
liberty of unsuspected conference, and he having nothing else to do, had only
leisure to meditate on that which was fearful to apprehend, but horrible to
enterprise. To this purpose Ovid with great elegancy in remed. Amor. lib. 1.
speaking of Aegistus, who in the absence of Agamemnon adulterated his Queen
Clitemnestra, thus writes: Queritur Aegistus quare sit factus adulter?
In promptu causa est, desidios^^ erat, etc.
Does any man demand the reason why
Aegistus an adulterer was, Lo I
Can tell, Because that he was idle, when
Others at Troy were sighting, and their men
Led stoutly on (...) to which place were accited
The Grecian Heroes with a force united.
He no imploiment had: There was no war
In Argos where he lived (from Troy so far)
No strife in Law, to which being left behind,
He carefully might have imploi'd his mind,
That which lay plain before him, the man proved,
And lest he should do nothing, therefore loved.


As Ovid of Aegistus, so may I say of Leucippus, whom rest, and want of action
in a stirring brain, and body, wrought this distemperature. Ashamed he was to
court his sister, first, because he knew her modest; a second impediment was,
she was elsewhere disposed and contracted to a Gentleman of a Noble family:
besides, she was his sister; to whom he wish^ all good, and then to corrupt her
honor, he could devise for her no greater ill: he considered that to persuade
her to her own undoing, would show ill in a stranger, but worse in a brother.
In these distractions, what should he do, or what course take? the thing he
apprehended was preposterous, and the means to compass it was prodigious; for
he came to his mother, told her his disease, and besought her of remedy: his
words as they were uttered with tear, so they were heard with trembling, for
they foavered her all over. Being in to the knees, he cared not now to wade up
to the chin, and proceeded, That if she would not be the means for him to
compass his sister, notwithstanding all obstacles whatsoever, he would by
speedy and sudden death rid himself out of all his miseries, desiring her
speedy answer, or with his naked poniard in his hand, he was as ready for
execution, as she to deny her assistance. I leave to any mothers consideration
but to imagine with what strange ambiguities, his words perplexed her, and what
convulsions it bred in her bosom, even to the very stretching of her heart
strings: but as she knew his courage to dare, so she feared his resolution to
act, therefore more like a tender hearted mother, then a virtuous minded
matron, rather desiring to have wicked children, then none at all, she promised
him hope, and assured him help, and after some persuasive words of comfort,
left him indifferently satisfied. What language the mother used to the daughter
to invite her to the pollution of her body, and destruction of her soul, is not
in me to conceive: I only come to the point, by the mothers mediation the
brother is brought to the bed of his sister, she is viti^ted, and his appetite
glutted, yet not so, but that they continued their private meetings, insomuch
that custom bred impudence, and suspicion certain proof of their incestuous
consociety: At length it comes to the ear of him that had contracted her, with
attestation of the truth thereof: he, though he feared the greatness of
Leucippus his known valor, and popular favor, yet his spirit could not brook
so unspeakable an injury; he acquaints this novell to his father, and certain
noble friends of his, amongst whom it was concluded by all jointly, to inform
Xanthius of his daughters inchastity: but for their own safety (knowing the
potency of Leucippus) to conceal the name of the adulterer. They repair to him,
and inform him of the business, entreating his secrecy, till he be himself
eie-witness of his daughters dishonor. The father at this news is enraged, but
arms himself with patience, much longing to know that libidinous wretch who
had dishonored his family. The incestuous meeting was watched and discovered,
and word brought to Xanthius that now was the time to apprehend them; he calls
for lights, and attended with her accusers, purposes to invade the chamber:
great noise is made, she affrighted rises, and before they came to the door,
opens it, slips by, thinking to fly and hide her self; the father supposing
her to be the adulterer, pursues her, and pierces her through with his sword.
By this Leucippus starts up, and with his sword in his hand, hearing her last
dying shreek, prepares himself for her rescue, he is incountred by his father,
whom in the distraction of the sudden affright, he unadvisedly assaulted and
slew. The mother disturbed with the noise, hasts to the place where she heard
the tumult was, and seeing her husband and daughter slain, betwixt the
horridness of the sight, and apprehension of her own guilt, fell down suddenly
and expired. And these are the lamentable effects of Incest, the father to kill
his own daughter, the son his father, and the mother (the cause of all ill) to
die suddenly without the least thought of repentance. These things so
infortunately happening, Leucippus caused their bodies to be nobly interred, when
forsaking his fathers house in Thessaly, he made an expedition into Creet, but
being repulst from thence by the inhabitants, he made for Ephesia, where he
took perforce a City in the province of Cretinaea, and after inhabited it. It
is said that Leucophria the daughter of Mandrolita, grew enamored of him, and
betrayed the City into his hands, who after married her, and was ruler thereof.
This history is remembered by Parthenius de Amatoriis, cap. 5. Of incest betwixt
the father and the daughter, Ovid. lib. Metam. speaks of, whose verses, with
what modesty I can, I will give you the English of, and so end with this
argument.

Accipit obscoeno genitor sua viscera lecto,
Virgeneosque metus levat Hortaturque timentem, Cynarus and Mirha.
etc
Into his obscene bed the father takes
His trembling daughter, much of her he makes,
Who pants beneath him; 'bids her not to fear,
But be of bolder courage, and take cheer.
Full of her fathers sins, loath to betray
The horrid act, by night she steals away
Fraught, that came thither empty; for her womb
Is now of impious incest made the Tomb.
Next to the sin I will place the punishment. The punishment of Incest.
Jacob blessing his children, said to Reuben, Thou shall be poured out like
water, thine excellency is gone, because thou have defiled thy fathers bed,
Genesis 49. Absolon went in to his fathers concubines, and was soon after slain by
the hand of Joab, 1 Kings 2. 16. and 18. Of later times I will instance one
Nicolaus Estensis, Marquess of Ferrara, who having notice that his son Hugo (a
toward and hopeful young Gentleman) had borne himself more wantonly then
reverence and modesty required, in the presence of his stepmother, Parisia, of
the family of Malatestae; and not willing rashly either to reprove or accuse
them, he watch them so narrowly by his intelligencers and spies, that he had
certain and infallible testimony of their incestuous meetings, for which
(setting aside all conjugall affection, or paternall pity) he caused them first
to be cast in strict and close prison, and after upon more mature deliberation,
to be arraigned, where they were convicted, and lost their heads, with all the
rest that had been conscious of the act, Fulgos. lib. 6. cap. 1. I will borrow
leave to insert here one remarkable punishment done upon a Jew at Prague in
Bohemia, in the year 1530; who being then in adultery with a Christian woman,
they compelled him to stand in a ton pitched within, they bored a hole, in
which they forced him to put in that part with which he had offended: just by
him was placed a knife without edge, blunred for the purpose, and there he
stood loose, save fastened by the part aforesaid; fire being given, he was
forced through the torment of the heat, with that edgelesse knife to cut away
that pars virilis, and ran away bleeding, after whom they set fierce m^stiffs,
who worried him to death, and after tore him in pieces, Lycostin Theatro Human.
vitae.

Of Adultery.
THe wife of Argento-Coxus Calidonius, being taunted by Julia Augusta, because
it was the custom of their Country for the noble men and women promiscuously
to mix themselves together, and to make their appointments openly without
blushing; to her thus answered, I much commend the custom of our Country above
yours, we Calidonians desire consociety with our equals in birth and quality,
to satisfy the necessary duties belonging to love and affections, and that
publicly; when your Roman Ladies professing outward temperance and chastity,
prostitute your selves privately to your base grooms and vassals. The same is
reported to have been spoken by a B^itish woman, Dion Nicaeus Xiphilin. in vita
Severi. Her words were verified (as in many others I could here produce) so in
the French Queen Fredigunda, who though she infinitely flattered the King
Chilpericus her husband outwardly, yet she inwardly affected one Laudricus, to
whom she communicated her person and honor: these in the Kiugs absence were
scarce to be found asunder, insomuch, that Chilperick himself could not more
freely command her person by his power, then the other by his loose and
intemperete effeminacies. It happened, the King being on hunting, and leaving the
Chase before his hour, stole suddenly upon his Queen, and coming behind her as
she was taking her Prospect into the Garden, sportingly touched her upon the
head with the switch he had then in his hand, without speaking: she not
dreaming of the Kings so sudden return, and thinking it had been her private
friend (without looking back) Well sweetheart Landricus (says she) you will
never leave this fooling; and turning toward him withal, discovered the King,
who only biting his lip, departed in silence. She fea^^ng the Kings distaste,
and consequently his revenge, sends for Landricus, and as if the King had been
the offender, betwixt them two conspired his death, and within few days
effected it (for seldom does Adultery but go hand in hand with Murder.) From
the Sin, I come to the Punishment.

Among the Israelites it was punished with fines, The punishment of Adultery.
as may be collected from the history of Thamar, who being with child by Judas,
he threatened her to the stake, and had accordingly performed it, had she not
showed by manifest tokens, that he himself was the author of her unlawful
issue, Genesis 38. The Egyptians condemned the Adulterer so deprehended, to a
thousand scourges, the Adulteress to have her Nose cut off, to the greater
terror of the like delinquents, Diodor. Sicul. lib. 2. cap. 2. Coel. lib. 21.
cap. 25. By Solons Laws, a man was permitted to kill them both in the act,
that so found them, Ravis. In Judaea they were stoned to death, Plat. lib. 9.
de Legibus, punishes Adultery with death. The Locrenses (by tradition from
Zaluces) put out the Adulterers eyes. The Cumaei prostituted the Adulteress to
all men, till she died by the same sin she had committed, Alex. ab. Alex. lib.
4. cap. 1. It was a custom amongst the ancient Germans, for the husband to cut
off his wives hair so apprehended, to turn her out of doors naked, and scourge
her from Village to Village. One bringing word to Diogenes, That a fellow
called Dydimones, was taken in the act. He is worthy then (says he) to be
hanged by his own name; for Didymi in the Greek Tongue, are Testiculi, in
English the Testicles, or immodest parts: By them therefore (from whence he
derived his name, and by which he had offended) he would have had him to
suffer, Laert. lib. 6. Hye^tu^. the Argive, slew one Molurus, with his wife,
apprehending them in their unlawful congression, Coelius. Julius Caesar
repudiated his wife for no other reason, but because P. Clodius was found in
his house in Woman's Apparel. And being urged to proceed against her, he
absolutely denied it, alleging, That he had nothing whereof to accuse her: but
being further demanded, Why then he abandoned her society? he answered, That it
was behoofefull for the wife of Caesar, not only to be clear from the sin it
self, but from the least suspicion of crime, Fulgos. lib. 6. cap. 1. Augustus
banished his own Daughter and Niece (so accused) into the Island called
Pandateria (after into Rhegium) commanding at his death, That their bodies
(being dead) should not be brought near unto his Sepulcher. To omit many,
Nicolaus, the first Pope of that name, excommunicated King Lotharius (brother
to Lewis, the second Emperor) because he divorced his wife Therberga, and in
her room instated Gualdrada, and made her Queen. Besides, he degraded
Regnaldus, Archbishop of T^evers, and Gunthramus Archbishop of Collen, from
their Episcopal dignity, for giving their approbation to that adulterate
Marriage. And so much for the punishment: I will conclude with the counsel of
Horace, lib. 1. Satyr. 2.

Desine Matronas sectarier, unde laboris
Plu^haurire mali est, quam ex re decerpere fructum est.
Cease Matrons to pursue, for of such pain
Thou to thy self more mischief reap'st then gain.
Sisters that have murdered their Brothers.
AFter the untimely death of Aydere, Fratricides
his brother Ismael succeeded him in the Persian Empire, who arriving at
Ca^bin, was of his sister received with joy, and of the people with loud
acclamations: and being now possessed of the Imperial dignity, the better (as
he thought) to secure himself, having power answerable to his will, after the
barbarous custom of the Turkish tyranny, he first caused his eight younger
brothers to be beheaded, stretching his bloody malice to all or the most part
of his own affinity, not suffering any to live that had been near or deer to
his deceased brother; so that the City Casbin seemed to swim in blood, and
ecchoed with nothing but lamentations and mournings. His cruelty bred in the
people both fear and hate, both which were much more increased when they
understood he had a purpose to alter their form of religion (who with great
adoration honor their prophet Aly) into the Turkish superstition; his infinite
and almost incredible butcheries, concern not my project in hand, I therefore
leave them and return to his sister, whose name was Periaconcona, who when this
Tyrant was in the midst of his securities, and the sister (as he imagined) in
her sisterly love and affection; upon a night when he was in all dissolute
voluptuousness sporting amidst his concubines, she into whose trust and charge
he had especially committed the safety of his person, having confederated with
Calilchan, Emirchan, Pyrymahomet, and Churchi Bassa, the most eminent men in
the Empire, admitted them into the Seraglio in woman's attire, by whom with her
assistant hand in the midst of his luxuries he was strangled: an act though
happily beneficial to the common good, yet ill becoming a sister, unless
such an one as strived to parallel him in his unnatural cruelties, Turkish
History.

Equal with this was that of Quendreda, who after the death of Ranulphus King
of Mercia, his young son Kenelm, a child of seven years of age reigning in his
stead, whose royal estate and dignity being envied by his sister, she
conspired with one Heskbertus, by whose treacherous practice the King was
enticed into a thick forest, and there murdered, and privately buried; his
body long missed and not found, and the conspirators not so much as suspected:
But after, as Willielm. de regib. lib. 1. and de Pontificibus, lib. 4. relates,
a Dove brought in her bill a scrole written in English golden letters, and laid
it upon the Altar of Saint Peter, which being read by an Englishman contained
these words (by which the place where the body lay was discovered) At Clent in
Cowbach Kenelme Keneborn lies under Thorn, heaved by weaved, that is, in
plainer English, At Clent in Cowbach under a thorn Kenelm lies headless slain
by treason. Some say it was found by a light which streamed up into the air
from the place where his body lay covered. His hearse being after borne toward
his sepulcher, to be a second time interred, with solemn Dirges sung by the
Churchmen. Quendreda sitting then in a window with a Psalter in her hand, to
see the funeral solemnly pass by, whether in scorn of the person, de^ision of
the Ceremony, or both, is not certain, but she began to sing the Psalm of Te
Deum laudamus backward; The punishment of Fratricides
when instantly both her eyes dropped out of her head, with a great flux of
blood which stained her book, and it was after kept as a sacred relic in
memory of the Divine judgment. What need I trouble you with citing
antiquities, how this sin ought to be punished on earth, when we see how
hateful it is in the eyes of heaven; besides, to insult upon the bodies of the
dead, is monstrous, and even in things senseless to be punished: Ausonius
remembers us of one Achillas, who finding a dead man's scull in a place where
three sundry ways divided themselves, and casting to hit it with a stone, it
rebounded again from the scull, and stroke himself on the forehead; his words
be these: Abjecta in triviis inhumati glabra jacebat
Testa hominis, nudum jam cute calvicium,
Fleverant alii, fletu non motus Achillas, etc.
Where the three ways parted, a man's soul was found,
Bald, without hair, unburied above ground:
Some wept to see it, Achillas more obdure,
Snatched up a stone, and thinks to hit it sure;
He did so, at the blow the stone rebounds,
And in the eyes and face Achillas wounds.
I wish all such whose impious hands profane
The dead man's bones, so to be stroke again.


Of Mothers that have slain their Children, or Wives their Husbands, etc.
MEdea, ^arricides etc.
the daughter of Oeta King of Colchos, first slew her young brother in those
Islands, which in memory of his inhumane murder, still bear his name, and are
called Absyrtides; and after, her two sons. Macar^^^ and Pherelus, whom she had
by Jason. Progne, the daught^er of Pandion, murdered her young son It is
(begot by Ter^us the son of Mars) in revenge of the rape of her sister (...).
Ino the daughter of Cadmus) Melicertis, by (...) the son of Aeolus. Althea the
daughter of Theseus, slew her son Meleager, by Oeneus the son of Parthaon.
Themisto the (daughter of Hypseus) Sphincius, or Plinchius, and Orchomenus, by
(...), at the instigation of Ino, the daughter of Cadmus. Tyros (the daughter
of Salmoneus) two sons, begot by (...) the son of Aeolus, incited thereto by
the Oracle of Apollo* Agave (the daughter of Cadmus) Pentheus, the son of
Echi^^, at the importunity of Liber Pater. Harpalice. the daughter of Climenus,
slew her own father, because he forcibly despoiled her of her honor. Hyginus in
Fabulis.

These slew their Husbands. Clitemnestra (the daughter of Theseus) Agamemnon,
the son of Atreus. Hellen (the daughter of Jupiter and Laeda) Deiphobus, the
son of Priam and Hecuba; he married her after the death of Paris. Agave,
Lycotherses in Illyria, that she might restore the Kingdom to her father
Cadmus, Deianeira (the daughter of Oeneus and Althea Hercules the son of
Jupiter and Alomena, by the Treason of Nessus the Centaur: Iliona (the daughter
of Priam) Polymnestor, King of Thrace; Semyramis her husband Ninus, King of
Babylon, etc. Some have slain their Fathers, others their Nephews and Neeces;
all which being of one nature, may be drawn to one head: And see how these
prodigious sins have been punished.

Martina, the second wife to Heraclius (and his Niece by the brothers side) by
the help of Pyrrhus the Patriarch, poisoned Constantinus, who succeeding in the
Empire, fearing left her son Heraclius should not attain to the Imperial
Purple, in regard that Constantinus left issue behind him two sons, Constantes
and Theodosius, which he had by Gregoria, the daughter of Nycetas the
Patritian: notwithstanding, he was no sooner dead, but she usurped the Empire.
Two years of her Principality were not fully expired, when the Senate reassumed
their power, and called her to the bar; where they censured her to have her
tongue cut out, lest by her eloquence she might persuade the people to her
assistance: her son Heraclius they maimed off his Nose, so to make him odious
to the multitude, and after exiled them both into Cappadocia. Cuspinianus in
vita Heraclii. A more terrible judgment was inflicted upon B^unechildis, whose
History is thus related: Theodericus, King of the Frenchmen, who by this wicked
woman's counsel had polluted himself with the blood of his own natural
brother, and burdened his conscience with the innocent deaths of many other
noble gentlemen, as well as others of meaner (...) and quality; was by her
poisoned and deprived of (...) when he had made a motion to have taken to wife
his Niece, a beautiful young Lady, and the daughter of his late slain brother,
Brunechildis with all her power and industry opposed the Match, affirming that
Contract to be merely incestuous, which was made with the brothers daughter;
she next persuaded him, that his son Theodebertus was not his own, but the
adulterate issue of his wife by another: at which words he was so incensed,
that drawing his sword, he would have instantly transpierc'd her; but by the
assistance of such Courtiers as were then present, she escaped his fury, and
presently (...) plotted his death, and effected it as aforesaid. Trittenbem^^s
de Regib. (...), and Rober^us Gaguinus, lib. 2. Others write, that he was
drowned in a River, after he had reigned (...) years. Aventinus affirms, That
presently after he had slain his brother (entering into one of his Cities) he
was struck with thunder. Punishment due to Regicides.
Annal. Boiorum. lib. 3. But this (...) Butcheresse, Brunechildis (after she
had been the (...) an infinite number of people, and the death of (...) Kings)
at length moving an unfortunate war against Lotharius (to whom she denied to
yield the Kingdom) she was taken in battle, and by the Nobility and Captain,
of the Army condemned to an unheard of punishment: She was first beaten with
four Bastoons (before she was brought before Lotharius) then all her Murders,
Treasons, and Inhumanities were publicly proclaimed in the Army; and next,
her legs and hands being fastened to the tails of wild horses, plucked to pieces,
and dissevered limb from limb, Anno 1618. Sigebertus Trittemhemius, Gaguinus,
and Aventinus. And such be the earthly punishments due to Patricides and
Regicides. Touching Patricides, Solon (when he instituted his wholesome Laws)
made no Law to punish such, as thinking it not possible in nature to produce
such a Monster. Alex. lib. 2 cap. Romulus appointing no punishment for that
inhumanity, included Patricides under the name of Homicides, counting
Manslaughter and Murder abhorred and impious, but the other impossible,
Plutarch. in Romulo. Marcus Malleolus having slain his mother, was the first
that was ever condemned for that fact amongst the Romans; his Sentence was to
be sowed in a sack, together with a Cock, an Ape, and a Viper, and so cast into
the river Ti^er: a just infliction for such immanity. The Macedonians punished
Patricides and Traitors alike, and not only such as personally committed the
fact, but all that were any way of the comederacy. Alex. ab Alex. lib 3. cap.
5. and all such were ^^^ned to death. The Egyptians stabbed them with Needles
and Bodkins, wounding them in all the parts of their body, but not mortally;
when bleeding all over from a thousand small orifices, they burnt them in a
pile of thorns, Diodor. Sicul. lib. 2. de rebus antiq. The Lusitanians first
exiled them from their own confines, and when they were in the next foreign
air, stoned them to death. Nero having slain his mother Agrippina by the hand
of Anicetes, had such terror of mind, and unquietness of conscience, that in
the dead of the night he would leap out of his bed horribly affrighted, and say
(when they that attended him, demanded the cause of his disturbance) That he
heard the noice of trumpets, and charging of battles, with the groans of
slaughtered and dying men, from the place where his mother was interred.
Therefore he often shifted his houses, but all in vain, for this horror still
pursued him, even to his miserable and despairing end; for so X^phil^nus
testates, the Abbreviator of Dion in Nerone.

The perfidiousnesse, of Husbands to their Wives has been thus punished. By
the Law of Julia, all such were condemned as rioted and wasted the dowries of
their Wives. The Romans did not only hold such, impious and sacrilegious, that
profaned their Temples, and despised the Altars of the gods, but those also
that were rudely robustious, and laid violent hands upon their wives and
children; in such a reverent estimation they held fatherly issue and conjugal
piety, Alex. lib. 4. cap. 8. Almaricus having married the sister of the French
King, and using her most contumeliously and basely (for no other reason, but
that she was a faithful follower of the true Religion, and quite renounced
Arianisme) was by her brother Chilbertus, Punishments of unjust Divorce.
vexed and tormented with a bloody and intestine war. Michael Ritius, lib. 1.
de Regib. Francorum. M. Valerius Maximus, and Cai. Junius Brutus, being
Censors, removed L. Antonius from the Senate for no other reason, but that
without the advice and counsel of his friends, he had repudiated a virgin, to
whom he had been before contracted. Val. Maxim. lib. 2. cap. 4. So Tiberius
Caesar discharged an eminent Roman from his Quaestorship, for divorcing his
wife the tenth day after he had been married; accounting him merely void of
faith or constancy, that in a business so weighty, and of so great moment, in
so small a time expressed himself variable and inconstant Alex. lib. 4. cap. 8.
Rodulphus Veromandorum Comes forsook his wife, to marry the sister of the Queen
Petronilla, for which he was excommunicated by the Church of Rome; and the
Bishop Laudunensis, Bartholomaeus Noviocomensis, and Simon Peter
Sylvanectensis, that were assistants to the Earl Rodulphus in that unjust
divorce, were all suspended by the Pope. Robertus in Chronicis. The revenge of
these libidinous insolences was most apparent in the Emperor Andronicus, who
after the death of Emanuel (who preceded him) caused his son (the immediate
heir to the Empire) to be sowed in a sack, and cast into the sea. And being now
securely installed in the Constantinopolican Principality, besides a thousand
butcheries, slaughters and other insufferable cruelties, he addicted himself
to all luxurious intemperance, as vitiating virgins, corrupting Matrons,
contaminating himself with shameful Whoredoms and Adulteries, not sparing
the religious Nunneries, but forcing the Cloisters, ravishing thence whom he
pleased to glut his greedy and insatiate lust, and when (...) own desires were
qualified, would deliver them up to be stuprated by his grooms and vassals.
With whose unbridled appetites, and insufferable madness, the people being
vexed and tired, they invited Isacius to the (...) besieging the Tyrant, took
him and presented him before the Emperor elected; who, because he had so
maliciously trespassed against every man, devised for him a punishment that
might give satisfaction to all: he therefore caused him to put off his
Imperial Robes, and to appear no other then a private man, such as he had
maliciously offended; next, caused one of his eyes to be plucked out (the
punishment devised by Lycu^gus for Adulterers;) he mounted him upon an Ass,
with his face toward the tail, which being forced to hold in his hand, and
putting a Garland of De^ision about his temples commanded him to be led through
all the stre^ts of the City, allowing all men and women to speak against him
what opprob^y they pleased, without limitation, and do him all outrages that
stretched not to destroy his life. Thus was the Tyrant conducted along through
an implacable multitude, enterteined by the way with Clamors, Shouts, Railings,
Curses, and all manner of Contempts and de^isions, some spitting, others
casting soil and dirt, the women emptying uncleanly vessels upon his head;
insomuch, that no disgrace or abject usage could be devised, of which he was
not then in some kind sensible. This done, Whoredom punished.
he was carried to the common place of execution, and there like a Felon hanged
upon the gallows, Guielo Bituricensis. And this which was done to him,
undoubtedly belongs to all such shameless, barbarous, and brutish women, who
with brazen impudence having abandoned all grace and goodness, expose
themselves to the profession of all impurity and abominable d^shonesty, making
their corrupt bodies no better then Sinks of Sins, and Spittles of diseases;
not only pleased in their own ruins, without the destruction of others, till
their souls be as leprous as their infacted Bodies: nay more, since the
Maladies and Aches of the one is but momentary, and for them the Grave is a Bed
of Rest, and Death the Surgeon; but the other are permanent and endless,
namely, those of the Soul; of which Hell is the Prison, and the Devil the
Tormentor. From these greater, I now proceed to less; and though not in that
measure, yet in some kind punishable.

O Loquacity and Excess, and how they have been punished.
BEcause I desire Women to entertein nothing, either to the prejudice of
themselves or others, I could ingeniously wish, by taking away the cause to
remove the effect, and by suppressing the temptation, to cut off all occasion
that might allure men to offend. Two things there are, that be great corrupters
of Modesty, and provokers to Sin, namely, Wanton and unbridled Discourse, and
vain and fantastic prodigality in Attire: I will speak a little of the due
rep^ehension belonging unto these, ere I begin with others. If then the tongue
be the Orator of the heart, and by our words our minds are especially
signified, how much care ought women to have what they speak, and with what
modesty to govern the O^gan of their thoughts, since corrupt words arise from
corrupt apprehensions, and nothing but what is pure and irreprovable should
proceed from a heart that is without stain and blemish. Besides, too much
Loquacity I could wish you to forbear, with which many of your Sex has been
unsparingly branded. Many also have accused you to be so open breasted, that
you cannot conceal any secret committed unto your trust. I advise you to to be
counseled by Horace, lib 1. Epistol. ad Saevam.

Sed tacitus pasci si posset Corvus, haberet
Plus dap^s and rixae multo minus invidiaeque.
Would the Crow eat in silence, and not prate.
Much better she might feed, with much less hate.
It is reported of Theocritus Chius, Punishment of Loquacity.
being taken in battle, that in the way as the soldiers conducted him, with
purpose to present him before the King Antigonus, they persuaded him when he
appeared before the eyes of the Conqueror, to bear himself with all submiss
humility, and no doubt but he should find the Prince royal. He rather willing
to hazard his life then lose his jest (notwithwanding his bonds and captivity)
thus answered: If I cannot be assured of safety till I be brought before the
eyes of your King Antigonus, he having but one eye (for he had (...) the other
in battle) what then shall become of me? At which words Antigonus being (...)
to be slain; who had he kept his tongue, might have been sent home safe and
ransomlesse, Fubgos. lib. 8. cap. 1. Plautus in Asinaria thus reproves your
verbosity.

Nam multum loquaces merito habemur omnes
Nec mutam profecto repertam ullam esse
Hodie dicunt mulierem, illo in seculo.
Great (...) they say,
And (...) found
Any that can keep silence, but betray
Our selves we must (and seek the whole world round.)
If then Loquacity be so reprovable in your Sex, how ill then would Lies (which
women term Excuses) appear in your mouths? Punishment of Lying.
For who will believe the chastity of your Lives, that finds no truth in your
Lips? It is reported of two Beggars, who watching Epiphanius (a z^alous and
charitable man) as he came forth of his gates, to gain of him the greater alms,
the one of them fell prostrate upon the earth, and counterfeited himself dead,
whilst the other seemed piteously to lament the death of his companion,
desiring of Epiphanius something toward his burial: The good man wished rest
to the body deceased, and drawing out his Purse, gave bountifully toward his
funeral, with these words; Take charge of his Corse, and cease mourning my
son, for this body shall not presently rise again; and so departed: who was no
sooner gone, but the (...) commending his fellow for so cunningly dissembling,
jogs him on the elbow, and bids him rise that they might be gone; but he was
justly punished for his dissimulation, for he was struck dead by the hand of
Heaven: which his fellow seeing ran after Epiphamus with all the speed he could
make, desiring him humbly to (...) his companion again to life: to whom he
answered, The judgments of God once past, are unchangeable; therefore what
has happened, bear with what patience thou can. Zozamenus, lib. 7. cap. 6.
Therefore Plautus in Me^catore, thus says: Mihi scelus videtur me parenti
proloqui mendacium. ^ It appears to me (...) heinous thing to lie to my father.
If Lying be so detestable, what may we think of Perjury? The Indians used to
swear by the water Sandaracines (a flood so called) and who violated that Oath,
Punishment of Perjury.
was punished with death, or else they were curtailed of their Toes and
Fingers. In Sardinia was a Water, in which if the Perjurer washed his eyes, he
was instantly struck blind, but the innocent departed thence purer in his fame,
and more perfect in his sight, (...), lib. 5. cap. 10. Miraculous are those
ponds in Sicilia, Aristotle calls this Fountain, Acedinus.
called Palici, near to the river Simethus, where Truths and Falsehoods are
strangely distinguished: The Oaths of men and women being written in Tables,
and cast in them, the Truths swam above water, and the Lies sunk down to the
bottom. All such as forswore themselves, washing in these waters, died not long
after, but others returned thence with more validity and strength. The sin of
Perjury was hateful amongst the Egyptians, and the punishment fearful. All
Perjure^s had their heads cut off, as those that had two ways offended, in
their piety toward the gods, and in their faith to men, Diodor. Sicul. lib. 2.
cap. 2. de rebus antiquis.

From instructing your Tongues, I come next to your Attires: but having touched
it elsewhere, I will only speak of the just Taxation, luxurious habit, or
prodigality in Apparel has been branded with all ages and reproved in all
persons, especially in such whose garments exceed their estates, which argues
apparent pride; or such as pretend to be mere Fashion mongers, pursuing every
fantastic and outlandish garb, and such may be justly reproved of folly: but
since they are both so common in our Nation, to discover both too plainly, I
should but contend against custom, and seeking to please a few, offend many.
There was a law amongst the Grecians, that all such as vainly spent their
patrimony, either in riotous excess, or prodigality in attire, as well women
as men, were not suffered to be buried in the sepulchers of their fathers,
Alex. lib. 6. cap. 14. So hateful was spruceness in habit, and effeminacy
amongst the Macedonians, that Philip (the father of Alexander) deprived a
Nobleman of Terentum of all his Honors and Offices, because he but delighted
in warm Baths, thus reproving him: It seems thou art neither acquainted with
the customs nor manners of the Macedonians, amongst whom thou have not once
heard of a woman (though great with child) that ever washed but in cold water. I
see not how that which is so reprovable in men, can be any way commendable in
women. What shall we think then of those affected pleasures now adays so much
in use, as Riots, Revels, Banquet, Pride, Su^fets, Vinocity, Voracity: which as
in men (I mean being used in excess) they appear o^ious, so in young Virgins,
in whom should be nothing but affected modesty; in married Wives, that ought to
be presidents of Chastity; and temperate and grave Matrons, that should be the
patterns and imitable objects of sincere Virtue, they cannot but show
abominable. The inconvenience of these Excess, Silius Italicus well observed,
lib. 15 de bello Punici, when he thus said: -- Inde aspice late
Florentes quondam luxus quas vertitit urbes
Quippe nec Ira Deum tantum, Punishment of Prodigality and Excess.
nec tela, etc.
-- Thence look abroad and see
How many flourishing Cities ruined be,
Famous of old, since neither the Gods Rage,
The hostile Weapon, nor the enemies strage,
Has ruined Man in that abundant measure,
As Riot has, mixed with unlawful pleasure.


These are the sins that punish themselves, who as it is said of Lust, carry
their own whips at their girdles. I was bold in some part of this Work
(presuming on the goodness of your Sex) as to say, There was no excellent gift
in man, which was not in some sort paralleld by one woman or other. Therefore
if any of you have been or are still addicted to these enormities. I entreat
them but to remember what is writ of Themistocles, who in his youth was so
wholly given over to all dissoluteness, namely, these two excesses, Wine and
Women, that his father banished him his house, and his own mother through
grief strangled her self, Valor. Max lib. 6. cap. 11. But after Miltiades was
made General, and fought that memorable battle at Marathon, in which (against
infinite ods) he defeated the Barbarians, there was never any thing seen or
known in him, which was not modest and comely. And being demanded how he came
so suddenly changed, Militia inquit, etc. The thought of War (says he) will
admit neither sloth in me, nor wantonness, Plutareh in Grecor. Apophtheg.
Would you but entertein into your thoughts as settled an enmity against all
Vices (your public enemies) as he did against the Persians (the foreign
invaders) you would undoubtedly (after the battle of the mind, constantly
fought against all barbarous temptations) be ranked equal with him in all his
triumphs. It is likewise recorded of Isaeus, an Assyrian Sophist, who in his
youth being given to all voluptuousness and effeminate delicacies, but coming
to riper underderstanding, assumed to himself a wondrous continency of life,
and austerity in all his actions: insomuch, that a familiar friend of his
seeing a beautiful woman pass by, and asking him if she were not a fair one?
To him he answered, (...), i. De sii laborare de oculis, i. I am no more sick
of sore eyes. To another that demanded, What Fish or Fowl was mow pleasant to
the taste? he replied, (...), i. I have forgot to look after them; and
proceeded, I perceive that I then gathered all my Fruits out of the Garden of
Tantalus; insinuating unto us, that all those vain Pleasures and Delights, of
which youth is so much enamored, are nothing else but shadows and dreams, such
as Tantalus is said to be fed with.

Of several degrees of Inchastities, and of their Punishments.
PHilip of Macedon making war against the Thebans, Aeropus and Damasippus, two
of his chief Captains, had hired a mercenary strumpet, and kept her in one of
their tents; which the King hearing, he not only cashiered them from their
commands, but banished them his Kingdom: Polynaeus, lib. 4. In Germany,
Chastity and Modesty is held in that reverent respect, that no mean Artificer,
though of the basest trade that is, will entertein a Bastard into his service
or teach him his science: neither in the Academies will they permit any such to
take degree in schools; though it be a strange severity against innocent
children, who gave no consent to the sins of their parents, yet it is a mean to
curb the libe^^ies of men and women, deterring them from the like offenses.
Aeneus Silvius, lib. 1. of the sayings and d^eds of King Alphonsus, tells us of
one Manes Florentinus, who being in forbidden congression with a strumpet, was
adjudged (...) penance, which was not altogether as our custom in England is,
to stand in a white sheet, but naked all save a linen garment from his wast to
the knees, after the fashion of Basex; the Priests coming to strip him in the
Vestrie, would have put upon him that robe to cover his shame, which he no way
would admit, but was constantly resolved to stand (as our phrase is) stark
naked: but when the Church Officers demanded of him, If he were not ashamed to
show his virile parts in such a public assembly (especially where there were
so many Virgins, marriried Wives, and widow Women?) he answered, Minime
gentium, nam pudenda haec quae peccaverunt, ea potissimum dare poenas decet, i.
By no means* quoth he, most fit it is that those shameful things that have
offended and brought me to this shame, should likewise do open penance Pontius
Offidianus, a Knight of Rome, after he had sound by infallible signs his
daughters virginity to be de^ poiled and vitiated by Fannius Saturnius her
Schoolmaster, was not to content to extend his just rage upon his servant, and
punish him death, but he also slew his daughter, who rather desired to
celebrate her untimely exequies, then follow her to her contaminated Nuptials,
Val. lib. 6. cap. 1. Pub. Attilius Philiscus, notwithstanding in his youth he
was compelled by his master to prostitute his own body to unnatural lusts, for
brutish and unthriving gain, yet after proved a severe father; for finding his
daughter to have corrupted her virginal chastity; he slew her with his own
hand How sacred (then) may we imagine and conceive purity and temperance was
held in Rome, when such as had professed base prostitution in their youth,
became judges and punishers thereof even upon their own children, in their age?
Val. Max. lib. 6. cap. 1. Appius Claudius Regillanus, the most eminent amongst
the Decemviri, so doted on Virginia the daughter of Virginius a Centurion, who
was then in the camp at Algidus, that he suborned a servant of his to seize her
and claim her as his bondwoman, and bring the cause to be decided before him:
needs must the business pass on his side, being both the accuser and the
judge. The father being certified of these proceedings by Icilius a hopeful
young Gentleman before contracted unto her, leaving his charge abroad, repairs
to the City and appearing before the judgment seat, sees his own lawful
daughter taken both from himself and betrothed husband, and conferred upon
another as his slave and bondwoman. The judgment being past, he desires leave
to speak with his daughter apart, it was granted him by the Court, who slew her
with his own hand* then taking up her body, and lifting it upon his shoulders,
posted with that lamentable burden to the camp, and incited the soulders to
revenge, Livy, Volater. lib. 14. c. 2. Antropol. Quintus Fabius Servilianus
having his daughters chastity in suspicion, first delivered her to death, and
after punished himself with voluntary banishment. The punishment of these
inchastities is by the Poets to the life illustrated in the fable of Titius the
son of Terra, who intending to stuprate La^ona, was by Apollo slain with an
arrow, and being thrust down into hell, and chained to a rock, his Liver and
Heart is perpetually tired on by a ravenous Vulture, who still renewes his
inceaseable torments, Virgil lib. Aeneid. 6. under the person of Titius, would
pourtray unto us the unquiet conscience, which though sometimes it may be at a
seeming peace, yet the torment by being still renewed, daily increases and
gnawes the heartstrings of all such persons as to themselves are guilty.

Of Witches and the Punishment due to to them.
VIncentius cites this following History from Guillerimus in Specul. Histor.
lib. 26. cap. 26. Punishment of Witchcraft.
which also Johannes Wyerius, Ranulphus, and others, commemorates; an English
woman that dwelt at a Town called Barkley in England, being a Wircht, yet not
being much suspected, lived in indifferent good opinion amongst her neighbors,
and being feasting upon a time abroad, and wondrous pleasant in company, she
had a tame crow which she had brought up, that would be familiar with her, and
sit upon her shoulder, and prate to her in the best language it could: she at
this feast (the table being ready to be drawn) sported with her, which spoke to
her more plainly then it used some words, which she better then the rest of the
company understood, at which suddenly her knife dropped out of her hand, her
color changed, the blood forsook her cheeks, and she looked pale, ready to
sink down, and fetching some inward suspites and groans, she at length broke
forth into this language, Woe is me, my plow is now entered into the last
furrow, for this day I shall hear of some great loss, which I must forcibly
suffer. The rest wondering at her sudden change from mirth to passion; next at
her alteration of look, and lastly at her mystical language, when her words
were scarce ended, but a messenger rushed hastily into the room, and told her
that her eldest son with all the whole family at home, were sound suddenly
dead: which she no sooner heard, but overcome with sorrow, she fainted, and
being recovered and conducted to her own house, she took her bed, and presently
caused the only two children she had living, to be sent for, the one a Monk,
the other a Nun, who presently came to visit her and know her pleasure, to whom
with a pensive and distracted heart, the tears running from her eyes, she thus
spoke: Alas, my children be hold me your mother, and commiserate my wretch^^
(...) distressed estate, whose fate has been so (...) disastrous, that I have
hitherto been a wicked (...) diabolical Witchcraft, having been a mistress of
that (...) and a great perswader to those abominations; now (...) refuge I have
to fly to, is your religions zeal, and (...) this despair, for now is the time
that the Devils will exact their due. Those that persuaded me to this
mischief, are ready to demand their Covenant. Therefore by a mother^ love I
charge you, and by your filial duty I conjure you, since the Sentence of my
Souls perdition is irrevocable, that you will use your best endeavor and
industry for the preservation of my Body. This therefore I enjoin you, instead
of a winding sheet, (...) my body in the skin of a Heart, or Bucks Leather, then
put me in a Coffin of Stone, which cover with Lead, and after bind it with
Hoops (...). Bars of Iron, to which fasten three strong Chains: If my Body thus
coffined, lie three days quiet, bury me the fourth day, though I fear the
Earth for my manifold Blasphemies will scarce give enterteinment to my Body.
For the first two nights together, let there be fifty Psalms sung for me, and
as many Masses for so many days; which said, she gave up her last breath. She
dead, the brother and sister were careful to perform the mothers last Will, and
did all things accordingly. The first two nights, when the Quires of Churchmen
sung Psalms about the Body, the Devils with much ease broke open the Church
doors, which were b^lted, barred, locked, and propt, and broke two of the Chains
by which the Coffin was fastened, but the third remained steadfast. The third
night, about the time when the Cock begins to crow, the foundation of the
Temple seemed to shake with the noise of the Devils who ^lamored at the door:
one of the rest, taller in stature, and more terrible in countenance then his
fellows, knocked with more violence then those which attended him, till he had
broken the doors to shivers; when stalking to the Coffin, he called the woman
by her name aloud, and bad her arise and follow him: to whom the dead body
answered, I cannot for these Chains. To whom he answered, Those shall be loosed
to thy mischief; when tearing them asunder as they had been links made of
rushes, he sn^tched up the Coffin, and carried it to the Church door, where
stood ready a black Sumpter-horse, loudly neighing, whose hoofs were divided
like Eagles tallons, upon which he laid the body, burried it away with seeming
joy, whilst all the Qui^^sters looked on, and so vanished. Her shri^ks and
(...) were heard four miles off. Let this one suffice for many: I come now to
temporal punishments.

The Judges called the Areopagitae, when they deprehended a Witch, and were to
deliver her to death, if she were with child, stayed the execution till she
were delivered of her Infant, because they would not punish the innocent with
the delinquent, Aelian: de var. Histor. lib. 5. The Law to punish Witches
amongst the Persians, was to bring them to a place where their heads were
beaten to pieces betwixt two Rocks: So suffered Gyge, the handmaid to
Parisatides, the mother of Cyrus, Plutarch. in Artaxerxes. Charles the seventh,
King of France (or the Frenchmen) caused Prince Egidius de Roxa, Marshall of
France, to be first hanged, then burnt, because he confessed himself to be a
Witch, and professor of Magic; and withal, to have been the death of an
hundred and twenty children, and women great with child. A Witch of Avern was
burnt alive, for killing young infants, and salting their flesh and putting
them into pies, and baking them for public sale, Fulgos. lib. 9. cap. 2.
Johannes Bodinus, lib. Mag. Demonomaniae 4. cap. 5. tells us that there is a Law
sacred in France, that if any Magician, or Witch, or Soothsaier, or
Mathematician (that shall go beyond the true rules of Astrology) or expounder
of Dreams, shall frequent the Court, be he never so great in favor, or potent
in office, he shall be immediately degraded from all his honors, and put to
the rack and torture. And this Law is fitting (says he) to be writ in golden
Characters upon every Court gate, because there is no greater Pest extant to
Prince or people, then this viperous brood: therefore (above our Christian
Princes) he commends the Ethnic Kings. In the time of Marius, an Inchantress
(whose name was Martha) who pretended to foretell to the Roman Senate, the
success of the Cimbrian war, was banished, Plutarch in Mario. Claudius Caesar
condemned a Knight of Rome to death, and forfeited all his goods to the people,
Some say a Serpents egg.
because he wore about him a Cocks egg, as a Charm to dispense of Religion,
and that all the causes which he had in controversy, should (in despite of
the Judges) paste of his side. Even fellows that were scarce of any name or
opinion in the world, that were but suspected of Negromancy, were condemned to
death under Tiberius Caesar. The Emperor Caracalla adjudged all such as but
used enchanted herbs to the curing of Agues and Fevers, Spartian in Caracalla.
The Scripture says, Thou shall not suffer a Witch to live. Bodinus (contrary
to Wyerius, who will scarce believe there be any such, accounting all those
Judges (...) condemn them to the Stake or Gallows, no better then Executioners
and Hangmen) he shows diverse probable Reasons why they ought not to live.

The first is, Because all Witches renounce God and their Religion; Deuteronomy. 13.
now the Law of God says, Whosoever shall forsake the God of Heaven, and
adhere to any other, shall be stoned to death; which punishment the Hebrews
held to be the greatest could be inflicted, R. Maymon, lib. 3.

The second thing is, That having renounced God and their Religion, they curse,
blaspheme, and provoke the Almighty to anger. The law says, Whosoever shall
blaspheme, Levit. 24.
their sin shall remain with them; and whosoever shall take his name in vain or
in contempt, shall be punished with death.

The third thing is, That they plight faith, and make covenant with the Devil,
adore him, and sacrifice unto him as Ap^l^ius testifies of Pamphila Larissana,
a Witch of Thessaly as li^ewise a Witch of the Laodunensian suburbs, in the
month or May, 1578. who blushed not to do the like before many witnesses: Exodus
^0. 22*
now the Law says, Who that shall but incline or bow down to Images (which the
Greeks call (...)) shall be punished with death. D^ut. 13* 27
The Hebrew word (...), Numb. ^5.
and the Chaldaean Fisgud, (which all our Latin Interpreters translate
Adorare) imports as much as to incline, or worship: now these Witches do not
only incline unto him, but invoke and call upon him.

A fourth thing is (which many have confessed) That they have vowed their
children to the Devil; Levit. 21.
now the Law says, God is inflamed with revenge against all such as shall
offer their children unto Moloch; Deuteronomy. 18.
which Josephus interprets Priapus, and Philo, Satanus: but all agree, that by
Moloch in signified the Devil and malignant spirits.

A fifth thing is (gathered out of their own confessions) That they have
sacrificed Infants not yet baptized, to the Devil, and have killed them by
thrusting great pins into their heads. Sprangerus testifies, that he condemned
one to the fire, who confessed, that she by such means had been the death of
one and forty children.

A sixth thing is, That they do not only offer children in the manner off
sacrifice (against which the Holy Ghost speaks, That for that sin alone God
will extirp and root out the people) but they vow them in the womb. Deuteronomy. 18.


A seventh is, That they are not themselves blasphemers and Idolaters only, but
they are tied by covenant with the Devil, to allure and persuade others to the
like abominations; when the Law teaches, Deuteronomy. 13.
That whosoever shall persuade another to renounce his Creator, shall be stoned
to death.

An eighth is, That they not only call upon the Devil, but swear by his name,
Ier. 5* 12, 9.
which is directly against the Law of God, which forbids us to swear by any
thing save his own Name.

A ninth is, That adulterate incests are frequent amongst them, for which in
all ages they have been infamous, and of such detectable crimes convicted; so
that it has almost grown to a Proverb, No Magician or Witest, but was either
begot and born of the father and daughter, or the mother and son: which
Ca^ullas, in this Distick expresses; Nam Magus ex Matre, and gnato gignatur
oportet
Si vera est Pr^sarum impia Religio.
Infimating, that if the impious Religion of the Persians were true, Witches of
necessity should be the incestuous issue of the mother and son, or else e
contra.

A tenth, That they are Homicides, and the murtherere of Infants; which
Sprangerus observes from their own confessions, and Baptista Porta the
Neapolitan, in his book de Magia: Next, That they kill children before their
baptism, by which circumstances their offense is made more capital and heinou^.

The eleventh, That Witches eat the flesh of Infants, and commonly drink their
bloods, in which they take much delight. To which Horace seems to allude, when
he says: N^u pransae Lamiae vinum pucrum extrahat Alvo.
No^ from the stomach of a Witch new dined,
Plucks he a yet live infant --
If children be wanting, they dig humane bodies from their sepulchers, or feed
upon them that have been executed. To which purpose Luca^ writes: -- Liqueam
nodosque nocentes
Ore (...) corpora carpsit,
Abrasit (...), etc.
The Felons strongling (...) she nothing fears,
But with her teeth the fatal Knot she tears:
The hanging bodies from the (...) she takes,
And shaves the Gallows, of which dust she makes, etc.


Apuletus reports. That coming to Larissa in Thessaly, he was hired for eight
pieces of Gold to watch a dead body but one night, for fear the Witches (of
which in that place there is abundance) should gnaw and devour the flesh of the
party deceased, even to the very bones; which is often found amongst them.
Deuteronomy. 19.
Also, Murder by the Laws of God and man, is punishable with death: besides,
they that eat man's flesh, or deliver it to be eaten, are not worthy to live,
Cornel. lib de Sicari^s.

A twelfth is, That they kill as often by Poisons, as by Powders and Magic
Spells: now the Law says. It is worse to kill by Witchcraft then with the
Sword, Lib. 1. de Ma^^sic.

A thirteenth is, That they are the death of Cattle; for which, Augustanus the
Magician suffered death, 1569.

A fourteenth, That they blast the Corn and Grain, and being barrenness and
scarcity, when there is a hoped plenty and abundance.

A fifteenth, That they have carnal corsociety with the Devil, as it has
been approved by a thousand several confessions.

Now all that have made any compect or covenant with the Devil, if not of all
these, yet undoubtedly are guilty of many, or at least some, and there one
consequently not worthy to live. And so much for the Punishment (...), and
other known malefactors: I come now to the Rewards due to the Virtuous, and
first of (...) Ladies, for diverse excellencies worthy to be remembered.

Of Tirgatao Moeotis, Comiola Tu^ing^, and others.
TIrgatao, a beautiful and virtuous Lady, was joined in marriage to Hecataeus,
King of those Indians that inhabit ^eer unto the Bosphor, which is an arm of
the Sea, that runs betwixt two coasts. This Hecataeus being cast out of his
Kingdom, Satyrus the most potent of these Kings, reinstated him in his
Principality; but conditionally, That he would marry his only daughter, and
make her Queen, by putting Tirgatao to death. But he (though forced by the
necessity of the time, and present occasion) yet loving his first wife still,
would not put her to death, according to the Covenant, but caused her to be
shut in his most defenced Castle, there to consume the remainde^ of her life in
perpetual widowhood. The Lady comforted with better hopes, and born to fairer
fortunes, deceived the eyes of her strict keep^^s, and by night escaped out of
prison. This being made known to the two Kings, the son in law and the
father, they were wonderfully perplexed with the news of her flight, as
fearing if she arrived in her own Country, she might accite the people to her
revenge. They therefore pursued her with all diligence and speed, but in vain:
for hiding her self all the day time, and traveling by night through
pathlesse and unfrequented places, at length she arrived amongst the ^xomatae,
which was the Country of her own friends and kindred. But finding her father
dead, she married with him that succeeded in the Kingdom: by which means now
commanding the Ixomatae, she insinuated into the breasts of the most warlike
people inhabiting about Moeotis, and so levied a brave army, which she her
self conducted. She first invaded the Kingdom of Hecataeus, and infested his
Country with many bloody incursions; she next wasted and made spoil of the
Kingdom of Satyrus, insomuch, that they both were forced with all submisse
entreaties, by ambassadors to sue unto her for peace; to which she assented,
having before as hostage of their truce, received Metrodorus the son of
Satyrus. But the two Kings falsified to her their faith and honor: for Satyrus
dealt with two of his subjects (whom he best trusted) with whom he pretended
heinous displeasure; for which, flying and retiring themselves to her for
refuge, they there attend a convenient opportunity, to insiderate her life.
They submitting to her, her Court becomes their sanctuary. Satyrus sends to
demand the offenders: she by her letters entreats and mediates their peace and
pardon. These attend their next occasion: the one pretends private conference
with her, and bowing submissly to her, as she enclines her body to attend him,
the other invades her with his sword; her fortunate Belt kept the steel from
entering: Clamor is made, her servants enter, the Traitors are apprehended, and
confess all that before had passed betwixt Satyrus and them: Therefore she
commands his son Metrodorus (the Hostage, to be slain and the two conspirators
with him; gathers another army, and invades the Bos^^^ean Tyrant: She punishes
his perfidiousnesse with Rapes, Murders, Combustions, and all the Calamities
of war, till Satyrus himself (oppressed with miseries, and surcharged with
grief) expired, whom Gorgippus his son succeeded in the Principality, but not
with any security, till he had acknowledged his Crown as given to him by her,
and with many costly and rich gifts compounded for his peace, Polyb. lib* 8.
This Lady has a merited name for an invincible courage, and a masculine spirit.

No less worthy to be remembered, is Comiola Turinga; her history is thus
reported: In that great Navy which Peter King of Sicily sent against Robert
King of Naples, in the aid of the Lyparitans, with other P^inces (...)
N^^lemen, there was in that fleet one Roland, b^stard brother to King Peter.
The Sicilians being defeated by (...), Roland (amongst many other Gentlemen)
was surp^^^ed and cast into prison. Now when the friends and kinsmen of all
such Captives had been careful of their release, and almost all of them were
ransomed thence, King Peter (...) the sloth and cowardice of his subjects the
Sicilians, neglected his brother, and would entertein no discourse that tended
to his redemption. Whereupon he was put into a more close prison, no better
then a Dungeon, where he was debarred the benefit of light, and shortened of his
diet, where he spent his time in discontent and misery. This extremity of his
(with the Dukes slackne^^ in his release) coming to the ear of a beautiful
young widow of Messana, who had a large Dower from her parents, and was left
infinitely rich by her husband: she pitying his distressed estate, and withal
being somewhat enamored of his person, sent to him privately by such as he best
trusted, to know of him, if he would accept of her as his wife, if she did
instantly pay down his ransom. The motion being made, he seemed overjoied,
thanked the heavens for their assistance, and with great willingness accepted
of the motion. They are contracted by Proxy, and she paies down two thousand
ounces of gold for his freedom. This done, and Roland coming back to Messana,
he was so far from acknowledging the Contract, that he would not so much as see
her, or confess himself obliged unto her in the smallest courtesy, who (had
it not been for her charitable love and piety) might have languished in an
uncomfortable durance all the days of his life. Comiola Turninga at this
ingratitude much grieved; for she had not only paid down so great a sum, but
that which most afflicted her, was, that the fame of her marriage being ^ll
overspread, the Contract being denied, and by Roland abjured, must at least
redound to her perpetual scorn, if not to the disparagement of her fame and
virtue. To salve both, with what convenience she could she was advised to
accite him into the Ecclesiastical Court by Process, and to plead the
forenamed Contract, and (which she could easily do) prove it by witness.
Which the friends and kindred of Roland, hearing, persuaded him (to shun the
common fame which went of his ingratitude) to reconcile the tongues of evil
speakers, and to prevent all controversies and troubles in Law, to accept of
her as one that best deserved him. With much ado he accepts of the motion. A
public confluence of friends and kind^ed at an appointed day are assembled,
where when the ^^stard expected to hear her and her friends solicit him
conce^ning the marriage, she there first ripped up her courtesies, and with what
a charitable and chaste purpose she had (...) them* next she laid open his
barbarous ingratitude, not to acknowledge them; and lastly, his corrupt and
dishonest heart, in lying to God and her, by denying a contract past in the
presence of so many witnesses: therefore she told him, she now renounced both
contract, claim, or interest in him, accounting it a dishonor unto her, to cast
her self away upon one persidious and a coward. As for marriage, she had now
contracted her self to single chastity; and all the wealth she had, she vowed
to the service of God and his Church: and so left him with a kind of noble
disdain; being by all that saw and heard her constant resolution, as much
commended for her courage, as he condemned for his mutability and cowardice,
Honor and Reward to Fortitude.
Fulgos. lib. 5. cap. 3. If Lucius Aemulius Regillus in a Navall fight having
defeated Annibal (then General for the King Antiochus) was brought into the
Temple of Apollo by the Senate; where first having all his brave service
rehearsed by the Herald or Crier, with how puissant a Navy he had fought, how
many of the enemies ships he had foundred in the Sea, and how many taken and
brought to Rome; for which, by the consent of the Fathers, he was granted a
Triumph, Live. lib. 8. de Bello Macedon. and Volater. lib. 13. cap. 3. Anthrop.
If Aurelius Alex. Emperor, for fighting against the Persians, and vanquishing
the King Artaxerxes (whom Herodian in his History calls Artaxaces) for this act
alone (after a large and learned Encomiastick Oration, made of the excellency
of his valor) had likewise a public Triumph allowed him by the Senate,
Volater. lib. 3. If Leocritus the Athenian, and son of Protarchus (being but a
private soldier under the general Olympiodorus) at the assault of Pyraeum
(then guarded and defenced by Demetrius, the son of Antigonus because he was
the first that mounted and broke into the Rampire, then called Musaeum, in
entering which, he was slain; yet for this only brave act of Resolution, had all
Military Honors done to his Body, his Shield with his name engraven thereon,
with his valiant Enterprise inscribed, as a thing sacred to perpetual memory,
and dedicated to Jupiter the Deliverer, Pausan. lib. 1. What praise, what
admiration and condign honors, may this magnanimous, Queen Tyrgatao Meotu
claim, who not in one, but many battles, opposed two potent and puissant Kings;
whose martial valor righted her own injuries in person, met them, braved them,
and beat them in field, after many victorious defeats vassalled their insolent
pride, and subjected them to her own Heroical mercy? If amongst the Romans, he
that in battle had saved but the life of one Citizen, and bestrid him in
battle, and in the same conflict had slain an enemy, was honored with a Civick
Crown and Garland; to which, the Golden Honors, the Murall, and those Wreaths
of Dignity that either belonged to the Camp or the Pulpit, gave place: which as
he was tied perpetually to wear, so all the people were enjoined to give him
way, and do him honor; insomuch, that if he came late to be a spectator of the
Sports in the Theater, at his first appearance in the Orchestra, a place in the
Theater only for the nobility
Orchestra, all the Princes and Senators arose, from the highest to the lowest,
and offered him place: How shall we celebrate the ever to be admired
magnanimity of the Amazons, Marpesia, Lampedo, Orythea, Antiope, Penthesilea,
and others of that masculine Virtue and courage? The Archduke Agamemnon,
because Ajax had but fought with Hector (though not vanquished him) caused an
Ox to be sacrificed unto him, rewarding him with the hinder Loins and the
Horns, Homer. lib. 7. Iliad and 10. What Immolations then deserved Menalippe,
for combatting Hercules; or Hippolite, who hand in hand encountered Theseus? The
same General presented Achilles for his valor, because he flew Hector (though,
as some write, with the ods of base advantage) with seven threefooted Pots of
Brass, twenty Cauldrons, ten Talents of Gold, twelve Steeds, and seven
beautiful Lesbian Damsels: Idem. How would he have guerdoned the magnanimity
of Teuca, the wife of Argon, and Queen of Illyria, who not only led valiant men
in person to the field, but opposed the Roman Legions in all their might and
flourishing time of their Empire, obtaining from them many glorious Victories?
The ordinary soldiers in Rome (even for private and common services) were
guerdoned some with Obsidionall, Navall, and Civick Garlands; others, with
L^nces headed with Gold, some with Ivory Chairs: others with Statues of Ivory;
figured Gowns, called Vestes Palmatae, which were wrought or embroidered all
over with Palm trees (such Conquerors used in War, and Consuls in the time of
Peace:) blew Ensigns for Sea-conquest; golden Chains, double Corn, double
stipendary Wag^s, or Pay; and sometimes, with the dignity of civil M^gistracy
and Office. Others were presented with Rings, (...), Flags or Pendants, Coats
of Mail, and golden V^ssels: some were allowed Ovations, others Triumphs,
L^udations, Acclamations, Gratulations, etc. If these thing* were allowed to
men, only born for action, What Celebrations, Dignities, Praises and Encomiums,
what rich Chains of Pearls, and Carkanets of Diamonds, nay, Crowns embelished
with Carbuncles, what Pictures, Statues, Sepulchers, and Monuments to eternize
their memory (if it were possible) beyond all posterity) merits Hypsicratea,
the wife of Mithridates; Artemisia, of Mausolus; Tomyris Queen of the
Scythians; Zenobia, of the Palmirians; Amalasuntha, of the Goths, who have
changed their soft effeminacies into noble Virility, and their feminine
weakness into masculine Valor; in which by following, they have got the start,
and by imitating, excelled. I now proceed to the honor due to Modesty and
Temperance, lately expressed in Comiola Turinga.

Otho the fourth, Honor due to Temperance.
Emperor, being in Florence, and amongst many other beautiful young Damsels
(then in the flower of their age) casting his eye upon one Galdrata (...),
daughter to a Florentine Citizen, whose name was (...), he spoke liberally of
her beauty in the presence of her father; insomuch, that his words savoured of
great love and affection toward the Virgin which apprehended by B^llincionus
he told the Emperor, That if his fancy were that way addicted (and in the
presence of the Damosel) that (...) freely kiss and embrace her at his will
and (...): so whom she instantly replied upon his words ((...) the Emperors
pardon) That she had made a Vow (...) she would never kiss any man, save him
whom she (...) knew should futurely be her husband. Which answer the (...) in
such good part, as that he purposed her virtue should not pass without reward:
who asking, If she were yet cont^^cted to any? and she answering, No; Then
(says the Emperor) give me leave to provide thee of a husband: when calling to
him one Guido Germanus, a noble young, Gentleman, and one in his especial
favor, to him he presently contracted her (a man, as he was approved in Arms
and Virtue, so he was eminent in his Stock and Family, being nobly descended)
and gave her for her Dower all that large Valley which lies beneath the Hill
Ca^entinus, in the fields that are called Aretini Ag^^, and made it an Earldo
ne, which Title he bestowed on him. And from them two proceeded the famous
family of the Earls Guidons, whose eminence endured many heredi^ary
successions, Fulgos. lib. 6. cap. 1. I could amplify the Reward due to
Temperance, and illustrate it with as many modest and chaste women, before
remembered, as I have Magnanimity in the Heroic Queens and Warlike Ladies: But
to avoid pro^^^xity (which I labor to shun) let this one suffice for many.

The reward due to Fertility, or many Children, with such as have restored
their deca^ed Families.
THere was a law amongst the Spartans, that whosoever had three sons, that
family should be quit from watching and warding, and such common service; but
he that stored the Commonweal with five, he claimed immunity in all public
offices, Aelian, lib. 6. de Var. Histor. Amongst the Persians those that had
the most numerous offspring, were capable of the most honors, to whom the King
yearly sent rich presents, Herodot. lib. 1. What merited honors then deserved
Regina the daughter of Mascinus Scaliger, and Thaedaea Carroriensis* who being
married to Prince Barnobonus, Viscount of Mediolanum, had by him four sons and
twelve daughters: The first and eldest was married to Peter King of Cyprus; the
second to Lewis Dolphin, and first born son to the French King; the third, to
the Duke of Bavaria; the fourth to the Duke of Austria; the fifth to Vicount
Gallentius; the sixth to Leopoldus of Austria, grandfather to Frederick the
third Emperor; the seventh to another Duke of Bavaria; the eighth to Frederick
King of Sicilia; the ninth to Frederick Gonzage; the tenth to Duke Ernestus
Monachus; the eleventh to Frederick his younger brother; the twelfth and last
to the Earl of Kent* eldest son to the King of great Britain, from whose
generous offspring most of the roialest houses of Christendom (such as still
flourish in their pristine honors) claim their descent, so that this fruitful
Queen may be called* Cybele, or mother of the gods, Bernardus Scardeonus, lib.
3. H^stor. Pat. Pliny confers great felicity upon a Lacedemonian Lady called
Lampedo, because she was the daughter of a King, the wife of a King, and mother
to a King; when a certain rich Lady of Ionia came to Lacena, and with great
bo^sting and pride showed her, her precious jewels and rich garments, she
pointed to her four fair children whom she had liberally and virtuously
educated, and s^id, These are treasures only in which modest and discreet women
ought to glory. Plutarch in Apophtheg. Laconic. Eumele the wife to B^silius
Helenopontanus of Pontabus (as Nazianzenus testifies) had by him some five
sons, of which, three at one time were learned Bishops and stout champions for
the Gospel, namely Gregorius Nissenus, Basilius Magnus Caesariensis, and Petrus
Sebasta, then I blame not Epaminondas, who in all his nobl^ exploits, and
prosperous successes in war, was often heard to say, That nothing was so
pleasing and delightful to him, as that both his parents were yet alive to
participate with him in his honors: he in the great battle called L^uctricum,
had a glorious victory over the Lacedaemonians. Plutarch in Graec. Apophtheg. So
Basilius Magnus Bishop of Cesarea, gloried of nothing so much (with daily
thanks to God) as that he was born of Christian parents, namely,
Helenopontanus, his father and schoolmaster, and En^^ele Capadoce his mother,
and that he was nursed by Macrine, who had been a zealous and frequent auditor
of Gregory Naeocae Soriensis, his grandfather in that bloody persecution, under
the Emperor Maximinus, with his kinsmen and family retired himself into a Cave
in a moat, where with bread only, he miraculously fed himself and the rest for
the space of seven years, and after for the Faith of the Gospel suffered a
blessed and glorious Martyrdom, Licosck. in Theat. Human. Vitae. Saint Hierom
commends Paula the religious Roman matron for her nobility of birth, as being
begot by Rogatas a Grecian, who derived himself from Agamemnon, King of
Mecene, and royal General of those famous expeditions against Troy, and born
of Blesilla Romana of the ancient family of the Scipios and the Gracchi, and
was married unto Toxilius, illustrious in his blood, as claiming his descent
from Aeneas and the Julian pedigree: but nobility of birth not being our own
but our ancestors, it is not my purpose to insist of it any further. It
follows that I should speak something of such as have been the restorers of
ancient and decayed Families, even when they were at the last gasp and ready to
perish, and be as it were swept from the face of the Earth.

Vitalis Michael Duke of Venice, returning with his weather beaten Navy out of
Greece, where almost for the space of 2 years together without cessation he had
opposed Prince Emanuel Constantinopolitanus, being so exhausted, that scarce
Commanders, Mariners, or navall protection sufficiently accommodated was left
to bring back his fleet; whether by a pestilentiall mortality, or that Prince
Manuel had poisoned the Springs and Fountains, where the Venerian soldiers had
furnished themselves with fresh water* is (...) certain, but most sure it is,
besides many other disasters and discommodities, that which he held to be the
greatest, was, that there was not any of male issue of the Justinian Family,
left alive, but all of them in that unfortunate expedition perished to one man,
not any of that noble stock surviving, by whom the memory thereof might be
restored to posterity: This the Duke Michael often pondering with himself in
great sadness and sorrow, at length he bethought him of one Nicholaus, a young
man, who had devoted himself to a sequestered and religious life, and was of
the order of the Benedictian Friars; he had besides, one only daughter, whose
name was Anna, her he had a great desire to confer upon Nicholaus, so he could
any way admit a dispensation from Alexander then Pope: therefore to that
purpose he earnestly petitioned him, and made great friends to solicit him in
that behalf, who willing to repair the ruins of so noble a family now
altogether spent and wasted, gave approbation touching the marriage, which was
accordingly publicly and with great pomp solemnized. These two, now the only
hopes of that future posterity, had fair and fortuna^e issue, males and
females, who were no sooner grown to any perfection; and disposed of to
liberal and virtuous education, but (which is remarkable in two so young) they
conferred together to this purpose, that since Heaven had blessed them with
that for ^^ich marriage was ordained, and the purpose for which the
dispensation was granted (namely issue, and to revive a dying family) that they
would with an unanimous consent, again enter into religious vows and orders,
This motion was betwixt them resolved, and having nobly disposed of their
children, he took upon him holy orders, and retired himself to the Monastery
of St Nicholas; his wife Anna erected a Nunnery not far from Torcellus, which
she made sacred to Saint Adrian, how great and almost miraculous was their
abstinence and piety, that abandoning all worldly pleasures and delights, when
they flowed about them in all abundance, even then vowed themselves to solitude
and heavenly meditations, in which profession they both in a fair and full age
deceased, Egnat. lib. 4 cap. 3. and Marullus in Vita Vitalis. Not much
different from this is that which we read of Pharon Meli^nsis a noble Prelate,
who with his wife after some years of affectionate consociety passed betwixt
them, made by a united (...) a strict vow of future chastity; she be took
herself to a Nunn^^y, he to a Monastry: but after seven sollitary winters
passed, he was still troubled in his thoughts, for often calling to remembrance
the beauty of his wife, he repented himself of his former vow, and often
solicited her for a private meeting, which she still denying, and he more and
more importuning, at length the yielded to give him visitation; but the prudent
and chaste Lady had her face covered, her eyes dejected, and presented her self
in a base and sordid garment, where with her entreaties mixed with tears, she so
far prevailed with him, that without breach of their promise made to heaven,
they took their lasting leave, he still remaining in his Covent, and she
repairing to her Cloister, Marul. lib. 4. cap. 7. Volaterran. writes of Petrus
Vrseolus Duke of Venice, who after he had one son by his wife, by their
unanimous consent, they vowed perpetual abstinence from all venereall actions.
So likewise Aloysius de Caballis, a noble Venetian with his wife (a Lady
derived from the blood of the Patritians) these two agreed together never to
have carnal congression but only for issue sake, neither would they suffer any
motion, temptation, or any word, look, or gesture that might tend to the least
provocation, insomuch that (if we may believe report) the very linen which
they wore next them, was so interwoven and disposed about them, that when they
lay together, with great difficulty one might touch the others naked body,
Egnat, lib. 4. cap. 3. Now what meed these deserve I am not able to judge, I
leave it to his wisdom who is the rewarder of all goodness, and is the
searcher of the hearts and reins, and knows who are hypocrites, who true
professors, who pretend devotion, merely for devotion sake, and who profess it
for sincere zeal and religious piety.

Of Beauty, and the reward thereof.
TO the great and solemn marriage betwixt Peleus (the father of Achilles) and
Thetis, all the gods and goddesses were invited, saying Eris. i. Discord, who
taking it ill, that she alone of the immortal deities, should be either
forgotten or neglected in that high and solemn convention, and was not admitted
to the banquet: she casts in amongst them a golden Ball or Apple with this
inscription, Detur pulcherrimae, i Let this be given to the fairest. This was
no sooner done, but up start the then most potent goddesses, every one assuming
to themselves the excellency of Beauty, insomuch, that snatching at the Ball,
it had almost come to blows, till Jupiter was by them entreated to end the
controversy. But knowing how it would offend his wife to bestow it upon either
of his daughters; and again, if on the one, he must of force distaste the
other; he therefore rather then to sentence partially, willing to be no judge
at all, commanded Mercury to conduct them to the mount Ida, and there this
dissension to be ended by Paris the son of Priam, who then was a Neatherd, and
kept cattle in the mountains. These suddenly appearing before him, and the
young man abashed, Mercury cheered him up, cold his message from Jupiter, and
withal delivered to him the golden prize to be disposed of at his pleasure; to
whom the bashful Neatherd thus answered, How can I (O Mercury) that am but a
mortal man, and brought up in all ^osticie, be a just and equal censurer of
such divine Beauties, such causes ought to be decided by those that have been
trained up in the urbanity of walled Towns, or the delicacies of Courts, to
both which even from my infancy I have been an alien and mere stranger, I
(alas) have only judgment to distinguish this shee-goat from that, and which
heifer or the other is the fairer; but for these celestial beauties, in my
eyes they are all infinitely absolute and alike equal, insomuch, that I look
not upon one but my sight dwells upon her; and if I transfer mine eyes upon a
second, though I be refresht, yet I am not benefited; and if upon a third, I am
cloied with variety, not disparaging any, but still applauding the present: if
I cast my eye upon her, she is fairest; if upon the other, she appears no
less; if on the last, she equals both the other; and still that which is
nearest, seems the best, as if succession bred excellency. And now I could wish
my self like Argus, to be eyes all over, that the pleasure I receive from two,
might by taking these miraculous objects from an hundred, at once be multiplied
unto me according to the number, to make my now saciety a surfeit. Besides, the
one is Juno the wife and sister of Jupiter, the other are Minerva and Venus his
two daughters, so that of necessity in gaining one uncertain friend, I shall
purchase two most unconstant enemies; therefore (says he) I entreat you (O
Mercury) so far to mediate for me to these goddesses, that since but one can
conquer, the two vanquished will not be offended with me, but rather to impute
my error (if any be) to the weakness of my humane sight, then to any
premeditated and pretended spleen or malice. To which every one (trusting to
their own perfections) willingly assented, when Paris thus proceeded. Only one
thing I desire to know, whether it be sufficient for me being a judge to
censure of these features as they are paralleld, or more accurately to pry
into every lineament of their bodies, it be behoofeful for me to see them
naked. To whom Mercury replied* You being Judge, and they now standing at the
bar of your censure, have power to command them at your pleasure: then (says
Paris) for my better satisfaction I desire to see them naked. Mercury then
said, Strip your selves to your skins, O you goddesses, for it behooves him to
see, that judges: for mine own part I am neither one that sits upon the bench
to censure, nor stand at the bar for witness, therefore whilst you show all, I
will see nothing, but (...) my face and look another way. At this Juno first
began. It Is right (O Paris) and see as most presuming) I first un^ace my self,
and behold these are small and slender fingers, blew vained wrists, white arms,
and fair and (...) shoulders, look upon my round Ivory breasts, proportioned
wast, smooth and soft skin; nor do I only boast the splendour of my amiable
face, and clear and pleasant eyes, for the lower thou look, thou will the
more commend my feature, for I know I am the Queen and goddess of marriage,
totally, equally, and uniformly fair all over. This said, Paris bad Venus
expose her self to his free view, to which Minerva replied, Not, O Paris,
before she have unloosed and cast aside that golden and embossed girdled; for
she is a Witch, and it is not fit that thou being a judge should be
effascinated by her, neither ought she to have come to this place so neatly
accommodated, nor so painted and plastered with colors, temptations rather
beseeming a strumpet then a goddess, when in the deciding of so weighty a
contention, it is fitting that all our lineaments should be exposed without
addition, simply and of themselves. To whom Venus replied, If I be compelled to
put off my virginal girdle, that which all young married men use to unloose
from the wastes of their fresh and flourishing brides, before they can enter
into the new Elysium, and of virgins make them women; why do not thou then
Mine^^a lay by thy helmet, by which (it may be) thou hopest to seem terrible to
the judge, and so awe him to thy will: thou ought to show thy head and
forehead bare as mine is; but perhaps thou think with thy broad and
threatening burgonet, to shadow thy faint and blew eyes, which to thy pretended
beauty will appear no small or ordinary blemish. Then says Minerva, There lies
my helmet; and Venus, And there my girdle; and so they presented themselves
before him all three, naked: at which sight Paris being extasi'd, broke forth
into this acclamation, Oh Jupiter, thou monster-maker, and tamer, what
spectacle is this? what pleasure? what delight? what pulchritude? what beauty
is this in her? what regal state and majesty? In the second, what affright?
what terror? yet withal what amiablenesse in honor, and what sweetness in
victory? In the third, what tempting and looks and al^^ting smiles? what
enticing effeminacies and bewitching blandishments, able to melt Iron, and
soften Marble? O who shall then be vanquished, when every one is worthy to
overcome? I have enough of felicity, for I swim in a vast and boundless ocean
of rapture, and surfeit in a riot of superabundant delicacies. When no longer
able to contein himself from saciating his heightened appetite with one of them
at least (or had it been possible with all) he desired that they would singly
appear unto him, as not knowing how justly to determine, when his two eyes were
distracted three ways at once. It was then ordered by Mercury, that Minerva
and Venus (...) depart for the present, and Juno have the first (...) thus
began. Thou have beheld me (O Paris) from (...) the heel, neither in all my
body can thou (...) least (...), then judge me the fairest; Scepters, (...)
and Kingdoms, Potentates, Empires and domini^^^ (...) in my gift: I will first
make thee Emperor of all (...) of which thy father has but a nook or corner;
and if (...) satisfy not thy ambition, Lord and Ruler of the world. Who told
her he would consider of what she had said, but (...) he had heard all, he
could not determine of any thing, (...) so dismissed her (assured of the prize,
for self love is ever confident.) Minerva next appeared, and thus accosted
him: O thou fair Phrygian Swain, do me this honor, in all (...), Conflicts, and
Combustions, thou shall ever (...) victorious, and never vanquished, thy
brother Hector (...) shall excel in fame, and thy father Priam in honor, in
(...) combats thou shall overcome, and in all battles triumph; of a Shepherd I
will make thee a Soldier, and to Command more armies then thou keep herds.
Farther she was proceeding, when he interrupted her thus; I have no need
(Minerva) of martial Discipline, or military prowess* Asia is in Peace,
Phrygia and Lydia without distur^^^^, my fathers Empire fearless of hostility,
nor do I (...) your great and godlike offers, nor would I have you (...), but
you may now put on your helmet, for I have sufficiently beheld you all over.
She departed, and smiling Venus lastly presented her self with an amorous
look, and moving ^^^ability, thus saying, Behold me, Paris, look on me
considerately, and view me in all and every part exactly, let (...) thine eyes
wander loosely, but steadfastly dwell and insist upon every lineament with
judgment. This Face, these Eyes, this Neck, these Arms (and spread them wide,
in which he could not choose but wish himself locked) these Paps, this Womb,
this, etc. and what thy eyes see not, let thy thoughts feelingly apprehend.
Have thou not perused me enough? yet consider me further; what are Kingdoms
but cares? or thrones but troubles? what are battles but bloodsheds? or
victories but triumph over slaughter? To love and be beloved is content, and
conteins a Kingdom in it self; to war and here to vanquish, combat and thus to
come off is honor without harm, and conquest without cruelty: nor is this
feature on which thy eyes dwell with such admiration, the guerdon proposed thee
for my victory: but a Face fairer, Eyes brighter, Hands whiter, Flesh softer,
Skin purer, (...) more imitating gold, and Lips more lively resembling (...).
Think on such kisses, Paris, Hellens, Hellens of (...), she is the daugher of
Leda, whom Jupiter in the shape (...) a Swan defloured; white therefore she must
needs be, and (...), as hatched by so beautiful a bird. This is that Hellen
whom Theseus thought worthy of a rape, and royal Menelaus of the Pelopidan
family, his Hymenean contract: if thou fear and doubtest to attain to this
superabundance of happiness, lo, I have two children, Amability and Love,
these I will deliver unto thee who shall be captains of thy Vo^^ge, under thee
their general, Cupid my eldest shall inflame her, and Amability shall make
thee gracious and amiable in her eyes; I will moreover entreat the Graces to be
companions with thee in thy journie. These words were so sweetly delivered by
her, and so inflamedly apprehended by him that by giving the golden apple to
her, she had the glory to be esteemed the fairest and worthiest. Reward of
Beauty.
Now what greater reward for Beauty, then to be preferred before Wisdom and
Potency: Therefore Johannes Sambucus Tyrnabiensis, in his argument to Lucians
twentieth Dialogue inscribed Deorum Judicium thus writes: Matris Acidaliae
javenis deceptus amore
Non curat reliquas, (Caecus) habere Deas
Pallade quid melius Junone potentius ipsa,
Preferimus Cipridos muner^ prava tamen.
The Phrigian youth with Venus love surpised,
Took of the other goddesses no care:
Pallas and potent Juno he despised,
Leaving the good, and great, to choose the fair.
The Beauty of a woman is especially seen in the face, by which we may
conjecture the excellency of the other hidden lineaments of the body; and
therein is many times the pulchritude of the mind illustrated, as in the
bashful eye, modest look, and shamefaced countenance; therefore does the face
deservedly challenge the first seat of Beauty, the Head being the noblest part
of the body, the Will, the Mind, the Memory, the Understanding have their place
and residence, where they exercise their diverse effects and qualities,
therefore though they be in the other parts of the body excellently featured,
though they be Wise, Learned, irreprovable in Life and conversation,
unblemished in their reputation, and every way laudable, yet the face is the
first thing contemplated, as noble above the rest, and from which all other
excellencies are approved; for when all the rest are masked and hidden, that
only is continually visible, and laid open: and that may be the reason why most
women that are not born fair, attempt with artificial beauty to seem fair:
Beauty therefore being a Dower of it self, is a reward in it self.

Of Bounty, Charity, Piety, and other Virtues in Women, with their Rewards.
ONe Berta a Country maid, of the Village of Montaguum, in The Province
belonging to Padua.
Patavia, who having spun an excellent fine thread, which was so curiously
twisted, that it was not to be matched by the hands of any: and offering it in
the City to public sale, when none would reach to the price at which she
valued her pain and skill, she thinking it a gift worthy an Empress, presented
it to Ber^ba the wife of Henry the fourth, Emperor, who at that time sojourned
in Patavia. She both admiring the excellency of the work, and willing with her
royal bounty to encourage the plain Wench that wrought it, commanded her
steward to take the Yearn, and go with the maid to Montaguum, and out of the
best soil there, to measure so many acres of ground as that thread (stretched
out in length) would compass: by which her royal bounty, poor Berta grew
suddenly rich, and from a Dowerlesse Virgin became a Match enquired after by
the best men of the Country: insomuch, that from her flowed the illustrious
Patritian Family in Padua, which derive themselves from Montaguum. This the
Women of neighbor Villages seeing, they all began to strive to equal (if not
exceed) Berta, at their Wheels and Spindles, and hoping of the like reward,
troubled and oppressed the Empress with multiplicity of presents; who causing
them all to appear before her at once, she thus spoke to them: If not in Art,
yet Berta was before you in time; I thank you love, and commend your skill, but
she has prevented you of the blessing. Which saying of hers is still remembered
as a Proverb in all that Country: for when any thing is done unseasonably, or
not in due time, they say, Non e pui quel tempo, che Berta filava, i. You come
not in the time when Berta spun: or as our English Proverb is, You come a day
after the Fair, Bernard. Scardeonus. lib. 3. Histor. Paiav. In which the
Empress expressed great wisdom; who as she showed a rare bounty (in which men
and women come nearest the gods, who are the free givers of all good things) so
she knew how to dispose it; namely to her that came to tender her love: not
such as a varitiously presented their Offerings merely for lucre and benefit,
Bounty rewarded.
for such come but like fair weather after Harvest. And how could the Empresses
Virtue be better rewarded, then to have her Bounty outlast her Death, and her
Wisdom survive her Dust?

Touching Charity, Bruson. lib. 2. cap. 21. relates, That a poor beggar
desiring an alms of Lacon, he thus answered him: If I give thee any thing, I
make thee a greater beggar, and thou may curse him that first gave thee, for
it was he that made thee one. Amongst the Lacedaemonians, nothing was more
shameful then to beg, being an industrious Nation, hating sloth, and
contenting themselves with little. Notwithstanding Charity is commendable in
all, and reckoned amongst the best Theological Virtues: neither is it any
fault in such, if their goodness and bounty be not a means to encourage
idleness and sloth in bad people, who make a pretense of want and penury:
therefore commendable it is in any man that is apt to give, to know upon whom
he does bestow. King Archelaus being at a banquet, where such as he vouchsafed
to set at his Table, were wondrous pleasant about him; amongst others, one that
had great familiarity with him, demanded as a gift, a great standing bowl which
the King had then in his hand: which he had no sooner spoken, but the King
called to one that waited at his elbow, to whom he said, Hold, take this bowl,
and bear it to the Poet Euripides, and tell him, I bestow it on him as my free
gift. The other demanding the reason thereof, Archelaus answered, Thou indeed
art only worthy to ask, but not receive, but Euripides is worthy to receive
without asking. In which he nothing abated of his Kingly bounty, only he
apprehended how most worthily to dispose it: Plutarch. in Regum Apophtheg.
Charity rewarded.
But how this charity in Women is rewarded, I will only instance Tabitha,
spoken of in the Acts; who being dead, was thought worthy for her former
Charity (in relieving Widows and Orphans) to have Peter's knees and prayers, to
restore her again to life.

Now of the reward of religious Piety, in which many Matrons and godly martyred
Virgins (amongst such as have suffered strange deaths) may be included, as some
by the Sword, some by by Fire, others suffocated by Smoke, stilled in Jakes,
shot with Arrows, tortured upon Wheels, scourged with Whips, scared with
Irons, boiled in Caldrons, etc. their Crowns are glory, their Rewards neither
to be expressed by pen, tongue, or apprehension of man.

Loosnesse of Life first converted, and the conversion rewarded, in a home bred
History.
A Civil Gentleman (within memory) in the heat of Summer having been walking
alone in the fields, A Convertire rewarded.
contemplating with himself, and returning back not the same way he went out,
but through another part of the Suburbs, to which he was a mere stranger, and
finding himself athirst, he stepped into the first house that fairliest
offered it self to him, and called for a cup of Beer, seating himself in the
first room next to the street. He had not well wiped the sweat from his face
with his handkerchiefe, but two or three young wenches came skittishly in and
out the room; who seeing him to be a man of fashion, and therefore likely to be
of means, they thought to make of him some booty, being (it seems) set on by
the Grandam of the house, for as it proved, it was a common Brothel house. The
youngest and handsomest amongst the rest was put upon him: who entreated him,
not to be seen below, where every Porter, Carman, and common fellow came to
drink, but to take a more convenient and retired room. The Gentleman suspecting
the place (as it was indeed) to be no better then it should be, and being
willing to see some fashions, took her gentle proffer, and went with her up the
stairs: where they two being alone (and a bed in the room) beer being brought
up, she began to offer him more then common courtesy, being so far from
modesty, that she almost prostituted her self unto him. Which he apprehending,
asked her in plain terms, If these were not mere provocations to incite him to
lust? which she as plainly confessed. To whom he replied, That since it was so,
he was most willing to accept of her kind proffer; only for modesty sake, he
desired her to show him into a darker room. To which she assented, and leads
him from one place to another; but he still told her, that none of all these
was dark enough: insomuch, that she began at length somewhat to distaste him,
because in all that time he had not made unto her any friendly proffer. At
length she brought him into a close narrow room, with nothing but a Loop-hole
for light, and told him, Sir, unless you purpose to go into the Cole-house,
this is the darkest place in the house How does this please you? To whom he
answered, Unless (thou strumpet) thou can bring me to a place so palpably
^enebrious, into which the eyes of heaven cannot pierce and see me, thou can
not persuade me to an act so detestable before God and good men: For cannot he
that sees into the hearts and reins of all, behold us here in our wickedness?
And further proceeding, told he, the heinousness of her sin toward God, that
her prostitution was in sight of him and his Angels, and the everlasting
punishment thereto belonging. Or if (irreligious as she was) she held these but
dreams and fables, he bad her consider her estate in this world, and what her
best could be a Who^e: the name odious, the profession abominable, despised of
the indifferent, but quite abandoned of those confirmed in Virtue: That she was
in her self but a mere leprosy, to destroy her self, and insect others, a Sink
of Sin and diseases. Or if her extraordinary good fortune were such, to escape
the Spittle and the Surgeon, yet she was a continual vassal to every Constable
and Beadle, never certain of her Lodging, if not in the Stocks, in the Cage,
but the chiefest of her hopes in Bridewell, etc. To conclude, he read unto her
so strict and austere a Lecture, concerning her base and (...) life, that from
an impudent Strumpet, he wrought her to be a repentant Convertite. Her brazen
forehead melted at his fiery zeal, and all those scales of immodesty (like a
mask plucked off) fell from her face, and she appeared to him in her former
simple and innocentious life. When further asking her of her birth and
Country, she freely confessed unto him, That she was born in the North
Country, her father a Gentleman, once of fair revenue; but being impoverished
by peevish suits in Law, her mother first, and he (whether by age or grief, she
knew not) soon after died. She being an Orphan, and left distressed, loath to
beg of those whom her parents had before relieved, finding charity there cold,
and willing rather to appear base any where, then where she was known, sold
such small things as she had, to come up to London with the Carriers: where she
was no sooner alighted at her (...), but she was hited by this Bawd (altogether
unacquainted with her base course of life) who by degrees trained her to such
base prostitution: but withal protested with tears, that course of life was
hateful unto her; and had she any friend or kinsman, that could propose her
any means to relinquish that Trade, which in her soul she detested, she would
become a new woman, desiring that one month of her lewdness might be forgot,
for from that hour she protested Chastity all her life time after. Her apparent
tears and seeming penitence much persuading with the Gentleman, he protested,
If it lay in him, he would otherwise dispose of her according to her wishes;
and withal charging her, That if he sent unto her within two or three days
with money, to acquit her of the house, that she would attire her self as
modestly as she could possibly, not bringing with her any one rag that belonged
to that abominable house, or any borrowed garment in which she had offended but
instantly to repair unto him, at his first sending: and this being agreed
betwixt them, for that time they parted. The Gentleman wondrous careful of his
undertaking (because she was now his new creature) come to a Matron-like
Gentlewoman, a kinswoman of his (...) off (with whom and her husband he had
familiar acquaintance, and by that means daily access to the house, who had
pretty fine children, and were of fair revenue) and told her there was a civil
maid (a kinswoman of his, lately come out of the Country) who wanted a
service, whom if she pleased to enteriem, it might prove a great good to her,
and no less courtesy to him. Briefly, the motion was accepted, she sent for,
according to appointment, and (after he had tutored her in all things which she
should answer) accepted and enterteined. Her modest behavior and fair carriage,
with her tender love and diligence about the children, won her in short time a
good opinion of her master, a greater affection from her mistress, and a
general love of the whole household; insomuch, that within less then a year,
she was raised from a Chambermaid, to be a Waiting Gentlewoman, and the only
bosom friend of her mistress: who falling sick, even to death, ready to
expire her last, so much doted on her new servant, that she sent for her
husband, and besought him (if it stood with his good liking so to dispose of
himself) after her decease, to make that woman his wife, and mother to his
children; for one more loving and careful he should not find, and search
England through and through. The Gentlewoman soon after dies, he is left a
widower, and the charge of the whole house committed to our new Convertite,
with the bringing up of his children. Which she executed with such fidelity,
that he casting a more curious eye upon her youth and beauty, and withal
remembering his wives last words, not knowing for the present how better to
dispose of himself (Time, Place, and Opportunity, all things furthering her
preferment) he contracted himself unto her, and they were soon after married.
But before any of these late passages happened, I must remember you, that
instantly upon the preferment of this young woman, the Gentleman that brought
her this fortune, adventured all his means upon a voyage, which miscarried (for
the ship wherein he sailed, was taken by the Spaniard, and he almost a twelve
month kept prisoner in Lisbon.) But at length (by what means I know not) being
ransomed, he came for his Country, but so poorly and dejected, that he was
ashamed to show himself to any of his friends: for having tried some, and
finding their charity cold, he was loath to make proof of the rest; insomuch,
that he walked by Owl light, without a Cloak, and scarce had honest rags to
cover his nakedness, or hide him from shame. It happened, that just upon his
return the old Gentleman died too, and left her possessed of eight hundred a
year during the minory of the children, but the thirds howsoever: and withal
(to great and good opinion he had of her, that he made her full Executor. Now
just as she followed the He^se to the Church (having diverse suitors before her
husbands body was scarce cold) this Gentleman by chance coming by, like the
Picture of the Prodigal (as I before related him to you) she casting her eye
aside, had espied him, and presently apprehended him to be the man he was, and
whispering a servant in the ear (willing to be truly satisfied) ^ad him to fall
into discourse with him, to enqui^^ his name, his Lodging, with other
questions, as she directed him, and so proceeded to the Funeral; but to speak
nothing as from her. The servant fell from the train, and did as he was
commanded, and without suspicion of him that was questioned, brought her true
word how all things stood. The next morning (by her appointment) came a
Gentleman very early to his lodging (she having taught him his Lesson before
hand) who desired to speak with him, and first asked him his name, which
(though loath) he told him: the other proceeded, that if he were the same man he
pretended, he had heard of his worth and noble qu^lities, and withal, of his
casualties at sea; and not willing that any Gentleman should groan beneath so
great a burden, told him there was a hundred pounds, bad him furnish himself
with apparel and other necessaries, and so was ready to take his leave. The
other extasi'd with so great a courtesy from a stranger, whom he had not seen
before, enforced him back, to know what reason he had to be so charitable,
entreating him to consider what hope he had to be so charitable, entreating him
to consider what hope he had of future satisfaction, or at least to resolve him
what security he demanded. The other answered, That for the first, his
courtesy was grounded upon his worth; his satisfaction was in his
acknowledgement; and his security, in that he knew him honest, and told him,
some three days after he would call upon him, when he was habited like
himself, to entreat his further acquaintance, and so presently left him. But
troubled in his mind above wonder, to receive such bounty from a man unknown,
when all his kindred and familiar friends, were ashamed of his acquaintance;
yet took the benefit of the present occasion, and suited himself according to
his former, not his present fortunes. When the Gentlem^n came according to
promise, he seemed glad (...) alteration, and withal entreated him to walk
(...) with him to dinner: he (who could not deny him any (...)) seemed
willingly to assent, not once demanding whither. In the mean time the late
widow had provided a great Feast, whither she had envited all her suit as (who
were not few) this Gentleman whom she had employed (and knew no further of her
mind) being one of the chiefest. ^^eat was upon the Table, the guests ready to
sit down; now the last that came in, were the two new friends late remembered.
In comes the widow, to bid them all welcome. This new made up Gentleman
ignorant of whatsoever had before happened, demanded of his friend, If it were
not such a woman? who briefly told him all: How she came a stranger to the
house, and what a fortune by her good demeanor she had in a short time
purchased; That she was now a widow, had such and such means left, and all or
most of those Gentlemen (and himself amongst the rest) were suitors, and that
their hope was, this day she would make choice of a husband. Whatsoever he
thought, he said nothing for the present. The widows turn was to place every
man according to his degree, or at least to our own fancy: this new Gentleman
was neglected, and the stools being furnish^, left standing at a bay window.
She took place at the tables end only, leaving her husbands chair empty, when
suddenly starting up, Methinks says she, some one in this room might be well
spared, for we have more guests then stools. The Gentleman at these words bit
his lip, and was entreated to sit down by his friends, but whilst they were
straining courtesy she proceeded, Is this a suitor too? no question some that
either has borrowed his cloths, or engaged all his credit for this one new
suit, in hope to gai^ the widow; but women are now adays grown more wise. By
whose acquaintance came he hither? Mine, answered his friend: then says she,
perhaps he wants a dinner, and has not money to pay for his ordinary. Well, he
may sit down amongst the test; some of you there make him some elbow (...).
These words made him wish himself again prisoner in Lisbon; (...) any where,
save where he was. This was (...) to the rest, but torture to him, who much
blaming her (...), yet arming him with (...) his (...) who brought him (...)
eating as little a (...) the Table, some (...) to please her. A health went
(...): All pledged it gladly, (...). At length rising from her stool Methinks
(says she) we are all (...) only (...) at Gentl^man at the lower end of the
Table is melancholy: but I k^ow the reason, it is perhaps because he is placed
so low, but (...) his disease, I have for it a present remedy when (...) to him
where he sat, the plucked him by the sleeve, desi^ing him to remove, for she
had ^^^ther place for him. Who desiring her to (...) him to further, refused to
rise: but she would needs enforce him, the rest likewise persuading, as
wondering what further sp^^^ she would make with him. Well (says ^e) I am this
day yours, but will be mine own ever hereafter: And so being drawn by her to
the upper end of the chamber like a Bear to the ^^ake, where her late husbands
ch^ir stood empty: Now Sir (says she, with a more serious countenance (...)
before) my new husband, sit here in my old husbands chair, and bid these your
guests welcome. Still he fr^^^d, and they laughed, as before: when she craving
pardon (...) so abusi^g his patience, openly protested, That this meeting was
merely for his sake, and to make them witnesses of their present contract: for
if he refused her to wife, she vowed never to have other husband; acknowledging
that all her fortunes (next to the Divine Providence) came by his goodness
(omitting the former circumstances) and that she knew no way better to
express her gratitude, then to confer them on him, by whom they first came.
Thus the close proved better then the beginning, and the banquet of Sweetmeats
made amends for the harsh Feast, for they found this last (of all the other
passages) to be only serious. They were there contracted (the suitors
witnesses) and soon after married. And thus his virtue and her conversion, had
one joint reward.

Cura.
ONe woman I had almost forgotten, but better remember her at last, then not at
all; and strange it is I should do so, since she is still present with the King
in his Thron^, with the General in the Camp, the Tradesman in his Shop, and
the Plowman in his Cottage, she is with the Scholar in his Study, and the
Statesman in his Closet, she is still at the elbow of every Father or Mother,
and no family can exist without her. In this my work she has risen early with
me in the Morning, and again sat up with me till past Midnight, she will leave
no man Waking, nor forsake him till he his fast Sleeping. This woman's name is
Care, the grandmother of Fears and Doubts, who passing a river, and finding a
vein of bituminous and clammy clay (being full of thoughts) she began to
fashion a part thereof to the true semblance and shape of a man, and
deliberating with her self what she had done, and being enamored with her late
workmanship, and casting how best to dispose it, Joves Herald (Mercury) coming
that way by accident, saluted her, whom she entreated to be an intercessor to
Jupiter in her behalf, to give that picture life. He at Mercuries entreaties,
did so. There was then question made how to name it, Cura would have it called
after her own name, Care; but Jupiter would not agree to that, but give it his;
next, up start Tellus, i. The Earth, and pleaded the name belonged to her,
because from her it first proceeded. The deciding of this controversy was put
to Saturn, who thus ended it: You Jupiter shall take charge of it, and after
death receive the Spirit back that first gave it; Care, because she first
fashioned it, Care shall all the life time possess it. But because the
difference is about the name, Homo vocetur quia ex humo factus esse videtur, i.
Let it be called man because made of the Earth: And therefore with great
elegance, Tibull. 3. lib. 3. Eleg. 3. thus writes: Nam grave quid prodest
pondus mihi diviti^ auri?
Arvaquae si findant pinguia mill ^oves, etc.
What profit golden heaps weighed by the pound?
Or if a thousand Oxen plow my ground?
What profits me my house? although it stand
On Phrygian columns, wrought by curious hand,
Dug first, and fetched from the Tenarian Mine,
Or else Caristus whether brought from thine?
Or woods, beneath my roof planted for state,
Which seem the sacred groves to imitate?
My golden beams and ^loors with marble paved,
Or my Pearl-shining vessels so much craved
From the Erichthraean shores? what all my pride
In wool, that is in Sydonian purple di'd?
Or what besides, the vulgar sets on fire,
Who still most envy, where they most admire.
These but the temporeall gifts of fortune are,
And it is no pomp can f^ee my thoughts from Care.


Reward due to Philosophers, Orators and Poets.
IN what honor all Philosophers have been of old with Princes and Emperors,
lies next in me to speak of, as Agathe Pythagoricus with Arcesilaus King of
Macedon, Plato with Dionysius, Aristotle with Philip and Alexander, Xeno
Cit^eius the son of Mnasenus with the Athenians, Theophrastus honored by
Demetrius, Psaleraeus with golden statutes, Posidonius entired to Cneius
Pompeius Magnus, Ariston to Julius Caesar, Zenarchas to Augustus, Apollonius
Tyanaeus to Bardosanes King of Babylon, Dion Prusienis to the Emperor Trajanus,
Arrius to Alexander, Heliodorus to Adrianus, Sopater to Constantinus Magnus,
with infinte others, of which it is not necessary now to insist. Plutarch
remembers us in the life of Alexander, That he having taken ten of these
Gymnosophists, So called of Sabbea, chief City of Arabia.
that were the cause of the falling off of the Sabbea a people of Arabia, who
had done many outrages to the Macedonians, because they were esteemed
Philosophers, and famous for their ready and acute answers, he therefore to
those ten propounded ten several questions, with this condition, that he who
answered the worst of them should be first slain, and so in order the rest; and
of this he made the eldest judges. Of the first he demanded, Whether in his
judgment he thought there to be more men living or dead? who answered, Living,
because the dead are not. The second, Whether the Earth or the Sea harbored the
greatest Monsters? Resp. The Earth, because the Sea is but part thereof. The
third, What beast of all creatures was the most crafty? That which to man is
best known. The fourth, Why did the Sabbae revolt from Macedon? Resp. That they
might either Live well, or Die ill. The fifth, Whether the day was before the
night, or the night before the day? Resp. The day, for one day was before
another. The sixth, What was the best way to make a man generally beloved of
all? Resp. To be the best man, and no tyrant. The seventh, How might a man be
made a god? Resp. By doing that which a man is not able to do. The eighth,
Whether is Life or Death the stronger? Resp. Life, because it bears so many
disasters. The ninth he demanded, How long he thought a man to live? Who
answered, ^ust so long as he desired not to see Death. When the King turning to
the judge, bad him give just sentence; he said that one had answered more
impertinently then another: then says the King, thou art the first that
ought to die for so judging. But he replied, Not so, O King, because it was
your own condition, that he should suffer first that made the worst answer.
This said, the King dismissed them bounteously and roially rewarded. If then
for ambiguous answers to such slight and yet doubtful questions, Alexander
thought them worthy of such gifts and presents; with what Memories, what
Praises, what Crowns, Columns, and Statues ought we to dignifie and celebrate
the names of Queen of Zenobia, Amalasuntha, Aspatia, Fulvia, Morata, and
others? This Solomon the wisest (not only of Kings) but of men, well knew, when
having made proof of the wisdom of Nicaulis Queen of Aethiopia, he sent her
back into her Country so liberally furnished and so roially rewarded. What I
have spoke of these may be pertinently apply to our women studious in Divinity,
Oratory, and Sophistry, and laboriously practiced in all other liberal Arts
and Sciences; Nor can I more fitly in my mind conclude this work, then as I
begun with goddesses, so to end with good women: Only of the honor due to
Poetesses, because it belongs something to mine own profession, I will borrow
my conclusion from Ovid in his last Elegy of the first book Amorum, the title
is Ad invidos quod fama poetarum sit perennis: Quod mihi livor edax ignavos
objicis annos?
Ingeniique vocas carmen inerte meum?
Why (eating envy) do thou as a crime,
Object unto me sloth, and misspent time?
Terming the Muse and sacred Numbers vain,
The fruitless issue of an idle brain.
I am not won to spend my youth in war,
By which our predecessors famous are:
It tempts not me to search the brabling laws,
Orat the bar to quarrel in a cause:
These (...) mortal (...), and transitory,
When (...) purchase (...) eternal glory.
Whilst Ida stands, or Ten^dos has name,
O^ Symois streams shall run, so long thy same
(Meonides) shall live, whilst grain shall grow,
Which men with sith or sicle, reap or mow:
Whilst vineyards grapes, and these grapes yields us wine,
Famous Ascraeus, even so long shall thine.
Battiades, the whole world shall impart,
For what he wants in wit, he has in art.
No less can chance to thy Cothurnate strain,
Oh Saph^cles: nor Aratus thy vain.
The honors by the Muses you have won,
Shall last, if not outlast both Moon and Sun.
Whilst there is a crafty Servant, or hard Sire,
Fat (...), men shall admire
(...) Ennius although obscure,
(...) you shall both endure.
All shall (...) Varro that but hear of Greece;
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Shall both be famous. Whilst there is Tree or Stone,
Or Plant or Herb, or Ground to tread upon,
When (...) consume, and when the Plow shall wast
And be forgot, yet Numbers still must last.
Unto the Muses, even Monarchs must yield,
And glorious triumphs purchased in the field:
To her yield Tagus with thy golden shine,
You Terrhene are, and only she divine.
Let then the vulgar, what is vile admire,
That nothing else save earthly dross desire.
Gold hair'd Apollo with full hand shall bring
My flowing cup filled from the Muses spring.
And crowned with myrtle, I shall now be sung,
And be made frequent in each lovers tongue.
Envy the living soul detracts, but Fate
Concluding life, she likewise ends her hate.
And then her rancor is no longer fed,
When living Honor shall maintain us, dead:
And when my Funeral Rites their last fires give,
Then shall the great'st part of my self still live.


And this perpetuity of Fame which Ovid in giving to others likewise attributes
to himself, is that which all the truly Noble, Chaste, Wife, Virtuous, Learned
and Religious Virgins, Wives and Matrons, have proposed as their just Reward;
who lift their thoughts upward, and despising the Frailties, Uncertainties, and
Vanities of the Earth, aim their Meditations Contemplations, and Pious Actions
at the sublimities of Heaven.

FINIS.

