FORTUNE BY LAND and SEA.

A TRAGI-COMEDY.

As it was Acted with great Applause by the QUEENS Servants.

WRITTEN BY THO. HAYWOOD. AND WILLIAM ROWLY.

LONDON: Printed for John Sweeting at the Angel in Pope's Head Alley, and Robert
Pollard at the Ben Iohnson's Head behind the Exchange. 1655.

The Persons of the Play.
O^d Forest. Frank Forest. his Sons. ^oung Forest. his Sons. Old Harding.
Philip his eldest Son married Susan Forest. William and John his younger Sons.
M. Rainsford, a quarelsome Gentleman. Goodwin, Gentlemen, Friends to Rainsford.
Fo^^^^ Gentlemen, Friends to Rainsford. Merchant, Brother to Mrs. Harding.
Purser, and Clinton Pirates. Clown. (...). (...). (...) (...) Drawers.
Officers. Mrs. Anne Harding, second Wife to old Harding. Susan, daughter of old
Forest, wife of Philip Harding.
The Scene LONDON.

Fortune by Land and Sea.
Act. 1.
Scen. 1.
Enter Mr. Raynsfoorth, old Mr. Forest, Frank Forest, Susan Forest, Goodwin
and Mr. Fo^ter, 2. Gentlemen. Rayns. I Prithee Frank lets have thy company to
supper.


Frank. With all my heart if I can but give my Father here the slip by six a
clock I will not fail.


Rayns. I Will talk with him, I prithee old man lends thy son to night, we will
borrow him but some two hours, and send him home again to thee presently.


Good. Faith do Mr. Forest, he cannor spend his time in better company.


Old For. Oh Gentlemen, his too much liberty breeds many strange outrageous
ills in youth, and fashions them to vice.


Rayns. Nay school us not old man, some of us are too old to learn, and being
past whipping too, there is no hope of profiting; if we shall have him say so?
if not, I prithee keep him still, and God give the good of him.


Frank. Nay will you be gone, I Will be at the heels of you as I live.


Fost. It Is enough, nay come, and if we shall go, let us go:


Old For. Nay Gentlemen do not mistake me pray, I love my son, but do not dote
on him; nor is he such a darling in mine eye, that I am sought to have him from
my sight; yet let me tell you, had you gentlemen called him to any fairer
exercise, as practice of known weapons, or to back some gallant gennet; had it
been to dance, leap in the fields, to wrestle, or to try masteries in any noble
quality, I could have spared him to you half his age:

But call him out to drinking, of all skill
I hold that much used practice^ the most ill.

Frank. I told him you would still be urging him, and see what comes on it. I
Per sequar.


Rayns. Sir what we does in love, and let you know we do not need his purse
nor his acquaintance, nor if you should mistake, can we be sorry nor wound to
ask your pardon: fare ye well, come Gentlemen.


Frank. will you be gone? I Will come.


Old Forr. Oh son that thou will follow rioting, surfeit by drinking and
unseasoned hours; these Gentlemen perhaps may do it they are rich, well landed,
and their Fathers purchase daily, where I heaven knows the world still
frowning on me, am forced to sell and Margage to keep you. His brother rancks
himself with the best gallants that flourish in the Kingdom, thee not able to
spend with them, yet for his virtuous parts he is borne out, his person woed
and sought, and they more bound to him for hi^ discourse then he to them for
their expense and cost. Thy course is otherwise, all drinking healths, cups of
muld Sack, and glasses elbow deep: drink in thy youth, maintain thee in thine
age, no 'twill not hold out boy.


Frank. My company has not been to your purse so chargeable; I do not spend so
much.


Old Forr. Thou spendest thy time more precious then thy coin, consumest thy
hopes, thy fortunes and thy after exyectations, in drowning surfeits, tell me
can thou call that thrift to be in all these prodigal.

Use thy discretion, somewhat I devine,
Mine is the care, the loss or profit thine. Exit.

Susan. Brother be ruled, my Father grieves to see you given to these boundless
riots, will you follow?


Frank. Lead you the way, I Will after you.


Susan. It Is well, he will look for you within,


Frank. When? can you tell? Exeunt severally.


Enter Raynsfoorth, Goodwin, and Foster. Rayns. Boy my cloak.


Goodw. Our cloaks sirrah. Enter a Drawer.


^ost. Why Drawer.


1. Drawer Here Sir.


Rayns. Some Canary Sack and Tobacco.


Draw. You shall Sir, wilt please you stay supper?


Rayns. Yes marry will we Sir, lets have the best cheer the kitchen yields: the
pipe sirrah^


Drawer. Here Sir.


Rayns. Will Frank be here at supper?


^oodw. So Sir he promised, and presumes he will not fail his hour.


Rayns. Some Sack boy, I am all lead within, there is no mirth in me, no^ was I
wont to be so lumpish sad: reach me the glass: what is this?


Draw. Good Sherry Sack Sir.


Rayns. I meant Canary Sir, what have no brains?


Draw. Pox a your brains, are your fingers so light.


Rains. Say sir.


Draw. You shall have Cannary presently.


Goodw. When was he wont to be in this sad strain, excepting some few sudden
melanchollies, there lives not one more free and sociable.


Fost. I am too well acquainted with his humor, to stir his blood in the least
distemperature; Cose I Will be with you here. Enter Drawer.


Rains. Do, come to me; have you hit upon the right Cannary now^ or could your
Hogshead find a Spanish But? A health.


Goodw. Were it my height I Will pledge it.


Fost. How do you now man?


Rains. Well, well, exceeding well, my melancholy sadness steals away, and by
degrees shrinks from my troubled heart: Come let us be merry, more Tobacco boy,
and bring in supper. Enter Frank Forest.


Fost. Frank, welcome, welcome, will thou be here old lad?


Goodw. Or here?


Fran. Wherefore has nature lent me two hands but to use them both at once (my
cloak) I am for you here and here.


Fost. Bid them make haste of supper; some discourse to pass away the time.


Rains. Now Frank, how stole you from your Fathers arms? you have been schooled
no doubt; fie, fie upon it, ever I would live such base servitude to an old gray
beard, Sfoot I Would hang my self. A man cannot be merry and drink drunk, but he
must be controled by gravity.


For. O pardon him, you know he is my father, and what he does is but paternal
love; though I be wild, I am not so past reason, his person to despise^ though
I his counsel cannot severely follow.


Rains. Sfoot he is a fool.


Fran. A fool; you are a --


Fost. Nay Gentlemen.


Frank. Yet I restrain my tongue, hoping you speak out of some spleenful
rashness, and no deliberate malice: And 'tmay be you are sorry that a word so
unreverent to wrong so good an aged Gentleman should pass you unawares.


Rains. Sorry, Sir boy, you will not take exceptions.


Fra. Not against you with willingness, whom I have loved so long; yet you
might think me a most dutiless and ungracious Son to give smooth countenance
unto my fathers wrong; come, I dare swear 'twas not your malice, and I take it
so; lets frame some other talk, hear Gentlemen.


Rains. But hear me boy, it seems Sir you are angry.


Fra. Not thoroughly yet.


Rains. Then what would anger thee?


Fra. Nothing from you.


Rains. Of all things under heaven what would thou loathest have me do?


^ra. I would not have you wrong my reverent Father, and I hope you will not.


Rains. Thy Father's an old dotard.


^ran. I could not brook this at a Monarchs hands, much less at thine.


R^i^s. I boy, then take you that. Flings wine in's face.


(...). (...) ^ot born to brook this, oh I am slain.


(...). ^^ee^ Cose what have you done; shift for your self.


Rains. Away. Exeunt.


Enter two ^rawers. 1. Draw. Stay the Gentlemen, they have killed a man: O sweet
Mr. Francis; one run to his Fathers.


2. ^raw. Had not we Drawers enough in the house, but they must needs draw too?


1. ^raw. They have drawn blood of this Gentleman that I have drawn many a
quart of wine to: Oh sweet Mr. Francis; hark, hark, I hear his Fathers voice
below, ten to one he is come to fetch him home to supper, and now he may carry
him home to his grave: See here he comes.


Enter the Host, Mr. Forest, and Susan. Host: You must take comfort, Sir.


old For. Would heaven I could, or that I might beg patience.


Sus. Oh my brother.


old For. Is he dead, is he dead girl.


Sus. Oh dead sir, Frank is dead.


old For. Alas, alas my boy, I have not the heart to look upon his wide and
gaping wounds: Hide them, oh hide them from me, le^t those mouths through
which his life past through swallow mine: Pray tell me, Sir, does this appear
to you fearful and pitiful, to you that are a stranger to my dead boy?


Host. How can it otherwise?


old For. Oh me most wretched of all wretched men, if to a stranger his warm
bleeding wounds appear so griesly, and so lamentable, how will they seem to me
that am his Father? will they not hale my eyeballs from their rounds, and with
an everlasting blindness strike 'em.


(...). Oh Sir, look here.


^ld For. Do thou long to have me blind, then I Will behold them since I know
thy mind: oh me is this my son that does so senseless lie, and swims in blood,
my soul shall fly with his

Unto the land of rest, behold I crave,
Being killed with grief we both may have one grave.

Sus. Alas my Father's dead too gentle Sir, help to retire his spirits
over-travell'd with age and sorrow.


Hest. Mr. Forest.


Sus. Father.


old For. What says my girl? good morrow; what is a clock that you are up so
early? call up Frank, tell him he lies too long a bed this morning: was wont to
call the Sun up, and to raise the early Lark, and mount her amongst the clouds;
will he not up, rise, rise thou sluggish boy.


Sus. Alas he cannot Father.


old For. Cannot, why?


Sus. Do you not see his bloodless color fail.


old For. Perhaps he is sickly that he looks so pale.


Sus. Do you not feel his pulse no motion keep? how still he lies.


old For. Then is he fast asleep?


Sus. Do you not see his fatal eye-lide close.


old For. Speak softly, hinder not his soft repose.


Sus. Oh see you not these purple conduits run, know you these wounds?


old Fost. Oh me my murdered Son.


Enter young Mr. Forest. Mr. For. Sister.


Sus. O brother, brother.


Mr. For. Father, how cheer you Sir? why you were wont to store for others
comfort that by sorrow were any way distressed, have you all wasted, and spared
none to your self.


old For. Oh Son, son, son, see alas, see where thy brother lies, he dined
with me to day, was merry, merry, eye that course was, he that lies here, see
there thy murdered brother, and my son was, see do not thou not weep for him.


Mr. For. I shall find time,
When you have took some comfort I Will begin
To mourn his death, and scourge the murderers sin.
Dear father be advised, take hence his body, and let it have a solemn funeral.

old For. But for the murderer, shall not he attend the sentence of the Law
with all severity.


Mr. For. Have you but patience, should we urge the Law he has such honorable
friends to guard him, we should in that but bark against the Moon; nay do not
look that way, take hence the body, let the Law sleep, the time ere it be long;
may offer't self to a more just revenge: We are poor, and the world srowns on
all our fortune, with patience then bear this amongst the rest: The heavens
when they be pleased may turn the wheel of Fortune round, when we that are
dejected, may be again raised to our former height.


old For. Oh when saw Father such a tragic sight,
And did outlive it, never son, ah never
From mortal breast run such a precious River.

Mr. For. Come Father and dear Sister join with me,
Let us all learn our sorrows to forget,
He owed a death, and he has paid that debt. Exeunt.

Scen. 2.
Enter old Mr Harding, his two sons William and John, his Wife Anne, a^ newly
come fram the Wedding. old Hard. So things are as they should be, we have
attained the height of solace and true joy, sweet Na^ no, sooner married but a
Mother of this my hopeful Issue, cheer thoughts, for what I want in youth I will
supply in true affection, and what age does scant me in sprightly vigor, I Will
make good in wealth.


An^e: Sir, you well know I was not easily won, and therefore not soon
changed; advisedly, not rashly did ^ venture on your love. My young unsettled
thoughts from their long travels have late attained unto their journeys end,
and they are now at rest.


old Hard. Here they have found a harbor to retire to.


Will: 'Twould become you to use my Father here respectively: you see how he
receives you almost dowerless.


Ioh. 'True, where he out of his own abilities might have commanded Widows
richer far, I, and perhaps each way as beautiful.


Anne: Upbraid me not, I do confess he might, nor was this match my seeking: If
it has pleased your father for some virtues known in me, to grace me with his
free election: Me^thinks it worse becomes you being sons to blame a Fathers
pleasure; howsoever better my self I cannot if he thought me

Worthy his bed I see small reason you
Should wrong me to him that my state best knew.

old Hard. Nan^, I am pleased they shall be satisfied; and boys I tell you,
though you be my sons, you much forget your duty to a Mother whom I hold
worthy to be called my Wife; no more of this I charg you.


Will: Sir, we have done.


old Hard: No child to her, can be to me no Son.


Ioh. I am pleased, here my spleen dies,
Suddenly fallen as it did quickly rise.

old Hard: This is the end I aimed at, were my eldest present among us much I
had my height of wishes. Enter Clown.


Clow. I have been there, Sir.


old Hard. And foundest thou my Son Philip?


Clow: When you had given him me in charge, I had of him great care I have took
of him great care, and I have took him napping, as you know who took his Mare:
I found your son Philip like a Cocksparrow billing: if I had stayed but a
little longer, I might have taken him and his h^n treading, I know not whether
it be St. Valentines day or no, but I am sure they are coupled.


old Hard. How coupled do thou mean?


Clow: I see them one and one, and that you know makes two, and two makes a
couple, and they well coupled, may in time make a third between 'em; I do not
think but it is like to be a match.


old Hard: I vow if ever he match into that family, the Kindred being all
beggered, that forced union shall make a firm divorce 'twixt him and mine.


Enter Philip and Susan. Clow: Here they are, Sir, coram nobis, you will find
it a plain case if the matter be well searched; I have spoke but what I have
seen; and now let every one answer for themselves.


old Hard: What means these hands?


Phil. Nothing Sir, save a mere interchange of hearts and souls doubly made
fast by vows.


old Hard: ^Twixt her and thee!


Phil: So, and no otherwise.


old Hard: Yet thou have time to pause, and to repeat but after this no limit
to consider; cast her off, or henceforth I disclaim thee for my Son.


P^il: Yet I shall ever hold you for my father.


old Hard: Then show in this thy duty, quite forsake her, and be restored into
my family.


P^il: O Sir she is a virgin chaste and fair, unto whose bed I am by oath
engaged; that power above that heard the contract pass, both heard, approved,
and still records the same: Oh Sir I am of years, often have you wished to see me
well bestowed, and now is the time your wish has took effect: It was your
prayer that heaven would send me a good Wife, and lo in her they have showed
their bounty.


old H^rd. Thou thy baseness, take one tha^'s of my chasing.


Phil: Do men use by other hearts and eyes their wives to choose?


old Hard: She Is poor.


Phil: Yet virtuous.


old Hard: Virtue, a sweet dower.


Phil: Yet that when Mammon fails retains her power.


old Hard: Possessed of virtue then thou need ought else.


P^il: Riches may waste by fire, by sea, by stealth,
But water, ^ire, nor theft can virtue waste,
When all else fails us that alone shall last.

old Hard: Go to Cheapside with virtue in your purse,
And cheapen Plate, or to the Shambles hye,
And see what meat with virtue you can buy.
Will virtue make the pot ^eeth, or the ^ack turn a spit laden? tell me, will
your Landlord at quarter day take virtue for his rent? will your Wives virtue
yield you ten in the hundred? a good stock would do all this: Come, come Son, I Will
find thee a rich match and turn her off.


Will: Faith do brother, the only way to thrive is to be ruled by my Father.


John: Do you think I being but the youngest, would marry under the degree of a
Gentlewoman, and that without my fathers consent too?


Phil: I wish you may not, but withal advise you to make a conscience how you
break a vow: And Sir, for you, with pardon, I could trace you even in that path
in which I stnnd condemned: This Gentlewoman my beauteous Mother-in-law, whose
virtues I both honor, and admire, whom in no kind I envy, I presume you
married not for riches; for if so, Where is that wealthy Dower she brought
along? being your self example blame me not to make a father my strict
president.

In viewing me bear but your self in mind,
And prove to her, as I to this like kind.

Anne. The Gentleman speaks well, pray let me mediate between you a
reconcilement.


Will: Good Sir do.


Ioh: Since it is my Mothers pleasure to take it well, we will be joint suit^rs
with her.


Clow. And I too good Master.


old Hard: the boy's inflexible, and I obdure, he cannot be more saucy to
object that which I would not hear then I perverse, in yielding to a knave so
obs^inate.


Sus. He is your Son, and of your blood the first; brand him not with a name so
odious, you cannot write your self a Gentleman, but l^ave him of that name
inheritor, though you have power to take away his means, deprive him both your
blessing and your love,

Which methinks in a Father should seem strange,
His state, you may his blood you cannot change.

Old Hard. Bated on all sides: have I been thus long a Father and a Master to
direct, to be at these years pupil'd by a girl? a begga^, one that all the
wealth she has, bears on her back, and shall I suffer this? whilst these that
ought to a^m me with just rage, preach to me patience; I Will endure no more, come
leave them sweet wife, gentle sonn^s away. Ex^un^.


Phil. I Will have thee yet though all the world say nay.


Clow. Now which of these parties shall I cleave to and follow: we^l now I
remember my self I Will show my self a true Citizen and stick to the stronger
side. Exit.


Scen. 3.
Enter Mr. Raynsfoorth and young Mr. Forest meeting. For. Pray let me speak
with you.


Rayns. With me Sir?


Forr. With you.


Rayns. Say on.


Forr. Do you not know me?


Rayns. Keep off upon the peril of thy life, come not within my swords length
least this Arm prove fatal to thee, and bereave thy life, as it has done thy
brothers.


Forr. Why now thou know me truly by that token, that thou have slain my
brother, put up, put up, so great a quarrel as a brothers life must not be made
a street brall, it is not fit that every Apprentice should with his shop-club,
betwixt us play the sticklers, sheath thy sword.


Rayns. Swear thou will act no sudden violence, or this sharp sword shall
still be enterpos'd 'twixt me and thy known hatred.


Young Forr. Sheath thy sword, by my religion and that interest I have in
Gentry I will not be guilty of any base revenge.


Rayns. Say on.


F^rr. Let Us walk, trust me let not thy guilty soul be jealous of my fury this
my hand's curbed and governed by an honest heart, not by just anger, I Will not
touch thee ^oully for all the world: let us walk.


Rayns. Proceed.


Forr. Sir, you did kill my brother, had it been in fair and even encounter,
though a child, his death I had not questioned.


Rayns. Is this all?


Forr. He Is gone, the Law is past, your life is cleared, for none of all our
kindred laid against you evidence to hang you; you are a Gentleman, and pity
'twere a man of your descent should dye a Fellons death: See Sir, thus far we
have demeaned fairly like our selves: but think you though we winck at base
revenge, a brothers death can be so soon forgot, our Gentry bas^el'd and our
name disgraced? no t'must not be, I am a Gentleman well known; and my demeaner
hitherto has promised somewhat: should I swallow this, the scandal would out
live me: briefly then I Will fight with you.


Rayns. I am loath.


Forr. Answer directly whether you dare to meet me on even terms, or mark how
i will proceed.


Rayns. Say I deny't.


Forr. Then I say thou art a villain and I challenge thee, where ere I meet
thee next, in field or town, thy Fathers manners or thy Tennants grange, saving
the Church, there is no privilege in all this land for thy despised life; no
guard of friends, no night walks, or ^ly stealth, no jealous fear which in a
murderers eye keeps hourly watch, shall have the privilege: this even and
balanced fight body to body; I Will kill thee be it in thy bed, at meat, in thy
wives arms; as thou tookest my brother, with thy back toward me, basely:
answer me.


Rayns. I Will meet with thee; the hour?


Forr. By six to morrow morning, it is your privilege to appoint the place and
weapon.


Rayns. Hownse low the place, my choice of weapon this.


Forr. I can except at neither; fail the place, or suit your weapons length,
farewell. Exit.


Rayns. Yes it is thou meetest thy last farewell on earth, the appointed hour's
to morrow: let the same fate obscure his desperate head that fell upon his
brothers. Enter Goodwin and Foster.


Goodw. Now Cozen Raynsforth.


Rayns. I Will so swinge my yonker.


Fost. Why who has raised this storm Sir?


Rayns. Wat'^t thou what? The elder Forest parted but even now, called me to
question 'bout his brothers death, and since has challenged me.


G^odw. Challenged?


Rayns. Challenged me.


F^st. Why he is too wea for you.


Rayns. Yes, I shall weak him, my purpose is to teach the stripling (...) And
you be honest Gentlemen stand but a loofe to morrow, and observe how I will
swinge my youth about the field.


G^odw. And please Heaven i will be there.


Fost And so will I.


Rayns. He seeks his fate, and murderers once being in Wad^ farther till they
drown; sin pulls on sin. Exit.


Explicit Actus primus.
Act. 2.
Scen. 1.
Enter Old Harding, William, John, Anne. Will. It Is true upon my life.


Old. Hard, Say what thou will I Will not believe it boy.


Will, Do you believe me to be your Son William.


Old Ha. Well.


Will. Do you believe I stand here?


Old Hard. On.


Will. That this Gentlewoman is your wife?


Old Hard. So.


Will. That Jack Harding here is my brother?


Old Hard. Good.


Will. That I speak to you, that you list to me? Do you believe any think that
is to be believed?


Old Hard. What of all this?


Will. Then believe my brother Phillip has married Mistress Susan. I saw them
in the Church together; I heard them pronounce the words together, whether it
be better or worse for them I know not, but they are in for better and worse,
that I am sure.


Old Hard. As sure as thou art certain this is true, so sure I Will disinherit the
proud boy: and all the Magazin that I enjoy, devide 'tween you my sons.


John Not all Father, alas, allow him some small legacy to live on.


Will: If It be but a cast Farm, or some poor Cottage rather then nothing, it
may be he will content himself with a little, you know somewhat has some ^avour.


Old Hard: He that has set me and my love at nothing^ I Will leave him worth as
little.


Anne Chide him you may, but yet not cast him off; For Fathers ought most
chastise where they love; Parents as I have read, their rage should hide where
children fall through weakness, not through pride.


Old Hard: They are none such to me, my vow is past,
My life may fade, but yet my will shall last.

Enter Philip and Susan. Will. See where the four bare legs that belong to a
bed come, I could almost pity him.


Jack And why pity him, all the while that marriage is the first step to our
making?


Phil: See Sir it is done


Old Hard: And thou undone.


Phil: In losing your kind favor more undone then in your casual wealth.


Old Hard. By all that I enjoy.


Phil. Oh swear not, spare that oath, I Will credit you, although you speak but
mildely.


Old Hard: So thrive I, if for this marriage made in dispight of me I make thee
partner of any substance that is accounted mine.


Phil: Not made in spite of you, unsay that language, and then you chide me
truly as I live. And though on earth by your disherited hope to be heir to
heaven; I matched with her in sincere love, but in no spleen to you, though you
have sworn to give my fortunes from me; you have not sworn to reave me of your
love, that let me have, let others take the land.


Old Har^. My love goes with my land, and in this marriage thou have lost both.


Phil. Your substance I despise, but to lose that draws rivers from my eyes.


Anne Oh bear a soft and more relenting soul, and look upon the virtues of your
son, this Gentlewomans birth.


^l^ Hard. Wife, wife, if he have married her for birth, then let her birth
maintain him.


Anne My kind sons speak to your fath.


Will: Alas Mother, you hear my Father has sworn, and do you love him, and
would make him break's oath.


John Engage his soul, that were a wives part indeed.


Will: As I live I would not wish him now he has sworn to alter his mind in
the least circumstance, for more then I Will speak.


Phil: I am a kinder son then you be brothers, have you renounced me for your
son?


Old Hard. I have.


John You see he has.


Phil: You have not yet renounced me for your servant, that title let me bear,
I Will be your man, and wear your Livery, since my poverty inforces me to serve,
let it be you.


Will. Grant him that good Father, when you want employment for him, I may
sometimes have occasion to use him my self.


John A reasonable motion, you want a serving-man, since you must hire one on
force, as good him as another.


Phil: He wants a Maid too, let him hire this woman, his servant not his
daughter, give us but as you would do to strangers we are pleased.


Will. The motion's not amiss, can you milk sweet heart.


Susan I can.


Will: And sweep a house, serve a hog, grope a hen, feel a duck, wash and wring.


Susan what I have used, my soft hand best can show, but what I cannot I Will be
glad to learn.


John A good willing mind in troth, and can you bake and brew?


Susan I shall be easily taught.


John. Y'ad best look to it, for as you brew, so you are like to drink.


Old Hard. Sirrah, sirrah, can you hold the plough and thrash, sow, reap, load
a cart, drive a Teem.


Phil. These or what else I Will practice.


Old Hard. Come then of with these gay clothes, no habit's fit for hyndes; help
boys to suit them as their fortunes are; go search in the clowns wardrobe.


Will. Fear not we will fit 'em as well as if we had taken measure of 'em.


Ann^ To see this misery with such patience born, makes me to pity where these
others scorn.


John Here Sir is that will serve the turn if you employ him in the corn fields,
I Will warrant him fright the birds, here is that will make him look like a
scarecrow.


Will. And here is that will change the copy of her case, though not of her
countenance.


Old Hard. Too good for drudges, live now by your sweat, and at your labor
make account to eat.


Phil. Here Is but a sorry wedding day.


Susan My sweet Philip that thou should suffer these extremes for me, only
for me.


Phil. Let that betwixt my soul and thine be witness of my constant love;
Alas for thee that thou must drudge and toil, and having been a Mistress all
thy life, must now become a servant. Ent. Clown.


Clow. This being the wedding day of my Masters eldest Son, I expect rare
cheer. As first, the great spic'd Cake to go in, Cake-bread fashion, drawn out
with Currants, the Jealious Formety must put on his yellow hose again, and hot
Pies come mincing after, the boiled Mutton must swim in a River of stew'h
broth, where the channel's made of Prunes. Instead of peables, and prime
reasons, and Currants in the stead of checker stones and gravel, to omit Geese
and Guls, Ducks and Do^^erels^ Widgins and Woodcocks, of which there will be
plenty. At our wedding dinner we shall have the Bride in her tiffety taffeties
most sumptuous, and the Bridegroom as well in brancht Satin as brancht Rosemary
most courageous. I Will in and see them in all their beauty, and give them the
Joy, the boon Jour, the Besilus Manus, or to be more vulgar to the Incpaable,
the God give you good morrow.


Phil. Good morrow fellow simkin.


Clow. It Is he, no, no, it is not he.


Sus. Good simkin.


Clow. Her face, the trick o^ her eye, her leer, her blink, her askue, but to
say it is she, Proh deum atque hominum fidem.


P^il. Art thou amazed to ^ee me thus transformed, or her thus alterd, none but
such a Father, such a remorseless and hard hearted Father, could so translated
his children.


Clown. Oh Mr. Philip, I see your Father is no Scholar, but a mere Dun^e, ^
protest I never red a more vilde translation.


Sus. Nor see so sudden and unmeet a change.


C^o^. O young Mistress, Ovids Metamorphosis could never show the the like; but
how comes this to passe^ the manner, the manner, my heart begins to condole,
and my conduit pipes to open, we shall have a shower presently; the manner?


Phil. This morning having married my betrothed, for could I less do having
vowed so much? I came to him and most submissively entreated pardon for my self
and her.


Clow. Kind young man -- hold good heart.


Phil: He presently revises us, then renounced us, nor would he give us, should
he see us starve and famish at his gate, no not a crust of his ^indes bread, or
of his smallest beer not a bare crusful should we dye for thirst.


Clow: 'Twil out, 'twil out, but now for the apparel.


Sus: When he renounced us for his children, we had no means reserved unless
with baseness to beg our victuals, were resolved to work, so he at our entreaty
hired us both to be his hindes and drudges.


Clow: Your apron good Mistress, and so and so, you were stripped out of your
silks and sattens, and forced to put on these russets and sheepskins.


Phil: Even so.


Clow: O most tyrannical old Fornicator (old Master I would say) Well since
it is so, no more young Master, but fellow servant; no more Master Philip but
Phil; here is my hand I Will do two men's labors in one to save you a labor, and
to spare your shoulders I Will help at many a dead li^e: Come I Will go teach ye
hayte and ree, gee and whoe^ and which i^ to which hand; next I Will learn you the
name of all our Teeme, and ^cquaint you with Jocke the fore-horse, and Fibb the
fil-horse, and with all the godamercy fraternity.


Sus: Succeed it as heaven please.


Phil. What must be, must be, heaven has set it down,
At which they smile, why should we mortals frown?

Cl^^^ To see so brave a Gentleman turn Clown.


Exeunt. Act. 2.
Scen. 1.
Enter Goodwin and Foster. Fost. Are we not somewhat too early think you?


Goodw. It appears so, for neither challenger nor defendant are yet in field.


Fost: Which way do you think the day will go? or whether of them do you hold
to be the better man?


Goodw: That I am not able to judge, but if the opinion of the world hold
current, he that killed one brother, is thought will be the death of the other,
but these things are beyond us: lie close for being seen.


Enter Rainsforth and Forest the younger. Rains. Your resolution holds then?


young For: Men that are easily moved, are soon removed from resolution, but
when with advice and with foresight we purpose, our intents are not without
considerate reasons altered.


Rains: Thou art resolved, and I prepared for thee, yet thus much know, thy
state is desperate, and thou art now in dangers throat already even half
devoured; if I subdue thee, know thou art a dead man; for this fatal steel that
searched thy brothers entrails is prepared to do as much to thee; if thou
survivest^ and I be slain, thou art dead too, my alliance and greatness in the
world will not endure my slaughter unrevenged. Come, I am for thee.


young For: I would my brother lived that this our difference might end in an
embrace of folded love; but 'twas heavens will that for some guilt of his he
should be scourged by thee, and for that guilt in scourging him thou by my
vengeance punished, come I am both ways armed against thy steel, if I be
pierced by it, or against thy greatness mine pierce thee.


Rains. Have at thee. Fight and pause.


F^r^ I will not bid thee hold, but if thy breath be as much short as mine look
to thy weakness.


Rains. The breath thou drawst but weakly, thou now shall draw no more. Fight,
Forest loses his weapon.


For. That heaven knows, he guard my body that my spirit ows.


He guards himself, and puts by with his hat, slips, the other running falls
over him. and Forest kills him. Goodw. My Cosens fallen, pursue the murderer.


Fost. But not too near I pray, you see he is armed, and in this deep amazement
may commit some desperate outrage.


For. Had I but known the terror o^ this deed, I would have left it done
imperfectly, rather then in this guilt of conscience labored so far, but I
forget my safety, the Gentleman is dead, my desperate life, will be oversway'd
by his Allies and friends, and I have now no safety but by flight.

And see where my pursuers come, away,
Certain destruction hovers o'r my stay. Exit.

Goodw. Come follow, see he takes toward the City, you bear the body of my
Cosen hence unto the neighbor v^llage: I Will still keep
Within the murderers sight, raise Hue and cry,
He shall not escape our pursuit though he fly. Exeunt.

Enter William and Philip. Will: now will trusse me that point Phil, I could
find in my heart to beg thee of my Father to wait upon me, but that I am afraid
he cannot spare thee from the plough: besides I heard him say but the last day,
thou wast more fit to make a hind then a serving man.


Phil: Sir, you were once my brother.


Will: True, but that was when you were a son to my father.


Phil: I and my younger brother, I had then priority of birth.


Will: But now it seems we have got the start of you, for being but a servant
you are taken a button-hole lower.


Phil: When will this tedious night give place to day?


Will: I hope I may command.


Phil. I must obey. Enter Joh. and Sus.


Ioh: My string Sue, are these shoes well mundified, down a your maribones
good Sue, I hope you are not so straight l^c'd but you can stoop: you
acknowledge me one of your young Masters, if not, ^tis not unknown to you that I
know the way to my father.


Sus: Yes Sir, and can tell tales, I know you can, and I have felt the smart
on it.


Ioh: Whip me if you shall not if you begin once to grow stubborn: why when?


Sus. As humble as your feet. Enter Mrs. Anne.


Anne: Why how now naid is this work fitting you? and you Sir, you are looked
for in the stable, and should not loyter here, will you be gone?


Phil. I am for any service. Exit.


Sus. And I too. Exit.


An^e: We shall find other things for you to do.


Will: If you cannot here be they that can, a drudge, a groom, I Will send him of
my errand.


Ioh: And if I do not find work for her, I Will do nothing but take Tobacco in
every room, because twice a day I Will make her make clean house the. Exeunt.


Anne: These think because I am their Stepmother, their chiefest torture is
most my content, when I prote^^, to see them thus afflicted it grates my very
heart strings every hour: For though before their Fathers rathless eye, and
their remorsless brothers, I seem stern, yet privately they taste of my best
bounty,

And other of my servants are by me
Hired to overcome their chiefest drudgery.
Within Follow^ follow, follow. Ent. young For. with his weapon drawn

young For. I am pursued, and there is no place of refuge left to my desperate
life, but here is a woman, oh if she harbor soft effeminate pity she may
redeem me from a shameful death.


Anne: A man thus armed to leap my garden wall; help^ help.


young For: As you are fair, and should be pitiful, a woman therefore to be
moved; a Christian, and therefore one that should be charitable, pity a poor
distressed Gentleman, who gives his desperate fortune, life and freedom into
your hand.


Anne: What are you Sir, that with your weapon drawn affright me thus?


young For. If you protect my life, fair creature, I am a free Gentleman, but
if betray me, then a poor man doomed unto a shameful death.


Anne: What Is your offense that such suspicious fear, and timorous doubts waits
on your guilty steps?


young For: I have killed a man, but fairly as I am a Gentleman, without all base
advantage in even trial of both our desperate fortunes.


Anne: Fairly?


young For: And though I say it, valiantly.


Anne: And hand to hand?


young For. In single opposition.


Anne: In a good quarrel?


young For. Else let the hope I have in you of safety turn to my base
confusion. Gentle creature A cry within follow, etc. I cannot now stand to
expostulate; for hark the breath of my pursuers blow a fearful air upon my
flying heel, and I am almost in their fatal gripe. Say will you save me?


Anne: I will, then climb into that hovel.


young For. Oh any where.


Anne: Nay quickly then.


young For: Your hand fair Lady.


Anne: Away, leave me to answer for you.


Enter old Harding, Goodwin, Foster, and Off^cer^. old Hard: Over my garden
wall, is it possible?


Goodw: Over this wall I see him leap it lightly.


ol^ Hard. That shall we quickly know, see here is my wife, she can inform us
best.


Fost. Saw you not Mistress Harding, a young man mount o'r this garden wall with
his sword drawn?


Anne: My eyes were steadfast on my work in hand, and trust me I saw none.


old Hard: Perhaps he took down to the neighbor vill^ge, and when he saw my
wife, altered his course.


Anne: It Is very like so, for I heard a bustling about that hedge, besides a
sudden noise of some that swiftly ran toward your fields, make haste, 'twas
now, he cannot be far off.


old Hard: Gentlemen, take my word, I am high Constable; it is part of my
office, I Will be no shelter for any man that shall offend the Law: if we surprise
him, I will send him bound to the next Justice, follow you your search.


Good. Farewell good Mr. Harding.

Fost. Your word's sufficient without further Warrant,
Continue our pursuit, all ways are laid
And ere he reach the City, shall be stayed. Exit. G^od. and Fost.

old Hard. A dew good friends.

Anne. Pray what is the business Sir?

old Hard. Two Gentlemen, went into the fields to fight,
And one has slain another.

Anne. On what quarrel?


old ^ard. I had small leisure to importune that, only this much I learnt, the
man that is dead was great in fault, and he that now survives, subject unto the
danger of this search, bare himself fairly, and his fortune being to kill a man
Allied to Noble men, and greatly friended: is much pittyed. But Law me^t have
his course.


Anne. If this be true.
I thank my fate, and bless this happy hour
To save a life within Laws griping power.

old Hard. Come then the mornings bleak, and sharp the Air
Into the fire my girl, there is wholesome heat:
I Will in and see my servants set at meat.

Anne. Sir, i will but end this flower and follow you, I this should be some
bloody murderer, great were my guilt to shroud him from the ^aw; but if a
gentleman by fortune crossed, it is pity one so vallient and so young should be
given up into his enemies hands, whilst greatness may perhaps weigh down his
cause and balance him to death, who thus escaping may when he has, by means
obtain his peace, Redeem his desperate fortunes, and make good the forfeit made
unto the offended

Law prove as Heaven shall direct, I Will do my best,
It Is charity to succor the distressed. Ent. Forest above.

young For. Fair Mistress, are they gone, may I descend?

Anne. No safety lives abroad, then pray forbear.
To speak of scaping hence,

young For. Oh but I fear

Anne. My life for yours.

young For. However poor I fare
May you of this your charitable care
Taste happy fruit.

Anne. You did not kill him foully.

young For. No I protest.

Anne. Nor willingly.

young For. I willingly fought with him, but unwillingly
Did I become his death's man.

Anne. Could you now wish him alive again.


young For. With his hands loose, and yet he slew my brother.


Anne. Heaven has sent this gentleman because he is penitent, to me for
succor, therefore till the violence of all his search be past, I Will shroud him
here, and bring you meat and wine to comfort you, free I protest from all
unchaste pretense, till by some means I may conveigh you hence.


young For. The life you saw if I overcome this plunge shall be for ever yours,
all my endeavors to your devoted service I will store, and carefully hoard up.


Anne: Sir, now no more. Exeunt.


Act. 3.
Scen. 1.
Enter Philip and Clown. Clow: COme good fellow Phil, what nothing but mourning
and mowing, thy melancholy makes our teems to veil their foretops, and all our
Jades crest fallen, and to see thee wail in woe in the deep cart roots up to the
bellies plunge in pain: my Mistress Susan she is in the same pitiful pickle too.


Phil. Oh if this hand could execute for her all that my cruel father has
imposed, my toil would seem a pleasure, labor ease.


Clow. Ease, what is that? there is little to be found in our house, now we have
loosed the plough in the fields, they will find work enough about home to keep us
from the scurvey. Your hat Phil, see here comes our Mistress.


Enter Mrs. Anne with Bread and a Bottle. Anne: The place is clear, none sees
me, now is the time to bear my sorrowful charge bread, meat, and wine: these six
days I have kept him undiscovered, neither my husbands, nor my servants eyes
have any way discovered him. How now fellows, whither so fast this way?


Clow: Nay we do not use to go too fast for falling: our business at this
present is about a little household service.


Anne What business have you this way?


Clow, We are going, as they say, to remove, or according to the vulgar, to
make clean, where Chanticleer and Damepartlet the hen have had ^ome doings.


Anne What do thou mean by that?


Phil. By my Masters appointment, I must not say my Fathers, he has commanded
us first to make clean this hen-roost, and after to remove the hay out of that
hay-loft.


Ann^ Oh me, I fear the Gentleman's betrayed, what shift shall I devise.


Clow. By your leave Mistress, pray let us come by you.


Anne. Well double dilegence your labor's saved, it is done already, go and take
your pleasure. Son Philip, when I hear my Husband speak of such a base
employment, I straight hired a labourer to prevent it, and it is done.


Phil. You are kinder Mother then my Father cruel, and save me many a toil and
teadious travail imposed on me by your husband.


Anne O'r this place, I Will bear a jealous and a watchful eye to prevent this
discovery; and will you be gone?


Clow. Yes sweet Mistress, if you would but give a wink, a word to the dayry
maid for a mess of cream betwixt my fellow Philip and I, It Is good to be doing
something, for you know my Master does not love we should be idle.


Anne Well Sir, perhaps I shall remember you.


Clow. Come Phil let us be gone, and if you chance to blush at what my Mistress
has promised, I Will tell you who cast milk in your face.


Exeunt. Anne Shall I compare his present misery with the Enter Susan with
something in her Apron. misfortunes of this Gentleman, which might I reckon
greater, but leave them;

And to my charge we all must yield to fate
He casts us down that best can raise our state.

Sus. Oh through what greater plunges can I pass then I have done already; A
fathers penury, the good old man dejected and cast down, my Husband even swept
from the family where he was born, quite forsook by him, by whom he should be
fostered, made a servant

Amongst his servants, and his brothers scorn,
These mischiefs make me wish my self unborn.

^nne. Again prevented.


Sus How ^ath this meditation drawn my thoughts from my intended business I
forgot what I was sent about? my Master bade me scatter this Wheat and Barley
amongst the hens, and I will soon dispatch it.


An. What makes thee so near the place that I so strictly guard, what business
have you there?


Sus. Forsooth my Master bade me go serve the poultry.


Anne Come you shall not, for this time I Will do it for you.


Sus. Mother and Mistress too, it is courtesy in you to profer it, but should I
suffer, you might hold it justly in me small manners.


Anne I say it shall be so.


Sus. Shall any servant stand still and see her Mistress do her work^ pray
pardon me, I should condemn my self beyond imagination: I shall I stand idely
and see the work done by your hand?


Anne I say I will.

Sus. My words dare not say nay,
But my more forward action brooks no stay.

Anne Then doubtless he is betrayed.

Sus. Oh me what is here? why here is one that is come to steal your hens, a
thief who will filch your poultry.

Anne It Is not so.

Sus. Shall I cry thieves aloud [Forrest leaps down.]

Anne For Heavens sake no.

young Forr. Betray then hapless Forest, once more I lie
Ordayn'd for pity, or prepared to die.
What none but women and betray me? then
I see your hearts are flintier far then men.

Anne Think not that I Will betray you, nor shall she, if she respect my love or
her own life.


Sus. Betray my brother? it shall nere be said I stopped his flight when he had
means to escape.


young Forr. Oh fortune beyond hope amazed I stand
To see my life laid in my sisters hand.

Sus. Dear brother.

young Forr. My sweet sister.

Anne A strange greeting,
And 'twixt two hapless creatures happy meeting.

young Forr. What change has brought you to this downcast state?


Sus. Nay what mishap has ruinated you?


Anne You both forget your dangers, then leave off these passive fits, and
study for the safety of this distressed Gentleman your brother, now in the
ratheless mercy of the Law.


young Forr. Sister you have heard my fortunes.


Sus. With sad cheer, little surmising you had laid so near, dear. Mother let
us crave your farther assistance in furthering his escape.


Anne I am all yours.


young Forr. My safety lies in sudden expedition, debar me I am dead.


Anne I have a brother lives at Gravesend an Owner and a Merchant, and could we
but convey you safe to him; he soon would ship you over into France.


young Forr. All ways are loud, and hue and cry sent forth through every
hundred, how shall I reach thither withont discovery?


Sus. Here stands an empty trunk in the next room, which should be sent by
water to Gravesend to your brother, what if we should lock him fast in that?


Anne I like it well, but whom shall we employ to bear it safe?


Sus. Give it my husband and your man in charge, they two will see it carefully
delivered.


Anne By them I Will write unto him earnestly in your behalf, and doubt not of
your usage.


young Forr. The trunck, the trunk, Oh quickly, if you love me.


Anne Come I Will to write.


Sus. I Will find those that shall bear it.


young Forr. The plot is likely, but heaven knows I fear it. Exeunt.


Enter Mr. Harding, John, and William. old Hard. Now boys no question but you
think it long to have my state made over to your use.


John Oh Lord Sir.


old Hand. To have your eldest brother quite disabled of any challenge of
inheritance.


Will. We think it not long Sir, but if you should use all expedition possible,
I should say beshrew their hearts that would hinder it, we do not wish our
brother disinherited, but if it be your pleasure, Heaven forbid that we being
your sons should any way contradict it^


John We should not show our selves obedient sons to perswad you to infringe
your former vow; For, Father if you remember you swore long since to do it; And
heaven forbid you should break your oath.


Old Hard. Boys of mine own free spirit, mine one heart, and will you see him
pine, beg, starve, nay perish ere you will once relieve him.


Will I'^^ be your will, we will swear to do it.


Old Hand. And though the beggars brat, his Wife I mean, should for the w^^^ of
lodgi^g sleep on st^^ls or lodge in stocks or cages, would you^ (...) her to
better harbor?


John Unless too cold harbor where of twenty chimneys standing, you shall
scarce in a whole winter see two smoking; we harbor her? Bridewel shall first.


Old Hard. Lads of my own condition, my own humor, call me a Scrivner, reach me
pen and ink I Will doe'^ imediately.


Will. Run for a Scrivener Jack. Enter Mr. Anne meeting them.


John. Mean time post thou for Pen and Inck.


Anne Stay no such haste, sweet husband there be fitter times then these made
choice for such affairs, there is no enforcement to make your Will, being in
such perfect health; pray if you love me do not talk of death, nor to your
safety give such ill presage, besides this expedition in your sons, shows that
they covet more your Lands then life; de^er't then somewhat longer for my sake.


Old Hard. Then for thy sake I will, but my kind boys it is rather to sooth
her, then your least wrong, I will delay a little though not long.


Will. It has been long a doing, I would it were once done, if he should peak
over the perch now, and all fall to our elder Brother, we have used him so
doggedly, the least he can do is to thrust us out of doors by head and
shoulders.


John. Let him alone now, we will urge him to it at more convenient leisure.


Old Hard. When heard you from your brother at Gravesend, or how falls out his
voyage, can you tell.


Anne I had a letter from him two days since, in which he writes me all his
goods are Shipped, his wares in hold well stowed, and nothing wants save a fair
gale to bring him to the Straits.


Old Hard. Heaven make his voyage prosperous, for thou know I have a venture
of five hundred p^und enterred with him, my fortune joins with his; If he
succeed it falls out well with me, if not, I am likely to impart his loss.


Enter Old Mr. Forest. Old Forr. You are well found Sir.


Old Hard. I what art thou fellow.


Old Forr. You knew me in my pride and flourishing state, have you forgot me
now, as I remember we two were bred together, School fellows, boorded together
in one Masters house, both of one form and like degree in School.


Old Hard. Oh thy name's Forest.


Old Forr. Then in those days your Father Mr. Hardi^g was a good honest Farmer,
Tennant too unto my Father. All the wealth he purchased, far be upbraiding from
me, came from us as your first raiser; and you called me then your Landlord and
young Master: then was then, but now the course of fortunes wheel is turned;
you climbed, we fell, and that inconstant fate that hurled us down, has lift
you where we sat.


Old Hard. Well, we are Lord of all those Manors now, you then possessed. Have
we not bought them deerly? Are they not ours?


Old F^rr. I no way can deny't, I rather come as a poor suitor to you, ^o
entreat you for heavens sake and charities, to p^ty my lost daughter, your cast
son. Sir, I in all had but three Children left me, Crutches to bear up my
penurious age; one of these three was butchered cruelly, his body piteously,
alas pierced through. Then had I but two left, my eldest So^, and he is or
dead, or fled to save his life; If he still live, I have wasted, ^old and spent
even all that little that my fortunes left; and now I have but one, one only
daughter, and her I am not able to relieve with ought save ^ears and pity, to
these helps oh ^end your fair as^istance; she is yours as well as mine.


Old H^rd. All my part I disclaim, both in my son and her; they crossed my
pleasure, and they shall taste the smart, I was derided,

They that love me, shall by my will be guided.

Will. And that am I.

John. And I too Father.

A^n^ Base Parasites.

^ld Hard. You even pleased me well,
And you shall mount the height from which they fell.

Enter Philip and Susan. Old ^^rr. See^ see, alass^ those that seven Summers
since saw thy estate and look upon thee now, would at lest pity, if not help
thy wants; how happy was ^hy Mother and my Wife, that slept their last sleep
long before these (...) take their birth.


Su^ Dear ^ather succor us, help to redeem us from this cruel man that (...)
upon our m^sseries.


(...) (...) daughter add not to my tedious woes, thou bidst a (...) man gu^de
th^^ on thy way, and ta^est a broken staff to be thy (...).


^^l^ Good Sir release us.


Old F^r. It m^st be then with tears, for other help I have none, and ^h^y
heaven knows can little ease, but never help your woes. Sir, if ^our heart be
not of Adamant, or some hard metal that is impe^^^rable, (...) your blood and
mine, so soon grown deaf. Kind Gentlemen, speak to your wrathless Father, show
your selves brothers, do you turn aside. Fair Mistress what say you, I see your
eyes in all things with our passions sympathize, and you are doubtless sprung
from Gentle blood:

Gentry and baseness in all ages jar,
And poverty and wealth are still at war.

Old Hard, Thou growest too tedious, prithee friend be gone.


Old For. I hope you do not scorn me.


Old Hard. The truth is, I feign would have thee leave me.


Old Forr. It Is no disparagement unto your birth, that you converse with me, if
I mistake not, sure, sure I am as well born.


Old Hard. And yet sure, sure, it is ten to one I shall be better buried.


Old For. I am as honest.


Old Hard. Nay there you are a ground.
I am honester by twenty thousand pound.

Old For. Are all such honest then that riches have.


Old Hard. Yes rich and good, a poor man and a knave. Away about thy business,
loyter not about my gates, I shall compel thee else, for thy request my will is
peremptory, thy softness makes me much more violent, whom thou the more
commisseratest I contemn, they are in my deepest hate: Wife, Sons, let us go.


Old For. With eyes in tears sunk, heart circumvolved in woe.


Sus. What shall we now do?


Phil What? but endure the worst, when comfort's b^nish'd, welcome a^l
extremes, yet I have sent my fellow, or my man (...) prove some friends to help
to stock a Farm, I have not yet their answer, it is the last of all our hopes,
that failing we have run our latest course, outcast, end quite undone. Exeunt.


Enter the M^rchant reading a Letter, and after him young Mr. Forest. M^rch.
My Sister writes how your occasions stand, and how you are to use my secrecy
in a strange business that concerns your life. She has left nothing
unremembred here, or slightly urged to make me provident and care^ul of your
safety: gentle Sir, though I am a stranger to your fortunes, yet ^or her sake
whose love I tender deer^y, I am-all yours, my hou^e to entertain you, my purse
to furnish you in any course, my Ship if you will to Sea, is at your service, make
choice in which of these, in all, or any you will employ my faithful industry.


Young Forr. Oh Sir your unexpected courtesy to a poor stranger, challenges
the name of brother to the kindest Gentlewoman that ^^er breathed this air, you
cannot choose but be of one strain that such ^indness use; you bade me to make
choice of all your favors, my poverty and my necessity do both of them in my
ext^eams concerve to make me think the meanest of any means that can unplunge
me from t^is gulf of trouble, to be much better then I can deserve, to be much
greater then I dare desire, being too poor to merit, too dejected to aim at any
hopes.


Merc^. You wrong your worth, you have desert sufficient, that she writes in
your behalf, and I commend her for it, me thinks I see such honest parts in you,
that upon weaker urgence then these lines, I would build much affection^ on
these gifts that I see nature has endowed you with, ^ndeed I flatter not, none
flatter those they do not mean to gain by, it is the guise of siccophants, such
great men to ador^ by whom they mean to rise disdain the poor; my object is
much otherwise intended, I fain would lose by him whom I commended.


Young Forr. If ever this my weak ability grow strong age^, I will employ it
solely to shun the base sin of ingratitude toward you and your fair sister.


Merch. Will you use me?


Young Forr. But what shall I return you in exchange of those great favors.


Merch. Come your love, your love, it is more then all I can attempt for you
amounts unto, pray let me know the most of my employment.


Young Forr. Then will you but provide me a safe waftage over to France, to
Flanders, or to Spain or any foreign coast; I dare not trust my native country
with my forfeit life. Sir, this is all I would entreat of you.


Merch. You Are modest in your suit, the more you use me, the more I think you
love me, therefore this night ^le get you waftage ore for France, such Sea
apparel as I use my self, you shall accept part, here is ten pounds in gold,
and wheresoever you shall live hereafter, pray let me once a year receive from
you some brief or noat^ I Will not return your love idle^ or empty handed.


Young Forr. My life's yours, and lesser satisfaction then my life is much too
little.


Merch. Much too much, no more, no more I do entreat you, I am now upon a
voyage to the Straits my self, but 'twill be two days hence.


Young For. Heaven be your guide, as I find you, so find friends in your need,
blushing I run into your co^ntless detbts, more sums of love then all my hord
can pay, but if these black adventures I survive,

Even till this mortal body lie ingrav'd,
You shall be Lord of that which you have saved

Merch. Only your love, come we will provide this night
For you safe waftage, and your secret flight. Ex^unt

Scen. 4.
Ent^r Clown, Foster, Goodwin, an^ a Gentleman. Fost. Speak with us, why what is
the business?


Clow. Nay, that is more then I can resolve you upon the sudden, it may be
there is some great fortune fallen to him of late, and he would impart the
benefit to you.


Goodw. Nay then let us go, where shall we find him?


Clow. A word to the wise, it may be that he is in some monstrous extreme
necessity, and would gladly borrow some money of you, or so.


Goodw. I, said thou so? now I remember me, I needs must home, I have some
business, I Will see him at some other time.


Clow. Nay but one word more.


Fost. We cannot stay now.


Gent. Nor I, a great occasion calls me hence.


Clow. Nay then I see you are apt to take a man at the worst still, if you knew
what little need he has to borrow, borrow quoth he, a good jest, you know he
and I, my fellow Phil and I amongst other works that my Master uses to put us
to, we use to dig and delve; now if we have found a pot a money, and would
trust you with the laying of it out, why so?


Fost. How?


Clow: Marry even so, you know his Father is such a dogged old Cormudgeon, he
dares not for his ^ars acquaint him with.


Gent. Prithee go on.


Clow. 'Twere kindness in him to choose you out of all the friends he has in
the world to impart this benefit to, were it not? and say true.


G^nt. Troth he was always a kind honest youth, and would it lay in me to
pleasure him.


Goodw. In Troth or me, he should command my purse and credit both.


Fost. Where might we speak with him;


Clow. Hard by Sir, hard by, but stay Gentlemen, suppose there is no such
matter as finding of money, but what we mist in digging to supply his present
necessities he hopes to find from you, I promise you I partly doobt such a
matter.


Fost. How I forgot my self, I needs must home.


Goodw. Troth nor can I stay.


Gent. In sooth nor I. Ent. Philip meeting them.


Phil. Gentlemen whither so fast, I sent to speak with you.


Clow. I can assure you Sir, they are better to speak withal then to borrow
money of, one word or two with you my friends (by your leave Master) Gentlemen
I love you well, and that you may know I love you, I would ma^e bold to reveal
a secret to you, my young Master here, though you see him in these homely
Accoutraments, simple as you stand here, he has more to take to then I Will speak
of, he might, I marry might he, he might go brave and shine in pearl and gold;
he has now in his instan^ possession a thousand pound thick.


Fost. A thousand pounds?


Clow. Nay old lads, he has learnt his 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5. And never cost him
ten shillings.


Goodw. Five thousand pound?


Clow. You know where you hear it, Mum, here is your tale and your tales Man.


Gent. Good, good, proceed.


Clow. Now lift up your large ears and listen; to whom should he reveal all
this wealth, but to some friend? and how should he know a friend but by trying
of him; and how should he try a friend but by troubling of him? and how should
he trouble a friend but by borrowing money of him? now Gentlemen it may be at
first he will make his case poor and pitiful to you.


Fost. Only to try us.


Clow. Only to try you, have you no brains? do you think we have need of
money? has any of you occasion to use a hundred pound? need of money, as I said
before, so I say again, only to try you, be has done the like to four or five
that I know; now because they would not pity his supposed poverty, he would not
acquaint them with this infinite mass of wealth; you have wi^s, brains,
apprehension, if he makes his case known to you lay it on, if I said lay it on,
lay it on, you are not every body, if I had not seen some sparks in you, you
had not been the men, lay it on.


Fost. Enough, enough, I understand thee fully, kind Master Phi^ip will you use
my aid in my fair employment.


Goo^w. Sir or mine.


G^nt. Or mine.


Phil. Worthy friends, even one as all freely to speak, as you are Gentlemen,
and I from my childhood have protested love, as you are Christians; therefore
to the poor, such as I am, should be most charitable, help with your plenty to
releeve my wants, you know my labor, and have seen my need, then take some pity
of my poor estate, and help to ransom me from slavery, by lending me some
money.


Clow. Did I not tell you so? Lay it on.


Fost Sir you shall have a hundred pound of me.


Goodw. What need you use him and my self so near.


Gent. Trouble not them Sir, you shall hate of me:


Clow. Take It Master, take it all.


Phil. Oh Heavens! where slept this friendship all this while? who said that
charity was fled to heaven, and had no known abiding here on earth; see these
that know me disinherited, and to have no means to supply my wants, strive who
should most engage his purse and credit to one so much oppressed with poverty.


Clow. Alas sir, you see their kindness, I told you how strange he would make
it; Lay it on.


Fost. Pray Sir accept my kindness,


Gent. Goodw. Pray take mine.


Clow. Pray Master take their courtesies.


Phil. I Will use them all, and only borrow twenty pounds a pee^e to stock a poor
farm for my wife and me, some threescore pounds will do it.


Clow. Now, now, lay it on.


Gent. Take it all of me.


Goodw. Why all of you Sir, is not mine as ready?


Fost. When one can do it, what need you trouble three? but for the thousand
pound Sir, do not think but you may trust me with the whole employment of all
such moneys, and never trouble these.


Phil. What thousand pound?


Goodw. Though it be six thousand I durst be steward of so great a sum.


Clow. Why Master Fellow Phil?


P^il. Do you mock me Gentlemen, my wealth amounts not to a thousand straws.


Clow. I told you he would make it strange; lay it on.


Fost. Make not your wealth so dainty, for we know you have at least six
thousand pound in banck, you may impart it unto us your friends.


Phil. Who has deluded you, derided me, and make a mockery of my poor estate,
now I protest I have not in the world more riches then these garments on my
back.


Goodw, If possible, why here is my tale and my tales man.


Clow. No Sir you are deceived, here is your tale and you your self are your
tales man, for you carry it about you; the truth is Gentlemen that we have
betwixt us both no more crosses then you see.


P^il. Only the late hope of those sixty pounds promised by you ^urged and
uncompelled may raise my ruined fortunes.


G^nt. Will you disburst it all that were so forward?


Fost. I have no money, do it you for me.


Goodw. It is but one man's labor do it your self, if you have none I have less,
God be with you, one stays for me at home.


Gent. Nay take me with you Sir:


Phil. Why Gentlemen will you revault your words.


Fost. I have no money.


Phil. But now you strived which man should lend me most.


Fost. But then we reckoned Sir without our host,
Then we supposed you rich, but being grown poor,
I have made a foolish vow to lend no more. Exit.

Gent. I have made the like, you know your father threatens
To disinherit you, and should we lend,
You being poor, should of our purses spend. Exit.

Phil. Though I be poor, heaven may enable me.

Goodw. Heaven may do much^ that is all the beggars saying,
Let me hourd wealth, you seek for wealth by praying. Exit.

P^il. The time may come ere long, so I divine
T^ punish those that at their power repine. Exit.

Enter a Pursevant meeting the Clown. Pursev. Whither away so fast sirrah in
the Queens name, I command you stay,


Clow. What are you that look so big?


Pursev. A Pursevant.


Clow. If you be so pursey, can you lend's any money, I assure you it was the
last business we were about; or else tell me the reason why you stay my passage.


Purs^v. Sirrah I have a Proclamation to publish, and because my self am
somewhat hoarse, and thou have a large wide mouth, and a laudible voice I charge
thee for the better understanding of the multitude to speak after me word by
word.


Clow. If it be nothing else, do but advance me and I Will speak high enough, come
now, and teach me my new lesson.


P^rs^v Whereas two famous Rovers on the Sea.


Clow. Whereas two famous Rogues upon the Sea.


Purs^v Pus^r and Clinton:


Cl^w. That lost their purses at the Clink.


Purs. Long since proclaimed Pirates.


Clow: Long since proclaimed spirats.


Purs: Notwithstanding her Majesty's commission.


Clow: Notwithstanding her Majesty's condition.


Pur: Still keep out.


Clow: And will not come in.


Pur: And have of late spoiled a Ship of Exet^r.


Clow: And have of late spoiled all the sheep in the Exchequer.


Pur: And thrown the chief Merchant over board.


Clow. And thrown the Merchants cheeses overboard.


Purs: I therefore in her Majesty's name.


Clow: I therefore in the name of her Majesty.


Purs: Proclaim to him or them.


Clow: Proclaim to them or him.


Pur: That can bring in these Pirates Ships or Heads.


Clow: That can bring in these Pye^rusts or Sheeps-heads.


Pur: A thousand pound sterling.


Clow: A thousand Stares and Starlings.


Pur: If a banished man his country.


Clow: If a man he shall be banished his country.


Pur: If a condemned man liberty.


Clow: I a man at liberty condemned.


Pur: Besides her Majesty's especial favor.


Clow: Besides her Majesty's spectacles and favor.


Pur: And so God save the Queen.


Clow: And have you done now Sir?


Pur: I have, farewell.


Clow: Farewell Mr. Pursevant: he has so filled my head with proclamations.
Exit.


Act. 4.
Scen. 1.
A great Alarm and shot: enter Purser and Clinton, with store of Mariners,
bringing in the Merchant bound prisoner with others. Pur. NOw valiant mates you
have maintained this fight with courage and with woonted hardiment: the spoil
of this rich ship we will divide in equal shares, and not the meanest of any,
but by the custom of the sea may challenge according to his place, rights in
the spoil: though Outlaws, we keep laws amongst our selves, else we could have
no certain government.


Clint: A gallant prize, and bravely purchased too, with loss of blood on both
sides. A sea fight was never better managed nor exployted with more exchange of
hostile opposition, we did not look for such a valiant spirit in any Merchants
breast; nor did we think a ship of such small burden, so weakly manned, would
have endured so hot and proud a fight.


M^r: Nor did I think the providence of heaven would so have favored men of
base condition, such as profess wrong, pyracie and theft, have spoiled my men,
and ransackt every corner of my surprised bark; seized all my substance, and
shared amongst you my best merchandise; and not alone undone me, and in me all
that are mine, but in overwhelming us shook the estate of all my creditors.


Pur: What Is that to us? men of our known condition must cast behind our hacks
all such respects, we left our consciences upon the land when we began to rob
upon the sea.


Clin: We know we are Pirates, and profess to rob, and would not have us
freely use our trade? If thou and thine be quite undone by us, we made by thee,
impute it to thy fortune, and not to any injury in us;

For he that is born to be a beggar know
How ever he toyls and trafficks must dye so.

Mer: If you must needs possess this thriving trade, yet since the seas afford
such choice of store, you might methinks have spared your own countrymen.


Pur: Nay since our country have proclaimed us pirates, and cut us off from any
claim in England, we will be no longer now called English men.


Mer: Clinton I know thee, and have used thy skill, ere now in a good vessel of
my own, before thou tookest this desperate course of life, perhaps if now thou
do me a good office, time may enable me to quit thy love.


Clin: Troth I could wish we had light of any other, but since thy fate has
cast thee upon us, we must neglect no opportunity; for they that intermit
advantages, must know occasions head is bald behind. My merry mates come top
your cans apace, pile up your chests with prizes to the lids, and stuff the
vast hold of our empty ship with such rich wares as this our prize affords;
supple your biskets with such choice of wines

As freely come brought by the auspicious winds
To unlade themselves and seek for stowage here;
Since wine comes freely lets make spare of beer.

Pur. Let cans of wine pass round in healths through all, such golden prizes
come not every day, nor can we always meet such choice of spoils: First bind
the Merchant, lay him fast in hold, and having seized all his best Merchandise,
pierce with your ordnance through his ships crased keele, and sink her down
into the deep abyss, whence not all the Cranes in Europe or the world can weigh
her out again.


Clin. Let it be so, Lest she prove prize unto a second foe.


M^r. Be It as my fate shall please, my loss I value but as goods lent me, now
to be paid back, but that which most afflicts my sorrowful soul, is that my
friends have ventured largely with me, especially my Sister, who I fear will
brook that ill which I with patience bear.


Pur. P^ace him below the hatches as our prisoner, and now to part our purchase
bravely won, even with the hazard of our dearest lives.


Cli^. The danger past still makes the purchase swee^. Come first drink round my
merry mates, that done, devide in peace what we by war have (...) (...)


Enter young Mr. Forest, like a Captain of a ship, with Sailors and Mariners,
ente^ing with a flourish. young For: Gentlemen, and my merry mates at sea,
those special savours you have crowned me with, can never be deserved upon my
part, so weak is my ability and knowledge in navigation and exploits at sea;
yet since your loves so far exceeds my worth, that of an unexperienc^d
Gentleman you have prefered me above many other, to be your Captain, and
command your Ship, I hope to bear my self so even and upright in this my
charge, that it shall not repent you of the least honor to my grace decreed.


1. Mar. Our Captain being lately slain in fight, we by your valor escaped our
enemies, and made their ship our prize, since we first knew you all our
attempts succeeded prosperously, and heaven has better blessed us for your sake.


2. Mar. When first we took you to our fellowship, we had a poor bark of some
fifteen tun, and that was all our riches, but since then we have took many a
rich prize from Spain, and got a gallant vessel stoutly manned, and well
provided of Ordnance and small shot, men and ammunition, that we now dare coap
with any Carract that does trade for Spain.


young For. We dare do any thing that stands with justice, our countries
honor, and the reputation of our own names; but amongst all our spoils I
wonder we have escaped the valiant Pirates that are so much renowned upon the
sea, that were a conquest worth the hazarding, besides a thousand pounds reward
proposed to that adventurer that can bring them in, my peace and pardon though
a man condemned, is by the proclamation ratified.


1. Mar. The ocean scarce can bear their outrages, they are so violent,
confounding all, and sparing none, not their own countrymen, we could not do
our country greater service then in their pursuit to en^age our lives.


young For. I could we meet those Rovers on the sea, so famous for their
piracies and thefts, so feared of all that trade for Merchandise, so proud of
their strong vessels and stout ging, that man her with their proud Artillery
that thunders wrack to every ship alike; oh with what ardour and enflamed
desire would we in the mid sea encounter them! Climb to the main-top, boy, see
what you kenne there.


Boy. I shall, I shall Sir.


young For. We seek for purchase, but we take it from foes, and such is held
amongst us lawful spoy^; but such as are our friends and countrymen we succor
with the best supply we have of victuals or munition being distressed.


Above, Boy. Ho there.


1. Mar. Ha boy.


Boy. A sail.


1. Mar. Whence is she?


Boy. That I cannot kenne; she appears to me out of our hemisphear no bigger
then a Crow.


young For: Discry her better, oh that it were the desperate Pirates Ship, on
that condition we might grapple straight, and try our desperate fortunes on
even change, but I that have been born to misery can never be so happy; oh my
fate when shall I pass away this tedious night,

Or when my stars will you burn out more bright.

Boy. Boatswain, ho.


1. Mar. Whence comes thy kenne?


Boy. She makes from South to West.


2. Mar. How bears she?


Boy. To the Lee ward.


young For. Clap on more sails and quickly fetch her up. What colors bears her
main-top?


Boy. She Is not so near in kenne.


young For. Discover her more amply, now my mates prepare your selves, for it
may be some prize; you Master Gunner load your ordnance well, and look well to
your cartridges and fire; see that your gunner room be clear and free, your
matches bear good coals, your priming powder pounded, not dank; next charge
your Murderers for fear of boarding: Stearsman part the Helm, and bear up
toward them, be they friends or foes we will hale them if heaven please; and
Master you heed well your compass, Boatswain with your whistle command the
Saylors to the upper deck to know their quarters, and to hear their charge.


Boy. Captain, ho.


young For. The news? whence is her flag?


Boy. She bears the Cross of England and St. George.


young For: Then she is a friend for England, and St. George our gallant vessel
in her main-top bears, and all our preparations needless then.


Boy. Arm rather, for I see them from a far make all provision for a present
fight, they have managed their hatches, hung their pendants out, displayed
their Ensigns, up with all their feights, their matches in their cocks, their
smoking Linstocks are likewise fired within their Gunners hands; and hark they
shoot already. A piece goes off.


young For: Come descend; the Pirat, Fortune thou art then my friend. Now
valiant friends and soldiers man the deck, draw up your feights, and lace your
drablers on, whilst my self make good the Forecastle, and ply my Musket in the
front of death, quarter your selves in order, some abaft, some in the Ships
waste, all in martial order; our Spright-sayl^ Top sail, and Top-gallant, our
Main-sail, Boar-spright, and our Mizen too are hu^g with waving pendants, and
the colors of England and St. Geo^g ply in the Stern. We fight against the foe
we all desire,

Alarm Trumpets, Gunner straight give fire. Exeunt.

Alarm. Purser and Clinton with their Mariners, all furnis^t with Sea devices
fitting for a fight. Clin. Give them a full broadside; oh Mr. Gunner your
upper tire of Ordnance shot over; you gave not one shot betwixt wind and water
in all this skirmish.


Gun. Sir, you speak not well, I pierced them with my chase piece through and
through; part of their Capstring too I with a Piece abaft shot overboard.


Pur. Oh 'twas a gallant shot, I saw it shatter some of their limbs in pieces:
Shall we grapple, and lay their Ship aboard? where be these Irons to hook 'em
fast?


Clin. I fear they are too well manned; for see the Gunner ready to give fire unto
their Murderers if we stay to board 'em: Shall we set sail and leave 'em.


Pur. How can we when our Ship has sprung a leak? being ready now to founder in
the sea; some ply the Pump: oh for one lucky bullet to take their Mainmast off;
he that can make it shall have a treble share in this next prize.


Gun. I shall go near it from my lower tire.


Clin. Gunner do that, it is all that we desire. Exeunt.


Alarm: Enter young Forest and his Mari^ers. 1. Mar. Where is the Gunner
Captain?


young For. Where he should not be, at his prayers I think: Is this a time to
pray, when the Seas mouth seems to spit fire, and all the billows burn. Come
hand with me, and we will board the Pirates instantly.


1. Mar. Hoyst up more sails, and fetch 'em roundly up, and with their gallant
vessel grapple straight.


young For. I spy the Pirates in the very prow and forehead of their Ship, both
wafting us with their bright swords: now Steersman take thy turn; and Boatswain
with your baser trumpets sound mingle your whistles shril, oh it is a Music the
Maremaids love.


1. Mar. Who hates it that's a soldier?


2. Mar. Thy Linstock Gunner, take thy level right,
The wind is ours to help us in the fight.

young For. It blows a stiff gale, it makes all for us, every Commander once
more to his charge, he that this day shall dye dies honorably; the Canon^
Basilisks, and Ordnance shall tooll his funeral peale, and some now sound,
shall dye three deaths in one, shot, burnt, and drowned.

Come spare no powder till you see our Ship,
Whose hard tough ribs hewed from the heart of oak,
Now black with pitch be painted blew with smoke. Exeu^t.

A great Alarm, and Flourish. Enter young Forest and his Mates with Purser
and Clinton with their Mariners pris^ners. young For. First thanks to heaven
for this great victory bought with the fearful hazard of our lives, and larg
expense of blood on either part.


Pur. We now are captives that made others thrall,
Thus ebbs may flow, and highest tides may fall.

Clin. The latest day must come to have his date;
Stars govern all, and none can change his fate.

young For. Such prisoners as these Pirates keep in hold, release them straight,
the riches of their ship we amongst you will divide in equal shares, to every
man's desert, estate, and place.


Pur. Fortune I spit defiance in thy face: Thy best we have tasted, an thy
worst we know, we can but pay what we to nature owe.


Enter the M^rchant broug^t in with other Prisoners. Mer. Surprised again, whose
prisoner am I now? I am Fortunes ball, whither am I bandied, having lost al
before, is it possible that I can now be made a second prize? I lost my wealth
in my first hostile strife,

And nothing now is left me save my life.

young For. These prisoners we will at our further leisure peruse and know
their fortunes and estates.


Mer. That captain I should know^ that face of his is with mine eye familiar,
sure it is he whose life I by my Sisters means preserved, with money and apparel
furnished him, and got him place at sea and has he now forgot me, what not know
me, the world right, when rich we honor, be^ing poor we spite: never look so
strange, I do not mean to claim acquaintance of such men as are ingrate: All my
good deeds once done I throw behind, whose meed in heaven, not earth I look to
find.


young For. That Merchant I have known, and now I better surveigh him, it is the
man to whom I owe all that I have, my fortunes, nay my life; what reason have
you Sir to fly me so, since unto you, and to my brothers wife, my hopes, my
power, my whole estate is due,

From whom my means and all my fortunes grew.

Me^. Do you know me then.

young For. Thin^ you I can forget, or slightly cancel such a countless debt,
behold my ship, my conquest, and my prize, these prisoners with my full command
is yours;

Yours, only yours, they at your service rest,
Alas dear friend how came you thus distressed?

Mer: These Pirates robbed me, and have ceised my goods with which they have
stuffed their hold; my brothers venture with mine own substance th^^ have made
their spoil.


young For. All which behold I re-deliver you, and to the utmost farthing will
restore; besides I make you partner in our prize, and herein am I only
fortunate to prove a grateful debtor.


Mer. Your gratitude exceeds all courtesy, both of my Sisters party and my own.


young For. It comes much short of either; oh dear Sir should I forget your
friendship showed in want, and done in my extremest poverty, it were a sin, of
heaven unpardonable; this Pirates Ship load with your merchandise you shall
straight man for England; where arrived, commend me to the mirror of her sex,
your Sister, in the humblest phrase you can, to whom deliver, as from me, this
jewel, the best our voyage yields; tell her from me, that Gentleman whose
innocent life she saved, has by that token her remembrance craved, to my
brother, and my Sister this small sum to buy their service from their fathers
hand, and free them from his slavish servitude.


Mer. I shall do all your will, and thus o'rsway'd,
Needs must report your debts are doubly paid.

young For. Having my pardon purchased, and my prisoners delivered to the
sentence of the Law, my next affairs shall be to visit her.

Purs. Our case is otherwise, our next affairs
Is to betake us to our Beads and Prayers.

Clin. Be as be may, base fortune I defy,
We bravely lived and I Will as boldly dye.

young For. Hoyst sail for England with our long wished prize,
Whilst we applaud that fortune he defies. Exe.

Enter old Mr. Harding, Anne his wife, Foster and Goodwin, William and John,
Philip and Susans setting forth a Table. old Hard. You Are welcome Gentlemen, come
take your places as your degrees are: wife the chair is yours; my loving boys
sit, let the servants wait.


Ioh. Brother, that is you.


old Hard. This day I do entreat you Gentlemen after the Tables ended, to be
witness unto some deeds that must inherit these, and him that is my eldest
quite disable, to which I must entreat your friendly hands.


Fost. Mine still is at your service.


Goo^w. So is mine Sir.


Will. O day long looked for.


Ioh. Now shall we live like two young Emperors; oh day worthy to be writ in
the Almanac in red Letters for a most famous holyday.


Phil. Well jest on Gentlemen, when all is tried,
I hope my patience shall exceed your pride.

Will. Wait at my elbow with a clean trencher Phil: do your duty, and have
your due, you know your place, be ready with a glass of beer, and when I say
fill, fill.


Enter the Clown. Clow. If please your worship here is a manner, or a kind of
some foul desire to have some conference with you.


old Hard. A sea foul?


Clow. Yes a Sea-gul, I mean a Mariner, he says he has some news to tell you
from my Mistress her brother at sea.


Old Hard. Touching my venture, prithee guide him in.


Clow. He smells as they say of pitch and tar, if you will have him to perfume
the room with his sea musk. I Will show him the way iustantly.


old Hard. I prithee do, and that with expedition.


Anne. I did not look thus soon to hear from him.


old Hard I fear some strange mishap has late befaln him.


Enter Saylor and the Clown. Anne. Now honest friend the news, how fares my
brother?


old Hard. How does my venture prosper?


Sail. Sir, your Ship is taken, all your goods by Pirates seized, your brother
prisoner, and of all your venture there is not the value of one penny saved.


old Hard. That news has pierced my soul, and entered me quite through my
heart, I am on the sudden sick, sick of I fear a mortal malady; oh, oh.


Ioh. How is it with my father?


old Hard. Worse and worse, the news of such a great and weighty loss kills all
my vitals in me.


Will. Father, for heavens sake father dye not yet before you have made over
your land.


Ioh. That were a jest indeed, why ^ather, father?


old Har. Trouble me not, if I survive this nig^, you two shall be my heirs.


Will. This night if it be thy will.


Anne. Alas, how fare you Sir?


Ioh. Take courage father.


old Harr. Son lead me hence, and bear me to my bed, my strength does fail, I
cannot help my self.


Will. Run, run for the writings, they are ready drawn at the Scriveners, bid
him bring them quickly with a vengeance.


old Hard. Let them alone, my hand has not the strength to guide my pen, let
them alone I say, support me to my bed, and my kind neighbors,

Assist me with your prayers, for I divine
My soul this night shall amongst Angels shine.

Ioh. Marry heaven forbid, can he find no time to die but now? come let us in,
and haunt his ghost about the writings. Exe. man. Good. and Fost.


Fost. It Is strange the bare report of such a loss should strike a man so
deeply to the heart.


Goodw. I often have read the like, how some have dyed with sudden joy, some with
exceeding grief.


F^st. If he should dye Intestate, all the land falls to the elder brother, and
the younger have nothing save mere from his courtesy.


Goodw. I know it, neither lands nor movables. Come lets hear what further
news within. Enter the Clown.


Clow. O my Master, my Master, what shall I do for my poor Master, the kind
churl is departed, never did poor hard-hearted wretch part out of the world so
like a lamb; alas for my poor usuring, extortioning Master, many an old widow
have thou turned into the street, and many an orphan made beg their bread; oh
my sweet, crul, kind, pittiless, loving, hard hearted Master, he is dead, he is
dead, he is gone, he is fled and now full low must lie his head. Oh my sweet,
vild, kind flinty, mild, uncharitable master.


Fost. Dead on the sudden! it is exceeding strange, yet for the eldest son it
happens well.


Goodw. Ill for the younger brother. Enter Jack and Will.


Will. Jack.


Iac. Will.


Will. The land's gone.


Iac. Fathers dead.


Will. We have made a fair hand on it, have we not? who shall fill the glass now,
and wait upon our trenchers?


Iac. Nay who must go to plough, and make clean the hen-roust, rub horse-heels,
lead the wains, remove the billets, cleanse the shoules, and and indeed who must
do all the drudgery about the house?


Will. Could he find no time to dye but now? I could even cry for anger: here
they come. Enter Phil. and Sus. well habited. Anne and others.


Phil. My fathers dead.


Ann. Alas for my dear husband.


Phil. Comfort your self, although he die intestate it shall not hurt you; we
have found you kind, and shall be now as willing to requite you, as able: How
now brothers, do you weep? and bear a part with us in heaviness? no, no, your
griefs and ours is contrary; I grieve I have lost a father, she a husband, this
does not move you; you lamenting stand, not for a fathers loss, but loss of
land: do you remember with what rude despite, what base contempt, and slavish
contumely you have despised me and my dear loved wife.


Iac We partly remember it.


Phil. So do not I; I have forgot it quite, in sign whereof, though had you got
my lands, heaven knows how ill you would have dealt with me, thus I Will use you
receive your patrimony.


Clow. No more fellow Phil now, but here receive your proportions.


Phil. Your diet if you please is at my table, or where you please if you
refuse my kindness.


Will. Kindness unlookt for, thanks gentle brother. Jack, why this gold will
never be spent.


Clow. Oh it is an easy thing to bring this mountain to a molehil.


Iac. This is more of your courtesy then our deserving, to trouble your table
being so many Ordinaries in town, were somewhat superfluous.


Phil. Spend but in compass, rioting eschew, waste not, but seek to increase
your patrimony, beware of dice and women; company with men of best desert and
quality; lay but these words in your hearts inrold, you will find them better
then these bags of gold.


Will. Thanks for your coin and counsel: Come Jack this shall be lavisht among
the suburbs; here^s drink money, dice money, and drab money, here is money by the
back, and money by the belly; here is that shall make us merry in Claret.
Muskadine, and Sherrey: farewell, brother.


Iac. My most bounteous brother.


Clow. Farewell young Masters.


Phil. And now my vilde friends, such as fawn on plenty, and cannot bear the
very name of want.


Clow. We have found the Mine now.


Phil. You that disabled once the power of heaven, and scorned my state unable
to be raised.


Clow. You see here is your Tale, and your Talesman.


Phil. Take heed lest here for your unthankfulness, that once raised, do not
remove your estates (God be with you) henceforth howe'r you speed, trust not in
riches, and despise not need.


Clow. One threescore pound will do it.


Phil. Mother, the thirds of all my Fathers lands are yours; with whatsoever
you like else; and now sweet Sue it glads me I shall make thee partner of all
this plenty that borest part with me in all extreme necessities.


Sus. You are all my wealth, nor can I taste of want whilst I keep you; O would
these fortunes raise my down cast Father, or repeal my Brother, my banished
brother to his native home, I were in all my thoughts at peace with heaven.


Phil. All that I have is theirs; my only sorrow, next to my father, is in part
for them, and next for your dear brother taken at Sea, whose loss if he survive
we will repair even with the best of our ability; but come unto our fathers
burial first, whom though his life brought sorrow, death content, we cannot but
with funeral tears lament.


Clow. And now no fellows unless it be at footbal. Enter Merchant.


Anne. Heaven being just could not deal longer roughly with one so virtuous and
completely honest, he merits all he has, but to my state. I am at once doubly
unfortunate, I have lost a husband and a brother ^oo.


Mr. A husband, Sister, but no brother, lo that brother lives.


Anne. And can it heaven be so?


Mr. You are the cause I live.


Anne. I brother? how? tidings were brought into this place but now your ship
was spoiled, you prisoner.


Mer. And 'twas true, yet all these losses I regained by you.


Anne. By me?


Mer: By you and Sister thus it was; you saved the life of a young Gentleman^
whom for your sake I furnished out to sea, he when my ship was taken, I
surprised, and bound, and cast in hold, restored my fortunes, and besides all
my merchandise restored, wherein you bare chief venture, made me sharer of the
rich Pirates prize.


Anne. That Gentleman!


Mer. The self same in whose life you did save your self some thousand pounds,
I have as further token of his gratitude, in this choice jewel he commends to
you millions of gratulations and kind thanks, besides unto his Sister store of
gold to redeem her wretched husband and her self from my deceased brothers
slavery, which now I see pale death has done for them.


Anne. You speak of unexspected novelties, with which we will acquaint their
sorrowful souls; these tokens will be joyful to them both, and tidings of his
safety welcomer then that great sum by him regained at ^ea.


Mer. We do them wrong to keep news of such joy
So long from them, which we will no longer smother,
Two thousand pounds I bring you and a brother. Exeunt.

Act. 5.
Scen. 1.
Enter the Sheriffs, the silver O^^re, Purser and Clinton going to Execution.
Pur. NOW how is it with thee Clinton?


Clin. Well, well.


Pur. But vvas't not better when we reigned as Lords, nay Kings at Sea, the
Ocean was our realm, and the light billows in the which we sailed our
hundreds, nay our shires, and provinces, that brought us annual profit, those
were days.


Clin. Yes golden days, but now our last night's come, and we must sleep in
darkness.


Pur. Worthy mate we have a flash left of some half hour long, that let us burn
out bravely, not behind us leave a black noysom snuf of cowardice in the nostrils
of our noble countrymen; lets dye no base example.


Clin. Thinks Tom wanton, whom storms could never move, tempests daunt, rocks
terrify nor swallowing gulphs affright, to whom the base abyss in roughest
rage showed like a pleasant Garden in a calm, and the Sea Monsters but like
beasts at land of profit or pleasure Clinton can be affrighted with a halter?
hemp him strangle that thinks of him so basely.


Pur. In that word thou have put a second sentence of our lives; yet Clinton
never was it my thoughts of thee: oh the naval triumphs thou and I have seen,
nay our selves made, when on the seas at once have been as many bonefires as in
Towns, kindled upon a night of Jubilee, as many Ordnance thundering in the
Clouds as a^ Kings Coronations, and dead bodies heaved from the hatches, and
cast overboard, as fast and thick as in some common Pest when the Plague
sweeps Cities.


Clin. That it had swept us then too, so the seas had been to us a glorious
monument, where now the fates have cast us on the shelf to hang 'twixt air and
water.


Sher. Gentlemen, your limited hour draws nigh.


Pur. I that is the plague we spoke of, yet no greater then some before have
tasted, and hereafter many be bound to suffer (and if Purser, as dying men
seldom deem amiss) presage not wrong, how many gallant spirits, equal with us
in fame, shall this gulf swallow, and make this silver oar to blush in blood?
how many Captains that have awed the seas shall fall on this unfortunate piece
of land? some that commanded Islands, some to whom the Indian Mines paid
Tribute, Turk vayl'd: but when we that have quaked, nay troubled floods, and
made Armadoes fly before our stream, shall founder thus, be split and lost,

Then be it no impeachment to their fame,
Since Purser and bold Clinton bide the same.

Clin. What is our Ship well tackled? we may lanch upon this desperate voyage.


Hang. Corded bravely.


Pur. Call up the Boatswain, soundly lash the slave with a ropes end; have him
unto the Chest, or duck him at the Mainyard.


Hang. Have me to the chest, I must first have you to the Gallows, and for
Ducking, I Am afraid I shall see you duckt and drakt too.


Pur. Oh you brave Navigators that have seen, or ever had your selves command
aboard, that knew our Empire there, and our fall now, pity at least us that
are made the scorn of a base common Hangman.


Shr. Thou do ill to offend them in their deaths.


Hang. I have, and long to make an end of them.


Pur. Had thou but two months since wrinkled a brow, looked but askew, much
less unloos'd thy lips to speak, speak said I? nay but lodged a thought, or
murmur of the least affront to us, thee, basest of all worms meat, I had made
unwholsom food for Hadocks: but I have done.


Clin. Enough Tom Watton, with these sheets not sails, a stiff gale blows to
split us on yo^ rock.


Pur. And set sail from the fatal Marshal seas, and Wapping is our harbor, a
quick sand that shall swallow many a brave Marine soldier, of whose valor,
experience, skill, and Naval discipline, being lost, I wish this land may never
have need: but what s^ar must we sail by? or what compass?


Hang. I know not the star, but here is your compass.


Pur. Yes that way points the Needle, that way we steer a sad course, plague of
the Pilot; hear you Mr. Sherif, you see we wear good clothes, they are paid
for, and our own, then give us leave our own amongst our friends to distrib^te:
There Is, Sir, for you.


Clin. And you.


Pur. The work man made them took never measure on a Hangmans back; wear them
for our sakes, and remember us; there is some content for him too.


Hang. Thank your worships.


Clin. I would your knaveship had our worships place, if hanging now be held so
worshipful.


Pur. But now our Sun is all setting, night comes on, the watery wilderness ore
which we reigned, proves in our ruins peaceful, Mr. Chantes trade fearless
abroad as in the rivers mouth, and free as in a harbor, then fair Thames, Queen
of fresh water, famous through the world, and not the least through us, whose
double tides must o'rflow our bodies, and being dead, may thy clear waves our
scandals wash away, but keep our valors living; now lead on Clinton, thus arm
in arm lets march to death, and wheresoe'r our names are memoriz'd,

The world report two valiant Pirates fell,
Shot betwixt wind and water; so farewell. Ex^unt as they entered.

Enter old Forest and young Forest. old For. A fathers blessing, more then
all thy honors crown thee, and make thy fortunes growing still: Oh heavens I
shall be too importunate to ask more earthly favors at your hands; now that
you after all these miseries have still reserved my son safe and unscorn'd.
Besides thy pardon and thy countries freedom, what favors has her Grace
conferred on thee?


young For. More then my pardon and the meed proposed, to grace the re^t, she
styled me with the order of Knighthood, and for the service of my country, with
promise of employments of more weight: the Pirates were committed to the
Marshalseas, condemned already, and this day to dye: and now as part of my
neglected duty, it rests I visit that fair Gentlewoman to whom I stand
indebted for my life; that necessary duty once performed, out of my present
fortunes to distribute some present comfort to my Sisters wants.


old For. A grateful friend thou art, a kind dear brother, and a most loving
son.


Enter Philip, Susan, Merchant, Anne. Phil. Sir, more then all these fortunes
now befaln me, a fate 'midst all disaster unexpected, my noble brothers late
success at sea has filled me with a surplusage of joy, nor am I least of all
endeared to you, to be the first reporter.


Mer. It Is most true, and I the man that in the most distress had first share
of his bounty.


Anne. Of his goodness we have had sufficient taste already, but to be made more
happy in his sight would plenally rejoice us.


Sus. It would prove like surfeit after sweet meats.


young For. See all my friends, but rst let me salute her to whom I am most
bouud.


Sus. My most dear father.


old For. My blessings meeting with a husbands love make thy years long and
happy.


Anne You are most grateful, and much beyond my merit.


S^s. O sp^re me, Sir, to ^y into his arms that has so long fled from me.


yo^^g For. My s^eet S^ster.


Phil. Bar me not all the best frui^ion of what in part you have tasted: Sir, I
am one amongst the rest that love you.


young For. I take'^ my Sisters husband, unto me therefore one most intir'd.


Mer Sir the ^am^, and I though last in my acknowledgement, yet first in due
arrear^ge.


young For. You I know to be a worthy Merchant and my friend, to whose, next to
your sisters ^urtesie I stand engaged most for a forfeit life: But he next to
the powers divine above, I ever must adore; and now fai^ ^reature I dare more
boldly look upon the face of your good man then when I saw you last.


Mer. And that is some question.


yo^ng For. Wherefore has that word struck you with sudden sadness.


Ann^. My husband!


Phil. He Is late dead, and yet has left her none of the poorest widows.


young For. Dead did you say, and I a Bachelor, now on whom better or just^ier
can I confer my self, then to be hers by whom I have my being, and live to her
that freely gave me life? there is a providence that prompts t^o't, and I will
give it motion: Gentle Lady, by you I am, and what I am by you, be then to me
as I have styled you last, a Lady^ heavens have made you my preserver, to
preserve me for your self, loosing a husband, who knows but you have saved me
to that end, that lost name to recover; and by me sweet enterchange and double
gratitude: I left you sped, but find you now d^spoyl'd: Married you venter'd
for my single life; Widdow'd, by me to gain the name of wife.


Mer. What, pause you at the motion? you are not my Sister if you deny him.


Phil. Let me plead for him.


Sus. O doubly link me to you, be you styled my Brother and my Father.


old For. With you let my age join, and make me proud to say, that in my last
of days, barren of issue, I have got so fair a daughter.


young For. Sweet, your answer.


Anne. Sir, I should much mistake my own fair ends,
Should I alone withstand so many friends.
I am yours, and only so.

young For. I yours the same, and Lady now I kiss you by that name. Enter
Clown.


Clown. What kissing already! then I smell another wedding toward, and in no
fitter time then now: prepare your selves Gentlemen and Gentlewomen; make a
hall; for I come to present you with a Mask.


Phil. What Mask?


Clow. Not such as Ladies wear upon their faces, to keep the foul from the
fair, but a plain Mask, or rather more properly I may call it a Muming, because
the presenters have scarce a word to speak for themselves.


Phil. If there be any that appear as friends, and come to grace our feast in
courtesy, admit 'em prithee.


Clow. That shall I Sir, and with all expedition,
And that without drum, without fife, or musician.
These two lines shall serve for the Prologue: now enter scena prima, Dramatis
personae; these be the Actors, yet let me entreat you not to condemn them
before you hear them speak.


Phil. Amazement startles me: are these my brothers?


Clow. By the Fathers side it should seem; for you know he was a hard man, and
it should seem it is but a hard world with them.


Phil. And these my false friends that distrusted heaven, and put their faith
in riches; I pray Gentlemen how comes this change?


Ioh. How comes this change say you? no chang of pastors, which they say makes
fat calves, but change of drink, change of women, change of ordinaries, change
of gaming, and one wench in the change^ all these helped to make this change in
us.


Will. And change is no robbery, I have been robbed, but not at ruff, yet they
that have robbed you see what a poor stock they have left me: A whore stole
away my Maidenhead, ill company my good conditions, a broaker robbed me of my
apparel, drink of my wits, and dice of my money.


Phil. This is no more then expectation: but how come you thus altered?


Clow. If you had said hal^^red, Sir, you had gone more roundly to the business.


Fost. Sir, there was coining laid to my charge, for which (though I acquit my
self) I made my estate over unto a friend (for so I thought him) but now he has
cosened me, and turned me out of all.


Goodw. In dead of night my counting house was broak open by thieves, and all my
coin (which was my whole estate, and god I then did trust in) stole away, I
left a forlorn beggar.


Phil. O wondrous, why this passes.


Clow. It may pass amongst the rest for a scurvey jest, but never like Mother
Passes Ale, for that was knighted.


Mer. Ale knighted! how I prithee?


Clow: You have heard of Ale Knights, therefore it is not improbable that Ale
may be knighted.


Mer. Thy reason?


Clow. Why there is Ale in the town that passes from man to man, from lip to
lip, and from nose to nose, but mother Passes double Ale I assure you,
Sir-passes, therefore knighted.


Phil. Leave trifling, for more serious is the object offered before our eyes:
In these heavens justice, in these a most remarkable president to teach within
our height to know our selves; of which I make this use; you are my brothers (a
name you once disdained to call me by) your wants shall be relieved: you that
distrusted heavens providence, and made a mock of want and others misery, no
more deride; part of your loss shall be by me supplied according to my power.


young For. My noble brother, you teach us virtue, of which I could wish all
those that see good days make happy use, so those distressed; for both there is
president, but to our present nuptials; reverent Father dear Lady, Sister,
Friend, nay brothers too, but you Sir, most conjoined and endeared.

In us the world may see our fates well scanned,
F^rtune in me by Sea, in you by Land. Exeunt omnes.

FINIS.

