A REVIEW OF Mr HORN'S CATECHISM: And Some few of his Questions and Answers
noted by J. H. of MASSINGHAM p. Norf.

Non desunt interpolatores veritatis;
Ne desint quoque redintegratores.
Polit. CAMBRIDGE, Printed by JOHN FIELD, Printer to the Universitie. 1660.

A Review of Mr HORN'S Catechism: and some few of his Questions and Answers
noted, by J. H. of Massingham, p. Norf.
WHile I trouble not my Reader with other Preface, I must not omit to give him
notice of thus much at the first; that M Horn's Catechism, called Brief
Instructions for children, was brought me by a friend, with this small request
that I would peruse it; which though I might perhaps have seen before; yet as
then, had I not read so much as one entire page of it, howsoever it had been
extant for above the space of five years. But for the next request he made,
that I would let him know what I thought of it, especially some of the Answers
in it; it was not enough to tell him that he knew, the better of the two, how
to judge of it: and for his further desire, that I would write something in
brief, touching what I thought therein to be unsound; it might not suffice to
say, That to be Censor librorum, or but libelli, was too high and hard a task
for me, though it were but in a private way: so that the motion with some
earnestness redoubled, took place with him that is of this mind, that whosoever
with importunity sets another on work, stands reasonably charged, in some sort,
with the faults and failings.

In the mean time, and in such a licentious season, wherein every opinion dares
boldly bring a voucher ready; though we can do little else, we cannot but
complain, that whatsoever liberty be given to other Discourses, some of them
too wild and scathfull; books of Christian Institution, which lay down the
first Principles, should be no more heeded and looked after, but pass abroad
without all censure and inspection: That Catechismes which are the public
cisterns or receptacles, made and framed the better to hold the water derived
from the spring of Gods holy word, for benefit of the young and ignorant,
should be no better preserved and guarded, to the intent that nothing noxious
or unwholesome be injected. The law of God severely forbade his people, to
remove the landmarks that their forefathers had set down and fastened: and the
Romans from Numa thus, Qui terminum exarassit, ipsus and boves sacri sunto:
there may be cause given oftentimes to posterity, entangled in endless
contentions, to curse the memory of those who pluck up that which they never
set. Articles of Religion, and confessions of Faith, and forms of Catechism,
are the sacred terms and bounds of particular churches, fixed as the surest
conservatours of peace, as well as of the truth.

But as the laws, are not made for the righteous, whose obedience moves from a
stronger spring; but for the unrighteous, loose and irregular: so these limits
now spoken of, are chiefly for the ignorant and unstable; for the untaught,
that are in danger to be ill taught; for such as make the multitude one of
their marks, whereby to find out the truth of Christianity; for other
Christians, who are faithful in the land, and are firmly built upon that truth
which they have learned of men, but not of men only; they make good the want
of outward order, and supply the defect of humane Authority, by their greater
care and diligence; that they may not be found as chaff when the floor is
purged with the fan of heresy and schism; that they may save themselves, and
others, so far as they may, from an untoward and backsliding generation: as
David's zeal was the more kindled, because of others wickedness: They have made
void thy law, says he, Therefore I love thy commandments.

No marvel is it, of such persons as this author is, who dread and deprecate
all national establishment of Religion, as sanguinary persecution; but matter
of wonder is it as well as grief, that any of those that worthily lament the
breaking down of the hedge, should be among the first of them, that lay to
their hands to spoil the vines: and being aggrieved at the removal of that
government, which is indeed the best simply, and as I think the best always,
should be with the forwardest, to take advantage of no government at all,
whereby to spread and propagate opinions most contrariant and destructive to
the doctrine of our Church, when it was rightly constituted. But while I speak
of limit and good order, it is fit to keep my self to what I am about.

In the title of these Brief instructions, that clause [ as may best serve the
capacity of children] might well have been omitted, unless he had meant to
leave out that which follows in the title, concerning the great mysteries,
there specified; and that which follows, and bears a great proportion in the
book, concerning the Quinquarticular controversies: For think you these to be
fit matter of instruction for children? If this be milk, I wonder what he
counts strong meat. Heretofore it has been said, that these things should be
argued in schools, among the learned, and not be made the subject of our
Homilies ad populum, or treated of in vulgar auditories, to fall upon these
points there, was a matter of presentment, and an iniquity to be punished, and
have they already found so large a room in brief Instructions for children?

Solomon gives this warning in the 17 of the Proverbs, Qui attollit ostium,
quaerit ruinam; He that exalts his gate seeks destruction: whether it be a
moral caution against vain pretenses, and high presumptions; or oeconomical,
advising men to beware of over-chargeable and too costly structures, lest they
be unable to go on, and finish; and for want of foresight, come at last to
build themselves quite out of doors. [ The great mysteries of redemption,
faith, works, law, gospel, of predestination, election, reprobation opened]
appears at first approach, too high a gate, too losty a frontispiece for a
childrens Catechism: but I cannot believe that ever he thought these points so
needful to be learned at first beginning: that was not the chief intent. The
young ones must betimes be prepossessed with a vile opinion of the present
pretended Orthodox: and this is the scope of many of the Answers they are to
learn: Hannibals father brought him along to the Altar, and made him lay hold
on it with his hands, and there he swore him against the Romans, when he was
but nine years old. And the children must be brought early to know their foes,
and what they are against whom they must bend their forces, and empty their
quivers: not against the Papists, nor the Anabaptists, nor the Socinians: no
danger being feared now, it seems, from any of these: but the pretended
orthodox that walk by vote, and Elders tradition. Against these they must be
taught to believe, that they are of a Satanical persuasion. Answ. 199. and that
they hold most horrible impieties. Answ. 298. with other reproaches and all for
believing Gods free and saving grace, and that he does not love all men alike.
And these Answers they are to get by heart, and lay them up in the storehouse
of their memory, that so they may be ready at all times to give an account to
him that asks, of the malice that is in them: howbeit the Apostle faith, In
understanding be ye men, but in malice be ye children, as if malice,
uncharitableness and hatred of others, were not to be found in them, nor are
they so comparatively, unless it be where such instructions as these are
planted. But it is the surest way, and that he knows well, to train them up
early in the way he would have them go, that so they may not depart from it in
their older age; to fill them with animosities so soon as they be capable
against the persons and opinions of their adversaries. As there is no
friendship to that which is called Praetextata amicitia: according as the
Scolium a kind of song, in Athenaeus makes it the fourth point of felicity
(...) that is, to have neighborhood and acquaintance with such as have been
brought up together with us from our childhood: so there is no enmity like
that which children are seasoned with all, at their first setting out, and bred
in from their green and tender years: Crescent illi, crescetis and irae; As
they grow up, their disaffections also increase and gather strength with them.
But if abrenunciations, and negative positions have been thought unfit, and
importune to be thrust into a Confession of Faith, or Articles of Religion
agreed upon; then doubtless, such condemnation of contrary erroars, as does
involve the parties also, and reflect upon the persons, does much less become
the delivery of the very first principles.

In the Preface is this profession made.

I do indeed about the goodness of God toward, and the death of Christ for
men, vary from the commonroad of the present pretended orthodox, because they
leave the Scripture-road, and walk in a by-path of some Elders tradition. I
would have you and yours with my self, not walk by vote, but by rule, the word
of God.]

The road is not therefore to be forsaken, because it is common: as multitude
is the Papists mist, which they would cast before our eyes; so is paucity the
Anabaptists: but God has given us no such rule as either: and as it is
unthankfulness; and worse than so, when God has given Kings and worldly powers
to propagate and cherish Christian Religion, then to cry out, Not many noble;
so is it also, when as the nations do sly as a cloud of Doves to the windows
of the Church, and God fulfills his gracious promises of multiplying believers
as the sand, or the stars, or the numberless drops of dew from the mornings
womb, then to cry out of following the multitude, or walking in a common road.
[ Not by vote, says he, nor by man's precept, but by the word of God.] Answ.
Vote, and the rule of Gods word may be, not contrary but subordinate. Might not
the 39 Articles, for instance, the Assemblies Catechism or Confession, be
framed by the rule of Gods word, and yet be voted too? If a single Pastor
write a Catechism, and frame Answers, that he would have his parishioners, or
people, over whom he is set, to learn, and get by heart are they not now taught
by the precept and appointment of man? Is there not as much lording or dominion
over the faith of others, in a parish, or small congregation, as there is in a
Diocese, Province, or Nation? Should we in earnest walk after this Tradition,
here plainly taught and delivered; as the Jews in the Prophet Jeremy are said
to multiply their gods, secundum numerum civitatum, according to the number of
their cities; so must we multiply our Creeds secundum numerum capitum, so that
every particular person may have a form of faith by himself: which is the very
spirits and heart of Anabaptisme. And I do verily believe, that not only the
more judicious sort of his charge and neighborhood, but very children that are
of any capacity, will think it far safer, in matters of difference, to follow
the judgment of many pious learned men, than of One, though he were equally
qualified with the best of them.

And as to the particular, touching which he now enters his dissent; he loves
to raise a perpetual dust, wheresover he goes, about the extent and intention
of benefit by Christ's death, and injuriously charge his adversaries, with
broad denial of Scripture sayings, because they interpret one sentence by
another, and are unwilling to make use of the universal particle All, or Every
one, therewithal to overthrow the contents of the Gospel, and as with a helve
or handle, to cut down the chief trees of the forest. And whatsoever he
talks here of the Scripture-road, and rule of Gods word: as if this were it,
that did bear the sway with him, and carry him on so strongly; I have cause to
suspect it to be but talk, out of what I find in a late work of his, called
Essays: for page 24. he observes that those words Act. 13. 48. were no part of
Paul's doctrine by him then preached, but only an assertion of Luke, the writer
of the Apostles Acts: and tells us further, that it is safer to stick to
Paul, than to Luke, if they disagree, though he thinks here he can reconcile
them.

But will he indeed stick to the Apostle Paul? Neither. for page 36. He tells
us that those places in Paul's Epistles, which seem to clash with Gods willing
all men to be saved, and in particular, that discourse of his Romans 9. Are those
places hard to be understood that Peter speaks of 2 Epist. 3. 16. So that he
has bethought himself, how he may easily answer all that can be brought
against him, out of the Apostle Paul, the Champion of free grace though he be;
for if the argument that is brought be hard to be answered; then the place
whence it is taken, is hard to be understood; and it must be supposed not to be
rightly understood, so long as it shall seem to cross the Universalists. And
thus in stead of walking by others vote, he plainly and peremptorily walks by
his own will, and without regard, or heed taken, wresteth to his purpose that
very Scripture, that warns us of the fearful danger of wresting any.

I doubt not but you shall find nothing therein, but what is wholesome, and may
look my worst adversaries boldly in the face.

Answ. That is not always the best, that looks the boldest. Truth may be
confident, but falsehood has the greater faculty of out-facing, and clamouring,
obstrepit adulter sensus, and with making continued noise, drowneth all that
can be said against it. And I think that very seldom comes forth any one piece
into the light, that is of such hapy composure, and of such proof thorowout,
from head to heel, that it may not by a watchful eye be found penetrable, in
some one part or other. Wherefore considering what ought to be thought upon,
humane frailty, and how prone men are to be overseen and mistaken; and
considering also how moral it is, and withal, how usual, for the best of all,
to bespeak their Readers civility, and incline him to a favorable
interpretation, of what may perhaps not be able to abide a strict examen; In
these regards, I think it was but needlessly done, and unadvisedly, to fasten
such a commendation, and so emphatical, upon the forehead of his own book, as
will outvie any ordinary approbation drawn up by them that give their license
to another; and may hold pace with those Encomiasticks, that take their
license poetical now and then, to flatter and hyperbolize. Nothing (at all) to
be found (upon search) but may look in the face, and that boldly, my
adversaries, yea the worst of them, and all this, without any doubt. For who
will think that he deserves favor and connivence, that makes a solemn
protestation against them, as no way needful in his case.

Far, far be it from Christian ingenuity, to take that ill, that is well
spoken; or what is ill, to make it worse than it is; or to disesteem what is
good and solid, because it comes bound up and joined with that which is unsound
and noxious. I do here, once for all, willingly acknowledge the far greater
part of these instructions, to be, as far as I do discern, very godly, sound,
and rational, well agreeing with Gods holy word, and the confessions of
Reformed Churches, and dexterously delivered, and fitted to the apprehension of
those, to whom they were intended. But withal, the writer of them cannot
justly be offended, if the dead flies, be by a wary hand, though not so
skillful as were meet, taken forth of his box of ointment. The which is the
more needful to be done, because the better the greater part is, the more
likely it may serve to make the bad, that is mixed, and interwoven, to pass
unsuspected, and be swallowed down. Such deceitful dealing may possibly be
used; and it is thought that phrase, cauponari verbum, is taken from the
vintrey, where sometimes the good does help to put off, and vend the naught. It
is good to be sober, and suspicious: and our blessed Savior, who bade the
people hear the Pharisees: bade them also beware of the leaven of the
Pharisees: and his sheep are taught, to distinguish, betwixt wholesome food and
venomous though springing near together: and as they wax in spiritual strength,
have their senses exercised to discern both good and evil, and to separate that
which is precious from that which is vile.

So much for the Preface.
Qu. 1. WHat is the chief thing thou ought to exercise thy self to, in thy
youth?

A. To remember, mind, or consider my Creators.

Creators] A word, never before, as I think, heard of in our Church. All the
Churches Christian have been forbidden, by the Catholic Religion, to say,
there be Three Lords, or Three Almighties: and why not, Three Creators also?
for so he says, that says Creators, because of the Trinity of Persons,
according as his Answer is to the fifth Question. But he consulted the
Original, and found it so, as we are told in his margin: but he should withal
have been advised by them that are skillful in the Hebrew, whether Jews or
Christians, and then perhaps he would have found it to be no more than Enallage
numeri, one number for another, the plural put for the singular. Every one is
to be credited in his own art, and every one in his own language. Mercer, of
whom Thuanus spared not to write, Neminem unquam Christianum felicius
Hebraisasse, would not turn it, Memento Creatorum: but this he tells us there,
that the Jews, de Deo passim solent loqui pluraliter, when they speak of God,
use to speak in the plural number. And Aben-Ezra goes further, as I find him
in Mr Scldens Titles; Every tongue, says he, has its property. As it is
honorable in the languages of Europe for an inseriour to speak to a great man
by the plural number: So likewise in the holy tongue it is honorable, to speak
of a Potentate plurally, as Adonim, Baalim] the Idiome of their language is not
of God only, but of any great Person, to speak in the plural number.

Amama might have satisfied him in this matter: who censureth the Vulgar for
Deos alienos, in the first precept, and thinks with Drusius, and diverse
Papists, it should be, Deum alium: if therefore the Catechist intended to alter
the English version, and shift the numbers, he should have done it for the
better, and not for the worse. 1 Samuel 28.13. I saw gods ascending. They may
allege good reason, who make it Divum ascendentem, I saw a god ascending, or
rising up out of the earth, ( Samuel was a Judge, and Judges are gods) whom we
have reason to hear for congruities sake, who read that which follows thus;
What form is HE of? in the singular. When Zanchy had written De tribus Elohim,
Grotius took exception at that Title; and Ludovicus Capellus defends it so,
that withal he excuses it, as Catachrestical, and an (...) It is not good
trusting children and common people, with such expressions, as offend some, and
put others, of the learnedest men that this present age has seen, to explicate
and mollify. Yet I enter not the Controversy, in which so great parties are
dissenting, What soliditie or strength of Argument, may be had from hence, for
the Article of the Sacred Trinity: I insist only upon this; The Noveltie, and
the Scandal, of rendering such words plurally in vulgar languages.

Q. 25. Why addest thou that word sinful? are there any lusts of the flesh not
sinful?

A. Yes, such desires as be and proceed from the weakness of nature, Deuteronomy. 12.
15.
and tend to the due preservation of man, John 4. 7, 8.
as to eat when one is hungry; Hcbr. 13. 4.
drink when one is thirsty, etc. which being ordered according to Gods word,
are lawful and not renounced by us.

I think him much mistaken in unfolding those words of our Church-Catechisme [
The sinful lusts of the flesh]. It had been a good work to have instructed his
scholars, in the right meaning of the word flesh, as it is taken in that place.
The Jews, as Buxtorfius tells us in his Synagoga, when their children come to
be past seven, are wont to learn them Nomenclations, and how to call and know
by the right names, those things that are of daily use in life and common
converse. Without presumption to give direction, a great part may be allotted
in the first institution, to the explication of Divinitie-terms, for want of
which, wholesome and sound discourses are often either quite lost, or serve to
breed in men, mistakes and errors.

Our three enemies, to be fought against, and renounced, are the World, the
Flesh, and the Devil. Now in this Answer Mr Horn takes the word Flesh, for the
work of God, or created nature, even such as was in our blessed Savior, as by
his text of Joh. 4. appears. But it is not the sinful lusts of the Flesh; it
is the Flesh, which in Scripture ordinarily, without any manner of Addition, is
spoken of, as our Spiritual enemy, and it signifies, not the Body, nor yet
sense and appetite, inferior to reason; but it signifies the corruption of our
nature, repugnant to the Law of God, defiling Body and Soul, and the highest
faculties of the mind. And thus the best of Popish expositours interpret the
word; howsoever others of them so give the meaning, that many of their common
followers, think that to crucify the flesh, is to starve themselves; as they
think that to renounce the world, is to go into a Monastery, where they enjoy
the plenty of the world, without the trouble that belongs to it. A man would
think, says Saint Augustine, De Civ. Dei, lib. 14. cap.2. that the Epicureans
lived according to the flesh, because they followed bodily pleasures: and the
Stoics according to the Spirit, because they placed happiness in the mind;
Sed sicut loquitur Scriptura divina, secundum carnem vivere utrique
monstrantur: but according as the holy Scripture speaks, both of them live
according to the flesh. That which deceived him, was, as I suppose, the Epithet
of sinful: as if therefore some lusts of the flesh were not sinful. Whereas
Epithets are not always put for distinction, but often for Amplification and
Efficacy. So may we read Vastum aequor, gelidum Boream, for Emphasis, and not
Difference: and in Hebr. 12. 23. Spiritus justorum perfectorum: out of which
one of the Pontifician writers would prove Purgatory: This shows, says he,
that there are spirits of just men, not yet made perfect. A weak argument: as
it was a wicked one of another, that said the Apostle Peter did insinuate some
service of Idols to be lawful, because he said, 1 Epist. 4. 3. according to
their vulgar, illicitis idolorum cultibus, unlawful services of Idols.

The World, Flesh, and Devil, which we have renounced, are enumerated by the
Apostle, Ephesians. 2. v. 2, and 3. This world, said he there: our Church added an
Epithet, This wicked world. The lusts of our Flesh, said the Apostle: our
Church added an Epithet, sinful lusts; but neither of them for difference, but
for Emphasis and Aggravation.

Qu. and Answ. 40. in marg.

It was called the Tree of knowledge of Good and Evil, because God therein
would try, whether man would do good or evil; and Adam had therein distinction
of good and evil. Good and Evil here, do not signify, Duty, and Sin; or,
Obedience, and Disobedience; but Happiness, and Misery: happiness to be
enjoyed; and misery to be undergone.

And Knowledge here, signifies Experience, or as we commonly call it, Wosull
Experience; when they should know Good by the loss of it, and Evil by the
sense of it. Howsoever Satan took occasion from the name, to abuse the woman's
credulity, and curiosity, as if she should, have attained some rare knowledge,
that would have made her blessed, and even God-like.

As therefore the one of the two, was called the Tree of Life, so might the
other be called, for so it was, the Tree of Death, and plainly they were told,
that whenever they did eat of it, they should die the death. This being the
reason of the name, as it is in a manner agreed upon by all, I marvel why our
Author should balk it, and give us two other reasons why it is called the tree
of Knowledge; whereof, the one is obscure; and the other unsound, referring it
to Gods knowledge, as if God did thereby come to know what man would do.

Yet should I not have noted this, or made any stay at it, but that I know how
far the Socinians have gone in denial of Divine Prescience, and what haste some
of the Remonstrants make in following after them, and what Doctrine one of the
prime Universalists delivered long ago, namely, Fr. Puccius in his Catholic
Assertion of the Efficacy of Christ's Death in all men, as they are men;
confuted both by Papist and Protestant above three score years now past. The
ways of Men and Angels, says he, before the fall, and after the fall, which
they might have gone in, and did not, as well as those they did go in, were
both alike foreseen of God; not these, more then those; adeout juxta sensum
humanism possemus dicere cum ignorasse quae nos contingentia dicimus.

I grant that in holy Scripture, God is said to Tempt or try, and no more then
that is said here; and that in Genes.22. 12. Now I know thou fear God, is
just as much as is said, v.1. God did tempt Abraham. But who knows not, that
this, and many the like are spoken humanitus, in a manner of speech borrowed
from men; as when he does, as a man being angry uses to do; then is he said
to be angry: and when he does, as a man that repents him of anything, uses
to do, then is he said to repent: So commanding Abraham to offer his son, yet
not intending that he sold offer him, he is said to tempt, or try him;
because he did ad similitudinem tentantis, after the manner of men, who will
usually do or say this, or that, only to learn or know, the purpose or
disposition of another, as yet unknown. And in like sort it may be said, that
God did tempt or try Adam, in the Precept touching the tree of knowledge: But
then, first, let us not make more figurative or tropical locutions than need,
or than there are. And secondly, whatsoever improper speeches there are found
in Gods word; that should be proper, and plain, and easy, that is intended for
the capacity and instruction of children. They should be told, and the common
people also, what irreligious principles, those who plead so hard, for Their
liberty of man's will, after all their tragical declamations, are forced to
maintain, that so they may tremble to set foot in such ways, as necessarily,
and naturally end, among other things, in denying Gods foreknowledge of humane
actions. For what good Christian is there that will not soon take check at
this, though but meanly seasoned with Religion?

In the Question and Answer 83. he shows how Christ did exercise the office,
of a Prophet, of a King, and of a Priest; of the last, in these words.

As a Priest he prepared the sacrifice to be offered up to God, for us, and
made intercession, both for his Disciples, and transgressors.

Q. 86. What was the Sacrifice that as a Priest, he prepared to offer for us?

A. But one propitiatory Sacrifice, which was himself, or his own body.

Q. 87. How did he prepare himself this Sacrifice?

A. By giving up himself in obedience to his Father, a ransom for us, from sin
and death.

Q. 88. How did he that?

A. In that being made under the law for us, he accordingly yielded himself to
death to bear the curse due unto us.

Q. 102. How did and does he more fully exercise his Priestly office in Heaven?

A. He in his Ascension offered and presented himself, Hebr. 8. 1, 4. and 9. 14.
as the prepared Sacrifice to his Father, Psalm. 110. 1, 4.
and was thereby consecrated the great high Priest entered within the veil, Lev.
8. 9. with Hebr. 7. 27. and 9 12, 24. and 7. 25.
with the virtues of his own blood, to appear in the presence of God for us,
and to make intercession.

The preparatives, that were, to Christ's death, or Sacrifice of himself, we may
call those infirmities, which together with our nature, he took upon him:
meaning not personal infirmities, as diseases, or distempers, of this or that
sort, but such as accompany mankind in general, hunger, thirst, weariness,
fear, pain, grief, and mortality: we may reckon also his devout obedience, his
humility, and voluntary humiliation, or empoverishing of himself, his vehem nt
supplications, with strong crying and tears. As these, did forego his
Sacrifice, so did they prepare so it: but that his death should be a
preparation to his Sacrifice; and that his Sacrifice should only be prepared
on earth, and offered in Heaven; is a new part of learning, and sounds
somewhat strange, out of what shop soever it came and to what purpose soever it
was first forged.

Our Church has taught us, that Christ suffering upon the cross, did make
THERE, a full, perfect and sufficient Sacrifice, oblation and satisfaction, and
our Savior said upon the Cross, It is finished. And when the Apostle to the
Colossians, C.2.V.14. says that the handwriting was blotted out, and taken out
of the way, or, out of sight, and (to make it past all fear of ever being
produced against us) that it was nailed to his cross, that is, cancelled, and
torn in pieces; there needs nothing more to be said, to let us know that
there needs nothing more to be done, for perfecting the Sacrifice and
expiation. For whether he speaks in reference to the Ceremonial, or the moral
law or both, it was a full and complete Sacrifice to the purpose intended. And
holy Scripture plainly speaks of his death, and Sacrifice, as precisely the
same: the altar being the cross, and no other propitiatory Sacrifice, but his
body crucified and dead. Hebr.9. 26, 28. Christ must not offer often, because
he must not suffer often, and he must not suffer often, because it is appointed
for men once, and but once to die: To offer, and to suffer, and to die; are in
this case, made the very same thing. And even in common speech, and in common
sense, the sacrifice of any thing consists in the killing of it: and if it be
of a thing inanimate, then it consists in the consuming of it: but neither
killing nor consuming, is the preparing of the Sacrifice. Where was Christ
slain? was it not upon the earth? yes: and shall he be sacrificed in heaven? or
where was ever the killing the sacrifice, called the preparing of it?

There was among the Jews, the Preparation of the Passover; and the killing of
the Passover, and the eating of the Passover, these three. It is true that the
killing of it, did prepare for the eating of it. But the eating of it, was the
Sacrament of it, not the Sacrifice of it. The places or texts of Scripture,
such as carry any color, may be considered. Hebr. 8. 4. For if he were on
earth, he should not be a Priest, seeing that there are Priests that offer
gifts according to the law.] From which words, he may as well gather, that
Jesus Christ was not a Priest at all, upon earth, as that he did not complete
his sacrifice upon earth: but it was granted he was a Priest in preparing the
Sacrifice. Answ. to Qu. 83. By showing the meaning of that place, his mistake
will appear. The Apostle prefers Jesus Christ before the Levitical High
Priest, among many other respects, in this for one, The place, where now he is.
Our High Priest is in heaven, made higher then the heavens, c. 7. v. 26. c. 8.
v. 1. A minister of the Sanctuary, verse. 2. that is, The Holy of Holies, the
Oracle, or most sacred Quire, wherein, under the law, the High Priest only did
officiate: which place, as formerly, it did typifie, so here it does signify
heaven it self. On this, depends the fourth verse: wherein he proves that if
a Christ be a Priest, as that (...) was taken for granted; he must be a Priest
in heaven, for if he were on earth, he should not be so much as a Priest, much
less a High Priest. For Priests on earth offer gifts prescribed by the
Levitical law: such gifts Christ did not offer: such a Priest therefore Christ
was not, he was not of the tribe of Levi: no Levitical Priest, therefore he
offered no Levitical gifts: other earthly Priests there are to do that.
Therefore must he be a Priest offering in heaven, or no Priest at all. Now our
Catechist should have considered, how these words, in verse 4. are brought in,
and to what they belong, the Apostle speaks not now of sacrifices, slain and
offered in the Temple, by the Priests; but of such oblations as were made by
the High Priest in the most holy place, into which he entered once a year, and
thereby did shadow out our High Priest, who entered into heaven, and offered
there such services as we needed, after that he had finished the Sacrifice of
himself on earth.

In this Epistle are often mentioned, and distinguished, gifts, and sacrifices:
in this fourth verse, only, gifts are named; all sacrifices are gifts, but all
gifts are not sacrifices. Our High Priest being ascended into heaven, offers,
as a Gift, not as a Sacrifice, himself; and the merit of his passion, as the
High Priest carried the blood into the Oracle: And as Aaron did bear the names
of the twelve tribes upon his breast, so does our High Priest, the names of all
his faithful people: he offers prayers for them, and incense with their
prayers, that they may be accepted.

But especially he would abuse his Reader here upon the Homonymie or ambiguitie
of the word, offer: which though by frequent use it be in some sort appropriate
to sacrifices, yet is it sometimes otherwise used, as, To him that smites thee
on the one cheek, offer also the other; and, if he shall ask an egg, will he
offer him a scorpion? it may mean no more than to tender, exhibit, show: no
more than to proffer, produce, or bring forth: as much as to present, or
represent, if we take this word, after the Latin use, which is, to bring forth
any thing and make it present. Suetonius of the Emperor Claudius: poenas
parricidarum repraesentabat, he would see them suffer before his face, or in
his presence. Such is the use of it in Cyprian, and often in Tertullian. And in
this sense did our High Priest offer himself at the throne of Majesty; on the
cross he offered his Sacrifice; but in heaven, he presents his Gift, his
body, his merits, his prayers, his incense, our names also, or persons, in some
sort; gifts or services, all of them, but Sacrifice none of them.

These two words [ offer and present] are coupled together in the Answer thus.
He in his Ascension offered, and presented himself as the prepared Sacrifice to
his Father] To offer a prepared Sacrifice, is one thing; which Christ then did
not; it is another to present himself, who was before offered in Sacrifice; and
thus did our Priest and Advocate, and Intercessour, appear in the presence of
God for us, Hebr. 9. 24.

So this is the abuse, to make us believe, that because whatsoever is presented
may be said to be offered, therefore it must be offered as a Sacrifice.

Another Text is, Psalm. 110, Thou art a Priest for ever. The eternity of his
Priesthood can be no where but in heaven. Therefore, no where but in heaven was
his Sacrifice perfected. Thus he seems to argue thence. Answ. Priest, and
Sacrifice, are relative, where one is, the other is also. A priest must offer
sacrifice; but it is not requisite that he should do it always in actu
exercito, it is enough that it be done in actu signato; that is, that he will
offer, or has offered, or can, according to Law and Rite, offer sacrifice.
Jesus Christ is a Priest for ever, but he does not ever, or always sacrifice.
The Sacrifice was offered but once (and how often does the Apostle rehearse
that word Once?) by virtue of which, he was consecrated a Priest for ever. One
Text more Hebr. 9. 12. by his own blood he entered into the Holy place having
obtained eternal redemption for us] Answ. But this blood was shed upon the
cross, as the bullock and the ram, were first slain, and then their blood was
carried into the most holy place. The Sacrifice was without, the Application of
it, was within the veil.

Having obtained] that is, formerly by his passion, and this Redemption thus
obtained, before his Ascension, is called eternal, because it did abide and
continue; so that there was no need of any second, any other Redemption, to
follow after Ascension.

Q. 160. Who is the head, and governor of this Church?

A. Jesus Christ himself is the only head and Lord of it, Fph. 5. 23. and 4.
5. 11. 12.
though he substitute others, 2 Cor. 12. 8.
for helps of government, and usefulness therein.

Q. 161. What be they?

A. For more inward growth and helpfulness, he has given Apostles, Prophets,
Evangelists, Pastors and Teachers. For outward order, Bishops or Elders and
Deacons.

The Church is considered two ways. (1) Generally, consisting of all those who
are joined together in profession of Christianity and outward means of
salvation. (2) more especially, consisting of those who are the best and
principal, united to God in faith and love.

The former of these, is termed the Church visible, or, The many called: the
other, is termed the Church invisible, or, The few chosen. The visible Church
Catholic is the whole number of professing Christians thorowout the world, All
that in every place call upon the name of Jesus Christ. This great body, or
society Ecclesiastical, contains, and comprehends under it, as parts of
it, all the parish Churches, all Classical, Diocesan, Provincial, and National
Churches.

Of the Catholic invisible Church, Jesus Christ is the only Head and Lord:
but he has not substituted any other in his stead, nisi vicarium spiritum
sanctum, unless the Holy Ghost. He has indeed appointed officers in the Church
visible; which officers have hitherto usually been divided into two sorts:
first, Temporary and extraordinary; and secondly, Perpetual, and ordinary:
which division, I think, it had been better to retain, than to give us a new
one, which will not hold. For certainly the Apostles and Evangelists, did
govern outwardly; and as certain it is, that the Bishops or Elders did teach,
and feed the flock of God, for inward growth and helpfulness, Acts 20. 28. and
1 Pet. 5. 2.

It should seem that he means here, The Catholic Church visible; for such was
the Church he described in Answ. to Qu. 158. A company of men called out of the
world, and gathered into the worhip of God.] In this Church indeed our Savior
has set officers, 1 Cor. 12.28. in which whole chapter, the Apostle treats
of this kind of Church: and it is true also that Jesus Christ may be said to
be Head of this Church, in regard of the Graces of Edification, derived from
him, for the Offices, Ministry, and Government of his Church, and in regard of
the common benefits, and common gifts of a spiritual kind: and thus is said v.
12. So also is Christ: where he means, by Christ, this Body of the Catholic
Church visible, of which he is in some sort the Head; and which is, in some
sort his Body, and therefore called Christ, Though most properly he is, as most
commonly he is said to be, Head only of that Body, whereof he is also the
Savior, Ephesians. 5. 23. which as his Spouse, or wife, shall live and reign with
him for ever in heaven. And I have some reason to think, that our Catechist did
not intend, in this place, so much to exclude the Bishop of Rome from being the
spiritual head of the Christian world; as he did intend to exclude the
Christian Magistrate, from ruling in a National, or any other particular Church.

Many years now past, that the King of England should be called Head of the
Church, offended the parties of each extremity: As those of our own were
sorely troubled at it; so was it the point or sting of the charge against the
Bishop of Rochester:and when Hadr. Junius was blasted from Rome, for that in
the Dedication of his Greek Lexicon to Edward the VI. he called him Supreme
Head of the Church of England; he pleaded for himself by letters, to the Court
of Cardinals, that here with us, to clip the Kings Title, was almost as
Capital, as to clip his Coin.

Howbeit, it was thought fit, in the beginning of the Queens Reign, whether to
alter it, or explain it, by putting Governor in stead of Head. More, as I
suppose, out of charitable condescension, then any necessity, or harm in the
word; inasmuch as the word does not note any internal efficacy or influence,
but only outward regiment; the title or term of [ LORD] being as liable to
exception, both the one and the other signifying no more then Superiority or
pre-eminence: and a King or Queen regnant, might as well be called Head of
these National Churches, as Saul was called by Samuel, Head of the tribes of
Israel, 1 Samuel.15. 17. And that argument had with it more fallacy, then
civility, which some formerly have used: Omnes filii participes, etc. All that
are sons, are partakers of chastisement or Discipline: No true, or right-bred
son that is extra Disciplinam: Therefore the Supreme Magistrate being a
Christian, must be censurable as others are, because he is a son of the Church.
But of what Church is he a son? of the Church Catholic he is: but of a
particular or local Church, of this or that denomination, he is the Father, not
a son: nor any member is he, but the Head. But I return, and attend upon our
Catechist, with my suspicion to his

Qu. 287, What is the Magistrates Duty?

A. To execute judgment and justice impartially, Romans 13.3,4, 5.
protecting and encouraging them that do well, Psalm.82. 1, 2,3,4. and 72.3.
and punishing the evil, and endeavoring to the utmost of his power, the peace
and welfare of the people under him. Jer. 22.3. 1 Timothy 2.2.


Nothing is here of the power of the Magistrate in matters of Religion; That,
is left out of his Commission in this place. This being so great a Controversy
at this present; and this so proper a place to have spoken to it, I think my
negative argument will hold good; He sets down nothing of it here; therefore he
believes it not; therefore he would not have it taught. One of his Texts in the
margin, if he had marked it, speaks of Godliness, as well as Peace, 1 Timothy 2.
2. and since he has thought good to allege some texts out of the Old
Testament, the proper place indeed where to inquire, what authority
Ecclesiastical, Kings and Supreme Powers, have by Gods allowance; he might
there have found evidence enough for that claim. But there has scarce been
known any man, that has a teeming head, or goes big with new fancies, and
chooses to leave the common-road, rather than walk by vote, that ever cared
much for the Magistrates intermeddling in the Church, or matters of Faith, but
is ready to cry out of Sacrilege, and encroachment upon Christ's royal office;
and scornfully to ask, if God be not able enough to defend his truth, but must
be beholden to men. It is one of the many points wherein the old and new
Donatists do meet. Optatus lib. 3. Donatus solito furore succensus, in haec
verba prorupit, Quid est Imperatori cum Ecclesia? Let worldly Potentates look
to the peace and welfare of their Realms, and let the people alone with their
Religion.

But that I be not thought somewhat too quick, in gathering his denial of the
Magistrates office circa sacra, from his omission of it in this Answer, or out
of the doubt raised out of his Answer to Qu. 160. I pray give me leave to call
to mind the complaint that he makes to his Reader of the Open Door: For
speaking of his own opinion, that is, the Universalists Doctrine; and of the
Doctrine of the seeming Orthodox, and comparing them together, and likening
them to Tamars Twins; he says, That his own Doctrine is indeed the elder, and
came forth first, howsoever the world, like the midwife then, will needs have
the other Doctrine the Eldest, and would have a scarlet thread upon it,
establish it by a bloody Civil Sanction.] So may we know, what they are in his
account, Bloodthirsty men, that think of settling their Religion by Authority:
and yet it is the same man, who very lately, has sent abroad a piece to tell
the world, how much the Principles of the Orthodox have contributed to breeding
of the Quakers: giving instance in six particulars; the last whereof is, Their
vein of Allegorizing. If he be pleased to sweep his own house first, and begin
to them in his example; it is somewhat probable, that they will do what they
think fit to be done in that matter.

In the mean time, and until they reform their vein of Allegorizing, I would,
with all due respect, beseech him, to forbear his vein of scoffing; the which
of the two, does bring the greater prejudice to Religion, and does more expose
it to contempt of strangers: as when he calls his brethren that dissent from
him, Minis^ers of the Gospel, and Ortho-Philistines. For as they who please
themselves in this humor, do more revive the memory of Martin Marprelate, with
his scurrilities; so if they further add any invectives whatsoever in a
critical season, against either Academy, or Clergy; they too much resemble in
face and feature, that bastard brood, which yet now must be left at some others
door, the lamentable and besotted persons abovenamed. They who set on foot new
opinions, should do it modestly, if not timorously; or else with evident, and
invincible proof, or demonstration. If his differing doctrines be indeed true,
yet are they but new, yet are they foreign, and, as I may say, intruders, to the
constitution of our Church; and I hope he does not think his adversaries to be
so very weak, as to be flouted out of their possession.

And the same man it is (to give another instance that the same man is not
always of the same mind) who in the Dedicatory before his Caveat, commends
the Magistrates, or the Parliament, as having done worthily in the Act they
made to prevent and punish blasphemy against God; and would have them stop the
spreading of blasphemy against Christ (so he calls the opinion of the seeming
orthodox) by the like provision.] that which is one while a bloody Sanction, at
another time he thinks were a good deed. And whether the two Doctrines he
speaks of, be like the twins, or no; he is but too like the father of the
twins: he is very fervent in the case, till he perceives it come too near
himself, and his own party; and then, as the persons vary, the case is
altered.

Qu. 167. What call you the Law? Joh.1. 17.


A. The doctrine given by Moses for convincing of sin, Rom.3.20,21.
and for a Schoolmaster to tutour men to Christ. Gal.3. 19,23-24.


Qu. 168. How is that Law, as given by Moses divided?

A. Into Moral, Ceremonial, and Judicial.

Qu. 170. Why did God give the Moral Law?

A. To discover our sin, and cursedness, Romans 5. 20. and 7. 7.
that so we might the more gladly embrace his son. 2 Cor. 3. 7.


Qu. 193. Does the Law yet continue in its force?

A. Not to us, as to the Jews before Christ's coming, Rom 6. 14. and 10. 4.
because he is the end of it, Gal.3. 25. and 4. 4,5.
for righteousness to every one that believes, and has by his death redeemed
us from under it.

Qu. 196. Is the Law then of use to us now.?

A. Yes verily, if it be used lawfully. 1 Timothy.1.8.


Q. 197. What is the lawful use of it?

A. First to show us what is sin, Rom.3.20. and 7.7.
what not, and so to convince us that we have and do sin. 1 John 1.8,10.


Secondly, Rom.5.20,21.
to show us the need we have of Christ, 1 Timothy 1. 8,9, 10,11,15.
and his Sacrifice, and the cause to bless God for him.

Thirdly, Psalm. 81.9,10.
to show us what we may expect to be effected in us by the grace of Christ, and
how short we are yet of it. Rom.8.4.
Jam. 2.8,9, 10,11.


Fourthly, to witness to Christ, Romans 3.21.
and the grace in him.

Fifthly, 2 Timothy.3.14, 15,16,17.
it with all other Scriptures is profitable to instruct, exhort, and rebuke,
etc.

Qu. 290. But ought thou not to walk in the observation of the Ten
Commandments given by Moses?

A. In walking in the truth, Romans 8.4. and 13. 8,9,10.
as is expressed, Gal.5. 14, 16,18.
and so acting forth faith and love, I do observe and keep also those
commandments, because in walking after the Spirit, the righteousness of the Law
is, and shall be fulfilled in me.

The brief Instruction to be gathered out of these Questions and Answers, is
this: that the Law (that is, the Decalogue or ten Commandments) is of good use
to bring us to Christ: but after that we be brought to him; then his Grace and
Spirit be sufficient to direct us, so that we shall not much need the Law to be
a Rule to us, at leastwise not regard it more than any other piece of Scripture.

To this I answer: We have hitherto in our Church been taught, and have
learned, that the Decalogue is a Rule directing, and, a Law binding, even
justified and regenerate Christians, though otherwise than it binds persons
unregenerate.

Artic. 7th of the 39. Though the Law given by Moses, as touching Ceremonies do
not bind Christian men, nor the civil precepts be of necessity to be received,
yet no Christian man what soever is free from the obedience of the Commandments
which are called Moral. No man, be he never so perfect a Christian. So the
Articles of K. Edw. 6.

Assemblies larger Catechism. The Moral Law is a Declaration of the will of
God to mankind, directing and binding every one, as well persons regenerate as
others, to perfect and perpetual conformity and obedience thereunto.

The Congregational Churches in the Declaration of their Faith chap. 19. 5, 6.
The moral Law does for ever bind all, as well justified persons as others to
the obedience thereof, and is a Rule of life to true believers, as well as to
others.

Thus have these taught, agreeably to the Catechismes and Christian
Institutions of other reformed Churches, and writers. For whether they have
made the ends and uses of the Moral Law, fewer, or more; this has still been
one; to be Norma vivendi, a Direction to order our life by. We thought, we had
attained hitherto, to walk by the same Rule, and to be of one mind in this
matter, whatsoever our other differences be; And why this Author should by
teaching otherwise draw away disciples after him, let him see to it.

Open door, Preface. It Is injurious. [Many preachers in stead of
Gospel-preaching, become teachers of the Law, and jumble Law and Gospel
together: so that they neither preach Law nor Gospel, but a mingle mangle of
both, not knowing what they say, nor whereof they affirm, talking of Duties to
them, who want Principles to perform them rightly] by these words of his, it
should seem, that as the Law, must not be a Rule of Duties, to persons
unconverted: so it must be no Rule at all, to any person whatsoever.

But I prove, that the ten Commandments, even As given by Moses, do oblige
justified persons, to the Duties therein enjoined. First, by Scripture. When
Jesus Christ came, he confirmed the Law Moral, Matthew. 5. 17. Think not that I
came to destroy the Law, I came to fulfill it. Now that he meant the Law Moral,
and that As given by Moses, appears by the following explication of the several
Commandments, verse.21. and 27, and 33. Matthew.22. v. 38,39. He gave the sum of
the first and second Table, calling them the first and second, the two great
Commandments. Moses gave the Law, in ten Precepts, and two Tables, and as so
given, Christ confirmed it.

The Apostles also in their Epistles, exhort Christians to the Duties of the
Law, As given by Moses; as well for manner, as matter. Jam. 2. He that said, Do
not commit adultery, said also, Do not kill. And the Apostle Paul, Ephesians. 6.
calls the fifth commandment, The first commandment with promise; the first,
to wit, of the second Table. Moses gave the Law in ten precepts, and two
Tables, and as so given, the Apostles do mention it, and urge the Duties of it.

Secondly, I prove by his own words, the Law to be a Rule to them that are in
Christ. Qu. and Answ. 197. he says, The first lawful use of the Law, is, to
show us what is sin, and to convince us that we do sin; that is, that the
regenerate do sin, as appears by his Text, 1 John.1.8. If we say we have no sin,
etc. How can the Law show us that we do sin, but by being a rule against which
we sin. Then next he allows the Moral Law, to be profitable with all other
Scriptures, to instruct, exhort, rebuke, etc. indeed he does not say, to
direct, rule, bind, unless these be contained in his, etc. But if all other
Scripture be a rule or Canon to us, in belief and life, why may not the
Decalogue be so also? or what reason can be given, why the Decalogue written in
the 20 Chapter of Exodus, should be of use above other Scripture to discover
sin, and convince men, Before Justification; and yet after Justification,
should be of no more use, then other Scriptures are, to rule and direct us in
our obedience? for plainly he teaches in his Answ. to Qu. 197. (What is the
lawful use of the Law?) That for justified persons to use the Law as a Rule of
obedience, More then other parts or places of Scripture, is to use it
unlawfully.

Qu. 197. he faith, The Law shows what we may expect to be effected in us, by
the Grace of Christ: and to that Qu. Ought thou not to walk in the
observation of the ten Commandments? the Answer is, In acting forth faith and
love we keep the Commandments, because in walking after the Spirit, the
righteousness of the Law is fulfilled in us, Romans 8. 4.

I answer, First, that place now named, I believe, he misunderstandeth: for he
takes it to be meant of Sanctification, whereas, most probably it is meant of
the righteousness of Justification, as is evident by conferring the fourth
verse with the first, being both of the same import.

Secondly, Whatsoever the teacher intends to sow, the scholar may likely pick
up here, a seed of Enthusiasime: for, if walking in the Spirit, and grace of
Christ, and Acting forth faith and love, do bring a Supersedeas to the ten
Commandments; then why not to all the Scripture as well? why may not the
written word in general be thought needless to teach us our duties, or mind us
of Comfort, Reproof, or Instruction? since this may be as well supplied in us,
as the righteousness of the Law is fulfilled in us,

by walking after the Spirit. But the Spirit of God directs us by the word, not
discharging it, but causing us to understand, believe, embrace, and remember it.

Thirdly, whereas he produces that text in the margin, Romans 13. Love is the
fulfilling of the Law, to prove that if we act forth love, we shall not much
need to walk in the observation of the Decalogue. I shall now endeavor to show
his mistake.

To fulfill, is taken two ways; First, to perform perfectly: To fulfill all
righteousness, Matthew. 3. To fulfill the Ministry, Coloss. 4. And thus the
Ceremonial Law of Moses was fulfilled, while the Priests, Levites, and people,
performed the rites and Ordinances which were enjoined them. Secondly, to bring
to an end, issue, or event. So Predictions and Prophesies, Types and Figures,
are said to be fulfilled, when the things are come to pass, which those did
foresignifie: So the Scripture was fulfilled which says, He was numbered with
the transgressors: and thus the Ceremonial Law of Moses was fulfilled, when
Christ came and died for us, and put an end to it.

Now of these two significations of the word [ fulfill] in this sentence [ Love
fulfilleth the Law] he seems to take it in the latter sense, as if it were
said, The Spirit of God and Grace of Charity, has made the Law out of Date,
and put a final period to it; so that now it is not to be regarded any
otherwise than the prophesies and shadows which have accomplishment in Christ:
whereas the word fulfill, is not to be taken in this sense, but in the former.
And yet if he does take the word, fulfill, in the former sense, namely
perfectly to perform, as the word is taken there, (understanding the while,
perfection of parts, not of degrees) then, he is mistaken in thinking that love
fulfills the Law per actus elicitos, doing it self all that is required,
whereas it does not fulfill the Law otherwise than per actus imperatos, by
setting others, other faculties and graces on work. The Sun gives light to the
world, per actum elicitum; it brings forth flowers and fruits, per actum
imperatum. Love causes us to be well and kindly affected, this is the own and
proper work of it: but over and above, it lays a command upon us to be
serviceable in several Duties. Love is not the fulfilling of the Law by elicit
actions (for fear and trust, are required moreover in the first Table; upright
dealing and mercifulness in the second) if it were, it should indeed bring some
discharge to the Law; because it should contain in it self, all the several
parcels of the Law: But because it does fulfill the Law only, by exciting us,
or setting us on work, to do the several duties enjoined, therefore it is
needful, nevertheless, that the Law should still abide in place and force,
that we may know what the particulars are that God requires of us, and that we
may do them out of obedience to his will, who commands these particulars to
be done.

And certainly, Love is not more, a fulfilling of the Law, after that Christ is
come, then it was before his coming: for to love God above all, was ever the
sum of the first Table: and to love our Neighbor as our self, was always the
sum of the second Table: and howsoever meant, the meaning was ever the same:
and as much did charity put an end to the Decalogue, in the Old Testament, as
it does in the New.

One chief place of Scripture, by occasion of which, and by following the sound
of it more than seeking after the sense of it, he is misled, and mis-leadeth
others, is that which he quoteth to the Qu. 167. of the Law being a
schoolmaster to Christ: which text, as some others also do, he mis-understands
thorowout. For first by the Law, they mean the Moral, or ten Commandments;
whereas indeed it means the Law Ceremonial, chiefly, if not only, which has
as much of the Gospel in it, as of the Law; the several rites and Ceremonies,
being but appendices Evangelii, annexed to the Doctrine of the Gospel, then,
though somewhat darkly, revealed. That the Apostle means this, and not the Law
Moral, considered, as a Covenant of works, holding nothing for the present of a
Savior, appears by the scope of the Apostle to the Galatians; which is against
them, that would have circumcision, and all the Ceremonies of Moses retained in
the time of the Gospel, as necessary to our Justification in Christ: the very
same opinion, that beginning at Antioch, the Apostles condemned at Jerusalem,
Acts 15. The error of the believing Pharisees was not, that it was needful to
be circumcised, and to keep the ten Commandments, but to be circumcised, and
keep the Law of Moses, namely, that Law of Moses, which was of the same kind
with circumcision, which properly is the Law of Moses; the law Moral, being the
Law of Nature, written in man's heart before, and by Moses ministry written out
fair, in Tables of stone. Yet is it true that the Apostle speaks in that
Epistle against the Moral Law, so far as it was supposed to justify us: but
this he does by way of argument against his adversaries; and not as if he made
the cause of the Moral Law, and Ceremonial, all alike, in respect of retaining,
or not retaining them; his way of arguing being, a genere ad speciem negative.
We are not justified by the Law, any Law whatsoever; therefore not by the Law
Ceremonial.

And as our Author mistakes the term [ Law] here; so does he also in the
fourth lawful use of the Law, which is to witness to Christ, quoting Romans 3.
21. where it is said, that the Righteousness of Christ is witnessed by the Law
and the Prophets. Where the Law, signifies the Books of the Law, not the ten
Commandments. In the promise made to Adam, Gen 3. to Abraham, Genesis 12. is
testimony given to Christ and his grace, and in all those places where Moses
wrote of him. The Law and the Prophets, being the same in that place, that
Moses and the Prophets, Acts 26. 22. Moses in his five books wrote of Christ,
so did the Prophets.

So for the Law. The word Schoolmaster mistaken, helps to deceive them
further: for upon hearing of that, they presently imagine great rigor, and
hard usage to be intended: they think of nothing but stripes and scourges, and
ruling with a wooden scepter, as if he must needs be an Orbilius plagosus, such
a one as Fr. Junius met withal, that he complains of so much in his life:
Corpus suum exercitavit in corpore meo: whereas the best authors that treat of
teaching young scholars, as Plutarch and Quintilian, will not allow of striking
of them. But be it as it may, for that: Paedagogus, howsoever through penury of
words we be forced to turn it, is, Formator morum: such a one as was allowed
and appointed to wait on great men's sons and heirs apparent, and to teach them
how to behave themselves; and to frame their pliable and waxen age, to love of
goodness, and practice of virtue, and detestation of vice, to fashion them
betimes, so far as might be, for what they were to be another day. (...), so
calls it Constantine Manasses, speaking of him that was Pedagogue to the
Emperor Augustus: he did set him in right tune for his carriage, and made his
behavior congruous to himself, so great a Personage. Thus Cyrus had one who
taught him beforehand, not to respect: persons in matters of Justice, by
reproving him for that he would have adjudged a coat, that was in question, not
to the true owner, but to another whom it best fitted. And Julian in his
Misopogon, checks the soft and effeminate people of Antioch by his own
education, which was no way suitable to them: My Pedagogue, says he, taught
me, when I went into the Theater, to look upon the ground; he would have him
cast his eyes downward; not look up, upon the wanton and lascivious objects
there presented to spectatours.

His office likewise was, to accompany his young master, when he went abroad,
or from home: Thus the famous Cato, the latter of the two, and the last of the
Romans, aged fourteen, when upon a visit he went to Sylla, being then at the
height of his tyrannies; and saw the heads of the proscribed lie by heaps at
the gate of his Palace; had a Pedagogue attending on him: and well it was he
had so; for he talked so desperately upon their return, that (as my Author
says, semper postea adduxit excussum) when ever after they were to go thither,
care was taken that he might be searched left the fierce youth should bear any
thing about him, that might carry danger with it.

Yea, more than all this, the Pedagogue, did wait upon this his charge, when he
went to school, to learn letters and literature: Barthius Advers. 21. 1.
Paedagogi sequebantur pueros heriles literis operam daturos: and Chrysostom
says that the Pedagogue, is not contrary to the Master ((...)) but joins with
him in the work, and prepares the scholar to take the lessons that are to be
taught him: Manifestly distinguishing him from a Schoolmaster, taken in the
common and vulgar notion. So our Author, with many others, mistakes the second
term, in, lex Paedagogus noster.

Thirdly, they mistake as much, and as ill, the word noster; for, the [ Nos]
included in that Possessive, they take tor particular Christians now living,
and for such as shall hereafter live in the Church of God. Answer. to Qu. 167.
The law was given for a Schoolmaster to tutour men to Christ] men,
indefinitely, and indifferently; meaning to humble unconverted Christians in a
sense of their sins, till such time as they have attained peace and pardon, and
then the Law has done the work belonging to it; when they have attained faith,
they are no longer under such a master. Whereas the Apostle does not speak of
particular persons, nor of the differing condition and estate of a man before
his conversion and after; Although it be true that the work of the Law, is
needful to prepare for Justification through Christ Jesus, and a distressed
conscience makes way for saving grace and spiritual comfort; yet that is not
it, which the Apostle teaches there; he makes comparison (not between two
several estates of the same person) but between two several people. He
compares the Judaical Church, and the Christian Church; and considering them
both together, as a congregative body, or one entire person, he speaks of the
several ages of that Body or Person. The Church of God under the old Testament
was a Child, or Heir in his minority: But the Christian Church in the new
Testament, is as a man grown up, or of full age: as if he had thus said: We the
Jews were under the law of Ceremonies, and circumcision, but now we are no
longer so. For neither does he say, in the present time, The Law is, but it
was, heretofore a Schoolmaster to Christ. And lastly, they mis-understand the
word Christ, in this sentence, The Law is a Schoolmaster to Christ. For they
take Christ here for a Savior, at large: as faith, in the next verse Gal. 3.
25. for justifying faith, or faith in a Savior: whereas Christ here
signifies, Christ revealed, or manifested in the times of the Gospel, as chap.
2. verse 4. Our liberty which we have in Christ Jesus, and chap. 6. verse. 15.
in Christ Jesus neither circumcision avails, nor uncircumcisison: in the old
Testament, it was something, now it is nothing. And Faith in the place now
named, [ after that faith is come] means Tempus Evangelii, the Gospel, or
Doctrine of Christ exhibited in the flesh.

Whereas therefore, they take the meaning of these two verses to be this; (Gal.
3. 24, 25.) The Moral Law, showing what God requires of us, and what the curse
is, that is due to the breach of it; drives us to Christ, and forces us to
seek a Savior: but after we be jastified by faith in Christ, we are no longer
under that Law; the Apostle says not so: but this it amounts to, which he
says: The Ceremonial law under which ye would still continue, was but to train
you up, and prepare you for the full manifestation of Christ incarnate, and now
when Christ Jesus is come, the Church of God has no more need of shadows and
Ceremonies: their work is done, and we are freed from being under them any
longer.

That this is the meaning of the words, and that S. Paul, by being under a
Schoolmaster, means not. Being under the spirit of bondage, (as some call it)
and that he speaks not of Christian liberty, from the curse of the Moral Law,
but only from the burden of the Ceremonial law, is evident by that which
follows in the fourth chapter. For they who were under this Schoolmaster,
whosoever they were, were the mean while heirs or children, not servants,
although in some regards not much distant from servants. A servant knows not
what his lord does: A servant knows as much as the heir does, before he be of
age, being kept in ignorance, little acquainted with his fathers mind, yet he
knows that his father loves him, and will make him inheritour of his estate.
But they who are under the malediction of the Moral Law, know not thus much,
know not so much as this comes to; neither are they heirs, or lords of all.

The Jews, whiles under this Schoolmaster, were children; after Christ came,
they were sons: they were sons before, but how? natura, non liberate, sons in
their minority, and under tutelage. They were made partakers of Christ, but not
of Christ fully manifested. So that the Apostle makes opposition, betwixt
these two, Children, and Sons, by sons understanding adulti, men of age. The
difference of which words in the Apostles text chap. 3. verse. 26. and chap. 4.
verse. 1, 6. is not observed accordingly in some translations; though in some
others it be: and among the former, Ours is. Clemens Alex. Paedag. 1. 6. (...),
when he called them Sons, he meant they were men, to distinguish them from
infants or little ones under the Law. So then there is nothing spoken by St
Paul here, that gives countenance to them that make void the force of the
Decalogue to believing Christians: and though our Author in expounding of the
words, goes not alone; yet approved writers never go so far, as to teach that
when a Christian has attained faith, he is no longer under the Regulation of
the Moral Law, though they teach he is no longer under the malediction of it.

Qu. 216. what is the Lords Supper?

A. An ordinance of Christ, in which when he was about to suffer, he appointed
the Professors of his name to take and break bread, and eat it, and drink of
one cup together, therein representing and sealing the further grace to be met
with in him.

Professours] I do agree with him thus far, that our Savior appointed
Professors to eat; that is, that the Profession of Christian faith, does
warrant both the Minister to deliver, and the Communicants to receive, the
Eucharist, if they be not under Church Censures, though they be not as yet
endued with justifying faith, or saving grace; Otherwise, if competency of
knowledge, and freedom from scandal, without convincing signs of
regeneration, be not sufficient; it would follow, that the Sacraments should
be, in their own nature intended, as badges or marks of difference, not betwixt
Christians and Pagans, a Church, and no Church; but betwixt hypocrites and true
believers: the converted, and the non-converted: and should serve to separate
the Church visible, from the Invisible: and the Lords Supper should be as a fan
to sever the wheat from the chaff: which to do is a work belonging to the last
day, both generally, and respectively.

But that Professors should be appointed to break bread, this has with it
some umbrage and suspicion. For it does seem to authorize, any Christian,
though unordained, to administer that Sacrament. and this suspicion is
increased, because in sixteen Questions and Answers, containing the Doctrine of
the Sacraments, this is all the mention he makes of any Minister, and this
upon the matter is no mention at all. To take, and eat, belongs to each
communicant; but to take and break, is an action Ministerial; and by the
Evangelists relating, and the Apostle repeating the Institution, constantly
spoken of our Savior Christ only.

The Council of Trent framed a curse against those who held that all Christians
have power to administer the Sacraments: but the Protestants answered, that
they were not concerned in it. It might touch the Anabaptists, whom they
opposed, as much as who most: And Bellarmine rehearses Calvin's words, relating
to that Curse or Canon; Nemo sanus Christianos omnes, etc. that is, no man that
is in his right senses, does think, all Christians have power alike in
administering the Sacraments; and concludes thus, itaque cum Calvino nulla
nobis hoc loco controversia est: who should administer the Eucharist, in this
we differ not, says he, though we be not fully agreed, who should administer
Baptism.

Therefore, whether it were carelessly done, or purposely, it was ill done, to
teach that Christ appointed Professors of his name, (Christians at large) to
take and break bread, (to administer the Lords Supper) a doctrine disclaimed by
all Christians, but Anabaptists.

Qu. 265. When shall the dead be raised? 1 Thessalonians. 4. 16.


A. They that are christ's at his coming, 1 cor. 15. 23, 24.
and the rest afterward. Rev. 20.4,5.


There is no ground for this answer in any of the Texts quoted, there is some
color indeed out of the first of them, if you take it alone, and separate from
the verse foregoing, and the verse following; The Dead in Christ shall rise
first: the Apostle does not mean that those who are none of Christ's shall be
raised next, or in the second place, for he compares not together the raising
of these two sorts, namely, the Dead that are Christ's, and the Dead that are
none of his; but he compares, of those that belong to Christ; the dead, and
the living: or the raising of the dead, and the changing of the living: so it
follows: Then we which are alive and remain, shall be caught up together with
them, etc. But the other two have not so much as any color at all: for that in
1 Cor. 15. speaks not of the Resurrection of the unjust: and that in Revel.
20. speaks not of the last Resurrection.

Now I come to the Quest. and Answers that look toward the Cinque-Points, which
I have reserved to consider together, howsoever scattered thorowout the
Catechism.

Qu. 57. Is there then no escape from this misery?

A. Yes, the same God that created us at the first, had Love, Power, and
Wisdom enough to help us, and has devised and provided help for us.

This Answer is true, and without exception; save that here seems to be a
reasoning, from the power of God, to his act: he has done it, because he can
do it, which is not safe.

And considering the usual argumentations of this sort of men, I do suspect
herein, a Dark, but Dangerous insinuation, That God has done for us all that
he could do, and that Man thinks fit he should do. He that speaks but darkly,
is oftentimes best understood, and made out by his companion; and that shall
now be the Author of (...), p. 33. How dwells the love of Man in God, if
having means and opportunity in his hand to relieve the whole world of
mankind, without the least inconvenience to himself, he yet shall suffer the
far greatest part of them to perish, without intending relief to them.]

Which conceit, when it is once taken in, and while it is made use of, though
not improved, does unavoidably expose men to Epicurcan Atheism: for when they
shall see in those things, wherein we walk by sight, and not by faith, as we do
in the mysteries of faith; when they shall observe in the world, that God
Almighty does not do all the good that we may well think he can do; and that he
does not free the creature from the servitude that it yet groans under; and
does not put forth his helping hand, without the least inconvenience to
himself, for the relief of man and beast, but suffers evils and miseries to
continue and abound; It must needs follow, that being poisoned with this
principle, they should hereupon be tempted, to doubt of, perhaps to deny,
either God himself, or his Providence, or his Power, or Wisdom, or Goodness.
But the Prophet Malachi says, God had residuum spiritus, yet he made but one:
so has he infinite treasures of power and goodness: yet it pleased him to deal
according to his infinite wisdom, and not according to our thoughts. This is
but a chip of the old Marcion: and when time shall come, God will be cleared
and justified, in his sayings, and in his doings, and all his holy attributes,
with little thank to the censorious.

Qu. 93. For whom was his Death a satisfactory ransom?

A. For all.

Qu. 94. How does that appear?

A.. The Scriptures plainly affirm it so, telling us, that he died and gave
himself a ransom for all, tasted Death for every one.

The controversy is not, Whether Christ did die for all, or no: but how, and
in what sense, it is so said. There be many places of holy Scripture, and many
arguments, not easily solved; because, as I think, insoluble; which are brought
to prove, that Jesus Christ did suffer death for all men: But when it is also
said, that he died for his sheep; and for his Church; and that for whom God
delivered up his son, to them he gives all things; and when his Death,
Resurrection, and Intercession, do as in a chain, one draw the other, Romans 8.
And when it is certain, that God does not give all things to all men, as
namely, not Faith and Repentance; we are of necessity put upon it to
distinguish: which we do so as to satisfy our selves; yet finding withal,
that Contention is fed with a fire that is unquenchable.

We believe, as our Church has made profession, and taught us, that the Son of
God did offer a full, perfect, and sufficient oblation and satisfaction. for
the sins of the whole world, and that he died for every man. And although
notice of this be not given to every man, or all the world; yet may it be
given, and truly declared to them.

Such love did God bear to Humane nature, or all mankind, more than to the
lapsed Angels; that there was, and is a possibility for every man whatsoever to
be saved, though he do not perform the Law, or Covenant of works. Gods justice
is so far satisfied, that way is made for mercy, pardon, and favor.
Nevertheless, for the actual participation of benefit by Christ's Death, and
application to each particular person, there is more to be done, than what is
done by Christ for all the world. The fruit of his passion, as to life eternal,
is derived only to his body mystical, to such as are more nearly united to
him, than by the common Relation, or kin, or claim of humane nature, which he
took upon him, and for which he suffered. And although by his blood he
obtained, as well Universal, as eternal Redemption; yet by Faith in his blood
are we justified. And he who is said to be the Savior of all men, is said also
to be the Savior of his Body; that is, of such as partake of his Spirit, and
are subject to him, and joined to him, as the parts of the Body are to the
Head: So all men are not.

In this Nation at some especial times, comes forth a General Pardon: in which
case though we set aside the Exceptions, or the excepted; Those persons to whom
it is really and truly intended, must sue out their pardon: otherwise, they
may be supposed not to accept of it. And if then, any shall urge the Term, and
Title of the General Pardon, and insist, without end upon this, That a pardon
it is, and such a pardon as is general to all the people, without taking notice
of any thing else further to be done; he that has but small skill, can easily
see, how weak such kind of reasoning is.

Now whereas Faith is Gods gift, and he bestows his Spirit where he will, and
man cannot believe of himself, nor perform the condition required; here
begins the first overture of that secret difference that is betwixt man and
man: and here first opens it self, the great mystery of Election, in that the
Ransom, or Satisfaction which God has accepted, as general, and sufficient for
all men, that whosoever believes should not perish; does not actually, and
efficaciously, profit all men to life eternal, because to all men it is not
given, to believe and perform the condition.

Whereas others think best to distinguish here, the unversal particle All; all,
both Jews and Gentiles: or all, that is, the several kinds, or estates of men:
or all, that is, all the Elect. I do now distinguish the Intentional particle,
For: which denotes the end, or intention; and sometimes moreover the effect of
the Intention.

The death of Christ was for all, but not for all alike, or in the same manner,
or with the like issue and event. He gave himself, and suffered sufficiently,
with a general Intention for all; but efficaciously, with a special Intention,
for some only.

When we say sufficiently, we do not mean a mere or bare sufficiency, as if
there were only price and worth enough in Christ's blood, to redeem all. As a
rich man may have money enough in his chest, to relieve all the poor in the
Town: But we mean a sufficiency with promise and proffer of benefit for all,
yet not without a condition to be performed: As when a rich man does give such
a sum of money, to be by dole distributed to all the poor of that Town where he
lives: provided that they orderly attend at such a time and place to receive
it. The Gift is intended for them all. But some it may be, had no notice of it:
and perhaps some others have no mind to take it. Yet were the alms intended
for them all, and to each of them who did absent themselves, it may be truly
said, Had you waited as was appointed, you had received your dole. But so it
cannot truly be said to such poor, as live in distant places, because it was
not intended, nor provided for them.

There is no possibility for Satan and his angels to be saved by the death of
Christ, not only because their nature was not assumed, but because Christ's
death in the purpose of God, was not ordained for them, as it was for mankind.
This Proposition therefore [ If Satan believe, he shall be saved] is not true,
because Christ died not for him. But this Proposition [ If Judas Iscariot
believe, he shall be saved, was true, because Christ died for him.

A favorite may procure a place at Court, for his friend in the Country; who
nevertheless does choose to live retiredly, and in the shadow, rather then in
the view and glory of the world: the preferment in the mean time being ready
for him, intended for him, and proffered him.

And that in this sense, our Blessed Savior did suffer death for all men: as
our Church has framed the Answer; Jesus Christ redeemed me and all mankind,
may be proved out of those words, 1 John 3. 23. This is his Commandment, that
we should believe in the name of his Son. There is not only a Command or
Commission to the Apostles, to preach the Gospel to every Creature: But a
Command also to every one that hears it, to believe it. Now, first, God does
not command any thing to be believed that is not true: and whosoever believes
in the Son of God, must believe, this at the least, that he died for him;
therefore God commands every man that hears the Gospel, to believe that the
Son of God died for him. Now whatsoever I believe, is not therefore true
because I believe it; but it must be true before it be believed: so for all
those that are commanded to believe, did Christ suffer Death, and offer
Sacrifice.

And if any man shall hold on the contrary, that Faith does not consist in
believing this or that proposition, as, Jesus Christ gave himself for me; but
in laying hold on, and apprehending and receiving Christ a Savior, and that
this is the right object of that kind of Faith, which is given in command to
every one that hears the Gospel; Then I argue, secondly thus: God does not
command any thing that is impossible. I mean not, that is impossible to such a
person as now he is, and at such a time; but that is impossible in it self to
be done. But now it is a thing not possible or any way feasible, for me to lay
hold on Christ a Savior, unless he be ordained and appointed a Savior for me:
and this cannot be, but by Gods appointment and institution, setting him forth
to be a common Sacrifice and propitiation: thus it is in life spiritual, even
as in corporal life, and the course of nature, it is impossible to be fed and
nourished by a stone, because it never was ordained of God for food. Therefore
Jesus Christ did give himself a Sacrifice for all men that hear the Gospel: and
as for them who never heard of him, he offered Sacrifice for their sins also:
and whosoever shall go and tell them so, shall tell them but the truth.
Although, until they hear it, they do not sin, in not believing it; as they
do, who hear, and believe not. So much for the general intention, and
ordination of Christ's Death for all men.

But as there is this general Redemption, by means of that one Sacrifice for
all men; so there is proper to those who are chosen to life, A special
Redemption; which, as it proceeds from Election, Ephesians. 1.4. so it consists in
actual forgiveness of sins, v.7. in whom we have Redemption, the forgiveness of
sins. All men are no where said to be elected, All men are no where said to be
forgiven. So some Redemption belongs to all; but, not every kind of Redemption.

And that the intention of benefit by Christ's Passion, was not alike to all, on
his part; but more to some than to others; appears hence, that there was not
the like application of it, made by him to all. He who offered himself a
Sacrifice for the sins of all men, yet did pray for some only, Joh. 17. 9. And
God who gave his son, that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, did
absolutely intend, that the benefit of that promise should infallibly take
place, in some, by removing that infidelity, which might have hindered them,
and by giving faith which enabled them, to perform the condition, and lay hold
on the promise, for want of which faith, others are lost. If in time, and in
execution, he deals not alike the fruit of Christ's Death to all men; then may
we safely gather, that his purpose and intention, touching the fruit of Christ's
Death was not alike to all men. Executio est speculum Decreti, we may safely
behold and view, Gods purpose and determination, in what he does in time effect
and bring to pass.

And if any man shall now murmr within himself and say: I know not whether I
be of that selected number, for whom Christ's Death was intended to be actually
and every way efficacious; nor whether Gods love and good will be as much to
me, as it is to any other, and shall thereupon neglect the duties of Gods law,
and the means of his own eternal safety, giving ear to the whispers of some
false teachers, by whom he is encouraged so to do, or at leastwise excused for
so doing, rather than listening to the grave and wholesome advice, of our
Church-Articles; which is, To receive Gods promises, in such wise, as they be
generally set forth in holy Scriptures; I shall only desire him to call to
mind that saying of Moses Deuteronomy. 29. Secret things belong to the Lord, our God;
but things revealed belong to us. In which words the Man of God sets bounds
to our knowledge, and to our search, as once he did to the people at the foot
of the mount, that they might know their distance and keep it, and not at their
utmost peril, break through, any gaze. And whosoever he be that shall refuse, to
entertain and embrace points of belief, and the Doctrine of godliness fully
revealed; and in the mean time busily intermeddle with secrets reserved; shall
add to disobedience, the sacrilege of curiosity, and may fear that God will
set his face against him, that shall dare to cross and thwart, in such a
manner, so severe an Edict made known and published.

Having delivered, by way of Question and Answer, that Christ's Death was a
satisfactory Ransom for all, and that nevertheless the greatest part go to
destruction, he proceeds.

Qu. 96. How can that be if Christ's Death was a satisfactory Ransom for their
sins, what shall they perish for?

A. Because he here through coming a light into the world, Joh. 3. 19.
they love darkness rather, Prove.1.24,25.
sin against his mediation, and resuse to be saved by him. Joh. 5. 40.


Qu. 97. Was not his Death the Ransom for these sins too?

A. Properly and absolutely it was not, Rom.5.12,18.
so as to make the forgiveness of them due debt, 1 Cor. 5. 21.
but only for the sin of Adam, and the sins that it brought upon us considered
as before and without Christ's coming, which was all the sin we were bound over
to death by, and must have perished in, had not God sent him to die for us.

Qu. 98. Must all they then that sin against his Mediation and the light and
Grace thereby received, perish?

A. All that persist finally so to sin shall but not all that at any time sin
such sins, Psalm. 68.21.
Prove.1.22,23.
for he can forgive them also, Ezekiel. 18.22. and 33. 16.
Act. 13. 39.
and does, to them that repent of them.

Qu. 99. How can that be?

A. Very well, Rom.5.16.17.
because of the superabundancy of the worth and merit of his Death beyond the
demerit of Adams sin, and of all the sins that thereby he found upon us.

The Brief of these Instructions is this:

All sin, and sins whatsoever; Original and Actual; of all men whomsoever,
whether they repent of those sins or not, do obtain at Gods hand forgiveness as
due debt, by means and virtue of Christ's satisfaction; those sins excepted
which are against the Gospel; and Christ coming a light into the world, yet
these may be forgiven too, if they be repented of, because Christ's gift for
Justification superaboundeth for the forgiveness of more sins than Adams
transgression brought upon us.

An accusation that is found to be false, reboundeth with greater force upon
him that brought it: I will not charge the Catechist with this opinion now set
down by me. It is charitable to think, he wrote here, he could not well tell
what: but I do charge his words, his Questions and Answers with the collection
abovesaid.

The worst of Pagans, may claim, it seems, as due debt, the pardon of their
most atrocious crimes, because these are sins, that Adams sin brought upon
them, Answ. 97. that Christ found upon them, Answ. 99] Original sin produces,
or brings upon us, all actual sins, as the root produces the fruit. The
greatest sins of all, those by the Apostle enumerated, Romans 1. Sins against the
law of nature, sins ripe to judgment, filled in measure and running over: such
as for number, and greatness, and multiplication, follow one another till they
reach to heaven, Revel. 18.5. these all, if they be but against the Law of
nature, and not against the Grace of Christ, claim pardon, as due debt, first,
without asking pardon, (it is but just, and just it is, to give, or pay due
debt, though it be not demanded.) secondly without Repentance: indeed for sins
against Christ's Mediation, there is a Condition or Proviso, that they be
repented of: but none at all for other sins, they are forgiven absolutely,
without further suit or service. So that according to this Doctrine, it is far
better, to hold of the first Adam, as our Head, and as our Root, than to hold
of the second, or to hear of him: For, by the first Adam, and the privilege
procured for him, we are clear of our old debts, and by means of the second, we
contract new.

If any shall say, to salve his words, from this worse than heathenish
Divinity, that whereas he speaks Answ. 96. of sinning against Christ's
Mediation, he may happily mean that Mediation, which the works of Creation do
speak, according to his Instructions Qu. and Answ. 152, 153. and that thus all
heinous sins against the law of nature, may be said to be against the Grace of
Christ; and thus the Sodomites might be said, to sin against Christ's Mediation,
obscurely intimated in that God gave them a pleasant country, and caused the
sun to rise upon their city: To this I answer, He cannot mean the Mediation and
Grace made known by the creatures, but must mean the Mediation made known by
Christ's Incarnation, because Answ. 97. he says Christ's Death was a Ransom for
those sins that were upon us Before, and considered Without, Christ's coming a
light into the world: now I think Christ's coming, cannot possibly be understood
otherwise, than of his coming in the flesh; and Answ. 96. He here-through
coming: that is, by his Death, as is plain by the Question. And howsoever,
there weit no sins before God did speak his goodness, in the heavens and works
of Creation, or that can be considered without Christ's Mediation supposed to be
shown in temporal blessings. So that the sense which the words yield, cannot
be, but as is said.

There be some opinions, if they be fit to be rehearsed in Christian ears; need
nothing but their mere rehearsal for their confutation, for their detestation.
I love not to rake in this worse than Pelagian puddle, where the Preaching of
the Gospel is so far from being made a benefit or a blessing upon a People,
that Christians, and none but Christians thorowout the world, are capable of
being cast away or perishing. But for his Pelagian Crambe (I call it so, as by
him urged) of the Universal particle [ All] he has alleged two texts. One,
Romans 5. 18. By the righteousness of one the free gift came upon all men, to
justification: the other 1 Cor. 15.22. (for I take that verse and not the 21 to
be meant, as being the parallel place). In christ shall all be made alive:
concerning this last place, whether it be the 21, or 22, or both, somewhat is
to be premised, because it may be diversely understood. I think it is to be
taken of a glorious vivification, or Resurrection to life: for this properly is
a Resurrection: and of this only is treated, in that whole chapter; for the
wicked or cast-aways shall arise, not by efficacy of Christ the Savior, but by
sentence of God the Judge: for being by him, sentenced to Death, they must come
forth of prison to be led to execution: That Resurrection, which is a
privilege of the holy Catholic Church, in the Apostles Creed: That which is
spoken of Luke 20. 36. children of God, being children of the Resurrection; is
that spoken of in this chapter: also in 1 Thessalonians. 4. the comfort of Gods people
being intended both there, and here.

Now for the Texts brought to prove, the forgiveness of men's sins, that were
brought upon them by Adam, to be Due Debt, I answer, he might have looked
within a few verses of his second text, and thus have read: [ But when he says
all things, it is manifest that he is excepted, etc.] In some universals, there
be manifest exceptions: and in every universal, there is restriction to the
subject matter, or that which for the present is spoken of: he charge us
somewhere, with broad denial of Scripturesayings. Not so: but it is the Denial
of the broad sense of some Scripture-sayings, this we own and acknowledge. All
things that are said in Scripture, or any where else, are not to be taken in
the full latitude. Divina gratia opus est, says St Chrysostom. Hom. in Joann.
39. ne (...) insistamus: ita haeretici in errorem incidunt; We had need pray
that God would give us grace, not to stand too much upon the bare words, for so
come heretics to fall into their errors. Gods word is written for them that
are awake, and have understanding, and make use of it, when they read, But for
those two places he needed not to have looked far, to find a limitation of the
universal particle all: for Romans 5.18. it is limited in the very next verse,
verse. 17. recipientibus, to them that receive the abundance ot Grace. And in 1
Cor. 15.22. it is limited in the very next verse, 23. to those that are
Christ's. christ the first fruits, afterward they that are christ's.

And as tor the difference he has given us, between the sins against the Law
of Nature, and the sins against the light of the Gospel, that Christ's Death
should be properly, for the pardon of the former, and not of the other, I can
no where find; nor do I acknowledge any ground for it. St John tells us,
that the blood of Jesus Christ, cleanses us from all sin: and the Apostle
Paul, who persecuted Christ, when he was come a light into the world, was
nevertheless made a pattern to those that should afterward believe, 1 Timothy
1.16. if he who fiercely persecuted Jesus Christ, be made of God a Pattern and
Precedent to others, of the virtue of his Death; surely then was Christ's Death
as proper for him, as for others; and as proper for them that sin as he did, as
for him. They who never heard of Christ are commanded to repent; Act. 17.30. as
well as they who crucified the Lord of life, Act. 2. 38. Christ died for both,
and both must repent, and neither of them can claim forgiveness of due debt,
without Repentance.

M H. talks much, and unseasonably enough of the extent of Christ's Death; and
makes it almost an unpardonable crime, to limit it to Gods elect, or them that
shall be saved: But who ever made so odious a restraint of it, as he has here
made? as if it were not properly and absolutely a Ransom, for any person this
day in England, or yet in all Christendom; for all the sins of Christians must
needs be against the light of the Gospel, their sins cannot be considered
before, or without Christ's coming. One text he alleges, but depraveth it,
that it may serve his purpose, Romans 5.16,17. The judgment was by one to
condemnation; but the free gift is of many offenses to justification, therefore
Christ's Death was properly for those sins he found upon us, for those sins,
which were brought upon us by Adam; but for no other sins properly and
absolutely. Only out of the superabundance of Christ's Grace, upon our
Repentance, shall be forgiven more sins than ever came by Adam: as if
infidelity, and sinning against the light of the Gospel, and refusing to be
saved, and love of darkness more than light; were not found upon us by means of
Adams transgression. And secondly I answer, the meaning of the Apostles words
is this. The first Adams sin was but one: but when the second Adam comes, does
he only take away that one sin? not so: he does set us free from many
offenses; that is, from the multitude of offenses or actual sins committed by
us: Now S. Paul does not distinguish of those many offenses, (and why should
any other then?) but would be taken to mean all kind of offenses, whether
considered before, and without Christ's coming; or else proceeding out of love
of darkness, when his coming is made known. From all kind of actual sins,
properly and intentionally, though not absolutely without Repentance, Christ's
offspring or children are discharged, through Christ their Head and Father.

Qu.136. What is Election?

A. A gracious act of Gods free will, in which he, before the foundations of
the world, chose (or purposed to choose) the man Jesus Christ into unity with
the eternal Word, and and so to be his holy One, the treasury of all his
blessing, and worker out of all his pleasure, and in him all the seed springing
forth of the travail of his soul to holiness and blessing with him, for the
praise of his own grace. Ephesians.1.4,5,10.
Isai. 42.1.
1 Pet. 2.4,9.
Isai. 53.10,11.
Col. 1.19. and 2.9.
Gal. 3.7,9, 26,27,28,29.
Ephesians. 1.5,6.


The question is propounded concerning Election: the main or chief part of the
answer is returned concerning the Incarnation of the son of God; or the uniting
the man Jesus Christ with the eternal word. A bold Innovation, Confusion, and
Elusion.

Innovation, so will I think it, and call it, until I can find who has gone
before him, of the Papists, Protestants, of the Remonstrants, Lutherans, or any
other in this definition.

Confusion, in that he has confounded, and in a manner, made all one, those
things which are of a quite differing and disparate nature.

Elusion, for what greater abuse or mockage can by any man be put upon his
friend, than to stretch forth his hand and hold out one thing, and when he
should take it, to give him quite another? Should any man take such liberty as
to imitate him, he might reduce not the Incarnation only, but most of the
Articles of the Creed, and most of the works of God, to Election. And even this
great Mystery of the Incarnation, which appertained not to this place, he has
expressed very untowardly. Had he been so wary as to keep himself to the
Athanasian Creed, he had not used those words of God choosing the man Jesus
Christ to be united with the word, but of Christ assuming the manhood into God,
or to the Eternal word. The Man denotes the Person, The Manhood denotes the
Nature. Jesus Christ did not assume man's Person, but man's Nature. The Humanity
was framed, and united, both, at the same instant of time: the making and
taking to himself our flesh, was but one Act. If the Son of God had taken to
himself, a man already made and perfected, and having personal subsistence;
then there should have been two persons in Christ, whereas there is but one
person consisting of two natures; as our Author has soundly and fully
delivered, above, in the Answer to the 68 Question. So that here, wresting that
to his purpose which did not belong to it, to the intent he might be thought,
not to deny all personal Election, but that God chooses One man, particularly
and definitely; he has unwittingly dashed himself upon Nestorianisme.

And if any man shall say now, That I deal not fairly, thus to aggravate a
mistake of this kind, where no harm is intended, but all is meant well, as I
am willing to acknowledge out of his own words elsewhere, I shall allege that
for my self, which is to be found, if I mistake not, and is observed in the
Civil Law, and as I think, in our Laws too: Res illicita and jocularia, casum
reddit atrociorem. He that being seriously employed in his honest calling, or
any lawful action, does by way of mis-adventure procure some danger or damage,
to his neighbors goods, or life, or limb; shall not incur the same guilt, nor
draw upon himself the same punishment, that another shall, who does the very
same harm, whiles he is either in sport and idle, or else bent upon some other
mischief. Our Author was meditating a Mock-answer to a serious Question, and
studying how to elude, and evade, and make void, Gods Election of particular
persons: to that purpose wresting both the word of God, and the Analogy of
Faith: a bad intent, an ill design and work; in prosecution of which, while he
stumbled upon an old condemned heresy, the blame of what befell him, may with
right and reason rest upon him.

After the prime and principal part of his Answer, follows something touching
what is mentioned in the Question; (the other I called a Mock-Answer) but in
such a manner, as if he were afraid of being guilty of following his Elders
Tradition, or of delivering what he has received of our Church, affecting to
be wiser then his Teachers, who yet have delivered nothing, but what they have
received of Christ and his Apostles. This may appear by these particulars.

First whereas he says, [ chose, or purposed to choose] I do mis-doubt his
disjunctive, as tending to overthrow all precedaneous Election. In Copulatives,
both must be true, to make the proposition true: but in Disjunctives, it is
enough, if one of them hold true; and it is likely that with some of his
partners, he will betake himself, if need be, to the sole purpose or intention
to Elect. So abundantly cautelous he is, that there should be no Election
whatsoever, ab aeterno, though it be but such, as one would think, might very
safely have been yielded. open door, Preface. [That any uncalled, are ever
called Elect, I can no where find in Scripture,] In what terms would he have
it delivered that he might say, Now have I found it? There are Elect from the
beginning; Elect before the foundation of the world: therefore as yet uncalled:
he may find Election placed before Vocation, in that chain, Romans 8.

When as they hear the Elect spoken of, they will tell you, that Elect does not
signify chosen, but choice, or Excellent. Tell them, it is Electos quos
elegit: the Elect whom he has chosen: they will say, That God chooses them
then, when they believe. Tell them, that God does choose his Elect before the
foundation of the world: that is, say they, He did purpose to choose them when
they come to believe. But so were they justified, and glorified before the
world was: so was the world at an end, before the foundation was laid. Thus no
words of holy Writ, how plain soever, can secure the truth against the perverse
wits, of such as are corrupt and self-willed.

Secondly, he teaches here, That in the Doctrine of Election we must begin
with Christ: and there are given abroad certain verses of his, which tender
this as a Main-principle to be born in mind, That Christ fore-known is the
foundation of all, and the not knowing, or learning of this, breeds many
errors: these texts subjoyned, Isa. 28. 16. 1 Cor. 3. 11. Agreeably whereunto
it has been taught by others of his way, and by such as led the way to Others.
That Gods first Decree, is, De mittendo Christo, to send his son into the
world. Answ. There must be something of necessity, precedent to the Mission or
Manifestation of Christ, or to Gods preordination to send and manifest him. I
know that in God, who is eternity it self, all things are together, nothing
properly going before or following. And to us, as we now are, it is a hard
matter to know how to speak or think of Gods manner of acting or proceeding in
his Decrees: Nevertheless, as when he speaks unto us in holy Scripture, he is
pleased to condescend to our capacities, and to borrow his manner of speech
from our custom and usage, to the intent he may be understood of us; So he
gives us leave, when we speak of him, to use our own expressions, so they be
agreeable to his holy Word, and with due regard to him who is in all things
infinite. Accordingly whereunto we say; That as some things in the order and
manner of the Creatures, are simul tempore, together as to their beginning in
time, which are not, simul natura, together in their own nature, one of them
causing the other to be; as the Sun, and the light of it; Fire, and the heat of
it: In like sort, Gods election of men, and his purpose to send Jesus Christ;
these two, though they be both alike ab aeterno, yet natura, the Election of
his Church, goes before his purpose to send his Son. And this I prove by those
words, So God loved the world, that he gave his Son: 1. John 4. He loved us,
and sent his Son. Therefore whether it be Gods love and mercy to mankind, in
the general; or in special to the Elect; and whether election be of particular
persons, or believers in general; Gods love does go before his purpose or
decree to send his Son, because he sent his Son out of his love to Man.

When a Christian Prince, hearing of such a number of his subjects, held
captives under the Great Turk, does send such a sum of money as is demanded; in
this case certainly his good will that he bears to those his subjects, does
precede his sending, or his purpose to send the money for their Ransom.

The Love of God, is, Causa proegumena, quae intus movet ad agendum, which some
call causa antecedens, the cause moving from within, The Death of Christ is,
Causa procatarctica, quae extrinsecus movet ad agendum, the cause moving from
without: and therefore subsequent to the other, though both be considered
together; as he that resolves upon the end, does therewithal deliberate and
resolve of the means tending thereto. Gods Love, or good will is an antecedent
cause to Christ's manifestation. And as a foundation is for the good and benefit
of what is laid upon it; so was Christ given in caput Electorum, to be a Head,
and a Mediator, that by him the Elect might be brought to Glory. Although
therefore the son of God, be the Author and finisher of our Salvation, if we
speak of the Execution of it in time; yet if we speak of the Decree of it,
before all time; So Christ is not the foundation of our Election, but Gods love
is. And yet I hope, he will not say, we lay any other foundation then Christ,
according to the Apostles sense, 1 Cor. 3. any more then the Apostle himself
did, when he said in one place, The foundation of God stands sure, 2 Timothy 2.
and in another, We are built upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets,
Ephesians. 2.

Thirdly, he teaches that Christ is not only Fundamentum electionis, but
subjectum also and primus Electorum, as if God did choose Christ first, and
then others; and two places are brought in the margin, wherein he is said to be
Gods Elect; Isa. 42. 1. Behold my servant whom I uphold, my Elect in whom my
soul delights: and 1 Pet. 2.4. To whom coming as to a living stone,
disallowed of men, but chosen of God, and precious. These two places are
alleged to make good his new Doctrine, that the Great Mystery of Election,
which in his Title he promised to open, is in the prime notion to be
understood, of Gods choosing of Christ.

I answer, It is needful that be done, that he has omitted; and that is, to
distinguish, and remove the darkness, that arises from ambiguity. There is a
fourfold Election.

1. To an office So David was chosen King, whiles he followed the sheep: and
our Savior chose the twelve to be Apostles. 2. To the Church visible; So God
chose the people of Israel, Deuteronomy. 7.6. The Lord has chosen you te be a special
people. 3. To the Church invisible, or the mystical body of Jesus Chri^st, Joh.
15. 19. I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world hates you. 4.
To salvation, or life eternal, Ephesians. 1.4. According as he has chosen us in him,
before the foundation of the world. 2 Thessalonians. 2.13. God has from the beginning
chosen you to salvation.
Now both the places abovesaid, where Christ is said to be Elected, are meant
of an Election to an Office, or Place, Honor and Dignity, as the context, and
plain reason evidently show: in Isai 42. he is, To give judgment, to make
Laws, to be a teacher, to be a light of the Gentiles, to open the blind eyes,
and to bring forth the prisoners. All these belong to his Royal and Prophetical
Office. And in that place of Peter, his office is likewise spoken of. To whom
coming] as to one in chief place, that in him we may be established: a chief
corner stone] this is for the good of others, to hold the building firm: and
such as was the Reprobation, or Rejection; such was the Election surely. But
the Rejection was in this to be in no place at all: therefore the Election must
be in this, to be in the chief place of all. So we may say that our Savior was
predestined, and preordinated, ad officium; but if we say, that he is the
first of the predestinate, or primus Electorum, who then is secundus? None: for
none is there of that order to follow. Jesus Christ is chosen to an Office:
Believers are chosen to salvation, Each of these is called Election. But the
one is not of the same kind, that the other is.

Therefore, inasmuch as he has not brought any place where it is said, that
Christ was elected otherwise than to an Office: and inasmuch, secondly, as
Election to salvation or life eternal imports either a lost estate, as in
men; or a changeable and hazardous estate, as in Angels, who are said to be
elected, I Tim. 5. and inasmuch thirdly, as the Manhood of our Savior never
had any personal subsistence, but was immediately assumed to the Godhead, past
all possibility of falling into sin and misery; in these regards, I leave it to
be considered, whether or no, and how Christ may be said to be elected to
salvation. But if in no place of Scripture this Election be spoken of, then
sure I am, this is none of the Election that ought to have been spoken to, in
the Answer to the Question abovesaid.

Fourthly, he teaches that Christ is not only the first Elected, but the
only elected personally [ in him all the seed springing forth of the travel of
his soul] All, in the general, not one in particular, not any determinately.
But the Apostle says, 2 Timothy 2. 19. The, foundation of God stands sure,
having this seal, The Lord knows WHO are his. Qui not Quales, who, not how
qualified, as, that they are true believers, and obedient. This general
consideration may soon be known by every one. But you may say again, Every one
cannot tell who they be that are truly faithful and obedient: but the Lord
knows in particular who they be that are such: to this, I return, That unless
final perseverance be yielded, this is no sure foundation: this is no seal, the
which uses to be for certainty and assurance: that foundation stands not
sure, that is subject to change, revolt, and apostasy. Qui sint, therefore
cannot be, believers in general: if you say, Qui sint, be credentes
perseverantes, believers that hold on in faith and obedience to the end: then I
say, this is not to the scope of the Apostle, which is to comfort the people of
God against the fearful example and offense of Apostates. Hymeneus and
Philetus have erred and overthrown the faith of some: if some fall away, and
draw others after them, who can be secure? We may all be seduced, first or
last: No, says the Apostle. Nevertheless] that is, though some fall away, and
others follow, yet Gods elect shall steadfastly abide; But here were no comfort
for believers, if only those who persevered in true faith and continued to the
end, should then, upon their perseverance and continuance be sure not to fall
away, as Hymeneus and Philetus did.

Qu. 140. May not men be said to be elected in their believing?

A. Yes, in respect of an actual election (or executing the Decree of Election)
which is the actual taking a man out of the world, 1 Pet. 1.2. and 2.9.
Joh.15.16,19.
2 Pet.1.10.
Psalm. 4.3.and 65.4.
into fellowship with Christ and God in him. Isai. 14.1.


It is true that when men do believe, they may be said, and are said sometime,
to be Elected then; But who takes upon him, either to write a Systeme of
Divinity, or a Catechism pretending to lay open these great mysteries, uses
not, and ought not to term this Election, but vocation; according as the
Apostle does call it, and distinguish it from Election, in that chain, Romans
8.29,30. And he has here in his Margin made a kind of Medley, of all the four
sorts of Election above specified, as may appear by view of his Texts.

1 Pet. 1.2. is spoken of Election to life eternal chap. 2. verse.9. a chosen
generation] of election to the Church visible. Joh.15.16. I have chosen you,
that you should bring forth fruit] is meant of choice to their office of
Apostleship. verse.19. I have chosen you out of the world] is meant of Election
to the Church invisible, which is all one with Vocation, That of the fourth
psalm, The Lord has chosen (so our English vulgar, but others, separated) to
himself the man that is godly] is to be understood of Election, or separation
to an office, namely the Kingdom. Psalm.65. Blessed is the man whom thou
choosest] is meant of choosing or admitting to the Church visible, namely of a
particular congregation; so it follows, and causest to approach unto thee,
that he may dwell in thy courts, we shall be satisfied with the goodness of thy
house, even of thy holy Temple. Isai.14.1. The Lord will choose Israel and set
them in their own land] is meant of Election to the Church visible constituted:
and 2 Pet.1.10. of Election to life eternal.

Thus has he obscured what he undertook to open, whether out of too much
artifice, or too little Art; I will suppose the former.

Qu. 141. But did not God choose his Elect to holiness and glory, in their own
personal considerations?

A. No sure, neither as in Adam standing, Ephesians.1.4.
nor as in him fallen, nor as in themselves considered, but in Christ.

As if they might not be considered personally, and in themselves, and either
standing or fallen; and yet withal, be chosen in Christ, Not in Adam, says
he, standing or fallen, but in Christ.] So then as it is commonly said by some,
that the Elect were considered standing, by others, fallen; before, or when
Christ did choose them; So now they must be said, to be in Christ when they
were chosen [ In Christo] must not go to Elegit, but to Nos,] Elegit nos
existentes in Christo. God chooses us when we are true believers. But this is
not his sense, although diverse have so taken Ephesians. 1.4. He has helped us
elsewhere to know his meaning here. In the Preface to his other work. For the
matter. [We were chosen to blessing and holiness in him, as the present Freemen
of Lynn, might be said to have been, by foregoing Kings, chosen to such
privileges as they have now, in the first choosing it to be a Corporation, and
in those that were then made members of it.] We see how small and faint a
matter he makes of Election, if any thing at all: A King of England, that
above a hundred years now past, did choose a Corporation (if you call it
choosing) neither did, nor does, choose them who are admitted freemen since
that time, any more than he did choose their chief Magistrate, this year; or
their Burgesses that were sent thence to the last Parliament. There is no
Election, where there is no knowledge, of what is chosen, what refused. This
similitude therefore can neither prove nor illustrate being false in the ground
of it: yet it helps us to his meaning, or interpretation of those words,
Elegit nos in Christo; which is this, God chose us in choosing Christ: Chose
Christ first, in him chose them, who should in after ages believe in him. This
gloss did well become the Problems of that hardy adventurer, who attempted to
wrest and wind up our English Articles to the Church of Rome. But for Mr Horn,
who promised to cleave perfectly to the word, he might very well have looked
onward to the next verse, verse. 5. where it is, per Christum, by him; which
might very well interpret in ipso, in him: and he might very well have looked
on to the seventh verse, where it is in quo, in whom we have forgiveness. What?
had Christ forgiveness first, and then we in him? had he Redemption through his
blood, and then we in him? No: but God did forgive us, and redeem us, and bless
us, and choose us through him, or by means of him, or with respect to him, as
our Mediator: or he might have interpreted this place by 1 Thessalonians. 5.9. God
has appointed us to obtain salvation by our Lord Jesus Christ; which is as
much as this, he has chosen us to salvation in Christ. And as his similitude
is not true, so neither is it fitted to the Mystery now spoken of. For God
Almighty did chiefly, and in the first place (so far as we may be able to make
difference) choose his people to salvation, and in the next place chose Jesus
Christ, to the office of Mediator (no other Election of him I know spoken of)
Jesus Christ was the gift of God; for having chosen his Church, he gave his son
to be their Head to bring them together, and to hold them together, that they
might not fall and be lost, as they were under the first Adam.

But to prove Election to be personal, and not of the generality of believers;
and yet withal to be in Christ, I allege that place in Revel. 13.8. where it
is described by Names written in the book of the Lamb slain. A book, here is a
Catalogue of Names, as Genesis 5. and Matthew. 1. and names are of persons. And the
book of life, is the book of the Lamb slain, because God does not save, or
bring to Glory his Elect, but by intervention of Christ's satisfaction, that
Justice and Mercy may stand togegether. This place of Scripture, has our
Author in his Essays, a late piece of his, in a long and laborious discourse,
vindicated from this sense, and this purpose. The sum is this. Names, says he,
written in Gods book, are not those by which we call men, as John, James, etc.
but their qualities in the general, by which men may be called. The wise in
heart shall be called prudent, Prove. 16. So the Elect are called Righteous,
Meek, Merciful, Godly, Fearers of God; these names, were always in the book of
life, but are newly put upon believers, when they receive Christ, and be
qualified, with new frames and dispositions, and this, he says, appears
clearly and beyond all contradiction, to be the genuine import, of those so
often abused Scriptures, touching names written in the book of life.] I answer,
not beyond all, for it is in some contradiction to himself; it is his common
Doctrine, and in particular beneath at the Qu. and Answ. 202. That we may not
gather Gods love or Election, from our duties of obedience, or inherent graces.
Are these qualities and dispositions names always written in heaven, and put
upon beleving persons when they do receive Christ, and are endued with those
qualities; and shall they not signify that God has then elected, and does
then love such persons? Shall they be names in the book of life, and shall they
not notify the persons upon whom they are put, as heirs of life? This
therefore is in clear contradiction to himself. He should not be so forward as
he is, to accuse his brethren for making a mingle-mangle, of some matters they
take in hand; for he has here most confusedly mingled together Qualities with
Names, Names proper with names appellative, and if his Achievements take
place, and be answerable to his essays, he will go near to bring us all to
Babel, that none shall understand other. If the Messenger that brings to a
Corporation, the precept for Election, should deliver it to the chief
Magistrate there, with these words; Sir, I have brought you here a writing for
choice of Burgesses, together with the names of those whom you are to choose,
for to serve in Parliament; hearing this, he would perhaps think, there were
sent him a Conge d'eslire, and fear some infringement of liberty: but opening
it and finding nothing but some general and usual qualifications, well
consisting with freedom of choice; he might very well chide him for such
abuse, and ask him where he learned to talk so frivolously and so fondly.
Qualities are not Names; neither are Names Qualities: Qualities are inherent in
us; Names are imposed on us: neither is that a man's Name always by which he is
called. Noah was righteous and he was called so, yet that was not his name.
Moses was meek, and was called so; yet that was not his name. In the language
of holy Scripture, Names do signify Persons, and individual Substances: he
calls the stars by their names: I know thee by name, Exodus.33. I have called
thee by Name, Isai.43. He calls his own sheep by name, Joh.10. Can any take
these places to be meant otherwise, than of individual and personal notice?
Nothing will serve Mr Horn, but such names, as John and James, and so long as
we cannot find these spoken of in Gods word, he will not yield, there are any
such written in heaven; nor any personal Election: but what if he can find
such names as Clement? Will that satisfy him? when the Apostle says Phili.
4.3. with Clement also, and other my fellow laborers, whose Names are written
in the book of life; I take his meaning to be this; as if he had said, with
Clement, and those others, whom though I name not now in this Epistle, as I do
Clement; yet are their names written far more happily elsewhere, even in the
book of life with God in heaven. Such names therefore, as John, James, Clement,
we say, but understand still what we say, (...), are written in the book of the
Lamb slain.

Q. 142. Does not the Scripture tell us that God elected Jacob personally to
salvation, and rejected Esau, personally from it, before they were born, or had
done good or evil?

A. God did elect Jacob, but the Apostle neither says personally, nor to or
from salvation.

Qu. 143. How are we to understand him then?

A. That he chose Jacob nationally (that is, him and his posterity to be
privileged with the choice means of salvation above all nations, and therein
gave him the Dominion, and rejected Esau and his posterity from the same, yet
so as his family, and all the families of the earth, had blessing in Jacob's,
and might have enjoyed it, in submitting to him.

This appears to be the Apostles meaning: 1. The Oracle to Rebecca speaks of
them as of two nations. 2. The Prophet Malachi applies it to their posterities.
3. The Apostle speaks of casting off the nation of the Jews. 4. Nor does he
speak of them, as so reprobated, that it was impossible for them to be saved.

First, Let it be supposed, that the words are not taken personally, but are to
be taken of the Israelites preeminence above the Edomites in outward and
temporal Privileges: yet this is enough by accommodation, to show that God is
free in his choice, and refusal; in that they who are every way alike, are not
alike dealt withal, whether it be in worldly blessings, or spiritual, or
eternal: if temporal inheritance be of Gods purpose wholly, not of works; then
also the heavenly: and why may not one Person, as well as one People, be loved,
and another hated, before either good or evil done?

But secondly, The Election and the Rejection were Personal. The Scripture in
Genesis, speaks primarily of their Persons: in Malachi, secondarily, and by
application, of their posterity. Answ. to Qu. 143. [Him and his Posterity] The
persons therefore of the Heads of the respective nations, are not to be
excluded. And in particular, for the personal Reprobation of Esau, it that must
be spoken to: 1. Holy Scripture says, he was a profane person, for that he
sold his Birthright for a Breakfast: it is not said, he was unwise, to make
so foolish a bargain; but profane, so to under-value and part with his
inheritance of the land of Canaan, the right he had to the promise, and to the
covenant made with Abraham, in so contemptuous a manner. 2. It is said he was
hated of God. Now though hatred may sometime signify less love, yet not
always, yet not here likely, where there are such Synonymous phrases, as
hardened vessels to dishonor, vessels of wrath. 3. The Apostle brings Esau
for an example, or proof, that some of Abraham's children may be rejected, may
be children of the flesh, and not children of God, not children of the promise,
Room. 9.8,13. Let us not go about to make void the Apostles argument.
Nevertheless, if any man will contend, that as the blessings conferred on
Jacob, and denied to Esau, were typical; so also was the Election of the one,
and the Rejection of the other: and that Esau was only Typus Reproborum, and
that he did repent afterward, being reconciled to his Brother, Genesis 33. and
return to the Church of God; The Allegorical exposition of these two texts, in
Genesis and Malachi, are sufficient to confirm the Apostles Doctrine of
Election and Reprobation, which he treats of in those three chapters,
Rom.9,10,11.

Secondly, whereas our Author would have the Election of Jacob to consist in
this, that he and his posterity were privileged, with the choice means of
salvation. 1. It moves some wonder that so great weight should be laid upon
the greater or less means of salvation, by them who hold all men in the world
to have sufficient means of salvation.

2. Jacob and Esau were brought up alike in the same family, instructed in the
same religion, made alike partakers of the seal of the righteousness of Faith,
thus far they were not differenced.

3. A Catechist who pretends to deliver common grounds of Divinity, should
deliver them in common terms of Divinity In his Title, was, the mystery of
Election: But to be privileged with the means of salvation, this is, and ought
to be called External vocation, which is expressly contra-distinguished from
Election, by our blessed Savior, when he says, Many are called, few are
chosen. And accordingly S. Paul here shows the difference, betwixt the Church
visible, and invisible; and that all are not Israel, that are of Israel,
because God chooses and refuses whom he will, of those who belong to the
Church, and partake of the outward Call: but he makes no comparison or
opposition betwixt Israelites and Ethnicks; nor betwixt Christians, and
Infidels; nor betwixt those that have more means, and those that have less
means: But to remove the offense, which did arise from the Jews rejection of
Christ and his righteousness, he shows that God does keep his promise with
Abraham, in that he saves his children of the promise, whom he chooses to
Glory, whether they be many or few, whether they be Jews or Gentiles.

4. It had been agreeable and tending to our Authors design, if he could have
showed, that in these three chapters, 9,10, and 11; there is no other love nor
hatred spoken of, or intended, but only as thus far, that God offers to some
the more choice means of Salvation; to others, but ordinary and common means:
and that to show mercy, and to harden, is the same with affording choice means,
and ordinary means. But this he could never do. Did God love his Church of the
Old Testament, less than us of the New Testament? Was his love so much less to
the Kings and Prophets, who desired to see Christ's day, then it was to the
Apostles, who saw what the others desired to see, but could not see? Or was
Capernaum more beloved of God, then Tire and Sidon, so far as the one should be
said to be loved, the other hated? the one elected, the other reprobated? In
whatsoever way it be, that God may be said to harden, he hardens them that he
sends the best means to, as soon as any other: yea, by his word he hardens
them. To the Prophet he says, by whom he sends, and when he sends his word,
Make the heart of this people fat, and their ears heavy; and the Gospel
preached by the Apostles themselves, was the savor to death, as well as to
life. Luke 11.49. The wisdom of God said, I will send them Prophets and
Apostles, and some of them they shall slay and persecute; He sends oftentimes,
and in wisdom sends, where he knows little good will be done. Or he should
have showed, that there is no Election or Rejection spoken of, in all that
discourse of S. Paul, to or from salvation. But this he could never do: for the
Apostle speaks of an Election that is made out of those who have choice
external means: a choosing out of these. Among the Israelites who were for
number as the sand, a remnant saved, chap.9.27. of whom Paul was one, chap.
10.1. there was a people whom God fore-knew, verse.2. that is, a people not
only called, but chosen. Israel has not obtained, but the Election has
obtained, verse. 7. Out of the Israelites therefore, who were elected to choice
means of salvation, there was an Election to life eternal, which properly is
called the mystery of Election. But now it is to no purpose all that he has
said, concerning Jacob and Esau, unless he intended to prove that the Apostle
has not rightly alleged the Testimonies concerning them, out of Genesis, and
the Prophecy ot Malachi.

Qu. 145. But says not the Scripture, that God made Pharaoh to destroy him?

A. No: but he made him stand, The Original signfies, To make to stand: and
suits with Rom.9.22.
or raised him up, (namely, out of former judgments) and forbore him with much
long-suffering, when a vessel of wrath, fitted to destruction, to glorify his
name and power thereby the more abundantly.

Here the Catechist plays the Mimus, and in a scoffing imitation puts not a
proper question, but a figurative Interrogation, crudely enough and
invidiously; which being negative, must be resolved affirmatively; Says not the
Scripture? q. d. the Scripture does certainly say so, at least, as the
pretended Orthodox, have made the world believe. And yet they never said more
in this, then the Scripture says, namely, that God raised up Pharaoh to show
his wrath upon him, for his own glory. The word is diversely rendered and
expounded: but whether it be Feci, Creavi, Excitavi, Posui, Feci surgere, Feci
stare, (any of these) or whether it be Feci restare, h. e. superstitem mancre,
agreeably to the Septuagint: I have reserved thee, preserved thee, or kept thee
till now; it is not much material. They who give the sense according to any ot
the first forenamed, do think it suits with Prove. 16. 4. The Lord has made the
wicked for the day of evil; and do think that the Apostles word, Romans 9. does
suit with it, ver. 17. and there is nothing, ver.22. against it: They think the
Apostle may explain himself, ver.20. Why have thou MADE me thus? ver. 21. -- of
the same lump to MAKE --. Howsoever those sound Interpreters who follow the
Septuagints meaning [I have kept thee from former judgements] do not think it
any prejudice to that cause, in opposition of which it is here produced: for if
God Almighty did defer and suspend his judgments, and continue him in being,
for to show his glory in taking vengeance; the Apostle might well apply it
further; whether he were raised, or reserved; it shows the freedom of Gods
Sovereignty, and power to dispose of his Creature to his glory, whether by
showing mercy, or by hardening.

Qu. 146. How then says the Scripture that God has power, as a Potter over
the clay, to make of the same lump, one vessel to honor, and another to
dishonor?

A. To show that God may do with his own what he will, distribute to them what
he pleases, preferring one before another in means of salvation, forbearance
toward them, or power exercised for their good, as in the case of preferring
Jacob and his posterity before Esau, and his. Though yet those he honored,
abusing their honor, were broken off, when the dishonored were made vessels
of Mercy through faith in Jesus Christ.

He tells us when God does make any man a vessel of honor, and leaves it
plain enough to be understood, when he makes any man to be a vessel of
dishonor; that is, when he vouchsafes him a less degree of the favors
specified. When he allows any man less means of salvation, than he does to
another: and when he shows less power, for the good of one, than he does for
the good of some other. For God forbeareth all men, and exercises power for
the good of all men, more or less. Thus much being premised. I come to observe
as follows.

First, it is a matter that causes scandal to the common people, to ascribe so
much to the difference of the means, conducing to salvation, that the very
Degree, of greater means or less, should be able to make men vessels of honor
or dishonor. They need not be assisted, in setting up such superstitious
fancies, and conceits of their teachers, and outward helps to holiness and
happiness. For 1. some are too forward to think themselves safe, so long as
they live under an eminent ministry, though they learn little, and practice
less. And 2. some others are too ready to lay the blame here, and give this the
reason, why they and the world about them amend no faster, because they are no
better taught. Worldly men, when they have no mind to find the way to true
conversion, and reformation; begin oftentimes to quarrel with their Ministers
and Pastors, as not being qualified with awakening gifts: their way of
preaching is not efficacious: and, who was ever known to be converted by a
Liturgy? forgetting in the mean time the 16 chapter of S. Luke: where, as there
is set before us and laid open the state of the other life or world; so is
there also a window opened to men's breasts and thoughts, that we may know what
fond conceits they have. Nay, father Abraham, but if one went to them from the
dead, they would repent; and he said unto them, if they hear not Moses and the
Prophets, neither will they be persuaded, though one rose from the dead.

Secondly, A Doctrine it is uncomfortable, and uncharitable, to teach, that
those persons, for examples sake, who living in the darker corners of this
Land, have not so plentiful instructions, as others have, are therefore made
of God to be vessels of dishonor. God sees not as man sees; chooses not
according to outward appearance and accommodation; but requires of Christian
people, according to what they have, and not according to what they have not:
it lies not all upon the edge of the instrument, or weapon; but strength of the
hand, in this work: and oftentimes, the first are last, and the List first.
Man's life consists not, whether it be corporal or spiritual, in the abundance
of the means that he possesses, but in Gods blessing and heavenly influence,
which causes often, as good health and habitude with. Daniels pulse, as
Benjamins double Mess.

Thirdly, A like Doctrine it is to teach, that whom God forbeareth not, but
chasteneth and scourges early, they are therefore vessels of dishonor, but
who knows not that Judgment uses to begin at Gods house? and that if there
be a difference, he least of all forbeareth those that be his own? the fruit of
this Doctrine would be, to add affliction to the afflicted, and help to make up
the measure of their sufferings, who find not the power of God exercised for
their good, with the mark and designation of reprobates.

In the very next verse following the mention of vessels to honor and
dishonor, it is said that, God endures with much long-suffering the vessels
of wrath, Romans 9.22. and does forbearance help to make a vessel of honor?
spoken of verse. 21. Our Author either could not or would not see what was next
at hand, and lay plain before his eyes: otherwise, Almighty Gods forbearance to
punish, had never entered the description of a vessel made to honor.

Fourthly, he interprets that to be a vessel to honor, upon which any honor
is conferred though for the duration, temporary and transitory, for such are
all the honors that he mentions. Thus Judas, even then, when an Unbeleever,
Thief, and Devil, was notwithstanding a vessel of honor, according to the
Dialect of these instructions, because he was born withal, and preferred in
outward means to life eternal before thousands of others whereas this
preposition, In, I N honorem, I N contumeliam, not of, but to honor, and
dishonor, being a final particle, and denoting the end; cannot otherwise well
be taken, than to denote a final state, and condition permanent. Had it been
his aim to take the Apostles sense, and not to force a meaning upon him; in the
very next verse, verse. 22. he might have seen explained what is meant by
vessels of dishonor, namely, vessels made up and fitted to destruction, not
less forborne, less regarded, and honored.

Fifthly, according to the tenor of the answer abovesaid, the same person may
be a vessel to honor, and dishonor both; successively, at several times;
that, confessedly: but not only so, but sensu composito; at the same time, he
shall be a vessel of honor, because he is preferred before some others, and a
vessel of dishonor, because some others again are preferred before him, in
participation of divine patience and goodness, and outward aid. For thus it
must needs be, in the several degrees, and the variety of these kinds of
savours vouchsafed of God to the sons of men.

Sixthly, if we view the words before, that gave the occasion to these, we
shall soon perceive how unlikely a matter it is, that either Jew or Gentile,
should charge God above with injustice, or that the Apostle should defend Gods
justice, by checking the presumption of humane reason; and yet nothing be
objected but this, that God uses some men better than he uses others, in
patience toward them, and means tending to life, and power exercised for their
good.

Lastly, there would be no colorable cause of complaint against God, nor
should any man need to say, why have thou made me thus? if it be in his power
to make himself otherwise, to make himself, even as he will, notwithstanding
any thing that God has done. He may happily honor one man more than another, in
outward mercies, and dispensations, which thereafter as a man shall well or ill
make use of, he shall make himself accordingly a vessel of wrath, or mercy.

God in mercy made the people of Chorazin and Bethsaida, vessels of honor (if
we can be persuaded so to call it) by the mighty and gracious works wrought
among them. But they by abusing this honor, made themselves truly and indeed,
vessels of dishonor. And others again who were dishonored of God, by having
fewer Talents, through good improvement of them, became vessels of glory and
honor. The rule of our belief teaches us otherwise, Gods purpose of Election
does stand or abide firm, Rom.9.11. his Counsel is immutable toward the heirs
of promise, Hebr.6.17. vessels of honor and dishonor, being no more
interchangeable here, than gold and silver, wood and earth, of which the diverse
vessels are made, 2 Timothy 2. 20.

Thus much concerning Election.

Of the means of salvation, he has formerly spoken sundry times, in several
Questions and Answers. But he did not tell us how far that term should be
extended; whether beyond the Church or no. Now he asks in

Q. 149. What be those means? (namely that God affords us toward faith in
Christ, and the blessings in him.)

A. All those things in which God by Christ, as the light of the world, and
great Prophet speaks forth himself and goodness to men, whether more generally
and darkly; or more specially, and plainly. (of the former sort are his works,
ordered by way of enlargement or chastisement, concerning which he proceeds
thus.)

Qu. 152. They speak of God and his Attributes, but do they speak any thing of
Christ?

A. Distinctly they do not: but by interpretation and more obscurely they do,
as the effect speaks some hidden cause, or the work the workman.

Qu. 153. Declare this more plainly.

A. They manifest and speak that Goodness of God, Psalm.75.1, 2, 3.
Psalm.68.18, 19.
that could not have been toward us, Acts 14. 17.
had not Christ interposed between God and us: so that as the Death of men
speaks Adams sin, so they speak Christ's Mediation.

The brief of these instructions is this; according to the New light that some
blazing Comets have afforded us: The works of Creation and Providence, bring
men to the knowledge of Christ our Savior, and the Sun, Moon, and Stars preach
the Gospel.

As for Christ's interposing betwixt God and us, I do in the first place
acknowledge, that his Mediation is not only sufficient, that is to say,
potentially efficacious, but moreover actually efficacious, for all men in the
world, whether they come to know any thing of him or no; yea, for the other
creatures also: thus far, as to that mixture and measure of mercy which they
enjoy, and conservation of them in that estate, wherein we now behold them. God
did so far accept of Noah's sacrifice, Gen.8. from which he smelled a sweet
savor; that he said, I will not again curse the ground any more: but while the
earth remains, Seedtime and Harvest, Cold and Heat, Summer and Winter, Day
and Night shall not cease. It is more likely that the weight of so great a
promise, and of such extent, to the worlds end, should rest and bear it self,
upon the virtual contents of Noah's sacrifice; than upon the Duty, Obedience,
or Religious exercise of Noah's person at that time. The sacrifice of Noah might
please God, but that with which he was pacified and appeased, was the virtue of
Christ's sacrifice, contained Sacramentally in that of Noah, as it was also in
all the Propitiatory offerings of the Old Testament, in which was offered and
performed true satisfaction and propitiation, though not truly, or in truth,
but only in Type and figure.

And as this promise or purpose of God, touching the preservation and upholding
of Man, and all flesh; although it were absolute and not conditionate, nor with
any contract made, is yet called in Scripture, a Covenant, Gen.9. taking that
term at large and improperly: So has the Rain-bowe been called a Sacrament of
it, in like large and improper acception. Thus far we hold that Jesus Christ
did interpose as a general Mediator: but this no way conduces to the purpose
of these Questions and Answers: and that for these two reasons: 1. Because thus
much is not known to all men by means of the works or creatures of God, but to
some only, and that by means of his word. 2. Because this Mediation avails
only, and extends only, to temporal and worldly benefits, not to salvation,
or life eternal. Whereas in this Catechism, the works of God are said to speak
a further Mediation, and to be means with which Gods spirit and power is
conversant [To bring men to faith in Christ, and so to the blessings in him,
even to be vessels of mercy. Quest. and Answ. 146, 147, 148.

In gainsaying which opinion, I craveleave to ask this question: Do the Sun,
Moon, and Stars together with other works of Gods Creation, speak any other
language now, then they did before the fall of man? it must be answered, No. As
the Sun does shine alike, at this day upon the just and the unjust; so did it
upon Adam, while he was in Paradise, and when he was thence excluded. All
things continue alike from the beginning of the Creation, 2 Pet. 3. which
though brought in as the saying of the Impostours, yet does not the Apostle
deny the truth of what is said, but only their false collection and reasoning
thence: namely, that because the world has so long continued, therefore it
must always continue, and never have end. Now shall we think, that Jesus Christ
did interpose as Mediator between God and us, when as yet there was no need?
Or, that there was a Remedy published to the world, before the Malady was
known, or was? If any difference there be in the Dialect and voice of the
creatures and works of God; then, they do not utter his goodness toward men
more, than they did before sin came into the world, rather his anger and
punishing hand: The vanity and servitude of corruption, to which the creature
is unwillingly subject, testifying as well the frown of Gods countenance, as
the sin and fall of man. The characters of Divine Providence, though they be
not very dim to be discerned, yet are they very difficult to be disciphered,
and do present to the quickest view and apprehension, the Bounty of the Supreme
Lord, and the curse of his Law, set one over against the other; but not the
contents of the Gospel, or the mercy of a Savior: The Gospel being Tidings
must be brought; and being News, must be told, before it can be known; and
being tendered by way of Covenant, implies a necessity that notice be given to
the parties concerned: Faith in Christ comes by hearing: how can they believe
in him, of whom they have not heard? Our Redemption is taught us in the school
of Christ, not in the Theater of the world. 1 Cor.1.21. After that in the
wisdom of God (that is, in the Glass of the Creatures, where shines Gods
wisdom, and power, and goodness) the world by wisdom, (that is, by their own
wisdom, and search, and interpretations, and collections) knew not God (not
God a Savior) it pleased God by the foolishness of preaching (that is, by
making known to the world, that the eternal Son of God was crucified for them)
to save them that believe. No mystery is known by nature. The Gospel is a
mystery or secret, 1 Timothy.3.16. a mystery which none of the Princes of the
world knew.

And whereas he says, Qu, 152. The works of Creation do speak of Christ, but
more obscurely] against this, I argue thus. If heathen persons by means of the
creatures were brought to know Christ a Savior, though more obscurely; Then,
when Christ a Savior is evidently taught, they would have entertained him: But
when he was evidently taught, they refused him, and counted his Gospel
foolishness: Therefore they did not know him before, no, not so much as
obscurely.

When Paul preached Jesus at Athens, where was highest improvement of natural
light, he was not only encountered by the Philosophers, even the Stoics, the
best of the pack; but a worse matter then so, he was had before the Highest
Court, and endited for innovating in Religion. And every where, as well as
there, was the Gospel spoken against, Acts 28.

He who should have counted all fabulous, that was reported of America, or the
Western world, at the first discovery; certainly that man never had formerly,
any such suspicion or surmise, as Columbus had: namely, that of the huge space
or quantity of the Globe terrestrial, which the Sun in daily motion compasses,
and which was not then taken notice of, there might be as well land as sea, and
that land habitable and inhabited: for had he thus imagined of himself, he
would not then have laughed at the story of the Newfound land, and held it as
a foolish fiction.

Had the Mediation of Christ a Savior been darkly gathered from the fabric of
the world, and works of Providence; then would it not, when fully, faithfully,
and credibly published, prove to be matter of offense, and be judged folly, as
it was of them who had no other call but outward. And how could that be seen of
them by the less light, that was not seen of them by the greater light,
arising, and shining on them?

And whereas he says, that Gods works speak christ, as the work the workman]
it comes in here impertinenly, and belongs to the former member of the
Division; They speak of God, but do they speak of Christ? So asks the
Question, which is as much as to say thus; The works speak of a Creator, but
do they speak also of a Savior? Now they speak God the Creator, and not
Christ the Savior, as the work the workman. Secondly, it is true that the work
shows the workman: but as a workman, and no further: it shows qualis, or qualis
artifex, but not quis: not his name: if it did, we should not see Artists set
their names upon their curious pieces, Such a one Fecit, Sculpsit; or if his
name, not his disposition, and moral character: or if that, not his Will and
Testament.

If a Nobleman should build a large and fair house, furnishing it with all
things needful, and making it his place of residence, should freely entertain
passengers, for the time they stay with him; thus far may they well reason and
conclude: Surely this great man had money enough, neither did he spare for any
cost in rearing this edifice. One of good judgment he is, and discretion, thus
to contrive the rooms, and order his family in so frugal, and so plentiful a
manner: A good and courteous man he also is, to treat us so liberally, that we
want neither meat, nor drink, nor lodging, nor atendance. Thus far should they
argue well, from the effect to the cause; from the work, to the workman. But
too simple and shallow should he be among them, that should conclude thus from
the premises: Therefore surely, he will pay my debts; therefore he will put me
into his Will, and give me such and such Legacies: therefore he will make me
one of his heirs. The works which God has made, and the blessings he bestows
on us, with an open hand, and daily loadeth us withal, do witness of him, his
goodness, his eternal power and Godhead. But they show not who he is, they
declare not his name, nor that he is the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, that
brought Israel out of Egypt: This is his name; and this is his memorial: they
show not his nature; nor the persons of the Trinity; and therefore not the
second person, or the Mediator: not his Will, how he must be worshipped, and
served, in the Covenant of works: much less his Gospel or Covenant of Grace,
that he made, and that by way of Testament, with his Church and people,
designed by him, to be heirs of his kingdom.

Qu. 155. But can we find that God ever accepted of any faith men acted
toward him, by means of any works of his, short of the distinct knowledge of
Christ?

A. Yes sure, both Rahab, and Cornelius, and diverse others, God being no
respecter of persons, but through the Mediation of Christ accepting every one
in any nation, that (by what means he affords them) do fear him, and work
righteousness before him.

They who have hitherto denied, and opposed the Doctrine of that Universal
Grace, which the Patrons of it maintain to be presented to all men, and met
withal by all men; have desired, and called for, at the Adversaries hands, the
Names of some of those persons, that have at any time by this Grace, been
brought home to God; and have further said, that if any there were to be found,
they should have heard of them, long ere now, on both ears.

Mr Horn in this Question, puts himself upon the service; and accepts the
challenge, which had better be waved, and holds up the cause in such a manner,
that he lets it quite fall to the ground: for in the Answer, he produces only
a pair of Proselytes; the which were Jews in Religion, though not by birth, or
nation; and therefore had as distinct knowledge of Christ, as the true Church
of God then had. Thus by naming these two, he has caused withal, good proof
to be given in, that none can be named.

When he says, [ by what means he affords them] he speaks as if it were
already gained and granted, that there is variety of means to the attainment of
saving faith; and as if Gods non-acception of persons, were partly in this,
that he regards not how men come by Grace so they have it, whether by work or
word; whether by Nature, or Creature, or Scripture. Whereas Rahab and Cornelius
had no means, but the only means. And let him find out whom he can persuade,
that the one of them did not learn the faith and fear of the true God, from
those whom Joshua sent to Jericho; nor the other living in the Metropolis of
Palestine, from the nation Jews; but rather from the view and contemplation of
heaven and earth.

Qu. 177. What is herein discovered to be sin?

A. All erroneous and false conceptions of him, (as if he was like an old man,
or cruel, or all mercy, or takes no notice of men and their actions) with all
will worship, according to our own devices, or men's traditions.

Cruel] This is an arrow shot upward, and must fall somewhere: let them look to
it, who are most therein concerned. He sees little who sees not, which way
this, and the like rude and unsavory girds do look. This is but a taste for
his new beginners, who may afterward, be laid in, with a larger allowance to
feed on, from his own party, or if need be, from his own pen, with Abaddon,
(...). and such like poysonfull stuff, as help to swell the Preface to his open
door. When Andradius, another universalist, had argued for his opinion, that
Faith indeed is necessary to righteousness and life; but may be obtained by
that knowledge, which is in part written in man's heart naturally, and in part
acquired by the consideration of the Creatures; otherwise; Non posse Deum vel
ab injustitia vel a crudelitate defendi: Chemnitius took the boldness to say,
that these were Cerberei latratus, page 108. de operibus Infidelium, and yet
Chemnitius was no Calvinist; and yet Andradius his words, were not direct and
positive; but through his confidence spoken, out of supposition, and putting
case, that his own opinion should be false, and his Adversaries true. But it
seems some men, choose to be deeply engaged, and resolve to take no quarter;
being sworn to their beloved cause, even after the manner of the old
Soldurian's law: they strengthen their party with the uttermost breach: and as
they who landing sink their ships, they intend not to listen to sound of
retreat, nor proffer of compromise. Whereas were their opinion true, and
certain, touching Gods decrees, and dealings toward the sons of men;
Nevertheless, as earthly Princes love not to hear their power, or prerogatives
disputed, much less circumscribed; it were neither true nor safe, to say, that
God were unjust, if he should do otherwise.

And I do observe here, the Catechists partiality. He has included in a
different character, four several instances of such as have false conceptions
touching God Almighty. The first is, some of the Papists, who worship God in
the picture of an old man. The second, his Adversaries, whom he selected to
deal withal, in this Catechism, and against whom principally it was composed,
as intentionally for his chief aim, so intensively, for his greatest
earnestness: these he means who conceive of God as cruel. The third, they who
hold God to be all Mercy, as the old Marcionites, and many others now, their
near allies. The fourth the Epicureans, who deny Providence; these four. Now
of these four, he represents the first, so as they themselves do willingly own,
what he charge them withal. Bellarmine says, that though it be not a matter
of Faith, but of Opinion, yet for his part, he holds it lawful, to picture
God, in forma hominis senis; and the 7th of Daniel is commonly alleged, where
it is said, that the Ancient of days did sit, and the hair of his head was like
the pure wool, (that is, white as wool) as white as snow. Rev.3. And yet
perhaps, and by the way; the ground of the proof from thence, may be found to
fail. For, first, Candidum, and canum, are not the same: whiteness, most
likely, meaning not hoariness, or age, but purity, or sanctity. Mundities, not
canities, as well in hair, as garment. Secondly, Antiquus, and Senex, are not
the same. Ancient, does signify Gods Eternity, before all times; but an old
man, is looked upon as decaying, and going out of the world, Et quod senescit
prope est interitum, Hebr.8. The heavenly Spirits whom God has placed next
himself, in condition and state, as well as in station, are pourtrayed with
younger faces commonly: Even as that Angel, that rolled away the stone from our
Saviors sepulcher, was in forma (...), in the form of a young man, or youth;
quia Angeli nunquam canescunt aut consenescunt, sed perpetuo florent, vigent,
vegentque, as the most learned Vossius, has noted in his Harmony of the
Gospel: that is, because the Angels do never wax old, or wither; but are still
and always, lively, vigorous, fresh and flourishing. But whether the practice
can be made good or no, it is not denied, nor disowned.

No more is that which is charged upon the third sort, who make God all
goodness, and mercy; they think they need not be ashamed of this, so pleasing
it is, and plausible. And our Author himself gives them no great
discouragement, page.268. of his work abovenamed, where the question being
concerning Gods desire of man's salvation, how great it is, and of his
helpfulness thereto, he makes a kind of wonder at it, that any man should
think [ that we can speak too well of God.] Our selves in the mean time being
judges, what is well and what is ill, thought or said, and understanding
goodness, not absolute, but related, which is no other but beneficence, or
bounty.

The fourth sort are likewise forward to maintain the opinion that is laid to
them, and think it honorable to the supreme governor of the world, not to
look after matters of small regard, one of their founders boasted Relligionum
animos nodis exsolvere porgo: and his followers freely make profession. These
three the Catechist deals fairly withal, and does them no wrong. But when he
comes at the second instance, or the party, as he calls them in the preface,
he most invidiously lays to them, that which they never said, nor thought: as
if they taught God to be cruel, and as if he were by them so conceived and
apprehended to be.

Opposite to mercy named by him, on one hand, stands Justice, or Severity, as
well as Cruelty: but those terms were not for his turn, Cruelty is unjust
Severity: God punishes none but for sin, and punishment of sin is no
injustice; therefore does the Apostle abominate the thought, of ascribing to
God any injustice, even there where man's reason must least of all be satisfied.
This is not their opinion, but a false and odious deduction of his own. So much
for his partiality in this place.

Qu. 199. Why say you it is glad tidings to all people, and the revelation of
God righteousness to all? is there any needfulness or usefulness of believing
that extent of it, as you seem to insinuate?

A. Romans 3.9,10,19,22,23,24. and 5.12,18.
2 cor.3.12,13. with 4.2,3,4.
Yes verily, for seeing that man's misery is so clearly and generally held forth
in Scriptures, that any man in crediting them may see himself miserable, it is
very behoovefull that the remedy be as plainly, and generally held forth, that
any man in crediting the Scriptures may see it is provided for him; yea so
useful is this, both in respect of a man's self, and his demeanor to others,
that none but Satan, and such as he blinds, would persuade men otherwise.

The holy Scriptures do clearly set forth man's misery to be general, or
belonging to all men; but the remedy of that misery is not clearly and plainly
set forth to be general or universal, and belonging to all men, otherwise than
according to the sense before specified, which is sufficient to encourage any
person that takes notice of it, to lay hold upon it.

That chapter by him quoted, Romans 3. does in diverse verses testify man's loss,
and sinfulness, to be universal, and over all; but the remedy by Christ's
righteousness, in respect of actual efficacy, is restrained, ver.22. to them
that believe. Which restriction is very often expressed, and must be understood
in those places, where it is not expressed, and where the universal particle
All, is barely and solely laid down.

This answer of his, to the question abovesaid, being committed to the memory
of the younger sort of people, may do them hurt; and it is not like to do them
good, as being no way apt to teach them, either the fear of God, or the
reverence of man. Not the fear of God, because it carries with it toward him,
so much arrogance; as to prescribe and set down what it behooved him to have
done, though it does not appear he has done it: Not the reverence of man,
because it carries with it toward him so much virulence, as to judge all those
to be led blindfold by the Devil, that are not persuaded God has done, what
is here thought behoovefull to be done, though it be plain and certain he has
not done it.

A multitude is held inexcommunicable; What presumption is it then to deliver
up multitudes of Churches to Satan for their teacher, because they refuse to
follow him, who professes to leave that road, in which Their guides and
worthies have gone before them!

As for that he directs us to, 2 Cor. 4. I answer: Those persons, to whom the
Gospel being preached by the Apostle, was hidden; whose minds the god of this
world had blinded, that they should not see it in the brightness of it, and
hereby were lost, and did perish; Were not so much beloved of God, as others
were, to whom the Apostle preached with better success; although they had the
same choice means of salvation that others had: neither was there so much good
will toward them, as there was to others, whose eyes and hearts the Lord did
open, that they might see, and believe, and affect what was taught, and be
saved: much less was there so much good will toward a third sort of men, that
were never so much as outwardly called. This we think, this we believe, and
hold. And if any man shall say, That whiles we are of this mind, and because
we think thus much, therefore Satan blinding our eyes, has persuaded us to it:
We will with more modesty return him this advice, that he would beware of
another kind of blindness, which Tertullian speaks of, Apolog.9. Coecitatis
species videri videre quae non sunt: it is a kind of blindness to see that
which is not, or to see more than is to be seen: after the same manner do we
think him to be blind, who can discern that Grace is of the same extent in the
world, that Sin is: and that the Salve provided for mankind, is full out as
broad as the sore, (otherwise than as before explained upon Qu.93.) and that
looks upon the Gospel, with a false pair of spectacles, by means of which it
appears far larger, than God has thought fit it should be.

In the Questions and Answers 200, 201. he gives many reasons, reduced to five
heads, why it is behoovefull, that the remedy should be as general, and as
plain, as the misery: as, [Because it gives us ground to repent, and bless God,
and have good thoughts of him: condemnation of unbeleevers will be more just; a
man shall not be laid open to despair; he shall have good ground to love, and
help, and pray for others.

It is sufficient to speak to these reasons in the general.

First, I think it no way bebooveth, nor becomes man, to say, what it behooved
God to have done: because by this means Man is made judge of Gods doings: it
behooveth, or, it must be, tenetur, decet, dcbuit, are words no way suitable to
us, who ought rather to apply our selves, to learn what God has done, than to
take upon us to teach, what he should do.

Just thus is the Popes infallibility pleaded for, and a living Judge. Regula
viva infallibilis. Very useful, very needful it were, that there should be
some, one to end all questions, and without further argument or appeal, to
determine controversies. So were it also that every Bishop were infallible, and
that every Parish Priest were so: and if every particular person were
infallibly directed, they should have the greater reason to be thankful, and
their condemnation would be the more just, if certainly knowing their duties
and matters of faith, they should refuse to believe and do accordingly.

I answer secondly, Not every thing must be taught, whether it be true or
false, because some; good may likely come of it, if it be believed. Neither on
the other hand, must we forbear to teach the truth, because it may be abused to
evil.

The Doctrine of Merit, is a great encouragement to good works; yet, as he will
not be held a skillful Architect, that shall dig up the foundation of a Town;
that he may have wherewithal to finish or repair the top of it: So let our
builder take good heed, how he does weaken, and how he does tamper with the
groundwork of free Grace, pretending great need and much benefit that may come
thereon. If men will not otherwise bless God, and have good thoughts of him,
unless they be taught that he loves one man as much as another; we must not
any whit the more be found false witnesses of God, 1 Cor. 15. 15. false
witnesses, I mean, as the Apostle means, not against him, but for him,
alleging more in his behalf, than will hold true, because we think it makes
for him, and his glory. Will ye accept his Person? says Job, chap. 13. that
is, do you think that he will take it well, or be beholden to you, if you go
about to show him more favor, than his cause will well bear, in the truth of
it? Plainly, this will fall out to be an accusation, not defense.

Thirdly, his Adversaries, who hold universal Redemption, though not every way
as he does: do repent, and bless God, and think well of him, and hope in him,
not running into despair, and do love others, and pray for them, and help them:
all this they do, and are called upon to do, by virtue of that Doctrine, which
they have learned touching Gods love, and Christ's Death.

And lastly, it would be weighed, whether the people being taught to reason
after this manner, be not endangered so far to forget the charge of Moses,
Deuteronomy. 29. abovementioned, as quite contrary to it, to be careless in doing
duties commanded, and conforming to Gods revealed will; because they are made
no further acquainted with his secret intention and purpose; and whether they
be not hereby instructed, to stand and capitulate, and be upon points of
certainty, with God the Judge, in whose debt and danger nevertheless so much
they are: And for his reasons, this may suffice.

Next after these reasons, showing the necessity of believing the extent of
Christ's righteousness to all, he proceeds thus.

Qu. 202. May not a man as well and surely know the remedy to be for him by his
believing, wel-walking, or the like?

A. Prove.28. 26.
Jer. 17. 9.
Jer. 23. 25, 29.
2 Pet. 1. 19.
No surely: For, 1. The acts of a man's own deceitful heart, are nothing so
evident and sure a foundation of believing a thing (no nor any other pretended
Revelation) as the word of God is.

By his beleeving] in the Question, Believing is opposed to, and set against
the word. [not so well by believing, as by the word of God] whereas we cannot
know any thing by the word, otherwise than by believing the word. By believing
therefore, as I suppose, he means, the inherent grace or gift of Faith: and
by believing and wel-walking, I take him to understand Faith and Obedience: and
when he says in the Question [ or the like] I think he means good
affections, and desires, and dispositions. The greatest ambiguity and confusion
lies in those words [ the remedy to be FOR HIM] for they may bear a double
sense. 1. He knows the remedy to be for him, that is, undoubtedly informed,
that God has done graciously for all, and so for him] as our Author speaks
in his Answer to Quest. 200. or that knows that Christ died for all the
world, that whosoever believes in him should not perish. Thus the remedy is
for him, provided that he seeks to enjoy it, and attain it. 2. He knows the
remedy to be for him, to whom it is so applied, that he is assured it has
taken place on him, that he has found relief, and is cured, and has obtained
Peace and Pardon and Justification. He that knows the remedy to be for him
in the first sense, may possibly not know it to be for him in the second. So
plainly they be two several matters, and yet here they are made all one. The
Orthodox do say, That a Christian by faith, obedience, and the testimony of
the Spirit, may assuredly know, that the remedy of Christ's Death, and the
benefits of his Passion are his own, and efficaciously applied for the raising
him to spiritual life, and hope of inheritance incorruptible. But can any man
know the remedy to be for him thus, by the word of God alone, setting aside
the consideration of faith and obedience? he cannot. Well may he question the
truth of his faith, that has no better ground to believe that Christ has done
away his sins, than this; That he has done away the sins of all the persons in
the world.

How he demeaned himself in delivering the Doctrine of the Moral law, we saw
before: here we have another smack of his Antinomian leaven, whiles he denies
works, or graces, or faith either, unless it be of his own mark and allowance,
to confer any thing to the consolation of a Christian.

He tells his opinion with some passion, in the Preface to his other work,.
Only whereas. [Their daubings that tell souls, they may know that Christ loves
them, by their good desires and endeavors, strifes and labors, my soul
abhors.] We have little reason to think, that he remembers the profession
that he made at the beginning; To follow the rule of Gods word, howsoever he
might leave the common-road, for most certainly he has here left both the one
and the other. Holy Scripture teaches us to argue from our Sanctification to
our Justification, as being two things never severed in the person, or their
subject; though they be distinguished in their nature. If any man be in Christ,
he is a new creature: and he that is renewed, may be assured, that he is in
Christ, and that Christ loves him. They are the Characters which he gave:
Blessed are the merciful, the meek, the pure in heart, and they who have good
desires, hungring and thirsting after righteousness: and he has told us, that
they who do the will of God, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven; and that
they are in the mean time to him, as his brother and sister and mother. I trust
his sheep will never hearken to the voice of any stranger, to the contrary, nor
much regard great words. They hear the Apostle Paul say, 2 Cor. 1. 12. Our
rejoicing is this, the testimony of our conscience, that in simplicity and
godly sincerity we have had our conversation in the world. And they hear the
Apostle Peter say 2 Epist. 1. chap. if virtue, and temperance, and patience and
godliness be in you, you make your calling and election sure, and you shall
never fall: and they hear the Apostle John say 1. Epist. 3. chap. in this the
children of God are manifest, even in doing righteousness, verse. 10. and verse.
14. We know we have passed from death to life, because we love the brethren.
There is great cause that that kind of faith should be suspected, how much
soever it be cried up, that must assure our interest in Christ, without good
actions, or good affections.

And whereas also he excludes Revelation, we oppose like wise the Apostles
testimony, Romans 8. 16. the Spirit bears witness that we are the children of
God. and 1 Cor. 2. 12. We have received the Spirit which is of God, that we may
know the things that are freely given to us of God. I know no other Revelation
the pretended orthodox do pretend to, and he sets himself against none else,
and his words are general [ not any other pretended revelation.

I think that under those words in the Qu. [ or the like] may be meant also,
changes and alterations, in men's hearts and lives from bad to good: In a
funeral sermon of his, page 18, 19. he plyeth this matter, much disheartening
those that think they believe, and are of Gods Elect, because they find
themselves changed and reformed: he tells them, they ground their faith of
Christ's Mediation upon their works. Answ, Those who are taught, that good works
are the product and fruit of faith, cannot ground their faith upon their works.
Neither can good Christians value such talk as this while they remember what S.
James says, Show me thy faith by thy works, and I will show thee my faith by
my works. He that is suspected to be dead, may by a stander by, be certainly
known to be alive, if he perceive him to draw his breath; and if another of of
the bystanders shall argue, that it is a great weakness to ground any man's
life upon his breath, and that it can be no true life that is so grounded; he
would by others, be thought in this, not to be reasonable, but ridiculous.

Man's Conversion is a work of that nature, that it is not always easy to be
discerned; neither ought men to be too scrupulous, or curious, in finding the
time, means, and manner of it. But where these are obscure, or uncertain, and
when doubts and difficulties arise, touching these; the help has always been
from consideration of the change that is wrought in us. If a man may assuredly
know that he has attained his journeys end, and arrived at the desired haven;
he ought not too much to trouble himself, about the way, how he came there. Let
not therefore Christians be beguiled of this supply and relief, but pass by, if
need be, the circumstances, of time, and place, and way, and insist upon the
substance, which is the alteration that is made, which they may do, as well,
and upon as certain ground, as to this work upon the soul, as the blind man
did concerning the work that our Savior wrought upon his body, saying, Joh. 9.
One thing I know, that whereas I was blind, now I see. So may a true convert
say, I was sometimes darkness, but now am I light in the Lord, Ephesians. 5. 8. And
the prodigal son, had as much cause of comfort and joy, as the father had, upon
the new return, and change appearing, that He who was dead is alive, and he
that was lost, is found.

And whereas he told his Auditory then, page 19. that it is Pharisaical to
conceit, that God loves us, because of reformations, and frames begotten in us
by his grace and [a certain secret insensible working of power in the heart] it
may be answered, If the work of the Spirit be secret and insensible, what
better way can there be, to take notice of it, than by the change and
alteration that is made in us? He that would know whether the Sun moves or
not, must not look upon the Sun, nor can he see the shadow move upon the Dial;
but if he comes an hour or two hence, he may easily discern, that the Sun and
the shadow are removed, and that therefore they did move before. But the truth
is, our Author holds no such internal work, or power needful to conversion,
for of the six helps to Quakerisme, afforded by such as are counted orthodox,
this is by him counted the second [Their speaking of faith as wrought by some
immediate power, as besides the word preached.] but so much for this.

I think, by [the like] in the Question last rehearsed, he may mean also,
Consolations, and sense of heavenly joy: for in a discourse of his, called A
Caveat to true Christians, page 84, 85. he much mislikes, that men should
gather comfort or assurance, from sensible feeling and visits, and says that
such are thence called sensual, as not living by Faith, but upon matters of
sense: thus he there. But where are they called sensual? who ever called them
so? A little before, page 82. upon those words of the Apostle Peter, They that
are unlearned, wrest the Scriptures; he notes thus. [He means not unlearned in
Aits and languages] But I suppose, there be few among us, though so far
illiterate, as they be not able to read his book, but even by custom of our
English language, have learned the difference betwixt Sensual, and Sensible.
The word [sensual] is twice found. Jam. 3. and Jude verse. 19. in both places it
stands opposed to spiritual, and signifies as much as Carnal: such as intend
only, and are led by, their part sensitive, or carnal appetite, or nature,
common to us, with the bruits: ( sensual, having not the Spirit) and in our
common speech, a sensual man, is one that is given to brutish pleasures. Now
shall such a Christian, as is visited with the consolations of God, and is made
sensible of heavenly light and joy; that can in some sort take up the Prophets
words, in the multitude of the sorrows that I had in my heart, thy comforts
have refreshed my soul; be called Sensual? It is true that the sense of divine
comfort, and the light of Gods countenance, may denominate persons sensible,
namely, thereof: yet not absolutely sensible, for such we call them that are
apt to perceive and understand readily what is done or said. But to say they
are, absolutely Sensual, is so gross a mistake, that I cannot but wonder it
should fall from him who is skillful in Arts and languages, how soever
undervaluing them in others. Not living by Faith, says he, but upon matters of
sense.] Faith, and Sense, may be opposed, and are sometimes, very distant and
contrary; but not as sense is taken here. For they who have, as holy Scripture
speaks, joy in believing; or that, as the Apostle Peter says, believing,
rejoice with joy unspeakable and glorious; do live by faith, and upon sense
too, that is upon sensible consolations, or perception of divine favor: as a
man may comfort and cheer himself, in a winters night, by the heat of the fire,
and the light of it too.

But what is the reason, why we may not believe that Christ has dealt
graciously with us, in that he has bestowed upon us, the gifts of Faith and
Obedience; or that we may not conclude spiritual life, from spiritual
affections and desires? It is this, because a man's heart is deceitful. The
Scripture says indeed, Man's heart is deceitful; but it says not, that every
man's heart, is at all times and in every thing actually deceived. Some men have
a custom lacerare Scriptur as; to rend the Scripture, as it were, to tear a
text out of the Bible, which they think is for their turn, though against
reason, against the Analogy of Faith, and quite contrary to other places,
which should, by collation, help to interpret. One Scripture says, Man's heart
is deceitful above all things. Another says, that our heart does gives right
and true verdict concerning our estates: If our heart condemn us, God is
greater than our heart and knows all things. If our heart condemn us not, it
is so good a sign that we may have confidence toward God. A faithful
Christian may rightly judge of his own condition, though an hypocrite be
mistaken in judging of his; whose heart yet, as it is heavy in the midst of his
mirth and laughter; may, likely enough condemn him, in the midst of his
confidence and self-deceit. I answer secondly, and affirm, that this rule, here
given, or this saying of Scripture, without right interpretation, or due
restriction, That Man's heart is deceitful, and no sure foundation of believing
a thing, being applied to other matters in like sort (and why not to others as
well as to this?) is a sure foundation or principle of Scepticisme, or
believing nothing at all; which is not many removes distant from Atheism. With
the heart man believes: and if the heart be deceitful in every thing, how can
he believe any thing? And thirdly he does not well, to make opposition betwixt
a believing man's heart, and Gods word. He who collecteth that God loves him,
because he has bestowed his sanctifying graces upon him; does not make his own
heart, but Gods word, to be the foundation of his belief. Nor does he, as the
Text points, Prove. 28. Trust in his own heart, but makes use of his own
heart, or reason, in applying the word of God to his own case, and his own
benefit, according to the will of God. Now follows the second reason.

2. Tit. 3. 5.
Rom 4. 24,25. and 3. 25.
Nor is such a Faith under the Gospel-Declaration, a distinguishing Character
of Gods Election, as springs not up from the love of God, and blood of Christ
shed for us, as in the word of God declared to us, and by the authority thereof
apprehended by us; as this faith that goes before, and is our ground of such an
apprehension.

This is his second reason, preferring the faith of the Universalist, before
the faith of the pretended Orthodox: The one is no character of Gods Election,
the other is. The meaning is this, as if he had said; He who believes that God
loves all alike, and Christ died alike for all men, as to the intention of
benefit by his Death; has a right faith, even before any grace of
Sanctification wrought. But he who believes that the benefit of Christ's Death,
who died for all, is more intended to some than others, has no true faith, nor
sign of Gods Election, though his faith be accompanied with obedience, good
desires and changes, and a pretended testimony of the Spirit. An Assertion, I
know not whether he more boldly, or more blindly uttered. I shall touch now
only upon these two particulars. 1. How uncharitable he is to his adversaries,
or the dissenting party. 2. How uncomfortable, to his own party. 1. He has
no charity for that party, that is not of his own way. I take charity now for
that effect or fruit of charity, which is showed in believing all things, and
hoping all things: that is, the best things that may be believed, and that may
be hoped, touching others. He assirmeth the faith of the Universalist, to be
the only distinguishing character of Gods Election; the faith of all others,
be they never so virtuous, pious, sanctified, mortified, to be a false and
feigned faith: it seems they set their soot in the wrong way, at first: they
began amiss; and now how far soever they go, and how fast soever they go, they
still wander and go astray in a by-path. What good can be expected from an ill
beginning? what firm building, from a sandy foundation? if the root be
rottenness, the fruit can be nothing but dust and smoke. But I answer: That
every one may be saved in his own Religion, is an Opinion Anathematized in our
Church-Articles. Nevertheless Christians are not wont, I am sure they ought not
to be peremptory, in condemning one another, upon matters of no greater
importance. But of all men, an Universalist, how ill does it become to be a
Monopolist! How ill accords that charity to it self (if at least that be not
a false charity, that overthrows the true faith) which is in so high a flow
to Heathens, and in so low an ebb to Fellow Christians! But it must not be any
great matter with us to be judged by man. That person, who with a true belief
can say; The Son of God loved me and gave himself for me: and with an humble
and thankful mind can say, God has put his fear in my heart; if not
researching but adoring Gods secret judgments; he shall forbear to think, that
there was as much good intended to every one as to him; has far more reason to
suspect this Catechist for a seducer, than himself for an hypocrite, or unsound
believer. For, supposing it were true, as we are verily persuaded it is not,
that God had such a love, and such a gracious intention toward all persons in
the world, as this Author teaches; yet is not the belief of it, so necessary
an ingredient to justifying faith, that it should be no true justifying faith
without it. For as the faith of Peter, and many others of the Jews, was a true
and saving faith, even then when they were ignorant of the extent of Gods Love
and Grace in the Gospel, toward the Gentiles, Act. 10. and 11. So we doubt not
but the faith of a Christian believer, may be, and is, a sound faith, and
character of Gods Election; although he be to seek in this New discovery very
of Gods good will, and grace extended toward all men in an equal dispensation.

2. As he is uncharitable to all others, so is he uncomfortable to such who do
think it best, to leave the beaten path of Gods Church, and follow him For he
does deprive and spoil them of that assurance and testimony of Gods love, which
they had from sanctifying gifts, and inherent graces: having been heretofore
rightly taught, that though they might not put confidence in their works, and
good desires; yet they might raise and gather confidence and comfort from their
works, and good desires, testifying, that their faith is true. And that Apostle
who said, That his rejoicing was the testimony of a good conscience, and good
conversation; advises every man to rejoice in himself, Gal. 6. 4. And
whosoever goes any other way to work, to get a comfortable assurance, than by
these marks of holiness, and fruits of faith; will never be able to
distinguish, betwixt a false peace of conscience, and a true; but will be
unavoidably exposed to the delusions of Satan.

But it may be thought, that he takes his followers from their former stay, and
prop, to help them to a better. What is that? It is to be of his judgment of
Universal Redemption, and Universal Grace Well: suppose that a sinner were
fully persuaded that God did wish him as well, from the foundation of the
world, and as really intend the benefit of Christ's Death for him, as for any
other Saint, now glorified in heaven; There cannot hence arise any strong
consolation, whiles withal he is persuaded that God intended as much good from
the beginning to Cain and Judas; and whiles withal he takes notice of our
Authors Quest. and Answ. 95. Shall all men then be saved eternally? No, the
greatest part go to destruction.] So small relief can be had for a distressed
conscience, from the common love, or the generality of Gods good will toward
all men.

His texts in the Margin, Tit. 3. 5. Not by works of rightcousness, but
according to his mercy he saved us: and Romans 3. and 4. treating of
Justification, cannot be applied against the knowledge of Gods love that may be
obtained by means of Sanctification.

His last reason, why we may not gather out of inherent graces, that there is
mercy and remedy for us, is in these words:

3. Luc.18. 9, 10, 11.
This is the way to make men Pharisees, trusters in themselves that they are
righteous, and despising others not qualified like themselves.

Not every one that shall do what the Pharisees did, and did amiss, shall
presently be a Pharisee, unless he does it with the Pharisees mind. He that
washes his hands before meat, or when he comes from market, and concourse of
people; must not be called Pharisee, unless it be done with an opinion of
cleansing himself from his sins; or from pollution contracted in company. Not
the bare words of the Pharisee, Luke18. but the scope of our Savior is to be
attended; which is, to teach us when we pray to God, to come in humility, and
to beware of justifying our selves in his sight and presence, upon confidence
of our own righteousness: and to teach us also, that when we approach to God
the Judge, it lies not all upon this, Whether we be more or less sinful, but
whether we be penitent or no. For one man may be guilty of many and great sins,
and yet truly repenting of them, and craving pardon, and fleeing to Gods mercy,
shall be justified and saved. Another man whose sins are comparatively small,
if he stands upon his own righteousness, and good deeds, shall be lost. The
Pharisees words were unseasonably spoken, and to an ill intent, which
nevertheless may be well spoken [ God I thank thee, I am not as other men are].
It is rightly observed, Finis dat esse in moralibus: it is our intention that
does formalize our words, or our actions; toward God, or man. As the very same
terms may serve(materially) for a Reproach, and a Reproof, according to the
different manner and end of the speaker. Thou fool, is a reproach, yet Abigail
called her husband so; and Paul called the Galatians so, out of their love and
good will. So a Saint may say, just as the Pharisee said, and yet deserve no
blame for pride nor contempt of others. Nehcmiah did call to mind what good he
had done for his people, when he presented his prayer to God: and Hezekiah
said, Remember, O Lord, I beseech thee, how I have walked before thee in truth:
yet who will say that these were like the Pharisee. And the Prophet David,
Psalm. 119. does often make complaint, how others did break the Law of God; and
as often does he make profession, how he kept the Law of God, and was zealous
for it; and yet who will say, he was a despiser of others?

I observe of our Author, that though he think good to conform in his opinions
to the Remonstrants, and militate under their Banner, for the most part either
following them in their way, or else therein going beyond them; yet he often
marches over into the Tents of the Antinomians, and closes with them as their
own: which two parties, nevertheless, and their Principles, are wholly
inconsistent, and opposite in extremes. I instance now, in his opinion touching
Good works done after grace received, in this place, and elsewhere touching
works morally virtuous, done before Grace received: which by the one party are
magnified near to the Merit of Congruitie, as if God did bestow Faith according
to the good use of natural gifts, in whomsoever: And by the other part are so
vilified as if they were no way to be thought upon, otherwise than as
hindrances, and not steps, in the Church of God, toward true Conversion.

Essays p.18. he maintains, an equal dispensation of Grace to all men, and
answering that Sophisme, or captious question, why of two men, every way alike
disposed, going to the same sermon, one should be converted, the other not; he
renders this reason among many others: Because one may be more vicious
outwardly, and having less conceit of his goodness, may sooner receive
instruction, than another that is civilly and religiously inclined, as the
Publicans and harlots entered into the kingdom sooner than the proud conceited
Pharisees.] But first, These two sorts of men, are not every way alike
disposed: and secondly, If he had said, That the civilly and religiously
inclined, are more ready to receive instruction, than the vicious, he had said
somewhat probable: But the quite contrary by him there delivered, is an error;
and whether it be a vulgar one or no, it is a very weak one, and very
scandalous to weak people. Not that I think there is any efficiency in natural
or moral perfections toward the producing of the least degree of saving Grace;
But because God Almighty does for the most part, and in the ordinary way of
bringing men home to him, make use of Civil virtues, and outward conformity to
Christian duties, as previous and preparative to conversion and regeneration.
Neither can I see any manner of solidity in his proof, because it can never be
made good, That the Scribes and Pharisees were not vicious, or that they were
religiously inclined, notwithstanding their ostentation and hypocrisy.

Trusters in themselves] This appellation recoilleth forcibly, and therefore
better had been spared. He did not well remember here those of his own belief,
who had never taken such pains, and troubled the Churches of God in promoting
their five articles with such eagerness; in hewing and repairing those broken
cisterns with such diligence; but that they had a mind to trust themselves,
rather than another. They who will have no decrees touching men's estates, but
revocable; They who plead so much, and in such a manner, for freewill, and
against free grace; They who like better of their general and sufficient grace,
than of any special and efficacious grace; do give us leave to guess, whether
they be trusters in themselves or no.

If he be pleased to enquire, it may be, he may find, that they were of his
own party, who thought that saying of our Savior, that Salvation was not only
difficult, but impossible with men, howbeit possible with God; to be too harsh
and rigid; and therefore sought to make it more soft and pliable, by taking up
an odd conceit, that turned the Camel into a Cable-rope, which might by their
own hands be untwisted, and pass the needles eye. Little reason was for this,
but that they had a mind to keep the staff in their own hands, and trust
themselves rather than any other. Yet I say not, that they are as the Pharisees
were, trusters in themselves, that they are righteous: but trusters in
themselves, that they can be so when they will. Thus wicked men are taught by
them, to believe that God would never be so unreasonable, as to command any
thing that is impossible; or bid them work if their hands were bound; or invite
them to come to him, if their feet were not at liberty; and so long as God
calls them, they have power to come. Such who are loath for the present to deny
ungodliness and worldly lusts, are encouraged to defer their repentance,
thinking that they can leave their sins, and be converted, and become new men
at their own leisure, before their death, at furthest when they come to leave
this life, that so they may be elected (for that is the only time of
peremptory election) to life eternal. Their adversaries Doctrine should not be
pressed with the inconvenience of breeding men in security, and sloth, and
presumption. No Doctrine but may be abused: and their own is obnoxious, and
liable to the abuse of security and confidence, and self-confidence, at least,
as much as the other.

Qu. 205. How does God work Faith, preserve, and increase it by the Gospel?

A. By the cooperation of the holy Ghost enlightening men's minds into, and
persuading their hearts to embrace the truth and goodness of God, presented to
them therein, in their hearing, reading, meditating, or conferring about it.

In this Question and Answer, he instructs his followers in the Doctrine of
the Remonstrants, touching The work of God in man's Conversion. Posset disputari
(said they at first, so soon as they were known by that name, Col. Hag. P.
311.) sitne hic nobilissimus agendi modus qui fit suadendo: it may be disputed,
whether or no it be not the most noble way of dealing with man, by persuading
of him: and whether it be convenient to use any other way, with safety to the
properties of humane nature: and whether it be not enough, if as much be done
for man's conversion, as Satan uses to do, in drawing men to sin, though there
may be some other actions beyond the power of Satan, as immediate illumination
of the understanding, which in this business does much help. So wrote they
then. Without further doubt, resolved now, and thought fit to be put among
Principles, these two, for Conversion of a sinner; Illumination, and
Persuasion: as if it were no more then to bring a light into a dungeon, and to
tell the prisoner, it is better to be abroad at his liberty, then to lie there.
Some of those who love not to hear of Pelagius, are loath to go much beyond him.

As for Moral persuasion, he has laid us in a text beforehand, by a new
translation, Epist. to Open Door. for those words, Ephesians. 5. 6. [ The children of
disobedience,] he has altered to [ the children of unperswasibleness.] As if
the worst that is in them, were this; that they will not be persuaded: and
would they but be persuaded, the work were done. But I take his word, and argue
thence; If wicked men be unperswasible, as I think they are; then persuasion
will not do it; that will not do it alone. There must be that, and somewhat
more done. There is no charming of deaf ears: the contumacious will not listen
to fair words. No such hooks will draw Leviathan to the shore; no such darts
enter his scales, while he sporteth in the deep.

But if not by persuasion, how then? what? by compulsion? Neither. Never yet
was any man compelled to either good, or evil. We must, and will think that to
be the best and noblest way that God Almighty is pleased to use: and that is,
to give a new spirit, and frame of heart; to incline and bend the will to good:
yet not to break it, or deprive it of the native liberty, but to cure the
depraved nature of it; to amend and rectify the chief spring or wheel of
motion. And this is not to offer violence, or force, any more than was offered
to that band of men that followed Saul, whose hearts God had touched; or to
Saul himself, that was turned to another man, 1 Samuel 10.

To draw a man to that which is against his nature, this indeed is rather
violent, then kindly working. When a Physician has cured the dropsy once, it
is then an easy matter to persuade the patient to forbear immoderate drinking;
but before that be done, it is either labor lost, or force offered. The
strength of Gods grace overcomes the reluctancie and rebellion of man's heart,
yet not in a hostile way: for as it overcomes the heart strongly; so it
inclines it mildly, and changes it gently, and heals it, and raises it to
a right temper, and better state; so here is more than persuasion and yet no
prejudice to the liberty of will.

And as for Illumination, he has likewise provided a text; Open Door, p. 141.
whereupon those words, 1 John 1. 7. [ If we walk in the light] he gives his
paraphrase: Whosoever receives the light that comes from God, and walks
therein, as God is in it, affording power, and strength to him there-through]
as if all men within the Church were within the light there spoken of, and they
walked in it that receive it, being presented to them, and met withal, as our
Author loves to speak.

But by Light, the Apostle means Goodness, and Truth, and Purity, as by
Darkness, Ignorance, and Sin: verse next before, if we walk in darkness: and
chap. 2. verse. 9. he that hates his brother is in darkness; speaking of
Christians, not Infidels. To walk in the light therefore, is not to entertain
the means, that God affords to his Church, universally, as the light of the
Sun is spread in the air: but it is to live in Gods faith and fear, in
holiness, truth and justice. I grant that God is a Sun, as the Psalmist calls
him, and as S. James means, when he terms him the Father of Lights: yea, a
spiritual Sun: yet does he not shed forth his spiritual beams any otherwise
than by a voluntary dispensation, when, and how, and to whom he will; not
presented to all alike, not by every one to be met withal, or to be walked in:
so that hence cannot be made good that Universal Objective Grace, by some
maintained.

Now that saving Faith is not produced, in the heart of a sinner, by
Illumination and Persuasion only; may be proved by these two arguments. First,
because they are far unable to do it; for corruption is so deeply fastened in
man's nature, and such is his Death in sin, that though his understanding be
enlightened, and his affections persuaded, yet if his heart and will be not
renewed, and changed and quickened, the work will still be undone.

To persuade, is but to present objects outwardly, and these are looked upon,
according as the Subject is disposed; these are apprehended, ad modum
recipientis, as the party stands affected. Never was there foul love, nor fair
prison. Sin, and sinful lusts are more beautiful in the eyes of a wicked
worldling, and are more suitable to him, than the Grace and Glory of heaven,
though set forth by a potent Orator. And the wild Ass, that has long been
wonted to the range of the hills, scorneth the populous and pompous city.

Illumination likewise, is but an outward work; though it be wrought within
man, yet it is external to the heart of man; it is from without, and as I may
say, forinsecal, and therefore cannot much confer to the power of the soul. It
is not Light, but Eye Salve, that must help the faculty, and recover the
sight. And this is to be noted further, that where the holy Ghost does
enlighten the mind, and not withal correct the innate pravitie of the heart;
may follow, and sometime does follow, the sin against the holy Ghost: which
sin, is so called, as we know, not because it is against the person, but
against the office, or work of the holy Ghost, which is, to convince, and to
illuminate. And the Devils are thought to be guilty of this kind of sin,
because of the height of light in them joined with the height of malice.

Secondly, suppose that these two, could produce true faith, yet this were not
enough to make good, what we are often taught, namely, that Faith is not of our
selves, but it is the gift of God; yea such a gift as is wrought by the
exceeding greatness of his power, even that power that raised Christ from the
dead: for what is done should be chiefly by the efficacy of the object,
thoroughly laid open. And as Satan on the one hand enticeth to the pleasures of
sin, so should the Spirit of God on the other, proffer holiness, and heaven;
and promise, and excite, and invite, and commend: but the will when it comes
to, must cast the scale, and like an impartial judge, no way bent, or made
beforehand, give sentence and determine, what is to be done, and what must be
followed: and thus shall faith be produced by man himself, and not be as it is
called, Gods gift.

And whereas he says, that God does work Faith [by the cooperation of the holy
Ghost] it is to be noted that the Spirit of God in working Faith (if it be
meant of the first production of it) is not said in sound Divinity to cooperate
with man, as if man did co-work with God. For what is done, is the sole work of
Gods grace and power. As Lazarus being dead, could do nothing, could not
cooperate to raise himself to life: but being by divine power quickened, he
could then eat, and walk and speak. So man being dead in sin, has no free will
to Good, to Faith or Conversion: but having received Grace, as a principle of
spiritual life, he can then walk in the Spirit, and Serve God in a spiritual
manner.

Qu. 208. Can any man hear of himself?

A. Prove. 20.12.
Romans 10.17.
No, as the ability to hear the Gospel outwardly is of Gods gift: so the word
outwardly heard, brings to men by the gift of God, power of more inward hearing
and attention.

This Question and Answer, what man can do, and what power he has or has not,
in order to life eternal, does of right appertain in Divinity to the place or
Head of Free Will. Yet whereas he says here: No man can hear outwardly of
himself, but it is Gods gift: it may admit a twofold sense: The first is this:
No man can come to hear the Gospel outwardly, unless God of his Grace be
pleased to send it to him. And this should be his meaning by one of his texts
which he quoteth, Romans 10. Faith comes by hearing and hearing by the word of
God. Which words signify thus much, if at least the Apostle may explain
himself. Men cannot believe in him, of whom they never heard: neither can they
hear but by the word of God: that is, by mandate, or commission from God, to
some or other, for to go and preach to them. But this is not his meaning: for
he is giving the reason, why Faith is not wrought in all those, that have the
Gospel; which is this: because they do not hear and learn, but stop their ears
and refuse Gods gift.

The second sense therefore is this: That any man is able outwardly to hear the
Gospel, is the gift of God by nature, in whom we live and move, and are. This,
I think, he means. But First, this is not proved by his text out of the
Proverbs, The hearing ear and the seeing eye, the Lord has made even both of
them. For as God did frame the earth, and yet the earth does bring forth fruit
of her self, the blade, the ear, and the corn; Mark 4.28. So may man hear the
word of God, and see the Moon and Stars, of himself, though God did frame both
the hearing ear, and the seeing eye.

And secondly, the pretended Orthodox, who are thought by some, too much to
deny free will, did never yet deny that man has free will to natural, and
moral actions, and religious too, though not in a spiritual manner until he be
regenerate. Therefore to say, as here he does, that man has not ability of
himself to hear outwardly, is a note beneath Gammoth, and a great deal more
than needs, whatsoever the matter is, that he stoops so low. But seeing he
goes so far in denying free will, I hope he will never be so fierce, as some
have been before him; who, for the Semi-Pelagian objected to them, have
returned roundly the Sesqui-Manichean; with somewhat more rage, than reason:
The Manicheans did indeed deny free will: but how, quoad naturam, sive radicem
liberi arbitrii, according to the very nature of it, or free choice, which is
essential to man. 2. to evil. 3. before the fall: this was the Manichean.
Whereas the Pelagian affirmed, vires liberi arbitrii, the power or strength of
man's will to good after the fall. And who they be that claim kindred more or
less, to each of these is an easy matter to judge and determine. But thirdly,
overmuch courtesy and condescension, do always give some cause of suspicion:
yet I proceed no further, than to suspicion, or conjecture. He who can, upon
quitting the point of free will, gain in exchange the point of Universal Grace,
may think himself no looser, having found out a way to corroborate the title of
Universalist, which is thought now, well worth the owning and affecting. We
know who it was of old time, who talked much of Grace, but when it came to be
explained it was nothing but Nature. To hear outwardly, is by nature: to hear
inwardly is by grace, both of these, are in this Answer, called, both alike,
without any difference, Gods gift: And as far as we may guess by his words,
here, and in other places, both of them are of like extent, thus far, that look
where God gives the outward hearing, he gives the inward hearing also. Now
though it should be granted, that Grace may possibly be Universal, and bestowed
upon all men, and yet be grace still, and that it does not consist in being a
Privilege vouchsafed to some only; yet how universal soever it be, it cannot
be universal Grace, unless it be superadded to Nature, and natural endowments.
Gods Grace is always beside, or, over and above humane nature.

Barely to hear, is not Grace but nature, so is it to live and move, with
inward attention to hear, is not universal, but belongs to internal vocation,
which is the special Grace of God, opening the ears and inclining the heart to
hear and obey. So that from the power of hearing, can no way be made good,
Universal Grace.

Qu. 256. Is it possible then for a man that has believed, to fall from his
Faith, and so from Grace?

A. Yes surely, if it be not well rooted in his heart, and the heart thereby
kept single for God, and fruitful in good: but where these things are, no
danger of falling.

He that would rightly answer this Question, of falling from Faith, as I think,
should first distinguish true justifying faith, from false, unsound, and
temporary faith: and not speak of these two, as if they were all one, as in
this Answer is spoken.

Such a faith as is feigned and unsound, may be lost: but true faith, that is
of a right kind, is not lost. Our blessed Savior has learned us this
difference, and taught us this Doctrine, Matthew. 13, verse. 21, 23. True faith
has rooting, and is fruitful, and abides. False faith has no rooting, is
unfruitful, and endures not.

This therefore, may well be added, and inserted into his Answer. Such faith
from which any man does fall, was never true faith, even while he did stand
therein. The temporary believer had no root, before he withered: and the
foolish virgins took no oil with them from the first, and the house that fell,
had no good foundation, before it fell, and therefore did it fall.

The Apostles speaking of Apostates, do usually put a difference presently
after, betwixt them, even whiles they stood, and true believers; lest true
believers should take offense, and be discouraged, and suspect themselves to be
in no better condition, than those revolters were whiles they continued. This
may appear by these places following.

2. Thessal. 2. Having spoken of the fearful judgments of God, upon such as
should be seduced and perish, for want of love to the truth, he adds verse.
13. But we are bound to give thanks always to God for you, because he has from
the beginning chosen you to salvation.

2 Timothy 2. Hymeneus and Philetus fell into a heresy: drew others along with
them. Neverthaless the foundation of God stands sure; and, the Lord knows
who are his, verse.19.

Hebr. 6. having largely described the cursed estate of those that totally and
finally fall away in five verses, from the 4th to the 8th, he adds v, 9. But
beloved we are persuaded better things of you and things that accompany
salvation. As if he had said thus: We do not only think that you are now in
better state than they are, but that you will always abide so. Though it might
be but persuasion of charity, that these were so qualified: yet is it matter of
certainty, that true grace, wheresoever it be, does accompany Salvation: not
only comes near, as neighboring, or bordering upon it; nor yet as contiguous
only, for so it may fall short: but it is so contiguous with salvation, that
it is withal, coherent with it, dependent on it, not to be severed: yea
continuous with it, in one un-interrupted piece, or progress. It is such kind
of Grace, in which Salvation is wrapped, and folded up, and contained, as the
bird in the egg: As the several ages of man, infancy, youth, manhood, do
differ one from the other, and do follow one the other, yet withal they are
the same life still continued, although in differing degrees. Joh. 5. 24. He
that believes has everlasting life, if he that believes has life, and that
life be everlasting, then a believer cannot fall away.

Hebr. 10. two last verses. If any man draw back, my soul shall have no
pleasure in him. But we are not of them who draw back unto perdition, but of
them that beleeeve to the saving of the soul: to believe, and, to draw back;
these two, are contrary, and inconsistent, as salvation and perdition are.

2 Pet.2. 22. When he had showed the dangerous estate of some, who had turned
from the way of righteousness, and were again entangled in the pollutions of
the world, after they had escaped them, he concludes: But it is happened to
them according to the true Proverb; The dog is turned to his own vomit again,
and the sow that was washed, to her wallowing in the mire. His meaning is,
though they were washed and reformed outwardly, yet they still remained what
they were: they still retained their old unclean disposition: and their nature
continuing, caused this return. A sheep differs from a swine newly washed: so
differs a true convert from a false.

Joh. 2. 19. They went out from us, but they were not of us, and chap. 5. 9.
after that he had mentioned the sin unto Death, the worst kind of Apostasy of
all, he adds: We know that whosoever is born of God sins not: still making
a difference, betwixt true believers and Apostates before their falling away.

Qu. 272. Thou said thou were bound by thy Baptism, to keep Gods holy will
and Commandments; and walk in the same all the days of thy life; Tell me what
is the will and Commandment of God concerning thee?

A. 1 Timothy 2. 4.
Gods will is, that I should be saved, and come to the acknowledgment of the
truth.

Will is sometime Command: thus the Princes will and command is, that the
Rebels lay down their arms by such a day. Will, is sometime Intention and
purpose: thus the Princes will and purpose is, to pardon and receive to favor
those that do lay down their arms by such a day. In this case, to keep the
Princes command, is good sense: so is it not, to keep the Princes intention or
purpose.

That God does will, or intend and purpose to save all men, howsoever it be
understood; is matter of belief, not of practice: therefore not of precept, and
therefore not to be kept, or done. Whereas to keep, is to observe and do, as to
keep the commandments, Matthew. 19. 17. to Keep the whole Law, Jam. 2. 10. I
think it is no sense, and therefore can be no truth, to say, That we vowed in
our Baptism, to keep Gods holy Intention, that all men, or each man
respectively, should be saved.

How much better a transition, then this, do we find in the Church Catechism?
You said, you did promise in your Baptism to keep Gods holy Commandments: Tell
me how many there be? Ten, etc. So that the meanest capacity understood that
question, far better without this answer, then with it

As for the Text, 1 Timothy 2. 4. God will have all men to be saved, and to come
to the knowledge of the truth: it may be thus explained: S. Paul shows there
the reason, why at that time kings and worldly powers were to be prayed for,
more than in former times, because God now intended to enlarge the limits of
his Church, and show mercy to all the world, excluding no nation or people. And
as it was more suitable to Gods nature, who is a Spirit, to be worshipped in
spirit and truth, Joh. 4. and not as before Christ's coming, in outward rites,
shadows, and ceremonies, which then bare a great part of Gods service; So was
it more agreeable and consonant: That whereas there is one God, Creator of all
mankind, there should be now access to him for all people, by one Mediator,
and not for one nation only as heretofore. And because this cannot be done so
well, not quietly and peaceably, unless Kings and earthly Potentates embrace
the Christian faith; Therefore especially must they be prayed for.

So that Gods will, in this place, is not his command; and to be saved, is
matter of reward, not of work; a reward which he bestows on us, not a work
which he commands us to do. And to come to the knowledge of the truth, is not
to believe, but to be made partakers of the Gospel, by publication: The which
was joined indeed with a command or charge to his Apostles, to preach the
Gospel; but no command there was to the Nations to receive it, until it were
brought them, and they did come to the knowledge of it.

But may the universalists now say: If it be indeed the will of God, that all
that hear the Gospel should be saved: Then is not salvation limited to some
only, called the Elect.

To this I answer, by putting them in mind, of what I suppose they have often
heard. Gods will is twofold: 1. Revealed, and Conditional; thus he wills all
men to be saved. 2. Secret and absolute; so he wills only a few to be saved.
If they cannot understand how he should will things thus contrary one to the
other, let them help themselves with this similitude. A Nobleman, Landlord to
many decayed tenants deeply endebted to him, wills them to pay what they ow
him, otherwise to be ejected. To some few of them, formerly his menial
servants, he sends secretly supplies, and enableth them to discharge their
arrears: against the rest the law passes. The Landlords will now is, that all
his tenants should pay their rents, enjoy their houses and lands as formerly,
and that none of them should be dispossessed, or emprisoned. And it is his will
also, that a few of his tenants should certainly hold possession, though most
of them be cast out: of these two, the first will is conditional, upon their
performance, and payment: the second is absolute, because accompanied with his
power and purse, and grounded upon his own performance. If this be right, and
reason, and plain to be understood; then let them not say, that we deny the
Scripture-saying, God wills all men to be saved: and let them give us leave
to say withal, that he does not absolutely will all men to be saved, because
he does not by his Almighty arm, rescue all men out of the bands of infidelity,
in which by their own fault they are fast held.

Qu. and Answ. 295, 296, 297, 298, 299, 300.

It is observed of some men, that in disputation; and of many men, that in
discourse, they will be sure soon to wind themselves into that point where
their skill lies. Our Author in his fix last Questions and Answers, returns
thither where his zeal lies, and where he is never found long time
non-resident. This zeal he shows, not in giving his adversaries a parting
blow, but, as I may say, in storming them, having before given them only some
easier assaults. And, as in a fray is usual, he takes up that which comes
next to hand, to strike, and to lay on withal; though no way fitted, though
never intended for any such purpose. And rather then he will suspect his own
confidence, he will censure welnigh all Christians (the generality almost, so
he says Qu. 297.) as if they were false worshippers, unbeleevers, and void of
true religion, because they refuse what he tenders them, that may presently
turn their dross to silver, and their shadows to solidity and substance. Among
other things, he says, they give God the lie] words with which it pleases the
holy Ghost to aggravate the heinous and sacrilegious sin of wilful infidelity,
of denying Christ made known, to whom God the Father gave so manifold
testimony; but are not lightly to be taken up against every false opinion, much
less in defense of any error. He says, They make void Gods grace, and Christ's
death.] This is truly said of such as persist in their unbelief, rejecting the
Gospel being offered, and refusing to be baptized. He needed not to have spoken
more hardly of them, had they renounced their Savior, and turned to Mahomets
belief.

They are very zealous, (he says) but their Religion and Devotion, are
abominable in Gods sight, and most horrible impieties.] He has left nothing
wherewithal to express the worst that is in them, when their best is thus bad.

They multiply services without knowledge, and offer the sacrifice of fools,
they miss of Gods promises, and seek after him, but find him not, because they
seek him by the works of the Law, endeavoring to establish their own
righteousness.] As if it were all one to him, to speak what is true, and to
speak what he knows to be false, when he is in hot pursuit of his adversaries.

But I have now paid that small debt, which I might seem to ow, as well to
them that desire to learn, and not to be abused; as to others, who love to be
deceived rather than be taught. The words of Salvian, though touching another
subject, shall serve me for my Caution, and for my Conclusion. De Gubern. Dei,
lib. 1. Sed de his dicendum amplius non est: tanta quippe est majestatis sacrae
and tam tremenda reverentia, ut non solum eaquae ab illis contra religionem
dicuntur horrere; sed etiam quae pro religione nos ipsi dicimus, cum grandi
metu ac disciplina dicere debeamus: that is, It is best to say no more
concerning these matters; because so great and so dreadful is the sacred
Majesty of God, that we must not only detest what others do utter against
our religion; but when we speak in defense of our religion, we must be very
wary that it be done with greatest avvfulness and fear, with all the
reverence and regard that may be.

Postscript.
WHatsoevr the exceptions be in particular, against what I have done, I foresee
one in the general, that may be taken, and must now be satisfied; and it is
this: There are two Editions of this Catechism: One in the year 1654, the
other in the year 1656. What I have written is upon the former: whereas it
might have seemed more ingenuous to have dealt with the latter, containing
second thoughts, and some alteration. This is the objection. My Answer now
follows. It was the first Edition only that was brought and put upon me,
having not so much as heard of any second, until I had welnigh gone through
with the observations here tendered. Secondly, the first was published, and is
extant, and in the hands of many, who will not be very ready, so long as they
have one, to enquire after another of the second impression. Thirdly, how far
this allegation may be pleaded by him, who told us that which has been noted
once before, There was nothing in the first Edition, but what might look his
worst adversaries in the face, I leave to himself to be considered. And lastly,
How little the alteration is, and how the difference is not very material,
especially as to the chief points of Heterodoxy, and how the Retractation none
at all, I leave to others to be considered. For as when we have once
acknowledged the Truth, and never so much as once denied it, there lies no
obligation upon us, that we should at all times make confession of it: So an
Error or Errors once divulged and spread abroad, are not sufficiently
recalled by silence and omission, but remain the Authors own, till something
more be done, and it is well if then the danger cease.

FINIS.
The Table.
The Preface Page, 1. Creatours p. 12. Sinful lusts P. 14. Tree of knowledge P.
16. The Prepared Sacrifice P. 19. Head of the Church P. 26. The Law P. 33.
Prosessours to break bread P. 48. Order of the Dead rising P. 59. God had power
enough P. 51. Jesus Christ died for all P. 53. All in Adam pardoned P.61, etc.
Election, what it is P. 69. Election in believing P. 79. Election in personal
considerations P. 80. Jacob and Esau P. 86. Pharaoh P. 91. Vessels to honor
and dishonor P. 93. Works speak Christ's Mediation P. 99. Rahab and Cornelius
P. 106. False Conceptions: four Instances P. 108. Remedy must be general P.
115. Reasons why it ought to be so P. 115. Signs of Gods Love P. 127. How
Faith is wrought P. 136. No man can hear of himself P. 142. Falling from Faith
P. 146. Gods will that all should be saved P. 150. Conclusion P. 154.
FINIS.

