Examen Historicum: OR A DISCOVERY AND EXAMINATION OF THE Mistakes, Falsities,
and Defects In some Modern Histories OCCASIONED By the Partiality and
Inadvertencies of their Several Authors.

By Peter Heylin.

In Two Books.

Tacit in Vit. Jul. Agric. Vitium parvis magnisque Civitatibus commune,
ignoratio Recti and invida.
Horat. De Art Poet. -- non ego paucis
Offender maculis, quas non incuria fudit
Aut humana parum, cubit natura --
LONDON, Printed for Henry Seile and Richard Royston, and are to be sold over
against S. Dunstans Church in Fleetstreet, and at the Angel in Ivy-lane. 1659.

A General PREFACE to the Whole.
IT is affirmed of History by the famous Orator, that it is Testis temporum,
the Witness and Record of time, by which the actions of it are transmitted
from one age to another. And therefore it concerns all those who apply
themselves to the writing of Histories, to take special care that all things
be laid down exactly, faithfully, and without deviation from the truth in the
least particular. For if the Witnesses be suborned, the Record falsified, or
the Evidence wrested, neither Posterity can judge rightly of the actions of
this present time, or this time give a certain judgment of the Ages past. It
is therefore a good direction which Josephus the Historian gives us, and which
he followed as it seems in his Jewish Antiquities, not only to be careful that
the style be pleasing, but that the whole Work be framed by the Level and Line
of Truth. Nam qui Historiam and rerum propter Antiquitatem obscurarum
expositionem, etc. They (says he) who make profession to write Histories, and
to recite such things as are obscured by Antiquity, ought not only studiously
to conform their style, but also to beautify the same with ornaments of
Eloquence, to the intent the Reader may converse in their Writings with the
more delectation. But above all things they must have an especial care so
exactly to set down the truth, Antiq. Iad. Lib. 14. cap 1.
that they who know not how those things came to pass may be the more duly
and fitly informed. There is another Rule, which he bound himself to. that is
to say, Neither to omit any thing through ign^rance, nor to bury any thing in
forgetfulness; and all these cautions well observed make a pe^f^ct History.
But on the contrary, there are some who do spend themselves on the style and
dress, as if their business rather were to delight the ear then inform the
judgment; Others so biased by self ends and private interesse, that they seem
rather Advocates to plead for some growing party, then true Reporters of
affairs as they be before them. Some who endeavoring to be copious, clap all
together in a huddle which is offered to them, without relation to the
Ornaments and Attire of Language; and others with like carelessness as unto
themselves, but greater inconvenience as unto the Reader, examine not the truth
and certainty of what they write, so they write somewhat which they think may
inform the Reader. Betwixt these truth is oftentimes irrecoverably lost, the
Reader led aside from the ways of Verity into the crooked lanes of Error* and
many times conducted to such dangerous praecipices as man prove destructive to
himself, and of ill consequence to all those which are guided by him. The
errors of the understanding in matters which may possibly be reduced to
practice, are far more mischievous then those which do consist in the niceties
of speculation, and advance no further, which moved the Orator not only to
honor History with the Attribute of Testis temporum, but to style it also by
the name of Magistra vitae.

These things considered as they ought, have made me wonder many times at the
unadvisednesse of some Late Writers in this kind, whose Histories are composed
with so much partiality on the one side, and so much inadvertency on the other,
that they stand more in need of a Commentator to expound the Truth, and lay it
clear and open to the view of the Reader, then either the dark words of
Aristotle, or any other obscure piece of the ancient Writers. I speak of
Histories here, not Libels, of which last sort I reckon Weldons Pamphlet,
called, The Court of King James, and Wi^sons most i^famous Pasquill of the
Reign of that King; in which it is not easy to judge whether the matter be
more false or the style more reproachful in all parts thereof. Certain I am we
may affirm of them, Tacit. Annal. lib, 4.
as Cremutius Cordus does of the Epistles of Antonius, and the Orations of
Brutus, falsa quidem in Augustum probra, se^ multa cum acerbitate habent, that
is to say, that they contained not only many false and disgraceful passages
against the honor of Augustus, but were apparelled in all the bitterness of a
scurrilous language. With such as these I shall not meddle at the present,
leaving their crimes unto the punishment not of an Index, but an Ignis
expurgatorius, as most proper for them. But as for those whom either the want
of true intelligence or inadvertency in not weighing seriously what they were
to do, or the too much indulgence to their own affections have made more
capable of being bettered by correction, I have thought it more agreeable to
the Rules of justice, to rectify their mistakes, and reform their Errors,
then absolutely to condemn and decry their Writings. At this time I have two
before me whom I conceive to stand in need of such Observations, by which the
truth may be preserved, and the clear face of things presented to the Readers
eye; the one of them an Author of Ecclesiastical, the other of some Civil
Histories. In both I find the Truth much injured, and in one the Church. The
Errors of the one tend not to the subversion of any public interesse, but,
being Errors, may misguide the Reader in the way of his knowledge and
discourse, and therefore I have rectified him with some Advertisements (not
taking notice of such passages as have been made the subject of some
Observations from another hand) that so he may be read with the greatest
profit. The other (besides errors of this kind too many) has intermingled
his Discourse with some Positions of a dangerous nature, which being reduced
into practice, as they easily may not only overthrow the whole power of the
Church as it stands constituted and established by the Laws of the Land, but
lay a probable foundation for the like disturbances in the Civil State. And
therefore I have fitted him with some Animadversions in the way of an Antidote,
that so he may be read, if possible, without any danger.

I know well how invidious a task I have undertaken, and that it will be
charged upon me at the first apprehensions of it, that I have rather chosen to
find fault with the Writings of others, then to write any things of this kind
which may be subject to the like partialities and mistakings. Carpere vel noli
nostra, vel ede tua, might come in seasonably here, if I had not somewhat to
allege for my justification. But when the Reasons which induced me to the
first Adventure (mentioned in the Introduction following) be seriously
considered, as they ought to be; I hope I shall be capable of excuse at the
least, if not of pardon. And for my venturing on the other, I shall say nothing
more at the present, but that as well my love to Truth as to do right unto the
Author (whom I would willingly look on as a man well principled, and of no ill
affections to Church or State) has invited me to it. Truth is the Mistress
which I serve, and I presume that none will be offended with me because I tell
them of their Errors in a modest way, and bear witness for them to that
Truth of which they do profess themselves such especial Lovers. In that
great Disputation between the Esquires of the body of King Darius, whether the
King, Wine, Women, or the Truth were of greatest power, 1 Esdr. cap. 4. ver. 41.
the whole Assembly cried out in behalf of Truth, Magna est Veritas, and
praevalet, that is to say, Great is Truth, and mighty above all things. So that
in standing for the Truth, without consideration unto the recompense of reward,
I hope, though I mee^ some Adversaries, I shall find more Friends: If not (for
I am at a reasonable pass for that) it shall be no small comfort to me that
the weak Candle of my Studies has given light to others, whereby they may
discern some Historical Tru^hs even in the darkest Mists of Error, which
either partiality or incogitancy has cast before the eyes of unwary Readers.
Which said, I shall now add no more, but that having two P^tients under cure
of different tempers, it is not to be thought that I should administer unto
both the same kind of Physic* an ordinary purge being sufficient for the one,
whereas the foul body of the other does require a Fluxing; as some wounds may
be healed with Balm, when others more corrupt and putrified do exact a
Lancing. But so it happens many times, that some men are more impatient of
the Cure, then sensible of their Diseases, and that in stead of giving thanks
to the Physician, for the great pains he took about them, they pay him with
nothing but displeasures. Which being the worst that can befall me, I am armed
against it. If by the haz^rd of my peace, I shall procure this benefit to the
present and succeeding times, that men may prove more careful of what they
write, and not obt^ude upon the Reader (either through ignorance, inadvertency,
or somewhat worse) such and so many Falsities, Mistakes and Errors, as have
been lately put upon him in some Modern Histories, it is that I aimed at; and
having gained that Point, I have gained my purpose.

Non partis studiis agimur, sed sumpsimus Arma
Consiliis inimica tuis, ignavia fallax.
Peter Heyliu.

Examen Historicum: OR A DISCOVERY AND EXAMINATION OF THE Mistakes, Falsities,
and Defects, In some Modern HISTORY. Part. I. CONTAINING Necessary
ANIMADVERSIONS ON THE Church History of Britain. AND The History of Cambridge.

Published by Thomas Fuller.

For vindication of the Truth, the Church and the injured Clergy.

2 Corinthians. 13. 8. Non possumus aliquid adversus veritatem: sed pro veritate.
Minut. Foel. in Octavio. Et Veritas quidem obvia est, sed requirentibus.
A Necessary Introduction To the Following ANIMADVERSIONS ON THE CHURCH HISTORY
OF BRITAIN. Touching the Title of the Book, and the Preface to it.
1. INtending some short Animadversions on the Church H^story of Britain, for
Vindication of the Truth, the Church, and the injured Clergy, I have thought
good to prepare the way unto them by a plain, but necessary Introduction,
touching the Quality and Nature of the Book which I have in hand. Concerning
which the Reader is to understand that in the Year 1642. M. Fuller published his
Book called The Holy State, in the Preface whereof he lets us know, that he
should count it freedom to serve two Apprentiships (God spinning out the thick
thread of his life so long) in writing the Ecclesiastical History from Christ's
time to our days. And so much time it seems he had spent upon it (except some
starts for recreation in the Holy Land) before he had finished and exposed it to
the public view; the Book not coming out until the Year 1655. whether
agreeable to his promise and such a tedious expectation, we are now to see.

For first, The Reader might expect by the former passage, that he designed the
General History of the Church, from the first preaching of Christ, and the
calling of the twelve Apostles to the times we live in: whereas he has
restrained himself to the Church of Britain, which he conceives to be so far
from being founded in the time of Christ, that he is loath to give it the
Antiquity of being the work of any of the Apostles, of any of the Seventy
Disciples, or finally of any Apostolical Spirit of those eldest times.

And secondly, Though he entitle it by the name of the Church History of
Britain, yet he pursues not his Design agreeable to that Title neither: there
being little said of the affairs of the Church of Scotland, which certainly
makes up a considerable part of the Isle of Britain, and less (if any thing at
all) of the Church of Ireland, which anciently past in the account of a British
Island.

Nor is it thirdly, a Church History rightly and properly so called, but an
aggregation of such and so many Heterogeneous bodies, that Ecclesiastical
affairs make the least part of it. Abstracted from the dress and trimming, and
all those outward imbelishments which appear upon it, it has a very fit
resemblance to that Lady of pleasure of which Martial tells us, Pars minima est
ipsa puella sui, that the woman was the least part of her self. The name of a
Church-Rhapsody had been fitter for it, though to say truth (had it been
answerable thereunto in point of learning) it might have past by the old Title
of Fullers Miscellanies. For such and so many are the impertinencies, as to
matters of Historical nature, more as to matters of the Church, that without
them this great Volume had been brought to a narrower compass, if it had taken
up any room at all. So that we may affirm of the present History as one did of
the Writings of Chrisippus an old Philosopher, Diog. Laert. in vit^ Chrysippi.
viz. Si quis tollat and Chrysippi, Libris quae aliena sunt, facil^ illi vacua
relinquerentur, Pergamena, that is to say, that if they were well purged of all
such passages as were not pertinent to the business which he had in hand,
there would be nothing left in them to fill up his Parchments.

2. The first of this kind which I am to note, is a mere extrinsecall and
outside unto those impertinences which are coucht within; consisting of
Title-Pages, Dedicatory Epistles, and several intermediate Inscriptions unto
every Section. A new way, never traveled before by any, till he found it out,
and such wherein he is not like to find many followers, though the way be
opened. I know it is no unusual thing for works of different Arguments,
published at several times, and dedicated to several persons, to be drawn
together into one Volume; and being so drawn together, to retain still those
particular Titles and Dedications which at first they had. But I dare
confidently say, that our Historian is the first who writing a Book of the same
Argument, not published by peece-meal, as it came from his hand, but in a full
and entire Volume, has filled his Sheets with so many Title-leaves and
Dedications, as we have before us. For in this one Book, taking in the History
of Cambridge, which is but an Appendix to it, there are no fewer then 12
particular Titles, beside the general; as many particular Dedications, and no
fewer then fifty eight or sixty of those By-Inscriptions which are addressed to
his particular Friends and Benefactors, which make it bigger by forty Sheets
at the least, then it had been otherwise. Nay, so ambitious he is of increasing
the Number of his Patrons, that having but four Leaves to come to the end of
his History, he finds out a particular Benefactress to inscribe it to: Which
brings into my mind the vanity of Vitellius in bestowing, and of Roscius
Regulus for accepting the Consular Dignity, for that part of the day on which
Cecina, by Order and Decree of the Senate, was degraded from it: Of which the
Historian gives this Note, that it was, Magno cum irrisu accipientis
tribuentisque, a matter of no mean disport amongst the People for a long time
after: But of this Argument our Author heard so much at the late Act in Oxford,
that I shall say no more of it at this present time.

3. In the next rank of Impertinencies, which are more intrinsecal, part of
the substance of the work, I account his Heraldry, Blazons of Arms, D^scenis of
noble Families, with their Achievements intermingled as they come in his way,
not pertinent, I am sure, to a Church-H^storian, unless such persons had been
Founders of Episcopal Sees, or Religious Houses, or that the Arms so blazoned
did belong to either.

Our Author tells us, lib. 5. fol. 191. that knowledge in the Laws of this
Land, is neither to be expected or required in one of his profession; and yet I
trow, considering the great influence which the Laws have upon Church Matters,
the knowledge of the Law cannot be so unnecessary in the way of a Clergyman,
as the study of Heraldry: But granting Heraldry to be an Ornament in all them
that have it, yet is it no ingredient requisite to the composition of an
Ecclesiastical History: The Copies of Battle-Abbey Roll fitter for Stow and
Hollingshe^d, where before we had them, can, in an History of the Church,
pretend to no place at all, though possibly the names of some may be remembered
as their Foundations or Endowments of Churches give occasion for it. The Arms
of the Knights-Errant, billeted in the Is^e of Ely, by the Norman Conqueror, is
of like extravagancy. Such also is the Catalogue of those noble Adventurers,
(with their Arms, Issue and Achievements) who did accompany King Richard the
first to the War of Palestine, which might have better served as an Appendix to
his History of the Holy War^ then found a place in the main Body of an History
of the Church of England: Which three alone, besides many intercalatious of
that kind, in most parts of the Book, make up eight sheets more, inserted
only for the ostentation of his skill in Heraldry, in which notwithstanding he
has fallen on as palpable Errors, as he has committed in his History: For
besides those which are observed in the course of this work, I find two others
of that kind in his History of Cambridge, to be noted here.

For fol. 146. he tells us, That Alice Countess of Oxford was Daughter and
sole Heir of Gilbert Lord Samford, which Gilbert was Hereditary Lord
Chamberlain of England: But by his leave, Gilbert Lord Samford was never the
Heriditary Chamberlain of the Realm of England, but only Chamberlain in Fee to
the Queens of England, betwixt which Offices how vast a difference there is,
let our Author judge.

And secondly, The Honor of Lord Chamberlain of England, came not unto the
Earls of Oxford by that Marriage, or by any other, but was invested in that
Family, before they had attained the Title and Degree of Earls: Conferred by
King Henry the first on Aubrey de Vere, a right puissant Person, and afterward
on Aubrey de Vere his Son, together with the Earldom of Oxford, Cambd. in Oxf.
fol. 389.
by King Henry the second; continuing Hereditary in that House, till the death
of Robert Duke of Ireland, the ninth Earl thereof, and then bestowed for a time
at the Kings discretion, and at last settled by King Charles in the House of
Lindsey. But because being a Cambridge Man, he may be better skild in the Earls
of that County, let as see what he says of them; and we shall find, fol. 162.
That Richard Plantagenet, Duke of York, was the eighth Earl of Cambridge.

Whereas first, Richard Duke of York was not Earl of Cambridge.

And secondly, If he had been such, he must have been the seventh Earl, and not
the eighth: For thus those Earls are marshalled in our Catalogues of Honor, and
Books of Heraldry, viz. 1. William de Meschines. 2. John de ^amalt. 3. William
Marquess of Iuliers. 4. Edmond of Langley, D. of York. 5. Edward D. of York. 6.
Richard de Conisburgh, younger Brother of Edward. 7. James Marquess Hamilton,
etc. No Richard Duke of York to be found amongst them, his Father, Richard of
Konisburgh, having lost that Title by Attainder, which never was restored to
Richard his Son (though most improvidently advanced to the Dukedom of York) nor
unto any other of that Line and Family.

4. Proceed we in the next place to Verses, and old ends of Poetry, scattered
and dispersed in all parts of the History, from one end to the other; for which
he has no precedent in any Historian, Greek or Latin, or any of the National
Histories of these latter times: The Histories of Herodotus, Xenophon,
Thucydides and Plutarch, amongst the Greeks; of Caesar, Livy, Salust, Taci^us,
and Sue^onius, amongst the Latins, afford him neither warrant nor example for
it: The like may be affirmed of Eus^bius, Socrates, S^zomen, Theodoret, Russin
and Evagrius, Church Historians all; though they had all the best choice, and
the most excellent Poets of the world to befriend them in it: And he that shall
consult the Histories of succeeding times, through all the Ages of the Church,
to this present day, will find ^h^m all as barren of any encouragements in
this kind, as the ancients were: Nay, whereas Bishop Godwin in his Annals,
gives us an Epitaph of two Verses only made on Queen Jane Seymour, and
afterward a Copy of eighteen verses on the Martyrdom of Arch Bishop Cranmer;
Annal R. Mariae.
he ushers in the last with this short Apology, Contra mor^m ^^storiae liceat
quaeso inserere, etc. Let me, (says he, I beseech you) insert these following
verses, though otherwise against the Rule and Laws of History* But what alas!
were eighteen or twenty verses compared with those many hundred (six or seven
hundred at the least) which we find in our Author; whether to show the
universality of his reading in all kind of Writers, or his faculty in
Translating (which when he meets with hard Copies, he knows how to spare) I
shall not determine at the present: Certain I am, that by the interlarding of
his Prose with so many Verses, he makes the Book look rather like a
Church-Romance, (our late Romancers being much given to such kind of Mixtures)
then a well^ built Ecclesiastical History. And if it be a marter so
inconvenient to put a new piece of cloth on an old garment; the putting of so
many old patches on a new pi^^e of cloth, must be more unfashonable. Besides
that, many of these old ends are so light and ludicrous, so little pertinent to
the business which he has in hand, that they serve only to make sport for
Children, (ut pueris placeas and Declamatio fias) and for nothing else.

5. This leads me to the next impertinency, his raking into the Chanel of old
Popish Legends, writ in the da^ker times of Superstition, but written with an
honest zeal, and a good intention* as well to raise the Reader to the
admiration of the person of whom they write, as to the emulalation of his
virtues: But being mixed with some Monk^^h dotages, the most learned and
ingenious men in the Church of Rome have now laid them by; and it had been very
well if our Author had done so to, but that there must be something of
entertainment for the gentle Reader, and to inflame the reckoning which he pays
not for. But above all things, recommend me to his Merry Tales, and scraps of
Trencher^ jests, frequently interlaced in all parts of the History; which if
abstracted from the rest, and put into a Book by themselves, might very well be
served up for a second course to the Banquet of Iosts, a Supplement to the old
Book, entitled, Wits, Fits and Fancies; or an Additional Century to the old
Hundred Merry Tales, so long since extant. But standing as they do, they
neither do become the gravity of a Church-Historian, nor are consistent with
the nature of a sober Argument. But as it seems, our Author came with the same
thoughts to the writing of this present History, as Poets anciently addressed
themselves to the writing of Comedies, of which thus my Terence.

Poeta cum primum animum ad scribendum appulit,
Id sibi neg^tii credidit solum dari,
Populo ut placerent quas ^ecisset fabulas.
That is to say, Thus Poets, when their mind they first apply
In looser verse to frame a Comedy,
Think there is nothing more for them to do,
Then please the people, whom they speak unto.


6. In the last place proceed we to the manifold excursions about the Antiquity
of Cambridge, built on as weak Authority as the Monkish Legends, and so
impertinent to the matter which he has in hand, that the most Reverend Mat.
Parker, (though a Cambridge Man) in his Antiquitates Britanicae, makes no
business of it: The more impertinent, in regard that at the fag-end of his Book
there follows a distinct History of that University, to which all former
passages might have been reduced: But as it seems he was resolved to insert
nothing in that History but what he had some probable ground for; leaving the
Legendary part thereof to the Church-Romance, as m^st proper for it. And
certainly he is wondrous wise in his generation: For fearing lest he might be
asked for those Bulls and Chartularies which frequently he relates unto, in the
former Books; he tells us in the History of Cambridge, fol. 53. That they were
burnt by some of the seditious Townsmen in the open Market place, Anno 1380. or
thereabouts: So that for want of ot^e^ ancient evidence, we must take his word,
which whether those of Cambridge will depend upon, they can best resolve. For
my part, I forbear all intermedling in a controversy so clearly stated, and
which has lain so long asleep, till now awakened by our Author to beget new
quarrels: Such passages in that History as come under any Animadversion, have
been reduced unto the other, as occasion served, which the Reader may be
pleased to take notice of as they come before him.

7. All these extravagancies and impertinencies (which make up a fifth part of
the whole Volumn) being thus discharged, it is to be presumed that nothing
should remain but a mere Church History, as the Title promises; But let us not
be too presumptuous on no better grounds: For on a Melius inquirendum into the
whole course of the Book which we have before us, we shall find too little of
the Church, and too much of the State, I mean too little of the Ecclesiastical,
and too much of the Civil History: It might be reasonably expected, that in a
History of the Church of England, we should have heard somewhat of the
foundation and enlargement of Cathedral Churches, if not of the more eminent
Monasteries and Religious Houses; and that we should have heard somewhat more
of the succession of Bishops in their several and respective Sees, their
personal Endowments, learned Writings, and other Acts of Piety, Magnificence,
and public Interess, especially when the times afforded any whose names in
some of those respects deserved to be retained in everlasting remembrance; it
might have been expected also, that we should have found more frequent mention
of the calling of National, and Provincial Synods, with the result of their
proceedings, and the great influence which they had on the Civil State,
sparingly spoken of at the best, and totally discontinued in a manner, from the
death of King Henry the fourth, until the Convocation of the year, 1552. of
which no notice had been taken, but that he had a mind to question the
Authority of the Book of Articles which came out that year, though published as
the issue and product of it, by the express Warrant and Command of King Edward
the sixth: No mention of that memorable Convocation in the fourth and fifth
years of Philip and Mary, in which the Clergy taking notice of an Act of
Parliament then newly passed, by which the Subjects of the Temporali^y, having
Lands to the yearly value of five pounds, and upwards, were charged with
finding Horse and Armor, according to the propertion of their yearly Revenues
and Possessions, did by their sole Authority, as a Convocation, impose upon
themselves and the rest of the Clergy of this Land, the finding of a like
number of Horses, Armor, and other Necessaries for the War, according to their
yearly income, proportion for proportion, and rate for rate, as by that Statute
had been laid on the Temporal Subjects: And this they did by their own sole
Authority, as before was said, ordering the same to be levied on all such as
were refractory, by Sequestration, Deprivation, Suspension, Excommunication,
Ecclesiastical Censures all; without relating to any subsequent confirmation by
Act of Parliament, which they conceived they had no need of: Nor find we any
thing of the Convocations of Queen Elizabeth's time, except that of the year
1562. (and that not fairly dealt with neither, as is elsewhere showed) though
there passed many Canons in the Convocation of the year 1571. and of the year
1585. and the year 1597. all Printed, and still publicly extant; besides the
memorable Convocation of the year, 1555. in which the Clergy gave the Queen a
Benevolence of 2^. in the pound, to be levied by Ecclesiastical Censures,
without relating to any subsequent confirmation by Act of Parliament, as had
accustomably been used in the Grant of Subsidies.

It might have been expected also that we should have found in a Church History
of Britain, the several degrees and steps by which the Heterodoxies and
Superstitions of the Church of Rome did creep in amongst us; and the degrees by
which they were ejected and cast out again, and the whole Reformation settled
upon the Doctrine of the Apostles, attended by the Rites and Ceremonies of the
Primitive times; as also that some honorable mention should be found of those
gallant Defenses which were made by Dr. Bancroft, Dr. Bilson, Dr. Bridges, Dr.
Cosins, and diverse others, against the violent Batteries and Assaults of the
Puritan Faction in Queen Elizabeth's time; and of the learned Writings of B.
Buckeridge, B. Morton, Dr. Su^cliff, Dr. Burges, etc. in justification of the
Rites and Ceremonies of the Church of England, against the remnants of that
scattered (and then broken) Faction in the time of King James; of which we have
Negry quidem, not a word delivered: Nor could it stand with his design (which
will discover it self in part in this Introduction, and shall more fully be
discovered in the Animadversions) that it should be otherwise* All which
together, make it clear and evident that there is too little of the Church or
Ecclesiastical History in our Authors Book: And that there is too much of the
State or Civil History, will be easily seen, by that unnecessary intermixture
of State-Concernments, not pertinent to the business which he has in hand: Of
this sort to look back no further, is the long Will and Testament of King Henry
the eighth, with his Gloss or Comment on the same, taking up three whole sheets
at least, in which there is not any thing which concerns Religion, or which
relates unto the Church, or Church Affairs; although to have the better color
to bring it in, he tells us that he has transcribed it, not only for the
rarity thereof, but because it contained many passages which might reflect much
light upon his Church History.

Lib. 5. ^ol. 243. Of this sort also is his description of the pomp and order
of the Coronation of King Charles, which though he does acknowledge not to be
within the Pale and Park of Ecclesiastical History, yet he resolves to bring it
in, because it comes within the Purlews of it, as his own words are: But for
this he has a better reason then we are aware of, that is to say, That if
hereafter Divine Providence shall assign England another King, though the
transactions herein be not wholly precedential, something of state may be
chosen out grateful for imitation.

Lib. 11. fol. 124. As if the Pomp and order of a Coro^nation were not more
punctually preserved in the Heralds Office (who have the ordering of all things
done without the Church, and are Eyewitnesses of all which is done within)
then in our Authors second-hand and imperfect Collections: The like may be said
also of the quick and active Reigns of King Edward the sixth, and Queen Mary,
in which the whole Body of the reformed Religion was digested, settled, and
destroyed; sufficient of it self to make a competent Volumn, but contracted by
our Author (like Homers Iliads, in the Nut shell) into less then 25 sheets: And
yet in that small Abstract we find many Impertinencies, as to the work he has
in hand, that is to say, The great proficiency of King Edward, in his Grammar
Learning, exemplified in three pieces of Latin of his making, when he was but
eight or nine years old; the long Narrative of Sir Edward Mountague, chief
Justice of the Common Pleas, to vindicate himself from being a voluntary Agent
in the business of the Lady Jane Gray; the full and punctual relation of W^ats
Rebellion, and the issue of it, though acted upon some false grounds of Civil
Interess, without relating to Religion or to Church Affairs: Infinitum esset
^re per singula, It were an infinite labor to look into all particulars of this
nature, which are found in our Author, make up a great part of the Book; but we
may guess by this brief view, (as Ex pede Hereulem) that his diversion upon
Civil Matters and Affairs of State, which neither have relation to, nor any
influence at all upon those of the Church, do make up a considerable part of
the rest of the Book: Which Civil Matters and State-Concernments being
discharged also (as in all reason they ought to be) we next proceed to the
Church History it self: In which, if we should make the like defalkation, and
expunge every passage which is either positively false, or ignorantly mistaken
by him, there would be very little left to inform the Reader, as by the
following Animadversions will appear sufficiently.

8. But well it were, if only Abberrations from Historical truth were to be
met with in our Author: In whom we find such a continual vein of Puritanism,
such dangerous grounds for inconformity and Sedition to be raised upon, as
easily may pervert the unwary Reader, whom the facetiousness of the style (like
a hook baited with a painted Fly) may be apt to work on. Murdering of Kings
avowed for necessary prudence, as often as they shall fall into the power of
their Subjects Lib. 4 fol. 109. The Coronation of the Kings, (and consequently
their succession to the Crown of England) made to depend upon the suffrage and
consent of the People, Lib. 11. fol. 122. The Sword extorted from the Supreme
Magistrate, and put into the hands of the common People, whenever the
Reforming humor shall grow strong amongst them, Lib. 9. fol. 51. The Church
deprived of her Authority in determining controversies of the Faith, and a
dispute raised against that clause of the Atticle, (in which that Authority is
declared) whether forged or not: Lib. 9. f. 73. Her power in making Canons
every where prostituted to the lust of the Parliament, contrary both to Law and
constant practice; the Heterodoxies of Wickliff Canonized for Gospel, and
Calvin's Opinions, whatsoever they were, declared for Orthodox; the Sabbatarian
Rigors, published for Divine and Ancient Truths, though there be no Antiquity
nor Divinity in them; the Hierarchy of Bishops so coldly pleaded for, as shows
he had a mind to betray the cause, whilst all things pass on smoothly for the
Presbyterians, whom he chiefly acts for: And this is that which we must look
for, par my and par tout, as the Frenchmen say. Nor deals he otherwise with the
persons which are brought before him, then he does with the Causes which they
bring. No professed Puritan, no cunning Nonconformist, or open Separatist, comes
upon the Stage, whom he follows not with Plaudites and some fair Commends, when
as the Fathers of the Church, and the conformable Children of it are sent off
commonly in silence, and sometimes with censure: The late Archbishop of
Canterbury, so eminently deserving of the Church of England, must be raked out
of his Grave, arraigned for many misdemeanors, of which none could accuse him
when he was alive; all his infirmities and weaknesses mustered up together, to
make him hateful to the present and succeeding Ages; when Mr. ^ov^'s
Treasonable practices and seditious Speeches, must needs (for footh) be buried
in the same Earth with him. The University of Oxford frequently quarrelled and
exasperated, upon ^light occasions, the late Kings party, branded by the odious
Title of Malignants, not bettered by some froth of pretended Wit in the
Etymology. The regular Clergy shamefully reproached by the Name of covetous
Confo^m^sts, Lib. 9. fol. 98. And those poor men who were ejected by the late
long Parliament, despitefully called Baals Priests, u^savory sal^, not ^i^ to
be thrown upon the Dung^ hill; though he be doubtful of the proofs which were
brought against them. Lib. 11. fol. 207. So many of all sorts wronged and
injured by him, that should they all study their personal and particular
Revenges, he were not able to abide it: And therefore we may j^stly say in the
Poets Language.

Si de to^ (...) Namin ^ quis^ue Deorum
(...) in (...) unus erit.
Which may be Englisht in these words, Should all wronged (...) seek to avenge
their same,
(...) were not enough to bear the shame.


9. But nothing does more evidently discover his unfaithful dealing, then his
repo^t of the proceedings in the Isle of ^^gh, between his Majesty and the long
Parliament Divines; of which he tells us, Lib. 11. fol. 235. That his (...)
a^^n^wledged their great pains to inform his judgment, according to their
persuasions, and also took especial notice of their civilities of the
Application both in the beginning and body of their Reply; and having cleared
himself from some misunderstanding about the Writ of Partition which they
speak of, puts an end to the business. The man who reads this passage, cannot
choose but think that his Majesty being vanquished by the Arguments of the
Prebyterians, had given over the cause; and therefore as convicted in his
Conscience, renders them thanks for the Instruction which he had received, and
the Civilities they used toward him in the way thereof: But he that looks upon
his Majesty's last Paper, will find that he had Learnedly and Divinely refe^'d
all their Arguments: And having so done, puts them in mind of three questions
which are proposed in his former Paper, acknowledged by themselves, to be of
great importance in the present controversy; without an Answer whereunto, his
Majesty declared that he would put an end to that conference: It not being
probable (as he told them) that they should work much upon his Judgment,
whil^^ they are ^^arful to declare their own, nor possible to reli^ve his
conscience, but by a free d^^laring of theirs: But they not able, or not
daring, (for fear of displeasing their great Masters) to return an Answer to
those Questions, his Majesty remained sole Master of the field, a most absolute
Conqueror: For though the first blow commonly does begin the Quarrel, it is the
last blow always that gets the Victory: But Regium est, cum benefeceris male
audire: It has been commonly the fortune of the greatest Princes, when they
deserve best, to be worst reported.

10. Nor deals he better with the Church, then he does with the King;
concealing such things as might make for her justification, and advocating for
such things as disturb her order. In the last Book we find him speaking of
some heats which were raised in the Church, about placing the Communion Table
Altar-wise, and great fault found for the want of Moderation in those Men, who
had the managing of that business. But he conceals his Majesty's Determination
in the Case of St. Gregory's, Novem. 3. 1633. by which all Bishops and other
Ordinaries, were encouraged to proceed therein, and consequently those of
inferior rank to defend their actings. The Chapel of Emmanuel College in
Cambridge is built North and South, contrary to the usage of the Primitive
times, and the Church of England, with which King James being made acquainted,
he answered (as our Author tells us) That it was no ma^ter how the Chapel
stood, so the heart stood right: Which Tale being told by him, and believed by
others ( and populum qui sibi credit habet, Ovid. in Ep. Hypsiphil.) as he is
like enough to find many Believers, farewell to all external Reverence in the
Service of God: What need we trouble our selves or others with standing,
kneeling, bowing in the acts of Worship; it is no matter in what posture the
Body be, so the Heart be right. What need we put our selves or others to the
charge of Surplices and Hoods, of Gowns and Cassacks, in the officiating of
Gods Service; It is no matter in what habit the Body be, so the heart be right.
There is another Chapel in Cambridge which was never consecrated, Hist. of
Camb.
(whether a Stable or a Dormitory, is all one to me.) At which when some found
themselves grieved, our Author tells them, That others of as great Learning and
Religion (himself especially for one) dare defend, that the continued Series of
Divine Duties, Hist. Camb. fol. 155.
publicly practiced for more then thirty years (without the least check or
control of those in authority) in a place set apart to that purpose, does
sufficiently consecrate the same: Stables and Barns by this Argument, shall in
some tract of time become as sacred as our Churches; and if the Brethren think
it not enough for their ease to be pent up in so narrow a Room, it is but
repairing to the next Grove or Coppise, and that in a like tract of time shall
become as holy as Solomon's Temple, or any consecrated place whatsoever it be:
Churches may well be spared, pulled down, and their Materials sold for the use
of the Saints; a Tub by this our Authors Logic, will be as useful as the
Pulpit unto Edification: And that we may perceive that nothing is more precious
with him then an irregular, unconsecrated, and unfurnished Chapel. Melvins
infamous Libel against the Furniture of the Altars in the Chapels Royal, (for
which he was censured in the Star Chamber) must be brought in by head and
shoulders, out of time and place, for fear least such an excellent piece of
Puritanical Zeal should be lost to posterity: These things I might have noted
in their proper places, but that they were reserved for this as a taste to the
rest.

12. Et jam finis erat, and here I thought I should have ended this Anatomy of
our Authors Book, but that there is another passage in the Preface thereof,
which requires a little further consideration: For in that Preface he informs
us by the way of caution, That the three first Books were for the main written
in the Reign of the late King, as appears by the Passages then proper for the
Government: The other nine Books were made since Monarchy was turned into a
State. By which it seems, that our Author never meant to frame his History by
the line of truth, but to attemper it to the palate of the present Government,
whatsoever it then was, or should prove to be, which I am sure agrees not with
the Laws of History. And though I can most easily grant, that the fourth Book,
and the rest that follow, were written after the great alteration and change of
State, in making a new Commonwealth out of the ruins of an ancient Monarchy;
yet I concur not with our Author in the time of the former: For it appears by
some passages, that the three first Books, either were not all written in the
time of the King, or else he must give himself some disloyal hopes, that the
King should never be restored to his place and Power, by which he might be
called to a reckoning for them. For in the second Book he reckons the Cross in
Baptism for a Popish Trinket, by which it appears not, I am sure, to have been
written in the time of the Kingly Government, that being no expression suitable
unto such a time. Secondly, speaking of the precedence which was sixth in
Canterbury, by removing the Archiepiscopal See from London thither, he tells
us that the (...) is not much, which See went first, when living, seeing our
Age ^ath laid them ^oth alike level in in their Graves: But certainly the
Government was not changed into a State or Commonwealth, till the death of the
King; and till the death of the King, neither of those Episcopal Sees, nor any
of the rest, were laid so level in their Graves, but that they were in hope of
a Resurrection; the King declaring himself very constantly in the Treaty at the
Isle of Wight, as well against the abolishing of the Episcopal Government, as
the alienation of their Lands. Thirdly, In the latter end of the same Book he
makes a great dispute against the high and sacred privilege of the Kings of
England, in curing the disease commonly called the Kings Evil, whether to be
imputed to Magic, or Imagina^^^n, or indeed a Miracle; next brings us in an
old Wives Tale about Queen Elizabeth, as if she had disclaimed that power which
she daily exercised; and finally, manageth a Quarrel against the form of Prayer
used at the curing of that Evil, which he arraigns for Superstition and
impertinencies, no inferior Crimes: Are all these Passages proper to that
Government also? Finally in the third Book he derogates from the power of the
Church, in making Canons giving the binding and concluding Power in matters
which concern the Civil Rights of the Subjects, not to the King, but to the
Lay People of the Land assem^^^d in Parliament; which game he after follows
in the ^ighth and last: And though it might be safe enough for him in the
eighth and last to derogate in this manner from the Kings supremacy in
Ecclesiastical affairs; yet certainly it was neither safe for him so to do, nor
proper for him so to write in the time of the Kingl^ Government, unless he had
some such wretched hopes as before we sp^ke of.

(...) I must need; say that on the reading of these Passages, an^ the rest
that follow, I found my self possessed with much indignation, and long expected
when some Champion would appear in the lists against this Goliath, who so
reproachfully had defiled the whole Armies of Israel. And I must needs confess
withal, that I did never enter more unwillingly upon any undertaking, then I
did on this: But being ^ollicited thereunto by Letters, Messages, and several
personal Addresses; by men of all Orders and Dignities in the Church, and of
all Degrees in the Universities, I was at last overcome by that importunity
which I found would not be resisted: I know, that, as the times now stand, I am
to expect nothing for my Pains and Travel, but the displeasure of some, and the
censure of others: But coming to the work with a single heart, abstracted from
all self ends and private Interesses, I shall satisfy my self with having done
this poor service to the Church, my once Blessed Mother, for whose sake only I
have put my self upon this Adventure. The party whom I am to deal with, is so
much a stranger to me, that he is neither beneficio, nec injuria notus, and
therefore no particular respects have moved me to the making of these
Animadversions, which I have writ (without relation to his person) for
vindication of the truth, the Church, and the injured Clergy, as before is
said: So that I may affirm with an honest Conscience: Non lecta est operi sed
data causa meo, That this implo^ment was not chosen by me, but imposed upon me;
the unresistable entreaties of so many friends having something in them of
Commands: But howsoever, Iacta est alea, as Caesar once said when he passed
over the Rubicon, I must now take my fortune whatsoever it proves, so God speed
me well.

Errata on the Animadversions.
PAge 10. line 17. for Melkinus r. Telkinus, p. 20. l. 21. for Queen of* r.
Queen of England, p. 27. l. 6. for Woode^ poir r. Woodensdike,s p. 42. l. 1.
for inconsiderateness, r. the inconsiderateness of children, p. 121. l. 28. for
ter r. better, p. 145. l. 2. for statuendo r. statuendi, p. 154. l. 22.
Horcontnar, r. cantuur, p. 154. l. 17. for Dr. Hammond r. D. Book, p. 160. l.
1. for his r. this, p. 163. l. 28. for Jesuits r. Franciscans, p. 189. l. ult.
for contemn r. confession, p. 221. in the Marg. for wether r. with other, p.
228. l. 2. for Den r. Dean, p. 239. l. 29. for Commons r. Canon, p. 271. l. ult
for culis r. occulis.

ANIMADVERSIONS ON The Church History OF BRITAIN.
LIB. I.
Of the Conversion of the Britans to the Faith of Christ.
IN order to the first Conve^sion o^ (...) B^itish Nations, our Author takes
beginning at the sad condition they were in before the Chris^ian Faith was
preached unto them.^ And in a sad condition they were indeed^ as being in the
estate of Gentilism, and consequently without the true knowledge of the God
that made them; but yet not in a worse condition then the other Gentiles, w^^
were not only darkened in their understandings, b^^ ^o depraved also in their
Affections, as to work all ma^n^er of uncleanness, even with greediness. Not ^o
(...) in their Conversation as the Asiati^ks, no^ ^o (...) as the Greeks; nor
branded wi^h th^se fi^thy and ^^natural lusts which St. Paul charge on the
R^mans, and were in ordinary practice with most Eastern Na^^^ns. And t^^^gh
they were Idolaters, yea and foul Id^lat^rs, as our A^tho^ has it, yet neither
were their ^o^s of so br^tish and impu^e a nature, as the Priapus, Cl^cina, and
Ster^utia amongst the Romans; or as the^^ Venus, (...), common Harlots all: of
which and such like other Gods the old Fathers tell us, that they were not
N^mina colendorum, sed cri^ira c^lentium. No^ were they so immodest and ^bscene
in their (...) and Ce^emonies, as were the Gre^ks and Romans in the sacrifices
of their Cybele or Bere^ynthia, whom they call the Mother of the Gods; (...)
de^c^ibed by Arnobius, Lactan^^^^, and others of the ancient W^iters, in ^u^h
lively colors, (...)
as no chaste eye can look upon them without detestation. And for the number of
their Gods, they fell extremely sho^t of that in^^^ite m^ltitude which St.
Augustine finds amongst the Romans; our Author naming only th^ee (which he
calls Gods Paramount) that is to say, Bel^nus, Andat^^ and Diana, though wh^the^
this last we^e a British Deity may be more then questioned. When the^efo^e
Gil^as tells us of the ancients Britans, that in the numbe^ of their Gods they
had almost exceeded ^^^gypt (P^rtenta paene numero Aegyptiaca vin^entia, in
that a^thors language) he must be unde^stood with re^erence to the times in
which he lived, when all the Roman Rabble had been thrust upon them, and not as
speaking of the times of their first conve^s^on: But whether they were more, o^
(...) our Author is resolved on Diana for one, whose Temple was built in or
near the place where St. Paul's now stands, as our learned Antiquaries do
acknowledge;

For. 1. Which (says he) renders their conceit not altogether un^ikely, who
will have London so called from Llan-Dian which signifies in British the
Temple of Diana.] A conceit, whosesoever it was, not altogether so likely
neither as our Author makes it. For though the Britans being well stored with
woods and Venison, possibly might have a hunting Goddess amongst the rest, yet
certainly she was not called by the name of Diana, till the Roman Conquest and
Plantations, before which time this City had the name of London (or Londinum)
as we read in Tacitus. The name and sacrifices of Diana were not originally
British, but of Roman race; as the great Temple in or near the place where St.
Paul's now stands was of their foundation. The Britans worshipping Apollo, by
the name of Belinus, as both Camden and our Author say they did, must be
supposed to have another name for Diana also; and were more likely to have
called her by the name of Artemis, her old Grecian name, or by some other of as
near a remembrance to it, as Belinus was to that of Bell in the Eastern
Countries. Assuredly if that great City had received this name from Dianas
Temple, the Welsh, being so tenacious of their ancient language, would have had
some remembrance of it, who to this day call it Lundayn, Camd^n in (...)
and not Llan-dian according to the new conceit which our Author speaks of. But
of this enough.

Now to facilitate this great work of their conversion, Camden and Godwin, two
great Antiquaries, have alleged one reason, which is not allowed of by our
Author; and our Author has alleged another reason which none can allow of but
himself. The reason alleged by the two great Antiquaries is that the Druides
did (...) the Britans in the knowledge of one only God; which questionless was
a great step toward their Conversion. Druides unum esse Deum semper
inculcarunt, says our Authors margin. But this he reckons a (...) and (...)
charitably wishes thereupon, viz.

(...) Power, whom generally they entitled by the name of Jupiter, yet they
did well enough agree in giving him the Supreme power over all the World.

Et qui Iovem Principem volunt falluntur in nomine, sed de una potestate
consentiunt, Mi^ u^. ^bid.
as my Author has it. Nor did those old Philosopho^s ke^p the great Truth unto
themselves like a Candle in a dark Lanthorn, or hid under a Bushel, but placed
it like a great light on the top of a Mountain, that all the people might
disce^n it; who the^eupon li^ting their hands unto the Heavens, did frequently
make their addresses but to one God only, saying in common speech unto one
another, that God was great, and God was true, and if God permit. Of which my
Author (the same Ch^istian Advocat) seems to make a question, Idem ibid.
Vulgi iste naturalis s^rmo est, an Christiani confitentis cratio? That is to
say, whether those expressions ^avoured not rather of the Christian then the
vulg^r Heath^n. And he^e^pon I may con^lude in the behalf of the Druides, (o^
^ather of those lea^ned Pens who affirm it of them) that being Philosophers in
study, and Divines by O^^ice, and very eminent in their times, i^ both
capacities they might as well instruct the People in the knowledge of one only
God, as any other of the Heathen Sage^^ either Gre^ks or Romans. The reason
alle^dged by these great Antiquaries being thus made good, we next p^oceed to
the Examination of that which is p^oduced by our Author, who tells us that

Fol. 3. It facilitated the entrance of the Gospel ^ither, that Roman c^nquest
had in part civilized the (...) of this Island, by trans^orting C^l^ni^s, and
erecting of (...) there.] Then which the^e co^ld not any thing be (...) more
diffe^ent from the (...) the time of that con^ersion which we (...) as all
(...) amongst them our Author himself) have a^^^rmed from (...) (who lived in
the fourth Century of the Chri^^ian Church) t^mpore (...) Tiberii Caesaris,
toward the latter end of ^^e Reign of Tiberius Caesar, that is to say, about
(...) seven years after (...), at what time (...) Romans had neither erected
any one City, nor (...) any one Colony in the South paris of the Island. ^or
though Julius Caesar in purs^ance of his Gallick (...), had attempted this
Island, crossed the Th^mes, and pierced as far as ^erulamium in the Country of
the Cattieuchlani (now Hartfordshire) yet either finding h^w d^fficult a work
it was like to prove, or having b^siness of more moment, he gave over the
enterprise, (...) with the honor of the first discovery, (...) quam tradidisse,
as we read in Taci^^^ (...) after this in order to the conquest (...) till the
time of Claudius. Augustus would by no means be pe^waded to the undertaking,
and much le^s ^iberius, in whose last years the Gospel was first preach^ in
Britain, (...)
as before wa^ said. Consilium id Div^s Au^^^ (...) Tibe^ius praecipue. And
though (...) was once re^olv'd on the expedition, yet being never constant to
his reso^^tions, he soon gave it (...): ^^ving the honor of this conquest to
his Uncle (...), who next succeeded in the Empire, and being invited into
Britain by a discontented Party amongst the Natives, reduced some part thereof
into the form (...) a Roman Province. Of this see Tacitus at large in the life
of Agricola. By which it will appear most cl^^ly, that there was neither City
of the Roman e^ec^ion, nor Colony of their Plantation till the time of
Claudius; and con^equently no such facilitating of the wo^^ by either of those
means which our Author dreams (...) B^^ from the time, proceed we to the
Authors of this first Conversion, of which thus our Author.

Ibid. Pa^^on^ the (...) mainly stickl^th for the Apostle to have first
preached the Gospel here.] And our Author does as mainly stickle against it.
The reason which induced Parsons so to stickle in it, was as our Author thinks,
and tells us, Fol. 4. To infer an obligation of this Island to the Sea of
Rome; and to exempt this Island from that Obligation, our Author has
endeavored to disprove the Tradition. Whereas indeed St. Peter's preaching in
this Island (if he were the first that Preached he^e) in the time of Tiberius
must be before his Preaching in the City of Rome, to which he came not till the
Reign of the Emp^ror Claudius. And thereupon it follows by the Jesuits
Logic, that the Britans by sparing their Apostle to p^each at R^me, did lay an
obligation upon that City, but received none from it: or granting that St.
Peter had first preached at Rome, yet would this draw upon us no such engagement
to the Pope and the Church of Rome, as our A^tho^ fears; and other German
Nations by Boni^ace, Willibald, (...) Willibrod, and Swibert, English Saxons
all, might (...) did draw the like dependence of those Ch^rches upon this of
England. So that this fear being ove^ blown, we will consider somewhat further
of St. Peter's f^^st Preaching in this Island, not as de^ive^'d by Tradition
from the Church of Rome, which is suspected to h^ve pleaded their own Interess
in it; but as affi^med po^itively by the Greek Menologies, and in the works o^
Simeon Metaphrastes and app^oved Greek Author. Camd B it. fol. 6^.
Of the Menologies (though vouched by Camden to this purpo^e) our Author takes
no notice at all, b^t lets the weight of his di^pleasure fall on Metaphrastes,
of whom he tells us that

Ibid. Metaphrastes is an Author of no credit^ as B^ronius himself does
confess. B^t first Ba^onius (...) makes no such confession; that which o^r
Autho^ tells us from him being only this, In aliis multis (...) ab ipso positis
errare eum certum est; that is to say, that h^ has e^r'd in many things by him
delivered. (...) if to err in many things delivered in so great a (...), as
that of Simeon Metaphrastes, may forthwith be conceived sufficient to make an
Author of no c^e^i^, God bless not only our Histo^ians, but Baronius himself
from being held Authors of no credit, in both whom there are many errors not
possible to be reconc^led to the truth of story. But secondly, as Baronius did
not, so he could not say, that Metaphrastes was an A^thor of no credit; the man
being not only pious, b^t learned al^o for the times in which he lived, honored
as a Saint in the Gre^k Menologies on the 27. of November, and graced with a
Funeral Oration by Michael Psellus a renowned Scholar, Ex^. apud Su^ium. (...)
highly extolled by Balsamon for his pains and industry in this present work,
and no less magnified by the Fathers in the Council of Florence, Anno 1436. All
which had never set such an estimate upon him in their seve^al times, S^ss. 7.
had he been an A^thor of no credit as (...) Author makes him. I had now ended
with St. P^ter, but that I find him appear in a Vision to King E^ward the
Confesso^, and telling him that he had preached the Gospel in Britain
(occasioning thereby the fo^ndation of the Abbey of St. Peter in Westminst^r) to
which our Author makes this Answer;

To this vision pretended of Peter, we oppose the certain words of St. Paul, 1 Timothy 1. 4. Neither give heed to tables.] What pity is it that this Apparition
was no^ m^de, and the same tale told over again to Thomas Fuller of
Hammersmith, that so it might have found some credit with our Author, though
with no body else. For of this Thomas Fuller our Author tells us (and tells
it in confirmation of some miracles done by King Henry the sixth, after his
decease) that being a very honest man he had happened into the company of some
who had stolen some Cattle, for which he was condemned and executed; and being
on the top of the Ladder K. Harry the sixth appeared unto him, and so ordered
the matter, that he was not strangled with the rope, but preserved alive; and
finally that in gratitude for so great a benefit, he repaired to that Kings
Tomb in Chertsey Abbey, and there presented his humble thanks unto him for that
great deliverance. There being as good Authors for that Apparition of St. Peter
as for this of St. Henry. Vel neutrum ^^ammis ure, vel ure duos. Either let
both be burnt for false, or believed for truths.

Less opposition meets the preaching of St. Joseph of Arimathea, though it
meets some. For notwiths^anding that this Tradition be as general, as
universally received, as almost any other in the Christian Church; yet our
Author, being resolved to let fly at all, declares it for a piece of Novel
superstition disguised Better provided (as it seems) to dispute this point,
then the Ambassadors of Castile^ when they contended for precedence with those
of England in the Council of Basil* who had not any thing to object against
this Tradition of Joseph's preaching to the Britans, although the English had
p^ovoked them by confuting their absurd pretenses for St. James his preaching
to the Spaniards. For first our Author does object in the way of scorn, that

Fol. 6. The relation is as ill acco^tred with tackling in which it is affi^med
that St. Philip, St. Joseph and the rest were put witho^t either Sails or
Oa^es, with a purpose to drown them.] No such strange piece of Errantry (if we
mark it well) as to render the whole truth suspected. For first we find it in
the Monuments of the elder times that Acrisius King of Argos exposed his
daughter Danae with her young Son Perseus, in such a vessel as this was, and
as ill provided of all necessaries, to the open Seas; who notwithstanding by
the divine Providence, were safely wafted to those parts of Italy which we now
call Puglia. And secondly for the middle times we have the like story in an
Author above all exception, even our Author himself, who tells us, Lib. 6.
Fol. 265. of our present History, that King Athelstane put his Brother Edwine
into a little wherry or Cock-boat, without any tackling or furniture thereunto,
to the end, that if the poor Prince perished, his wickedness might be imputed
to the waves. Our Author objecteth in the next place, that

No Writer of credit can be produced before the Conquest, who mentions
Joseph's coming hither.] For An^wer whe^eunto it may first be said, that where
there is a con^^nt uncontrol'd tradition, there is most commonly the less care
taken to commit it to writing; secondly that the Charters of Glassenbury
relating from the Norman to the Saxon Kings, and from the Saxons to the
Brit^ns, being all built upon St. Joseph's coming hither, and p^eaching here,
may serve in stead of many Authors bearing witness to it; and thirdly, that
Friar Bale, as great an enemy to the unwarrantable Traditions of the Church of
Rome as our Author can desire to have him, has vouched two witnesses hereunto,
that is to say, Melkinus Avalonius, and Gildas Albanus, whose writings, or some
fragments of them, he may be believed to have seen, though our Autho^ has not.
Joseph's first Church to the Virgin Mary, the burying of his body in it, and the
enclosing of the same with a large Churchyard; I look upon them as the
products of M^nkish ignorance, accommodated un^o the fashion of those times
which the writers lived in. The^e is scarce any Saint in all the Calendar,
whose History would not be subject to the like misconstructions if the
additaments of the middle and darker times should be produced to the
disparagement of the whole Narration.

But such an enemy our Author is to all old traditions, Glassenbury Thorn,
though before cut down by some Souldie^s as himself confesses; like Sir John
Falstaff in the Play, who to show his valor, must thrust his sword into the
bodies of those men which we^e dead before. The budding or blossoming of this
Thorn he accounts untrue ( which were it true, etc. fol. 8.) affirming from I
know not whom, that it does not punctually and critically bud on Christmas day,
but on the days near it or about it. And were it no otherwi^e then so, the
miracle were not much the less, then if it budded c^itically upon Christmas
day, as I have heard from persons of great worth and credit dwelling near the
place, that indeed it did: though unto such as had a mind to decry the
Festival, it was no very hard m^tter to belly the miracle.

In fine, our Author either is unwilling to have the Dianas Image is said to
have done by the Act. 19 35.
Town-^lerk of Ephesus; or else m^st suddenly rise out of the earth, as Tages
the first Soothsayer amongst the Thuscans, is reported to have done by some
ancient Writers. And yet we cannot say of our Author neither, as Lactantius did
of one Acesilas (if my memory fail not) Recte hic aliorum sustulit disciplinas,
sed non recte sundavit suam; that is to say, that though he had laid no good
grounds for his own opinion, yet he had solidly conf^ted the opinions of
others. Our A^thor has a way by himself, neither well skilled in pulling down,
nor in building up.

From the first conversion of the Britans, proceed we now unto the second, as
Parsons calls it, or rather from the first Preaching to the Propagation. The
Christian faith here planted by St. Peter or St. Joseph (or perhaps planted by
the one, and watered rather by the other, in their several times) had still a
being in this Island till the time of Lucius. So that there was no need of a
new conversion, but only of some able Laborers to take in the harvest. The
Miracles done by some pious Christians induced King Lucius to send Elvanus and
Meduinus (two of that profession) to the Pope of Rome, requesting principally,
that some Preachers might be sent to instruct him in the faith of Christ. Which
the Pope did acco^ding to the Kings desire, sending Faganus and Derwianus, two
right godly men, by whom much people were converted, the Temples of the gods
converted into Christian Churches, the Hierarchy of Bishops settled, and the
whole building raised on so good a foundation, that it continued undemo^isht
till the time of the Saxons. And in the summing up of this story, our Author
having ref^ted some peti^ Arguments which had been answered to his hand (though
much mistaken by the way in taking Diotarus King of Galatia, for a King of
Sicilie, fol. 10.) gives us some other in their stead, which he thinks
unanswerable* First he ob^ects against the Popes an^we^ to the King, that

It relates to a former letter of King L^cius wherein he requested of the Pope
to send him a Copy or Collection of the Roman Laws, which being at that time
in force in the (...) if Britain, was but actum agere.] But certainly though
those parts of Britain in which Lucius reigned, were governed in part (and b^t
in part) by the Laws of Rome, yet were the Laws of Rome, at that time more in
number, and of a far more general practice, then to be limited to so narrow a
part of their Dominions. Two thousand Volumes we find of them in Justinians
time, out of which, by the help of Theophilus, Trebonianus, Platina in vita.
and many other learned men of that noble faculty, the Emperor composed that
Book or body of Law which from the universality of its comp^ehension, we still
call the Pandects. So that King Lucius being desirous to inform himself in the
Laws of that Empire, whether in force or out of use, we regard not now, might
as well make it one of his desires to the Pope of Rome; as any great person
living in Ireland, in Queen Elizabeth's time, might write to the Archbishop of
Canterbury to procure for him all the Books of Statutes, the Yearbooks,
Commentaries, and Reports of the ablest Lawyers, though Ireland were governed
at that time by the Laws of England. For though Pope Eleutherius knew better
how to suffer Martyrdom for Christ's cause (as our Author has it) then to play
the Advocate in another; yet did not that render him unable to comply with the
Kings desires, but that he thought it better to commend the knowledge of Gods
Law to his care, and study. In the next place it is objected, that

This letter mounts King Lucius to too high a Throne, making him the Monarch or
King of Britain, who neither was the Supreme nor sole King here, but partial
and subordinate to the Romans.] This we acknowledge to be true, but no way
prejudicial to the cause in hand. Lucius both was and might be called the King
of Britain, though Tributary and Vassal to the Roman Emperors, as the two
Baliols John and Edward were both Kings of Scotland, though Homagers and
Vassals to Edward the first, and third, of England, the Kings of Naples to the
Pope, and those of Austria and Bohemia to the German Emperors. Nor does the
next objection give us any trouble at all, that is to say, That

The Scripture quoted in that Letter is out of St. Hieroms Translation, which
came more then a hundred years after:] Unless it can be proved with all (as I
think it cannot) the Hierom followed not, in those texts, those old
Translations, which were before received and used in the Western Churches. Less
am I moved with that which follows, viz.

That this letter not appearing till a thousand years after the death of Pope
Eleutherius, might probably creep out of some Monk^ Cell, some four hundred
years since] Which allegation being admitted (the Monks Cell excepted) it makes
no more to the discredit of the letter which we have before us, then to the
undervaluing of those excellent Monuments of Piety and Learning, which have
been recovered of late times from the dust and moths of ancient Libraries. Such
Treasure like money long locked up, is never thought less profitable when it
comes abroad. And from what place soever it first came abroad, I am confident
it came not out of any Monks Cell; that generation being then wholly at the
Popes devotion, by consequence not likely to divulge an Evidence, so m^nifestly
tending to the overthrow of his pretensions. The Popes about four hundred years
since were mounted to the height of that power and Tyranny which they claimed
as Vicars unto Christ. To which the^e could not any thing be more plainly
contrary then that passage in the Popes letter, where he tells the King, That
he was Gods Vicar in his own Kingdom (vos estis Vicarius De^ in Regno vestro,
as the Latin has it) Too great a secret to proceed from the Cell of a Monk,
who would have rather forged ten Decretals to ^pho^d the P^pis^ (...) over
Soverain Princes, then published one only (whether true or false) to subvert
the same. Nor does this Letter only give the King an empty Title, but such a
Title as imports the exercise of the chief Ecclesiastical Power within his
Dominions. For thus it follows in the same; The people* and the folk of the
Realm of Britain be yours; whom if they be divided, ye ought togather in
conc^rd and peace, to call them to the faith and law of Christ, to cherish and
maintain them, to rule and govern them, so as you may reign everlastingly with
him whose Vicar you are. So far the very words of the letter, as our Author
rendereth them, which savor far more of the honest simplicity of the Primitive
Popes, then the impostures and suppos^titious issues of the ^atter times.

Our Author tells us fol. 9. that he had ventured on this story with much
aversness; and we dare believe him. He had not else labored to discredit it in
so many particulars, and wilfully (that I say no worse) suppressed the best
part of the Evidence in the words of Beda; who being no friend unto the
Britans, Beda Hist. Eccles. ^ib. 1. cap. 4.
has notwithstanding done them right in this great business. And from him take
the story in these following words; Anno ab i^carnati^ne Domini, 156, etc. In
the 156. year after Christ's Nativity, Marcus Antonius Verus together with
Aurelius Commodus his Brother, did in the fourteenth place from Augustus
Caesar, undertake the government of the Empire. In whose times when as
Eleutherius a godly man was Bishop of the Church of Rome, Lucius King of the
Britans* sent unto him, Obsecrans ut per ejus mandatum Christianus essiceretur,
entreating by his means to be made a Christian; whose vertrious desire he ein
was granted; and the faith of Christ being thus received by the Britans, was by
them kept inviolate and undefiled until the time of Dioc^tian. This is the
substance of the story, as by him delivered, true in the main, though possibly
there may be some mistake in his Chronology, as in a matter not so canvassed as
it has been lately.

Now to proceed unto our Author, he tells us fol. 10. Ieffery of Monmouth, That
at this time there were in England twenty eight Cities, each of them having a
Flamen or Pagan Priest; and three of them, namely London, York, and Caer-Lion
in Wales, had Archflamens, to which the rest were subjected: and Lucius placed
Bishops in the room of the Flamens, and Archbishops, Metropolitans in the
places of Archflamens; concluding in the way of scorn, that his Flamines, and
Archflamines seem to be Flams and Archflams, even notorious falsehoods.] And it
is well they do but seem so, it being possibly enough that they may seem
Falsehoods to our Author, even notorious Falsehoods, though they seem true enough
to others, even apparent truths. And first though Ieffery of Monmouth seem to
deserve no credit in this particular, where he speaks against our Authors
sense; yet in another place where he comes up to his desires he is otherwise
thought of, and therefore made the Foreman of the grand Inquest against
Augustino the Monk, whom he enditeth for the murder of the Monks of Bancor.
And certainly if Ieffery may be believed when he speaks in passion, when his
Welsh blood was up, Lib. 2. fol. 63.
as our Author words it, as one that was concerned in the cause of his
Countrymen; he may more easily be believed in a cause of so remote Antiquity,
where neither love nor hatred, or any other prevalent affection had any power
or reason to divert him from the way of truth. And secondly, though Ieffery of
Monmouth be a Writer of no great credit with me, when he stands single by
himself, yet when I find him seconded and confirmed by others, I shall not
brand a truth by the name of falsehood, because he reports it. Now that in
Britain at that time there were no fewer then eight and twenty Cities is
affirmed by Beda Beda. Hist. Ecclesiast. Ang. l. 8. cap. 1.
. Henry of Huntington Hist. l 1. in initio.
not only agrees with him in the number, but gives us also the names of them,
though where to find many of them it is hard to say. That in each of these
Cities was some Temple dedicated to the Pagan Gods, that those Temples
afterward were employed to the use of Christians, and the Revenues of them
assigned over to the maintenance of the Bishops and other Ministers of the
Gospel, has the concurr^nt testimony of approved Authors; that is to say,
Ma^thew of Westminster out of Gildas, Anno 187. Rodolph de Diceto cited by the
learned Prima^ of Armach in his Book De Primordiis Eccles. Brit. cap. 4.
Gervaso of Tilbury, ibid. cap. 6. And for the Flamines, and Archflamines, they
stand not only on the credit of Ieffery of Monmouth, but of all our own
Writers, who speak of the foundation of the ancient Bishoprics, even to
Polydor Virgil. Nor want there many forain Writers who affirm the same, Mart.
Polon. in Chron.
bginning with Martinus Polonus, who being esteemed no friend to the Popedom
(because of the Story of Pope Ione which occurs in his Writings) may the rather
be believed in the story of Lucius. And he agrees with Ieffery of Monmouth in
all parts of the story, as to the Flamines and Archflamines, as do also many
other of the Roman Writers which came after him. But where both our Author and
some others have raised some objections against this part of the History, for
Answer thereunto I refer the Reader to the learned and laborious Work of
Francis Mason late Archdeacon of Norfolk, De Ministorio Anglicano, L^b. 2. cap.
3.
the sum whereof in brief is this, Licet in una urbe multi Flamines, that
though there were many Flamines in one City, yet was there only one which was
called Pontifex or Primus Flaminum; the Pope or principal of the Flamines; of
which kind one for every City, were those whom our Historians speak of. And
for the Archi-Flamines or Proto-Flamines, though the name occur not in old
Roman Writers, yet were there some in power and Authority above the rest, who
were entitled Primi Pontificum (as indeed Coifi by that name is called in
Beda) which is the same in sense with Arch-flamines although not in sound. Beda
Hist. Ecclesi st. l 2. c. 13.
All I shall further add is this, that if these 28 Cities were not all
furnished with Bishops in the time of Lucius for whom it was impossible to
spread his arms and express his power over all the South parts of the Island;
yet may the honor of the work be ascribed to him, because begun by his
encouragement, and perfected by his example; as Romulus is generally esteemed
for the Founder of Rome, although the least part of that great City was of his
Foundation.

Our Author has not yet done with Lucius. For admitting the story to be true,
he disallowes the turning Pagan Temples into Christian Churches, which he
censureth as the putting of new Wine into old Vessels, which afterward
savored of the Cask, Christianity hereby getting a smack* of Heathen
ceremonies. But in this point the P^imitive Christians were as wise as our
Author, though they were not so nice. Who without fearing any such smack,
accommodated themselves in many ceremonies to the Gentiles, and in some to the
Jews; that being all things to all men, they might gain the more, as in fine
they did: which notwithstanding our Author hereupon infers;

They had better have built new Nests for the holy Dove, and not have lodged it
where Schriech-owls and unclean Birds had formerly been harbored.] A p^ety
piece of new Divinity, and such as favors strongly of the Modern Anabaptist;
such as not only does ^eproach the practice of most pious Antiquity, but lays
a sure ground for the pulling down of all our Chu^ches (as having been abused
to Popish Superstitions in the former times) if ever that increasing faction
sh^^ld become predominant. What pity is it that our A^thor had not lived and
preached this Doctrine in King Edwards time, that the Parochial Churches and
C^thedrals being sent after the Abbeys, new Nests might have been built for the
Dove in some tree or other, un^er the shade whereof the people might assemble
to their devotions: and not new Nests provided only, but new feathers also, the
vestments prescribed to the Mini^^ers by the Church of England, being condemned
and disallowed by the Puritan party, because in use formerly with the Priests
of the Church of Rome. More of this stuff, but of a more dangerous conquence to
the public peace, we shall see hereafter.

We have now done at last with the story of L^cius, and must next follow our
Author unto that of Amphibalus, in prosecution whereof he ^elleth us of a great
Christians in or near the City of Litchfield, from thence so denominated, of
which thus says he;

Fol. 19. This relation is favored by the name of Litchfield, which in the
British tongue signifies a Golgotha, or a place bestrewed with sk^ls.] It Is
true indeed that Litchfield, or Licidfield, as Beda calls it, is made by John
Rosse to signify Cadaverum Campus, C^md. in Staff shire.
or the field of dead bodies. But that it does so signify in the British
language, I do more then doubt, the termination of the word being mee^ly Saxon,
as in H^fenfield, Cock-field, Camps^^^^d, and many others. As little am I
sa^isfied in the Etymon of the name of Maidenhead, which he ascribes unto the
worshipping of the head of one of those many Maidens which were martyred with
Vrsula at Colen, fol. 36. For which though he cite Camden for his Author
(following therein, Camden in (...) sh.
but not approving the old Tradition) yet when I find in the same Camden, that
this Town was for^er^y Maidenhith, that anciently there was a ferry near the
place where the town now stands, and that Hith in the old Sax^n tongue, did
signify a Wh^rse, Haven, or landing place, I have some reason to believe, that
the Town took this name from the Wharse or Ferry belonging at that time to some
neighboring Nunnery, or to some private Maidens dwelling thereabout, who then
received the profits of it. Just so Queen-Hith in London took that appellation,
S^owes (...)
because the profits of that Wharf were anciently accounted for to the Queens
of England; and Maiden-bradly in Wilshire was so denominated because belonging
to one of the inheretrices of Manasses Basset, Camden in W^shire, fol. 243.
a most noble personage in his time, who founded a House here for Maiden
Lepers. But to return again to L^itch-field, It must needs seem as strange to
my judicious Reader, that one part of it should be borrowed from the Britans,
and the other from the Saxons; as it seems strange unto our Author, and that
justly too, that Cern in Dorcetshire should anciently be called Cernel, from
the Latin word Cerno, which signifies to see, and the Hebrew word El
signifying God, fol. 67.

I fear that learned pen has gone too far, who makes him founder of a
Bishopric at York, and styleth him an Emperor surpassing in all virtue and
Christian ^iety.] The learned pen here spoken of is that of judicious Camden,
whose character of Constantius Chlorus our Author in this place will not let
pass without some censure. That he did found (or rather re^ound) a Bishopric
in the City of York, I am confident Camden had not said without very good
grounds, though on what grounds he said it, I am yet to seek. A Bishopric and
a Bishop of York we find on good Record within few years after; Eborius the
Bishop of that City subscribing to the Council of Arles in the time of
Constantine, the Son and next succe^^or of Constantius Chlorus. And that he was
a Prince of su^passing virtue, is generally agreed upon by all Historians, both
Pagans and Christians. The Question then will surpass also in Christian piety,
which our Author will not otherwise grant, b^t by our Saviors Argument only,
concluding those to be on our part who are not against us; Constantius doing no
other good unto Christianity, but that he did not do it harm. A censure not
agreeable to so good an Emperor, who though he were no through-paced Christian,
yet did he both favor their Religion, and protect their persons, as Eusebius
testifies de vita Constantini, lib. 1. cap. 1^. And not so only, but as our
Author himself confes^eth, he b^th permitted and preserved them who would
rebuild the decayed Christian Churches. If ^o (...) the persons of Christians
in the exercise of their Religion, to have them near unto him in places of
greatest trust and eminence, to suffer them to rebuild their Churches and
defend them in it, be not the (...) of some good unto Christianity, more then
the (...) harm, let our Author carry it, and Camden (...) the blame of his
needless Courtship. But this is not the first time, in which our Author has
clash with (...), and I see it will not be the last, by that (...) follows.
For speaking on the by how Wolve^ (...) entered into England, considering that
Merchants would not bring them, and that they could not swim over themse^ves,
he adds these words, viz.

Which has prevailed so far with some, as to (...) this now an Island,
originally annexed to the Cont^^ent.] It seems that though some so con^eive it,
ye^ (...) Author does no^. And yet he cannot choose but know that those whom he
does pass so slightly over by the name of some (as if not wo^thy to be
notified by (...) proper names) are the most eminent and renowned Antiquaries
of these latter times. Amongst which if I reckon Camden for one, and a chief
one too, I should but do him right, and not wrong the rest. Whose arguments to
p^ove the point, he that lists to see, may find them at large laid down in his
description of Kent; which when our Author can confute (as I do^bt he cannot)
he may then slight it over as a thing conceived and conceived only by some men
not wo^th the naming Till then I shall behold it as a matter not co^ceived but
proved, and so must he.

I should here end this Ch^pter and this Book togethe^ b^t tha^ I find a
trifling error not worth our notice, ^ut that I would set all things right as
they come before me* which is the placing of the Empero^ Constantine in the
Catalogue of those who commonly (...) under the name of the nine Worthies, and
this ^aith he,

Is more then comes to the proportion of Brit^in; that amongst but nine in the
whole World, two should prove Natives of this Island, Constantine and (...).
That Arthur goes for one of the Worthies, I shall e^sily grant, and I shall
grant too, that in the opinion of some w^iters this Island gave birth unto
another of them, namely Guy of Warwick. His Knight Sir Guy one of the nine, we
touch but by the way, says Warner in his Albions England. But in the common
estimate they are reckoned thus; that is to say, three Jews, 1. Joshua, 2.
David, 3. Judas Maccabaeus; three Gentiles, 4. Hector of Troy, 5. Alexander the
great, and 6. Julius Caesar; three Christians, 7. Arthur of Britain, 8.
Charlemain of France, and 9. Godfry of Bovillon. But I condemn my self for
mingling this poor piece of Errantry with such serious matters, though the
necessity of following my Leader as he goes may excuse me in it.

ANIMADVERSIONS ON The Church History OF BRITAIN.
LIB. II.
Of the Conversion of the Saxons, and that which followed thereupon till the
Norman Conquest.
IN order to the Conversion of the Saxons, our Author begins (as he had done
before in that of the Britans) with the unhappy condition of that People in the
state of Gentilism; in the description whereof he omitteth that which was
indeed their greatest unhappiness, that is to say, their barbarous and inhumane
sacrifices of men and women unto two of their Idols. For Camden tells us of
their God called Wooden, Camd. in Brit. fol. 135.
that they used to procure his favor by sacrificing unto him men alive; and I
have read in Verstegan (if my memory fail not) a man inferior to none in the
Antiquities of this Nation, that at their return from any conquest they used to
sacrifice the noblest of Thur. In this not much inferior to the Palestinians in
their sac^ifices to Moloch, or to the Carthaginians in the like abominable
sacrifices to Saturn, or to the Scythians in the like to Diana Taurica,
Lactant. lib. 16. cap. 21.
or ^inally to the Galls in theirs to Haesus and T^euta^es their own National
Deities. But not to lay at our Authors charge these small sins of Omission, we
must next see whether he be not guilty of some sin of Commission also. For
making a general muster of the Saxon Gods, and showing how they were disposed
of in relation to the days of the week, he concludes it thus:

And thus we see the whole week bescattered with Saxon Idols, whose Pagan Gods
were the Godfathers of the days, and gave them their names.] Not the whole
week, though the greatest part thereof was thus bescattered. Sunday and Monday
being so called in reference to the Sun and Moon, or else in correspondence to
the the names of Dies Solis, and Dies Lunae, which they found given by the
Romans at their entrance here. For either the Sun and Moon were worshipped by
the ancient Saxons, and then might think themselves neglected in having no
place assigned them amongst the rest; or else the Saxon Pagan Gods were not the
Godfathers to all the days of the week, as our Author tells us. As much he
seems to be mistaken in their God called Woden, of whom thus he tells us.

that is wood, fierce or furious, giving the denomination to Wednesday, or
Wodensday, In Brit. fol. 135.
Armed cap a pe with military Coronet on his head; he was the God of Battle,
by whose aid and furtherance they hoped to obtain victory; correspondent to
Mars.] But Camden sings another song, telling us that Wooden was not worshipped
for Mars but Mercury. Above all other Gods, says he, they worshipped Mercury,
whom they called Wooden, whose favor they procured by sacrificing unto him men
alive, and to him they consecrated the fourth day of the week, whereupon we
call it at this day Wednesday. Thus also in another place, Wansdike in the
Saxon tongue called Wodenepoic, Id. in Wi^sh. fol. 241.
that is to say, the Ditch of Wooden or Mercury, and as it should seem of Woden
that false imagined God and Father of the English-Saxons. And herein I shall
rather subscribe to Camdens then our Authors judgment. For certainly had the
Saxons worshipped Wooden as the God of Battle, or correspondent unto Mars,
they would have given him the third day of the week, or the day of Mars, and
not the fourth day of the week, or the day of Mercury; as they gave Sunday and
Monday unto Sol and Luna, and Thursday unto Thur, whom they worshipped in the
place of Jupiter, ascribing unto him (as the Greeks and Romans did to Jupiter)
the power of bearing rule in the Air, governing Thunder, Lightnings, Winds,
Showers, fair weather, etc. as Adam Bremensis a good Writer does inform us of
them. And though it may be true, which our Author tells us, that by his aid
and furtherance they hoped to obtain victory, yet this entitleth him not to the
place of Mars; as many victories being gotten by wit and stratagem (the known
Arts of Mercury) as by strength and valor. But from our Authors failers in
recounting the superstitions of our Saxon Ancestors, let us next see how he
behaves himself in laying down the story of their conversion. In which though
he ascribe something unto Austin the Monk, yet he will by no means allow him to
be their Apostle.

Fol. 54. The Papists (says he) commonly call Augustine the English Apostle,
how properly we shall see hereafter. And after fol. 68. The Papists brag that
he was the Apostle of the English.] In these few words there are two things to
be considered, whether he is called the Apostle of the English, by the Papists
only, and secondly, whether he were not so both in fact and title. Not called
so by the Papists only, I am sure of that; but called so commonly by as good
Protestants as our Author himself. Thus Camden a right English Protestant,
Camd. Brit. fol. 136.
After this Augustine, whom commonly they call the Apostle of the English men,
being sent hither by Gregory the Great, having abolished these monstrous
abominations of Heathenish impiety, with most happy success planting Christ in
their hearts, con^erted them to the Christain faith. Nor does he speak this
only in the voice of the common people, but in another place more plainly as
his own opinion. A place there is about this Shire called Austins Oak, Id. in
Worcest. fol. 578.
at which Augustine the Apostle of the English men, and the Bishops of Britain
met, etc.

Dr. Philemon Holland of Coventry, a good Protestant also, making an Index unto
Camden, speaks the self same language; Augustine the Apostle of the English;
which is short, but full. Gabriel Richardson of Brazen Nose, an honest
Protestant, in his laborious piece called the State of Europe, Richardsons
state of Europe. lib. 3.
tells us of Canterbury, that the Archbishops See was founded by King
Ethelbert in the person of St. Austin the Apostle of the English. More of this
kind might be produced, were it not given us for a Rule in the holy Scripture,
Ex ore duorum testium vel trium, that two or three witnesses were sufficient to
confirm a truth.

Austin were not the Apostle of the English, both in fact and title. In order
whereunto, we must first take notice, that the word being merely Greek, does
signify in its natural and original sense a Messenger, a Legate, an Ambassador,
from whom, to whomsoever sent; and though appropriated to the twelve as by way
of excellence, yet not improperly communicated unto others in succeeding times,
with reference to the Nations whom they had converted. So Boniface an English
man the first Archbishop of Ments is called by Dr. Holland, (as by many others)
the Apostle of Germany, Palladius styled by Camden the Apostle of the Scottish
Nation; Camd. in Scotland, fol. 45.
and the Irish would not think themselves to be fairly dealt with, if their St.
Patrick should not be honored with that Title also. In this sense Austin may
be called, and that not improperly, the Apostle of the English Nation; though a
derivative Apostle, an Apostle (as our Author calls him in the way of scorn,
fol. 68.) at the second hand, though others propagated the Gospel further then
he lived to do. It was enough to entitle him to this Apostleship, that he first
publicly preached the Gospel, and brought the glad Tiding of Salvation amongst
the English, though he neither converted all the Nation, nor traveled into all
parts of the Land to attempt the same. Neither St. Paul could be entitled the
Apostle Gentiles, St. Thomas of the Indians, nor St. Matthew of the Ethiopians;
if it were necessarily required to their Apostleships, that all the Nations of
the Indians must be converted by the one, or the vast Countries of the
Ethiopians must be conve^ted by the other; or finally, if St. Paul to save them
a labor, must have reduced all the Gentiles to the faith of Christ. And this
the Ambassadors for the King of England at the Council of Basil, understood
right well, when they contended for precedence with those of Castile. For when
the Castilians had objected, that although Joseph of Arimathea had preached in
England, it was but in a corner thereof, the grand body of Britain remaining
Pagan many hundred years after: the English Ambassadors wisely answered, that
the Allegation was impertinent to the present purpose, it being not the
Universality, but the first Preaching of the Christian Faith which gained the
name of an Apostle; there being no Disciple (as they truly urged it) that ever
converted a Kingdom totally and entirely to Christianity, for which consult our
very Author, Lib. 4. fol. 181.

And yet the pains in preaching of Austin were not so limited and restrained to
one Kingdom only, but that Saxon Heptarchy, preaching the Gospel in all places
to which the Spirit did conduct him, or his business lead him. Our Author
grants him to have converted the Kingdom of Kent, fol. 7. and to have taken
care for planting the Gospel in the Kingdom of the East Saxons, and for that
end ordaining Mellitus the first Bishop of London, fol. 67. From hence he
carries him to a conference with the British Bishops in the Country of the
Wiccians (now Worcestershire) then part of the Kingdom of Mercia, fol. 60. From
thence to Richmondshire in the Kingdom of Northumberland, where he is said to
have baptized above ten thousand in one day, fol. 66. And finally to Cern in
Dorsetshire, part of the Kingdom of the West Saxons, where he destroyed the
Idol of Heal or Aesculapius. By which we see, that he visited no fewer, then
five of the seven Kingdoms in the Saxon Heptarchie, not only doing in each of
them that particular work which he went about, but preaching in all fit places
as he passed along. And this considered as it ought, with reference to the
distance of those several places to which our very Author brings him, gives him
just title to that honor which our Author would so willingly deprive him of,
when telling us how the Papists called him the English Apostle, he adds these
words, how properly (so called) we shall see hereafter.

I have spent more time then I intended in defense of this Title, and therefore
think it seasonable to proceed from the Person to his Acts. Of which the first
we meet with is* the fixing of the Archiepiscopal See at Canterbury, for which
our Author amongst many other Reasons, gives us this for one, viz.

That London by reason of the receipt thereof was likely But here I must needs
ask our Author, whether he thinks, that this was really one of those many
motives which occasioned Austin to resolve of Canterbury for his seat of
residence. If yea, then must our Author grant him to be endued with the spirit
of Prophecy, which I think he will not; if not, then a contingency so remo^e
could not be taken by him into consideratior, as indeed it was not. For first,
London at that time was the chief City of the Kingdom of East-sex, one of the
weakest of the seven, and so not likely to prevail over all the rest. Secondly,
if any of the greater Kingdoms of Mercia, West-sex, or Northumberland, should
in fine prevail, it was not not probable that the Conquerors would remove the
Seat Royal from their own Dominions into any of the conquered Countries. And
thirdly, though the Kings of the West Saxons, who prevailed at last, and became
Monarchs of the whole, settled the Royal Seat in London, yet was it not till
Winchester their own Regal City was destroyed by fire, and made unable to
receive them.

Fol. 60. The first cast of his office was to call a Council Saxon and British
Bishops to come together in the confines of the Wiccians and West Saxons.] Our
Author places this meeting within few lines after in the confines of Worcester
and Herefordshire, and more rightly there; Worcestershire, or the Country of
the Wiccii confining on the County of Hereford, but bordering in no place on
the Kingdom of West-sex, the whole County of Gloucester being interposed. So
that our Author being mistaken in the place of the meeting, it is no wonder if
he stumble at the Monuments and Records thereof. Of one of which he tells us,

That we can part with it without any loss to our selves, and therefore bids
it to make shift for its own Authenticalness, fol. 60.] The Record slighted
thus is a Memorial of the Answer of the Abbot of Bancor to Archbishop Austins
proposition, communicated by Peter Moston a Welsh Gentleman to that learned and
industrious Antiquary Sir Henry Spelman, and by him placed in his collection of
the British and Saxon Councils. Which honor he had never given it, had he not
conceived it worthy to deserve that place; nor had the Papists used such
violence to wrest it from us without the hope of gaining somewhat to themselves.

But to proceed, this con^erence being ended without success, there followed
not long after the great slaughter of the Monks of Bancor, for which our Author
in a merrier humor then becomes the sadness of the matter, or the gravity of an
Ecclesiastical History, has caused Austin to be indicted, impanelling a Jury,
Matthew Parker the learned Archbishop of Cant^rbury, and John Jewel, the
renowned Bishop of Salisbury, must be re^ected by the Jury as incompetent
witnesses; partly because of their known opposition to the Romish Church; and
partly because of their modern writing, almost a thousand years after the
matter in fact, fol. 64. And all this done to add the greater honor to Mr.
Fox, as Modern as either of the two, and as averse as either of them from the
Church of Rome. But Mr. Fox was Mr. Fox, no friend unto the Rites and
Ceremonies of the Church of England, whereas the other two were Bishops and
great sticklers for them. This ma^^es our Author magnify For for his
moderation, whose moderate testimony (says he) much moved the whole Court; and
as much to condemn the others for the sharpeness of their expressions against
Austin (whom our Author himself reproacheth often for his pride and
haughtines^; fol. 62.) which made them of less credit amongst the Jury. A
thread of which fine spinning we shall find frequently interwo^en in the whole
web of this History, and toward the latter end thereof, not a few whole pieces
made of no better yarne. And let the Reader take this with him for a taste of
our Authors good affections to the several parties, that it is bare M. Parker
and plain Bishop Jewel, without welt or guard, but reverent^ Mr. Fox by all
means, and so let him pass. And let us pass also to the residue of the Acts
of Austin.

Fol. 66. Who all this while was very industrious, and Saxons to the Ch^istian
faith. Insomuch that a certain Author reports, how in the River Swale near
Richmond in Yorkshire, be in one day baptized above ten thousand.] The certain
Author* whom he means, is an old fragment of a namelesse Author, cited by
Camden, fol. 136. who rels the story otherwise then our Author does. For though
the Fragment tell us, that the River was called Swale, yet that it was the
River Swale near Richmond in Yorkshire, is the addition of our Author. That
there is a River of that name near Richmond is affirmed by Camden, C^mden in
R^chmondsh^^e, sol. 7^0*
who withal tells us, That it was reputed very sacred amongst the ancient
English, for that in it, when the English-Saxons first embraced Christianity,
there were in one day baptized with Festival joy by Paulinus the Archbishop of
York, above ten thousand Men besides Women and little Children. Of Austins
baptizing in this River, not one word says he. Neither does Beda touch upon
it, as ce^tainly he would have done, had the^e been ground for it. And
therefore if I may have leave to venture my opinion, I shall concur with the
old fragment, as to the name of the Rive^, and yet not carry Austin ou^ of
Kent, and much less into Richmondshire to perform that office. Cam^en in
K^^t, fol 3^3.
For when we find in Camden that the Medway ^alling into the Thames, is
divided by the Isle of Sheppey into two great branches, of which the one is
called East-Swale, the other West-Swale, I see no reason why we should look any
where (...) for that River Swale mentioned in the old fragment, which before we
spoke of. But herein I must submit ^y self to more able judgments. The place
agreed on, ^e should next inquire into the numbers, but that our Author seems
to grant as much as the fragment craveth. Only he tells us that

If so many were baptized in one day, it appears plainly, that in that age the
Administration of that Sacrament was not loaded with those superstitious
Ceremonies, as essential thereunto, of crossing, spittle, Oil, Cream, Salt, and
such like Trinkets.] Our Author here reckons the sign of the Cross in
Baptism amongst the (...) trinkets, and superstitious Ceremonies of the Church
of Rome, and thereby utterly condemns the Church of England, which does not
only require it in her Rubricks, but also pleads for it in her Canons. Not as
essential to that Sacrament (the Papists not making Spittle, Oyl^^ream, Salt,
etc. to be essential thereunto, as our Author says) but only for a Sign
significative in token that the party signed shall not be ashamed to confess
the faith of Christ crucified, (...)
and manfully to fight under his Banner, against sin, the world, and the Devil,
and to continue Christ's faithful Soldier and servant unto his lives end. A
Ceremony not so new, as to be brought within the compass of Popish Trinkets,
though by them abused. For when the point was agitated in the Conference at
Hampton Court, Conser^^ce page 71.
and that it was affirmed by some of the Bishops, that the Cross in Baptism
was used in the time of Constantine; Dr. Reynolds the most able Man of the
opposi^e party, who had before acknowledged it to have been in use in other
cases, from the very times of the Apostles, had not one word to say against it.
And to say truth, no man of modesty and Learning, could have spoke against it,
when it was proved so clearly by Dr. Andrews then Dean of Westminster o^t of
Tertullian, Cyprian, Origin, (each of which died long time before Constantines
Birth) to have been used in immortali Lavacro, in that blessed Sacrament. That
good old saying of Tertullian, Caro signetur ut anima muniatur, may serve once
for all. And therefore when our Author tells us in the following words, that
in that age nothing was used with Baptism, but Baptism, it must be considered
as a smack of that old Leaven which more and more will sour the lump of his
whole discourse. We have already had a taste of it in the very first Book, we
find a continuance of it he^e* and we shall see more of it hereafter; Our
Autho^ not being coy in showing his good affections not only to the Persons of
the Non-conformists, but their inconformity; not to the men only, but their
Doctrines and Opinions also. And this is that which we must trust to in the
whole course of this History.

Having now done with the Acts of Austin, we shall not keep our selves to so
continued a di^course as before we did, but take our Authors Text by piecemeal,
as it comes before us, and making such Animadversions on the same, as may best
serve to rectify the story, and maintain the truth; as namely,

Thus the Italian, Spanish, and French, Daughters or Neeces to the Latin, are
generated from the corrption thereof.] This is (I grant) the common and
received opinion, but yet, me thinks, our Author who loves singularities,
should not vouchsafe to travel on the public Road. For in my mind it is
affirmed with better reason by our learned Brerewood, B^erewood Enqu. cap. V.
That those tongues have not sprung from the corruption of the Latin, by the
inundation and mixture of Barbarous people in those Provinces, but from the
first imperfect impression and receiving of it in those foreign Countries. For
the Latin tongue was never so generally received in any of the conquered
Provinces out of Italy, as to be spoken ordinarily by the common people; the
Gentry and Nobility might be perfect in it, for the better dispatch of their
Affairs with the Roman Magistrates, who had the Government and Lieutenancy in
their several Countries. And some (...) of it might be found with the vulgar
also, who having continual intercourse with the Roman Soldiers, and some
recourse for Trade to the Roman Colonies, could not but get a smattering of the
Latin tongue. Just so the Gentry and Nobility both in Wales and Ireland, are
trained up for the same reasons in the English tongue; which notwithstanding
could never get the mastery of the natural Languages, (...) much ground on
those of inferior quality. Secondly, had these National Languages proceeded
from the depravation of the Latin tongue by the mixture of the ba^barous
Nations, it must needs follow, that the Italian had not now been the language
of all people in Italy, nor the French of all the Nations which inhabit France:
and sic de caeteris. My reason is, because the Heruli, being settled in those
parts, which we now call Piedmont, the Longobards more toward the East, the
Goths about the middle parts, the Saracens and Greeks in the Realm of Naples,
there must needs be as many distinct languages in that one Continent, as there
were Barbarous Nations planted in it, or at the least such different Dialects,
as could be scarce intelligible unto one another. Whereas it is certainly and
most plainly known, that there is only one Language spoken in all that
Country, equally understood by all, without so much as any sensible difference
in pronunciation; more then is usual in all places between the Country
Villages and the neighboring Citizens. The like may be affirmed of the ancient
Gallia, planted on the Eastside of the Loyre by the Burgundians, on the West
side of that River, and toward the Mediterranean, the Pyrenies and the Aquitan
Ocean by the Gothish Nations, in most other parts of it by the Franks; and yet
all speaking (with very little difference) the same one Language, which from
the most predominant People we now call the French. More to which purpose might
be said, were not this sufficient.

Ibid. The Hebrew the common Tongue of the whole world (that is to say,
divided) into several Languages.] An Opinion as common as the other, and as
weakly grounded, such as I marvel at in our Author, who having traveled over
all the Holy Land, should have been better studied in the true nature and
original of the Holy-Tongue. Nor is it the opinion only, that this Tongue was
spoken universally before the Flood, and even in Paradise it self in the state
of innocence; but that it shall be spoken in the Celestial Paradise, the
language of the Saints in glory: in so much that some good women of my old
acquaintance, were once very eagerly bent to learn this Language for fear (as I
conceive) they should not chat it handsomely when they came to heaven. Now for
the ground thereof, it is no other then an old Jewish Tradition, importing,
that this being the common Language of all people before the Flood, was
afterward appropriated unto Phaleg (the son of Heber) and to his Posterity,
because not present with the rest a^ the building of Babel, and consequently
not within the curse of con^ounded Languages. (...)
But against this it is disputed; first that it is but a Tradition, and
therefore of no sure foundation to build upon. And secondly, that it is such a
Tradition, as holds no good coherence with the truth of Story; it being a most
clear and demonstrative truth, that the Hebrew Tongue was not the Language
which Abraham brought with him out of Chaldea and Mesopotamia, but that which
he found spoken in the Land of Canaan ^t his coming thither, to which both he
and his posterity did conform themselves. Or had it been the Language of Heber,
as they say it was, (but most undoubtedly was not) yet, thirdly, had this been
a privilege conferred on Heber, that he and his posterity should speak the
Original Language without alteration or corruption, it must have been extended
to all those of the House of I^cktan which descend from him; as also to the
House of Laban in Padan-Aram, and to the Moabites, and the Ammonites, as the
seed of Lot; and finally to the Madianites, Ishmaeelites, and Idumaeans,
descended of Abraham and Esau; and not be limited and confined only to the
House of Jacob. Now that the language which afterward was, and still is called
by the name of the Hebrew, was spoken vulgarly in the land of Canaan before the
coming of Abraham thither, is not affirmed by Brerewood only, but by Scaliger,
Grotius, Vossius, Bochartus, (all of them men of great renown for their learned
studies) and by many others of this Age. By most of which it is affirmed also,
that the name of Hebrews was given unto them by the people of Canaan, not in
regard of their descent from Heber the father of Phaleg, but from Abraham's
passing over the River Euphrates, when he came out of Chaldaea with his Family
to dwell amongst them; that name in the Canaanitish language signifying as much
as trajiciens or transfluvialis; and therefore not unfitly given by them to
Abraham at his first coming thither. And if the Hebrew (as we now call it) was
that Holy Language which was spoken in Paradise, continued by the Patriarchs
before the Flood, and after to the building of Babel; it must needs seem
infinitely strange, that it should be reserved only amongst the Canaanites,
accursed in the person of Canaan (their common Parent) by his Grandfather Noah,
and so abominated by God for their filthy wickednesses, that he resolved to
spew them out of their Native Country, as in fine he did. Or if Abraham
brought it with him also, when he came into the Land of Canaan, he must needs
leave it behind him also amongst the Chaldees, where he was born, and where
his Ancestors had dwelt before their ^emoval unto Haran. And yet we know that
the Hebrew Tong^e was so different from the Chaldean, that when the Jews
retu^ned from the Captivity of Babylon, where they had been accustomed to, and
bred up for the most part in the Chaldean Language, they could not understand
the very words of the Hebrew Text without an Interpreter, as is apparent in the
eighth Chapter of Nehemiah, verse. 7, 8. But of this Argument enough, let us now
go forward.

Fol. 69. As Pitseus a Catholic Writer would have it.] Roman Catholic if you
will, but no Catholic Writer. And much I wonder, that an Author so averse from
the Church of Rome, should give the Title of Catholic to a stickler in the
Romish Quarrel; though others of less zeal and prudence do commonly but
inconsiderately bestow it on them. A Title which they take with joy, and from
thence suck unto themselves no small advantage. Parenes. ad S^vtos p. 99
Adeo probanda est Ecclesia ^ostra a nomine Catholici, quod extorquet etiam ab
invitis Haereticis, as is bragged by Barclay. But as Pope Gregory pleading
against the Patriarch of ^^^stantinople, who had then assumed unto himself the
name of Ecumenical Bishop, advertiseth all the rest of that sacred Order;
Gr^g. M. Ep^st. 70.
Si ille est Universalis, restat ut vos non sitis Episcopi: so may I say with
reference to the present case. By gracifying these men with the name of
Catholics, we do unwittingly confess our selves to be no Christians, or at
least but Heretics.

lays claim to the Antiquities of Crekelade and Lechlade, two ancient Schools
of Greek and Latin, as some would have it, removed afterward to Oxford, etc.]
The like we find fol. 117. where our Author tells us of two Towns or the
banks of the Isis, the one called Greekelade in which the Greek, the other
Lechlade, or Latinlade in which the Latin Tongue was taught by Philosopher^.
Camden. in Wilts 141.
Most miserably mistaken in both places. For though Crekelade, of Grekelade may
import a study of Greek Philosophers, as some are ready to believe, yet
ce^tainly Lechlade in no Language will signify the like study of the Latin
Tongue. The Country people (as it seems) do better understand themselves then
our Author does. Amongst whom there is a common Tradition, that Crekelade, was
a University of Greek Philosophers, Lechlade of Leches, or Physicians, as the
name does intimate; and Latten a small Village betwixt both to be the place of
study for the Latin tongue. But though the people are mistaken in the Etymon
of the name of Lechlade, yet are they not so far out as our Author is, in
making Lechlade or Latinlade, to be both the same place and of the same
signification; whereas in truth that Town is so denominated from the River
Lech, which arising in the Hills of Cotswold, passes first by Northlech, from
thence to Eastlech, and finally falls into the Thames near S^. Iohns-bridge
in this Parish of Lechlade. As for the University of Oxford, which from hence
took beginning, as our Author has it, and the Antiquity thereof, I shall not
meddle at the present, though our Author forgetting the Subject which he was to
write of, takes all occasions to hook in every old Tradition (though less
probably grounded) to justify the seniority of the younger Sister.

Fol. 78. Deira, whence, say some, Deirham or Durham, lay betwixt Tees and
Humber.] More out of this then in his Lechlade or Latinlade, which before we
had. For first Durham is not so called quasi Deirham. Our learned Antiquary
gives us a better and more certain derivation of it. The River (says he) as
though it purposed to make an Island, compasses almost on every side the chief
City of this Province, standing on a Hill, whence the Saxons gave it the name
of Dunholm. For as you may gather out of Bid, they called an Hill Dun, and a
River-Island Holme. Hereof the Latin Writers have made Dunelmum, the Normans,
Duresme; but the common people most corruptly Durham* But secondly, (which mars
all the matter) the Bishopric of Durham was not in the Kingdom of Deira, as
being wholly situate on the North side of the Tees, and consequently part of
the Realm of Bernicia, which makes our Author mistake in another place, fol.
51. the more remarkable, where speaking of the Kingdom of Deira, he gives us
this Comment in the Margin (viz.) What this day is the Bishopric of Deirham or
Durham. But as long as some say so, all is well, though who those some are
(except our Author) I can no where find. Only I find that as it is held
necessary for a No^body to be in all great Houses, to bear the blame of such
mischances as by the carelessness of servants and inconsiderateness, do too
often happen; so is it no less necessary, that there should be a somebody also
in all great undertakings to bear the blame of such misfortunes as our
Adventurers at wit do as often meet with. And such a somebody as this our
Author has found out to be the Father of another conceit of his concerning
Teyburn (that I may take in this also whilst it is in my mind) of which he
tells us lib. 4. fol. 168. That some have deduced the Etymology of Teyburn
from Ty and Burn; because forsooth the Lord Cobham was there hanged and burnt.
Whereas indeed it was so named from the Tey, or Teybourn, a small Brook passing
near unto it in the former times. Which Brook or Bourn arising not far from
Padington, has since been drawn into several Conduits for the use of the City.

A place so marked, being foretold fortunate to Aeneas to found Alba ( since
Rome) therein.] A passage as well stored with Errors as the rest before, and
such a piece of fine new learning, as never any Antiquary had found out till
now. For first, Aeneas was not the founder of Alba, though that the place
designed unto him for the fear of his Kingdom. The building of that City was
the work of Ascanius, as we find in Virgil.

At puer Ascanius -- Regnumque a sede Lavini
Transferet, and longam multa vi muniet Albam.
That is to say; Ascanius from Lavinum shall translate
To Alba strongly fenced the Regal State.
And secondly Alba was not built in the place where Rome since stood, but
duodecimo ab urbe Lapide, about twelve miles off. For though the River Tiber in
some ancient Writers has the name of Albula, yet I never found many Writer
either old or new (till I incounter'd it ^n our Author) that Rome was anciently
called Alba.

Fol. 104. It is admirable to consider what Sholes of were formerly vented out
of Cimbrica Chernonesus, take it in the largest extent, for Denmark, Norway,
and Swedeland.] And in the largest extent it is taken indeed, such as no Author
ever gave it before this time. The Cimbrick Chersonese truly and properly so
called comprehended only those parts of the Kingdom of Denmark, which we now
call Iuitland, divided by the River Eydore, from the Dukedom of Hostein.
Ortelius, and some (...) Geographers make it to take up all that Languel, or
piece of Land on the North of Germany, extended from the River Albis in the
South, and stretching Northward to that part of the Ocean which leads into the
narrow Strait, or passage now called Sundt. But never any till our Author
extended this name over those great Kingdoms of Denmark, Norway, and Swedeland,
or unto any part of either beyond the Sundt. And yet he had need stretch it a
great deal further before he can find place in it for his Huns, and Vandals:
of which the first inhabited in Asia, beyond the Fens of Maeotis; the last upon
the Coast of the Baltic Sea in Germany, now the Dukedom of Mecklenburg.

Fol. 125. Datum in Grantecestria, Anno ab incarnatione Frithstano, Civitatis
Scola^ium Cantabrig. Cancellario, and Doctori per suum, etc.] These words are
the conclusion of an ancient Charter, supposed to have been given to the
Scholars of Cambridge by King Edward the elder; against which our Author
fancies one objection which he thinks easy to be answered, but utterly leaves
out another, which I think upanswerable. The objection which our Author makes
against it, is the barbarous style and language of it; which if it be a good
objection against this Charter, will be as strong against all the Charters of
this age, as some ages following in which there (...) but little of the
Elegancies of the Latin tongue. An^ therefore this objection might have well
been spared but that our Author would be thought to deal ver^ equally in the
business, by saying all that might b^ said against himself. But yet I have
another objecti^on which he takes no notice of, because not so easi^ to be
answered; which is, that Frithstan (whatsoever he was) is here honored with the
degree of Doctor, and the title of Chancellor. But first I would fain know
where Frithstan took the degree of Doctor, and i^ what faculty he took it; that
title in those early days being so unusual, as hardly to be found amongst the
Attributes of the learnedest men. Secondly, I conceive it to be very hard, I
had almost said impossible, for him to prove, that the chief Officer of
Cambridge (admitting it at that time for a place of learning) had the^ name of
Chancellor. When I shall see some proof o^ this, and some satisfaction, I shall
give some credit to the Charter, till then none at all.

Fol. 139. Cambridgeshire men claim an ancient (new antiquated) privilege to
lead the Van in all Battles.] Zealous alike not only for the University, but
the County of Cambridge, his zeal in both transporting him beyond his knowledge
into dark adventures. Some Authors he pretends to for the University, for this
privilege none* telling us only that he has read it, though he know not
where. But I can tell him when and where I have read the contrary, that is to
say, in learned Camden, who ascribes this honor to the Kentish. For this he
cites not only the authority of a n^melesse Monk, but the words of Johannes
Sarisburiensis in his Polycratiaeon, Camd. in Kent, 324.
which are these that follow, For good desert (says he) of that notable valor
which Kent showed so puissantly and patiently against the Danes, it retains
still unto these days in all Battails the honor of the first and foreward,
yea and of the first conflict with the Enemy. And if this privilege was given
the Ken^ish for their valor showed against the Danes, it could neither be
given to the men of Cambridge-shire, as our Author would, nor on the same
occasion as he says it was.

Fol. 141. It did not afterward embolden him to the ] He speaks this of King
Edward the Confes^or, who had he tarryed till the Crown had descended on him,
might possibly have found a place amongst the Confessors, but not amongst the
Kings of England. For the truth is, the right title to the Crown was at that
time in Edward surnamed the Outlaw, the eldest Son of Edmund Ironside, who
flying into Hungary to avoid the fury of the Danes married the Kings sister of
that Country, and was by her the Father of Edgar Atheling, and of Margaret
wife to Malcolm Conmor King of the Scots. But these being absent at that time,
Emma the Mother of Prince Edward, and Widow to Canutus the Dane, took the
opportunity to set her Son upon the Throne, as being not only half-brother to
King Edmund Ironside, but also half-brother, and consequently ^earest kinsman
to Canutus the second; which if it were a good descent, will plead almost as
strongly for King Harald, as it did for him. But by what means soever he got
the Crown, he deserved to wear it, our Author telling us

Ibid. That whereas formerly there were manifold Laws in the Land, made, some
by the Britains, others by the Danes, others by the English, etc. He caused
some few of the best to be selected, and the rest as captious and unnecessary,
to be rejected; from whence they had the name of the Common Laws.] That the
Common Law was so called because compounded of the Saxon, British, and Danish
Laws, which were before of force only in such places where the Danes, Britans,
and Saxon* had the greatest sway; though it be easy to be said, will be hard
to be proved. The Britans at that time lived under their own Princes, and were
governed by their own Laws, and so they were for a long time after; so that
King Edward having no dominion over them could not impose a Law upon them. Not
was it probable that he should borrow any of their Laws, or impose them on his
natural subjects, considering the Antipathy and disaffection betwixt the
Nations. There were indeed at that time in England three kinds of Laws. The
first called Dane-lage or the Danish Laws, prevailing for the most part in the
Kingdom of the East Angles, and that of Northumberland; secondly Saxon-lage,
used generally in the Kingdoms of the West Saxons, East Saxons, South Saxons,
and that of Kent; and thirdly, Merce^-lage, extending over all the Provinces of
the Kingdom of Mercia. As for the Britans of Cornwall and Cumberland, they had
no distinct Law for themselves (as had those of Wales) but were governed by the
Laws of that Nation unto which they were subject. By these three sorts of Laws
were these Nations governed in their several and respective limits, which being
afterward reduced into one body, and made common equally to all the subjects,
did worthily deserve the name of the Common Law. But secondly I dare not give
the honor of this action to King Edward the Confessor. The great Justinian in
this work was another Edward, called, for distinctions sake, King Edward the
elder, who began his Reign Anno 900. almost 150 years before this Confessor, to
whom our Author has ascribed it. But the truth is, that these Laws being
suppressed by the Danish Kings who governed either in an arbitrary way, or by
the Laws of their own Country, they were revived and reinforced in the time
of this Edward, from whence they had the name of Edward the Confessors Laws,
and by that name were sued and fought for in the time succeeding, of which more
hereafter. Now as this work may be ascribed to his love to justice, so from his
piety, his successors derive as great a benefit of curing the disease which
from thence is called the Kings evil, which some impute (as our Author tells
us) to secret and hidden causes.

Fol. 145. Others ascribe it to the power of fancy and an ] Amongst which
others, I may reckon our Author for one. He had not else so strongly pleaded in
defense thereof. But certainly what effect soever the strength of fancy and an
exalted imagination^ as our Author calls it, may produce in those of riper
years, it can contribute nothing to the cure of children. And I have seen some
children brought before the King by the hanging sleeves, some hanging at their
Mothers breasts, and others in the arms of their Nurses, all touched and cured
without the help of any such fancies or imaginations as our Author speaks of.
Others less charitably condemn this cure as guilty of supersti^ion,
quarrelling at the Circumstances and Ceremonies which are used; and this they do

(Says he ibid.) either displeased at the Collect, consisting of the first
nine verses of the Gospel of St. John, as* wholly improper, and nothing
relating to the occasion, etc.] Our Author tells us more then once, lib. 11.
167. of his being a Clerk of the Convocation, but I find by this, that he
Clerk of the Closet. Which had he been, he would not have mistaken the Gospel
for a Collect; or touched upon that Gospel which is less material, without
insisting on the other, which is more pertinent and proper to the work in hand;
or suffered the displeased party to remain unsatisfied about the sign of the
Cross made by the Royal hands on the place* infected (as it after follows)
when there is no such crossing used in that sacred Ceremony, the King only
gently drawing both his hands over the sore at the reading of the first Gospel.
But that both he and others may be satisfied in these particulars, I have
thought fit to lay healing of that malady in this manner following.

The form of the Service at the healing of the Kings-evill.
The first Gospel is exactly the same with that on Ascension day. At the
touching of every infirm person, these words are repeated, They shall lay their
hands on the sick, and they shall recover.

The second Gospel begins the first of St. John, and ends at these words, Full
of grace and truth. At the putting the Angel about their necks were repeated,
That Light was the true light which lights every man that comes into the
world.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Christ have mercy upon us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

etc.

Min. O Lord save thy servants.


An. Which put their trust in thee.


Min. Send unto them help from above.


An. And evermore mightily defend them.


Min. Help us, O God our Savior.


An. And for the glory of thy name sake deliver us, be merciful unto us sinners
for thy names sake.


Min. O Lord hear our Prayer.


An. And let our cry come unto thee.


The Collect.
Almighty God, the eternal health of all such as put their trust in thee, hear
us we beseech thee on the behalf of these thy servants, for whom we call for
thy merci^^l help, that they receiving health may give thanks unto thee in thy
holy Church, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

The peace of God, etc.

This is the whole form, against which nothing is objected, Light which was the
true Light, and lights every man which comes into the world, did not shine
more visibly, at the least mo^e comfortably upon the people, then in the
healing of ^o many sick, infirm, and leprous persons, as did from time to time
receive the benefit of it. But it is time I should proceed.

Fol. 148. These chose Harald to be King* whose Titl^ A Title not so de^picable
as our Author makes it, nor much inferior unto that by which hi^ Predecessor
obtained the Kingdom. Harald being ^on to Earl Godwin, (the most potent man of
all the S^^xons) by Theyra the natural Daughter of Canutus the first, was
consequently Brother by the whole blood to Harald Har^agar, and Brother by the
half blood to Canutus the ^econd, the two last Danish Kings of England. In
which respect being of Saxon Ance^^ry by his Father, and of the Danish Royal
blood by his Mother, he might be looked on as the fittest person in that
conj^ncture to con^ent both Nations. But whatsoever his Title was, it was
undoubtedly better then that of the Norman, had either his success been
answerable, or his sword as good. Upon occasion of which Conquest our Author
tells us that

Ibid. This was the fifth time wherein the South of this Island was conquered;
first by Romans, secondly by Picts and Scots, thirdly by Saxons, fourthly by
the Danes, and fifthly^ by the Norman] But this I can by no means yield to,
(...) Scots and Picts not being to be named amongst those Nations who subdued
the South part of this Island. That they did many times harass and depopulate
the South part of it, I shall easily gr^nt; but to the subduing of a Co^ntrey
there is more req^ired then to waste and spoil it: that is to say, to fix their
dwelling and abode (for some time at least) in the Count^ey conquered; to
change the Laws, alter the language, or new mould the Government; or finally to
translate the Scepter from the old Royal Family to some one of their own. None
of which things being done in the Invasions of the Scots and Picts, they cannot
properly be said to have subdued the South parts of the Island, as our Author
(out of love perhaps to the Scots) would persuade the Reader.

ANIMADVERSIONS ON The Third and Fourth Books OF The Church History OF BRITAIN.
From the time of the Norman Conquest, to the time of King Henry the Eighth.
WE are now come unto the times of the N^rman Government, when the church beg^n
to settle on a surer bottom, both for (...) and polity; the Bishops less
obnoxious to the Ki^^^ then fo^merly, because elected by the Monks and C^nons
of their own Cathedrals* their Con^istories free (...) the intermixture of
Lay-assistance, and their Syn^^s m^nag'd by themselves. Wherein though the
(...) power of making such Synodicall Cons^i^^tions (...) facto bind all
pa^ties, yet our Author is resolved to have ^^otherwise.

Fol. 19. The Pr^ceedings (says he) of the Canon Law were never wholly
received into practice in the Land; but so as made subject in whatsoever
touched temporals, to Secular Laws, and National Customs. And the Laity at
(...) limited Canons in this behalf.] How false this is, ^ow contrary to the
power and practice of the Church before the ^ubmission of the Clergy to King
Henry the ei^^^; and ^inally how dangerous a g^ound is hereby (...) to weaken
the Authority of Convocations, will (...) appear by ^^ying down the sum of a
Petition pre^^^^ed by the House of Commons to the same King H^nry, together
with the Answer of the P^elates and inferior Clergy, then being Synodically
assembled, to the said Petition.

The substance of the Petition was as follows, viz.

THat the Clergy of this your Realm, being you* Highness Sub^ects, in their
Convocation by them holden within this your Realm, have made and daily make
diverse Sanctions or Laws conce^ning Temporal things, Acts (...) An^o ^532.
and some of them be ^ep^gnant to the Laws and Statu^e^ of your Realm, not
having (...) requirin^ your most Royal assent to the same Laws so by them
made, another any assent or knowledge of your Lay Subjects, is had to the same,
no^he^ to them published and known in their Mother tongre al^^it dive^s and
sundry of the said Laws extend in certain causes to your excellent Person,
your liberty and Pre^ogative Royal, and to the inte^diction (...) your Laws
and Possessions, and so likewise to the Good^ and Possessions of your Lay
Sub^ects, decla^in^ the in^ringers of the same Laws so by them ma^e not only
to incur the terrible censure of Excommunication, but also to the detestable
crime and sin of Her^^e, by the which diverse of your humble and obedient Lay
Subjects be brought into this Ambiguity, whether they may do and execute your
Laws according to your Jurisdiction Royal of this Realm, for dread of the same
Censures and pains comprised in the same Laws so by them made in their
Convocations, to the great trouble and inquietation of your said humble and
obedient Lay sub^ects, etc. the impeachment of your Jurisdiction and
Prerogative Royal.

The Answer thereunto was this. TO this we say, that forasmuch as we (...) and
take our Authority of making Laws to be grounded upon the Scripture of God,
and the determination of holy Church, which must also be (...) rule and squier
to try the justice and righteousness of all Laws, as well Spiritual as
Temporal; we verily trust that considering the Laws of this Realm be such as
have been made by most Christian, religious and devout Princes and People, how
both these Laws proceeding from one fountain the same being sincerely
interpreted, and after the good meaning of the makers, there shall be found no
repugnancy, nor contrariety, but that the one shall be found as aiding,
maintaining and supporting the other. And if it shall otherwise appear, as it
is our duty (whereunto we shall always most diligently (...) ourselves) to
reform our O^dinance* to Gods Commission, and to conform our Statutes and
Laws; and those of our predecessors, to the determination of Scripture and
holy Church; so we hope in (...) and shall daily pray for the same, that your
Highness will, (...) came why, with the assent of your (...) temper your Graces
Laws accordingly. (...) shall (...) a most happy and perfect (...) and
agreement, as God being Lapis angula^^ to agree and con^oyn the same. And as
concerning (...) of your Highness Royal assent to the (...) of such Laws as
have been by our (...), or shall be made by us in such points and (...) as we
have by God authority to rule and (...) by such Provisions and Laws; we
knowing your Highness wisdom, and virtue, and learning, nothing doubt but the
same perceives how the granting hereunto depends not upon our will and
liberty. And that we your most humble Subjects may not (...) the execution of
our charge and duty certainly prescribed by God, to you^ Highness assent,
although in very deed the same is most worthy for your most Noble, Princely,
and excellent virtues, not only to give yo^^ Royal assent, but also to devi^e
and comm^nd what we should for good order and (...) Statutes and Law provide
in the Church, nevertheless conside^ing we may not so ne in such sort refrain
the doing of our office in the ^ee^ing and ruling of (...) people your Graces
Subjects; we most humbly desiring your Grace as the same has heretofore, so
from hence forth to show your Graces (...) and opinion unto us, what your high
Wisdom shall think convenient, which we shall most gladly hear and follow i^ it
shall please God to in^^^ is so to do, with all submission and humility be^^ech
the same, following the step^ of your most Noble Progenitors, and conformably
to your our own Acts do maintain and defend such Laws, and Ordinance^, as we
according to our calling and by Authority of God, shall for his honor make, to
the ^di^ication of virtue, and maintaining Christ's faith, of which your
Highness is named Defender, and has been hitherto indeed a special Protector.

Furthermore whereas your said Lay Subjects say, that sundry of the said Laws
extend in certain causes to your excellent Person, your Liberty and Prerogative
Royal, and to the interdiction of your Land and Possessions: To this your said
Orators say, that having submitted the trial and examining of the Laws made in
the Church by us and our Predecessors, to the just and straight Rule of Gods
Laws, which gives measure of Power, Prerogative, and Authority to all
Emperors, Kings, Princes, and Potentates, and all other; we have conceived such
opinion, and have such estimation of your Majesty's goodness and virtue, that
whatsoever any persons not so well learned as your Grace is would pretend unto
the same, whereby we your most humble Subjects may be brought in your Graces
displeasure and indignation, surmising that we should by usupation and
presumption, extend our Laws to your most noble Person, Prerogative and Realm,
yet the same your Highness being so highly learned, will of your own most
bounteous goodness facilly discharge and deliver us from that envy, when it
shall appear that the said Laws are made by us, or our Predecessors conformable
and maintenable by the Scripture of God, and determination of the Church,
against which no Laws can stand or take effect.



Somewhat to this purpose had been before endeavored by the Commons in the last
Parliament of King Edw. 3. of which, because they got nothing by it, but only
the showing of their teeth without hurting any body; I shall say nothing in
this place, reserving it to the time of the long Parliament, in the Reign of
King Charles, when this point was more hotly followed, and more powerfully
prosecuted than ever formerly.

What says our Author unto this? Finds he here any such matter, as that the
Laity at their pleasure could li^^^ the Canons of the Church? Or that such
Canons in whatsoever t^uched temporals were subject unto secular Laws and
National Customs? And hereof I desire the Reader to take special notice, as
that which is to serve for a Catholicon, of general Antido^e against those many
venomous insi^nations, which he shall meet with up and down in the course of
this History. As for the case in which our Author grounds this pestilent
Position, it was the Canon made in a Synod at Westminster, in the Anselm, Anno
1102. prohibiting the sale of men and women like brute beasts in the open
Market. Which Canon not finding presently an universal obedience over all the
Kingdom (as certainly ill customs are not easily left, when they are
countenanced by profit) occasioned our Author to adventure upon this bold
assertion.

Indeed St. David's had been Christian some hundred of years, whilst Canterbury
was yet Pagan.^ Not many hundred years I am sure of that, nor yet so many as to
make a plural number by the Latin Grammar; Kent being conquered by the Saxons,
who brought in Pae^^nism, Anno 455. Converted unto Christianity by the
preaching of Austin, An. 569. Not much more then 140 years betwixt the one and
the other.

To whose honor he (viz. King Stephen) erected St. Stephens Chapel in
Westminster near the place whero lately the Court of Requests was kept.] Our
Author is here (...), and will not parler le tout, as the French men say. For
otherwise he might have told us that this Chapel is still standing, and since
the ^^endry of it to King Edward the sixth, (...)
ha^^ been (...) for a Parliament House, impl^yed to that purpose by the
Common, as (...) be thus reserved, I can hardly tell; unless it be to prevent
such inferences and observations, which by some wanton wits might be made upon
it.

Fol. 40. By the same title from his Father Jeffery he possessed fair lands in
Anjou and Maine. I had thought he had possessed somewhat more in Anjou and
Maine, then some fair Lands only, his Father Ieffery Plantagenet being the
Proprietary Earl of Anjou, Maine, and Toureine, not a^itular only, succeeded in
the same by this King Henry and his two sons, Richard, and John, till lost
unhappily by the last with the rest of our Estates on that side of the Sea.
From this Ieffery descended fourteen Kings of the name of Plantagenet, the name
not yet extinguished, though it be impoverished: our Author speaking of one of
them, who was found not long since at the Plow. Lib. 2. p. 170. Another of that
name publishing a Book about the Plantation of new Albion, An. 1646. or not
long before.

Fol. 53. King John sent a base, degenerous and unchristian Admiralius
Murmelius a Mohammedan King of Morocco, then very puissant, and possessing a
great part of Spain.] This Admiralius Murmelius, as our Author and the old
Monks call him, was by his own name called Mahomet Enaser, the Miramomoline of
Morocco; to whom if King John sent any such Message, it was as base,
unchristian and degenerate as our Author makes it. But being the credit of the
^ale depends upon the credit of the Monkish Authors, to which b^ood of men that
King was known to be a professed Enemy ^ha^ing and hated by one another^ it is
not to be esteemed so highly as a piece of Apocrypha, and much less to be held
for Gospel Possible it is, that being overlaid by his own subjects, and
distressed by the (...) he might send unto that King for aid in his great
extremities. And doing this (...) this were a^^) he did no (...) and in
ignation, and (...) so much as was done afterward upon far weaker grounds by
King Francis the first, employing the Turks Forces both by Sea and Land against
Charles the fifth. But the Monks coming to the knowledge of this secret
practice, and const^^ing his actions to the worst, improved the Molehil to a
Mountain, rendering him thereby as odious to posterity, as he was to themselves.

I question whether the Bishop of Rochester (whose Country house at Brumly is
so nigh) had ever a House in the City.] There is no question but he had, St^w
finding it in Southwark by the name of Rochester (...) adjoining on the South
side to the Bishop of Winchesters, minons, and out of ^eparation in his time
(as possibly not much frequented since the building of Bromly House) and since
converted into Tonements for private others to recover the rest from oblivion,
I shall help him to the knowledge of two more, and shall thank any man to find
out the third. The first of these two is the Bishop of Lincolns House, situate
near the old Temple in Holborn, first built by Robert de Chesney Bishop of
Lincoln, Anno 1147. Since alien'd from that See to the Earls of Southampton,
and passing by the name of Southampton House. The second is the Bishop of
Bangors, a fair House situate in Shoo-lane near St. Andrews Church, of late
time Leased out by the Bishops, and not long since the dwelling of Dr Smith
Doctor in Physic, a right honest and ingenuous person, and my very good
Friend. Of all the old Bishops which were founded before King Harry the eight,
there is none whose House we have not found but the Bishop of A^aph* to the
finding whereof, if our Author, or any other will hold forth the Candle, I
shall follow the (...) the best I can, and be thankful for it.

And though some high Royalists look on it as the product of subjects, (...)
themselves on their (...) Our Author tells us in his (...) Brerewood upon a
diligent enquiry has found it otherwise then our Author does* letting us know,
That the first Country in Christendom, whence the Jews were expelled without
hope of return, Brevewoods ^nq. cap 13.
was our Country of England, whence they were banished, Anno 1290. by King
Edward the first; and not long after out of France, Anno 1307. by Phi^ippus
Pulcher. Not out of France first, out of England afterward, as our Author
would have it.

Thus men of yesterday have pride too much to remember what they were the day
before.] An observation true enough, but not well applied. The two Spen^^rs
whom he speaks this of, were not men of yesterday, or raised out of the dirt or
dunghill to so great an height; Camden in Monmouthsh.
but of as old and known Nobility as the best in England: insomuch that when a
question grew in Parliament, whether the Baroness de Spencer, or the Lord of
Aburgaveny were to have precedence, it was adjudg'd unto de Spencer, thereby
declared the antientest Barony of the Kingdom at that time then being. These
two Spencers, Hugh the Father was created Earl of Winchester for term of life;
and Hugh the Son by marrying one of the Daughters and coheirs of Gilbert dt
Cl^re, became Earl of Gloucester. Men more to be commended for their Loyalty, then
accused for their pride, but that the King was now declining, and therefore it
was held fit by the prevalent faction to take his two supporters from him, as
they after did.

The Lord Chancellor was ever a Bishop.] If our Author by this word ever
understands (...), most commonly, or for the most part, he is right enough; but
then it will not stand with the following words, viz. as if it had been against
equity to employ any other (...). (...) he take the word ever in its proper and
more natural sense, as if none but Bishops had ever been advanced unto that
office, he does not only misinform the Reader, but confute himself, he having
told us fol. 31. of this present book, that Thomas Becket being then but
Archdeacon of Canterbury, was made Lord Chancellor, and that as soon as he was
made Archbishop, he resigned that office. But the truth is, that not only men
in holy Orders, but many of the Laity also had attained that dignity, as will
appear to any who will take the pains to (...) the Catalogue of the Chancellors
and (...) of the Great Seal, in the Glossary of Sir Henry (...): in which
appear not only some of inferior dignity, as Deans, Archdeacons, Household
Chaplains; but many also not dignified with any Ecclesiastical ^^^^or
Notification, and therefore in all probability to be looked on as mere Laymen,
Counselors, and Servants to the Kings in whose times they lived, or otherwise
studied in the Laws, and of good affection^, and consequently capable of the
place of such trust and power.

Fol. 116. This year^ viz. 1350. as Authors generally agree, King Edward
instituted are Order of the Garter.] Right enough as unto the time, but much
mistaken in some things which relate unto that ancient and most noble Order:
our Author taking up his Commodities at the second hand, neither consulting the
Records, no^ dealing in this business with men of credit. For first there are
not (...) Canons in the Church of Win^or, but thirteen only with the Dean: it
being King Edwards purpo^e when he founded that O^de^, consisting of twenty
(...) Knights, himself being one, to (...) as many greater and lesser Canons,
and as many old Soldiers commonly called poor Knights^ to be pensioned there.
Though in this last the number was (...) if he be not mistaken (as indeed he
is) Sir Thomas Row was the last Chancellor of the Order; whereas Sir James
Palmer one of the Gentlemen Huishers of the Privy Chamber succeeded him in the
place of Chancellor after his decease, Anno 1644. He tells us thirdly, that
Register being always the Dean of Winsor, which is nothing so. For though the
Deans of late times have been Registers also, yet ab initio non suit sic, it
was not so from the beginning; The first Dean who was also Register, being John
Boxul, Anno 1557. Before which time, beginning at the year 1414. there had been
nine Registers which were not Deans; but how many more before that time I am
not able to say, their names not being on Record. And so^^thly he tells us, that
the Garter is one of the extraordinary Habiliments of the Knights of this
Order, their ordinary being only the blew Ribbon about their necks, with the
picture of St. George appendant, and the Sun in his glory on the left shoulder
of their Cloak; whereas indeed the Garter is of common wearing, and of such
necessary use, that the Knights are not to be seen abroad without it, Hist. of
St George L. 3. cap. 3, 8.
upon pain of paying two Crowns to any Officer of the Order who shall first
claim it, unless they be to take a journey; in which case it is sufficient to
wear a blew Ribbon under their Boots to denote the Garter. Lastly, whereas our
Author tells us, that the Knights he^eof do wear on the left shoulder of their
Cloaks a Sun in his glory, and attributes this wearing, as some say, to King
Charles; I will first put him out of doubt, that this addition was King Charles
his; then show him his mistake in the matter it self. And first, in the first
year of that King, Ap. 26, 1626. it was thus enacted at a public Chapter of
the O^der, viz. That all Knights and Companions of the Order, shall wear upon
the left part of their Cloaks, Coats, and riding Cassacks, at all times when
they shall not wear their Roabs, and in all places of Assembly, an Escocheon of
the Arms of St. George, id est, a Cross within a Garter, not enriched with
Pearls or Stones: in token of the honor which they hold from the said most
noble Order, instituted and ordained for persons of the highest worth and
honor. Our Author, secondly, may perceive by this Act of the Kings, that St.
Georges Cross within the Garter is the main device enjoined to be worn by all
the Knights of that noble Order; to which the adding of the Sun in his glory
served but for ornament and imbellishing, and might be either used or not used
(but only for conformities sake) as they would themselves. So many errors in so
few lines one shall hardly meet with.

The Fourth Book.
From the first Preaching of Wickliffe, to the beginning of the Reign of King
Henry the Eighth.
OUR Author begins this Book with the Story of Wickliffe, and continues it in
relating the successes of him and his followers, to which he seems so much
addicted, as to Christen their Opinions by the name of the Gospel. For speaking
of such encouragements and helps as were given to Wickliffe by the Duke of
Lancaster, with other advantages, which the conditions of those times did
afford unto him, he adds that

Fol. 129. We must attribute the main to Divine Provid^^ce Gospel.] A name too
high to be bestowed upon the Fancies of a private Man, many of whose Opinions
were so far from truth, so contrary to peace and civil Order, so inconsistent
with the Government of the Church of Christ, as make them utterly unworthy to
be looked on as a part of the Gospel. Or if the Doctrines of Wickliffe must be
called the Gospel, what shall become of the Religion then established in the
Re^l^ of England, and in most other parts of the Western wo^ld? Were all but
Wickliffes Followers relapsed to (...), were they turned Jews, or had embraced
(...) of Mahomet? If none of these, and that they (...) in the faith of Christ,
delive ed to them in the Gospels of the four Evangelists, and other Apostolical
Writers, Wickliffes new Doctrines could not challenge the name of Gospel, nor
ought it to be given to him by the pen of any. But such is the humor of some
men, as to call every separation from the Church of Rome, by the name of
Gospel, the greater the separation is, the more pure the Gospel. No name but
that of Evangelici would content the Germans when they first separated from
that Church, and reformed their own; and Harry Nichols, when he separated from
the German Churches, and became the Father of the Familists, bestows the name
of Evangelium Regni on his Dreams and Dotages. Gospels of this kind we have
had, and may have too many, quot Capita tot fides, as many Gospels, in a
manner, as Sects and Sectaries, if this world go on.

Now as Wickliffes Doctrines are advanced to the name of Gospel, so his
Followers (whatsoever they were) must be called Gods servants, the Bishops
being said fol. 151. to be busy in persecuting Gods servants; and for what
crime soever they were brought to punishment, it must be thought they suffered
only for the Gospel and the service of God. A pregnant evidence whereof we have
in the story of Sir John Oldcastle, accused in the time of King Harry the fifth
for a Design to kill the King and his Brethren, actually in Arms against that
King in the he^^ of 20000 men, attainted for the same in open Parliament, and
condemned to die, and executed in St. Giles his Fields accordingly, as both Sir
Roger Acton his principal Counselor, Stow in Hen. 5.
and 37 of his Accomplices had been before. For this we have not only the
Authority of our common Chronicles, Walsingham, Stow, and many others; but the
Records of the Tower, and Acts of Parliament, as is confessed by our Author,
fol. 168. Yet coming out of Wickliffes Schools, and the chief Scholar
questionless which was trained up in them, he must be Registered for a Martyr in
Fox his Calender. And though our Author dares not quit him, (as he says
himself) yet such is his tenderness and respect to Wickliffes Gospel, that he
is loath to load his Memory with causless Crimes, fol. 167. Clergy of that
time for their hatred to him, discrediteth the relation of T. Walsingham, and
all later Authors, who are affirmed to follow him as the Flock their
Belweather; and finally leaves it as a special verdict to the last day of the
Revelation of the righteous Judgments of God.

From the Scholar pass we to the Master, of whom it is reported in a late
Popish Pamphlet, that he made a recantation of his Errors, and lived and dyed
confo^mable to the Church of Rome. This I behold as a notorious falsehood, an
imposture of the Romish party, though the argument used by our Autho^, be not
of strength sufficient to enforce me to it. If, says he, Wickliffe was
sufficiently Rome sufficiently reconciled to him? Using such cruelty to him
many years after his death, fol. 171. But this, say I, is no reason, of no
force at all. Wickliffe might possibly be reconciled to the Church of Rome, and
yet the Min^sters of that Church, to strike a terror into others, might*
execute that vengeance on him after his decease, which they had neither power
nor opportunity to do when he was alive. Quam vivo iracundiam debuerant, in
corpus mort^i contulerunt. And hereof we have a fair example in Marcus Antonius
de Dominis Archbishop of Spalato, who coming into England, 1616. did manifestly
oppose the Doctrines of the Church of Rome, in some learned Volumes. But being
cunningly wrought on by some Em^ssaries of the Romish party in the year 1622.
he went ba^k to Rome, was reconciled to that Church, and writ the e most
reproachfully of the Church of England; which notwithstanding, he was kept
prisoner all the rest of his life, and his body burnt to ashes after his
decease. So then it is no such new matter for a dissenting Christian, such as
Wickliffe and de Dominis were, though branded by the n^me of Heretics, to be
admitted to a reconciliation with the Church of Rome, and yet that Church to
carry a revengeful mind toward them when occasion serves.

And all this while we have expected that our Author Wickliffes Doctrines, that
by seeing the Piety and Orthodoxie of his Opinions, we might have thought more
reverently both of him and his Followers. But therein our expectation must
remain unsatisfied, our Author thinking it more agreeable to his Design to hold
the Reader in suspense, and conceal this from him: dealing herein as the old
Germans did with those of other Nations, who came to wait upon Valeda a great
Queen amongst them; not suffering any to have a sight of her, to keep them in a
greater admiration of her parts and Person. Arcebantur aspectu quo plus
venerationis inesset, Hist. Lib. 4.
as it is in Tacitus. The wheat of Wickliffe was so soul, so full of chafe,
and intermingled with so many and such dangerous Tares, that to expose it to
the view, were to mar the market. And therefore our Author having formerly
honored his Opinions by the name of Gospel, and his followers with the Title of
Gods servants, as before was noted; had reason not to show them all at once, in
a lump together, that we might think them better and more Orthodox then indeed
they were. But the best is (to save us the trouble of consulting Harpsfield,
and others who have written of them) our Author has given them us at last on
another occasion, Lib. 5. fol. 208. many of which the Reader may peruse in
these Ammadversions, Numb. 113. Thus having laid together so much of this
present Book as relates to Wickliffe and his followers, I must behold the rest
in fragments as they lie before me.

Fol. 152. He lies buried in the South Isle of St. Peter's and since has got
the company of Spencer and Drayton.] Not Draytons company I am sure, whose body
was not buried in the South-Isle of that Church, but under the North wall
thereof in the main body of it, not far from a little door which opens into
one of the Prebends houses. This I can say on certain knowledge, being casually
invited to his Funeral, when I thought not of it; though since his Statua has
been set up in the other place which our Author speaks of.

Fol. 153. The Right to the Crown lay not in this Henry, but in Edmund Mortimer
Earl of March, descended by his Mother Philippa, from Lionel Duke of Clarence,
elder son to Edward the third.] I shall not now dispute the Title of the House
of Lancaster, though I think it no hard matter to defend it; and much less
shall I venture on the other controversy, viz. whether a King may Legally be
deposed, as is insinuated by our Author in the words foregoing. But I dare
grapple with him in a point of Heraldry, though I find him better studied in
it, then in matter of History. And certainly our Author is here out, in his own
dear Element. Edmund Mortimer Earl of March not being the Son, Camd^n in
R^dnor. 624,
but Husband of the Lady Philippa Daughter of Lionel, Duke of Clarence, and
Mother of Roger Mortimer Earl of March, whom Richard the second (to despite the
House of Lancaster) declared Heir apparent to the Kingdom of England. It Is
true, this Edmond was the son of another Philippa, that is to say, of Philip
Montacute, wife of a former Roger Earl of March, one of the founders of the
Garter. So that in whomsoever the best Title lay, if lay not in this Edmond
Mortimer as our Author makes it.

This is one of the clearest distinguishing (...) the Tempora^^ and Spiritual
Lords^ that (...) be tried per pares, by their Peers, being (...).] No^ shall I
here dispute the point, (...) may not challenge to be tried by his (...)
whe^^er the Bishops were not Barons and (...) of the Realm. Our Author
intimates that they were not, but I think they were, and this I think on the
authority of the learned Seldom, (...)
in whom we find, that at a Parliament at Northampton (...) Henry the 2. the
Bishops thus challenge their own ^ee age, viz. Non sedemus hi^ Episcopi, sed
Barons, Nos ^^^^nes, v^s Barons; Pares hi^ sumus: that is to (...) We (...)
not (...) as Bishops only but as Barons; We are Barons, and you are Barons;
here we sit as Peers. Which last is also (...) in terminis, by the words of a
Statu^e (...) Act of Parliament, (...)
wherein the Bishops are acknowledged to ^e Peers of the Land. And for further
proof he^ eo^, Ihon ^tratford Archbishop of Canterbury (if I remember it
aright) being fallen into the disple^sure of King Edward the third, and denied
entrance into the House of (...) made his Protest, that he was Primus (...)
Regni, the (...) Peer of the Realm, and therefore not to be (...) from his
place and Suffrage. But of this Argument enough, i^ not too much as the case
now stands* (...) thing, to consider what they have (...) what they are at this
pre^ent.

(...) (...) Reign the^e pa^^ an Act of Pa^liament, by which it was enacted,
That the Country of Wales should be, stand and continue for ever from
thenceforth incorpo^a^ed, united, and annexed to and with this Realm of
England. And that all and singular person and persons born and to be born in
the said principality, country or dominion of Wales* shall have, in^oy, and
inhe ^it all and singular Freedoms, Liberties, Rights, (...) H. 8. c. 26.
Privileges, and Laws within this Realm, and other the Kings Dominions, as
other the Kings Subjects naturally bo^n within the same, have, and enjoy, and
inhe^ ^it. And thirdly, Henry the fourth, and the making of this Act by King
Henry the eighth, there passed bo^e an hund^ed and twenty years, which
intimates a longer time then some years after, as out Author words it.

I will not complain of the dearness of this Unive^sity, where seventeen weeks
cost me more then seventeen years in Cambridge* even all that I had.] The
o^dinary and unwary Render might collect from hence, that Oxford is a
chargeable place, and that all commodities there are exceeding dear, but that
our Author lets him know, that it was on some occasion of dist^^bance. By which
it seems our Author does (...) to the time of the War, when men from all (...)
did repair to Oxford, not as a University, but a place of safety, and the fear
Royal of the King; at (...) time notwithstanding all provisions were so
plen^^ull and at such cheap rates, as no man had reason to complain of the
(...) of them. No better argument of the (...) of the soil and richness of the
(...) in which Oxford stands, then that the (...) on the accession of such
(...) at that (...) and on that occasion. (...) Author therefore (...) be
thought to relate unto somewhat else then is here exp^essed, and possibly may
be, that his being at Oxford at that time, (...) him within the compass of
Delinquency, and consequently of Sequestration. And (...) has (...) son to
complain of the University, or the dearness of it; but rather of himself, for
coming to a place so chargeable and destructive to him. He might have tarryed
where he was (for I never heard that he was sent for) and then this great
complaint against the dearness of that University would have found no place.

Fol. 175. Surely what Charles the fifth is said to have Florence, that it is
pity (...) should be seen save only on holy days, etc.] Our Author is somewhat
out in this, in fachering that saying on Charles the fifth, Emperor and King of
Spain, which Boterus and all other Authors ascribe to Charles Archduke of
Austria; that is to say, to Charles of Inspruch, one of the younger sons of the
Emperor Ferdinand the first, and consequently Nephew to Charles the fifth. Not
is o^r Author very right in taking Aquensis for Aix in Provence;

Fol. 178. Especially (^aith he) if, as I take it, by be meant^ scited in the
f^rthermost parts of Provence, though even now the English power in France was
a waning.] For first, the English never had any power in Provence, no interest
at all therein, nor pretentions to it: as neither had the French Kings in the
times our Author speaks of. Provence in those days was independent of that
Crown, an absolute Estate and held immediately of the Empire, as being a part
and member of the Realm of Burgundy, and in the actual possession of the Dukes
of ^njou: on the expiring of which House, by the last will and Testament of
Duke Rene the second, it was bequeathed to Lewis the eleventh of France, by him
and his successors, to be enjoyed upon the death of Charles Earl of Maine, as
it was accordingly. And secondly, that Bernard, whom the Latin calls Episcopus
Aquensis is very ill taken by our Author to be Bishop of Aix. He was indeed
Bishop of Acqus or Aux in Guienne called anciently Aquae Augustae from whence
those parts of France had the name of Aquitaine; and not of Aix (which the
ancient writers called Aquae Sextiae) in the Country of Provence. Now Guienne
was at that time in the power of the Kings of England, which was the reason why
this Bernard was sent with the rest of the Commissioners to the Council of
Basil; and being there amongst the rest maintained the rights and preheminences
of the English Kings.

In agitating of which controversy as it stands in our Author, I find mention
of one Johannes de Voragine a worthless Author, fol. 181. Mistook both in the
name of the man, and his quality also. For first, the Author of the Book called
Legenda aurea related to in the former passage, was not Johannes, but Iacobus
de Voragi^e. In which Book, though there are many idle and unwarrantable
fictions; yet secondly was the man of Worthless Author, as being learned for
the times in which he lived, Archbishop of Gen^a a chief City of Italy, and
moribus and dignitate magno precio, as Philippus Bergomensis tells us of him,
Anno 1290. at what time he lived; most eminent for his translation of the Bible
into the Italian tongue (as we read in Vossius) a work of great both difficulty
and danger as the times then were, Vossig de Lat. Hist.
sufficient (were there nothing else) to free him from the ignominious name of
a worthless Author. A greater mistake then this, as to the person of the Man,
is that which follows, viz.

Fol. 185. ^umph^y Duke of G^oue^ son to King the fifth.] This though I cannot
look on as a fault of the Presle, yet I can easily consider it as a slip of the
pen; it being impossible that our Author should be so far mistaken in Duke
Humphry of Gloucester, who was not son but b^othe^ to King Henry the fifth. But I
cannot think so charitably of some other errors of this kind which I find in
his History of Cambridge, fol. 67. Where amongst the English Dukes which
carried the title of Earl of Cambridge, he reckons Edmund of Langly fifth son
to Edward the third, Edward his son, Richard Duke of York his brother, father
to King Edward the fourth. But first this Richard whom he speaks of, though he
were Earl of Cambridge by the consent of Edward his elder brother, yet was he
never Duke of York; Richard being executed at South-Hampton for treason against
King Harry the fifth, before that Kings going into France, and Edward his elder
brother slain not long after in the Battle of Agincourt. And secondly, this
Richard was not the Father, but Grandfather of King Edward the fourth. For
being married unto Anne, sister and heir unto Edmund Mortimer Ea^l of March, he
had by her a son called Richard, improvidently ^estored in blood, and advanced
unto the Title of Duke of York by King Henry the sixth, Anno 1426. Who by the
L^dy Cecely his wife one of the many Daughters of Ralph E^rl of Westmerland,
was father of King Edward the fourth, George Duke of Clarence, and King Richard
the third. Thirdly, as Richard Earl of Cambridge was not Duke of York, so
Richard Duke of York was not Earl of Cambridge; though by our Author made the
last Earl thereof (Hist. of Came. 162.) before the restoring of that title on
the House of the Hamiltons. If our Author be no better at a pedigree in private
Families, then he is in those of Kings and Princes, I shall not give him m^^h
for his Art of Memory, for his History less, and for his Heraldry just nothing.
But I see our Author is as good at the succession of Bishops, as in that of
Princes. For says he, speaking of Cardinal Beaufort,

Fol. 185. He built the fair Hospital of St. Cross near Winchester, and
although Chancellor of the University of Oxford, was no grand Benefactor
thereunto, as were his Predecesso^s Wickam and Wainfleet.] Wickam and Wainfleet
are here made the Predecessors of Cardinal Beaufort Winchester, whereas in very
deed, though he succeeded Wickam in that Bishop^ick, he preceded Wainfleet. For
in the Catalogue of the Bishops of Winchester they are marshalled thus, viz.
1365. 50. William of Wickham, 1405. 51. Henry Beaufort, 1447. 52. William de
Wainfleet, which last continued Bishop till the year 1486. the Sea being kept
by these three Bishops above 120. years, and thereby giving them great
Advantages of doing those excellent works, and founding those famous Colleges,
which our Author rightly has ascribed to the first and last. But whereas our
Author tells us also of this Cardinal Beaufort, that he built the Hospital of
St. Cross, he is as much out in that as he was in the other; Camd. in Hun.
fol. 267.
that Hospital being first built by Henry of Blais, Brothe^ of King Stephen and
Bishop of Winchester, Anno 1129. augmented only, and perhaps more liberally
endowed by this Potent C^^dinal. From these Foundations made and enlarged by
these three great Bishops of Winchester successively, p^o^eed we to two others
raised by King Henry the sixth, of which our Author tells us

This good precedent of the Archbishops bounty (that is to say, the foundation
of All Souls College by Archbishop Ch^cheley) may be presumed a Spur to the
speed of the Kings liberality; who soon after founded Eaton College, etc. to
be a Nursery to Kings College in Cambridge, fol. 184.] Of ^aton College, and
the condition of the same, our Author has spoken here at large, but we must
look for the foundation of Kings College, in the History of Cambridge, fol 77.
where I find some thing which requires an Animadversion. Our Author there
charge Dr. Heylyn for avowing something which he cannot justify, that is to
say, for saying, That when William of Wainfleet Bishop of Winchester
(afterward founder of Magdalen College) persuaded King Henry the Sixth to
erect some Monument for Learning in Oxford, the King returned, Imo potius
Cantabrigiae, ut duas (si fieri possit) in Anglia Academias habeam. Yea rather
(said he) at Cambridge, that (if it be possible) I may have two Universities in
England. As if Cambridge were not reputed one before the founding of Kings
College therein. But here the premises only are the Doctors, the inference or
conclusion is our Authors own. The Doctor infers not thereupon, that Cambridge
was not reputed an University till the founding of Kings College by King Henry
the sixth; and indeed he could not: for he acknowledged before out of Robert de
Reningt^n that it was made an University in the time of King Edward the second.
All that the Doctor says, is this, that as the University of Cambridge was of a
later foundation then Oxford was, so it was long before it grew into esteem,
that is to say, to such a measure of esteem at home or abroad (before the
building of Kings College, and the rest that followed) but that the King might
use those words in his Discourse with the Bishop of Winchester. And for the
Narrative, the Doctor (whom I have talked with in this business) does not shame
to say, that he borrowed it, from that great Treasury of Academical Antiquities
Mr. Brian Twine, whose learned Works stan^ good against all Opponents; and that
he found the passage justified by Sir Isaac Wake in his Rex Platonicus. Two
Persons of too great wit and judgment, to relate a matter of this nature on no
better g^ound then common (...)-talk, and that too spoke in merriment by Sir
Henry Savil. Assuredly Sir Henry Savil was too great a Zealot for that
University, and too much a friend to Mr. Wake, who was Fellow of the same
College with him, to have his Table-talk and discourses of merriment to be put
upon Record as grounds and arguments for such men to build on in that weighty
Controversy. And therefore when our Author tells us, what he was told by Mr.
Hubbard, Mr. Hubbard by Mr. Barlow, Mr. Barlow by Mr. Bust, and Mr. Bust by Sir
Henry Savil; it brings into my mind the like Pedigree of as true a Story, even
that of Mother Miso in Sir Philip Sidney, telling the young Ladies an old Tale,
which a good old woman told her, which an old wise man told her, which a great
learned Clerk told him, and gave it him in writing; and there she had it in her
Prayer Book; as here our Author has found this on the end of his Creed. Not
much unlike to which, is that which I find in the Poet; Quae Phoebo Pater
omnipotens, mihi Phoebus Apollo
Praedixit, vobis Furiarum ego maxima pand^.


That is to say; What Jove told Phoebus, Phoebus told to me,
And I the chief of Furies tell to thee.


But to proceed,

This was that Nevil, who for Extraction, Estate, Alliance, Dependents, Wisdom,
Valor, Success, and popularity, was superior to any English Subject since the
Conquest.] Our Author speaks this of that Richard Nevil, who was first Earl of
Warwick, in right of Anne his Wife, Sister and Heir of Henry Beauchamp, the
last of that Family, and after Earl of Salisbury by descent from his Father; a
potent and popular man indeed, but yet not in all or in any of those respects
to be matched with Henry of Bullenbrook son to John of Gaunt, whom our Author
must needs grant to have lived since the time of the Conquest. Which Henry
after the death of his Father was Duke of Lancaster and Hereford, Earl of
Leicester, Lincoln, and Darby, etc. and Lord High Steward of England. Possessed
by the donation of King Henry the third of the County Palatin of Lancaster, the
forfeited Estates of Simon de Montfort Earl of Leicester, Robert de Ferrars
Earl of Darby, and John Lord of Monmouth; by the compact made between Thomas
Earl of Lancaster, and Alice his Wife, of the Honor of Pomfret, the whole
Estate of the Earl of Lincoln, and a great part of the Estates of the Earl of
Salisbury; of the goodly Tertitories of Ogmore and Kidwelly in Wales, in right
of his descent from the Chaworths; of the Honor and Castle of Hartford by the
grant of King Edward the third, and of the Honor of Tickhill in Yorkshire by
the donation of King Richard the second; and finally of a Moity of the vast
Estate of Humphry de Bohun Earl of Hereford, Essex and Northampton in right of
his Wife. So royal in his Extraction, that he was Grandchilde unto one King,
Cousin german to another, Father and Grandfather to two more. So popular when a
private person, and that too in the life of his Father, that he was able to
raise and head an Army against Richard the Second, with which he discomfited
the Kings Forces, under the command of the Duke of Ireland; so fortunate in his
successes, that he not only had the better in the battle mentioned, but came
off with Honor and Renown in the War of Africa* and finally obtained the Crown
of England. And this I trow, renders him much Superior to our Authors Nevil,
whom he exceeded also in this particular, that he dyed in his bed, and left his
Estates unto his Son. But having got the Crown by the murder of his
Predecessor, it stayed but two descents in his Line, being unfortunately lost
by King Henry the sixth, of whom being taken and imprisoned by those of the
Yorkish Faction, our Author tells us,

That Statesmen do admire how blind the Policy of that Age was in keeping King
Henry alive, there being no such sure Prison as a Grave for a Captive King,
whose life (though in restraint) is a fair mark for the full Aim of
mal-contents to practice his enlargement.] Our Author might have sp^r'd this
Doctrine so frequently in practice amongst the wordly Politicians of all times
and ages, Ovid. Met. Lib. 2.
that there is more need of a Bridle to hold them in, then a Sput to quicken
them. Parce precor stimulis, and fortius utere loris, had been a wholesome
Caveat there, had any friend of his been by to have advised him of it. The
mu^thering of deposed and Captive Princes, though too often practiced, never
found Advocates to plead for it, and m^^h less Preachers to preach for it,
until these latter times. First made a Maxim of State in the School of
Machiavel, History of Flo^ence.
who lays it down for an Aphorism in point of policy, viz. that great Persons
must not at all be touched, or if they be, must be made sure from taking
Revenge; inculcated afterward by the Lord Gray, who being sent by King James
to intercede for the life of his Mother, did unde^-hand solicit her death, and
whispered nothing so much in Queen Elizabeth's ears, Camdens Annals An. 1586.
as Mortua non mordet, if the Scots Queen were once dead, she would never bite.
But never pressed so home, never so punctually applied to the case of Kings, as
here I find it by our Author; of whom it cannot be ^ffirm'd, that he speaks in
this case the sen^e of others, but positively and plainly does declare his own.
No such Divinity p^each'd in the Schools of Ignatius, though fitter for the Pen
of a Mariana, then of a Divine or Minister of the Church of England. Which
whether it passed from him before o^ since the last sad accident of this
nature, it comes all to one; this being like a two-hand-sword made to strike on
both ^^des, and if it come too late for instruction, will serve abundantly
howsoever for the justification. Another note we have within two leaves after
as derogatory to the Honor of the late Archbishop, as this is dangerous to the
Estate of all Sovereign Princes, if once they chance to happen into the hands
of their Enemies. But of this our Author will give me an occasion to speak more
in another place, and then he shall hear further from me. Now to go on.

Fol. 197. The Duke requested of King Richard the Earldom of Hereford and
Hereditary Constableship of England.] Not so, it was not the Earldom, that is
to say, the Title Earl of Hereford, which the Duke requested, but so much of
the Lands of those Earls as had been forme^ly enjoyed by the House of
Lancaster. Concerning which we are to know, that Humphry de Bohun the last Earl
of Hereford, left behind him two Daughters only, of which the eldest called
Eleanor was married to Thomas of Woodstock Duke of Gloucester, Mary the other
married unto Henry of Bullenbrook Earl of Darby. Betwixt these two the Estate
was parted, the one Moiety which drew after it the Title of Hereford falling to
Henry Earl of Darby, the other which drew after it the Office of Constable to
the Duke of Gloucester. But the Duke of Gloucester being dead, and his estate
coming in fire unto his Daughter who was not able to contend, Henry the fifth
forced her unto a sub-division, laying one half of her just partage to the
other Moiety. But the issue of Henry of Bullenbrook being quite exti^ct in the
Person of Edward Prince of Wales Son of Henry the sixth, these three parts of
the Lands of the Earls of Hereford, having been formerly incorporated into the
Duchy of Lancaster, remained in possession of the Crown, but were conceived by
this Duke to belong to him as being the direct Heir of Anne Daughter of Thomas
Duke of Gloucester, and consequently the direct Heir also of the House of
Hereford. This was the sum of his demand. Nor do I find that he made any suit
for the Office of Constable, or that he needed so to do, he being then
Constable of England, as his Son Edward the last Duke of Buckingham of that
Family, was after him.

At last the coming in of the Lord Stanley with three thousand fresh men
decided the controversy on the Earls side.] Our Author is out in this also. It
was not the Lord Stanley, but his Brother Sir William Stanley, who came in so
seasonably, and thereby turned the Scale, and changed the fortune of the day.
For which service he was afterward made Lord Chamberlain of the new Kings
Household, and advanced to great Riches and Estates, but finally beheaded by
that very King, for whom, and to whom, he had done the same. But the King
looked upon this action with another eye. And therefore when the merit of this
service was interposed to mitigate the Kings displeasure, and preserve the man,
the King remembered very shrewdly, that as he came soon enough to win the
Victory, so he staid long enough to have lost it.

ANIMADVERSIONS ON The Fifth and Sixth Books OF The Church History OF BRITAIN.
Relating to the time of King Henry the Eighth.
WE are now come to the busy times of King Henry the Eighth, in which the
power of the Church was much diminisht, though not reduced to such ill terms as
our Author makes it. We have him here laying his foundations to overthrow that
little which is left of the Churches Rights. His superstructures we shall see
in the times ensuing more seasonable for the practice of that Authority which
in this fifth Book he hammereth only in the speculation. But first we will
begin with such Animadversions as relate unto this time and story as they come
in our way, leaving such principles and positions as concern the Church, to the
close of all; where we shall draw them all together, that our discourse and
observations thereupon may come before the Reader without interruption.

And the first thing I meet with is a fault of Omission; Dr. Newlen who
succeeded Dr. Iackson in the Pres^dentship of Corpus Christi College in
Oxford, Anno 1640. by a free election, and in a statuteable C. C. C. in Oxford,
fol. 166. and Dr. Stanton who come in by the power of the Visitors above eight
years after being placed therein. Which I thought fit (though otherwise of no
great moment) to take notice of, that I might do the honest man that right
which our Author does not.

Fol. 168. King Henry endeavored an uniformity of Grammar all over his
Dominions; that so youths though changing their Schoolmasters might keep their
learning.] That this was endeavored by King Henry, and at last en^oyned, I
shall easily grant. But then our Author Convocation in the yea^ 1530. in which
complaint being made. Quod multiplex and varius in Scholis Grammaticalibus
modus esset (...) etc. That the multiplicity of Grammars did much him to
learning; it was thought meet by the Prelates and Clergy then assembled, Vt una
and eadem edatur formula Auctoritate (...) singula Schola Gramma^icals per
(...) Acta Convocation^s 1530.
that is to say that one only (...) that within few years after, it was
enjoined by the Kings Proclamation to be used in all the Schools thoughout the
Kingdom. But here we are to note King^ Anno 1519. whereas the Convocation took
not this into con^ideration till the eighth of March, Anno 1530. and ce^tainly
would not have meddled in it then, if the King had settled and enjoined it so
long before.

Fol. 168. Howsoever it is probable, some other ^ardiner gathered the Flowers
(made the Collections) though King Henry had the honor to wear the Posie.] I
am not ignorant Martin Luther, is by some Popish writers ascribed to Dr. John
Fisher, then Bishop of Rochester. But this Cav^^ was not made till after this
King had re^ected the Popes Supremacy, and consequently the less credit to be
given unto it. It is well known, that his Father King Henry the seventh
designed him for the Archbishopric of Canterbury, and to that end caused him
to be trained up in all parts of learning, which might enable (...) for that
place. But his elder Brother Prince Arthur d^ing, and himself succeeding in the
Crown, though he had laid aside the thoughts of being a Priest, he could not
but retain that Learning which he had acquired, and reckon it amongst the
fairest Flowers which adorned his Diadem. Too great a Clerk he was to be called
Beauclerk junior, as if he were as short in learning of King Henry the first
(whom commonly they called Beauclerk) as he was in time; though so our Author
would fain have it, Hist. Came. p. 2, 3. A little learning went a great way in
those early days, which in this King would have made no shew^ in whose ^^me
both the Arts and Languages began to flourish. And if our Author does not
suspect this Kings lack of learning, he has no reason to suspect his lack of
(...) the work being small, the glory great, and helps enough at hand if he
wanted any. But of this enough.

Fol. 196. Which when finished (as White Hall, Hampton Court, etc.) he either
freely gave to the King, or exchanged them on very reasonable considerations.]
That Hampton Court was either freely given by Wolsey, or exchanged on very
reasonable terms, I shall grant as easily; but Whitehall was none of his to
give, as belonging to the Archbishop in the right of the Sea of York, and then
called York place. But the Kings Palace at Westminster being lately burnt, and
this House much beautified by the Cardinal, the King cast a longing eye upon
it; and having attainted the Cardinal in a Praemunire, he seized upon this
house with all the furniture thereof as a part of the spoil. Which when he
found he could not hold, as being the Archbishops and not the Cardinals, he
sent an Instrument unto him to be signed and sealed for the surrendry of his
title and estate therein; and not content to have forced it from him, (the
Cardinal honestly declaring his inability to make good the grant) he caused the
Dean and Chapter of York to confirm the same unto him under their Common Seal
in due form of Law, which being obtained and much cost bestowed upon the House,
he caused it to be called Whitehall; gratifying the Archbishops of York with
another House, belonging then to the Sea of Norwich, and now called York-house.

Fol. 170. So that lately there were maintained therein one Dean, eight Canons,
three public professors of Divinity, H^brew and Greek, sixty Students, etc.]
Our Author tells us Lib. 4. that the spent seventeen weeks in this University,
but he that looks on this and some other passages will think he had not tarryed
there above seventeen hours. For besides his omitting of Dr. Newlin spoken of
before, and his giving of the name of Censors to the Deans of Magdalen, which I
find afterward, Lib. 8. ^. 7. he is very much mistaken in the matters of
Christ Church. For first the three Professors of Divinity, Hebrew, and Greek
are no necessary parts of that foundation, nor can be properly said to be
founded in it. Till of late times they were and might be of other Colleges, as
they are at this present, this College being only bound to pay them for their
annual Pensions forty pounds apiece. In after times King James annexed a
Prebends place in this Church to the Professor of Divinity, as King Charles did
another to the Hebrew Reader. But for the Greek Reader he has only his bare
pension from it, and has no other relation to it, but by accident only; the
last Greek Reader of this House being Dr. John Perin who died in the year 1615.
And secondly, he is very far short in the number of Students, diminishing them
from an hundred to sixty, there being an Hundred and one of that foundation by
the name of Students, equivalent to the Fellows of most other Colleges in the
Revennes of their place and all advantages and encouragements in the way of
learning. But this perhaps has somewhat in it of design, that by making the
foundations of Oxford to seem less then they are, those in the other
University, might appear the fairer.

Fol. 171. And here Wolsey had provided him a second Wife (viz.) Margaret
Countess of Alanzon, sister to Francis King of France.] As much ou^ in his
French, English Heraldry. For first the Lady Margaret here spoken of was never
Countess, though sometimes Duchess of Alanzon, as being once wife to Charles
the fourth Duke thereof. And secondly, at the time when King Henry's divorce
from Queen Katherine was first agitated, this Lady was not in a capacity of
being projected for a Wife to King Henry the eighth, being then actually in the
bed of another Henry, that is to say, Henry of Albret King of Navarre, as
appears plainly by the Articles of Pacification which were to be propounded for
the restoring of King Francis the first (being then Prisoner in Spain, Anno
1525.) to his Realm and Liberty. Hollinshead in Henry 8.
In which it was propounded amongst other things, that Francis should not send
any Aid to the said Henry of Albret (for the recovery of his Kingdom)
notwithstanding that he had married the Kings Sister, and other Sister that
King had none but this Margaret only.

Fol. 178. Yet had he the whole Revenues of York Archbishop^ ick (worth then
little less then four thousand pounds yearly) besides a large Pension paid him
out of the Bishopric of Winchester.] And a large Pension it was indeed (if it
were a Pension) which amounted to the whole Wolsey having gotten the Bishop^ick
of Winchester, to be holden by him in Commendam with the Sea of York, was
suffered to enjoy it till the time of his death, Anno 1631. After which time as
Dr. Edward Lee succeeded him in the Church of York, so then, and not before,
Dr. Stephen Gardener principal Secretary of State, was made Bishop of
Winchester, by which name, and in which capacity I find him active in the
Convocation of the following year.

Fol. 184. The Clergy of the Province of Canterbury alone bestowed on the King
One hundred thousand pounds, to be paid by equal portions in the same year,
say some; in four years say others, and that in my opinion with more Here have
we three Authors for one thing, some, others, and our Author himself, more
knowing then all the ^est in his own opinion. But all out alike. This great sum
was not to be paid in one year, nor in four years neither, but to be paid by
equal portions (that is to say, by twenty thousand pound per annum) in the
five years following. And this appears plainly by the Instrument of Grant it
self. Where having named the sum of an hundred thousand pounds by them given
the King, they declare expressly, Ad usum Majestatis ejusdem intra quinquiennium
ex nunc proxime and immediate sequens per qui^q, aequales portiones solvend'
etc. The first payment to be made the morrow after Michaelmas day then next
ensuing after the day of the date thereof, which was the 22 of March 1530.

Fol. 186. But he might have remembered, which also produced the peerless Queen
Elizabeth, who perfected the Reformation.] Either our Author speaks not this
for his Puritan party whom he acts for in all this work, will by no means grant
it; comparing that most excellent Lady in their frequent Pasquils to an idle
Huswife, who sweeps the middle of the house to make a show, but leaves all the
dirt and rubbish behind the door. The grand Composers of the Directory do
persuade themselves, that if the first Reformers had been then alive they would
have joined with them in the work, Pref to the Directory.
and labored for a further Reformation. And what else has been clamoured for
during all her Reign, and by the Ringleaders of the Faction endeavored ever
since her death, but to carry on the work of Reformation from one step to
another, till they had brought it unto such a perfection as they vainly dreamt
of, and of which now we feel and see the most bitter consequences? And as for
the Prelatical party, the high Royalists, as our Author calls them, they
conceive the Reformation was not so perfected in the time of that prudent
Queen, but that there was somewhat left to do for her two Successors; that is
to say, the altering of some Rubricks in the Book of Common Prayer, the adding
of some Collects at the end of the Letany, the enlargement of the common
Catechism, a more exact translation of the Bible then had been before, the
settling of the Church upon the Canons of 603. and finally, a stricter and more
hopeful course for suppressing Popery, and for the maintenance both of
conformity and uniformity by the Canons of 640.

Fol. 187. And now I cannot call King Henry a Bachelor, because once married;
nor a married man, because having no wife; nor properly a Widower, because Our
Author speaks this of Henry the eighth immediately after his divorce, but is
much mistaken in the matter. King Henry was so averse from living without a
Wife, that he thought it more agreeable to his constitution to have two Wives
together then none at all. To that end while the business of the Divorce
remained undecided, Hollinsh. page 129.
he was married privately to the Lady Anne Bollen, on the 14 of November (Stow
puts it off till the 25 of January then next following) by Dr. Rowland Lee his
Chaplain, promoted not long after to the Bishopric of Coventry and Lichfield;
the Divorce not being sentenced till the April following. soon after he was
solemnly married to the Lady Anna Bollen, he is in that mistaken also. King
Henry though he was often married, yet would not be twice mar^yed to the same
Woman; that being a kind of Bigamy, or Anabaptistry in marriage, to be hardly
met with. All that he did in order to our Authors meaning is, that he avowed
the marriage openly which before he had contracted in private; the Lady Anne
Bollen being publicly showed as Queen on Easter Eve, Stow in H. 8. page 562.
and solemnly crowned on Whitsunday being June the second. Assuredly unless
our Author makes no difference between a Coronation and a Marriage, or between
a marriage solemnly made, and a public owning of a Marriage before
contracted: King Harry cannot be affirmed to have married Anne Bollen solemnly
after the Divorce, as our Author tells us.

Fol. 208. Though many wild and distempered Expressions be found therein, yet
they contain the Protestant Religion in Oar, which since by Gods blessing is
happily refined.] Our Author speaks this of a paper containing many erroneous
Doctrines presented by the Prolocutor to the Convocation: some few of which as
being part of Wickliffs Gospel and chief ingredients in the Composition of the
new Protestant Religion lately taken up, I shall here subjoyn.

1. That the Sacrament of the Altar is nothing else but a piece of bread or a
little predie round Robin.

2. That Priests have no more Authority to minister Sacraments then the Laymen
have.

3. That all Ceremonies accuestomd in the Church, which are not clearly
expressed in Scripture, must be taken away, because they are Men's inventions.

4. That the Church commonly so called is the old Synagogue; and that the
Church is the Congregation of good men only.

5. That God never gave grace nor knowledge of holy Scripture to any great
Estate or rich man, and that they in no wise follow the same.

6. That all things ought to be common.

7. That it is as lawful to Christen a child in a Tub of water at home, or in
a Dirch by the way, as in a Font-stone in the Church.

8. That it is no sin or offense to eat White-meats, Eggs, Butter, Cheese or
flesh in Lent, or other Fasting days commanded by the Church, and received by
consent of Christian people.

9. That it is as lawful to eat flesh on Good Friday, as upon Easter day, or
other times in the year.

10. That the Ghostly Father cannot give or enjoin any penance at all.

11. That it is sufficient for a Man or Woman to make their confession to God
alone.

12. That it is as lawful at all times to confess to a Layman, as to a
P^iest.

13. That it is sufficient that the sinner do say, I know my self a sinner.

14. That Bishops, Ordinaries, and Ecclesiastical Judges, have no Authority to
give any sentence of Excommunication or censure; ne yet to absolve or loose any
man from the same.

15. That it is not necessary or profitable to have any Church or Chapel to
pray in, or to do any divine service in.

16. That buryings in Churches and Churchyards be unprofitable and vain.

17. That the rich and costly O^naments in the Church are rather high
displeasure then pleasure or honor to God.

18. That our Lady was no better then another Woman, and like a bag of Pepper
or Saffron when the spice is out.

19. That Prayers, Suffrages, Fasting, or Alms-deeds do not help to take away
sin.

20. That Holy Days ordained and instituted by the Church, are not to be
observed and kept in reverence, in as much as all days and times be alike.

21. That Plowing and Ca^ting, and such servile work may be done in the same as
on other without any offense at all as on other days.

22. That it is sufficient and enough to believe, though a man do no good works
at all.

23. That seeing Christ has shed his blood for us and Redeemed us, we need not
to do any thing at all, but to believe and repent if we have offended.

24. That no humane C^nstitutions or Laws do bind (...) Christian man, but
such as be in the Gospels, Paul's Epistles, or the New Testament: and that a man
may break them without any offense at all.

25. That the singing or saying of Mass, Mattens, or Even song, is but a
roaring, howling, whistling, mumming, tomring, and juggling, and the playing on
the Organs a foolish vanity.

This is our Authors golden Oar, out of which his new Protestant Religion was
to be extracted. So happily refined, that there is nothing of the Old Christian
Religion to be found therein. Which though our Author does defend as
Expressions rather then Opinions, the Careers of the Soul, and Extravagancies
of humane infirmity, as he does the rest, yet he that looks upon these points,
and sees not in them the rude draught and lineaments of the Puritan Platform,
which they have been hammering since the time of Cartwright, and his
Associates, must either have better eyes then mine, or no eyes at all. I see
our Author looks for thanks for this discovery for publishing the paper which
contained these new Protestant tru^hs, and I give him mine.

Fol. 239. At this time also were the Stews suppressed by the Kings command.]
And I could wish that some command to maintain both the convenience and
necessity of such common Brothel houses. Had Bishop Jewel been alive, Defense
of the Apolog.
and seen but half so much from Dr. Harding ple^ding in behalf of the common
women permitted by the Pope in Rome, he would have thought that to call to him
an Advocate for the Stews had not beeen enough. But that Doctor was nor half so
wise as our Author is, and does not fit each Argument with a several Antid^te
as our Author does* hoping thereby by, but vainly hoping, that the arguments
alleged will be washed away. Some of our late Critics had a like Design in
marking all the wanton and obscene Epigrams in Martial with a Hand or Asterism,
to the intent that young Scholars when they read that Author, might be
fore-warned to pass them over. Whereas on the contrary it was found, that too
many young fellows, or wanton wits, as our Author calls them, did ordinarily
skip over the rest, and pitch on those which were so marked and set out unto
them. And much I fear that it will so fall out with our Author also, whose
Arguments will be studied and made use of when his Answers will not.

Otherwise, some suspect, had he survived King Edward the sixth, we might
presently have heard of a King Henry the ninth.] Our Author speaks this of
Henry Fitz Roy, the Kings natural Son by Elizabeth Blunt, and the great
disturbance he might have wrought to the Kings two Daughters in their
Succession to the Crown. A Prince indeed whom his Father very highly cherished,
creating him Duke of Somerset and Richmond, Earl of Nottingham, and Earl
Marshal of England, and raising him to no small hopes of the Crown it self, as
appears plainly by the Statute 22 H. 8. c. 7. But whereas our Author speaks it
on a supposition of his surviving King Edward the sixth, he should have done
well in the first place to have informed himself whether, this Henry and Prince
Edward were at any time alive together. And if my Books speak true, they were
not; Henry of Somerset and Richmond dying the 22. of July, Anno 1536. Prince
Edward not being born till the 12. of October, An. 1537. So that if our Author
had been but as good at Law or Grammar, as he is at Heraldry, he would not have
spoke of a Survivor-ship in such a case, when the one person had been long dead
before the other was born.

These incoherent Animadversions being thus passed over, we now proceed to the
Examination of our Authors Principles, for weakening the Authority of the
Church, and subjecting it in all proceedings to the power of Parliaments.
Concerning which he had before given us two Rules Preparatory to the great
business which we have in hand. First that the proceedings of the Canon Law
were subject in whatsoever touched temporals to secular Laws and National
Customs. And the Laity at pleasure limited Canons in this behalf, Lib. 3. n.
61. And secondly, that the King by consent of Parliament directed the
proceedings of the Ecclesiastical Court in cases of Heresy. Lib. 4. n. 88. And
if the Ecclesiastical power was thus curbed and fe^^ered when it was at the
highest, there is no question to be made, but that it was much more obnoxious
to the secular Courts, when it began to sink in reputation, and decline in
strength. How true and justifiable, or rather how unjustifiable and false these
two principles are, we have shown already, and must now look into the rest,
which our Author in pursuance of the main Design has presented to us. But
first we must take notice of another passage concerning the calling of
Convocations or Synodical meetings, formerly called by the two Archbishops in
their several Provinces by their own sole and proper power, as our Author
grants, fol. 190. to which he adds,

Fol. 190. But after the Statute of Praemunire was made (which did much
restrain the Papal power, and subject it to the Laws of the Land) when
Archbishops called no more Convocations by their sole and absolute command, but
at the pleasure of the King.] In which I must confess my self to be much
unsatisfied, though I find the same position in some other Authors. My reasons
two, 1. Because there Praemunire to restrain the Archbishops from calling these
meetings as before; that Act extending only to such as purchase or pursue, or
cause to be purchased or pursued, in the Court of Rome, or elsewhere any such
translatations, Processes, Sentences of Excommunication, Bulls, Instruments, or
any other things whatsoever which touch the King, against him, his Crown and
his Regality, or his Realm; or to such as bring within the Realm or them
receive, or make thereof notification, or any other Execution whatsoever within
the same Realm, or without, etc. And 2. because I find in the Statute of the
submission of the Clergy, that it was recognized and acknowledged by the
Clergy in their Convocation, that the Convocation of the said Clergy is,
Stat. 25 H 8. c. 19.
always has been, and ought to be assembled always by the Kings Writ. And if
they had been always called by the Kings Writ, then certainly before the
Statute of Praemunire; for that the whole Clergy in their Convocation should
publicly declare and avow a notorious falsehood, especially in a matter of
fact, is not a thing to be imagined. I must confess my self to be at a loss in
this intricate Labyrinth, unless perhaps there were some critical difference in
those elder times between a Synod and a Convocation: the first being called by
the Archbishops in their several and respective Provinces, as the necessities
of the Church; the other only by the King, as his occasions and affairs did
require the same. But whether this were so or not, is not much material, as the
case now stands, the Clergy not assembling since the 25 of King Henry the
eighth, but as they are convocated Anno 1532. though it passed not into an Act
or Statute till the year next following. Well then, suppose the Clergy called
by the Kings Authority, and all their, Acts and Constitutions rati^ied by the
R^yal assent, are they of force to bind the Subject to submit and conform unto
them? Not, if our Author may be judge, for he tells us plainly

Fol. 191. That even such Convocations with the Royal assent, subject not any
(for recusancy to obey their Canons) to a civil penalty in person or property,
until confirmed by (...) of Parliament.] I marvel where our Author such Canons
and Constitutions as were concluded on in Synods or Convocations, before the
passing of the Statute of Praemunire, were without any further Ratification,
obligatory to all subjected to their jurisdiction. And he has told us also of
such Convocations as had been called between the passing of the Statute of
Praemunire, and the Act for Submission, that they made Canons which were
binding, although none other then Synodical Authority did confirm the same.
Upon whi^^ ^remisses I shall not fear to raise this Syllogism, viz* That power
which the Clergy had in their Convocations before their submission to the King
to bind the subject by their Canons and Constitutions without any further
Ratification then own Synodicall Authority, the same they had when the Kings
power signified in his Royal assent was added to them; but the Clergy (by our
Authors own confession) had power in their Convocations before their submission
to the King to bind the Subject by their Canons and Constitutions without any
further ratification then their own Synodical Authority; Ergo they had the same
power to bind the Subjects when the Kings power signified by the Royal assent
was added to them. The Minor being granted by our Author, as before is showed,
the Major is only to be proved. And for the proof hereof, I am to put the
Reader in mind of a Petition or Remonstrance exhibited to the King by the
House of Commons, Anno 1532. in which they showed themselves agrieved, that the
Clergy of this Realm should act Authoritatively and Supremely in the
Convocations, and they in Parliament do nothing but as it was confirmed and
ratified by the Royal assent. By which it seems that there was nothing then
desired by the House (...) ^ommons, but that the Convocation should be brought
down to the same level with the Houses of Parliament; and that their Acts and
Constitutions should not bind the Subject as before in their Goods and
Possessions, until they were confirmed and ratified by the Regal power. The
Answer unto which Remonstrance being drawn up by Dr. Gardener then newly made
Bishop of Winchester, and allowed of by both Houses of Convocation, was by them
presented to the King. But the King not satisfied with this Answer ^^solves to
bring them to his bent, le^t else perhaps they might have acted something to
the hindrance of his divorce, which was at that time in agitation; and
therefore on the 10 of May he sends a paper to them by Dr. Fox (after Bishop of
Hereford) in which it was peremptorily required, That no Constitution or
Ordinance shall be hereafter by the Clergy Enacted, Promulged, or put in
Execution unless the Kings Highness do approve the same by his high Authority
and Royal assent; and his advice and favor be also interponed for the
execution of every such constitution among his Highness Subjects. And though
the Clergy on the receipt of this paper removed first to the Chapel of St.
Katherines, and after unto that of St. Dunstan to consult about it, yet found
they no Saint able to inspi^e them with a resolution contrary to the Kings
desires; and therefore upon the Wednesday following, being the 15 of the same
Month, they made their absolute submission, binding themselves in Verbo
Sacerdotii not to make or execute any Canons or other Synodical Constitutions,
but as they were from time to time enabled by the Kings Authority. But this
submission being made unto the King in his single person, and not as in
conjunction with his Houses of Parliament, could neither bring the Convocation
under the command of Parliaments, nor render them obnoxious to the power
thereof, as indeed it did not. But to the contrary hereof it is said by our
Author, that

Fol. 194. He (viz. the King) by the advice and consent of his Clergy in
Convocation and great Council in Parliament, resolved to reform the Church
under his inspection from gross abuses crept into it.] To this I need no other
For fol. 188. it will appear, says he, (and I can tell from whom he says it)
upon serious examination, that there was nothing done in the Reformation of
Religion, save what was acted by the Clergy in their Convocations, or grounded
on some Act of theirs precedent to it, with the Advice, Counsel and Consent of
the Bishops and most eminent Churchmen; confirmed upon the Postfact, and not
otherwise by the Civil Sanction, according to the usage of the best and
happiest times of Christianity. So then the Reformation of the Church was acted
chiefly by the King with the advice of the Clergy in their Convocation; the
confirmation on the post-fact by the King in Parliament: and that (by his
leave) not in all the Acts and Particulars of it, but in some few only, for
which consult the Tract entitled, The Way and Manner of the Reformation of the
Church of England. Now as our Author makes the Parliament a joint Assistant
with the King in the Reformation, so he conferreth on Parliaments the supreme
Power of ratifying and confirming all Synodicall Acts.

Fol. 199. The Parliament (says he) did notify and declare that
Ecclesiastical power to be in the King, which the Pope had formerly unjustly
invaded. Yet so that they reserved to themselves the confirming power of all
Canons Ecclesiastical; so that the person or property of Refusers should not be
subjected to temporal penalty without consent of submission of the Clergy and
the Authority of the King grounded thereupon is notified and recorded to
succeeding times; nor any such reservation to themselves of a confirming power
as our Author speaks of in any Act of Parliament (I can knowingly and boldly
say it) from that time to this. Had there been any such Privilege, any such
Reservation as is here declared, their power, in confirming Ecclesiastical
Canons had been Lord Paramount to the Kings; who could have acted nothing in it
but as he was enabled by his Houses of Parliament. Nor is this only a new and
unheard of Paradox, an Heterodoxie (as I may call it) in point of Law, but
plainly contrary to the practice of the Kings of England from that time to
this; there being no Synodical Canons or Constitutions (I dare as boldly say
this too) confirmed in Parliament, or any otherwise ratified, then by the
superadding of the Royal assent. For proof whereof look we no further then the
Canons of 603 and 640 confirmed by the two Kings respectively, and without any
other Authority concurring with them in these following words (viz.) We have
therefore for Us, our Heirs, and lawful Successors, of our especial Grace,
certain knowledge, and mere motion, given, and by these p^esents do give our
Royal assent according to the fo^m of the said Statute or Act of Parliament
aforesaid, to all and every of the said Canons, Orders, Ordinances, and
Constitutions, and to all and every thing in them contained. And furthermore,
we do not only by our said Prerogative Royal, and Supreme Authority, in causes
Ecclesiastical, ratify, confirm, and establish by these our Letters Patents
the said Canons, Orders, Ordinances, and Constitutions, and all and every thing
in them contained, as is aforesaid, but do likewise propound, publish, and
straightly enjoyne and command by our said Authority, and by these our Letters
Patents, the same to be diligently observed, executed and equally kept by all
our loving Subjects of this our Kingdom, both within the Province of Canterbury
and York, in all points wherein they do or may concern every or any of them
according to this our Will and Pleasure hereby signified and expressed. No
other Power required to confirm these Canons, or to impose them on the people
but the Kings alone. And yet I ^row there are not a few particulars, in which
those Canons do extend to the property and persons of such Refusers as are
concerned in the same; which our Author may soon find in them if he list to
look. And having so done, let him give us the like Precedent for his Houses of
Parliament (either abstractedly in themselves, or in cooperation with the King)
in confirming Canons; and we shall gladly quit the cause, and willingly submit
to his ^er judgment.

But if it be Ob^ected, as perhaps it may, That the Subsidies granted by the
Clergy in the Convocation are ratified and confirmed by Act of Parliament,
before they can be levied either on the Granters themselves, or the rest of the
Clergy.

I answer, that this makes nothing to our Authors purpose, that is to say, that
the person or property of Refusers should not be subjected to temporal penalty
without consent of Parliament. For first, before the submission of the Clergy
to King Henry the 8. they granted Subsidies and other aids unto the King in
their Convocations, and levied them upon the persons concerned therein by no
other way then the usual Censures of the Church, especial, by Suspension and
deprivation, if any Refuser prove so refractary as to dispute the payment of
the sum imposed. And by this way they gave and levied that great sum of an
Hundred thousand pounds in the Province of Canterbury only, by which they
bought their peace of the said King Henry, at such time as he had caused them
to be attainted in the Praemunire. And secondly, there is a like Precedent for
it since the said Submission. For whereas the Clergy in their Convocation in
the year 1585. being the 27 year of Queen Elizabeth, had given that Queen a
Subsidy of four shillings in the pound confirmed by Act of Parliament in the
usual way; they gave her at the same time (finding their former gift too short
for her present occasions) a Benevolence of two shillings in the pound to be
raised upon all the Clergy by virtue of their own Synodical Act only, under the
penalty of such Ecclesiastical Censures as before were mentioned. Which
precedent was after followed by the Clergy in their Convocation. an. 1640. the
Instrument of the Grant being the same verbatim with that before; though so it
happened (such influence have the times on the actions of men) that they were
quarreld and condemned for it by the following Parliament in the time of the
King, and not so much as checked at, or thought to have gone beyond their bounds
in the time of the Queen. And for the ratifying of their Bill by Act of
Parliament, it came up first at such times (after the Submission before
mentioned) as the Kings of England being in distrust of their Clergy, did not
think fit to empower them by their Letters Patents for the making of any
Synodical Acts, Canons, or Constitutions whatsoever, by which their Subsidies
have been levied in former times, but put them off to be confirmed and made
Obligatory by Act of Parliament. Which being afterward found to be the more
expedite way, and not considered as derogatory to the Churches Rights, was
followed in succeeding times without doubt or scruple; the Church proceeding in
all other cases by her ^^tive power, even in cases where both the person and
property of the Subject were alike concerned, as by the Canons 1603, 1640. and
many of those past in Q. Elizabeth's time (though not so easy to be seen) does
at full appear. Which said we may have leisure to consider of another passage
relating not unto the power of the Church, but the wealth of the Churchmen. Of
which thus our Autho^.

Fol. 253. I have heard (says he) that Queen Elizabeth being informed that Dr.
Pilkington Bishop of Durham had given ten thousand pounds in marriage with his
Daughter; and being offended that a Prelates daughter should equal a Princess
in portion, took away one thousand pounds a year from that Bishopric, and
assigned it for the better maintenance of the Garrison of Barwick.] In telling
of which story ou^ Lib. 9. fol. 109. being shrunk to eight; and that eight
thousand pound not given to one Daughter (as is here affirmed) but divided
equally between two: whereof the one was married to Sir James Harrington, the
other unto Dunch of Berk-shire. Secondly, this could be no cause of the Queens
displeasure, and much less of the Cour^ie^s envy; that Bishop having sat in
the Sea of Durham above seventeen years. And certainly he must needs have been
a very ill Husband if our of such a great Revenue he had not saved five hundred
pounds per annum to prefe^ his Children; the income being as great, and the
charges of Hospitality less then they have been since. Thirdly, the Queen did
not take away a thousand pound a year from that Bishopric, as is here
affirmed. The Lands were left to it as before, but in regard the Garrison of
Barwick preserved the Bishops Lands and Tenants from the spoil of the Scots;
the Queen thought fit, that the Bishops should contribute toward their own
defense, imposing on them an annual pension of a thousand pound Pilkington was
no Doctor, but a Bachelor of Divinity only; and possibly had not been raised
by our Author to an higher Title and Degree then the University had given him,
but that he was a Conniver at Nonconformity, as our Author tells us Lib. 9.
fol. 109. Lastly, I shall here add that I conceive the Pension above mentioned
not to have been laid upon that See after Pilkingtons death, but on his first
preferment to it, the French having then newly landed some forces in Scotland,
which put the Queen upon a necessity of doubling her Gua^ds and increasing her
Garrisons. But whatsoever was the cause of imposing this great yearly payment
upon that Bishopric, certain I am, that it continued and the money was duly
paid into the Exchequer for many years, after the true cause thereof was taken
away; the Queens displeasure against Pilkington ending either with his life or
hers, and all the Garrisons and forces upon the Borders being taken away in the
beginning of the Reign of King James. So true is that old saying, Quod Christus
non capit fiscus rapit, never more fully verified then in this particular.

The Sixth Book.
Containing the History of Abbeys.
THis Book containing the History of Abbeys seems but a Supplement to the
former, but being made a distinct book by our Author, we must do so likewise.
In which the first thing capable of an Animadversion, is but merely verbal, viz.

Fol. 266. Cistercians so called from one Robert living in Cistercium in
Burgundy.] The place in Burgundy from whence these Monks took denomination,
though called Cistercium by the Latins, is better known to the French and
English by the name Cisteaux; the Monks thereof Monks of Cisteaux by the
English, and Lesmoines de Cisteaux by the French, and yet our Author has hit
it better in his Cistercians, then Ralph Brook York Herald did, in his
Sister-senses, for which sufficiently derided by Augustine Vincent, as our
Author being so well studied in Heraldry, cannot choose but know.

Fol. 268. But be he who he himself or any other pleases brother if they will
to St. George on Horseback. ^ Our Author not satisfying himself in that
Equitius, who is supposed to be the first Founder of Monks in England, makes
St. George on Horseback; that is to say, a mere Chimera, a Legendary Saint, a
thing of nothing. The Knights of that most noble Order are beholding to him for
putting their Patron in the same Rank with St. Equitius; of whose existence on
the Earth he can find no Constat. But I would have him know, how poorly so
ever he thinks of St. George on Horseback, that there has more been said of
him, his Noble birth, Achievements with his death and Martyrdom, then all the
Friends our Author has, will or can justly say in defense of our present
History.

Fol. 270. -- So they deserve some commendation for their Orthodox judgment in
maintaining some Controversies in Divinity of importance against the Jesuits.]
Our Author speaks this of the Dominicans or preaching Friars, who though they
be the sole active managers of the Inquisition, deserve notwithstanding to be
commended for their Orthodox judgment. How so? Because forsooth in some
Controversies of importance, that is to say, Predestination, Grace, Free Will,
and the rest of that link, they hold the same opinions against the Jesuits and
Franciscans, as the Rigid Lutherans do against the Melanchthonians, and the
Rigid or Peremptory Calvinists against the Remonstrants. As powerful as the
Jesuits and Franciscans are in the Court of Rome, they could never get the
Pope to declare so much in favor of their Opinion, as here our Author (out of
pure zeal to the good Cause) declares in favor of the Dominicans. It was wont
to be the property or commendation of Charity, that it hoped all things,
believed all things, thought no evil, and in a word covered a multitude of
^ins. But zeal to the good cause having eaten up Charity, so far ascribes unto
it self the true qualities of it, as to pass over the sins and vices of such
who have engaged themselves in defense thereof. And he that favors the good
cause, though otherwise heterodox in Doctrine, irregular in his Conversation,
as bloody a Butcher of the true Protestants as these Preaching Friars, shall
have his imperfections covered, his vices hidden under this disguise, that he
is Orth^dox in judgment, and a true Professor. Otherwise the Dominicans had
not ^ound such favor from the hands of our Author, who would have drawn as
much blood into their cheeks with his pen, as they have drawn from many a true
Protestant by their persecutions.

Fol. 300. We will conclude with their observation (as an ominous presage of
Abbeys ruin) that there was scarce a great Abbey in England, which once at
least, was not burnt down with lightning from Heaven.]^ Our Author may be as
Paul's s^eeple in London, lib. 9. Now only noting by the way, that scarce any,
and but thirteen (for our Author names no more which were so consumed) hang not
well together. If only thirteen were so burnt (and sure our Author would have
named them if they had been more) he should have rather changed his style, and
said that of so many Religious Houses as suffered by the decays of time and
the fury of the Danish W^^s, or the rage of accident I fires, scarce any of
them ^^d been stricken by the hand of Heaven.

Fol. 313. Hence presently arose the Northern Rebellion, wherein all the open
undertakers were North of Trent, etc.] Not all the open undertakers, I am sure
of that our Author telling us in the words next following, that this commotion
began first in Lincolnshire, no part whereof except the River- Isle of Axholm,
lies beyond the Trent. Concerning which we are instructed by John Stow, Stow in
Hen. 8. fol 573.
that at an Assise for the Kings Subsidy kept in Lincolnshire, the people made
an insurrection, and gathered nigh twenty thousand persons, who took certain
Lords and Gentlemen of the Country, causing them to be sworn to them upon
certain Articles which they had devised. For which Rebellion, and some other
practices against the State 12 of that County, Id. fol. 5^4.
that is to say, 5 Priests, and 7 Laymen were not long after drawn to Tyborn,
and there hanged and quarte^ed. By which we see, that all the open undertakers
in the Northern Rebellion were not North of Trent* nor all the principal
undertakers neither; some Lords and Gentlemen of that County (though against
their wills) appearing in it, Camden in Lincolnshire fol* 535.
and amongst others Sir John Hussy created Baron not long before by King Henry
the eighth, and shortly after punished by him with the loss of his head, for
being one of the Heads of this Insurrection.

Fol. 316. Where there be many people, there will be many offenders, there
being a Cham amongst the eight in the Ark, yea a Cain amongst the four
Primitive Persons in the beginning of the world.] In this, our Authors Rule is
better then his Exemplification. For though there Ark, whereof Cham was one,
yet in all probability there were more then four persons in the world at the
Birth of Abel, reckoning him for one. For though the Scripture does subjoyn the
Birth of Abel unto that of Cain, yet was it rather in relation to the following
story wherein Abel was a principal party, then that no other children had been
born between them. The world had peopled very slowly, and never increased to
such vast multitudes in so short a time, if Eve had not twinned at least at
every birth, and that some other children had not intervened between Cain and
Abel. Not was Cain in relation to the time of his brothers birth to be
accounted of as Cain in our Authors sense, that is to say, a Malefactor, an
Offender, a murderer of his innocent brother; or if we take him in that sense,
there must be then some scores of persons at the least, if not many hundreds,
and consequently no such Cain amongst the Four Primitive Persons in the
beginning of the world, as our Author would.

Fol. 338. Such who are Prelatically affected, must acknowledge these new
Foundations of the Kings for a worthy work, etc.] So then the Foundation of six
Bishoprics, a worthy work (with reference to the work it self) by none but
such as are Prelatically affected. The Preferment of so many men of Learning,
the Education of so many children, the maintenance of so many Quiremen, the
relief of so many decayed and impotent persons, the provision made for so many
of all sorts, who had their being and subsistence in the said Foundations, had
nothing in it which might Signify a worthy work* unless there be somewhat of a
Prelatical persuasion in them, who put that value and esteem upon it. If any of
a contrary judgment do approve the same, it is not to be attributed to the
worth of the work, but to the accidental use which the unhappiness of this Age
has put them to, that is to say, by selling all the Lands which severally
belonged unto them to supply the present necessities of of the Commonwealth,
as our Author tells us. Assuredly such as are now founded in Colleges, or
possessed of Tithes, have good cause to thank him for this Discourse, which by
this Rule and Reason are to be approved of by none but those who are interessed
and concerned in them; except it be with reference to some subsequent sal^,
when the pretended exigencies of the Commonwealth, or of any prevailing party
in it shall require the some.

Fol. 340. It was in those days conceived highly injurious, to thrust Monks and
Nuns out of House and Home, without assigning them any allowance for their
subsistence.] Our Author says very well in this, there being few Religious
persons thrust out of their Houses, (except those that suffered by the first
act of dissolution) who either were not preferred in the Church, (as Wakeman the
last Abbot of Tewksbery, was by the King made the first Bishop of Gloucester) or
otherwise provided of some liberal pension, according to their age, wants, and
quality; insomuch as Sir William Weston Lord Prior, of the order of St. John's,
had an yearly Pension of a thousand pounds; Rawson the Subprior of a thousand
Marks, some of the Brethren of two hundred pounds per annum, and thirty pounds
per annum he that had least. Not did the King only give them such competent
Pensions as might yield them a subsistence for the future, but furnished them
with ready money beforehand (their viaticum or advance money as it were) toward
their setting up in the world, which commonly amounted to a fourth part of
their yearly Pension. The like honest care to which I find in our Authors
History of Waltham Abbey, fol. 8. where he tells us, that the Canons founded
there by King Harold, were not removed thence by King Henry the second,
(notwithstanding the scandalous conversation which was charged upon them) and
Augustinian Friars brought into their place, done^ praedictis Canonicis
sufficienter provisum fuisset, till the said Canons were other ways pro^ided of
sufficient maintenance. And this may serve for the instruction (I will not say
the reproach) of the present times, in which so many Bishops, Deans, and
Prebendaries no was obnoxious to any such scandalous accusations, have been
thrust out of their Cathedrals without the allowance of one penny toward their
subsistence* The like may be said also in the case of the sequestered Clergy.
For though by an Order of the House of Commons, their wives^ and children were
to enjoy a fifth part of the yearly profits of their Benefices, yet the
unconscionable Intruders found so many shifts to evade that Order, that very
few enjoyed the just benefit of it, and they that did, found their attendance
on the Committee for plundered Ministers so troublesome and chargeable to them,
that it did hardly quit the cost. One man I know particularly, who after above
twenty Orders pro and con^ and the riding of above a thousand miles backward
and forward, besides a chargeable stay in London to attend the business; was
fain at last to make a private agreement with the adverse party, and take a
tenth part in stead of a fifth. The like may be said also of the late Bill, by
which the Presbyterian Intruders are settled in the Bene^^ces of the seque^tred
Clergy for term of life. For though it be thereby provided, that the
Commissioners for rejecting of scandalous Ministers, shall have power to grant
a fifth part, together with the arrears thereof, to the sequestered and e^ected
Clergy; yet is the Bill clogged with two such circumstances, as make it
altogether unuseful to some, and may make it little beneficial unto all the
rest. For by the first it is declared, that no man shall receive any benefit by
it, who has either thirty pound per annum in Real, or five hundred pounds in
Personal Estate; by means whereof many who have had some hundreds of pounds
yearly to maintain their Families, are tied up to so poor a pittance as will
hardly keep their chil^ren from begging in the open streets. By the other,
there is such a power given to the Commissioners, that not exceeding the fifth
part, they may give to the poor sequestered Clergy as much and as little as they
please, under that proportion. And one I know particularly in this case also,
who for an Arrear of twelve years out of a Benefice rented formerly at 250 l.
per annum, to my certain knowledge could obtain but 3 l. 6 s. 8 d. (the first
Intruder being still living, and possessed of that Benefice) and no more then 20
Marks par annum for his future subsistence, which is but a nineteenth part in
stead of a fifth. And this I have observed the rather, that if these p^pers
should chance to come into the hands of any of those who have the conduct of
affairs, they would be pleased to cause the said Bill to be reviewed, and make
the benefit thereof more certain and extensive then it is at the present. Our
Author might have saved me the greatest part of this Application, had he been
minded to do the poor Clergy any right, as he seldom does. For proof whereof we
need but look upon a passage in his very Book, fol. 283. which is this that
follows. Once (says he) it was in my mind to set down a Catalogue (easy to
do, and useful when done) of such Houses of Cistercians, Templers, and
Hospitallers, which were founded since the Lateran Council, yet going under the
general notion of Tithe-free, to the great injury of the Church. But since on
second thoughts, I conceived it better to let it alone, as not sure on such
discovery of any blessing from such Ministers which should gain, but certain of
many curses from such Laymen who should lose thereby. So he. But I have heard
it for a usual saying of King Henry the fourth of France, That he that feared
the Popes curse, the reproaches of discontented people, and the frowns of his
Mistress, should never sleep a quiet hour in his bed. And so much for that.

Fol. 357. But this was done without any great cost to the Crown, only by
altering the Property of the place from a late made Cathedral to an Abbey.] Our
Author speaks this of the Church of Westminster, which though it suffered many
changes, yet had it no such change as our Author speaks of; that is to say,
from a Cathedral to an Abbey, without any other alteration which came in
between. For when the Monastery was dissolved by King Henry the eighth, An.
1539. it was made a Deanery, Will. Benson being the first Dean. In the year
1541. he made it an Episcopal See, or Cathedral Church, and placed Thomas
Thurlby the first Bishop there. But Thurlby being removed to Norwich, Anno
1550. the Bishopric was suppressed by King Edward the sixth, and the Church
ceased from being Cathedral, continuing as a Deanery only till the 21. of
November, 1557. at what time Dr. Hugh Weston the then Dean thereof, unwillingly
removed to Winsor, made room for Feckna^ and his Monks, and so restored it once
again to the State of an Abbey, as our Author tells us.

Fol. 359. Nor can I find in the first year of Queen Elizabeth any particular
Statute wherein (as in the r^ign of King Henry the eighth) these Orders are
nominatim suppressed, etc.] But first, the several Orders of Religious Persons
were not suppressed nominatim, except that of John's, by a Statute in the time
of King Henry the eight. Secondly, if there were no such Statute, yet was it
not because those Houses had no legal settlement, as it after follows; Queen
Mary being vested with a power of granting Mortmains, and consequently of
founding these Religious Houses in a Legal way. Thirdly, there Et quod non
invenit usquam, esse putat nusquam, in the Poets language. And such a Statute
as he speaks of there was indeed, mentioned and related to in the Charter of
Queen Elizabeth for founding the Collegiate Church of St. Peter in Westminster.
But being an unprinted Statute, and of private use, it easily might escape our
Authors diligence, though it did not Camdens; who being either better ^ighted,
Camd. ^n Midlesex, fol 4^9.
or more concerned, had a view thereof. For telling ^s how the Monks with their
Abbot had been set in possession again by Queen Mary, he after adds, that
they within a while after being cast out by Authority of Parliment, the most
virtuous Queen Elizabeth converted it into a Collegiate Church, or rather into
a Seminary or Nurse Garden of the Church, etc.

Fol. 369. Jesuits the last and newest of all Orders.] newest if the last,
there is no doubt of that, but the last they were not; the Oratorians (as they
call them) being of a later brood. The Jesuits founded by Ignatius Loyola, a
Spaniard* and confirmed by Pope Paul the thi^d, Anno 1540. The Oratorians
founded by Philip Meri^ a Florentine, and confirmed by Pope Pius the fourth,
Anno 1564. By which account these Oratorians are younger Brethren to the
Jesuits by the space of four and twenty years; and consequently the ^esuites
not the last and newest of Religious Orders.

ANIMADVERSIONS ON The Seventh and Eighth Books OF The Church History OF
BRITAIN.
Containing the Reigns of King Edward the sixth, and Queen Mary.
WE are now come unto the Reign of King Edward the sixth, which our Author
p^sseth lightly over, though very full of action and great alterations. And
he^e the first thing which I meet with, is an unnecessary Quaere which he makes
about the Injunctions of this King. Amongst which we find one concerning the
religious keeping of the Holy Days, in the close whereof it is declared, That
it shall be lawful for all people in time of Harvest to labor upon Holy and
Festival days, and save that thing which God has sent, and that scrupulosity
to abstain from wo^king on those days does grievously offend God. Our Author
he^upon makes this Quaere, that is to say,

Fol. 375. Whether in the 24 Injunction laboring in time of Harvest upon
Holy Days, and Festivals, relates not only to those of Ecclesiastical
Constitution (as dedicated to Saints) or be inclusive of the Lord's Day also.]
Zelot for the Lords-day-Sabbath, and ^^^dious to entitle it to some Antiquity,
we had not met with such a Quaere. The Law and Practice of those times make
this plain enough. For in the Statute of 5 and 6 of Edward the sixth, c. 3. the
names and number of the Holy Days being first laid down, that is to say, All
Sundays in the year, the Feasts of the circumcision of our Lord Jesus Christ,
of the Epiphany, etc. with all the rest still kept, and there named
particularly, it is thus enacted, viz. That it shall and may be lawful to every
Husbandman, Labourer, Fisherman, and to all and every other person and persons
of what Estate, Degree, or Condition he or they be, upon the Holy Days
aforesaid in Harvest, or at any other times in the year, when necessity shall
so require, to labor, ride, fish, or work any kind of (...), at their
free-wils and pleasure: any thing in this Act to the contrary notwithstanding.
The Law being such, there is no question to be made in point of practice, nor
consequently of the meaning of the Kings injunction. For further opening of
which truth we find in Sir John Haywoods History of this King, that not the
Country only, but the Court were indulged the liberty of attending but ness on
that day; it being ordered by the King amongst other things, That the Lords of
the Council should upon Sundays attend the public Affairs of the Realm,
Hist. Edward 6. p^g 353.
dispatch Answers to Letters for good order of the State, and make full
dispatches of all things concluded the week before: Provided that they be
p^esent at Common Prayer. And that on every Sunday night the Kings Secretary
should deliver him a memorial of such things as are to be debated by the Privy
Council in the week ens^ing. Which Orders had our Author read and compared
with the Statute, he had not needed to have made this Q^ere about the true
intent and meaning of the Kings Injunction.

Fol. 386. In the first year of King Edward the sixth, it was recommended to
the care of the most grave Bishops and others (assembled by the King at his
Castle at Windfor) and when by them completed, set forth in Print 1548. with a
Proclamation in the Kings name to give Authority thereunto, being also
recommended unto every Bishop by especial Letters from the Lords of the
Council to see the same put in execution. And in the next year a penalty was
imposed by Act of Parliament on such who should d^prave or neglect the use
thereof.] Our Author here mistakes Liturgy of King Edward the sixth, and a
particular form of Administration. For the better understanding whereof, he may
please to know, that in the first Parliament of this King there past a Statute,
1 E^. 6. c. 1.
Entitled, An Act against such as speak against the Sacrament of the Altar;
and for the receipt thereof in both kinds. Upon the coming out whereof, the
King being no less desirous (as Fox relates it) to have the form of
Administration of the Sacrament reduced to the right Rule of the Scriptures,
and first use of the Primitive Church, then he was to establish the same by
Authority of his own Regal Laws, appointed cert^in of the most grave and
learned Bishop and others of his Realm to assemble together at his Castle of
Windsor, Acts and Mon. page 658.
there to argue and entreat of this matter, and conclude upon and set forth one
perfect and uniform Order, acco^ding to the Rule, and use aforesaid; which Book
was printed and set out March 8. 1548. (which is 1547. according to the account
of the Church of England) with a Proclamation of the Kings before, as by the
Book it self appea^^^. But this Book thus set out and published, contained
nothing but a Form and Order of Adminis^ing the Holy Communion under both
kinds, in pursu^nce of the Statute before mentioned; and served but as a
preamble to the following Liturgy, a B^e^ fast (as it were) to the Feast
ensuing. The Liturgy came not out till near two years after, confirmed in
Parliament Anno 2. 3. Edw. 6. cap. 1. and in that Parliament cried up as made
by the immediate aid and inspiration of the holy Ghost. Which notwith^^anding
some exceptions being taken at it (as our Author notes) by Calvin ab^o^d, and
some Zealots at home, the Book was brought under a Review; much altered in all
the parts and offi^es of it, but wheth^r unto the better, or unto the worse,
let some others judge.

Fol. 404. At last the great Earl of Warwick deserted his Chaplain in open
field to shift for himself. Indeed he had higher things in his head, then to
attend such trifles.] A man may easily discern a Cat by her claw, and we may
find as easily by the scratches of our Autho^s pen to what party in the Church
he stands most inclined. He had before declared for the Dominicans and Rigid
Calvinists in some points of Doctrine, and now declares himself for the
Non-Conformists in point of Ceremony. He had not else called the Episcopal
Ornaments, particularly the Rochet, Chimere and Square-cap by the name of
trifles; such trifles as were not worth the contending for, if Res^lute Ridley
had been pleased to dispense therein. The truth is, that Hoopers opposition in
this particula^, gave the first ground to those Combustions in the Church which
after followed; Calvin extremely stickling for him, and writing to his party
here to assist him in it. And this I take to be the reason why our Author is so
favorable in his censure of him fol. 402. and puts such Answers in the mouths
of the Nonconformist fol. 404. as I can hardly think were so well hammered and
accommodated in those early days. Such as seem rather fitted for the temper
and acumen of the present times after a long debating of all particulars and a
strict search into all the niceties of the Controversy, then to the first
beginnings and unpremeditated Agitatious of a newborn Quarrel.

Fol. 406. Yet this work met afterward with some Frowns even in the faces of
great Clergymen, etc. because they concoived these singing Psalms erected in
Corrivality and opposition to the reading Psalms, which were formerly sung in
Cathedral Churches.] And those great ^ad good reason for what they did, wisely
foreseeing that the singing of those Psalms so translated in Rythme and Meeter
would work some alteration in the executing of the public Liturgy. For though
it be expressed in the Title of those singing Psalms that they were set forth and
allowed to be sung in all Churches before and after morning and eveni^g Prayer;
and also before and after Sermons; yet this allowance seems rather to have been
a Connivence then an approbation: no such allowance being any where found by
such as have been most industrious and concerned in the search thereof.
Secondly, whereas ^t was intended that the said Psalms should be only (...)
before and after morning and evening Prayer; and also before and after Sermons
(which shows they were not to be intermingled in the public Liturgy) in very
little time they p^evailed so far in most Parish Churches, as to thrust the Te
Deum, the Benedictus, the Magnificat, and the Nunc dimittis, quite out of the
Church. And thirdly, by the practices and endeavors of the Puritan party, they
came to be esteemed the most divine part of Gods public service; the reading
Psalms together with the first and second Lessons being heard in many places
with a covered head, but all men ^itting bareheaded when the Psalm is sung. And
to that end, the Parish Clerk must be taught when he names the Psalm to call
upon the people to sing it to the praise and glory of God, no such preparatory
Exhortation being used at the naming of the Chapters of the daily sung only in
Cath^dral Churches, he is exceedingly mistaken both in the Rubri^ks of the
Church, and the practice too: the Rubricks l^^ving them indifferently to be
said or sung, according as the Congregation was fitted for it, the practice in
some Parish Churches within the time of my memory being for it also. And this
our Author (as I think) cannot choose but know, if he be but as well studied in
the Rules of the Church, as in some Popish Legends and old ends of Poetry.

Fol. 407. Let Adonijah and this Lords example deterr Subjects from meddling
with the Widows of their Sovereigns, lest in the same match they espouse their
own danger and destruction.] I see little reason for this Rule, less for his
examples. For first Abishag the Shunamite, whom Adonijah des^red to have to
wife, was ^ever married unto David; and therefore cannot properly be called his
Widow. And secondly, Queen Katheri^e Parr the Widow of King Henry the eighth,
and wife unto Sir Thomas Seimor (the Lord here mentioned) is generally
charactered for a Lady of so meek a nature, as not to contribute any thing
toward his destruction. Had the Duchess of Somerset been less impetious
then she was, or possessed but of one half of that aequanimity which carried
Queen Katherine off in all times of her troubles, this Lord might have lived
happily in the arms of his Lady, and gone in peace unto the grave. We find
the like match to have been made between another Katherine the Widow of another
Henry, and Owen Tudor a private Gentleman of Wales, prosperous and comfortable
to them both; though Owen was inferior to Sir Thomas Seimor both in Birth and
Quality, and Katherine of Valois Daughter to Charles the sixth of France, far
more superior in her blood to Queen Katherine Parr. The like may be said also
of the marriage of Adeliza Daughter of Geofry Earl of L^vain and Duke of
Brabant, and Widow to King Henry the first, married to William de Albeney a
noble Gentleman, to whom she brought the Castle and Honor of Arundel,
con^erred upon her by the King her former Husband, continuing in the possession
of their posterity, though in several Families, to this very day; derived by
the Heirs general from this House of Albeney to that of the Fitz-^lans, and
from them to the Howards the now Earls thereof. Many more examples of which
kind fo^tunate and succesful to each party might be easily ^ound, were it
worth the while.

Fol. 421. This barren Convocation is entitled the Parent of those Articles of
Religion (forty two in number) which are printed with this Preface, Articuli de
quibus in Synodo Londinensi, etc.] Our Author here Scandalum Magnatum, making
King Edward the sixth of pious memory, no better then an impious and lewd
Impostor. For if the Convocation of this year were barren (as he says it was)
it could neither be the Parent of those Articles nor of the short Catechism
which was Printed with them, countenanced by the Kings Letters Patents pre^ixt
before it. For

First, the Title to the Articles runs thus at large, viz. Articuli de
quibus in Synodo Londinensi Anno 1552 inter Episcopos and alios eruditos viros
convenerat ad tollendam opinionum dissensionem, and consensum verae Religionis
Which title none durst have adventured to set before them, had they not really
been the products of that Convocation.

Secondly, the King had no reason to have any such jealousy at that time of
the major part of the Clergy, but that he might trust them with a power to
meddle with matters of Religion (which is the only Argument our Author brings
against those Articles) This Convocation being holden in the sixth year of his
Reign when most of the Episcopal Sees and Parochial Churches were filled with
men ag^ee^ble to his desi^es, and generally conform^ble to the form of worship
the^ by Law established.

Thi^dly, the Church of England for the first five years of Queen Elizabeth
retained these Articles and no other as the public tendries of the Church in
poin^s of Doctrine, which ce^tainly she had not done, had they been re^ommended
to her by a less Autho^ity then a Convocation.

Fourthly and las^ly, we have the testimony of our Author against himself, who
telling us of the Catechism above mentioned, that it was of the san^e
extraction with the Book of Articles, adds afte^wards, that being first
composed by a single person, it was perus^d and allowed by the Bishops and
other learned men (understand it the Convocation) and by Royal Authority
commended to all Subjec^, and c^mman^ed to all Schoolmasters to teach it their
Scholars. So that this Catechism being allowed by the Bishops and other learned
men in the Convocation, and the Articles being said to be of the same
extraction; it must needs follow thereupon, that these Articles had no other
Parent then this Convocation. The truth is, that the Records of Convocation,
during this Kings whole Reign, and the first years of Queen Mary, are very
imperfect and defective; most of them lost, and amongst others those of this
present year; and yet one might conclude as strongly that my Mother died
childless, because my Christning is not to be found in the Parish Register; as
that the Convocation of this year was barren, because the Acts and Articles of
it are not entered in the Journal Book.

The Eighth Book; OR The Reign of Queen MARY.
WE next proceed unto the short, but troublesome Reign of Queen Mary; in which
the first thing (...) occurs, is,

^ol. 1. But the Commons of England who for many ye^^s together had conn'd
Loyalty by-heart, out of the Sta^^^e of the succession, were so perfect in
their Lesson, that they would not be put out of it by this new started design.]
In which I am to note these things; first that he makes the Loyalty of the
Commons of England not to depend upon the primogeniture of their Princes, but
on the Statute of Succession, and then the object of that Loyalty must not be
the King, but the Act of Parliament, by which they were directed to the
knowledge of the next successor: and then it must needs be in the power of
Parliaments to dispose of the Kingdom as they pleased; the Peoples Loyalty
being tied to such dispositions. Secondly, that the Statutes of Succession had
been so many, and so contrary to one another, that the common people could not
readily tell which to trust to; and for the last it related to the Kings last
Will and Testament, so lately made and known unto so few of the Commons, that
they had neither opportunity to see it, nor time to con the same by heart. Nor
thirdly, were the Commons so perfect in this lesson of Loyalty, or had so fixed
it in their hearts, but that they were willing to forget it within little time,
and take out such new lessons of disobedience and disloyalty, as Wiat and his
Partisans did preach unto them. And finally they had not so well conn'd this
lesson of Loyalty in our Authors own judgment, but that some strong pretender
might have taught them a new Art of Oblivion: it being no improbable thing (as
himself confesses) to have heard of a King Henry the ninth, if Henry Fitz-Roy
the Duke of Somerset and Richmond, had lived so long as to the death of King
Edward the sixth.

Fol. 11. Afterward Philpot was troubled by Gardener for his words spoken in
the Convocation. In vain did he plead the privilege of the place, commonly
reputed a part of Parliament.] Richard the second. It Is true indeed, that in
the 8. year of King Henry the sixth, there passed a Statute by which it was
enacted, That all the Clergy which should be called thenceforth to the
Convocation by the Kings Writ, together with their servants and Families,
should for ever after fully use and enjoy such liberty or immunity in coming,
tarrying, and returning, as the great men and Commonalty of the Realm of
England, called or to be called to the Kings Parliament, have used, or ought to
have, or enjoy. Which though it make the Convocation equal to the Parliament,
Rost^l^ Abrid ^f. 423.
as to the freedom of their Persons; yet can it not from hence be reckoned, and
much less commonly reputed for a part thereof.

Fol. 14. Indeed the Queen bare Poole an unfeigned affection, and no wonder to
him that considers, 1. their Age, he being about ten years older, the
proportion allowed by the Philosopher betwixt Husband and Wife, etc.] In Queen
Mary's af^ection unto Poole, and the reasons of it, I am very well satisfied,
better then in the explication which he adds unto it. For if by the
Philosopher, he means Aristotle, Aristotle in the seventh Book of his Politics
having discoursed of the fittest time and age for marriage both in men and
women, Arist. Pol. l. 7* cap. 16.
concludes at last, that it is expedient that maidens be married about the age
of eighteen years, and Men at seven and thirty, or thereabouts. His reason is,
(...) *that is to say, Because they shall then be joined in wedlock, while
their bodies be in full strength, and shall^ cease from procreation in fit
time. Whether so great a disp^oportion were allowed of then, or that it was a
matter of Speculation only, and not reducible to practice, I dispute not now.
Only I note that it is twenty years, not ten, which the Philosopher requires in
the different ages of the Man and Wife.

Fol. 19. Lincoln Diocese the largest of the whole Kingdom, containing
Leicester, etc. with parts of Ha^tford and Warwickshires.] That the great^.
Diocese of Lincoln Bedford, Buckingham, Huntington, Leicester, and Lincoln,
with part of Hartfordshire is confessed by all; but that it contains also
some part of Warwickshire, I do very much doubt. Certain I am, Antiquit.
B^itan.
that Archbishop Parker, a man very well skilled in the jurisdiction of his
Suffragan Bishops, assigns no part of Warwickshire to the Sea of Lincoln;
dividing that County between the Bishop of Coventry and Lichfield, and the
Bishop of Worcester. I see by this our Author is resolved to play at all games,
though he get by none.

Fol. 27. The Letany, Surplice, and other Ceremonies in Service and Sacraments
they omitted, both as superfluo^s and Franckford, who t^rn'd the public Church
Liturgy quite out of their Church, fashioning to themselves a new form of
Worship, which had no warrant and foundation by the laws of this Realm. And
first (says he) the Letany, Surplice, and other Ceremonies they omitted both
as superfluous and superstitious. Superfluous, and superstitious, in whose
opinion? In that of the Schismatics at Franckford, our Authors, or in both
alike. Most probably in our Authors as well as theirs, for otherwise he would
have added some note of qualification, such as they thought, they judged, or
they supposed them: according as he has restrained them to their own ^ense in
the clause next following, viz. in place of the English Confession, they used
another, adjudged by them of more effect. Adjudged by them in this, not the
former sentence, makes me inclinable to believe that the Letany, Surplice, and
other Ceremonies are both superfluous and superstitious in our Authors
judgment, not in theirs alone. Secondly, our Author (as we have noted formerly
on the second Book of this History) reckons the Cross in Baptism, used and
required to be used by the Church of England, among the superstitious
Ceremonies and such like Trinckets with which that Sacrament is loaded. And if
he durst declare himself so plain in this second Book written as he affirms, in
the Reign of the late King, when he might fear to be called to an account for
that expression, there is little question to be made, but since Monarchy was
turned into a State, he would give his pen more liberty then he did before, in
counting the Letany, Surplice, and other Ceremonies is superfluous and
superstitious, as the Cross in Baptism. Thirdly, having laid down an abstract
of the form of worship contrived by the Schismatics at Franckford, he honoreth
them with no lower Title then that of Saints; and counts this liberty of
deviating from the Rules of the Church for a part of their happiness. For so it
follows, fol. 28. This, says he, is the Communion of Saints, who never
account themselves peaceably possessed of any happiness, until (if it be in
their power) they have also made their fellow sufferers partakers thereof. If
those be Saints, who separate themselves schismatically from their Mother
Church; and if it be a happiness to them to be permitted so to do; our Author
has all the reason in the world to desire to be admitted into their Communion,
and be made partaker of that happiness which such Saints enjoy. And if in order
thereunto he counts the Letany, Surplice, and other Ceremonies of the Church to
be both superstitious and superfluous too, who can blame him for it?

Fol. 39. Trinity College built by Sir Thomas Pope. ^I shall not derogate so
much from Sir Thomas Pope, as our Trinity College, naming no Bishop of this
House, as he does of others. He tells us that he lived in this University about
17 weeks, and all that time D^. Skinner the Bishop of Oxford lived there too.
Dr. Wright the Bishop of Li^chfield, p^obably was then living al^o, (for he
deceased not till after the beginning of the year 1643.) but living at that
time in his own House of Ecclesal Castle. Both of them Members of this
College, and therefore worthily deserving to have found some place in our
Authors History. And because our Author can find no learned Writers of this
College neither, I will supply him with two others in that kind also. The
first whereof shall be John S^lden, of the Inner Temple, (...), that renowned
Humanitian and Philologer, sometimes a Commoner of this House, and here
initiated in those Studies in which he af^erwards attained to so high an
eminence. The second William Chillingworth, an able and acute Divine, and once
a Fellow of this College; whose Book entitled The Religion of Protestants a
safe way to Salvation, written in de^ence of Dr. Potters Book called Charity
mistaken, commended by our Author, Lib. 3. fol. 115. remains unanswered by the
Jesuits, notwithstanding all their brags beforehand, to this very day. Which
Book though most ridiculously buried with the Author at Arundel (get thee gone
thou accursed Book etc.) by Mr. Francis Cheynel, the usu fructuary of the rich
personage of Pe^worth, shall still survive unto the world in its own just
value, when the poor three-penny commodities of such a sorry Haberdasher of
Small Wares shall be out of credit. Of this Pageant, see the Pamphet called
Chillingworthi Novissima, printed at London, Anno 1644.

Fol. 41. But now it is gone, Calice.
let it go; it was but a beggarly Town, and cost England ten times yearly more
then it was worth^ in keeping thereof.] Admit it be so, yet certainly it was
worth the keeping, had it cost much more. The English while they kept that
Town, had a door open into France upon all occasions, and therefore it they
carried the Keys of France at their Girdles. Sound Statesmen do not measure
the benefit of such Towns and Garrisons as are maintained and kept in an
Enemies Country, by the profit which they bring into their Exchequer, but by
the opportunities they give a Prince to enlarge his Territories. Of this kind
was the Town of Barwick situate on the other side of the Tweed, upon Scottish
ground; but Garrisoned and maintained with great charge by the Kings of
England, because it gave him the same advantage against the Scots, as Calice
did against the French. The government of which last Town is by Comines said to
be the goodliest Captain ship in the world, so great an Eyesore to the French,
that Mounsieur de Cords (who lived in the time of Lewis the eleventh) was used
to say, that he would be content to lie in Hell seven years together, upon
condition that Calice were regained from the English; and finally judged of
such importance by the French, when they had regained it, that neither the
Agreement made at the Treaty of Cambray, nor the desire to free New Haven from
the power of the English, nor the necessities which Henry the fourth was
reduced unto, could ever prevail upon them to part with it. But it is dry meat
said the Country fellow, when he lost the Hare; and so let Cali^e pass for a
Beggarly Town, and not worth the keeping, because we have no hope to get it.

ANIMADVERSIONS ON The Ninth Book OF The Church History OF BRITAIN.
Containing the Reign of Queen Elizabeth.
THe short Reigns of King Edward the sixth, and Queen Mary being briefly past
over by our Author, he spends the more time in setting out the affairs of the
Church under Queen Elizabeth; not so much because her Reign was long, but
because it was a busy Age and full of Faction. To which Faction how he stands
affected he is not coy to let us see on all occasions, giving us in the very
first entrance this brief but notable Essay, viz.

Fol. 51. Idolatry is not to be permitted a moment; the first minute is the
fittest to abolish it: all that have power have right to destroy it by that
grand Charter of Religion, whereby every one is ^ound to advance Gods glory.
And if Sovereigns forget, no reason but Subjects should remember their duty]
Our Author speaks this in behalf of some forward^ Spirits, who not enduring the
la^inesse of Authority in order to the great work of Reformation, fell
beforehand to the beating down of superstitious Pictures and Images. And though
some others condemned their indiscretion herein, yet our Author will not, but
rather gives these Reasons for their justification; 1. That the Popish Religion
is Idolatry. 2. That Idolatry is to be destroyed by all that have power to do
it. 3. (Which is indeed the main) that if the Sovereigns do forget, there is no
reason but Subjects should remember their duty. This being our Authors
Masterpiece, and a fair g^^^ndwork for Seditious and Rebellious for the times
ensuing, I shall spend a little the more time in the examination of the
p^opositions, as before we had them. And

Romish Religion is Idolatry, though possible it is that some of the members of
that Church may be proved Idolaters. I know well what great pains Dr. Reynolds
took in his laborious work entitled, De Idololatria Ecclesiae Romanae; and I
know too that many very learned and moderate men were not th^oughly satisfied
in his proofs and Arguments. That they are worshippers of Images, as themselves
deny not, so no body but themselves can approve them in it. But there is a very
wide difference betwixt an Image and an Idol, betwixt the old Idolate^s in the
state of Heathenism, and those which give religious worship unto Images in some
pa^ts of Chris^endom. And this our Author being well st^died in Antiquity, and
not a stranger to the (...) of the present times, cannot choose but know; though
zeal to the good cause, and the desire of being co^stan^ to himself, drew this
p^^^age from him. The Ch^istian faith delivered in the h^ly Gospels succeeded
over the greatest part of the then known wo^^d in the place of that Idolatrous
worship, which like a Leprosy had generally overspread the whole face thereof.
And therefore that the whole Mass of Wickliffes He^erodoxies might be Christened
by the name of Gospel, our Author thinks it necessary that the Popish Mass, and
the rest of the Superstitious of that Church should be called Idolatry.

2. That Idolatry is to be destroyed by all them that have power to do it, I
shall easily grant. But then it Id possumus, quod jure possumus, was the rule
of old, and it held good in all attempts for Reformation in the elder times.
For when the Fabric of the Jewish Church was out of order, and the whole
Worship of the Lord either defiled with superstitions, or intermingled with
Idolatries, as it was too often: did not Gods servants carry and await his
leisure, till those who were supreme both in place and power, were by him
prompted and inflamed to a Reformation? How many years had that whole people
made an Idol of the Brazen Serpent, and burnt ^^cense to it, before it was
defaced by King H^zekiah? How many more might it have longer stood undef^ced*
untouched by any of the common people, had not the King given order to demolish
it? How many years had the seduced Israelites adored before the Altar of
Bethel, before it was hewn down and cut in p^eces by the good King Josiah? And
yet it cannot be denied but that it was as much in the power of the Jews to
destroy that Idol, and of the honest and religious Isra^lites to break down
that Altar; as it either was, or could be in the power of our English Zealots
to beat down superstitious Pictures and Images, had they been so minded.
Solomon in the Book of Canticles compares the Church unto a Army, Acies
Castrorum ordina^a, as the Vulgar has it, an Army terrible with Banners, as
our English reads it. A powerful Body out of doubt, able which way soever it
moves, to waste and destroy the Country, to burn and sack the Villages through
which it passes. And questionless too many of the Soldiers knowing their own
power, world be apt to do it, if not restrained by the Authority of their
Commanders and the Laws of war. Tacit. H^^st. l 1.
Ita se Ducum Authoritas, sic Rigor Disciplinae habet, as we find in Tacitus.
And if those be not kept as they ought to be, Confusi Equites Peditesque in
exitium ruunt; the whole runs on to a swift destruction. Thus is it also in the
Church with the Camp of God; If there be no subordination in it, if every one
might do what he list himself, and make such uses of that power and opportunity
as he thinks are put into into his hands, what a confusion would ensue, how
speedy a calamity must needs fall upon it? Courage and zeal do never show more
amiably in inferior powers, then when they are subordinate to good directions,
especially when they take directions from the right hand, from the Supreme
Magistrate, not from the interests and passion of their fellow subjects. It is
the Princes office to command, and theirs to execute. With which wise caution
the Emperor Otho once represt the too great forwardness of his Soldiers, when
he found them apt enough to make use of their power in a matter not commanded
by him, Vobis Arma and Animus, Tacit. Hi^t. l. 1.
mihi Consilium and virtutis vestrae Regimen relinquites as his words there
are. He understood their duty, and his own authority, allows them to have power
and will, but regulates and restrains them both to his own command. So that
whether we behold the Church in its own condition, proceeding by the warrant
and examples of holy Scripture, or in resemblance to an Army (as compared by
Solomon) there will be nothing left to the power of the people either in way of
Reformation or Execution* till they be vested and entrusted with (...) lawful
power derived from him whom God has placed in Authority over them. And
therefore though Idolatry be to be destroyed, and to be destroyed by all which
have power to do it, yet must all those be furnished with (...) lawful power, or
otherwise stand guilty of as high a crime as that which they so zealously
endeavor to condemn in others.

3. But our Author is not of this mind, and therefore That if the Sovereign do
forget, the Subjects should remember their duty. A lesson which he never
learned in the Book of God. For besides the examples which we have in
demolishing the Brazen Serpent, and the Altar of Bethel, not acted by the power
of the people, but the command of the Prince; I would (...) know where we shall
find in the whole cour^e and current of the holy Scriptures, that the common
people in and by their own authority, removed the high places, and destroyed
the Images, or cut down the G^oves, those excellent Instruments of Superstition
and Idolatry; or that they did attempt any such thing till warranted and
commissionated by the Supreme Powers. Where shall we find that any of the
seven thousand person: which had not bowed the knee to Baal, did ever go about
to destroy that Idol? Or that Eliah or Elisha (two men as extraordinary for
their calling, as their zeal and courage) did excite them to it? Where shall we
find the Primitive Christians, when living under the command of Heathenish
Emperors busied in destroying Idols, or defacing the Temples of those Gods whom
the Pagans worshipped; though grown in those times to such infinite multitudes,
that they filled all places of the Empire, and Vestra omnia implevim^^, Cities,
Illes, Castles, Buroughs, your places of Assembly, Camps, Tribes, Palaces, yea
the very Senate and common Forum, as Tertullian pleads it. No other Doctrine
(...) ^eard of till either the new Gospel of Wickliffe, or the new Lights
shining from Geneva, gave beginning to it: when the Genevians were resolved on
a Reformation, and could not get the consent of their Bishop, who was also
their immediate Prince, they resolved to take the work into their own hands,
and proceed without him. And that the presence of their Bishop might not be a
hinderance unto their designs, they raised a tumult, put themselves in to a
posture of war, and thereby force him and his Clergy to forsake the City. And
this being done, they did not only order matters of Religion as they pleased
themselves, but took the Sovereignty of the City into their own hands, changing
the Government thereof to the form of a Commonwealth. Eo ejecto Genevates
Monarchiam in popularem Statum commutarunt, as Calvin has it in his Epistle
unto Cardinal Sadolet. The practice of these men drawn afterward into example
by Knox, and others, became at last to be the standing Rule and Measure of all
Reformations. For when the King and Queen of Scots, refused to ratify two Acts
which were sent unto them concerning the abolishing of the Mass, and the Popes
supremacy, Hist. of Q. Mary s. 25.
Knox, Winram, and the rest of that gang without more ado devised, and set up a
new form of Discipline, engrossing that power unto the Kirk, which formerly had
been usurped by the Popes of Rome. Afterward when the Queen was returned into
Scotland, and that some of their importunate Petitions were neglected by her,
it was concluded by the Ministers in as plain terms as might be, that if the
Queen will not, then we must, ibid. fol. 33.

According to this Rule the Netherlands proceeded also, not only driving on the
design which they had in hand (as the French Hugonots also did) without the
Kings Authority, but against it also. Finally, from a matter practical it came
at last to be delivered for a point of Doctrine, that if the Prince or Supreme
Magistrate did not reform the Church, then the people might. For this I find
in Clesselius, one of the Contra-Remonstrants of Roterdam. If says he, the
Prince and Clergy do neglect their duties in the Reforming of the Church,
Necesse est tumid facere plebeios Israelitas, that then, it does belong to the
common people. And it is with a Necesse too, if you mark it well* they might
not only do it, but they must be doing. Not in the way of Mediation or
Petition, by which the dignity of the Magistrate might be preserved, but by
force and violence, Licet ad sanguinem usque pro eo pugnent, even to the
shedding of their own blood, and their brethrens too. Our Author preaches the
same Doctrine, whether by way of Application or Instruction, it comes all to
one; for, Qui Parents laudat filios provocat, as Lactantius has it, Posterity
is too soon taught to follow the ill examples of their Predecessors. And though
he press it not so home as Clesselius did, yet when the gap is once set open,
and the Hedge of Authority torn down, bloodshed and war, and other acts of open
violence will come in of course. So that we may affirm of this dangerous
Doctrine, as the Sorbonists once did of the Jesuits, viz. Videtur in negotio
sidei periculosa, pacis Ecclesiae perturbativa, and magis ad destructionem quam
ad aedificationem. But I have staid too long upon these first Notes, I now
proceed unto the rest.

Fol. 54. This Parliament being very active in matters of Religion, the
Convocation (younger Brother thereunto) was little employed and less regarded.]
Our Author follows his design of putting matters of Religion into the power of
Parliaments though he has chosen a very ill Medium to conclude the point. This
Parliament as some Acts made in the time of Queen Mary, and settling matters in
the same State in which she found them at her first coming to the Crown. The
Common Prayer Book being reviewed and fitted to the use of the Church by some
godly men, appointed by the Queen alone, received no other confirmation in this
present Parliament then what it had before in the last years of King Edward.
The Supremacy was again restored, as it had been formerly; the Title of Supreme
head which seemed offensive unto many of both Religions, being changed into
that of Supreme Governor, nothing, in all this done de novo, which could
entitle this Parliament to such activity in matters of Religion, but that our
Author had a mind to undervalue the Convocation, as being little employed, and
less regarded. I grant indeed, that the Convocation of that year did only meet
for forms sake, without acting any thing; and there was very good reason for
it. The Bishops at that time were so ^enaciously addicted to the Church of
Rome, that they chose all (except Anthony Kitchen of Landaffe) rather to lose
their Bishoprics then take the Oath of Supremacy. So that there was little or
no hope of doing any thing in Convocation to the Queens content in order to the
Reformation of Religion, which was then designed, had they been suffered to
debate, treat, and conclude of such particulars as had relation thereunto. But
we shall see when things are somewhat better settled, that the activity of the
next Convocation will make amends for the silence and unsignificancy of this.

In the mean time I would fain know our Authors Reason, why speaking of the
Convocation, and the Parlialiament in the notion of Twins, the Convocation must
be England some hundreds of years before the name of Parliament had been ever
heard of; which he that lists to read the collection of Councils published by
that learned and industrious Gentleman Sir Henry Spelman, cannot but perceive.

Fol. 71. This year the spire of Poles- steeple covered with lead strangely
fell on fire.] More modestly in this then when he formerly ascribes the burning
of some great Abbeys to Lightning from heaven. And so this steeple was both
reported and believed to be fired Paul-steeple was fired with Lightning. But
afterward it was acknowledged (as our Author truly notes) to be done by the
negligence of a Plummer carelessly leaving his Coals therein; ^^nce which
acknowledgement we find no mention of this accident in our yearly Almanacks.
But whereas our Author finds no other Benefactors for the repairing of this
great Ruin but the Queens bounty, and the Clergie^ Benevolence, I must needs
tell him that these were only accessories to the principal charge. The
greatest part London, it being affirmed by John Stow, that after this mischance
the Queens Majesty directed her Letters to S^ow Su^ve^ the Mayor, willing him
to take order for the speedy repairing of the same. S^ow Su^ve^ of Land. p. 623.
And in pursuance of that order (besides what issued from the public stock in
the Chamber of London) the Citizens gave first a great Benevolence, and after
that three Fifteens to be speedily paid. What the Queen did in the way of
furtherance, or the Clergy of the Province of Canterbury in the way of help, is
to be looked upon as their free voluntary Act, no otherwise obliged thereto, but
as the public Honor of the Church and State did invite them to it. The Mayor
and City were the parties upon whom the command was laid, as most concerned in
the Repair of their own Cathed^al* Which I thought good to put our Author in
mind o^ as a fault of omission only, leaving such use as may be made of the
Observation to the (...) of others.

Fol. 71. Here I would fain be informed by some learned men in the Law, what
needed the restoring of those Children whose ^ather was condemned and died only
for Heresy, which is conceived a personal crime, and not tainting the bl^nd.
The Parliament this year had passed an Act for the Restitution in blood of the
children of Thomas Cranmer late Archbishop of Canterbury, for which our Author
as it seems can see no reason, in regard he was condemned and died only for
Heresy. For though (says he) this Archbishop was first accused of
High Treason, yet it afterward was waved, and he tried upon But in this our
Author is mistaken. For though Cranmer was condemned and died for Heresy, yet
he was not condemned for that only; nor was the accusation for Treason waved,
as he says it was, but the conviction of him as an Heretic superadded to it.
Being accused of High Treason for subscribing (though unwillingly) to the
Proclamation of the Lady Jane, he was committed to the Tower on the 15. of
September, S^ow^ An. fol. 617.
and on the 13. of November following arraigned at the Guildhall in London, and
there convicted and condemned, together with the said Lady Jane, the Lord
Guilford Dudley her Husband, and the Lord Ambrose Dudley her Husbands Brother.
Of which four the Lady Jane and her Husband only suffered death on that
condemnation; the Lord Ambrose Dudley being reprieved for a better fortune, and
the Archbishop reserved for a mo^e cruel death. For the Queen finding it more
satisfactory to the Court of Rome to have him burnt for an Heretic then hanged
for a Traitor, and being implacably bent against him for his activeness in the
Divorce; thought good to wave her first proceeding, and to have him put to
death for Heresy. But the Attainder holding still good at the Common Law,
there was great reason why his Children should desire a restitution in blood,
not otherwise to be obtained but by Act of Parliament. And so without troubling
the learned in the Law for our information, I hope our Author will be
satisfied, and save his Fee for other more necessary uses.

Fol. 72. In the Convocation now sitting, the nine and thirty Articles were
composed, agreeing for the main with those set forth in the Reign of King
Edward the sixth, though in some particulars allowing more liberty to
dissenting judgments.] This is the active Convocation which Edward; but
altering some Articles, expunging others, addingsome de novo, and fitting the
whole body of them unto edification; Not leaving any liberty to dissenting
Judgments, as our Author would have it, but binding men unto the literal and
Grammatical sense. They had not othewise attained to the end they aimed at
which was ad tollendam opinionum dissensionem, and consensum in vera Religione
firmandum; that is to say, to take away diversity of Opinions, and to establish
an agreement in the true Religion. Which end could never be effected, if men
were left unto the liberty of dissenting, or might have leave to put their own
sense upon the Articles. But whereas our Author instances in the Article of
Christ's descent into Hell, telling us that Christ's preaching unto the Spirits
there (on which the Article seemed to be grounded in King Edwards Book) was
left out in this; and thereupon infers that men are left unto a latitude
concerning the cause, time, manner of his descent; I must needs say, that he is
very much mistaken. For first the Church of England has always constantly
maintained a local Descent, though many which would be thought her Children,
the better to comply with Calvin and some other Divines of forain Nations, have
deviated in this point from the sense of the Church. And secondly, the reason
why this Convocation left out that passage of Christ preaching to the Spirits
in hell; was not that men might be left unto a latitude concerning the cause,
time, and manner of his Descent, as our Author dreams; but because that passage
of St. Peter being capable of some other interpretations, was not conceived to
be a clear and sufficient evidence to prove the Article. For which see Bishop
Bilsons Survey, p. 388, 389.

Fol. 74. In a word, concerning this clause whether the Bishops were faulty in
their addition, or their opposites in their substraction, I leave to more
cunning Arithmeticians ] The Clause here spoken of by our Author is the first
Sentence in the twentieth Article entitled De Ecclesiae Authoritate, where it
is said that the Church has power to decree Rites and Ceremonies, and
Authority in Controversies of the Faith. Which being charged upon the Bishops
as a late addition, the better to support their power and maintain their
Tyranny; the late Archbishop of Canterbury in his Speech* in the Star Chamber,
June the 15* 1637. made it appear that the said Clause was in a Printed Book of
Articles published in the year 1563. being but very few months after they had
passed in the Convocation, which was on the 29. of January 1562. in the English
account. And more then so, he showed unto the Lords a Copy of the twentieth
Article exemplified out of the Records, and attested by the hands of a public
Notary, in which that very Clause was found, which had been charged upon the
Bishops for an innovation. And thus much I can say of mine own knowledge, that
having occasion to con^^^t the Records of Convocation, I found this
controverted Clause verbatim in these following words, Habet Ecclesia Ritus
statuendo jus, and in fidei Controversis Authoritatem. Which makes me wonder at
our Author, that having access to those Records, and making frequent use of
them in this present History, he should declare himself unable to decide the
doubt, whether the addition of this Clause was made by the Bishops, or the
substraction of it by the opposite party. But none so blind as he that will
not see, says the good old proverb.

But our Author will not so give over. He must first have a fling at the
Archbishop of Canterbury upon this occasion. In the year 1571. (the Puritan
Faction beginning then to grow very strong) the Articles were again Printed
both in Latin and English, and this Clause left out; published according to
those copies in the Harmony of Confessions Printed at Geneva, Anno 1612. and
published by the same at Oxford (though soon after rectified) Anno 1636. Now the
Archbishop taking notice of the first alteration, Anno 1571. declares in his
said Speech, that it was no hard matter for that opposite Faction to have the
Articles Printed and this clause left out, Archbishops Speech, p. 71.
considering who they were that then governed businesses and rid the Church
almost at their pleasure. What says our Author to this? Marry, says he, I am
not so well skilled in Historical Horsemanship as to know whom his Grace
designed for the Rider of the Church at that time, fol. 74. Strange that a man
who undertakes to write an History governed the business of the times he
writes of. But this is only an affected ignorance, professed of purpose to
preserve the honor of some men whom he beholds as the chief Patrons of the
Puritan Faction. For aft^^wards (this turn being served) he can find out who
they were that then governed businesses, and rid the Church almost at their
pleasure, telling us, fol. 138* that the Earl of Leicester interposed himself
Patron-general to the non-subscribers, and that he did it at the persuasion of
Roger Lord North. Besides which two we find Sir Francis Knollys to be one of
those who gave countenance to the troubles at Frankfor^* at such time as the
Faction was there hottest against the Liturgy, Lib. 8 fol 35.
and other Rites and ^eremonies of the Church of England. Who being a mere
kinsman of the Queens and a Privy Counselor, made use of all advantages to
pursue that project, which being (...) on foot beyond sea, had been driven on
here, and though Leicester was enough of himself to rid the Church at his
pleasure, it being fitted with such helps, Sir Francis Walsingham and many more
of that kind which the times then gave him, they drove on the faster, till he
had almost plunged all in remediless Ruin. But our Author has not done with
these Articles yet, for he tells us of this Clause, that it was

Ibid. Omitted in the English and Latin Arti^^^^^ set forth 1571 when they were
first ratified by Act^^* Our Parliaments in matters of Religion, that he will
not suffer any, Canon or Act of Convocation to be in sorce or obligatiory to
the subject, till confirmed by Parliament. But I would fain know of him where
he finds any Act of Parliament (except it be in his own dreams) to confirm
these Articles; or that the Parliament of the 13 of the Queen (being that he
speaks of) appointed any Committee for Religion to examine the Oxthodoxy of
those Articles and make report unto the House. All that was done was this, and
on this occasion. Some Ministers of the Church too stiffly wedded to their old
Mumpsimus of the Mass, and some as furiously prosecuting their new Sumpsimus
of Inconformity, it was thought fit, that between these contending parties, the
Doctrine of the Church should be kept inviolate. And thereupon it was Enacted,
That every person under the degree of a Bishop, which did or should pretend to
be a Priest or Minister of Gods holy word and Sacraments in the Church of
England, 13 El. ^. 12.
should before Christmas then next following, in the presence of his Diocesan
Bishop testify his assent, and subscribe to the said Articles of the year
1562. Secondly, that after such subscribing before the Bishop he should on some
Sunday in the forenoon in the Church or Chapel where he served, in time of
Divine Service read openly the said Articles on pain of being deprived of all
his Ecclesiastical promotions, as if he were then naturally dead. Thirdly, that
if any Ecclesiastical person should maintain any Doctrine contrary to any of
the said Articles, and being convented by his Bishop, etc. should persist
therein, it should be just cause to deprive such person of his Ecclesiastical
promotions. Fourthly, that all persons to be admitted to any Benefice with
Cure, should likewise subscribe to the said Articles, and publicly read the
same in the open Church within two months after their induction, with
declaration of their unfaigned assent to the same, on the pain aforesaid, in
all which there was n^^thing done to confirm these Articles, but only a pious
care expressed for reformation of such disorders as were like to rise amongst
the Ministers of the Church, by requiring their subscription and assent unto
them under such temporal punishments, which at that time the Canons of the
Church had not laid upon them. So that our Author very well might have spared
this Flourish, that the Obligatoriness of these Articles as to temporal
punishments bears not date nine years before, from their composition in
Convocation, but henceforward from their confirmation in Parliament. And here I
must crave leave to fetch in another passage relating to the Acts of this
Convocation fol. 102. in which he tells us that The Bishops had been more
sparing in p^^ssing, and others more daring in denying subscription, because
the Canons made in the Convocation, Anno 1563. were not for nine years after
confirmed by Act of Parliament etc. In which on^ Autho^ shows much zeal, and
but little kno^ledge, the^e being no Canons mad^ in the Convo^ation of 1562.
(1563. in our Authors reckoning) no^ any thing at all done in it more then the
settling of the Articles, and passing a bill for the granting of a Subsidy to
the Queen, as by the Records thereof may be easily seen. But rather then the
Parliament shall not have the power of confirming Canons, our Author will find
our some Canons for them to confirm which never had a being or existence but in
his brains only. From the Articles our Author proceeds unto the Ho^ilies
approved in those Articles, and of them he tells us,

Fol. 75. That if they did little good, they did little ] With sco^^ and
insolence enough. Those Homilies were so composed, as to instruct the people in
all positive Doctrines necessary for Christian men to know, with reference both
to Faith and Manne^s; and being penned in a plain style, as our Author has it,
were ^^tter for the edification of the common people then either the strong
lines of some, or the flashes of (...) wi^ in others, in these latter times.
And well it had been for the peace and happiness of this Church, if they had
been more constantly read, and nor discredited by those men who studied to
advance their own inventions, above those grave and solid pieces composed by
the joint counsels and co-operations of many godly learned and religious
persons. But it is well howsoever, that by reading these (so much vi^ified)
Homilies, the Ministe^^ though they did little good, did but little harm; it
being to be feared that the precommant humor of Sermonizing has on the
contrary done much harm, and but little good. But our Author has not yet done
with this Convocation, for so it follows:

Fol. 76. The English Bishops conceiving themselves empowered by their Canons,
began to show their authority, in urging the Clergy of their Di^^e^s to
subscribe to the Liturgy, Ceremonies and Discipline of the Church, and such as
refused the same, were braaded with the odious name of Puritans.] Our Author
having given the Parliament a power of confirming no Canons, as before was
showed, he brings the Bis^ops acting by as weak Authority in subscribe to the
Liturgy, Ceremonies, and Discipline of the Church. And therefore if they did
any such thing, it was not a^ they were empowered by their Canons, but as they
were in^ ^b^^d by that Autho^ity which was inherent naturally in their
Epi^copal Office. But whereas he tells us in the following words, that the name
of Puritan in that notion began this year, viz. 15^4. I fear he has
anticipated the time a little, Genebrard a right good Chronologer placing it (
ortos in Ang^^^ Puritan^s) Anno 1566. And so far I am of our Authors mind,
that the grief had not been great if the name had ended that year, upon
condition that the occasion for which it was given them had then ended also*
But when he tells us that the name of Puritans was opposers of the Hierar^^y
and Church-Service^ and signif^eth a Nonconformist; as often as I meet such
Opposers, and such Non-con^o^mists in the co^^e of this Hi^^ory, I have warrant
good enough to call them by the name of Puritans. If any did abuse the n^m^s as
^^^^leth us afterward, (lib. x. fol. 100.) to asperse the most Orthodox they
we^e the mo^e to blame, let them answer for it: But if those Orthodox and
religious persons were Orthodox only in his sense, and under the color of
Religion did secretly (...) with those who opposed the Hierarchy and the
e^^^blisht Orders of the Church; it might be a disgrace, but no w^ong unto them
to be called Puritans. And if (...) against the tendries of the Church; I see
no reason why our Author should complain of it so much as he does in the place
afo^esaid. The practices of some men are many times Doctrines to others: and
the Calvinia. (...) being built upon Calvin's practices, and those ^b^tted and
confirmed by his following Doctrines: the name of Puritan, though first found
out to denote such as followed Calvin, in dissenting from the Hierar^hy in
Discipline and Church Government, might not unfitly be applied to such as
maintained his Doctrines also. But of this Argument enough, I shall add only,
and so proceed to other businesses, that Mr. Fox is broug^^ in as required to
subscribe to the Canons by Archbishop Parker; whereas there were at that time
no Canons to subscribe unto, nor is it the custom of the Church to require
subscription Canons, but unto those only who consented to the making of them.

Fol. 9^. John Felton who fastened the Popes Bull to the Palace ^f London, being
taken^ and refusing to fly, was Gibbet before the Popes Palace.] The Bull here
mentioned was that of Pope Pius the fifth, for excommunicating Queen Elizabeth,
which this John Felton (a (...) Papist) had hanged up at the Gates of the
Bishop of Lond^^s House, that the Subjects might take no^^^e of it; and for
that fact was hanged near the same (...) he had offended. But why our Author
should call the Bishop of Londons House by the name of the Popes (...), I do
very much wonder; unless it were to hold (...) with the style of Martin
Mar-Prelate, and the (...) Faction. Amongst whom nothing was more common then
to call all Bishops Petty-Popes* and more particularly to call the Archbishop
of Canterbury the Pope of Lambeth, and the Bishop of London, Pope of London.
But I hope more charitably then so, being more willing to impure it to the
fault of the Printers, then the pen of our Author. I only add, that to make
even with this John Felton (a zealous Papist) another John Felton of the next
age, a zealous Puritan, committed that execrable murder on the Duke of
Buckingham.

Fol. 98. Against covetous Conformists it was provided, that no Spiritual
Person, College, or Hospital, shall let lease other then for twenty one years,
or three lives, etc.] No mention in the Statute of Covernous Con^ormists, I am
sure of that; and therefore no provision to be made against them, the Coverous
Conformist is our Authors own. I find indeed that long and unreasonable Leases
had been which being found to (...) the causes of Dilapidations, and the decay
of all Spiritual Livings and Hospitality, 13. Eliz. c. 20.
and the utter impoverishing of all Successors incumbents in the same, the
Parliament thought it high time to provide against it. In all which Bedroll, it
were strange if we should find no Non-conformists, who had by this time got a
great part of the Church Preferments, and were more likely to occasion those
di^apidations then the regular and conformable Clergy: these la^^^ looking* on
the Church with an eye to succession, the former being intent only on the
present profit: And if we mark it well, we shall find that Coverousness and
Nonconformity are so married together, that it is not easy to divorce them:
though here the crime of coverousness be wrongfully charged on the Conformists,
to make them the more odious in the eye of the vulgar Reader. High Royalists in
one place, Covetous Conformists in another, are no good signs of true
affections to Conformity, and much less to Royalty.

Fol. 121. These Prophesyings were founded on the Apostles Precept; For ye may
all Prophecy one by one, that all may learn and all be comforted; but so as to
make it out, they were fain to make use of humane prudential Additions.] Not
grounded, but pretended to be grounded on those words of St. Paul; the
Prophesying there spoke of not being Grindal, whose Letter to the Queen is
recommended to the welcome of the pious Reader. fol. 122. But both the Queen and
her wise Council conceived otherwise of it, looking upon these Prophesyings as
likely to prove in fine the ^ane of the Commonwealth, as our Author has it.
No^ did King James conceive any better of them, Co^fer p. 80.
as appears by the conference at Hampton Court, in which it was moved by Dr.
Reynolds, (chief of the Millenary party) That the Clergy might have meetings
once every three weeks, and therein to have ^^^phesying, according as the
Reverend Father Archbishop Grindall, and other Bishops desired of her late
Majesty. No, said the King, (looking upon this motion as a preamble to a
Scottish Presbytery) then Jack, and I^m, and Will, and Dick, shall at their
pleasures, ce^^^re me and my Council, and all our proceedings: then Will shall
stand up and say, It must be thus; then Dick shall reply and say, Nay, marry,
but we will have it thus: And therefore stay I pray you for one 7 years before
you demand that of me: and then if you find me (...) and fat and my windepipes
stuffed, I will perhaps hearken to you: for if that government be once up, I am
sure I shall be kept in breath, then shall we all of us have work enough, both
our hands full. But let King James and Queen Elizabeth conceive what they will,
our Author has declared it to be Gods and the Churches cause, fol. 130. And
being such, it is enough to make any man consident in pleading for it, or
appearing in it.

Fol. 135. A loud Parliament is always attended with a silent Convocation, as
here it came to pass. The Activity of the former in Church matters left the
latter nothing to do.] A man would think by this, that the Parliament for all
this great cry we have little wool; our Author taking notice of nothing else
which was done this Parliament, but that it was made^ eason for the Priests or
Jesuits to seduce any of the Queens Subjects to the Romish Religion, and for
the Sub^ects to be reconciled to the Church of Rome, with other matters nor
within the power and cognizance of the Convocation. But he conceals another
Statute as necessary to the peace and safety of the Church and State as the
other was. 29 Eliz. c. 2.
By which it was Enacted, that if any person or persons should advisedly
devise, or write, print, or set ^orth any manner of Book, Rhyme, Ballade,
Letter, or Writing, containing any false, seditious and s^anderous matter, to
the defamation of the Queens Majesty, or to the encouraging, stirring, or
moving of any In^^^rection or Rebellion within this Realm, etc. or that shall
procure, or cause such Book, Rhyme, Ballade, etc. to be written, printed,
published, or set forth, etc. The offenders to suffer such pain of death, and
forfeiture as in case of Felony. A Statute made of purpose to restrain the
insolences of the Puri^^n Faction, and by which many of them were adjudged to
death in the times ensuing: some as the Authors, and others as the publishers
of seditious Pamphlers. But being made with limitation to the life of the
Queen, it expired with her; And had it been revived (as it never was) by either
of the two last Kings, might possibly have prevented those dreadful mischiefs,
which their posterity is involved in.

Fol. 157. Sure I am, it is most usual in the Court of Marches (Arches rather)
whereof I have the best experience.] This is according to the old saying, to
correct Magnificat. Whitgift knew better when he was to write, then to need any
such critical emendations. And therefore our Author might have kept his Arches
for some public Triumph after his conquest of the Covetous Conformists and
High Royalists which before we had. It was the Court of the Marches which the
Bishop speaks of, and of which he had so good experience; he being made
Vice-Precedent of the Court of the Marches by Sir Henry Sidney, immediately on
his first coming to the Sea of Worcester, as Sir George Paul tells us in his
life.

Fol. 163. By the changing of Edmond into John Contnar, it plainly appears,
that as all these letters were written this year, so they were indicted after
the sixth of July ( and probably about December) when Bishop Grindal deceased.
^ Grindal died on the sixth of July, and I know it also for a truth, that
Whitgift was translated to the Sea of Canterbury on the 23. of September then
next following. But yet it follows not thereupon, that all the Letters here
spoken of (being 12 in number) which are here exemplified, were writ in the
compass of one year, and much less in so narrow a time as about December. Nay
the contrary hereunto appears by the Lett^^s themselves. For in one of them
written to the Lord Treasurer, fol. 160. I find this passage viz. Your
Lordship objecteth, tha^ it is said I took this c^urse for the better
maintenance of my Book. My Enemies say so indeed, but I trust my friends have a
better opinion of me: what should I look after any Confirmation of my Book
after twelve years, or what should I get thereby more then already? Now the
Book mentioned by the Bishop, was that entitled, The Defense of the Answer to
the Admonition against the Reply of T. C. printed at London, An. 1574. To which
the 12 years being added, which we find mentioned in this Letter, it must
needs be, that this Letter to the Lord Treasurer was written in the year 1586.
and consequently not all written in the year 1583. as our Author makes them.
The like might be collected also from some circumstances in the other Letters,
but that I have more necessary business to employ my time on.

Fol. 171. The severe enforcing of Subscription hereunto, what great
disturbance it occasioned in the Church, shall hereafter by Gods assistance be
made to appear, leaving others to judge, whether the offense was given or taken
thereby.] Our Author tells us fol. 143. that in the business of Church
government he would lie at a close guard, and offer as little play as might be,
on either side. But for all that viz.

1. That the Queen only had Supreme Authority over all persons bo^n within her
Dominion.

2. That the Book of Common Prayer and Ordination of Bishops, Priests, and
Deacons, contains nothing contrary to the Word of God.

3. That the Articles of Religion agreed on in the year 1562. and published by
the Queens Authority, were consonant to the word of God.

All which being so expressly built on the Laws of the Realm, must needs lay
the scandal at their doors who refused subscription, and not at his who did
require it. But love will creep (they say) where it cannot go. And do our
Author what he can, he must discover his affection to the Holy cause upon all
occasions. No where more m^nifestly then where he tells us,

Fol. 187. That since the High Commission and this Oath (it is that ex Officio
which he means) were taken away by the ^^ct of Parliament, it is to be hoped,
that (if such swearing were s^ great a grievance) nihil analogum, nothing like
unto it (which may amount to as much) shall ] What could be said more plain to
testi^ie his disaffections one way, and his ze^l another? The High Commission
and the Oath rep^o^ched as Grievances, because the greatest curbs of the
Puritan party, and the strongest Bulwarks of the Church, a congratulation ^o
the times for abolishing both, though as yet I ^^nde no Act of Parliament
against the Oath except it be by consequence and illation only; and finally a
hope expressed that the Church never shall revert to her fo^mer power, in
substituting any like thing in the place thereof by which the good people of
the Land may be stopped in their way to the fifth Monarchy so much fought after.
And yet this does not speak so plain as the following passage, viz.

Fol. 193. Wits will be working, and such as have a Satirical vein, cannot
better vent it then in lashing of ] This spoken in defense of those scurrilous
Libels which Job Throgmorton, Penry, Fenner, and the rest of the Puritan Rabble
published in Print against the Bishops, Anno 1588. thereby to render them
ridiculous both abroad and at home. The Queen being (...) exclaimed against,
and her Honorable Council scandalously censured for opposing the Gospel, they
fall more foully on the Bishops, crying them down as Antichristian, Pettypopes,
Bishops of the Devil, cogging and cozening knaves, dumb dogs enemies of God,
etc. For which cause much applauded by the Papists beyond Sea (to whom nothing
was more acceptable then to see the English Hierarchy reproach^ and vilified)
and frequently ^^red by them as unquestioned evidences. For if our Authors rule
be good, fol. 193. That the fault is not in the writer, if he truly cite what
is false on the credit of another, they had no reason to examine punctually the
truth of that which tended so apparently to the great advantage of their cause
and party. But this Rule whether true or false cannot be used to justify our
Author in many passages though, truly cited, considering that he cannot choose
but know them to be false in themselves. And he that knowing a thing to be
false, sets it down for true, not only gives the lie to his own conscience, but
occasions others also to believe a falsehood. And from this charge I cannot see
how he can be acquitted in making the Bishops to be guilty of those filthy
sins, for which they were to be so lashed by Satirical wits, or imputing those
base Libels unto wanton wits, which could proceed from no other fountain then
malicious wickedness.

But I ^m we^ry and ashamed of taking in so impure a kennel, and for that cause
also shall willingly pass over his apology for Hacket that blasphemous wretch,
fol. 204. that he and his two Companions (his two Prophets, for so they called
themselves) were worse by nature then all others of the English Nation, the
natural corruption in the hearts of others being not less headstrong, but more
bridled: And finally, that if Gods restraining grace be taken from us, we shall
all run unto the same excess of Riot. Which Plea if it be good for Hacket,
will hold good for Judas; and pity it is, that some of our fine wits did never
study an apology for him.

From Hack^^ he goes on to Travers, a man of an unquiet spirit, but not half so
mischievous, of whom he says,

Fol. 214. At Antwerp he was ordained Minister by the Presbyt^ry there, and not
long after that, he was put in Orders by the Presbytery of a forain Nation.]
Here have Ordination and putting into Orders ascribed to the Pre^bytery of
A^t^^erp; a Mongrel company consisting of two blew Aprous to each Cruel
nightcap: and that too in such positive terms, and without any the least
qualification, that no Presbyterian in the pack could have spoke more plainly.
The man has hitherto stood distracted betwixt shame and love; love to the
cause, and shame to be discovered for a party in it, drawing several ways.
Pudor est qui suade^^ illinc, Hinc dissuadet Amor, in the Poets language. And
in this fit he thought it good to withdraw himself or stand by a^ a silent
Spectator, that his betters might have room to come forth and speak in the
present controversy of Church Government, fol. 143. But here love carries it
away, and he declares himself roundly for the Presbyterians, by giving them the
power of Ordination, and consequently of Ecclesiastical censure in their
several Consistories. Had he used the words of the Certificate, which he
grounds upon, and told us that Travers was admitted by that Presbytery to the
Ministry of the holy word ( in sacr^ verbi Dei Ministerio institutus, a^ their
words there are) he had done the part of an Historian. They may make Ministers
how and of whom they list, and put that Heavenly treasure into what vessels
they please. Scripturarum ars est quam omnes passim sibi vindicant, as St.
Ierom complained in his time. Let every Tradesman be a Preacher, and step from
the shop-board to the Pulpit, if they think well of it. This may be called a
making of Ministers in such a sense as Phoebe is said to be a Minister of the
Church of Cenchrea, to minister to the necessities of their Congregations. But
to ascribe unto them a power of Ordination or of giving Orders which they
assume not to themselves, savours too strong of the party, and contradicts the
general Rules of the ancient Fathers. At this time I content my self with that
saying of Ierom, because esteemed no friend to Bishops, viz. Quid facit
Episcopus, excepta Ordinatione, quod Presbyter non faciat? and for the rest
refer the Reader to the learned Treatise of Dr. Hammond, Entitled,
Observations upon the Ordinance of the Lords and Commons at Westminster for the
Ordination of Ministers pro tempore, Printed at Oxford 1644. Only I shall make
bold to quit my Author with a merry tale (though but one for an hundred) and
it is a tale of an old jolly popish Priest, who having no entertainment for a
friend who came to him on a Fasting day, but a piece of Pork, and making
conscience of observing the appointed Fast, dipped it into a tub of water, saying
down Porke up Pike. Satisfied with which device (as being accustomed to
transubstantiate, he well might be) he caused it to be put into the p^t and
made ready for dinner. But as the Pork for all this sudden piece of wit, was
no other then Pork; so these good fellows of the Presbytery by laying hands
upon one another, act as little as he: the parties so imposed upon ( imposed
upon indeed in the proper notion) are but as they were, Lay-brethren of the
better stamp, Ministers if you will, but not Priests nor Deacons, nor any ways
Canonically enabled for divine performances. But fearing to be chidden for his
levity, I knock off again, following my Author as he leads me; who being over
shoes, will be over boots also. He is so lost to the High Royalist and
covetous Conformist, that he cannot be in a worse case (with them) then he is
already. And therefore having declared himself for a Presbyterian in point of
Government, he will go thorough with his work, showing himself a professed
Calvinist in point of Doctrine, and a strict Sabba^arian too in that single
point, though therein differing (as the rest of that party do) from their
Master Calvin. First for the Sabbath (for the better day the better deed)
having repeared the chief heads of Dr. Bounds book published Anno 1595. in
which the Sabbatarian Doctrines were first set on soot, he adds, that learned
men were much divided in their judgments about the same.

Fol. 228. Some (says he) embraced them as ancient truths consonant to
Scripture, long disused and neglected, ] Amongst which some, he that shall take
our Author for one, will not be much mistaken either in the man, or in the
matter. For that he does approve Bounds Doctrines in this particular, appears;

First, By a passage, fol. 165. where he con^nts with him in reckoning the
casual falling of the Scaffolds at Paris-Garden on the Lord's Day, Anno 1583.
for a divine judgment upon those who perished by it, as they were beholding
that rude pastime.

Secondly, By his censure of the proceedings of Archbishop Whitgift against
these Doctrines, of whom he tells us, fol 229. That his known opposition to
the p^^ceedings of the Brethren, rendered his actions more odious, as if out of
envy he had caused such a pearl to be concealed.

Thirdly, by making these Sabbath Doctrines to be the Diamond in the Ring, of
those Catechisms and Controversies which afterward were set out by the
stricter Divines. And

Fourthly, by the sadness which he finds in recounting the grief and
distraction occasioned in many honest men's hearts by the several publishings of
the Declaration about lawful sports, lib. ^o. fol. 74.

But leaving him to stand or fall to his own Master, I would fain know what
text of Scripture, ancient Writer, or approved Council can be brought to
justify Bounds Doctrines which he affirms for ancient truths consonant to holy
Scripture. But more particularly where he can show me any ground for the third
Position, viz. That there is as great reason why we Christians should take our
selves as straightly bound to rest upon the Lords day as the Jews were upon
their Sabbath; it being one of the moral Commandments, whereof all are of
equal authority. This if it be a truth is no ancient truth; and whenever it
be received and allowed for truth, will in conclusion lay as heavy and
insupportable Burdens upon the consciences of Gods people as ever were imposed
upon the Jews by the Scribes and Pharisees. And secondly, I would fain know
the meaning of the following words, in which it is said, that others conceived
them grounded on a wrong bottom, but because they tended to the manifest
advance of Religion, it was pity to oppose them. I would fain know I say,
considering that the foundation grounded on a wrong bottom (as this seemed to
be) could tend to the manifest advance of the true Religion. That it tended to
the manifest advance of some Religion I shall easily grant; and if our Author
mean no otherwise, we shall soon agree. But sure I am, no part of the true
Religion was ever grounded upon ^alshood, and therefore is (...) Doctrine were
grounded on so ill ^ bottom a^ they say it was, it might ^on^^^ to the
advancement of a Faction and men's private (...), but to the true Religion it
was likely to contribute nothing but disgrace and scandal. L^stly, I am to
mind our Author, that he makes Mr. Greenhams Bounds opinions, which could not
be till in or after the year 1595. Whereas he had laid him in his grave above
two years before, telling us that he died of the Plugue in London, Anno 1592.
fol. 219. By which it seems that Greenham either writ this Treatise after his
decease; o^ else our Author has done ill in giving the f^^st honor of these
new Doctrins unto Dr. Bound. In the next place we shall see our Author engage
himself in defense of the Calvi^an Doctrins about Predest^ation, Grace, etc. of
which he tells us, that

Fol. 229. Having much troubled both the Schools and Pu^pit, Archbishop
Whitgift, out of his Christian care to propogate the truth, and suppress the
opposite errors, (...) used a solemn meeting of many grave and learned (...) at
Predestination, Grace, etc. had been long (...) in the Schools between the
Dominicant on the one side and the Francis^ans on the other (...) the
Dominicans grounding their opinion on the Authority of St. Augustine, Prosper,
and some others of the following (...) the Franciscans, on the general current
of the (...) Fathers, who lived ante mot^ certamina Pelagiana* before the
rising of the Pelagian Here^ies. (...) disputes being after taken up in the
(...) Churches, (...) moderate Lutherans (as they (...) them) followed the
Doctrine of Melanch^hon, conformable to the (...) those particulars: The others
whom they (...) or rigid Lutherans, of whom (...) Illyricus was the chief, go
in the same way with the Dominicans. The authority of which last opinion, after
it had been entertained and publishe in the works of Calvin, for his sake found
admi^^ance in the Schools and Pulpits of most of the Reformed Churches. And
having got footing here in England by the preaching of such Divines as had fled
to Geneva in Queen Mary's time, it was defended in the Schools of Cambridge
without opposition, till Peter Bar^ a French man came and settled there. Who
being the Lady Margarets P^ofessor in that University, and liking better of the
Melanchthonian way, then that of Calvin, defended it openly in the Schools;
many of parts and q^ality being gained unto his opinion. Which gave so much
displeasure to Dr. Whitaker, Dr. Tyndall, Mr. Perkins, and some other leading
men of the contrary judgment, that they thought best to use the Argument ab
Authoritat^ to convince their Adversaries; and complained thereof to the
Archbishop, and in the end prevailed with him to call that meeting at Lambeth
which our Author speaks of: in which some Articles (commonly called the Nine
Articles of Lambeth) were agreed upon, and sent down to Cambridge in favor of
Dr. Whitaker and his Associates. But our Author not content to relate the story
of the Quarrel, must take upon him also to be a judge in the Controversy. He
had before commended the Dominicans for their Orthodoxie Jesuits. He now
proceeds to do the like between the two parties (men of great piety and
learning appearing in it on both sides) disputing the same points in the Church
of England: honoring the opinion of Dr. Whitaker and his Associates with the
name of the truth; and branding the other with the Title of the opposite error.
And yet not thinking that he had declared himself sufficiently in the favor of
the Calvinian party, he tells us not long after of these Lambeth Articles,
fol. 232. that though they wanted the Authority of Provincial Acts, yet will
they readily be received of all Orthodox Christians for as far as their own
purity bears conformity to Gods word. Which last words (though somewhat
perplextly laid down) must either intimate their conformity to the word of God,
or else signify nothing. But whatsoever opinion our Author has of these Nine
Articles, certain it is that Queen Elizabeth was much displeased at the making
of them, and commanded them to be suppressed, which was done accordingly; and
with such diligence withal, that for long time a Copy of them was not to be
met with in that University. Nor was King James better pleased with them then
Queen Elizabeth was* Insomuch that when Dr. Renalds moved (in the Conference of
Hampton Court) that the Nine Articles of Lambeth might be superadded to the 39.
Articles of the Church of England; King James upon an information of the true
sta^e of the business, did absolutely refuse to give way to it. But of this
Memorand^m of our Authors mistake in making Dr. Richard Bancroft Bishop of
London, to be one of the Bishops which were present at the meeting at Lambeth,
whereas indeed (...) was Richard Fletcher, Bishop elect of London, and by that
name entitled in such Authors as relate this story; Dr. Bancroft not being
made Bishop of London or of any place else till the year 1597. which was two
years after this Assembly. Alike mistake relating to this business also, I
find in the History of Cambridge, about Dr. Baron of whom our Author tells us
thus:

Fol. 125. Hist. Came. The end of Dr. Peter Baro ( the Margaret Professor) his
triennial Lectures began to draw near, andC. And not long after, the University
intended to cut him off at the just joint, when his three y^ars should be
expired.] peregrinus domi, a stranger in his own University; in which the
Margaret Professor is not chosen for three years, but for two years only. And
this appears plainly by the Statutes of that Foundation, the precise words
whereof are these, viz. Et volumus insuper quod de caetero quolibet biennio
ultimo die cessationis cujustibet termini ante magnam vacationem Vniversitatis
praedictae, una habilis, apta and idonea persona in lectorem lecturae
praedictae pro uno biennio integro, viz. a festo Nativitatis B. Mariae virginis
tunc proxime sequente duntaxat durature, eligatur, fol. 105. in nigro cedice.
For this I am beholding to the Author of the Pamphlet called the Observator
observed, and thank him for it. Which said we shall close up this ninth Book
with some considerations on these following words, which our Author very
ingenuously has laid before us, viz.

Fol. 233. If we look on the Non-conformists, we shall find all still and
quiet, who began now to repose themselves in a sad silence, especially after
the execution of Udal and Penry had so terrified them, that though they might
have secret d^signs, we meet not their open and public motions.] And to say
Bilson, (after Bishop of Winchester) in defense of the Episcopal Government, of
Dr. Cousins Dean of the Arches, in m^intenance of the proceedings in ^ourts
Ecclesiastical; with the two Books of Dr. Bancroft, the one discovering the
absurdities of the Pretended holy Discipline, the other their practices and
Positions to advance the same, gave the first check to their proceedings at the
push of pen. All which being published, An. 1593. were seconded about two years
after by the accurate and well studied Works of Ric. Hooker, then Master of the
Temple, and Prebend of Canterbury; in which he so asserted the whole body of
the English Liturgy, and laid such grounds to found her polity upon, that he
may justly be affirmed to have struck the last blow in this Quarrel. But it was
not so much the Arguments of these learned (...), as the seasonable execution
of some principal sticklers, which occasioned the great calm both in Church and
State, not only for the rest of the Queens time, but a long time after. For
besides, that Cartright, and some other of the principal and most active
Leaders, had been imprisoned and proceeded against in the Court of Starchamber;
the edge of the Statute 23 Eliz. c. 2. which before we spoke, of, had made such
terrible work amongst them, that they durst no longer venture on their former
courses. Copping and Thacker hanged at St. Edmondsbury in Suffolk, Barrow and
Greenwood executed at Tyburn, and Penry at St. Thomas of Waterings, Vdal,
Billot Studley, and Bouler condemned to the same death, though at last
reprieved, (not to say any thing of Hacke^, with Coppinger, and Arthington his
two Prophe^s, as more mad then the rest) could not but teach them this sad
lesson, that, (...) is no safe dallying with fire, nor jesting with edge tools.
But there are more ways to the Wood then one, and they had wit enough to cast
about for some other way, since the first Hac non successit, alia tentandum
est, (...), had been learned in vain, if not reducible to practice. So that it
is no marvel, if after this we find them not in any public and open motion;
when wearied with their former blusterings, and terrified with the sad
remembr^nce of such executions, they betook themselves to secret and more dark
designs. Occultior Pompeius Caesare, non mesior, as it is in Tacitus. Pompeys
intentions were not less mischievous to the Commonwealth then Caesar's were,
but more closely carried. And because closely carried, the more likely to have
took effect, had any but Caesar been the head of the opposite party. The Fort
that had been found impregnable by open batteries, has been took at last by
undermining. Nor ever were the Houses of Parliament more like to have been
blown up with gunpowder, then when the Candle which was to give fire to it was
carried by (...) in a dark (...). Henceforward therefore we shall find the
Brethren (...) anoth^^ ward, practicing their party underhand, working their
business into a State-faction, and never so dangerously carrying on the (...)
as when least observed. Fill in the end when all preventions were let slip, and
the danger grown beyond prevention, they brought their matters to that end
which we shall find too evidently in the end of this History. To which before
we can proceed, we must look back upon a passage of another (...), which
without (...) the coherencies of the former Observations could not be taken
notice of and rectifed in its proper place, and is this that follows*

Fol. 179. Queen Elizabeth coming to the Crown, sen^ for Abbot Fecknam to come
to her, whom the Messenger found setting of Elms in the Orchard of Westminster
Abbey: But he would not follow the messenger, till first he had finished his
Plantation.^ The tale goes otherwise by Tradition then is Westminster Orchard,
or to say truth, of any Elms in any Orchard whatsoever of a late Plantation?
Elms are for Groves, and Fields, and Forests, too cumbersom and over-spreading
to be set in Orchards. But the tale goes that Abbot Feck^an^ being busied in
planting Elms near his Garden wall in the place now (...) the Dea^s-yard was
encountered with one of his acquaintance, saying, My Lord you may very well save
your labor the Bill for dissolving of your Monastery being just now passed. To
which the good old man, unmoved, returned this answer, that he would go
forwards howsoever in his plantation; not doubting, though it pleased not God
to continue it in the state it was, but that it would be kept and used as a
(...) of Learning for all times ensuing. Which said, our (...) need not trouble
himself with thinking how his (...) this day, as he seems to do; he knows where
to find them.

ANIMADVERSIONS ON The Tenth Book OF The Church History OF BRITAIN.
Containing the Reign of King James.
THE Puritan clamors being hushed, and the Papists giving themselves some hopes
of better days, afforded King James a quiet entrance to the Crown. But scarce
was he warm upon the Throne, but the Puritans assaulted him with their
Petitions, and some of the Papists finding their hopes began to fail them,
turned their private discontents into open practices, endeavoring to settle
their Religion by the destruction of the King, and the change of Government.
And first beginning with the Papists, because first in time.

Fol. 5. Watson with William Clark (another of his own profession) having
fancied a Notional Treason, imparted it to George Brooks.] To these he after
adds the Lord Cobham a Protestant, the Lord Gray of Whaddon a Puritan, and Sir
Walter Rawleigh an able Statesman, and some other Knights. In the recital of
which names our Author has committed a double fault, the one of omission, and
the other of commission. A fault of omission in Griffith Markham, as much
concerned as any of the principal actors, designed to have been Secretary of
Estate, had the Plot succeeded, and finally arraigned and condemned at
Winchester, as the others were. His Lord Gray by the name of the Lord Gray of
Whaddon (a fault not easily to be pardoned in so great an Herald) whereas
indeed though Whaddon in Buckinghamshire was part of his Estate, yet Wilton in
Herefordshire was his Barony and ant^ent Seat; his Ancestors being called LL.
Gray of Wilton, to difference them from the Lord Gray of Reuthen, the Lord Gray
of Codnor, etc.

Having thus satisfied our Author in this particular, I would gladly satisfy
my self in some others concerning this Treason* in which I find so many
persons of such different humors, and Religions, that it is very hard to think
how they could either mingle their interefles, or unite their counsels. But
discontentments make men fuel fit for any fire, and discontents had been on
purpose put upon some of them, the more to estrange them from the King, and the
King from them. And though I am not Oedipus enough for so dark a Sphinx, yet
others who have had more light into the businesses of that time, have made
their discontents to grow upon this occasion; Sir Robert Cecil then principal
Secretary to the Estate, fearing the great abilities of Rawleigh, and being
wearied with the troublesome impertinencies of Gray and Cobham, all which had
joined with him in design against the Earl of Essex their common Enemy; had
done their errand to Kings James (whose counsels he desired to ingross to
himself alone) before his coming into England. And the Plot took so good
effect, that when the Lord Cobham went to meet the King as he came toward
London, the King checked him (being then Warden of the Cinqne Ports) for his
absence from his charge in that dangerous time. The Lord Gray, was not looked
upon in the Court, as he had been formerly, there being no longer use of his
rashness and praecipitations. And the better to discountenance Rawleigh, who
had been Captain of the Guard to Queen Elizabeth, the King bestowed that Office
on Sir Thomas Erskin, then Vicount Fenton, and Captain of his Guard in
Scotland. All which being publicly observed, it was no hand matter for George
Brook, to work upon the weak spi^its of Gray and Cob^am, of which the last was
his brother, and the first his brothers special friend: and by such Artifices
as he used in laying before them their disgraces, and showing them a way to
right themselves, to draw them into the confederacy with Clark and Watson. And
it is possible, that they not being substantive enough to stand alone, might
acquaint Rawleigh with the Plot, whose head was able to do more then all their
hands. But of his actings in it, or consenting to it, when the pa^ties were
brought unto their Trial, there appeared no proof, but that Cobham in his
confession taken before the Lords had accused him of it; and that not only as
an accessory, but a principal actor. But Cobham not being brought into the open
Court to justify his accusation face to face, as the custom as, it was thought
a good argument by many, that Rawleigh was not so criminal in this matter as
his Enemies made him. And though found guilty by the Jury on no other evidence,
then a branch of Cobhams, confession, not so much as subscribed by his hand,
yet all men were not satisfied in the manner of this proceeding: it being then
commonly affirmed that Cobham had retracted his accusation, as since it has
been said and printed, that in a letter written the night before his Trial, and
then sent to the Lord^^ he cleared Rawl^igh from all manner of Treasons against
the King or State, for which consult the Observations upon some particular
Persons and passages, etc. printed Anno 1656.

But from the practices of the Papists, which have led me thus far out of my
way, it is now time that I proceed to the Petition of the Puritans, presented
to the King much about that time.

Fol. 7. This called the Millenary Petition.] And it was called so, because
given out to be subscribed by (...) thousand hands, though it wanted a fourth
part of thi^ number. More modest now then they had been in P^^ries time, when
in stead of one thousand, they threatn^^ to bring a Petition which should be
presented by the Martin Mar, Pr^^^rul'd the Roast, and would be satisfied with
nothing (...) the ruin of the English Hierarchy. Which notwithstanding the
King thought fit to demur upon it, and (...) commended the answering of their
Petition to the U^^versity of Oxford, and was done accordingly. The An^^^ and
Petition printed not long after, gave the first stop^^ this importunity;
represt more fully by the Confer^^^ at Hampton Court, of which it is told us by
our Auth^^ how some of the Millenary party complained that (...)

Fol. 21. This Conference was partially set forth only (...) Dr. Barlow Dean of
Chester, their professed Adversa^^ If so, (...) did it come to pass, that none
of their Divines th^^ present, no^ any other in their behalf did ever manife^^
the world the partialities, and falsehoods of it? The (...) was printed not
long after the end of the Conference publicly passing from one hand to
another, and ne^ convicted of any such crime as it stands charged with, (...)
any one particular p^^^age to this very day. Only pleased some of the Zealo^s
to scatter abroad some tri^^ing Papers, not amounting to half a sheet amongst
them, which tended to the holding up of their sinking Party; and being brought
by Dr. Barlow, were by him put in Print, and published at the end of his Book,
Vt deterrim and comparatione gloriam sibi compararet, in the words of Tacitus.
He could not better manifest his own abilities, then by having those weak and
imperfect Scribbles for a foil unto them. And here before I leave this
conference, I must make a start to fol. 91. for rectifying a mistake of our
Authors, which relates unto it. Where speaking of Dr. King, then Bishop of
London, and reciting the course both of his preferments and employments, he
tells us, that soon after the Kings coming to the Crown^^ he was made Dean of
Christ-Church in Oxon, and chosen one of the four Preachers in the Conference
at Hampton Court. But first Dr. King was not Christ-Church at the time of the
Conference at Hampton Court; that Conference being held in January, An. 1603.
and Dr. King not coming to the Deanery of Christ-Church till the year 1605.
Secondly, he was none Hampton Court, there being no such Preachers chosen for
the ^ime of that Conference. But as it is a true and old say^^g, that Omnis
fabula fundatur in Historia; so I may ^^y, that there was something true and
real, which might ^arry him inadvertently upon this Error. For in Sep^^mber,
Anno 1606. it pleased King James to call before ^im at Hampton Court the
Melvins, and some other of ^he principal sticklers for Presbytery of the
Scottish Na^ion. For information of whose judgment, and re^^ucing them, if
possible, to some conformity, he caused four Sermons to be there preached in
their hea^ing, by ^our of his most able Divines, that is to say, Dr. Andrews
then Bishop of Chichester, Dr. Barlow (before mentioned) then Bishop of
Rochester, Dr. King, then Dean of Christ-Church, after Bishop of London, and
Dr. Buckeridge, who after succeeded in the Sea of Rochester^ and dyed Bishop of
Ely. Which four Sermons being afterward printed, and bound together, though
they gave very good satisfaction to most persons else, could get no ground upon
those refractary Scots, who were resolved aforehand, not to hear the voice of
those Charmers, charmed they never so sweetly.

Fol. 27. Indeed a Statute had formerly been made the 13. of Queen Elizabeth,
which to prevent final (...) of Church Land, did disable all Subjects from
(...) them: but in that Statute a liberty was left unto the Crown ] Our Author
speaks this on occasion of a Statute made in the first Parliament of King Iam^^
by which the King and his Successors were made incapable of receiving any
Grants or Leases of Lands, from any Archbishops, or Bishops, for longer then 21
years, or three lives. But he is much mistaken in the grounds of it. For first
the Statute he relates unto, was not made in the thirteenth year of the Queen,
that Statute extending only unto Deans and Chapters, Masters of Colleges and
Hospitals, as also unto Parsons and Vicars, who by long Leases had dilapidated
the public Patrimony of the Church, and their several Houses, Not a word in
it, which concerns Archbishops and Bishops, or any Leases by them made. And
secondly, that Sta^ute, whatsoever it be, does not disable all Subjects from
accepting such Leases, Grants, and Alienations, but disableth the said
Archbishops, and Bishops, from making such Grants unto the Subjects. But the
truth is, that Statute which our Author means, is an unprinted Statute made in
the first year of Queen Elizabeth. By which it was enacted, That it should be
lawful for the said Queen, as often as any Archbishopric or Bishopric should
be vacant, to take unto herself any of the Castles, Manors, Lan^s, Tenements,
and Here ditaments to the same belonging, and to pay the said Archbishop, or
Bishop, in Impropriations, Tithes, and Portions of Tithes. And this is that
Statute which our Author relates unto, lib. 9. fol. 70. where it is said, That
a Bill passed for the assurance of certain Lands assumed by the Queen from some
Bishoprick^ during their Vacation. And secondly, it was enacted in the said
unprinted Statute, that it should not be lawful for any Archbishop, or Bishop,
to grant any Lands, Leases, or Estates for more then 21 years, or three lives
to any person whatsoever, except it were unto the Queen (...) Heirs and
Successors; which last words opened such a gap to sacrilege and rapine, that
what the Queen thought fit to leave unto the Church vacant sede, the Cou^^iers
would find some way to divest it of by making use of this last clause, first
in obtaining such a (...) to be made to the Queen, and then from the Queen unto
themselves: So that our Author might have saved his Advocating for this clause
of that Act, considering that he saw the ill consequents and effects thereof.

Fol. 54. Some of the greatest Prelates (how much Self is there (...) all men!)
though seemingly forward, really remi^^ in the matter.] This spoken in relation
to Che^sey Archbishop Bancroft, fol ^57. That he was very forward in founding
Chelsey Co^^edge, which as a two edged Sword, was to cut on both sides, to
suppress Papists and Sectaries. Upon which grounds there is no question to be
made, but that the work was furthered also by the rest of the Bishops, at the
least not hindered. Our Author has indeed afforded us this Marginal Note, viz.
This obstruction signifies nothing of discreet men, how ever it must pass for
company sake. But it had argued more discretion in him (as I conceive) to have
left this obstruction, as he calls it, out of his Discourse, then first to
break the Bishops heads and then give them this plaster. Howsoever he (viz.
Mr. Nicholas ^uller) left behind him the reputation of an honest man. No
honest still. Before we had the story of Thomas Full^r of Hammersmith condemned
for felony, but still so honest, and to entirely beloved by King Harry the
sixth, after his decease, that he appeared to him on the top of the Gallows,
encouraged him, and so cla^m'd the Rope, that it did not strangle him, lib. 4.
154. Afterward we meet with John Fuller, Doctor of the Laws (a better then he)
a Persecutor in Queen Mary's days, but a pitiful man, as the Index tells us.
Here we have Nicholas Fuller a Counselor, (the best of the three) decrying
openly the Authority of the High Commission, and thereby giving a legal
advantage to Archbishop Bancroft, by whom imprisoned, and there dying, but
dying with the reputation of an honest man. And then another Thomas Fuller a
Minister, (the best of all the company) and an honest man too, so well
deserving of the Church, and all good Churchmen (both alive and dead) by this
notable History, as not to doubt of the like favor at their hands (should
there be occasion) as Thomas of Hammersmith received of King Harry the sixth.

Fol. 57. I am credibly informed from a good hand, how in the days of King
James, a Scotch- man, and a prevalent Courtier, had swallowed up the whole
Bishopric of Durh^m, had not this Archbishop seasonably interposed his power
with the King and dashed the design.] Credible though the information were, yet
it was not true; there being no such prevalent Courtier, not no such Design.
It Is (...), the stomach of the Scots were sharp set, still crying Give, give,
but never satisfied; King James as boun^^ful and open handed toward them, as
they could desire. But neithe^ were they to impudent as to crave, nor the King
to impotent as to give a whole Bishop^ick (...) on^e, especially so rich a
Bishopric as this of Durham. But the truth is, that George Hume, Earl of
Dunbar, Lord Treasurer of Scotland, and highly favored by the King, having
procured a grant of all the batable grounds, as they then called them, upon the
Borders of both Kingdoms, began to cast his eye upon Norham-Castle and the
Lands about it, belonging to the Sea of Durham, conceiving it a fit place to
command the rest. But being a well principled man, and a great Minister of that
Kings, in restoring the Episcopal Government to the Church of Scotland, he
acquainted Bishop Bancroft with his desires; who knowing what great use might
be made of him for the good of this Church, and being sure enough of the
consent of Dr. Matthews, then Bishop of Durham, he thus ordered the business.
Whereas the Revenue of Norham-Castle, and the lands adjoining were valued at
one hundred twenty pounds per annum in the Bishops Rental, it was agreed that
the Earl should procure of the King an abatement of sixscore pounds yearly out
of the annual pension of a thousand pound which had been said upon that
Bishopric by Queen Elizabeth, as before is said. Secondly, that he should
obtain from the King for the said Dr. Matthews, and his Successors a
restitution of his House in the Strand called Durham-House, with the Gardens,
Stables, and Tenements thereto appertaining, which had been alienated from that
Bishopric ever since the dissolving of it by King Edward the sixth. Thirdly,
that in consideration hereof Bishop Matthews should make a grant of
Norham-Castle, and the Country adjoining in Feefarm to the King, by him
immediately to be conveyed to the Earl of Dunbar. And fourthly, that his own
(...) being thus served, the said Earl should join with Bishop Bancroft, and
his friends, for obtaining from the King an Act of Parliament, whereby both he
and his successors should be made incapable of any the like Grants and
Alienations for the time to come; which as it was the (...) Marke^ that ever
Toby Matthews was at, so was it the best bargain which was ever driven for the
Church of England; so ^ar from swallowing up that Bishopric, that it was the
only means to save that, and preserve the rest. And yet perhaps the credible
information which our Author speaks of, might not relate unto the Bis^oprick,
Durham, bestowed by that King (being then not well studied in the Composition
of the Church of England) on Sir Adam Newton, a Courtier prevalent enough, as
having been Tutor to Prince Henry the Kings eldest Son. And possible it is,
that the Scots might have kept it in their hands from one generation to
another, if Dr. Hunt (not otherwise to be remembered) had not bought him out of
it, and put himself into the place.

Fol. 59. And as about this time some perchance overvalu^d the Geneva Notes,
out of that especial love they bare to the Authors, and place whence it
proceeded, so on the other side, some without cause did slight, or rather
without charity I trow, our Author will not take upon him to condemn all those
who approve not of the Genevian Notes upon the Bible, or to appear an Advocate
for them, though he tells us not many lines before, that they were printed
thirty times over with the general liking of the people. I hope he will not do
the first for King James his sake, who in the Conference at Hampton Court, did
first declare, that of all the Translations of the Bible into the English
Tongue, that of Geneva was the worst; and secondly, that the Notes upon it were
partial, untrue, seditious, and savouring too much of dangerous and traitorous
conceits. For p^oof whereof his Majesty instanced in two places, the one on
Exodus 1. verse. 19. where disobedience to Kings is allowed of; the other in ^
Chron. 8. 15* 16. where Asa is taxed for deposing his Moth^r only, and not
killing her. A Note, whe^eof the Scottish Presbyterians made special use, not
only deposing Mary their lawful Queen from the Regal Th^one, but prosecuting
^er openly and under hand, till they had took away her life. These instances,
our Author in his Summary of that Conference, has passed over in silence; as
loath to have such blemishes appear in the Genevians, or their Annotations. And
I hope also that he will not advocate for the rest. For let him tell me what he
thinks of that on the second of St. Matthews Gospel, v. 12. viz* Promise ought
not to be kept, where Gods honor and preaching of his truth is hindered, or
else it ought not to be broken. What a wide gap, think we, does this open to
the breach of all Promises, Oaths, Covenants, Contracts, and Agreements, not
only betwixt man and man, but between Kings and their Subjects? Wh^t Rebel ever
took up Arms without some pretenses of that nature* What Tumults and Rebellions
have been raised in all parts of Christendom, in England, Scotland, Ireland,
France, the Netherlands, Germany, and indeed where not? under color that Gods
honor, and the preaching of the truth is hindered? If this once pass for good
sound Doctrine, neither the King, nor any of his good Subjects in what Realm
^oever, can live in safety. Gods Honor, and the preaching (...) his Truth, are
two such pretenses, as will make void all Laws, elude all Oaths, and thrust
our all Covenants and Agreements, be they what they will. Ne^^ I would have our
Author tell me, what he thinks of this Note on the ninth of the Revelation,
ver. 3. where the (...) which came out of the smoke, are said to be (...)
teachers, Heretics, and worldly subtle ^relates, with (...) F^iers, Cardinals,
Patriarchs, Archbishops, Bishops, (...), Batchelors, and Masters. Does not this
note (...) fasten the name of Locusts on all the Cle^^y of (...) Realm, that is
to say, Archbishops, Bishops, and all (...) as are graduated in the University,
by the name of Doctors, Batchelors, and Masters? And does it not as plainly
yoke them with F^iers, Monk^, and Cardinals* p^incipal instruments in all times
to advance the Popecom? I know the words which follow after are alleged by
some, to take off the envy of this Note, viz. who forsake Christ to maintain
false doctrines. But the enumeration of so many particulars makes not the Note
the lets invidious, the said explication notwithstanding; because the Note had
been as perfect and significant, had it gone thus in generals only, that is to
say, by Locusts here are meant false Teachers, Heretics, and other worldly
subtle men, that seduced the people, persuading them to fo^sake Christ, to
maintain false Doctrine. But the Genevians, who account Archbishops, and
Bishops, to be limbs of the Pope, resolved to join them with the rest of his
members, Friars, Monks, and Cardinals; and our Author, being a great favourer
of the Presbyterians, must not take notice of this scandal: especially
considering that Papacy and Praelacy are joined together, in the language of
the present times, and therefore fit to go together in this Annotation.

Fol. 68. In this Parliament Dr. Harsnet Bishop of Chichester, gave offense in
a Sermon preached at Court, pressing the word, Reddite Caesari quae sunt
Caesaris, as if all that was levied by Subsidies, or paid by Custom to the
Crown, was but a redditum of what was the Kings before.] This Ha^^^et (...) the
Sermon above mentioned, was held by Pro^ogation in the year 1609. and
afterward dissolved by Procl^mation in December of the year next following.
Concerning which Sermon, King James gives this account to the Lords and Commons
assembled before him at White Hall, March 23. (and therefore s^ith he) That
Reverend Bishop here amongst you, though I hear by diverse he was mi^^aken, or
not well understood, yet did he preach both learnedly and (...) ancient this
point concerning the power o^ a King* for what he spoke of a Kings power in
abstracto, is most true in Divinity; for to Emperors or Kings, that are
Monarchs, their Subjects bodies and goods are due, for their defense and
maintenance. But if I had been in his place, I would only have added two words
which would have cleared all: for after I had told as a Divine, what was due by
the Subjects to their Kings in general, I would then have concluded as an
English man, showing this people, that as in general all sub^ects were bound to
relieve their King, so to exhort them, that as we lived in a settled state of a
Kingdom that was governed by his own fundamental Laws and Orders, that
according thereunto they were now (being assembled for this purpose in
Parliament) to consider how to help such a King as now they had, and that
according to the ancient form and order, established in this Kingdom, putting
so a difference between the general power of a King in Divinity, and the settled
and established state of this Crown and Kingdom: and I am sure that the Bishop
meant to have have done the same, if he had not been strai^ned by time, which
in respect of the greatness of the present Preaching before us and such an
Auditory he durst not presume upon. (...) that the doctrine of the Bishop being
thus justified and explained by King James, and the Parliament continuing
undissolved till December following, we have no reason to believe that the
Parliament was dissolved upon this occasion; and much less on the occasion of
some words spoken in that Parliament by Bishop (...), of which thus our Author.

Ibid. Likewise Dr. Neile Bishop of Rochester, uttered words in the House of
Lords, interpreted to the disparagement of some reputed zealous Patriot in the
House of Commons.^ In this passage I have many things to excep^ And 2. that the
words themselves are not here laid down, and yet are made to be so hainously
taken, that to s^ve the Bishop from the storm, which was coming ^owards him,
the King should principally be occasioned to ^^ssolve that Parliament. 3. That
Dr. Neile is here called Bishop of Rochester, whom twice before, viz. sell. 64.
and 67. he makes to be Bishop of Coventry and Lei^hfield. And 4. That the words
here intimated, should be spoken in Parliament, Anno 1613. whereas by giving
Dr. Neile the Title of Rochester, it should rather be referred to the
Parliament holden by prorogation till the last of December, Anno 1610. when it
was dissolved, and then dissolved as appears by the Kings Proclamation, for not
supplying his necessities, and other reasons there expressed, whereof this was
none.

Fol. 70. Some conceive that in reveng^ Mr. John Seldom soon after set forth
his Book of Tithes, wherein he Historically proves, that they were payable
jure humano, and not Whether the acting of the Comedy called Ignoramus, might
move Mr. Seldom at the first to take this revenge, I enquire not here, though
it be probable it might; that Comedy being acted before King James, Anno 1614.
and this Book coming out about two years after, Anno 1616. But here I shall
observe in the first place our Authors partiality, in telling us that Mr.
Seldom in that book has proved Historically that Tithes are payable (...)
humano, and not otherwise; whereas indeed he undertook to prove that point, but
proved it not; as will ^ppear to any which have read the Answers set out
against him. I observe secondly, our Authors ignorance in the Book it self,
telling us within few lines after, that the first part of it is a mere Jew, of
the practice of Tithing amongst the Hebrews, the second a Christian, and
chiefly an English man; whereas indeed that part thereof which precedes the
manner of Tithing amongst Christians, has as much of the Gentil as of the Jew,
as much time spent upon examining of the Tithes paid by the Greeks and Romans,
as was in that amongst the Hebrews. Thirdly, I must observe the prejudice which
he has put upon the Cause, by telling us in the next place, that though many
Divines undertook the Answer of that Book, yet sure it is, that never a fiercer
storm fell on all Parsonage Barn; since the Reformation, then what this
Treatise raised up. And so our Author leaves this matter without more ado,
telling us of the Churches danger, but not acquainting us at all with her
deliverance from the present storm; neither so violent, not so great, nor of
such continuance, as to blow off any one Tile, or to blow aside so much as one
Load of Corn from any Parsonage barn in England. For though this History gave
some Country Gentlemen occasion and matter of discourse against paying Tithes,
yet it gave none of them the audaciousness to deny the payment; So safe and
speedy a course was took to prevent the mischief: which since our Author has
not told us (as had he played the part of a good Historian he was bound to do) I
will do it for him.

No sooner was the Churches Patrimony thus called in question, but it pleased
God to stir up some industrious and learned men to undertake the answering of
that History, which at the first made so much noise amongst the people. Dr.
Tillesly Archdeacon of Rochester first appeared in the Lists, managing that
part of the Controversy, which our Author calls a Christian, and an
Englishman, relating to old Chartularies and Infeodations. The three first
Chapters which Dr. Tillesly had omitted concerning the payment of Tithes by the
Jews and Gentiles, were solidly, but very smartly, examined and confuted by Mr.
M^ntague, at that time Fellow of Eaton College, and afterward Lord Bishop of
Chichester; as finally the two first Chapters about the Ti^hing of the Jews
were learnedly reviewed by Mr. Nettles a Count^ey (...), but excellently well
skilled in Talmudical Learning. In which encounters the Historian was so galled
by Tillesly, so gagged by Montague, and stung by Nettles, that he never came
off in any of his undertakings with such loss of credit. In the Preface to his
History, he had charged the Clergy with ignorance and laziness; upbraided them
with having nothing to keep up their credit but beard, habit and title; and
that their Studies reach no further then the Breviary, the Postils, and the
Polyanthea. But now he found by these encounters, that some of the ignorant and
lazy Clergy were of as retired studies as himself, and could not only match,
but overmatch him too in his own Philo^ogi^.

But the Governors of the Church went a shorter way, and not expecting till
the Book was answered by particular men, resolved to seek for reparation of the
wrong from the Author himself, upon an Information to be brought against him in
the High Commission. Fearing the issue of the business, and understanding what
displeasures were conceived against him by the King and the Church, he made his
personal appearance in the open Court at Lambeth on the eight and twentieth day
of January, Ann^ 1618. where, in the presence of George L. Archbishop of
Canterbury, John L. B. of London, Lancelot L. B. of Winchester, John L. B. of
Rochester, Sir John Benet, Sir William Bird, Sir George Newman Doctors of the
Laws, and Th^mas Mothershed Notary and Register of that Count, he tendered his
submission and acknowledgement, all of his own handwriting, in these following
words.

My go^ Lords, I most humbly acknowledge my error which have committed in
publishing the History of Tithes, and especially in that I have at all by
showing any interpretation of Holy Scriptures, by meddling with Councels,
Fa^hers, or C^nons, or by whatsoever occurs in it, offered any occasion of
argument against any right of Maintenance ^ure divino of the Ministers of the
Gospel; beseeching your Lordships to receive this ingenuous and humble
acknowledgement, together with the unfeigned protestation of my grief, for that
through it I have so incurred both his Majesty's and your Lordships displeasure
conceived against me in behalf of the Church of England.

JOHN SELDOM


Which his submission and acknowledgement being received, and made into an Act
of Court, was entered into the public Registers thereof by this Title
following, viz. Officium Dominorum contra Joh. Selde^^ de inter. Templo London.
Armigerum.

So far our Author should have gone (had he played the part of a good Historian)
but that he does his work by halfs in all Church-concernments.

Fol. 72. James Montague Bishop of Winchester a potent Courtier, took
exceptions that his Bishopric in the marshalling of them was wronged in
method, as put after any whose Bishop is a Privy Counselor.] The Bishop was
too wise a man to take this (as our Author Mocket, who had then newly
translated into the Latin tongue, the Liturgy of the Church of England, the 39.
Articles, the Book of the Ordination of Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, and many
Doctrinal points extracted out of the Book of Homilies. All which with Bishop
Jewels Apology, Mr. Noels Catechism, and a new Book of his own entit^led
Politi^ Ecclesiae Anglicanae he had caused to be Printed and bound up together.
A Book which might have been of great honor to the Church of England amongst
forain Nations, and of no less use and esteem at home, had there not been
somewhat else in it which deserved the fire then this imaginary Quarrel. For by
the Act of Parliament 31 H. 8. 6. 10. the precedence of the Bishops is thus
Marshalled; that is to say, the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Archbishop of
York, the Bishop of London, the Bishop of Durham, the Bishop of Winchester, the
rest according to the order of their Consecrations; yet so, that if any of them
were Secretary to the King, he should take place of all those other Bishops to
whom otherwise by the Order of his Consecration he had been to give it. If the
Doctor did mistake himself in this particular (as indeed he did) the fault
might easily have been mended, as not deserving to be expiated by so sharp a
punishment. The following reason touching his derogating from the Kings power
in Ecclesiastical matters, and adding it to the Metropolitan whose servant and
Chaplain he was, has more reason in it (if it had but as much truth as reason)
and so has that touching the Propositions by him gathered out of the Homilies,
which were rather framed according to his own judgment, then squared by the
Rules of the Church. But that which I conceive to have been the true cause why
the Book was burned, was, that in publishing the twentieth Article concerning
the Authority of the Church he totally left out the first clause of it, viz.
Habet Ecclesia Ritus sive Ceremonias statuendi jus and in Controversus ^ides
Authoritatem. By means whereof the Article was apparently falsified, the
Churches Authority dis^vowed, and consequently a wide gap opened to dispute her
power, in all her Canons and Determinations of what sort soever. And possible
enough it is, that some just offense might be taken at him, for making the
Fasting days appointed in the Liturgy of the Church of England to be commanded
and observed ob Politi^ is solum rations, for Politic Considerations only, as
insinuated page 308. whereas those Fasting-dayes were appointed in the first
Liturgy of King Edward the sixth Anno 1549. (with reference only to the
primitive Institution of those several Fasts) when no such Politic
considerations were so much as thought of. But whatsoever was the true cause,
or whether there were more then one, as perhaps there was, certain I am it
could not be for derogating any thing from the Kings Power, and enlarging that
of the Archbishop in confirming the election of Bishops, as our Author tells us.
For though the Doctor does affirm of the Metropolitans of the Church of
England, page 308. Vt Electiones Episcoporum suae Provinciae confirment, that
it belongs to them to confirm the Electio^s of the Bishops of their several
Provinces, and for that purpose cites the Canon of the Council of Nice, which
our Author speaks of; yet afterward he declares expressly, that no such
confirmation is or can be made by the Metropolitans, without the Kings assent
preceding, Cujus (...) electi comprobantur, comprobati confirmantur, confirmati
consecrantur, page 313. which very fully clears the Doctor from being a better
Chaplain then he was a Subject, as our Author makes him.

Fol. 77. At this time began the troubles in the Law-Countries about matters of
Religion, heightened between two opposite parties, Remonstrants, and
Contra-R^monstrants; their Controversies being chiefly (...) to five points,
etc] Not at this time, viz. 1618. which our Belgic Provinces into two great
Factions: that of the Remonstrants (whom in reproach they call their Minions)
being headed by John Olden Barnevelt, a principal Counselor of State and of
great Authority in his Country: the other of the Calvinists or
Contra-Remonstrants, being managed by Maurice Prince of Orange, the chief
Commander of the Forces of the States united both by Sea and Land. But the
troubles and divisions were now come to their full growth, they began many
years before; occasioned by a Remonstrance exhibited to the States of Holland
by the followers of Dr. James Harmin, who liked better the Melanchthonian way,
then that of Calvin, Anno 1610. and that Remonstrance counterballanced by a
Contra-Remonstran^^ made by ^uch Divines who were better pleased with Calvin's
Doctrine in the deep Speculations of Predestination, Grace, Freewil, etc. then
with that of Melanchthon. Hence grew the names of Remonstrants, and
Contra-Remonstrants, occurring frequently in the Writings on both sides, till
the Remonstrants were condemned in the Synod of Dort, and either forced to
yield the Cause, or quit their Country. Each party in the mean time had the
opportunity to disperse their Doctrines, in which the Remonstrants gained
exceedingly upon their Adversaries, especially after they had been admitted to
a public Confe^ence at the Hague, Anno 1611. in which they were conceived to
have had much the better of the day, and so continued in increase of their
power and credit, till the Quarrels and Animosities between the Prince and
Barnevelt put a full period to the business by the death of the one, and the
Authority of the other.

Fol. 82. Hereby the equal Reader may judge how heartily Mr. Montague in his
Appeal deals with our Divines, charging them that the Discipline of the
Church of England is in this Synod held unlawful. And again the Synod of Dort
in some points condemns upon the by even England.] Ass^redly Mr. Montague
deals very heartily with our Divines, Appell. Caesaram. cap. 7. page 69.
professing that he does reverence them for their places, worth, and learning;
though not obliged (as he conceived) to all or any of the Conclusions of the
Synod at Dort. And he might very well declare, as indeed he does, that the
Discipline of the Church of England in that and other Dutch Synods was held
unlawful, and by them condemned upon the by. For whereas in the Confession of
the Belgic Churches ratified and confirmed in the Synod of Dort, it is
declared and maintained, that all Ministers are by the word of God of equal
power, it must needs follow thereupon, that the Superiority of Bishops over
other Ministers is against Gods word. Quantum vero attinet Divini verbi
Ministros, Co^^es. Belg. Art. 31.
ubicunque locorum sint, eandem illi Potestatem and Authoritatem habent, ut qui
omnes sint Christi unici illius Episcopi universalis, unicique Capitis
Ecclesiae Ministri. These are the words of that Confewon, as it stands ratified
and recorded in the Acts of the Synod of Dort, as before was said. In which and
by which if the Discipline of the Church of England be not made unlawful in
terminis terminantibus, as they use to say; I am sure it is condemned upon the
by, which is as much as Mr. Montague had affirmed of it. And howsoever Dr.
Charleton then Bishop of Landaffe, as well to vindicate his own dignity,
England, tendered his Protestation of that Synod in behalf of Episcopacy; yet
was it made to signify nothing, nor so much as honored with an Answer; our
Author noting at the end of this protestation, Britannorum interpellationi
responsum ne gru q^^dem, viz. to this interpellation of the British Divines,
nothing at all was answered. There might be some wrong done to our Divines by
the rest of that Synod; but no wrong done by Mr. Montague, neither to our
Divines nor unto that Synod.

Fol. 89. Now whilst in common discourse some made this Judge, others that
Sergeant Lord Chancellor, King James made Dr. Williams, lately (and still) Dean
of Westminstet, and soon after Bishop of Lincoln.] In this and the rest which
follows touching the advancement of Williams to the place and dignity of Lord
Keeper, there are three things to be observed. And first it is to be observed,
that though he was then Dean of Westminster when the custody of the Great Seal
was committed to him; yet was he not then and still Dean of that Church, that
is to say, not Dean thereof at such time as our Author writ this part of the
History. For fol. 80. speaking of Dr. Hals return from the Synod of Dort, Anno
1618. he adds that he continued in health till this day thirty three years
after, which falls into the year 1651. And certainly at that time Dr. Williams
(then Archbishop of York) was not Dean of Westminster, that place having been
bestowed by his Majesty upon Dr. Steward Clerk of the Closet, An. 1645. being
full six years before the time which our Author speaks of. Secondly, whereas
our Author tells us, that the place was proper not for the plain but guarded
Gown; I would ^ain know how it should be more proper for the guarded Gown then
it was Wolsey, that Office continued for the most part in the hands of the
Prelates; at what time that great Office was discharged with such a general
contentment, that people found more expedition in their Suits, and more ease to
their Purses then of later times. By which it seems, that men who are never
bred to know the true grounds and reasons of the Common Law, might and could
mitigate the Rigor of it in such difficult cases as were brought before them;
the Chancery not having in those days such a mixture of Law as now it has, not
being so tied up to such intricate Rules by ^ (...) Note; in which netelle^^
us, that Sir Chapter Hatton was not bred a Lawyer. If so, then neither was the
Title (...) strong, nor the P^oscriptions so well grounded as ou^ Author makes
i^; the int^^position of Sir Christopher Hatton* between Sir Tho. Bromley and
Sir John Puckering, (...) it to three descents, and but thirty years, which is
too short a time (...) a Prescription to be built upon.

Fol. 93. He had 14 years been Archbishop of Spalato, etc. Conscience in show,
and covetousness indeed caused his coming hither.^ This is a very hard s^ying,
a censure, Interest tenebris, interest cogitationibus nostris, quasi alteris
tenebris, as Minutius has it. The man here mentioned had been in the
Confe^sion of our A^thor himself, Archbishop of Spalato in Dalmatia, ^ dignity
of great power and reputation, and consequently of a fair Revenue in propo^tion
to it. He could not hope to mend his Fortunes by his coming hither, or to
advance himself to a more liberal entertainment in the Church of England, then
what he had attained unto in the Church of Rome. Covetousness therefore could
not be the motive for leaving his own estate, of which he had been possessed 14
years in our Authors ^eckoning, to betake himself to a strange Country, where
he (...) promise himself nothing but protection and the ^^eedom of conscience.
Our Author might have said with more probability, that covetousness, and not
cons^ience, (...) cause of his going hence; no b^it of pro^^t or preferment
being laid before him to invite him (...) ^s they were both, by those which had
the managing (...) him hence. He had given great (...) to the Pope by his
defection from that Church, and no (...) councenance to the Doctrine of the
(...) Churches by his coming over unto ou^s. The (...) of ^o great a (...) of
that Church was not like to stand. And yet he gave greater blows to them by his
Pen, then by the defection of his Person; his learned Books entitled De
Republica Ecclesiastica, being still unanswered. In which respect, those of
that Church bestird themselves to disgrace his person, devising many other
causes by which he might be moved or forced to forsake those parts, in which he
durst no longer tarry. But finding little credit given to their libellous
Pamphlets, they began to work upon him by more secret practices: insinuating,
that he had neither that respect, nor those advancements which might encourage
him to stay; that the new Pope Gregory the fifteenth, was his special friend;
that he might choose his own preferments, and make his own conditions, if he
would return. And on the other side, they cunningly wrought him out of credit
with King James by the arts of Gondomar; and lessened his esteem amongst the
Clergy by some other Artifices: so that the poor man, being in a manner lost on
both sides, was forced to a necessity of swallowing that accursed bait by which
he was hooked over to his own destruction. For which and for the rest of the
story, the Reader may repair for satisfaction to this present History.

Fol. 96. Besides the King would never bestow an Episcopal charge in England on
a foreiner, no not on his own Contrymen the Scots.] This must be understood
with reference to the Church of England, King James bestowing many Bishoprics
upon his Contrymen the Scots in the Realm of Ireland. And if he did not the
like here (as indeed he did not) it neither was for want of affection to them,
nor of confidence in them; but because he would not put any such discouragement
upon the English, who looked on those preferments, as the greatest and most
honorable rewards of Arts and Industry. Quis enim virtutem exquireret ipsum,
Proemia si ^ollin?

Fol. 100. All men's mouths were now (...) with discourse Charles his match
with (...) Infanta of Spain. The Protestants grieved thereat, fearing that this
marriage would be the Funerals of their Religion, etc.] The bu^^ness of the
match with Spain ^ath already been sufficiently agitated between the Autho^ of
the History of the Reign of King Charles and his Observator, And yet I must
add some^hing to let our Author and his Reader to understand thus much, that
the Protestants had no cause to fear such a Funeral* They knew they lived under
such a King, who loved his Sovereignty too well to quit any part thereof to the
Pope of Rome; especially to part with that Supremacy in (...) matters, which he
esteemed the fairest Flower in the Royal Garland. They knew they lived under
^^ch a King, whose interest it was to preserve Religion in the same state in
which he found it; and could not fear but that he would sufficiently provide
for the (...) of it. If any Protestants ^eared the funeral of their Religion,
they were such Protestants as had been frighted out (...) as you know who used
to call the Puritans; (...) under the name of Protestants had ^ontriv'd
themselves into a Faction not only against Episcopacy, but even Monarchy also.
And to these nothing was more (...) then the match with Spain* fearing (and
perhaps (...) fearing) that the Kings (...) with that Crown might a^m him both
with power and counsel to suppress those practices which have since proved the
Funeral of the Church of England. But as it seems, they (...) fear was our
Author telling us fol. 112. that the (...) State had no mind or meaning of a
match: and that this was quickly discovered by Prince Charles at his coming
(...). How so? Because says he

Fol. 112. They demanded (...) in education of the (...) English Papists, etc*]
(...) viz. The Spaniards were desirous to get as good conditions as they could
for themselves and their Party, Ergo they had no mind to the match. Or thus,
The demands of the Spaniards when the business was first in Treaty, seemed to
be unrea^onable, Ergo they never really intended that it should proceed. Our
Author cannot be so great a stranger in the shops of London, as not to know
that Tradesmen use to ask many times twice as much for a commodity as they
mean to take; and therefore may conclude as strongly, that they do not mean to
sell those wares for which they ask such an unreasonable (...) at the first
demand. Iniquum petere ut aequum obtineas, has been the usual practice
(especially in driving S^a^e-bargains) of all times and ages. And though the
Spaniards at the first spoke big, and stood upon such points as the King
neither could* nor would in honor or conscience consent unto: yet things were
after brought to such a temperament, that the marriage was agreed upon, the
Articles by both Kings subscribed, a Proxy made by the Prince of ^ales to
espouse the Infanta, and all things on her part prepared for the day of the
wedding. The b^each which ^ollowed came not from any aversness in the Court of
Spain, though where the fault was, and by what means occasioned, need not here
be said. But well ^are our Author for all that; who finally has absolved the
Spaniard from this brea^h, and laid the same upon King James, despairing of any
restitution to be made of the Palatinate, by the way of Treaty.

Ibi^* Whereupon King James not only broke off all Treaty (...) pain* but also
called the great Council of his Kingdom By which it seems, that the breaking
off of the Treaty did precede the Parli^ment. But multa apparent quae non sunt,
Every thing is not as it seems. The Parliament in this ca^e came before, by
whose continual importunity and (...), the breach of the Treaties followed
after. The King loved peace ^oo well to lay aside the Treaties, and engage in
War before he was desperate of success any other way then by that of the Sword,
and was assured both of the hands and hearts of his subjects to assist him in
it. And therefore ou^ Author should have said, that the King not only called
together his great Council, but broke off the Treaty, and not have given us
here such an Hysteron Proteron, as neither does consist with reason, not the
truth of story*

ANIMADVERSIONS ON The Eleventh Book OF The Church History OF BRITAIN.
Containing the Reign of King Charles.
THis Book concludes our Authors History, and my Animadver^^ons. And (...) the
end be (...) unto the beginning, it is like to (...) enough; our Author
stumbling at the Threshold, (...) ^mo^gst superstitious people has been (...)
presage. Having placed King Charles upon (...) he goes on to tell us that

Fol. 117. On the fourt^enth (...) James his Funerals were (...) Collegiat
Church at (...) but the fourth, says the (...) Reign of King Charles; and (...)
^^venth of May on which those solemn Obsequies were (...) Westminster. Of which
if he will not take my word se^ him consult the Pamphle^ called the (...) (^ol.
6.) and he shall be satisfied. Our (...) mu^^ keep time better, or else we
shall never know how the day goes with him.

Fol. 119. As for Dr. Pre^^on, etc. His party would (...) us that he might have
chose his own Mitre.] And large parts of su^^icient receipt to manage the broad
(...), but that the Seal was proffered to him, fol. 131. But we are not bound
to believe all which is said by that party, who looked upon the man with such a
reverence as came near Idola^^y. His Principles and engagements were too well
known by those which governed Affairs, to vent^^e him unto any such great trust
in Church or State; and his activity so suspected, that he would not have been
long suffered to continue Preacher at Lincolns Inn. As for his intimacy with
the Duke (too violent to be long lasting) it proceeded not from any good
^pinion which the Duke had of him, but that he found how instrumental he might
be to manage that prevail^^g party to the Kings advantage. But when it was
(...) that he had more of the Serpent in him then of the (...), and that he was
not tractable in steering the (...) of his own Party by the Court Compass; he
was discountenanced and said by, as not worth the keeping. He seemed the Court
M^reor for a while, (...) to a s^dden height of expectation, and having (...)
and blazed a (...), went out again, and was as sudd^^nly ^o^gotten.

^ol. 119. Next day the King coming from Canterbury, (...) with all solemnity
she was (...) in London, where a Chapel (...) her Dev^tion^ with a Covent
(...) to the Articles of her (...) (...); how ^ame he to be suffered to be
present at (...) in the capacity of Lord Keeper? For that he did so, is
affirmed by our Author, saying, That the King took a S^role of Parchment out of
his bosom, and gave it to the Lord (...) who read it to the Commons four
sev^ra^ times, East-West, North, and South, fol. 123. Thirdly the Lord Keeper,
who read that Scrole, was not the (...) Keeper Williams, but the Lord Keeper
Coventry; (...) Seal being taken from the Bishop of Lincoln, and (...) to the
custo^y of Sir Thomas Coventry, in October before. And therefore fourthly, our
Author is much ou^ in placing both the Coronation and the following Parliament
before the change of the Lord Keeper; and sending Sir John Suckling to fe^ch
that Seal at the end of a Parli^ment in the Spring, which he had brought away
with him before Michaelmas Term. But as our Author was willing to keep the
Bishop of Lincoln in the Dea^^y of Westminster, for no less then five or six
years after it was conferred on another; so is he as desirous to continue him
Lord Keeper for as many months after the Seal had been entrusted to another
hand.

Fol. 122. The Earl of Arundel as Earl Marshal of (...) and the Duke of
Buckingham as Lord High Const^ble of England, for that day went before his
Majesty in In this passage and the next that follows ou^ Author shows himself
as bad an Herald in marshalling a Royal show, as in stating the true time of
the c^eation of a Noble Peer. Here in this place he pla^eth the Earl Marshal
before the Constable; whereas by the (...) 31 H. 8. c. 10. the Constable is to
have (...) before the Marshal. Not want there Precedents to show that the Lord
High-Constable did many times direct his M^ndats to the Earl Marshal, as one of
the Mini^^ers of his Court, willing and requiring him to perform such and such
services as in the said Precepts were exp^essed. In the next place we are
informed that Ibid. That the Kings Train being six yards long of Purple Velvet,
was held up by the Lord Compton, and the Lord Viscount Dorcester.] That the
Lord Compton was Lord Viscount Dorcester was the other of them, I shall never
grant, there being no such Viscount at the time of the Coronation. I cannot
(...), but that Sir D^dley Carleton might be one of those which held up the
Train, though I am not sure of it. But sure I am, that Sir Dudley Carleton was
not made Baron of Imber-Court till toward the latter end of the following
Parliament of An. 1626 nor created Viscount Dorcester until some years after.

Fol. 122. The Lord Archbishop did present his Majesty to the Lords and
Commons, East, West, North, South, asking their minds four several times, if
they did consent to the Coronation of King Charles their lawful ^overaign.]
This is a piece of new State-doctrine never known before England) should depend
on the consent of the Lords and Commons who were then assembled; the Coronation
not proceeding (as he after ^elleth us) till their consent was given four times
by ^cclamations. And this I call a piece of new State-doctrine never known
before, because I find the contrary in the Coronation of our former Kings. For
in the form and manner of the Coronation of King Edward 6. described in the
Catalogue of Honor, ^et ^orth by Tho. Mills of Canterbury, Anno 1610. we find
it thus: The King being carried by certain Noble Courtiers in another Chair
unto the four sides of the Stage, was by the Archbishop of Canterbury declared
unto the people (standing round about) both by Gods and man's Laws, to be the
right and law^ul King of England, France, and Ireland, and proclaimed that day
to be crowned, consecrated and anointed, unto whom he demanded, whether they
would obey and serve, or not? By whom it was again with a loud cry answered;
God save the King, and ever live his Majesty. The same we have in substance,
but in sewer words in the Co^onation of King James, where it is said, that The
King was showed to the people, and that they were required to make
acknowledgement of the^^ all^giance to his Majesty by the Archbishop; which
they did by acclamations. Assuredly, the difference is exceeding va^t betwixt
obeying and consenting, betwixt the peoples acknowledging their allegiance, and
promising to obey and serve their lawful Sovereign, and giving their consent to
his Coronation, as if it could not be pe^formed without such consent. Nor had
the late Archbishop been rep^oacht so generally by the common people, (and that
reproach published in several Pamphle^s) for altering the Kings Oath at his
Coronation, to the infringing of the Libe^^ies and diminution of the Rights of
the English Subjec^s; had he done them such a notable pie^e of service, as
freeing them from all promises to obey and ^erve, and making the Kings
Coronation to depend on their consent. For Bishop Laud being one of that
Committee, which was appointed by the King to review the form and o^der of the
Coronation, to the end it might be fitted to some Rites and Ceremonies of the
Church of England, which had not been observed before; must bear the greatest
blame in this alteration (if any such alteration had been made, as our Author
speaks of) because he was the principal man whom the King re^^ed on in that
business. But our Author tells us in his Preface, that this last Book with
diverse of the rest were written by him, when the Monarchy was turned into a
State, and I dare believe him. He had not el^e so punctually conformed his
language to the new State-doctrine, by which the m^king (and con^equently the
unmaking) of Kings is wholly ve^ted in ^he people, according to that Maxim of
Buchannan, ^opulo jus est, imperium cui velit deferat; then which ^here is not
a more pestilent and seditious passage ^n his whole Book De jure Regni apud
Scotos, though ^here be nothing else but Treason, and Sedition ^n it.

Fol. 123. Then as many Earls and Barons as could ^onveniently stand about the
Throne, did lay their hands ^n the Crown on his Majesty's head, protesting to
spend their bloods to maintain it to him and his lawful He^rs.] A promise
faithfully performed by many of them, Oxford, to those at Westminster, Anno
1643. And by that Catalogue we may also see what and who they were who so
ignobly brake faith with him, all those whose names we find not in that
s^bscription, or presently superadded to it, being to be reckoned amongst those
who in stead of spending their blood to maintain the Crown to him, and to his
lawful successors, concurred with them either in opere, or in (...), who
despoiled him of it. And to say truth, they were rewarded as they had deserved,
the first thing which was done by the House of Commons (after the King, by
their means, had been brought to the fatal Block) being to tu^ne them out of
power, to dissolve their House, and annul their privileges, reducing them to
the same condition with the re^t of the Subjects.

Fol. 127. And it had not been amiss, if such who would be accounted his
friends and admirers had followed him in the footsteps of his Moderation,
content with the enjoying without the enjoining their private practices and
opinions (...) This comes in as an inference only on a forme^ passage, in which
it is said of Bishop Andrews, that in Wh^^ place soever he came, he never
pressed any other Ceremonie^ upon them, then such as he found to be used there
before (...) coming, though otherwise condemned by some ^omany superstitious
Ceremonies, and super^luous Ornaments, in his private Chapel. How true this
is, I am not able to affi^m, less able (if it should be true) to commend it in
him. It is not certainly the office of a careful Bishop only to leave things
as he found them* but to reduce them, if amiss, to those Rules and Canons, from
which by the forwardness of some to innovate, and the connivence of others at
the innovations, they had been suffered to decline. And for the inference it
self, it is intended chiefly for the late Archbishop of Canterbury against
whom he had a fling before for his want of moderation in enjoining his private
practices and opinions on other men. But (...) our Author had done well to have
spared the man, who has already reckoned for all his errors, both with God and
the world. And secondly, it had been bette^ if he had told us what those
private practices and opinions were which the Archbishop with such want of
moderation did enjoyne on others. For it is possible enough that the opinions
which he speaks of, might be the public Doctrines of the Church of England,
maintained by him in opposition to those private opinions which the Calvinian
p^rty had intended to obtrude upon her. A thing complained of by Spalato, who
well observed that many of the opinions, both of Luther and Calvin, were
received amongst us as part of the Doctrine and Confession of the Church of
England, which ^therwise he acknowle^ged to be capable of an Oxtho^x sense.
Praeter Anglicanam Confessionem ^uam mihi ut modestam praedicabant) multa (...)
Lutheri and Calvini dogmata obtinuisse, Consil. red^undi.
^he there objects. And it is possible enough ^^at the practices, which he
speaks of, were not private either, but a reviver of those ancient and public
^ages, which the Canons of the Church enjoined, and by the remisness of the
late Government had been ^iscontinued. He that reads the Gag, and the Appello
^aesarem of Bishop Montague, cannot but see, that those ^^inions, which our
Author condemned for private, were ^he true Doctrine of this Church professed
and held forth ^n the Book of Articles, the Homilies and the
Common Prayer Book. But for a justification of the Pra^^ises (the private
practices he speaks of) I shall direct ^im to an Author of more credit with
him. Which ^^thor first tells us of the Bishops generally, That being of late
years either careless or indulgent, History of K. C. fol. 143.
they had not required within their Dioceses that strict obedience to
Ecclesiastical Constitutions which the Law expected; upon which the Liturgy
began totally to be laid aside, and in conformity the uniform practice of ^he
Church. He tells us secondly, of Archbishop Abbot in particular, Fol. 131.
That his extraordinary remi^ness in not exacting a strict con^o^mity to the
presc^^bed Orders of the Church in point of Ceremony, seemed to dissolve those
legal ce^erminations to their first principle of indifferency, and led in such
an habit of inconformity, as the future ed^cation of those tender con^cienced
men too long discontinued obedience, was interpreted an innovation. And finally
he tells of Archbishop Laud, F^l. 143.
who succeeded A^b^t in that See, that being of another mind an^ mettle, he
did not like that the external worship of God should follow the fashion of
every private fancy; and what he did not like in that subject, as he was in
State, so he thought it was his duty to reform. To which en^ in his
Metropolitical visitation, he calls upon all both Clergy and Laity to observe
the Rules of the Church. And this is that, which our Author cal^ the enjoining
his private practices; private perhaps i^ the private opinion of some men, who
had declared themselves to be professed enemies to all public^ Order.

Fol. 127. A Commission was granted unto five Bishop^ (Whereof Bishop La^d of
the Q^orum) to suspend Archbishop Abbot from exercising his Authority any
longer Had our Author said, that Bishop Laud had been one of the number, he had
hit it right, the Commission being granted to five Bishops, viz. Dr. Montain
Bishop of London Dr. Neil Bishop of Durham, Dr. Buckeridge Bishop o^ Rochester,
Dr. Howson Bishop of Oxford, and Dr. Lau^ Bishop of Bathe and Wels; or to any
four, three, (...) two of them* and no more then so. Had Bishop Laud been of
the Quorum, his presence and consent had been so necessary to all their
Consultations, Conclusions* and dispatch of Businesses, that nothing could be
done without him; whereas by the words of the Commission, any two of them were
empowered, and consequently all of them must be of the Quorum, as well as he;
which every Justices Clerk cannot choose but laug^^ Homicid^ mentioned, or so
much as glanced at in that Commi^sion, the Commission only saying, That the
sai^ Archbishop could not at that p^esent in his own person attend those
services which were otherwi^e proper for his (...), and Jurisdiction, and which
as Archbishop of Canterbury he might and ought in his own person to have
performed and executed. I am loath to rub longer on this sore, the point having
been so vexed already betwixt the Historian and the Observator, that I shall not
trouble it any further. Only I must crave leave to rectify our Author in
another passage relating to that sad Accident, for which says he,

Ibid. It would be of dangerous consequence to condemn him by the Canons of
forain Councels, which were never allowed any Legislative power in this Land.]
Which Legislative power, he means a Power of making Laws, as the word does
intimate, then it is true, That the Canons of forain Councels, had never any
such power within this Land. But if by Legislative power he means a Power or
Capability of passing for Laws within this Kingdom; then (though he use the
word improperly) it is very false that no such Canons were in force in the
Realm of England. The Canons of many forain Councels, General, National, and
Provincial, had been received in this Church, and incorporated into the body of
the Canon Law, by which the Church proceeded in the exercise of her
juri^diction, till the submission of the Clergy to King Henry the eighth. And
in the Act confirmative of that Submission, it is said exp^esly, That all
Canons, Con^titutions, Ordinances, and Synodals Provincial, as were made before
the said Submission, which be not contrary or repugnant to the Laws, S^^tutes
and Cus^oms of this Realm, nor to the damage or hurt of the Kings p^erogative
Royal, we^e to be used and executed as in ^ormer times. 25 H. 8. c. 19. So that
unless it can be proved, that the proceedings, in this case, by the Canons of
forain (...), was either contrary or repu^^ant to the Laws and (...) of the
(...) or to the damage of the Kings prerogative Royal; there is no dangerous
consequence at all to be ^ound therein. But whereas our ever since (he means
ever since that unhappy accident) he had executed his jurisdiction without any
interruption; I must needs add, that he is very much mistaken in this partilar;
Dr. Williams Lord elect of Lincoln, Dr. Carew Lord elect of Exceter, and Dr.
Laud Lord elect of St. David's, and I think some others refusing to receive
^piscopal Consecration from him upon that account. Far more mistaken in the
next, in which he tells us, that

Fol. 128. Though this Archbishop survived some years after, yet henceforward
he was buried to the world.] No Ford, yet neither this confinement, nor that
Commission were of long continuance. For about Christmas in the year 1628, he
was restored both to his liberty and jurisdiction, sent for to come unto the
Court, ^eceiv'd as he came out of his Barge by the Archbishop of York, and the
Earl of Dorset, and by them conducted to the King, who giving him his hand to
kiss, en^oyned him not to fail the Council Table twice a week. After which
time we find him sitting as Archbishop in the following Parliament, and in the
full exercise of his Jurisdiction, till the day of his death, which happened upon
Sunday August 4. 1633. And so much for him.

Fol. 137. My pen passing by them at present, may safely salute them with a God
speed, as neither seeing nor Our Author speaks this of the Feoffees appointed
by themselves for buying in such Impropriations as were then in the hands of
Lay-persons. I say appointed by themselves, because not otherwise authorized,
either by Charter from the King, Decree in Chan^^ery, or by Act of Parliament,
but only by a secr^t combination of the Broth^rhood to advance their projects.
For though our (...) us, fol. 136. that they were legally settled in trust to
make such Purchaces; yet there is more required to a legal settlement, then the
consent of some few persons amongst themselves: for want whereof this
combin^tion was dissolved, the Feoffees in some danger of sentence, and the
impropriations by them purchased adjudged to the King on a full hearing of the
cause in the Count of Exchequer, Anno 1632. Howsoever our Author (...) them
good speed, as neither seeing nor suspecting any danger but other men as wi^e
as he, did not only suspect, but see the danger. And this our Author might see
also, if zeal to the good cause had not darkened the eyes of his understanding.

For first, the Parties t^usted in the managing of this Design were of such
affections, as promised no good unto the peace and happiness of the Church of
England. Their names our Author truly gives us (...). 36. four Ministers, four
Common Lawyers, and four Citizens, men not unknown to such as then lived* and
observed the conduct of Affairs, to be averse unto the Discipline of the Church
then by law established. And ^f such public mischiefs be presaged by
Astrologers from the conjunction of Jupiter and Saturn, though the first of
them be a Planet of a most ^weet and gentle (...); what dangers, what
calamities might not be ^eared from the conjunction of twelve such persons, of
which there was not one that wished well to the p^e^ent Government? And
therefore I may say of them (...) Domitius Aenobarbus said unto his Friends
when they came to congratulate with him ^or the birth of Nero, (...)
Nihil (...) nisi detestabile and malo public^ (...),

(...), this will ^u^ther appear by their pro^^^dings in the business, not
laying the imp^opriation^ by them purchased to the Church or Chappelry ^o (...)
they had anciently belonged, nor ^etling them on the (...) of the place, as
many hoped they would. That had been utterly destructive to their main (...),
which was not to advantage the Regular and e^tablished Clergy, but to set up a
new body of (...) in convenient places, for the promoting of the cause. And
therefore having bought an impro^^iation, they parcelled it out into annual
Pensions of 40 or 50 l. per annum, and therewith ^alared some (...) in such
Market Towns where the people had commonly less to do, and consequently were
more apt to ^action and Innovation, then in other places. Our Author notes it
of their Predecessors, in Cartw^ights days, that they preached most diligently
in (...) places; it b^ing observed in England, that those w^o hold the Helm of
the Pulpit, always steer peoples h^arts as they please, Lib. 9. fol. 195. And
he notes it al^o of these ^eoffees, that in conformity hereunto, they set up a
P^eaching Ministry in places of greatest need, not in such Pa^ish-Churches, to
which the Tithes pro^e^ly belonged) but where they thought the Word was most
wanting, that is to say most wanting to advance their p^o^ect.

Thi^dly, if we behold the men whom they made choice of and employed in
p^eaching in such Market Towns as they had an eye on, either because most
populous, o^ because capable of electing Burgesses to serve in (...), they were
for the most part Non-con^^^^^, and sometime such as had been silenced by
(...), or the High Commission, for their (...). And (...) an one was placed by
(...) Town of (...) by the Archbishop of Canterbury, out of (...) in Middlesex
by the Bishop of London, (...) Yorkshire by the Archbishop of York* (...)
Hartfordshire by the Bishop of Lincoln, and finally ^^^pended from his Ministry
by the High Commission; yet thought the (...) man by Geering (as indeed he was)
to begin this Lecture.

Fourthly and finally, these Pensions neither were so settled, nor the^e
Lecturers so well established in their several places, but that the one might be
withdrawn and the other removed, at the will and pleasure of their Patrons, if
they grew slack and negligent (...) the holy cause, or ab^red any thing at all
(...) and fury they first brought with them. Examples of which I know some, and
have heard of more. And now I would fain know of our Author whether there be no
danger to be seen or suspected in this (...) these Feoffees in short time would
not (...) had more Chaplains to depend upon them, then all the Bishops in the
Kingdom; and finally whether such needy fellows depending on the will and
pleasure of their gracious Masters, must not be forced to Preach such Doctrines
only as best please their humors. And though I shall say nothing here of their
giving under hand private Pensions, not only unto such as had been silenced or
suspended in the Ecclesiastical Courts but many times also to their Wives and
Children after their decease, all issuing from this common-stock: yet othe^s
have beheld it as the greatest piece of Wit and (...) both to encourage and
increase their (...) could be possibly devised. If as our (...) Design was
generally (...) ^as because they neither (...) the mischiefs, which (...)
crush^ in tim^.

^ol. 148. However* there was no express in this Declar^tion that the Ministers
of the Parish should be pressed to the ] Our Author does here change his style.
He had (...) told us, that on the (...) publishing of the Decla^ation about
lawful Sports on the Lords day, no Mini^^er was de facto enjoined to read it in
his Parish, lib. x. fol. 76. and here he tells us, that there was no express
Orde^ in the Declaration (when revived by King Charles) that the Minister of the
Parish should be pressed to the (...) of it; adding withal, that many thought it
a mo^e proper work for the Constable or Tithing-man, then it was for the
Ministers. Bu^ if our Author mark it well* he may easily find that the
Declaration of King James was commanded to be published by order from the
Bishop of the Diocese through all the Parish Churches of his Jurisdiction; (...)
and the Declaration of King Charles to be published with like order from the
several Bishops through all their Parish Churches of their several Dioceses
respectivly. Ibid* p. 17.
The Bishop of the Diocese in the singular number in the Declaration of King
James, because it principally related to the County of Lancaster: the Bishops
in the plural number in that of King Charles, because the benefit of it was to
be extende^ over all the Realm. In both, the Bishops are commanded to take
Order for the publishing of them in their several Parishes; and whom could they
require to publish them in the Parish Churches, but the Ministers only? The
Constable is a Lay-Officer merely, bo^nd by his place to execute the Warrants
and commands of the Justices, but not of the Bishop. And though the ^i^hing man
have some relation to Church matters, and consequently to the Bishop, in the
way of pres^^^^ents; yet was he not bound to execute any such commands because
not tied by any Oath of Canonical (...) were. So that the Bishops did no^ (...)
tha^ ^ conceive he will not often to gain^ay him. It Holy Table, Name and
Thing, (...) Table, ^ 4 ^. 68.
who resolves it thus: All the commands of the King (says he) that are not
upon the first inference and illation (without any Prosyllogisms) contrary to a
clear passage in the Word of God, or to an evident Sunbeam of the Law of
Nature, are precisely to be obeyed. Nor is it enough to find a remote and
possible inconvenience that may ensue therefrom; (which is the ordinary
ob^ection against the Book of Recreations) for every good ^ubject is bound in
cons^ien^e to believe and rest assu^ed, that his Prince (environed with (...)
Council) will be more able to discover, and as (...) to prevent any ill sequel,
that may come of it, as himself possibly ^an be. And therefore I must not by
^^^obeying my Prince commit a certain ^in, in preventing a p^obable but
contingent inconveniency. This if it were good Doctrine then, when both the
Author and the Book we^e cr^ed up even to admiration, is not to be re^^^ted as
fal^e Doctrine now; truth being constant to (...), not varying nor altering
with the change of times. B^t o^r Author will not s^op here, he goes on and
says*

Ibid. M^^y moderate men are of opinion, that this abuse of the Lord-day was a
principal procurer of Gods anger, (...) poured out on this Land, in a long and
bloody Civil And moderate pe^haps they may be in apparel, (...) the like civil
acts of life and conversation; but (...) moderate enough in this Observation.
For who has k^^wn the mind of the Lord? or who has been his Couns^ll^ (...)
the great Apostle. But it is as common with some men of the newest Religions,
to adscribe (...) judgments to some special Reasons, as (...) the Key which
opens into his Cabinet (...) as i^ they were admitted to all (...) in the (...)
Heaven, before that dreadful (...) (...) o^ the year 1562. and 1565. the
constant (...) of the Chapels in his Majesty's Houses, most (...) the
Cathedral, and some of the Pa^ochial Churches, and ^inally a Declaration of the
King, Anno 1633. ^ommending a Con^ormity in the Parish Churches to their own
Cathedrals. They on the other side stood chiefly upon dis^ontinu^nce, but urged
withal, that some Rub^^^ks in the Common Prayer Book seemed to make for them.
So that the Question being reduced to a matter of ^act, that is to say, the
Table must (...) this way, or it must stand that way, I would fain know how any
condescension might be made on either (...) to an accommodation, or what our
Moderat^^ would have done to at one the differences. Suppo^e him ^^tting in the
Chair, the Arguments on both (...), and all the Audience full of expectation
(...) would carry it. The Moderator Fuller of old Me^^y-Tales then ordinary,
thus resolves the business, that he had heard it commended for a great piece
of wisdom in Bishop Andrews (...)
, That wheresoever he was a Parson, a Dean, or a Bishop, he never troubled
Parish, College, or Diocese, with pressing other Ceremonies upon them, then
such which he found used there before his coming thither; that King James
finding the Archbishop of Spalato in a resolution of ^^e^^ioning all such
Leases as had been made by his (...) in the Savoy, gave him this wise Counsel,
Relinque res sicut eas invenisti, That he should leave things as he found them;
(...)
that the s^id King being told by a great person of the invert^d situation of a
Chapel in Cambridge, (...) ^nswer that it did not matter how the (...) stood
so their hearts who go thither were (...) in Gods service. (...)
But for his part he liked (...) of the Resolution of Dr. Prideaux (...) when
wearied with the Businesses of the Councel-Table, and the High Commission. But
as he was soon hot, so he was soon cooled. And so much is observed by Sir
Edward Deering Collection of Speeches, p 5.
though his greatest adversary, and the first that threw dirt in his face in
the late long Parliament; who tells us of him, that the roughness of his
uncourtly Nature, sent most men discontented from him; (...) so, that he would
often (of himself) ^inde ways and means to sweeten many of them again when
they least looked for it. In this more modest then our Author, who gives us
nothing of this P^elate but his wants and weaknesses. But of this Reverend
Prelate he will give cause to speak more hereafter. Let us now on unto another
of a different judgment, his pro^est enemy Mr. Prin; of whom thus our Author.

Fol. ^57. Mr. William Prinne was borne about Bath in Glocestershire, etc. and
began with the writing of some Orthodox books.] In this story of Mr. Prinne and
his suffe^ings, our Author runs into many errors, which either his love unto
the Man, or zeal to the good cause, or carelessness of what he writes, have
brought upon him.

Bath is not in Glostershire, but a chief City in the County of Somerset.

Prinne (so far forth as I am able to judge by some Books of his not long since
published) as a man of a far more moderate spirit, then I have done formerly;
yet can I not think his first Books to have been so Orthodox as our Author
makes them. For not to say any thing of his Perpetuity, his Books entitled,
Lame Giles his Haltings; Cozens Cozening Devotions, and his Appendix to
another, have many things repugnant to the Rules and Canons of the Church of
England. No (...) Champion against bowing at the name of Jesus, nor greater
enemy to some Ceremonies here by Law (...). In which pa^^iculars i^ our Author
t^i^k him to be Orthodox, he declares himself to be no true Son of the Church
of England.

Thirdly, the Book called Histrio-Mastix was not writ Prinne about three years
before his (...), as our Author tells us, for then it must be w^it or
published Anno 1634. whereas indeed that Book was published in Print about the
latter end of 1632. and the Author censured in S^ar-Chamber for some p^ss^ges
in i^, about the latter end of the year 1633. Othe^wise had it been as our
Author tells us, the punishment (...) the offense, and he must suffer for ^
Book which was not published at that ^ime, and pe^haps not w^itten. But our
Author h^th a special fac^lty in this kind* which few writers (...). For ^s he
post-dateth this Histrio-Mastix, by making it come into the (...) after it did;
so he ante-(...) a Book of D^. White then Ely, which he makes to be published
two yea^s sooner then indeed it was. That book of his entitled A Treatise of
the Sabbath, came no^ ^ut ^ill Michaelmas Anno 1635. though placed by ou^
Autho^ as then written Anno 1633. for which see fol. 144.

Next unto Mr. Prinne, in the co^^se of his Censure, comes the Bishop of
Lincoln, the (...) whereof we have in our Author, who having left a (...)
somewhat which he thinks not ^it to make known to all gives some occasion to
suspect that the matter was far wo^se on the Bishops side then perhaps it was.
And therefore to prevent all further misconstructions in thi^ (...), I will lay
down the story as I find it thus, viz. The Bishops purgation depending chiefly
upon the testimony of one Prideon, it happened that the (...) after* one
Elizabeth Hea^on was delivered of a Hist of K. (...)
base child, and laid to this Prideon. The Bishop finding his great witness
charged with such a load of filth (...) would invalidate all his (...) valid,
the Bishop could easily prognosticate his own ruin; therefore he bestirs
himself amain, and though by order of the Justices at the public Session at
Lincoln, Prideon was charged as the reputed father, the Bishop by his two
Agents Powel and Owen procured that order to be suppressed, and by subornation
and menacing of, and tampe^ing with Witnesses, at length in May 10. Car.
procured the child to be fathered upon one Boon, and Prideon acquit. Which
le^d practices for the supportation of his Favorites credit cost the Bishop, as
he confessed to Sir John Munson and others, twelve hundred pounds, so much
directly, and by consequence much more. But to proceed, the cause being brought
unto a censure,

Fol. 157. Secretary Windebank motioned to degrade him; which (says he) was
lustily pronounced by a Knight and a Layman, having no precedent for the same
in former ] But first it is not very certain that any such thing was moved by
Sir Francis Windebank. A manuscript of that days proceedings I have often
seen, containing the Decree and Sentence, with the substance of every Speech
then made, and amongst others, that of Sir Francis Windebank, in which I find
no motion tending to a Degradation, nor any other punishment inflicted on him
then Fine, Suspension, and Inprisonment, in which the residue of the Lords
concurred, as we find in our Author. Secondly, it had been more strange if the
Knight had not been a Layman, the Church of England not acknowledging any
Order of Spiritual Knighthood. Knights in Divinity, are greater strangers in
this Land, then Lay-Divines; these last being multiplied of late, even ad
infinitum, the first never heard of. And thirdly, had it been so moved, and so
lustily moved, as our Author makes it, the Knight and Layman might have found
a precedent for it in the former ages.

the former times many precedents of like nature might be easily found. And
being understood of the times since the Reformation, it is not so infallibly
true, but that one precedent of it at the least may be found amongst us.
Marmaduke Middleton advanced to the Bishopric of St. David's Anno 1567. after
he had sat in that See three and twenty years, was finally condemned (for many
notable misdemeanors) not only to be deprived of his Bishopric, but degraded
from all holy Orders. Which sentence was accordingly executed by and before the
High Commissioners at Lambeth house, not only by reading it in Scriptis, but by
a formal devesting of him of his Episcopal Robes and Priestly vestments Whether
Ceremonies used at his bringing into the Court, and his thrusting out of it.
, as I have heard from a person of good credit who was present at it. And
somewhat there is further in the story of this Marmaduke Middleton which
concerns the Bishop now before us. Of whom our he utterly refused to do it,
claiming the privilege of a Peer, fol. 159. Which Plea was also made by the
said Bishop of St. David's, offering to give in his Answer to such Articles as
were framed against him, on his Honor only, but refusing to do it on his Oath.
Which case being brought before the Lords then sitting in Parliament, was ruled
against him; it being ordered that he should answer upon Oath, as in fine he
did. To this Bishop let us join his Chaplain Mr. Osbolstone, who being engaged
in the same Bark with his Patron suffered shiprack also, though not at the same
time, nor on the same occasion. Censured in Star Chamber not only to lose his
Ecclesiastical Promotions, but to corporal punishments.

Fol. 166. But this last pers^nal penalty he escaped by going beyond
Canterbury, conceived s^asonably gone beyond the Seas, whilst he secretly
concealed himself in London.] And he had escaped the last penalty, had he staid
at home. For Osbolston at that time conceived the Archbishop to be his greatest
enemy, yet the Archbishop was resolved to show himself his greatest friend,
assuring the Author of these Papers (before any thing was known of Mr.
Osbolstons supposed flight) that he would cast himself at the Kings ^eet for
obtaining a discharge of that corporal punishment unto which he was sentenced.
Which may obtain the greater credit; First, in regard that no course was taken
to stop his flight, no search made after him, nor any thing done in Order to
his apprehension. And secondly, by Mr. Osbolstons readiness to do the
Archbishop all good Offices in the time of his troubles, upon the knowledge
which was given him (at his coming back) of such good Intentions. But of these
private men enough; pass we now to the public.

Lib. XI. Part. II.
Containing the last 12. years of the Reign of King Charles.
ANd now we come to the last and most unfortunate part of this Kings Reign,
which ended in the loss of his own life, the Ruin of the Church, and the
Alteration of the Civil Government. Occa^^oned primarily, as my Author says,
by sending a new Liturgy to the Kirk of Scotland, for he thus proceeds.

Fol. 160. Miseries caused from the sending of the Book of Service, or new
Liturgy thither, which may sadly be termed a Rubric indeed, died with the
blood of so many of both Nations slain on that occasion.] Our A^thor speaks
this in relation to the Scottish tumults, Anno 1637. In telling of which story
he runs (as commonly elsewhere) into many Errors. For first those miseries, and
that caused by sending the Liturgy thither, the Plot had been laid long before
upon other grounds, that is to say* questioning of some Church Lands then in
the hands of some great Persons, of which they feared a Revocation to the
Crown; And secondly, the Manu-mitting of some poor subjects from the Tyranny
and Vassalage which they lived under in respect of their Tithes, exacted with
all c^^elty and in^u^tice by those whom they call the (...) for raising of a
tumult first, a Rebellion afterward; and this occasion they conceived they had
happily gained by sending the new Liturgy thither, though ordered by their own
Clergy first, as our Author tells us, at the Assembly of Aberdeen, Anno 1616.
and after at Perth, Anno 1618. and fashioned for the most part by their own
Bishops also. But of this there has so much been said between the Observator
and his Antagonist, that there is nothing necessary to be added to it.
Secondly, there was no such matter as the passing of an Act of Revocation for
the restoring of such Lands as had been aliened from the Crown in the Minority
of the King Predec^ssors. Of which he tells fol. 192. The King indeed did once
intend the passing of such an Act, but finding what an insurrection was likely
to ensue upon it, he followed the safer counsel of Sir Archibald Acheson, by
whom he was advised to sue them in his Courts of Justice. Which course
succeeding to his wish so ter^ified many of those great Persons, who had little
else but such Lands to maintain their Dignities; that they never thought
themselves secure, as long as the King was in a condition to demand his own.
Thirdly, though it be true enough, that some Persons of Honor had been denied
such higher Titles as they had desired, fol. 163. Men of Honor, which wrote
these terrible effects, but the denying of an Honorary Title to a Man of no
Honor. If Colonel Alexander Lesley an obscure fellow, but made rich by the
spoils and plunder of Germany, had been made a Baron, when he first desired it,
the rest of the Malcontents in Scotland might have had an heart, though they
had no head. But the King not willing to dishonor so high a Title by conferring
it on so low a person, denied the favor: which put the man into such a heat,
that presently he joined himself to the faction there, drove on the Plot, and
finally undertook the command o^ their Armie^. Rewa^ded for which notable
service with the Title of Earl of Levin by the King him^el^, he could not so
digest the injury of the first refusal, but that he afterward headed their
Rebellions upon all occasions.

Fol. 163. Generally they excused the King in their writings as innocent
therein, but charged Archbishop La^d as the principal, and Dr. Cousins for the
instrumental compiler thereof.] This is no more then we had reason to expect
from a lib. 4. fol. 193. where our Author tells us, that the Scottish Bishops
withdrew themselves from their obedience to the Sea of York, in the time when
George Nevil was Archbishop. And then he adds, Hence forwards no Archbishop of
York meddled more with Church matters in Scotland; and happy had it been, if no
Archbishop of Canterbury had since interessed himself therein. His stomach is
so full of choler against this poo^ Prelate, Abbot be suspended from his
Jurisdiction, the blame thereof was laid on Archbishop Laud, as if not content
to succeed, he endeavored to su^plant him, fol. 128. The King sets out a
Declaration about lawful sports, the reviving and enlarging of which must be
put upon his account also, some strong p^e^^mptions being urged for the proof
thereof, fol. 147. The (...) of the Church to her ancient Rules and public
Doctrines, must be nothing else but the enjoining of his own private practices
and opinions upon other men, fol. 127. And if a Liturgy be composed for the use
of Church of Scotland, who but he must be charged to be the Compiler of it? But
what proofs have we for all this? Only the (...) or his Enemies, or our Authors
own (...), or some common fame. And if it once be (...) shall pass for truth;
and as a truth (...) Authors History, though the greatest falsehood. Minut.
F^el.
Tam facilis in mendaciis fides, ut quicquid famae liceat fingere, illi esset
libenter audire, in my Authors language. But for the last he brings some p^oof,
(he would have us think so at the least) that is to Bailey, a Scot, whom it
concerned to make him as odious as he could, the better to comply with a
Pamphlet called The Intentions of the Army; in which it was declared, that the
Scots entered England with a purpose to remove the Archbishop from the King, and
execute their vengeance on him. What hand Dr. Cousins had in assisting of the
work, I am not able to say. But sure I am, that there was nothing done in it by
the Bishops of England, but with the counsel and cooperation of their Brethren
in the Church of Scotland, viz. the Archbishop of St. Andrews, the Archbishop
of Glasco, the Bishop of Murray, Ross, Brechin, and Dunblane, as appears by the
Book entitled Hidden Works of fol. 150, 153, 154, etc. And this our Author
must needs know (but that he has a mind to quarrel the Archbishop upon every
turn) as appears plainly, 1. By his Narrative of the Design in King James his
time, from the first undertaking of it by the Archbishop of St. Andrews, and
the Bishop of Galloway then being* whose Book corrected by that King with some
additions, expunctions, and accommodations, was sent back to Scotland. 2. By
that unsatisfiedness which he seems to have when the project was resumed by
King Charles, whether the Book by him sent into Scotland, were the same which
had passed the hands of King James, or not: which he expresses in these words,
viz. In the Reign of King Charles, the project was resumed, but whether the
same Book or no, God knows, fol. 160. If so, if God only knows whether it
were the same or no, how dares he tell us that it was not? and if it was the
same (as it may be for ought he knows) with what conscience can he charge the
making of it upon Bishop Laud. Besides (as afterward he tells us fol. 163.)
the Church of Scotland claimed not only to be Independent, and free as any
Church in Christendom, a Sister, not a Daughter of England. And consequently
the Prelates of that Church had more reason to decline the receiving of a
Liturgy imposed on them or commended to them by the Primate of England, for
fear of acknowledging any subordination to him; then to receive the same
Liturgy here by Law established, which they might very safely borrow from their
Sister Church without any such danger. But howsoever it was, the blame must
fall on him who did least deserve it.

Fol. 167. Thus none, seeing now foul weather in Scotland, could expect it fair
Sunshine in England.] In this Sun in England might have shined with a brighter
beam, if the clouds which had been gathered together, and threatened such foul
weather in Scotland, had been dispersed and scattered by the Thunder of our
English Ordinance. The opportunity was well given, and well taken also, had it
not been unhappily lost in the prosecution. The Scots were then weak,
unprovided of all necessaries, not above three thousand complete Arms to be
found amongst them: The English on the other side making a formidable
appearance, gallantly Horst, complea^ly armed, and intermingled with the
choicest of the Nobility and Gentry in all the Nation. And had the Scots been
once broken, and their Country wasted (which had been the easiest thing in the
world for the English Army) they had been utterly disabled from creating
trouble to their King, disturbances in their own Church, and destruction to
England. So true is that of the wise Histo^ian, Conatus subditor^m irritos
imperia ^^^per promovere; the Insurrections of the people when they are
suppressed, do always make the King stronger, and the Subjects weaker.

Fol. 167. The Sermon ended We chose Dr. Stewart Den of Chichester Prolocutor,
and the next day of sitting We met at Westminster in the Chapel of King Henry
the seventh.] Had it not been for these and some other passages of this nature,
our Author might have lost the hono^ of being took notice of, for one of the
Clerks of the Convocation; and one not of the lowest fourm, but passing for
some of those wise men, who began to be fearful of themselves, and to be
jealous of that power by which they were enabled to make new Canons. How so?
Because it was feared by the judicious (himself still for one) l^st the
Convocation whose power of meddling with Church matters, had been bridled up for
many years before, should now enabled with such power, over-act their parts,
especially in such dangerous, and discontented times, as it after follows.
Wh^ly foreseen. But then why did not WE, that is to say, our Author, and the
rest of those wise and judicious Persons, fore-warn their weak and unadvised
Brethren of the present danger; or rather why did they go along with the rest
for company, and follow those who had before outrun the Canons by their
additional Conformity? How wise the rest were I am not able to say. But
certainly our Author showed himself no wiser then Walthams Calf, who ran nine
mile to suck a Bull, and came home a thirst, as the Proverb says. His running
unto Oxford, which cost him as much in seventeen weeks, as he had spent in
Cambridge in seventeen years, was but a second Sally to the first
Knight-Errantry.

Fol. 168. Next day the Convocation came together, etc. when, contrary to
general expectation, it was motioned, to improve the present opportunity, in
perfecting the new ] I have not heard of any such motion as our Author speaks
of from any who were present at that time, though I have diligently labored to
inform my self in it. Not is it probable, that any such motion should be made,
as the case then stood. The Parliament had been di^^olv'd on Tuesday, the 5 o^
May. The Clergy met in Convocation on the morrow after, expecting then to be
dissolved, and licenced to go home again. But contrary to that general
expectation, in stead of hearing some news of his Majesty's Writ for their
dissolution, there came an Order from the Archbishop to the Prolocutor, to
adjourn till Saturday. And this was all the business which was done that day,
the Clergy generally being in no small amazement when they were required not to
dissolve, till further Orde^. Saturday being come, what then? A new Commission
says he was brought from his Majesty, by virtue whereof WE were warranted
still to sit not in the capacity of a Convocation, but of a Synod. I had
thought our Author with his wise and judicious Friends had better hearkened to
the ^enor of that Commission, then to come out with such a gross and wild
absurdity, as this is, so fit for none as Sir Edward Deering, and for him only
to make sport within the House of Commons. At the beginning of the Convocation,
when the Prolocutor was admitted, the Archbishop produced his Ma^es^ies
Commission under the Great Seal, whereby the Clergy was enabled to consult,
treat of, and conclude such Canons, as they conceived most expedient to the
pe^ce of the Church, and his (...) service. But this Commission being to expire
with the end of the Parliament, it became void, of no effect as soon as the
Parliament was dissolved. Which being made known unto the King, who was
resolved the Convocation should continue, and that the Clergy should go on in
completing those Canons which they had so happily began; he caused a new
Commission to be sent unto them in the same words, and to the very same effect
as the other was, but that it was to continue durante beneplacito only, as the
other was not. It follows next that

Ibid. Dr. Brownrig, Dr. Hacket, Dr. Holdsworth, etc. with others, to the
number of thirty six, earnestly protested against the continuance of the
Convocation.] It Is possible Dr. Brownrig, now Lord Bishop of Excester, Dr.
Hacket, and the rest of the thirty six, our Author being of the Quorum, (in his
own understanding of the word) might be unsatisfied in the continuance of the
Convocation, because of some offense, which as they conceived would be taken at
it. But if they had protested, and protested earnestly, as our Author tells us,
the noise of so many Vo^es concurring must needs be heard by all the rest which
were then assembled; from none of which I can lea^n any thing of this
Protestation. Or if they did protest ^o earnestly as he says they did, why was
not the Protestation reduced into writing, subsc^ibed wi^h their hands in due
form of Law, and so delivered to the Register to remain upon Record (among^ the
other Acts of that House) for their indemnity? Which not being done, renders
this Protest of theirs (if any such Protest there were) to signify nothing but
their dislike of the continuance. But whereas our Author tells us, that the
whole ^ouse consisted but of six score persons, it may be thought that he
diminishes the number of (...) purpose to make his own party seem the greater.
Canterbury i^ all pa^ties summoned do appear, there are no fewer then two and
twenty Deans, four and twenty Prebendaries, fifty four Archdeacons, and forty
four Cle^ks, representing the Diocesan Clergy, amounting in the total to an
hundred fo^ty four persons, whereof the thirty six Protestors (if so many they
were) make viz. at White Hall, May the 10. 1640. the Convocation being called
by the Kings Writ, is to continue till it be dissolved by the Kings Writ,
notwithstanding the dissolving of the Parliament. Subscribed by Finch Lord
Keeper, Manchester Lord Privy Seal, Littleton chief Justice of the Common
Pleas, Banks Attorney General, Whitfield, and Heath, his Maje^^i^s Sergeants.
Which writing (an Instrument our Author calls it) being communicated to the
Clergy by the Lord Archbishop on the morrow after, did so compose the minds of
all men, that they went forw^^ds very cheerfully with the work in hand: the
principal of those whom o^r Author calls Dissenters, bringing in the Canon o^
preaching for conformity (being the eighth Canon in the Book as now they are
placed) which was received and allowed of, as it came from his hand without
alteration. Howsoever our Author keeps himself to his former folly, shutting up
his extravagancie with this conclusion:

Fol 169. Thus was an old Convocation converted into a new Synod.] An
expression borrowed from the speech a witty Gentleman, as he is called by the
Author of the History of the Reign of King Charles, and since by him declared
to be the Lord George Digby now Earl of Bristow. But he that spent most of his
wit upon it, and the^eby gave occasion unto others for the like mistakings was
Sir Edward Deering in a Speech made against these Canons, Anno 1640. where we
find these flourishes, Would you confute the Convocation? They were a Holy
Synod. Would you argue against the Synod? Collection of Spe^^^es, p 26.
Why they were Commissioners. Would you dispute the Commission? They will
mingle all powers together, and answer that they were some fourth thing, that
neither we know nor imagine; that is to say (as it follows aft^rw^rds* p. 27.)
a Convocational-Synodical-Assembly of (...) More of this fine stuff we may see
hereafte^. In the mean time we may judge by this Remn^nt of the whole Piece,
and (...) i^ upon proof to be very ^light, and not worth the we^ring. For first
the Gentleman could not, and our Author cannot choose but know, that a
Convocation and a Synod (as (...) in England of late times) are but the same
one thing under dive^s names, the one borrowed from a Grecian, the other from a
Latin Original: the Convocation of the Clergy of the Province of Canterbury
being nothing but a Provincial Synod, as a National Synod is nothing el^e but
the Convocation of the Clergy of both Provinces. Secondly, our A^thor knows by
this time, that the Commission which seems to make this doughty difference,
changed not the Convocation into a Synod (as some vainly think) but only made
that Convocation active in order to the making of Canons, which otherwise had
been able to proceed no ^urther then the grant of Subsidies. Thirdly, that
nothing is more ordinary then for the Convocations of all times since the
Reformation, to take unto themselves the name of Syn^ds. For the Articles of
Religion made in the Convocation, An. 1552. are called in the Title of the Book
Articuli de quibus in Synodo Londinensi convenit, etc. The same name given to
those agreed on in the Convocation, An. 1562. as appears by the Title of that
Book also in the Latin Editi^n. The Canons of the year 1571. are said to be
concluded and agreed upon in Synodo inchoat a Land. in aede Divi Paul^, etc. In
the year 1575. came out a Book of Articles with this title following, viz.
Articles whereupon it was agreed by the most Reverend Father in God, the
Archbishop of Canterbury, and other the Bishops, and the whole Clergy of the
Province of Canterbury in the Convocation or Synod holden at Westminster. The
like we find in the year 1597. (being the last active Convocation in Q.
Elizabeth's time) in which we mee^ with a Book entitled, Constitutiones
Ecclesiasticae, etc. in Synodo in^heata Londini vic^simo quinto die Mensis
Octobris. Our Author finally is to know, that though the members of the two
Convocations of York and Canterbury did not mee^ in person, yet they
communicated their ^ounsels, the Re^ults of the one being dispatched unto the
other, and there agreed on, or rejected, as they saw (...) for it. Which laid
together shows the vanity of ^^^ther passage in the Speech of Sir Edward
Deering, where he vapo^reth thus, viz. A strange Commission, wherein no one
Commissioners name is to be found; a (...) Convocation, that lived when the
Parliament was (...): a strange Holy Synod, where one (...) conferred with the
other. Lastly, Si^ Edward Deeri^g seems to marvel at the Title of the Book of
Cano^^ then in question, expressing that they were treated upon in Convocation,
(...). p. 2^.
agreed upon in Syn^d. And this, says he, is a new Mould to cast Canons in
never used before. But had he looked upon the (...) of the Book of Canons, An.
160^. he h^d found it othe^wise. The Title this viz. Constitutions and Canons
(...) by the Bishop of London, President of the Convocation for the Province of
Canterbury, etc. and agreed upon with the Kings Majesty's License in their
Synod (...) at London, An. 1603. And so much for the satisfaction of all such
persons, whom either that gentleman, or this o^r Autho^ h^ve misinformed, and
consequently ab^^ed in this particular.

Ibid. Now because great B^aies m^ve (...). it was thought fit to contract the
(...) of some 26, beside the Prolocutor.] No ^^ch contracting some Rites and
Ceremonies, of which number were the principal of those whom he calls
dissenters, and our Author too amongst the rest: who having agreed upon the
Canon, it was by them presented to the rest of the Clergy in Convocation, and
by them app^ov'd. And possible it is, that the drawing ^p of some other Canons
might be referred also to that Committee ^ as is accustomed in such cases)
without contracting the whole Horse into that small body, or excluding any man
from being present at their consultation. But whereas our Author afterward
tells us, that nothing should be accounted the Act of the House till thrice (as
he takes it) publicly voted It is but as he takes it, or mistakes it rather,
and so let it go. But I needed not to have signified that our Author was one
of this Committee, he will tell it himself. And he will tell us more then that,
publishing himself for one of the thirty six Dissenters, the better The next
day (so he lets us know) We all subscribed the Canons, suffering our selves^
(according to the Order of such meetings) to be all concluded by the majority
of votes, though some of US in the Committee privately dissented in the passing
of many particulars. So then our Author was content to play the good fellow at
the last, and go along hand in hand with the rest of his company; dissenting
privately, but consenting publicly, which is as much as can be looked for.

Ibid. No sooner came these Canons abroad into a public ] Not possible that in
such a confusion both of Affections and Opinions, it should otherwise be. Non
omnibus una voluntas, was a note of old, and will hold true as long as there
are many men to have many minds. And yet if my information deceive me not,
these Canons found great approbation from the mouths of some, from whom it had
been least expected; particularly from Justice Crook, whose Argument in the
case of Ship-m^ny was printed afterward by the Order of the House of Commons.
Of whom I have been told by a person of great worth and credit, that having
read over the Book of Canons, when it first came out, he lifted up his hands,
and gave hearty thanks to Almighty God, that he had lived to see such good
effects of a Con^^^^tion. It was very well, that they pleased him; but that
they should please all men was not to be hoped for.

Fol. 171. Many took exception at the hollowness of the Oath in the middle
thereof, having its Bowels puffed up with a windy etc. a cheveral word, which
might be stretched as men would measure it.] Of this etc. which has made
Observator. Only I shall make bold to ask him, why he observed not this etc.
when the Oath was first under consideration; or why he signified not his
dissent when it came to the vote, and showed some reasons which might move him
to object against it. It had been fitter for a wise and judicious man to
signify his dislike of any thing when it might be mended, then to join with
others in condemning it when it was past remedy. But Mala m^ns malus animus, as
the saying is. The Convocation had no ill intent in it when they passed it so,
though some few, out of their perverseness and corrupt affections, were willing
to put their own sense on it, and spoil an honest-meaning Text with a factious
Gloss. But let us follow our Author as he leads the way, and we shall find that

Ibid. Some Bishops were very forward in pressing this Oath even before the
time thereof. For whereas a liberty was allowed to all, to deliberate thereon,
until the Feast of Michael the Archangel, some presently pressed the Ministers
of their Diocesses for the taking thereof.] It Michael the Archangel, which I
am sure the Canon gives not. The Synod did indeed decree, that all Archbishop,
Canon. 7. 1640.
and Bishops, and all other Priests and Deacons, in places exempt or not
exempt, should before the second day of November next ensuing, take the
following Oath against all innovation of Doctrine or Discipline. By which we
see, that the Oath was to be given and taken before the second of November, but
no such thing as Liberty of Deliberation till the Feast of St. Michael. And
therefore if some Bishops did press the Clergy of their several and respective
Diocesses, as soon as they returned home from the Convocation; they might well
do it by the Canon, without making any such Essay of their Activity, if
providence (as our Author most wisely words it) had not prevented them.

Ibid. The Exception of Exceptions was, because they were generally condemned
as illegally passed to the prejudice of the fundamental Liberty of the Subject,
whereof we shall hear Not generally condemned, either as illegally passed, or
as tending to prejudice of the Subjects Rights, I am sure of that. Scarce so
much as condemned by any for those respects, but by such whom it concerned (for
carrying on of their Designs) to weaken the Authority of the Church, and
advance their own. But because our Author tells us, that we shall find enough
of this in the following Parliament, we are to follow him to that Parliament
for our satisfaction. And there we find that Mr. Maynard made a Speech in the
Committee of Lords against the Canons, Church Hist. fol 180.
made by the Bishops in the last Convocation, in which he endeavored to prove,
that the Clergy had no power to make Canons, without common consent in
Parliament, because in the Saxon times Laws and Constitutions Ecclesiastical
had the confirmation of Peers, and sometimes of the People, to which great
Councels our Parliaments do succeed. Which Argument Canons without consent of
the Peers and people in Parliament; it must prove also that the Peers and
People can make no Statutes without consent of the Clergy in their Convocation.
My reason is, because such Councels in the times of the Saxons were mixed
Assemblies, consisting as well of Laics, as of Eccles^asticks, and the matters
there concluded on of a mixed nature also; Laws being passed as commonly in them
in order to the good governance of the Commonwealth, as Canons for the
Regulating such things as concerned Religion. But these great Councels of the
Saxons being divided into two parts in the times ensuing, the Clergy did their
work by themselves without any confirmation from the King or Parliament, till
the submission of the Clergy to King Henry the eighth. And if the Parliaments
did succeed in the place of those great Councels (as he says they did) it was
because that anciently the Procurators of the Clergy, not the Bishops only, had
their place in Parliament, though neither Peers nor People voted in the
Convocations. Which being so, it is not much to be admired that there was some
checking (as is said in the second Argument) about the disuse of the general
But checking or repining at the proceeding of any superior Court makes not the
Acts thereof illegal. For if it did, the Acts of Parliaments themselves would
be reputed of no force, or illegally made, because the Clergy for a long time
have checked (and think they have good cause to check) for their being excluded.
Which checking of the Commons ap^ears not only in thos^ anti^nt Authors which
the Gentleman cited, but in the Remonstrance tendered by them to King Henry the
Eighth, exemplified at large in lib. 3. n. 61. But because this being a Record
of the Convocation, may not come within the walk of a common Lawyer, I shall
put him in mind of that memorable passage in the Parliament 51. Edw. 3. which
in brief was this: The Commons f^nding themselves aggrieved, as well with
certain Constitutions made by the Clergy in their Synods, as with some Laws or
Ordinances which were lately passed, more to the advantage of the Clergy then
the common people, put in a Bill to this effect, viz. That no Act nor Ordin^nce
should from thenceforth be made or granted on the Petition of the said Clergy,
without the consent of the Commons; and that the said Commons should not be
bound in times to come by any Constitutions made by the Clergy of this Realm
for their own advantage, to which the Commons of this Realm had not given
consent. The reason of which is this (and it is worth the marking;) Car eux ne
veulent estre obligez a null de vos Estatuz ne Ordinances faitz sanz leur
Assent, because the said Clergy did not think themselves bound (as indeed they
were not in those times) by any Statute, Act, or Ordinance, made without their
Assent in the Court of Parliament. But that which could not be obtained by this
checking of the Commons in the declining and last times of King Edw. 3. was in
some part effected by the more vigorous prosecution of King Hen. 8. who to
satisfy the desires of the Commons in this particular, and repress their
checkings, obtained from the Clergy, that they should neither make nor execute
any Canons without his consent, as before is said; so that the Kings power of
confirming Canons was grounded on the free and voluntary submission of the
Clergy, and was not built, as the third Argument ob^ecteth, on to weak a
foundation as the Popes making Canons by his sole power: the Pope not making
Canons here, nor putting his Rescripts and Letters decretory in the place of
Canons, but only as a remedy for some present exigency. So that the Kings power
in this particular not being built upon the Popes, as he said it was, it may
well stand, That Kings may make Canons without consent of Parliament, though he
says they cannot. But whereas it is argued in the fourth place, that the the
Clergy shall not make Canons without the Kings leave, does not imply that by
his leave alone they may make them; I cannot think that he delivered this for
Law, and much less for Logic. For had this been looked on formerly as a piece
of Law, the Parliaments would have checked at it at some time or other, and
been as sensible of the Kings encroachments in executing this power without
them, as anciently some of them had been about the disuse of the like general
consent in the making of them.

Fol. 180. In the next place our Author tells us that Mr. Maynard endeavored
also to prove, that these Canons were against the Kings Prerogative, the
Rights, Liberties, and Properties of the Subject.] And he says well, that
Commons are against fundamental Laws of this Realm, Hist K Charles. fol. 208.
against the Kings Prerogative, prop^^^ of the Subject, the Right of
Parliament, and do tend to faction and sedition; and it was fit that some
endeavors should be used to make good the Vote. But this being but a general
charge, requires a general answer only, and it shall be this. Before the Canons
we^e subscribed, they were imparted to the King by the Archbishop of
Canterbury, and by the King communicated to the Lords of the Council; who
calling to them the assistance of the Judges, and some of the Kings Council
learned in the Laws of this Realm, caused the said Canons to be read and
considered of, the King being then present. By all which upon due and mature
deliberation the Canons were approved, and being so approved, were sent back to
the Clergy in the Convocation, and by them subscribed. And certainly it had
been strange that they should pass the approbation of the Judges and learned
Lawyers, had they contained any thing against the fundamental Laws of the Land,
the property of the Subject, and the Rights of Parliament; or been approved of
by the Lords of his Majesty's Conncel, had any thing been contained in them
derogatory to the Kings Prerogative, or tending to Faction and Sedition. So
that the foundation being ill laid, the superstructures and objections which
are built upon it, may be easily shaken and thrown down. To the first therefore
it is answered, that nothing has been more ordinary in all former times, then
for the Canons of the Church to inflict penalties on such as shall disobey
them; exemplified in the late Canons of 603. many of which extend not only unto
Excommunication, but even to Degradation and Irregularity, for which see Can.
38. 113. etc. To the second, That there is nothing in those Canons which
determines or limiteth the Kings Authority, but much that makes for and
defends the Right of the Subject, for which the Convocation might rather have
expected thanks then censure from ensuing Parliaments. To the third, That when
the Canon did declare the Government of Kings to be founded on the Law of
Nature, it was not to condemn all other Governments as being unlawful, but to
commend that of Kings as being the best. Nor can it Logically be inferred, that
because the Kingly Government is not received in all places, that therefore it
ought not so to be: or that the Government (by this Canon) should be the same
in all places, and in all alike; because some Kings do and may lawfully p^t
with many of (...) Rights for the good of their Subject^, which others do (...)
may as lawfully retain unto themselves. ^o the fourth, That the Doctrine of
Non-Resistance is (...) the words of St. Paul, Romans (...) condemn the Canon in
that behalf, (...) Word of God upon which it is (...) fifth and last, That the
Statute (...) that the days there m^ntion^ (...) days and no other, rel^tes
only to the (...) some other Festivals which had been formerly (...) in the
Realm of England, and not to the (...) Church from ord^ining any other Holy
(...) causes) in the times to come. Assuredly (...) Lawyer would have spoke
more home (...) could the cause have born it. Floquent^m (...) in the Ora^o^s
language. And therefore (...) on the heads of the Arguments ^s our (...) them
to us) I must needs think that they were (...) fitted to the sense of the
House, then they were (...) own.

What influence these arguments might have on the House of Peers, when reported
by the Bishop of (...) I am not able to affirm: But ^o far I (...) our Author,
that they lost neither (...) came from his mo^th, (who as our Author says)
(...) back friend to the Canons* because made (...) and durance in the Tower. A
piece of (...)

Fol. 182. Mr. (...) should so supinely suffer themselves to be surprised in
their power.] And well might Mr. Pim triumph, as having gained the point he
aimed at in subverting the coercive power, and consequently the whole exercise
of Ecclesiastical J^risdiction. But he had no reason to impute it to the ^inger
of God, or to the carelessness of the Bishops in suffe^ing themselves to be so
supinely surprised. For first ^e Bishops saw too plainly, that those general
words by which they were disabled from inflicting any pain or penalty, would be
extended to Suspension, Excommunication, and other Ecclesiastical censures. But
secondly, they saw withal that the stream was too strong for them to ^ive
against, most of the Lords being wrought on by the popular party in the House
of Commons, to pass the Bill. Thirdly, they were not without hope, that when
the Scots A^my was disbanded, and that Nation satisfied, by the Kings
condescensions to them, there might be such an explication made of those
general words, as to restrain them unto temporal pains and civil penalties, by
which the censures of the Church might remain as forme^ly. And fourthly, in
order thereunto they had procured a Proviso to be entered in the House of Pa^s,
That the general words in this Bill should extend only to the High Commission
Court, and not reach other Ecclesiastical jurisdictions, for which consult our
Author* fol. 181. ^aving thus passed over such matters as concern the Ch^^ch,
we will now look upon some few things which relate to the Parliament. And the
first is that

Fol. 174. D^. Pocklington, and Dr. Bray were the tw^ first that felt the
displeasures of it, the former for preaching and printing, the later for
licencing two Books, one cal^^ the other the Christian Altar.] No other way to
(...) the hig^ displea^ures of the Bishop of Lincoln, but by ^uch a Sacrifice,
who therefore is entrusted to gather such Propositions out of those tw^ Books
as were to be recan^ed by the one* and for which the other was to be deprived
of all his preferments. And in this the Bishop served his own turn, and the
peoples too: his own turn first in the great controversy of the Altar, in
which he was so great a ^^ickle^, and in which Pocklington was thought to have
provoked him to take that revenge. The Peoples turn he served next, in the
condemning and recanting of some points about the Sabbath, though therein he
ran cross to his former practice. Who had been not long since so far from those
Sabbatarian rigors (which now he would fain be thought to countenance) that he
caused a Comedy to be acted before him at his house at Bugden, not only on a
Sunday in the afternoon, but upon such a Sunday also on which he had publicly
given sacred Orders both to P^iests and Deacons. And to this Comedy he invited
the Earl of Manchester, and diverse of the neighboring ^entry, though on this
turning of the tide, he did not only cause these Doctors to be condemned for
some Opinions which formerly himself allowed of, but moved at the Assembly in
Jerusalem Chamber, that all Books should be publicly burnt, which had disputed
the Morality of the Lords-day-Sabbath. Quo teneam nodo, etc. as the Poet has
it. But whereas our Author tells us in the following words, that soon after
both the Doctors decea^ed for grief, I dare with some confidence tell him,
there was no such matter; Dr. Pocklington living about two years, and Dr. Bray
above four years after, with as great cheerfulness and courage as ever
formerly. How he has dealt with Dr. Cosen, we shall see more at large
hereafter in a place by it self, the discourse thereof being too long and too
full of particulars, to come within the compass of an Animadve^^on. In the mean
time proceed we unto Bishop (...) of whom thus as follows.

Fol. 182. A Bill was sent up by the Commons against Matthew Wren Bishop of
^ly, containing 25 Articles, etc.] impeachments of like nature were hammered at
and about the same time against many other Clergy men of good note, though
in^erior Order; the Articles whereof were printed and exposed to open sale to
their great disparagement. And therefore I would fain know the reason, why this
man should be singled ou^ amongst all the rest to stand impeached upon Record
in our Authors History; especially considering that there was nothing done by
the Lords in pursuance of it, the impeachment dying in a manner as soon as born.
Was it be^^use he was more criminal then the others were (...) the (...) was
better proved, or for what (...)? Well, since our Author will not, I will tell
you (...). And I will tell it in the words of King (...), in the Conference at
Hampton Court, upon occasion of a (...) exception taken by Dr. Reynolds at a
passage in Ecclesi^sticus. What trow ye, said the King, makes these men so
a^g^y with Eccles^^^cus? By my Sal, I think he was a Bishop^ or else they would
never use him so. And so much for tha^.

Fol. 174. About this time was the first motion of a new Protestati^n to be
taken all over England, which some months ] What time this was ou^ A^tho^ tells
us in the margin, pointing to Feb. 4. about which time there was no mention of
the Protestation, nor occasion for it. The first mention which was made of the
P^^testation was upon Monday, May the third, on which day it was mentioned,
framed, and taken by all the Membe^s of the House of Commons, excepting the
Lord George Digby (now Earl of Bristol) and an Uncle of (...). The occasion of
it was a Speech made by the King in the House of Peers in favor of the Earl of
(...) upon the Saturday before; which moved them to unite themselves by this
(...) bringing to condign punishment all such as ^^all either by ^orce,
practice, plots, councels, conspiracies, or otherwise do any thing to the
contrary of any thing in the same Pr^testation contained. Which Pro^estation
being carried into the (...) of Peers, was after some few d^yes generally taken
by that House also. But the prevalent party in the (...) of Commons having
f^^ther aims then such as our Author pleases to take notice of, first ca^s'd
(...) to be (...) by an Order of the fifth of May* that they (...) down to the
Sheriffs and I^s^ices of Peace in the several Shires; to whom the intima^ed,
that as they (...) the taking of it in themselves* so they c^uld not but
approve it in all such as should take i^. But f^nding that this did not much
edify with the Count^^^ (...), they desired the Lords to concur with them
(...) the same. Failing thereof, by an Order of their own House only, July 30.
it was declared, that the Prot^station made by them was fit to be taken by
every Person that was well affected in Religion, and to the good ^f the
Commonwealth; and therefore what Person ^^ever (...) not tak^ the same, was
unfit to bear Office in the Church or Commonwealth. Which notwithstan^ing many
refused to take it, as our A^thor tells us, not knowing b^t (...) use might
be made thereof: as afte^ward (...) by those Pikes and Protestations, which
cond^^^ed some of the five Members to the House of Commons.

Fol. 183* About this time came forth the Lord B^ook his Book against Bishops,
accusing them in respect of their Parentage to be de faece populi, of the (...)
of the people; and in respect of their Studies no way fi^ for Government, or to
be Barons in Parliament:] A passage mis-be^oming Fathe^s. From the first part
of which calumny the Bishops freed themselves well enough, as appears by our
Author. And from the second, since they were too modest to speak in their own
commendations, our Author might have freed them with one of the old tales which
are in his budget. And the tale is of a Nobleman in King Harry the eighths
time, Camd. Rem. page 286.
who told Mr. Pac^ one of the Kings Secretaries, in contempt of Learning, that
it was enough for Noblemens sons to wind their horn, and carry their Hauk
fair, and to leave study and learning to the children of mean men: to whom the
aforesaid Mr. Pace replied; then you and other Noblemen must be content, that
your children may wind their horns, and keep their Hauks, while the children
of mean men do manage matters of Estate. And certainly there can be no reason
why men that have been verst in Books, studied in Histories, and thereby made
acquainted with the chief occurrences of most States and Kingdoms, should not
be thought as fit to manage the affairs of State, as those who spend their time
in Hauking and Hunting, if not upon some worse employments. For that a
Superinduction of holy Orders should prove a Supersedeas to all civil prudence,
is such a wild extravagant fancy as no man of judgment can allow of.

Fol. 188. The next day the 12 Subscribers were voted to be committed to the
Tower, save that Bishop Morton of Durham, and Hall of Norwich found some
favor.] Our Hall Bishop of Norwich, but Dr. Wright Bishop of Coventry and
Lichfield, who found that favor at their hands. The like Misnomer I find
after, fol. 193. where he speaks of William Earl of Bath; the Earl of Bath of
whom he Henry, and not William, unless he changed his name when he succeeded in
that Earldom, as I think he did not, and I am sure our Author will not say he
did. As much he is mistaken also in point of time, leaving whereas they were
scarce detained there for half that time. For being committed to the Tower in
the end of December, they were released by an Order of the House of Peers on
the fifteenth of February, being the next day after the Bill for taking away
their Votes had passed in Parliament. But then the Commons looking on them, as
divested of their Right of Peerage, and consequently (as they thought) in the
same rank with themselves, returned them to the Tower again* and having kept
them there some few weeks (long enough to declare their power) discharged them
upon Bail, and so sent them home.

Fol. 195. About this time the word Malignant was (...) born (as to common use)
in England, and first as a n^te ^f disgrace on the Kings Party, and (because
one had had as good be dumb as not speak with the volge) possibly in that sense
it may occur in our ensuing History.] Nothing more Royalists and High
Royalists, as he ^ometimes (...) it was not because he thought them worthy of
no wo^^e a Title, but because the name of Malignant h^d not then been born. He
cannot choose but know, that the name of Roundhead was born at the same time
also, and that it was as common in the Kings Party to call the Parliamentarians
by the name of Roundheads, as it was with those of the Parliament Party, to
call the Kings Adherents by the name of Malignants. And yet I (...) (...), that
the word Roundhead, as it was fixed as a (...) of disgrace on the Parliament
party, does not occur, on any occasion whatsoever, in our Authors History. But
kissing goes by favor, as the saying is, and therefore let him ^avour whom he
pleases, and kiss where he favou^eth.

Fol. 196. By this time ten of the eleven Bishops formerly (...) their
Protestation to the Parliament, were after some months durance (upon good Bail
given) released, etc.] plunder had begun to be used amongst us. Plunder both
name and thing was unknown in England, till the beginning of the war; and the
war began not till September, Anno 1642. which was some months after the
releasing of fol. 187. whereof ten were sent unto the Tower, and the other two
committed to the cus^ody of the Black-Rod, f^l. 188. And if ten only were
releast, the other two must be kept in custody for a longer time: whereas we
find the Bishop of Norwich at home in his Diocese, and the Bishop of Durham at
liberty in London; they being the two whom he makes so far favored by the Wren
(...) detained in the Tower, which is nothing so. That Bishop was releast upon
bail when the other were, returned into his (...) as the othe^s did, and there
continued for a time, when on a sudden he was snatched (...) his (...) at (...)
in the Isle of Ely, carried (...) the Tower, and there imprisoned, never being
brought unto a hearing, nor any cause shown (...) his imprisonment to this very
day. Fourthly, A^chbishop Williams after his restoring unto liberty went not
into the Kings Quarters, as our Autho^ says, but unto one of his own houses in
Yorkshire, where he continued till the year 1643. and then came to Ox^^rd: not
that he found the North too cold for him, o^ the (...), but to solicit for
renewing of his C^mm^ndam in the Dea^ry of Westminster, the time for which he
was to hold it drawing toward an end.

Fol. 196. Some of the aged Bishops had their tongues so used to the language
of a third Estate, that more then once they ran on that (reputed) Rock in their
spe^ches, for which they were publicly s^en^, and enjoined an acknowledgement
of their mistake.] By whom they were publicly shent, and who they were that so
ingenrously acknowledged their mistake, as my Author tells us not, so neither
can I say whether it be (...) or false. But I must needs say, that there was
small ingen^ity in acknowledging a mistake in that wherein they (...) not been
mistaken; or by endeavoring to avoid a reputed Rock, to run themselves on a
certain Rock, even the Rock of scandal. For that the English Bishops had their
vote in Parliament as a third (...), and not in the capacity of temporal
Barons, will evidently appear by these reasons following. For first the Clegy
in all other Christian Kingdoms of the^e No^thwest p^rts make the third Estate;
that is to say, in the German Empire, as appears by Thuanus the Historian, lib.
2. In France, as is affirmed by Paulus Aemilius, lib. 9. in Spain, as
testifies Bodinus in his De Bepub. lib. 3. For which consult also the General
History of Spain, as in point of practice, lib. 9, 10, 11, 14. In H^ng^ry, as
witnesses Bonfinius, Dec. 2. l. 1. In (...) by Thuanus also, lib. 56. In
Denmark^ as (...) tells us in Historia (...) observing anciently the same
form and order of Government as was used by the Danes. The like we find in
Camden for the Realm of Scotland, in which anciently the Lords Spiritual, viz.
Bishops, Abbots, Priors, made the third Estate. And certainly it were very
strange, if the Bishops and other Prelates in the Realm of England, being a
great and powerful body, should move in a lower Sphere in England, then they
do elsewhere. But secondly, not to stand only upon probable inferences, we
find first in the History of Titus Livius, touching the Reign and Acts of King
Henry the fifth, that when his Funerals were ended, the three Estates of the
Realm of England did assemble together, and declared his Son King Henry the
sixth, being an Infant of eight months old, to be their Sovereign Lord as his
Heir and Successor. And if the Lords Spiritual did not then make the third
Estate, I would know who did. Secondly, the Petition tendered to Richard Duke of
Gloucester, to accept the Crown, occurring in the Parliament Rolls, runs in the
name of the three Estates of the Realm, that is to say, The Lords Spiritual,
and Temporal, and the Commons thereof. Thirdly, in the first Parliament of the
said Richard lately Crowned King, it is said expressly, that at the request and
by the consent of the three Estates of this Realm, that is to say, the Lords
Spiritual, and Temporal, and Commons of this Land assembled in this present
Parliament, and by Authority of the same it be pronounced, decreed, and
declared, That our said Sovereign Lord the King, was, and is the very and
undoubted King of this Realm of England, etc. Fourthly, it is acknowledged so
in the Statute of 1 Eliz. cap. 3. where the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and
the Commons in that Parliament assembled, being said expressly, and in terminis,
to represent the three Estates of this Realm of England, did recognize the
Queens Majesty to be their true, lawful and undoubted Sovereign Liege Lady, and
Queen. Add unto these the Testimony of Sir Edward Cook, though a private
person, who in his Book of the Jurisdiction of Courts (published by order of
the long Parliament) chap. 1. does expressly say; That the Parliament consists
of the Head and Body; that the Head is the King, that the Body are the three
E^tates, viz. the Lords Spiritual, and Temporal, and Commons. In which words we
have not only the opinion and tes^imony of that learned Lawyer, but the
Authority o^ the long Parliament also, though against it self. Those aged
Bishops had been but little studied in their own concernments, and betrayed
their Rights, if any of them did acknowledge any such mistake in ch^llenging to
themselves the name and privileges of the third (...).

Fol. 196. The Convocation now not sitting^ and matters of Religion being
brought under the cognizance of the Parliament, their Wisdoms adjudged it not
only convenient, but necessary, that some prime Clergy men might be consulted
with.] It seems then, that the setting up o^ change of the Gover^^ent, or to
the abrogating of the Liturgy of the Church of England, in all which the
Divines of their own nomination were presumed to serve them. And so accordingly
they did, advancing their Presbyteries in the place of Episcopacy, their
Directory in the room of the Common Prayer Book, their Confession to the
quality of the Book of Articles: all of them so short lived, of so little
continuance, that none of them past over their Probationers year. Finally
having se^v'd the turn, amused the world, with doing nothing, they made their
Exit, with far fewer Plaudites unknown to him: whereas he might have found them
all in the Ordinance of the Lords and Commons by which they were called and
empowered to be an Assembly. Of which pardon he afterward presumes in case he
has not marshalled them in their Seniority; because says he

Fol. 198. It ^avours something of a Prelatical Spirit ] I ^ee our Author is no
Changeling, Primus ad extremum similis sibi, the very same at last as he was at
the first. Certainly if it ^avour of a Prelatical Spirit to contend about
Precedencies, that Spirit by some Pythagorean Metempsychosis has passed into
the bodies of the Presbyterians, whose pride had swelled them in conceit above
Kings and Princes. Nothing more positive then that of Travers (one of our
Authors shining Lights, for so he calls him, Lib. 9. fol. 218.) in his Book of
Discipline; Huic Discipline omnes Principes submittere Fasces suos necesse est,
as his words there are. Nothing more proud and arrogant then that of the
Presbyterians in Queen Elizabeth's time, R^g in Praef. to the Artic.
who used frequently to say, That King and Queens must lay down their Scepters,
and lick up the very dust of the Churrches feet, that is, their own. And this,
I trow, does not savor so much of a Prelatical as a Papal Spirit. Diogenes the
Cynick affecting a vainglorious poverty, came into Plato's Chamber, and
trampled the Bed and other furniture thereof under his feet, using these words:
Calco Platonis fastum, that he trampled on the pride of Plato. To which Plato
very gravely answered, Sed majori fastu, intimating that the Cynick showed more
pride in that foolish action, then all the Ornaments of his Chamber could
accuse him of. Our Author need not travel far for the application, it comes
home unto him.

Fol. 203. We listen not to their fancy who have reckoned the words in the
Covenant, six hundred sixty six, etc.] I must confess my self not to be so much
a Pythagorean, Divinity in Numbers, nor am taken with such Mysteries as some
fancy in them. And yet I cannot choose but say, that the Number of Six hundred
sixty six words, neither more nor less, which are found in the Covenant, though
they conclude nothing, yet they signify something. Our Author cannot choose but
know what pains were taken even in the times of Irenaeus to find out
Antichrist by this number: Some thinking then that they had found it in (...)
with reference to the* persecuting Roman Emperors. Some Protestants think that
they had found it in a Dedication to Pope Paul the fifth, which was Paulo Vto
Vice-Deo; the numeral letters whereof, that is to say D. C. L. V. V. V. I.
amount exactly unto six hundred sixty six, which is the Number of the Beast in
Revelation. The Papists on the other side find it in the name of Luther, but
in what language or how speld, I remember not. And therefore whosoever he was,
which made this Observation upon the Covenant, he deserves more to be commended
for his wit, then condemned for his idleness. But much less is our Author Harry
the eighth. And not compared so without cause. For though I cannot say, that
the Ordinance which enjoined the Covenant did draw so much blood from the poor
Protestants as that Statute did; yet I may warrantably say, that there were
mo^e Families undone by the one, then lives lost by the other. And secondly, it
may be said (I fear too truly) that though the Covenant were writ in ink, it
was sealed with blood; many thousands of true English Protestants having lost
their lives by the coming in of the Scottish Armies drawn into England, in
pursuance of this Band or Covenant. So that the Lashes of each Whip being equal
in number, o^r Author has no reason to be displeased with them that made that
Parallel, though he may have some reason to himself not to applaud them.

Fol. 207. Now began the great and general purgation of the Clergy in the
Parliaments Quarters, etc. Some of whose offenses were so foul, it is a shame
to report them, ] And it was time that such a purgation should be made, if
their offenses were so foul as our Author makes them. But first our Author
might have done well to have satisfied himself in all particulars before he
raised so foul a scandal on his Chri^^ian Brethren, and not to have taken them
up upon hearsay, or on no better grounds then the credit of the first Century,
which he after mentions. Which modesty he might have learnt, 1. From the Author
of that scandalous and infamous Pamphlet (whatsoever he was) desisting from the
writing of a second Century, as being sensible, that the Subject was generally
odious. And certainly if it were odious in that party to write the same, it
must be much more odious in our Author to defend the writing. He might have
learnt it 2. from the most excellent Master in the Schools of Piety and
Morality which this Age has given us, even the King himself; who as our Author
tells us, fol. 208. would not give way that any such Book should be w^itten
of the vicious lives of some Parliament Ministers, when such an undertaking was
presented to him. But if their Offenses were so foul, the Writer of the Century
Herb had not spoiled all the Pot of Pottage. But first, Qui alterum incusat
probri seipsum intueri oportet, is a good rule in the Schools of Prudence, and
therefore it concerns our Author to be sure of this, that all things be well at
home, both in his own Person and in his Family, before he throw so much foul
dirt in the face of his Brethren. In which respect Manutius was conceived to be
the unfittest man in Rome (as indeed he was) to perform the Office of a Censor,
though most ambitiously he affected and attained that Dignity; of whom it is
affirmed by Velleius Paterculus, Nec quicquam ob^icere po^uit Adolescentibus
quod non agnosceret Senex, that is to say, that he was able to object no crime
to the younger sort, of which himself being then well in years, was not also
guilty. And secondly, Non temere de fratre mali aliquid credendum esse, was
anciently a Rule in the Schools of Charity; which our Autho^ either has
forgotten, or else never learned. He would otherwise have examined the Proofs,
before he had pronounced the Sentence; and not have positively condemned these
poor men for such foul offenses as cried to justice for punishment; and of such
scandalous enormities, as were not fit to be covered with the Mantle of
Charity. But he takes himself up at last with a doubt, that there might want
sufficient proof to convict them of it. Nothing (says he) can be said in their
excuse, if (what was the main matter (...) crimes were sufficiently proved. And
if they were not sufficiently proved, as indeed they were not, (no witness
coming in upon Oath to make good the Charge) our Author has sufficiently
proved himself an unrighteous Judge, an Accusator fratrum, as we know who is,
in accu^^ng and condemning them for scandalous enormities and foul offenses,
branding them by the name of Baal, and calling them unsavory Salt, not fit to
be thrown upon the dunghill, yet all this while to be unsatisfied in the
sufficiency of the proof. Decedis ab Officio Religiosi Iudicis, Minut. Fael.
is the least than can be said here, and I say no more. Only I note, what sport
was made by that Century then, and may be made hereafter of this part of the
History in the Court of Rome; to which the libellous Pamphlets of
Martin-Mar-Prelate published in Queen Elizabeth's time served for Authentic
Witnesses, and sufficient evidence to disg^^ce this Church. Nor have they
spared to look upon this whole business as an act of divine Retaliation
Reformers, under color of some Scandalous Enormities by them committed; under
pretense whereof so many poor Monks and Friars were (as they say) turned ou^ of
their Cells with like inhumanity by those which had the first hamme^ing of the
Reformation here by law established.

But to say truth, it is no wonder if he concur with othe^s in the condemnation
of particular persons, since he concurs with others in the condemnation of the
Church it self. For speaking of the separation made by Goodwin, Mr. Nigh, etc.
fol. 209. he professes, that he rather does believe, that the sinful
corruptions of the worship and government of this Church taking hold on their
consciences, and their inability to comport any longer therewith, was rather
the true cause of their deserting of their Country; then that it was for Debt,
or Danger^ as Mr. Edwards in his Book of his had suggested of them. What
grounds Mr. Edwards had for his suggestion, I enquire not now; though coming
from the P^n of one who was no friend unto the Government and Liturgy of the
Church of England, it might have met with greater credit in our Author. For if
these men be not allowed for witnesses against one another, the Church would be
in worse condition then the ancient Borderers: Amongst whom though the
te^^imony of an English man against a Scot, or of a Scot against the English
(in matters of spoil and dep^edation) could not find admittance; yet a Scots
evidence against a Scot was beyond exception. Lege inter Limitaneos cautum, ut
nullus nisi Anglus in Anglum, Annal Eliz.
nullus nisi Scotus in Scotum testis admittatur, as we read in Camden. We see
by this, as by other passages, which way our Authors Bowl is biassed, how
constantly he declares himself in favor of those, who have either separated
from the Church, or appeared against it. Rather then such good people shall be
thought to forsake the Land for Debt or Danger, the Church shall be accused for
laying the heavy burden of Conformity upon their Consciences, which neither
they, nor their forefathers (the old English Puritans) were resolved to bear.
For what else were those sinful Corruptions of this Church in Government and
Worship, which laid hold of their Consciences, (as our Author words it) but the
Government of the Church by Bishops, the Rites and Ceremonies of the Church
here by law established; which yet must be allowed of by our Author as the more
true and real cause of their Separation, then that which we find in Mr.
Edwards. Nor can our Author save himself by his parenthesis, in which he tells
us, that he uses their language only; for using it without check or censure, he
makes it his own as well as theirs, and ^ustifies them in the action, which he
should have condemned.

Fol. 214. Here Mr. Christopher Love gave great offense to the Royalists in his
Sermon, showing the impossibility ] This happened at the Treaty at Vxbridge,
where he had thrust himself (as the Commissioners affirmed) upon that
attendance. And for the words at which the offense was taken, they were these,
viz. That the Kings Commissioners came with Hearts full of blood, Treaty at
Vxb^idge, p. 31.
and that there was as great distance between that Treaty and Peace, as between
Heaven and Hell. For which, though some condemn him for want of charity, and
others for want of discretion; yet our Author seems more willing to have men's
censures fall lightly on him, because since he has suffered, and so sa^^fied
here for his faults in this, or any other kind. This Rule I both approve, and
am willing to practice, and could wish our Author were so minded; who will not
let the Archbishop of Canterbury be at rest in his grave after all his
sufferings, notwithstanding the great difference between the persons, and the
impulsives to their deaths. But Mr. Love was Mr. Love, and Bishop Laud was but
a Bishop, to whom now we come.

Fol. 216. As appears by his own Diary, which if evidence against him for his
faults, may be used as a witness ] The Diary which our Author speaks of, was
the Archbishops practical Commentary on those words of David, viz. Teach me O
Lord so to number my days, that I may apply my heart unto wisdom. No memorable
passage happened in the whole course of his life, till the end of May, 1633.
(when his Papers were seized on by Mr. Prin) which he had not book'd in a
Memorial by the way of a Diary or Journal. Out of which, though Mr. Prin
excerpted nothing but that which he conceived might tend most visibly to his
disgrace and disadvantage, and published it to that end in p^int; yet when it
came to the perusal of equal and indifferent men, it was so far from serving as
an evidence of his faults, (as our Author words it) that it showed him to be a
Man of Exemplary Piety in himself, unmoved fidelity to his friend, of most
perfect loyalty to his Master, and honest affections to the Public. He that
shall look upon the list of the things projected to be done, and in part done,
by him, fol. 28, 29. will find, that both his heart was set on, and his hand
engaged in many excellent pieces of work, tending to the great honor and
benefit both of Church and State; not incident to a man of such narrow
comprehensions, as some of his professed Enemies were pleased to make him.
Certain I am, that as Mr. Prin lost his end, so he could not get much thanks
for that piece of service.

Fol. 217. He is generally charged with Popish inclinations, and the story is
commonly told and believed of a Lady, etc.] Here is a charge of the Archbishops
inclination and the proof nothing but a tale, and the tale of a Lady, Quid
vento? Mulier; Quid Muliere? Nihil. The substance of the tale is this, that a
certain Lady (if any Lady may be certain) who turning Papist, was asked by the
Archbishop the cause of her changing; to which she answered, that it was
because she always hated to go in a crowd. And being asked the meaning of that
expression, she replied again, that she perceived his Lordship, and many others
making haste to Rome, and therefore to prevent going in a press, she had gone
before them. Whether this tale be true or false, though he does not know, yet
he resolves to set it down, and to set it down also with this Item, that it was
generally believed. Be it so for once. For not being able to disprove it, I
shall quit our Author with one story, and satisfy the equal Reader with
another. First for my Author, I have hea^d a tale of a Lady too, to whose Table
one Mr. Fuller was a welcome though a frequent guest; and being asked once by
her whether he would please to eat the wing of a Woodc^ck, he would needs put
her to the question, how her Ladyship knew it was a Woodcock, and not a
Woodhen. And this he pressed with such a troublesome impo^tunity, that at last
the Lady answered with some show of displeasure, that the woodcock was Fuller
headed, Fuller breasted, Fuller thighed, and in a word, every way Full^r.
Whether this tale be true or false, I am not able to s^y; but being generally
believed* I have set it down also.

B^t my other story is more serious, intended for the Nobember, Anno 1639. that
I received a message from the Lord Archbishop, to attend him the next day at
two of the clock in the afternoon. The Key being tu^n'd which opened the way
into his Study, I found him sitting in a chair, holding a paper in both hands,
and his eyes so fixed upon that paper, that he observed me not at my coming in.
Finding him in that posture, I thought it fit and manners to retire again. But
the noise I made by my retreat, bringing him back unto himself, he recalled me
again, and told me after some short pawse, that he well remembered that he had
sent for me, but could not tell for his life what it was about. After which he
was pleased to say (no^ without tears standing in his eyes) that he had then
newly received a letter acquainting him with a Revolt of a Person of some
Quality in North Wales, to the Church of Rome; that he knew that the increase
of Popery by such frequent Revol^s, would be imputed unto him, and his Brethren
the Bishops, who were all le^st guilty of the same; that for his part he had
done his utmost, so far forth as it might consist with the Rules of Prudence,
and the P^eservation of the Church to suppress that party, and to bring the
chief sticklers in it to condign punishment, to the truth whereof (lifting up
his wet eyes to Heaven) he took God to witness; conjuring me (as I would answer
it to God at the day of Judgment) that if ever I came to any of those places,
which he, and his Brethren by reason of their great age were not like to hold
long, I would employ all such abilities as God had given me in suppressing that
party, who by their open unde^takings, and secret practices were like to be the
ruin^ of this flourishing Church. After some words of mine upon that occasion,
I found some argument to divert him from those sad remembrances, and having
brought him to some reasonable composedness, I took leave for the present; and
some two or three days after waiting on him again, he then told me the reason
of his sending for me the time before. And this I deliver for a truth on the
faith of a Christian; which I hope will overbalance any Evidence which has
been brought to prove such Popish inclinations, as he stands generally charged
with in our Authors History.

Fol. 217. However most apparent it is by many passages in his life, that he
endeavored to take up many controversies betwixt us and the Church of Rome.]
And this indeed is Novum Crimen, that is to say, a crime of a new Beati
Pacifici, it had been sufficient war^ant unto any man to endeavor Peace, to
build up the breache^ in the Church, and to make Jerusalem like a City which is
at Unity in it self; especially where it may be done not only salva charitare,
without breach of charity, but salva fide too, without wrong to the faith. The
greatest part of the Controversies betwixt us and the Church of Rome, not being
in the Fundamentals, o^ in any Essential Points in the Christian Religion; I
cannot otherwise look upon it, but as a most Christian pious work, to endeavor
an atonement in the S^perstructures. But hereof our Author seems to doubt,
first whether (...) endeavors to agree and compose the differences be law^ul
possible. As for the lawfulness thereof, I could never see any reason produced
against it, nor so much as any question made of it till I found it here:
against the possibility thereof, it has been objected, that such, and so great
is the pride of the Church of Rome, that they will condescend to nothing. And
therefore if any such composition or agreement be made, it must not be by their
meeting us, but our going to them. But as our Author says, that many of the
Archbishops equals adjudg'd that design of his to be impossible; so I may say
(without making any such odious Comparisons) that many of our Authors betters
have thought otherwise of it. It was the petulancy of the Puritans on the one
side, and the pragmaticalness of the Jesuits on the other side, which made the
breach wider then it was at the first; and had those hot spirits on both sides
been charmed a while, moderate men might possibly have agreed on such equal
terms, as would have said a sure Foundation for the Peace of Christendom. Now
that all those in the Church of Rome are not so stiffly wedded to their own
opinions as our Author makes them, appears, first by the testimony of the
Archbishop of Spalato declaring in the High Commission a little before his
going hence, that he acknowledged the Articles of this Church to be true, or
profitable at the It appears secondly, by a Tractate of Franciscus de Sancta
Clara (as he calls himself) in which he puts such a gloss upon the nine and
thirty Articles of the Church of England, as renders them not inconsistent
with the Doctrines of the Church of Rome. And if without prejudice to the
truth, the Controversies might have been composed, it is most probable, that
other Protestant Churches would have sued by their Agents to be included in the
Peace: if not, the Church of England had lost nothing by it, as being hated by
the Calvinists, and not loved by the Lutherans.

But our Author will not here desist (so soon has he forgotten his own rule
made in the case of Mr. Love) and therefore mustereth up his faults, viz. 1.
Passion, human frailty. 2. His severity to his predecessor, easing him before
his time, and against his will, of his Jurisdiction. 3. His over-medling in
State-matters. 4. His imposing of the Scottish Liturgy. Of all which we have
spoke so much upon other occasions, that is to say, number. 246. 251. 289. 259.
and therefore do not count it necessary to add any thing here. And so I leave
him to his rest, in the Bosom of Abraham, in the land of the Living.

From the Archbishop of Canterbury, I should proceed to Dr. Williams,
Archbishop of York; but that I must first remove a Block which lies in my way.
Our Author having told us of the making and printing the Directory, is not
content to let us see the cold entertainment which it found when it came
abroad, but let^ us see it in such terms as we did not look for.

Fol. 222. Such (says he) was, call it constancy, or obstinacy, love, or
doting, of the generality of the Nation, on the Common Prayer, that the
Parliament found it fit, yea necessary, to back their former Ordinance with a
second. Assuredly the generality of the people of England is much obstinacy and
doting, then to love and constancy. The Liturgy had been looked on as a great
blessing of God upon this Nation by the generality of the people, for the sp^ce
of fourscore years and upwards, they found it est^^lis^t by the Law, sealed by
the blood of those that made it, confirmed by many godly and religious P^inces;
and had almost no other form of making their ordinary addresses to Almighty
God, but what was taught them in the Book of Common Prayer. And could any
discreet man think, or wise man hope, that a form of Prayer so unive^sally
received, and so much esteemed, could be laid by without reluctance in those
who had been so long accustomed to it, or called obstinacy or doting in them,
if they did not presently submit to every new nothing, which in the name of the
then disputable pro and con, he will reserve his private opinion to himself;
yet he discovers it too plainly in the present passage. Quid verba audiam, cum
facta videam? is a good rule here. He must needs show his private opinion in
this point, say he what he can; who makes a question, whether the adhesion of
the people generally to the public Liturgy, were built on obstinacy and
doting, or on love and constancy. But if it must be obstinacy or doting in
the generality of the people to adhere so cordially unto the Book of
Common Prayer, I marvel what it must be called in Stephen Marshall of Essex
(that great Bel-weather for a time of the Presbyterians) who having had a chief
hand in compiling the Directory, did notwithstanding marry his own Daughter by
the form prescribed in the Common Prayer Book; and having so done, paid down
five pound immediately to the Churchwardens of the Parish, as the fine or
forfeiture for using any other form of Marri^ge, then that of the Directory.
The like to which (I have credibly been info^med) was done by Mr. Knightly of
Fawsley, on the like occasion, and probably by many others of the same strain
also. With like favor he beholds the two Universities as he d^e; the Liturgy,
and hard it is to say, which he injureth most. And first beginning with Oxford,
he lets us know, that

Fol. 231. Lately certain Delegates from the University of Oxford, pleaded
their privileges before the Committee of Parliament, that they were only
visitable by the King, and such who should be deputed by him. But their
Allegations were not of proof against the Paramount power of Parliament, the
rather because a passage in an Article at the rendition of Oxford, was urged
against them, wherein they were subjected to such a Visitation.] Our Author
University of Oxford to the power of the Parliament, and that not only in
regard of that Paramount power, which he ascribes unto the Parliament, that is
to say, the two Houses of Parliament (for so we are to understand him) above
all Estates; but also in regard of an Article concerning the surrendry of
Oxford, by which that University was subjected to such Visitations. I find
indeed, that it was agreed on by the Commissioners on both sides touching the
Surrendry of that City; That the Chancellor, Masters and Scholars of the
University of Oxon, and the Governors and Students of Christ-Church of King H.
8. his Fo^ndation, and all other Heads and Governors, Artic. 13.
Masters, Fellows, and Scholars of the Colleges, Halls, and Bodies Corporate,
and Societies of the same University, and the publi^^^ Professors and Readers,
and the Orator thereon, and all other persons belonging to the said University,
or to any Colleges or Halls therein, shall and may, according to their
Statutes, Charters and Customs, enjoy their ancient form of government,
subo^dinate to the immediate Authority and power of Parliament. But I find
not, that any of the Heads or Delegates of that University were present at the
making of this Article, or consented ^o it, or tho^ght themselves obliged by
any thing contained in it. Nor indeed could it stand with reason, that they
should wave the patronage of a gracious Sovereign, who had been a Nursing
Father to them, and put themselves under the arbitrary power of those who they
knew minded nothing but destruction toward them. And that the University did
not think it self obliged by any thing contained in that Article, appears even
by our Author himself, who tells us in this very passage, that the Delegates
from the University pleaded their privileges before the Committee of
Parliament, that they were only visitable by the King, and such as should be
deputed by him; which certainly they had never done (unless our Author will
conclude them to be fools or madmen) had they before submitted to that
Paramount power, which he adscribes unto the Houses. Nor did the Houses of
Parliament find themselves empowered by this clause of the Article, to obtrude
any such Visitation on them. And therefore when the Delegates had pleaded, and
proved their privileges, a Commission for a Visitation was issued by the two
Houses of Parliament in the name of the King, but under the new broad Seal
which themselves had made; which notwithstanding, the University stood still on
their own defense, in regard that though the Kings name was used in that
Commission, yet they knew well, that he had never given his consent unto it.
Whereupon followed that great alteration both (...) the Heads and Members of
most Colleges which our Author speaks of.

Nor deals he much more heartily in relating the Visitation, which was made in
Cambridge; the Visitors whereof (as acting by the Paramount power of
Parliament) he more sensibly favors, then the poor sufferers, or malignant
members, as he calls them, of that University. For whereas the Author of the
Book called Querela Cantabrigionsis, has told us of an Oath of Discovery,
obtruded by the Visitors upon several persons, whereby they were sworn to
detect one another, Hist. of Came, fol. 168.
even their dearest friends; Our Author who was out of the storm, seeming not
satisfied in the truth of this relation, must write to Mr. Ash, who was one of
those Visitors, to be informed in that which he knew before; and on the reading
of Mr. Ash his Answer, declares expressly, that no such Oath was tendered by him
to that University. But first, Mr. Ash does not absolutely deny, that there was
any such Oath, but that he was a stranger to it, and possibly he might be so
far a stranger to it, as not to be an Actor in that part of the Tragedy.
Secondly, Mr. Ash only says, that he cannot call to mind, that any such thing
was moved by the Earl of Manchester; and yet I ^row, such a thing might be
moved by the Earl of Manchester, though Mr. Ash after so many years was willing
not to call it to mind, or else if no such Oath was tendered by him, as our
Author is assured there was not, that part of the Tragedy might be acted by Mr.
Good the other Chaplain, without communicating his Instructions to his fellow
Visitor. And therefore thirdly, I would know why Mr. Good was not writ to also,
that having from him the like Certificate, our Author might have had the better
grounds for his unbelief, before he had pronounced so positively against the
Author of that Querela. Fourthly, and finally, it is not easy to be thought,
that the Author of that Book should have vented such a manifest falsehood,
especially in a matter so derogatory to all Christian charity, and that neither
the Earl of Manchester, nor either of his two Chaplains, or any friend of
theirs, should in the space of ten years and more, endeavor to wipe off such
an odious imputation, till our Author out of pure zeal to the Paramount power,
played the Advocate in it.

But to return again to Oxford, one of the first effects which followed on the
alteration before remembered (though mentioned by our Author in another place)
was the risling of the Treasury in Magdalen College, of which he tells us,
lib. 9. fol. 234. That a considerable sum of gold, being by Dr. Humphry (who
had been left in a Chest, not to be opened, except some great necessity urged
thereunto, was lately shared between Dr. Wilkinson (who then held the place of
President by the power of the Visitors) and the Fellows there. But first our
Author is mistaken in Dr. Humphry, though he be willing to entitle him (whom he
calls a moderate Nonconformist) to some benefaction. The sum there found
amounted to above twelve hundred double Pistolets, the old Doctor having no
fewer then one hundred for his part of the spoil, and every Fellow thirty a
piece for theirs; each Pistolet exchanged at sixteen shillings six pence, and
yet the Exchanger got well by the bargain too. Too great a sum for Dr. Humphry,
who had many children, and no provident woman to his wife, to leave behind him
to the College, had he been so minded. The money (as the Tradition went in
that College) was left there by the Founder, to remedy and repair such ^uines
as either the casualty of fire, or the ravages of a Civil war might bring upon
it; to which the nature of the Coin being all French pieces (remember that the
English at that time were Masters of a great part of France) gives a further
testimony. Secondly, I would have our Author observe, that those whom he
accuses of this act of Rapine, were neither high Royalists, nor Covetous
Conformists, as we know who words it, but men agreeable to the times, and of
the same temper and affections which himself is of, the Conformists never being
so covetous as to cast an eye tow^r^s it, nor the high Royalists so ignoble in
their greatest extremities, as to lay hands on it. And thirdly, I must needs
charge our Author with some partiality in aggravating this fact (which indeed
cannot be excused) with so many circumstances, and passing over the like at
Cambridge, as a thing incredible; I cannot believe, says he, Hist. Camb. fol.
38. what I have read in the Querela Cantabrigiensis, That three or four hundred
pounds worth of Timber brought to Clare-hall for the repair of that House, was
lately taken away; that is to say, inverted to the use of some private persons,
whom our Author has be^riended with this incredulity. Nay so extremely
favorable he is to his friends in Cambridge, as to pro^ess, that had he seen
it, he would not have believed his own eyes; which is the highest point of
partiality, and most invincible unbelief that I ever met with. There remains
nothing now to conclude these Animadversions, but some passages relating to
Archbishop Williams: in which I must confess my self not willing to meedle, but
that I think it is as much against the Rule of distributive Justice to give one
man to much, as to give another man too little. Let us see therefore what he
says of this Prelate, and how far he says truth, the whole truth, and nothing
but the truth. And first says he,

Fol. 227. He sueth to the Parliament for favor, and obtained it,
whose^General in a manner he becomes in laying siege to the Town and Castle of
Abercon-way, etc.] This is the truth, but whether it be the whole truth, o^
suing for and obtaining pardon from the Parliament, precedeth in the order o^
time, his being their G^neral; and therefor it is not to be thought, but that
he had done some special service to the Parliament to prepare the way for such
a favor. Before his commitment to the Tower about the Bishops Protestation, he
was grown as odious to the Commons, as before he had been honored by them. He
had lived some time with the King at Oxford, and is said to have done him good
services in Wales; and (which is most) he had a fair temporal Estate, able to
yield some thousands of pounds for Composition in Goldsmiths-hall. So that
there must be somewhat in it more then ordinary, which occasioned that he
neither came under Fine nor Ransom, as the rest of the Kings Party did. But
what that was, whether he served them with intelligence when he was at Oxford,
or by inhibiting his Tenants and neighbors to pay their accustomed Taxes to
the Kings Forces when he lived in Wales, I determine not. Certain it is, that
before his redintegration with them, he had been in a manner besieged in his
House of Penrin by the Lord Byron, for the prohibiting of sending in such
provisions as had been required; and that observing with what carelessness the
Kings Soldiers did attend that service, he caused a sally to be made out of
the House, and slew many of them. Upon the merit of which service, and the
promise of greater, it is no wonder if such Ministers and Sollicitors of his as
were employed in that business, compounded for him without fine, though not
without money. That which our Author tells us of his being their General, seems
to have been fore-signified some five or six years before the siege of Conway
Castle.

Ibid. He was very chaste in his Conversation.] And I Weldon the nameless Author
aimed at (in the following words) in his Pamphlet called the Court of King
James, and some vulgar fames or hear-says too much credited by a late
Historian. Hist* of King Char. ^ol 21.
But I must needs say, that I am not satisfied in the arguments which are
brought to prove it. Wilson in his unworthy History of the Reign of King James,
make^ him to be Eunuchus ab utero, an Eunuch from his Mothers womb. The Author
of the Pamphlet called the Observator observed, conceives that Wilson went too
far in this expression, and rather thinks, that he contracted some impotency by
falling on a stake when he was a Boy, fol. 10. Our Author here seems to incline
unto this last, assuring us from such who knew the Privacies and casualti^s of
his infancy, that this Archbishop was but one degree removed from a Misogynist,
though to palliate his infirmity to n^ble Females he was most complete in his
Courtly Addresses. But first, the falsity and frivolousness of these De^ences
leave the poor man under a worse suspicion then they ^oun^ him in. His manly
countenance, together with his masculine voice, showed plainly that he was no
Eunuch; and the agreeableness of his conversation with the female Sex, did as
plainly show, that he was no Misogynist, or woman-hater. And secondly,
admitting these surmises to be true and real, they rather serve to evidence his
impotency, then to prove his chastity; it being no chastity in that man to
abstain from women, who either by casualty, or by nature is disabled from such
copulations. The virtue of chastity consists rather in the integrity of the
soul, then the muti^ation of the body; and therefore more to be ascribed to
those pious men, Qui salvis ^o^lis foemi^am vident Animo adversus libidinem
^aeco. Apol. c. 21.
, in Tertullians language, then to the old Philosopher, who put out his eyes to
avoid temptations of that nature. So that if this be all which they have to say
for the Bishops chastity, these Advocates had showed more wisdom in saying
nothing, then speaking so little to the purpose.

Ibid. Envy it self cannot deny, but that whither soever he went, he might be
traced by the footsteps of his benefaction.] benefactions it was none of the
least, that in both the Universities he had so many Pensioners; more (as it was
commonly given out) then all the Noblemen and Bishops in the Land together:
some of which received twenty Nobles, some ten pounds, and other twenty Marks
per annum. And yet it may be said without envy, that none of all these Pensions
came out of his own purse, but were laid as Rent-charges upon such Benefices as
were in his disposing, either as Lord Keeper or Bishop of Lincoln, and assigned
over to such Scholars in each University as applied themselves to him. And
because I would not be thought to say this without Book, I have both seen and
had in my keeping, till of late, (if I have it not still) an Acquittance made
unto a Minister in discharge of the payment of a Pension of twenty Nobles per
annum, to one who was then a Student in Christ-Church. The names of the parties
I forbear, he that received it, and he for whom it was received, (and perhaps
he that paid it too) being still alive. And possible enough it is, that this
Pensioning of so many Scholars had not been past over in silence by our Author,
if he had not known the whole truth as well as the truth.

Ibid. Much he expended on the Repair of Westminster Abbey-Church, etc The
Library at Westminster was the ] This though it be true in part, yet we cannot
say of it, that it is either the whole truth, or nothing but the truth. For the
plain truth is, that neither the charge of repairing that Church, nor
^urnishing Library, came out of his own private Coffers, but the Churches
rents: For at such time as he was made Lord Keeper of the great Seal; he caused
it to be signified unto the Prebendaries of that Church, how inconvenient it
would be both to him and them to keep up the Commons of the College; and gaind
so far upon them that they passed over to him all the rents of that Church,
upon condition that he should pay the annual pensions of the Prebendaries,
Schoolmasters, Quire-men, and inferior Officers, and maintain the Commons of
the Scholars. The rest amounting to a great yearly value, was left wholly to
him upon his honorable word and promise to expend the same for the good and
honor of that Church. The surplusage of which expenses received by him for
four years and upwards, amounted unto more than had been laid out by him on the
Church and Library; as was offered to be proved before the Lords Commissioners
at the visitation Anno. 1635. And as for the Library at St. John's, it might
possibly cost him more wit than money; many books being daily sent in to him
(upon the intimation of his purpose of founding the two Libraries) by such as
had either suits in Court, Lincoln, or Dean of Westminster.

Fol. 228. He hated Popery with a perfect hatred.] But Wi^son in his History of
great Britain sings another song, whether in tune, or out of tune, they can
best tell who lived most near those times, and had opportunities to observe
him. There is a mu^tering of some strange offer which he made to K. James at
such time as the Prince was in Spain, and the Court seemed in common
apprehension to warp toward Popery, which declared no such ^erfect hatred (as
our Author speaks of) unto that Religion. Nor was he coy of telling such whom
he admitted unto privacies with him, that in the time of his greatness at
Court, he was accounted for the Head of the Catholic Party, not sparing to
declare what free and frequent accesses he gave the principal Sticklers in that
cause both Priests and Jesuits, and the special services which he did them: And
it must be somewhat more than strange if all this be true that he should hate
Popery with a perfect ^atred; yet not more strange then that he should so
stickle in the preferment of Dr. Theodore Price to the Archbishopric of
Armagh in Ireland, who died a professed Catholic, reconciled to the Church of
Rome, as our Author has Lincolns hating Popery, then in Dr. Prices dying a
profess^d Papist, there is no credit to be given at all to that part of the
Character. Dr. Price, though once a great Favorite of this Bishop, and by him
continued Sub-Dean of Westminster many years together, was at the last supposed
to be better affected to Bishop Laud, than to Bishop Williams; Bishop Laud
having lately appeared a Suitor for him for the Bishopric of St. Asoph. And
therefore that two Birds might be killed with the same bolt; no sooner was Dr.
Price deceased, but the Bishop of Lincoln being then at Westminster, calls the
Prebend^ together, tells them that he had been with Mr. Sub-Deane before his
death, that he left him in very doubtful terms about Religion, and
consequently could not tell in what ^orme to bury him; that if the Dr. had died
a professed Papist he would have buried him himself, but being as it was, he
could not see how any of the Prebendaries could ^ither with safty or with
credit perform that office. But the Artifice and design being soon discovered,
took so little effect that Dr. Newel one of the Senior Prebenda^ies performed
the Obsequies, the rest of the whole Chapter attending the body to the grave,
with all due sol^mnitie.

Fol, 228. He was so great an honourer of the English (...) that of his own
cost he caused the same to be translated into Spanish, and fairly printed to
confute their false concept of our Church, etc.] If this be true, it makes not
only to his honor, but also to the honor of the English Liturgy translated
into more languages then any Liturgy in the world whatsoever it be; translated
into Latin by Alexand. Alesius, a learned Scot in King Edwards time; as
afterward by Dr. Walter Haddon in the reign of Queen Elizabeth, and his
translation mended by Dr. Mocket in the time of King James: translated into
French by the command of that King, for the Isles of Guernsey and Iersey, into
Spanish at the charge of this Bishop (as our Author tells us) and finally
into Greek by one Mr. ^etly by whom it was dedicated and presented to the late
Arch Bishop of Canterbury the greatest Patron and Advancer of the English
Liturgy. But 2. I have some reason to doubt, that the Liturgy was not
translated at the charges of Bishop Williams. That it was done by his
procurement I shall easily grant: but whosoever made the Bill of Charges, the
Church paid the ^eckoning; the Dominican Friar who translated it being ^ewarded
with a Benefice and a good Prebend, as Cab* p. 7^. ^he Bishop himself did
signify by letter to the Duke of ^uckingham. And as for the printing of the
book, I cannot ^hink that it was at his charges neither, but at the char^es of
the Printer; it not being usual to give the Printers ^oney and the copy too.
And 3. Taking it for grant^d, that the Liturgy was translated and printed at
this Westminster (whereof he was Dean) from the 18. o^ ^^bruary 1635. when the
business of the great ^ew was judged against him till his Commitment to the
Tower in July 1637. Nor ever going to the Chapel of the Tower (where he was a
Prisoner) to attend the Divine Service of the Church, or receive the Sacrament,
from July 1637. when he was committed, to November 1640 when he was enlarged. A
very strong Argument that he was no such Honourer of the English Liturgy, as
is here pretended: A Liturgy most highly esteemed in all places wheresoever it
came, and never so much vilified, despised, condemned as amongst our selves;
and those amongst our selves who did so vilify and despise it, by none more
countenanced then by him, who is here said to be so great an Honourer of it.
But for this Blow our Author has his Buckler ready, telling us that

Not out of Sympathy to Non-conformists, but Antipathy to Archbishop Laud, he
was favorable to some select Persons of that Opinion. An Action somewhat like
to that of the Earl of Kildare, who being accused before Henry the Eighth,
Camd. Rem.
for burning the Cathedral Church of Cassiles in Ireland, professed
ingeniously, That he would never have burnt the Church, if some body had not
told him that the Bishop was in it. Hare to that Bishop, and Archbishop of
Ir^land, incited that mad Earl to burn his Cathedral Church: and hate to
Bishop Laud, the Primate and Metropolitan of all England, stird up this Bishop
to raise a more unquenchable Combu^^ion in the Church of England. So that we
may affirm of him as Tertullian (in another case) of the Primitive Christians,
Viz. Tanti non est bonum, quanti est odium Christianorum. But are we sure that
he was favorable to the Non-Conformists out of an antipathy to Bishop Laud
only? which I have the Testimony of the Author of the History of King Charles,
published 1656. who tells us of him, That being malevolently inclined (about
the loss of the great Seal) he thought he could not gratify beloved Revenge
better then to endeavor the supplanting of his Sovereign. Hist. of King Chapter
fol. 151.
To which end finding him declining in the Affection^ of his People, he made
his Apostrophe and Applications to them, fomenting popular discourses tending
to the Kings dishonor, andC. And being once set upon that Pin (flectere si
nequeo superos, Ach^ronta moveb^, as we know who said) it is no m^rvell if he
showed himself favorable to the N^n Conformists, as being Enemies to Kings an^
a Kingly Government, and therefore likeliest to provide Fuel for a public
Fire: and yet besides these two there was a third impressive which might move
a^ strongly on his Nature, as either of them. Our Author f^rmerly told us of
him, that he was A b^ck Friend to the Canons, Non Conformists, of purpose to
subvert those Counsels, and ruinate those Designs for uniformity which had
been resolved and agreed on without his Advice. Consilii omnis cujus ipse non
Author esset, Tacit. Hist. L. ^.
inimicus, as we know who said. In order whereunto he had no sooner heard that
there was a purpose in some great Bishops of the Court to regulate the standing
of the Communion Table, according to the Pattern of the Mother Cathedral, and
the royal Chapels; but he presently set himself against it, dispercing
Copies of a Letter pretended to be writ^en ^y him to the Vicar of Grantham on
that occasion, and publishing his Book called the Holy Table, ^ull of
quotations, but more in number then in weight. An^ this he did out or a mere
Spirit of Contradiction, directly contrary to his own practice in all places
where he had to do; that is to say, not only in the Collegiate Church at
Westminster, whereof he was Dean, and in the Cathedral Church of Lincoln
whereof he was Bishop, but in his own private Chapel at Bugden also, where
there was no body to act any thing in it but himself alone. And so I take my
leave of this great Prelate, whom I both reverence for hi^ Place, and honor
for his Parts, as much as any. And yet I cannot choose but say, that I find
more reason to condemn, then there is to commend him; so that we may affirm of
him as the Historian does of Caiu^ C^^sar, Son of Agrippa, and Nephew to the
great Augustus, viz. Tam vary se gessit, ut nec laudaturum magna nec
vitupera^urum mediocri^ materia deficiat, (...) Hist. l. 2.
as my Author has it. And with the same Character, accommodated to our Author,
and this present History I conclude these Notes; subjoyning only this old
Saying as well for my comfort as defense, viz.

Truth, though it may be blamed, can never be shamed.

AN APPENDIX To the foregoing ANIMADVERSIONS; CONTAINING THE APOLOGY OF Dr.
JOHN COSINS, Dean of PETER BVRROVGH: In Answer to some Passages in the
Church History of BRITAIN; In which He finds himself concerned

AN APPENDIX To the foregoing ANIMADVERSIONS; etc.
IT IS well known to some in London, that the foregoing Animadversions were
finished, and fitted for the Press before Michaelmas, Anno 1657. the reasons
why they have lain so long unpublished were these two especially: First, A
Report that the Task was undertaken by a Cambridge man, who had more knowledge
of the Author whom I had to deal with then I can pretend to; and I desired
rather that the burden of it the public, satisfaction to all parties
entrusted, should be born by any then my self. Secondly, There was a general
opinion spread abroad in all places (to what ends I know not, nor much care)
that the Church Historian was in hand with a Review of the Work before us, in
which he was resolved to make some fair amends to Truth, to correct the errors
of his Pen, and to make reparation to the injured Clergy, and, to say truth,
there was none fitter then himself for that undertaking, none fitter to give
Plasters for the broken head^, then the man that break^ them. The Poet wa^
right enough in this, -- ^^m qui mihi vul^er^ (...)
Solus Achilleo tollere more potest.


That is to say, None but the man who gave the Wound,
Achilles like, could make it sound.
But the Reports being thought at last to have somewhat in them of design, or
artifice, to stave off the business, I was solicited with greater importunity
to p^blish the foregoing Anim^dversions, then I was at fir^^ to undertake
them. The Reader notwithstanding will be no looser by this delay.

For first, It gave me leisure and opportunity of bestowing my second thought
upon the Animadver^^ons, (adding here and there some Observations, which before
were wanting.)

And secondly, It brought into my hands the Ap^logie o^ Doctor John Cosens,
Dean of Peterburrough, in answer to some passages of our present History,
directed in the way of a Letter to one Mr. Warren, now deceased, with a desire
to have them communicated to the Author of some Animadversions upon that
History (which he was credibly informed, by what intelligence I know not^) to
be then in readiness. I shall therefore do him so much right as to communicate
his Papers to (...) public view; First laying down Mr. F^^^ers word^ (...)
they lie in his Hi^^ory, and then leaving Dr. Cos^ns to speak for himself. So
doing, I shall keep my self from engaging upon either ^ide, and leave the
Reader to judge indifferently between the p^rti^^ as h^ (...) occ^sion.

Mr. Fullers Charge on Dr. Cosens Lib 11. fol. 173.
DR. Cosens soon after was highly accused for Superstition and unjust
proceedings against one Mr. Smart on this occasion; Supe^stition^ changed on
Dr. Cosens
The Doctor is charged to have set upon the Church of Durham, a M^rble Altar
with Cherubins, which cost two thousand pounds, with all the Appurtenances
thereof, namely, a Cope, with the Trinity, and God the Father in the Figure of
an old man, another with the Crucifix and Image of Christ, with a red Bewd and
blew Cap; besides, he was accused for lighting two hundred Wax Candles about
the Altar on Candl^ma^ day, for forbidding any Psalms to be sung before or
after Sermon, though making an Antheme to be sung of the three Kings of Colen
(by the names of) Gasper, Balthazar, and Melchior, and for procuring a
consecrated Knife, only to cut the Bread at the Communion.

35. Mr. Smart a Prebendary of the Church, Cru^ll usage of Mr. Smart.
one of grave Aspect and reverend Presence sharply inveighed, in a Sermon
against these Innovations, taking for his Text, I hate all those that ^old
super^^itio^s Vanities, but thy Law I love.

36. Hereupon he was k^pt Prisoner four Months by the High Commission of York,
before any Articles were exhibited against him, and five Months before any
Proctor was allowed him, hence was he carried to the High Commission at
Lamb^th, and after long trouble remanded to York, fined five hundred pounds,
committed to Prison, ordered to recant, and for neglect thereof, fined again,
Excommunicated, Degraded, and Deprived, his Damage (as brought in) amounting to
many thousand pounds.

37. But now Mr. Rows of the House of Commons, bringing up the Charge to the
Lords against Dr. Cosens, termed Mr. Smart the Protomartyr of England in these
latter days of Persecution, and large reparation was allowed to him, though he
lived not long after to enjoy them.

Now though none can excuse and defend Dr. Cosens his carriage herein, Dr.
Cosins Praise.
yet this must be reported to his due commendation; some years after getting
over into France, he neither joined with the Church of French Protestants at
Charen Town nigh Paris, nor kept any Communion with the Papists therein, but
confined himself to the Church of English Protestants therein, where, by his
pious living, constant praying and preaching, he reduced some Recusants to, and
confirmed more Doubters in, the Protestant Religion; Many were his Encounters
with Jesuits and Priests, defeating the suspicions of his Foes, and exceeding
the expectacion of his Friends in the success of such Disputes.

PARIS, April 6. 1658.
The Answer of Dr. Cosins to the Charge foregoing.
Sir,
I Am glad to hear from you of your safe Arrival in England: and I am to thank
both you and other of my Friends, that intend to vindicate me from the Injury
done, no less to Truth then to my self, by a passage in Mr. Fullers History,
which I believe he inserted there (as he does many things besides) upon the
false Reports and Informations of other men, that were loath to let an old
malicious Accusation dye, as it might well enough have done, if he had not kept
it up still alive, and recorded it to Poste^ity; whereof he is so sensible
already himself, that by his own Letter directed to me (more then a year since)
he offered to make me amends in the next Book he written; but he has not done
it yet. Having never been acquainted with him more then by his Books, which
have many petulant, light, and indiscreet passages in them, I know not how to
trust him; and therefore if the Authors of the intended Animadversions (which
you mention) will be pleased to do me right, you may assure them there is
nothing but Truth in this ensuing Relation.

Mr. Smart, who had been Schoolmaster, and after became Prebendery of Durham,
was an old man of a most froward fierce, and unpeaceable Spirit, etc. Upon a
s^ditious Sermon which he preached in that Church, (where contrary to his duty
he had neglected to preach for seven years together before) he was first
questioned at Durham, from whence he was called to the High Commission Court at
Land. and afterward^ at his own desire remitted to the same Court at York;
where being sentenced to recant, and refusing so to do with great scorn, he was
at last, upon his obstinacy degraded from his Ecclesiastical Function; and
that Sentence was not long after judicially confirmed by Judge Damport at the
public Assizes in Durham, where he was by public sentence also at the Common
Law put out of his Prebend, and his Benefices that he formerly held in that
County.

Many years following he procured a large Maintenance for himself and his
Family, to the sum of 400 l. per ann. (more worth to him then his
Chu^ch-profi^s, ever were) out of the peculiar Contributions at London, and
elsewhere gathered up for silenced Ministers.

But when the Parliament began in the year 1640, upon project and hope of
getting more, he preferred a Bill o^ Complaint there against thirty several
persons at the least, that is, against the High Commissioners at London, the
same Commissioners and Prebends Residentiary at York, the Dean and Chapter of
Durham, with dive^s others, whereof I was but One, though he was pleased to set
my Name in the Front of them all. From all these together he expected to
recover and receive a greater sum of money (for Money was his project)
pretending that he had lost by them no less then thirty thousand pounds (though
he was never known to be worth one.)

After his Bill of Complaint was carried up by a Gentleman of the House of
Commons to the House of Lords among the rest of those persons that were accused
by him (some for Superstition, and some for Persecution) I put in my full
Answer upon Oath, and declared the truth of the whole matter; whereof Mr.
Fuller takes not any notice at all, and therein deals most unfaithfully both
with me and the Reader of his History; for that Answer of mine is upon Record,
among the Rolls of Parliament, and was justified before the Lords both by my
self, and by the very Witness that Mr. Smart and his Son-in-law produced there
against me; whereupon his own Lawyer (Mr. Glover) openly at the Bar of that
honorable House forsook him, and told him plainly, that he was ashamed of his
Complaint, and could not in Conscience plead for him any longer: Mr. Smart in
the mean while crying out aloud and beseeching their Lordships to appoint him
another Lawyer, and to take care of his fourteen thousand pound damages,
besides other demands that he had to make, which arose to a gr^ater sum.

But after this (which was the fifth day of pleading between u^) the Case was
heard no more concerning my particular, and many of the Lords said openly, that
^r. Smar^ had abused the House of Commons, with a caus^^ess Complaint against
me, whereupon my Lord the Earl of Warwick, was pleased to bring me an Order of
^he Lords House, whereby I had liberty granted me to ^eturn unto my places of
Charge in the University, or ^lsewhere, till they sent for me again, which they
never ^id.

The Answers that I gave in upon Oath, and justified before their Lordships,
were to this effect, all contrary (...) Mr. Fullers groundless reports.

1. That the Communion Table in the Church of Dur^am (which in the Bill of
Complaint and M. Fullers Hist. (...) said to be the Marble Altar with
Ch^rubins) was not (...) up by me, but by the Dean and Chapter there (...) of
Mr. Smart himself was one) many years be^^re I b^came Pr^^endary of that
Church, or ever saw (...) Country.

2. That by the public Account^ which are there ^^gistred, it did not appear
to have cost above the tenth ^^rt of what is pretended, Appurtenance^ and all.

3. That likewise the Copes used in that Church ^ere brought in thither long
before my time, and when ^r. Smart the Complainant was Preb^ndary there, who
^^so allowed his part (as I was ready to prove by the (...)-Book) of the money
that they cost, for they cost ^t little.

4. That as I never approved the Picture of the Tri^y, or the Image of God the
Father in the Figure of (...) old Man, or otherwise to be made or placed any
^^ere at all: So I was well assured that there were none ^^ch (nor to my
knowledge or hearsay ever had been) put upon any Cope that was used there
among us; One there was that had the Story of the Passion embroidered upon it,
but the Cope that I used to wear when at any time I attended the
Communion-Service, was of plain white Satin only without any Embroidery upon
it at all.

5. That that the Bill of Complaint called the Image of Christ, with a blew
Cap, and a golden Beard, (Mr. Fullers History says it was red, and that it was
set upon one of the Copes) was nothing else but the top of Bishop Ha^fields
Tomb (set up in the Church under a si^e-Arch there, two hundred years before I
was born) being a little Portraiture not appearing to be above ten Inches long,
and hardly discernable to the eye what Figure it is, for it stands thirty Foot
from the ground.

6. That by the local Statutes of that Church (wherun^o Mr. Smart was sworn,
as well as my self) the Treasurer was to give Order, that the provision should
every year be made of a sufficient number of Wax-light^ for the Service of the
Quire, during all the Winter time; which Statute I observed when I was chosen
into that Office, and had order from the Dean and Chapter by Cap^tular Act to
do it: yet upon the Communion Table they that used to light the Candles (the
Sacri^ts, and the Virgers) never set more then two fair Candle^ with a few
small Sizes near to them, which they put there, of purpose that the people all
about might have the better use of them, for singing the Psalms, and reading
the Lessons out of the Bibles: But two hundred was a greater number then they
used all the Church over, either upon Candlem^s Night or any other, and that
there were no more (sometimes many less) lighted at that time, then at the like
Festivalls in Christmas-Holydaies, when the people of the City came in greater
company to the Church, and therefore required a greater store of lights.

7. That I never forbad (nor any body else that I know) the singing of the
(Meeter) Psalms in the Church, which I used to sing daily there my self with
other company at Morning Prayer. But upon Sundaies and Holy Days in the Quire,
before the Sermon the Creed was sung (and sung plainly for every one to
understand) as it is appointed in the Communion Book, and after the Sermon we
sung a part of a Psalm, or some other Antheme taken out of the Scripture, and
first signified to the people where they might find it,

8. That so far was I from making any A^theme to be sung of the three Kings of
Colen, as that I ma^e i^ when I first saw it to be torn in pieces, and I my
sel^ cut it out of the old Song Books belonging to the Choristers School, with
a Penknife that lay by, at my very first coming to reside in that College. But
sure I was, that no such Antheme had been sung in the Q^ire, during all my time
of attendance there, nor (for ought that any the eldest persons of the Church
and Town could tell, or ever heard to the contrary) for fif^y or threescore
years before, and more.

9. That there was indeed an ordinary Knife I confess, provided and laid ready
among other things belonging to the Administration of the Communion, for the
cutting of the Bread, and diverse other uses in the Church Vestry; that when the
under Officers there had any occasion to use a Knife, they might not be put to
go to seek one abroad. But that it was ever consecrated, or so called,
otherwise then as Mr. Smart and some of his Followers had for their pleasure
put that appell^tion upon it, I never heard, nor I believe any body ^lse that
lived here among us.

[There were diverse other Articles of this nature in the Bill of Complaint,
whereof Mr. Smart could not prove any one to which I gave the like Answers, as
I did here to these; but Mr. Fullers History makes no mention of them]

10. Touching Mr. Smarts Sermon, I made answer, and submitted his censure to
the prudent and religious consideration of the Lords, whether he was not justly
condemned to be scandalous and seditious by his preaching thereof; and I
represented many passages in it, disagreeable to the Laws of God and his
Church, and repugnant to the public Statutes of Parliament.

11. For which after we had begun ^o question him in the High Commission Court
at Durham (where we endeavored to reduce him to a better mind, and to an unity
with the Church, against which he had so injuriously and intemperatly
declaimed;) I had no further hand or meddling with the prosecution of this
ma^ter in other Courts against him, more then that I wrote (at the special
instance of Judge Yelverton) a Letter in his behalf to the Archbishop of York,
and the Commissioners there, which I procured the Dean and most of the
Pr^bendaries of Durham to sign and subscribe with me, earnestly entreating for
him, that upon any due sense of his ^ault, he might be quietly sent back to us
again, in hope that he would hereafter live in better peace and concord with us
(as he promised both judge Yelverton and us to do) then he had done before.

12. The cruel usage and imprisonment that he suffered (whereof Mr. Fuller
takes special notice, and makes a Marginall mark at it) was, as I have been
credible assured, nothing else but a fair and gentle treatment of him in an
Officers House at York, to whom he was committed for a while, and paid little
for it. I^ is the Historians mistake here to say, he was carried from York to
Lambeth; for he was at his own request sent from Lambeth to York, the Fine that
was se^ up (...) him he never paid, and by his own wilful loss of his
Church Livings, he gained a larger maintenance, living at his ease and
pleasure, by the contribution that he got as a suspended and silenced P^eacher;
though the truth was, that having had a Prebend and a Benefice many years
together in the Bishopric of Durham, and being always in health, he neglected
preaching so much at them both, and elsewhere besides, that he was seldom noted
to preach above two Sermons in a year; who, though he demanded many thousand
pound^ at the Parliament, yet by Mr. Fullers leave, the Parliament gave him
none; nor ordered either my self, nor any other that he impeacht ever to pay
him a Groat: only upon Doctor Carrs death (who had been put into hi^ Prebend
place) he was sent by the Lords t^ his Vic^rage, and his Prebend again, which
he had little ^^ill to take, because he ^ound but little profit in comparion
of what he hoped to be had by them, in the mean while he took up diverse great
summ^ of mon^y from some of his Partisans in London, and made them believe that
the Parliament would pay them all with advantage.

13. There is another Marginall Note in Mr. Fuller, referring* as he says, to
my due praise and commendation, whereof he makes one part to be* that I joined
not with the French Pro^estants at Char^nton, since. I got over hither into
France: but I would that he and all the World should know it* I never refused
to join with the Protestants either there, or any where else, in all things
wherein they join with the Church of England. Many of them have been here at
our Church, and we have been at theirs. I have buried diverse of our people at
Ch^renton, and they p^rmit us to make use of their pecu^iar and decent
Sae^e^erie here in Paris for ^h^t purpose* which if they did not, we should be
^orced to bury our Dead in a Di^ch. I have Baptized many of their Children at
the request of their own Ministers, with whom I have good acquaintance, and
find them ^o be very deserving and learned men, great Lovers and Honoure^s of
our Church, notwithstanding the loss which She has lately received in
external Mat^ers, wherein we are agreed that the Essence of true Religion does
not consist. Many of their people (and of the best sort and quality among them)
have frequented our public Prayers with great reverence, and I have delivered
the holy Communion to them, according to our own Order which they observed
religiously. I have Married diverse persons of good Condition among them: and I
have presented some of their S^h^llars to be ordained Deacons and Priests (...)
by our own Bishops (whereof Monsieur De Tarenne's Chaplain is one, and the Duke
De la Force's Chaplain another) and the Church at Charenton ap^^^ved of it) and
I preached here publicly at their Ordination. Besides I have been (as often a^
I had ^are time from attending our own Congregation) to pray and sing Psalms
with them, and to hear both the Weekly and the Sunday Sermons at Charenton,
whither two of my Children also (pensioned here in a Protestant Family at
Paris) have daily repaired for that purpose with the Gentlewoman that governed
them.

All which is abundantly enough to let the World know and see here (as it does)
what a vain and rash man Mr. Fuller is in his History: wherein he has done
Injury to many more besides me, some dead and some alive, who I hope will
represent his unfaithfulness in his own Country, both to himself and to others.
I am only beholden to him for telling the t^u^h of me in one particular, which
is, that I have by Gods blessing reduced some, and preserved many others from
communicating with the Papists; defending the Truth of our own Religion (as I
have always done) where ever I am; and therein I pray God still to bless us
and preserve us all.

And now out of all this which I have faithfully related, I trust that those
who intend their ANIMADVERSIONS upon his History, will have enough to say and
insert in their own Style for the vindication of,

SIR, Your Affectionate, and most humble SERVANT J. C.


You know Monsieur Dalle to be one of the greatest account, and the best
Deserts amongst the reformed Churchmen in France: It will not be amiss to let
you know upon thi^ occ^sion, what he wrote to a Scholar, a Friend of his, and
an University-man in Cambridge, for these were the words in his Letter;

Tuus Cosins, imo noster (intercedit enim nobis cum illo suavis amicitia atque
familiaritas) mihi admodum probatur. Bestiae sunt and quidem fanatici qui eum
de Papismo suspectum habent, a quo vix reperias qui sit magis alienus, etc.

Thus having laid before the Reader both the Bill and Answer, I leave him to
make Judgment of it by the Rule^ of Equity; remembering him of that old Saying,
Videlicet*

Qui statuit aliquid, part in audita altera;
Equum licet statuerit, haud Equus fuit.
FINIS.
Examen Historicum: OR, A DISCOVERY AND EXAMINATION OF THE Mistakes, Falsities,
and Defects, In some Modern HISTORIES. Part. II.

Containing some Advertisements on these following HISTORIES. Viz.

1. The complete History of Mary Queen of Scots, and her Son and Successor,
King James the sixth.

2. The History of the Reign and death of King James of Great Britain, France
and Ireland, the first.

3. The complete History of the Life and Reign of King Charles, from his Cradle
to his Grave.

Terent. in Andr. Act. 1. Obsequium amico^, veritas caium pari^.

LONDON. Printed for Henry Seal, and R. Royston, and are to be sold over
against St. Dunstans Church in Fleet Street, and at the Angel in (...)

The PRE^ACE to the follovving ADVERTISEMENTS.
THe former Animadversions, being brought to an end, I am in the next place to
encounter with an easier Adversary: In whom though I find wor^ enough as ^o
matter of Historical Falsehoods; ^et ^ find no malicious and dangerous
untruths, destructive to the Church of England, or to the ^ame and ^o nor of
the Prelates, or the re^ular Cler^^ (...) have therefore given the Tul^ o^
Advertisements to the second part of this E^^men, that ^eing as a gentler so a
^itter term (...), which is not only to correct such (...) ^inde differing
from the truth, but (...) the defects of our Author in (...) which I conceive
his care or (...) might have led him to. Betwixt us both, I ^ope the R^ader
will be (...) in the tru^ ^^nduct of A^^^urs as they come b^^ore ^im. And if
the Author of the three Histories which I have in hand* bring no less ingenuity
and candor with him to the perusal of these Papers, then I did to the writing
of them; there will be no need of any such s^urrilous and unhandsom
expressions* as his Post-haste Reply, etc. is most guilty of; but whether he do
or not, is to me indifferent, being prepared before I undertook the business,
^o endure cheerfully all such Censures, as my desires to vindicate the injured
Truth, and truly to inform the Judgment of the equal Reader should expose me
to.

And herewith I shall put an end to my correcting of the Errors in other men's
Writings, though I confess I might find work enough in that kind, if I were
so minded; most of our late Scripturients affecting rather to be doing, then to
be punctual and exact in what they do; as if they were of the same mind with
the Ape^Carrier in the History of Don-Quixot, who eared not if his Comedi^s had
as many Errors in them, as there are motes in the Sun, so he might stuff his
Purse with Crowns, and get money by t^em: The small remainder of my li^e will
be better spent in looking back upon those Errors which the infirmities of
nature, and other humane frailties have made me subject to, that so I may
redeem the time, because my former days were evil: I shall hereafter be only
on the defensive side, and study my own preservation, if I shall causelessly be
assaulted without provoking any by a fresh encounter; and doing no otherwise, I
hope I shall be held excusable both by God and man: Viribus utendum est quas
fecimus, was Caesar's resolution, when oppressed by an unjust Faction and may
without offense be mine, when I shall be necessitated thereunto by an unjust
Adversary.

With the like hope I also entertain my self, in reference to some freedom
which I have made use of, in laying down the conduct of such ^ffairs, as may
concern posterity to be truly informed in: For though I neither hope nor wish
to live under such a Government, ubi and ^entire quae velis, and quae sentias
loqui liceat, in which it may be lawful for any man to be of what Opinion he
will, and as freel^ to publis^ his Opinions; yet on the other ^ide, I hope ^t
may be lawful for me, in (...) to memory the actions of the present or
preceding times, to make use of such a modest freedom, as without partiality
and respect of persons, may represent the true condition of affairs in their
proper colors: For I conceive it no less necessary in a just Historian, not to
suppose that which he knows to be true (ne quid very non audeat, as the old
Rule was) then it is for him to deliver any thing which he knows to be false,
or in the truth whereof he is not very well informed. The present times had
reaped no benefit by the Histories of the Ages past, if the Miscarriages of
great Persons, and the errors by them committed in the managery and transaction
of public business, had not been represented in them; which having said, I
shall no longer detain the Reader from reaping that commodity which these
Advertisements may afford him; his satisfaction being the cause, and his
content the recompense of these undertakings.

ADVERTISEMENTS ON 1. The complete History of MARY Queen of Scots, and of her
Son and Successor King James the sixth. AND 2. The History of the Reign and
Death of King James of Great Britain, France and Ireland, the first.

Enniusap. T^ll. de Offic* Homo qui ^rranti comiter monstrat viam,
Quasi lumen de lumine suo acc^ndat, facit.
ADVERTISMENTS On the Complete HISTORY OF Mary Queen of Scotland, AND King
James the sixth.
IN the Preface to the following History we are told, that on the composing of
the French quarrels by King H^n^y the eighth, there followed the surrendry of
Tourney, and Overtures of a match between the Dolphin and Henry's Sister.]

To Rectify which error we are to know that betwixt ^he taking and surrendry
of Tourney, there were two ac^ords made with the French: The first between King
Henry and Lewis the twelfth, in which it was conditioned amongst ^ther things,
that the French King should marry the La^y Mary King Henry's Sister. But he
deceasing within few ^onthes aftter on the first of January, the widow Queen
^as married in May next following Anno 1515. to Charles ^andon Duke of Suffolk.
The next accord, which seems (...) be hear meant by the Historian, was made
between the (...) King Henry and King Francis the first, Anno 1518.(...) which
the surrendry of Tourney was agreed upon, and a ^pitulation made for marrying
the young Dolphin of ^rance with another, Mary being the daughter (and not the
Sister) of King Henry, then being about two years old, which is the marriage
here intended, though mis^ook in the party.

fol. 2. James the fifth the 108. King of Scotland.] Which may come some what
near the truth, allowing the succession of the Scotti^h Kings, 39. in number
from the first Fergus to the second. But that succession being discarded by all
knowing Antiquaries, King James the fifth must fall so much short of being the
108. King of the Scottish Nation. Nor can it hold exactly true as unto that
number, if that succession were admitted; King James the first Monarch of great
Britain, and the Grandchild of this James the fifth, pretending only to an
hundred and six Predecessors in the throne of Scotland, as appears by this
inscription which he somewhere used viz.

-- Nobis haec invicta tulerunt Centum Sex Proavi.
Ibid. To palliat such potency, he procures an interview with him at Nice a
Maritine Town in the Confines of Provence.] interview procured was between King
Henry and the Pope (as by the Grammar of the Text must be unstood) then is the
Author much mistaken in the place and Persons; but if he mean it of an
interview between K. H^^^y and King Francis, it is true enough as to the
Persons, but not to the place. An interview there was between the two Kings at
Ard^es in the Marches of Calice, far enough from the con^^nes of Provence; and
a like interview there was between King Francis and the Pope at Nice here
mentioned, for enough from the borders of King Henry's Dominions, at which he
neither was present nor desired to be.

fol. 8. Prelate Bishops brought in by Palladius.] The Author speaks not this
as his own opinion, but as the opin^on of some of the Sco^s, who ground
themselves on the A^thority of B^chanan a fiery Presby^erian, and consequn^^^ a
professed enemy to Bishops, Buch. l. 5
and his words are these, Nam ad id nsque tem^us Ecclesiae, a^squ^ Episcopis,
per Monachos regeb^^ur: that is to say, the Church unto that time was governed
by M^nks without Bishops, But Buchanan perhaps might borrow this from (...),
another Writer of that Nation, and of greater Credit, who tells us this, per
Sacerdotes and (...) hos, sine Episcopis, Scoti in ^ide erudiebantar. The Scots
(he said) were instructed in the Christian faith by Priests and M^nks without
Bishops. But I trow, teaching and governing are two s^veral Offices. And though
it may be true that some partic^lar persons of the Scottish Nation might be
instrusted in (...) Gospel by Priests and Monks, withour help of Bi^hops, as is
said by Major; yet does it not follow thereupon that their Churches were
governed in the same manner as is said by Buchannan. And yet upon these faulty
grounds it is infered by the (...) with great joy and triumph, that in some
places of the world, the government by Bishops was never received for many
years together. Sm^^ym. p. 16.
For say they, we read that in ancient times the Scots were instructed in the
Christian faith by Priests and Monks, and were without Bishops 290. years.
Instructed possibly at the first without Bishops by such Pri^sts and Monks as
came thither out of Ireland, or the (...) of Man, or the more Southern parts of
B^itain; but not so governed when they were increased, multiplied into several
Churches and Congregations. And so it is affirmed by Ar^h-Bishop Spotswood, who
tell^th u^ ^ut of (...), that anciently the Priests of Scotland, whom they then
called (...), were wont for their better government to elect some one of their
number by Common suffrage to be chief and principal amongst them, Hist of
Scotland fol. 4.
without whose knowledge and con^^nt nothing was done in any matter of
importance; and that the Person so elected was called Scotorum Episcopus the
Scots Bishop, or a Bishop of Scotland. By which it does appear most plainly,
first that the Prelate Bishop was not first ordained here by (...) as the
Scottish say, and secondly, that that Church was not so long a time without
Bishops (if it were at all) as the English Presbyterians would fain have it.

fol. 15. John Calvin a Fre^^hman of Aquitain.^ Not so, but a Native of Noyo^ ^
City of Picardie, far enough from Aquitain, as is affirmed by all others which
have written of him.

The like mistake to which we find fol. 9^. where it is said, that the Lords
of A^bygny take name from Aubygny ^ Whereas indeed the Castle and Signeury of
Aubygny (from whence the younger house of Len^^ takes their denomination) is
not within the Province of Aquitam, but the Country of Berry.

fol. 20 And therefore to strike in with his Son and (...) his Fathers
obsequies with magnifi^ent Solemn^ly ] This spoken of the Obsequies of King
Henry the second of France performed by Queen (...) with great Magnificence;
not so much on the particular ground which I find here mentioned, as to
preserve her Reputation, and the Reputation of this Church by such Rites and
Ceremonies, with all foreign princes. To which end she did Solemnize the
Obsequies of such Kings and Emperors as died during her Reign in as great pomp
and splendour as she did this Kings: for before this in very Princely manner
were performed solemn Obsequies for (...) the fifth, a ri^h ^all of gold laying
upon the Hearse, the Emperors Ambassador being chief Mourner accompanied with
many Princes and Peers of England* And after this (...) did the like for many
others, with no great difficulty to (...) found in our comm^n Chronicles. By
means whereof, (...) did not only maintain her own Estimation, but caused the
Church of England to be looked on with greater veneratio^ and (...) popish
Princes, then it has been since th^^ leaving off (...) due observances.

fol. 27. And ^y co^pute of their own Lo^ds of the Cong^gation a hundred marks
a year was then sufficient for a single Minister.] Understand not here an
hundred marks sterling Sc^tish, each Mark containing no more then thi^teen
pence half penny of our English money, which make but 5. l. 13. s. upon our
account. A sorry pittance in it self, though thought enough by their good
Masters for their pains in preaching.

Fol. 53. Three of our Kings severally challenged that Trial against the French
King; and by Charles of Arragon and Peter de Ta^^acone for the (...) of
Sicilie.] Either the Author Sicilie was once indeed intended to be tried by
Combat, not between Charles of Arragon, and Peter of Tarracone, as is here
affirmed, but between Peter King of Arragon, and Charles Earl of An^ou,
pretending severally to that Kingdom. (10.) Such another mistake we have Fol.
55. Where it is said, that there were some preparations in King James his time
intended between two Scotch m^n, the Lord Ree, and David Ramsey:] Whereas indeed
those preparations were not made in King James, but King (...) his time; Robert
Lord Willoughby Earl of (...), and Lord great Chamberlain of England being made
Lord Constable pro tempore to deside that Controversy.

Fol. 83. Katherine de Medices, Pope Clements Brothers Daughter and Mother of
King Charles etc.] (11) Katheri^e de medices was indeed wife to Henry the
second, and mother to Charles the ninth, Fr^nch Kings, but by no means a
^^^thers daughter to Pope Clement the seventh. For first, Pope Clement being
the natural son of (...) (who was killed young and unmarried) had n^ brother at
all. And secondly, Katherine de Medeces was Daughter of (...) Duke of Vrbin,
son of Peter de Mede^es* and Gr^ndson of Laurence de Medic^s, the brother of
(...) before mentioned. By which account the father of that Pope and the great
Grandfather of that Queen were Brothers, and so that Queeu not Bro^hers
Daughter to the Pope: Of nearer ki^ she was to Pope Leo the tenth, though not
his Brothers Daughter neither, P^pe Leo being Brother to Peter de Medices, this
great Ladies Grandfather.

Fol. 84. This y^^r took away James Hamilton Earl of Arran, and Duke of
Castle-herauld, at Poictures a Province in Poictou, of which Poictires is the
p^^^cipal City, accounted the third City next to Paris and (...) ^ll that
Kingdom.

fol. 96. where we find mention of the abs^nce of the Duke of Arran: Whereas
indeed the chief of the Hamiltons was but Earl of Arrar, as he after calls him;
the Title of Duke being first conf^^'d by King Charles, upon James Marquess of
H^mil^on, created Duke H^mil^on of Arran, Anno 1643.

fol. 139. Where we find mention of the History of Q. Elizabeth, writ by
(...), whereas (...) writ no further then King Henry 8. the rest which follows,
being clapped to by the publisher of it, and possibly may be no other then
Camde^s Annals of that Queen, in the English Tongue: The like I frequently
observe in the name of Metallan, (Metellanus he is called by their Latin
Writers) whom afterward he rightly calls by the name of (...), fol. 149.

Fol. 156. The Leagures, with some justice in Rebellion, elect (...) (...), a
degree nearer to the Crown then Navar.] (...), (called ^harls) being the
youngest Son of ^harls Duke of (...); whereas Henry King of Navar, was the only
Son and Heir of An^ho^y the eldest Brother: So that not only the King of
Navar, but the Princes of the H^use of (...), derived from Francis Duke of
Anghein, the second Brother, had the precedence in Title before this (...)* But
being of the Catholic party, and of the Royal H^use of Bourbon, (in which the
Rights of the Crown remained) and withal, a man of great Age, and small
Abilities, he was set up to serve the turn, and screen'd the main Plot of the
L^aguers from the eyes of the people.

Fol. 161. Sir Thomas Randolph, bred a Civilian, was taken from Pembroke
College in Oxford.] Not otherwise Oxford, which is now called Pembroke
College) but by Anticipation: Lavinaqueve^t Littora, as in the like case the
Poet has it; that which is now called Pembroke College, was in those times
called Broadgates H^ll, not changed into a College, till the latter end of the
Reign of King James, and then in Honor of William Earl of Pembroke, Chancellor
of that University, and in hope of some endowment from him, called Pembroke
College.

Fol. 189. The other Title was of the I^^ant of Spain] In laying down whose
several Titles, the Author leaves out Spain, from the Lady Katherine, Daughter
of John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, married to Henry the third, King of
Castile, and Mother to King John the second, from whom descend the Kings of
Castile to this very day.

Fol. 191. Hawkins, Drake, Baskervile, etc. Fi^e s^ne Towns in the Isle
Dominica, in the West Indies.] They Hispan^ol^. and amongst others, that of
Dominica, or St. Dom^ngo: But they attempted nothing on the Isle of Dominica,
which is one of the Ch^rybes, and they had no reason; that Island being
governed by a King of its own, at deadly enmity with the (...), an^
conseq^ently, more likely to be ayd^d, then ann^yed, by those Sea Adventurers.

A like mistake we had before in the name of C^^m^rdin, fol. 157. That party
who discovered unto Queen Elizabeth the Estate of the Customs, not being named
(...), Carw^rdin.

Fol. 229. Sr. Thomas Erskin created Earl of Kelly, and by degrees Knight of
the Garter.] Not so: Knight of the Garter first, by the name of Thomas Viscount
Fenton, (as appears by the Registers of the Order) and then Earl of Kelly.
Thus afterward we find Sr. John Danvers for Sr. Charles D^nvers, fol. 238.
And John Lord Norris, for Sr. John Norris, fol. 243. And some mistakes of this
nature we find in the short story of the Earl of Essex; in which it is said
first, that

Fol. 233. He was eldest son to Waltar Devereux etc. Elizabeth Earl of Essex
and Ewe.] Not so; but Earl of Essex only, as appears by Camden in his
Britannia, fol, 454. If either he, or any of his Descendants have taken to
themselves the Tittle of Earl's of Ewe, they take it not by virtue of this last
Creation, but in right of their descent from William Bo^rchier created Earl of
Ewe in Normandy by King Henry the fifth, and father of Henry Bourchier created
Earl of Essex by King Edward the fourth.

Secondly, it is said of Robert Earl of Essex the son of this Wal^er, that in
89. he went Commander in chief in the expedition Fol. 233. whereas indeed he
went but as a Voluntier in that expedition, and had no command. And so much our
Author has acknowledged in another place, saying, that, Ambitious of common
fame, he put himself to Sea, and got aboard the Fleet, conceiting that their
respect to his bi^th and qu^li^y, would receive him their chief, but was
mistaken in that honor, Fol. 155.

Thirdly, it is said of this Earl of Essex, that he went Deputy into Ireland,
Fol. 234. Whereas indeed he was not sent Ireland with the Title of Deputy, but
by the more honorable Title of Lord Levi^enant, having power to create a Lord
Deputy under him, when his occasions or the the necessities of the state should
require his absence.

Fol. 2^1. The 26. of February 1^00. was born the Kings third son, and
Christn^^ Charles at Dunferling.] The of England, was not born on the 26. of
February, but on the 19. of Nove^^er, as is averred by all others who have
written of it, and publicly attested by the annual ringing of Bells upon that
day in the City of London during the whole time of his power and prosperity.
The like mistake we find in the ti^e and day of the Birth of Queen Elizabeth
of whom it is ^^id, Fol. 261. (25.) That she gave up the Ghost to G^d o^ that
day of her Birth, from whom she had it; intimating tha^ she died on the Eve of
the same Lady Day on which she was born. But the truth is, that she was born on
the Eve of the Nativity of the Virgin Mary being the seventh day of September,
and died on the Eve of the Annuntiation, being the 24. of March.

And so much for the History of the Reign of Queen Mary, and King James her
Son, as to the Realm of Scotland only; both of them Crowned (as) James the
fifth had also been) in their tenderest infancy. But whereas our Author tells us
Fol. 8. that Q Mary (...) the kingdom to her son, who was born a King; I can by
no means yield to that. I find indeed, Sa^iour Christ was born King of the
Jews, and so proclaimed to be by the Angel Gabriel at the very time of his
Conception. And I have read that Sapores, one of the Kings of Persia, was not
only born a King, but crowned King too before his birth; for his Father dying
without ^^ue (as the story says) left his wife with child, which child the Magi*
having signified by their Art to be a Male, the Persian Princes caused the
Crown and Royal Ornaments to be set upon his Mothers Belly; acknowledging him
there by for their King and Sovaraign. But so it was not with King James, who
was born on the 19 of June Anno. 1566. and Crowned King on the 24. of July
(being the 5. day after his Mothers resignation of the Crown and Government)
Anno. 1567.

ADVERTISEMENTS ON THE REIGN and DEATH OF KING JAMES, Of GREAT BRITAIN, FRANCE
and IRELAND, the first.
WE are now come unto the Reign of King James* as King of England, or rather as
King of England and Scotland, under the notion of Great Britain, of whose
reception, as he passed through Godmanchest^r, the Historian tells us, that,

Fol. 270. At Godmanchester in the Coun^y of Notthamptonshire, they presented
him with 70 Teem of Horses, etc. be^^g his Tenants, and holding their Land by
that Tenure.] But first, God^a^chester is not in Northampton, but in
Hunti^gtonshire. Godmanch^ster, to show their Bravery to the Kings of England
in that rustical Pomp, yet I conceive it not to be the Tenure which they hold
their Lands by: For Camden, who is very punctual in observing Tenures, mentions
not this as a Tenure, but a Custom only, adding withal, that they make their
boast, That they have in former time received the Kings of England, as they
passed in their progress this way, with ninescore Ploughs brought forth in a
rustical kind of Pomp for a gallant show: Camden Brit. l. 510.
If only for a gallant show, or a rustical Pomp, then not observed by them as
their Tenure, or if a Tenure, not (...) from ninescore to 70. all Tenures being
^ixt, not variable at the will of the Tenants.

Fol. 273. This most honorable Order of the Garter, was Edward the third, etc.]
So far our Author, right enough as unto the ^ounder, and rig^^ enough as to the
time of the institution, which he places in the year, 1350. But whereas he
tells us withal, that this Order was founded by King Edward the third, (...)
John of France, and King James of Scotland, being then Pris^ners in the Tower
of London, and King Henry of Castile, the Bastard expulst, and Don Pedro
restored by the Prince of Wales, called the Black Prince; in that he is very
much mistaken. For first, It was David King of the Scots, not James, who had
been taken Prisoner by this Kings Forces, there being no James King of the
Scots, in above fifty years after. Secondly, John of France was not taken
Prisoner till the year 1356. nor Henry of Castile expulsed by the Prince of
Wales, till ten years after, Anno 1366. By consequence, neither of those two
great Actions could precede the Order: But worse is he mistaken in the Patron
Saint, of whom he tells us, that,

Fol. 273. Among sundry men of valor in ancient days, was Geo. born at Coventry
in England, etc.] This, with the rest that follows, touching the Actions and
Achievements of Sir George of Coventry, is borrowed from no better Author,
then the doughty History of the Seven Ch^mpions of Christendom, of all that
trade in Knighthood-errant, the most empty Babble: ^But had our Author looked so
high as the Records of the Order, the titles of Honor writ by Seldom, the
Catalogue of Honor, published by Mills of Canterbury, Camdens Britannia, or any
other less knowing Antiquary, he might have found, that this most noble Order
was not dedicated to that fabulous Knight, S^^. George of Coventry, but to the
famous Saint and Soldier of Christ Jesus, St. George of Cappadocia: A Saint so
universally received in all parts of Christendom, so generally attested to by
the Ecclesiastical Writers of all Ages, from the time of his Martyrdom, till
this day; that no one Saint in all the Calender, (those mentioned in the holy
Scriptures excepted only) can be better evidenced: Nor does he find in
Matthew Parts, that St. George fought in the air at Antioch in behalf of the
English (the English having at that time no such i^^eress in him) but that he
was thought to have been seen fig^ting in behalf of the Christians.

Fol. 275. Earldoms without any place are likewise of two kinds, either in
respect of Office, as Earl-Morshal of England, or by Birth, and so are all the
Kings Sons.] In the Authority England, who commonly have the Title of their
Fathers Earldoms. since it is plain they are born Princes, which is the highest
civil Dignity next to that of Kings: It was indeed usual with the Kings of
England, to bestow upon their youngest Sons some Earldom or other, until the
time of Edward the third; after which time, they were invested with the Title
of Dukes, as appears evidently to any who are studied in their Chronologies:
But that they, or any of them, were Earls by Birth, is a new piece of learning,
for which if the Historian can give me any good proof, I shall thank him for it.

Fol. 278. Henry the eight thus cousened into some kindness, both by his own
power and purse, makes Charles Emperor, and the French King his Prisoner, 1519.]
Neither so, nor so: Henry did contribute both his power and purse to the taking
of the French King Prisoner, yet to the making of Charles Emperor, he
contributed neither the one nor the other. And secondly, though Charles were
created Emperor, Anno 1519 yet the French King was not taken Prisoner till six
years after, Anno 1525.

Fol. 31^. Oswald united the Crowns of England and Scotland, which were (...)
afterward for many Ages.] (3^) That Oswald King of Northumberland here
mentioned, was a Pui^^ant Prince (as being the ninth Monarch of the English) I
shall easily grant; but that he united the two Kingdoms of England and
Scotland, is not any where found: Our Author therefore must be understood, of
his uniting the two Realms of De^ra and Pernicia, (part of which last, has for
long time been accounted part of Scotland) which after his decease were again
divided.

Fol. 317. Whose Results, notwithstanding, are not to be obtruded on the
S^culars, to be obs^rved with the Authority of Laws, until they be allowed by
assent of the King and both ] An error far more pardonable in our present
Author, to whom the concernments of the Church are not so necessary to be known
or studied, then in our Church Historian, where before we had it, and which
has had a full Con^utation in our Animadversions, to which, for brevity sake,
I shall now refer.

Duke of Solia from France.] Either the Printer or the Author are mistaken
here: The Ambassador who was sent from France, was neither called Rory, nor
Duke of Solia, but Marquess of Rhosney, created afterward Duke of Sully, and
Lord High Treasurer of that Kingdom, by King Henry 4. A Protestant, and
therefore purposely selected for that employment: Of whom it is reported in the
conference at Hampton Court, that having observed the order and gravity of our
Church Service, in the Cathedral Church at C^n^erbury, he was heard to say,
that if the like had been used in France, there would have been many thousands
of Protestants more then were at that present.

for his good Service was created Earl of Salisbury,] That is to say, (for so
it must be understood) for his activity and diligence in discovering the
Powder Treason: But he was Earl of Salisbury before that Discovery, called so
by the Historian himself, in the course of tha^ Na^rative, and made so by King
James in the May forego^ng, at what time also, his Brother, Thomas Lord Burley
was made Earl of EXCESTER.

The like mistake I find in the advancement of Thomas Lord Buckhurst to the
Earldom of Dorcet, placed by the Author, fol. 342. in the year 1605. whereas
indeed he was created Earl of Dorcet in the first year of King James, March 13.
Anno 1603.

Fol. 333. The Earl of Flanders, etc. being by Storm cast upon our Coast, etc.
was fain to yield to all the Kings demands, in delivering up the Countess of
Warwick, and other Fugitives resident in Flanders.] This story is well meant,
but not rightly told, there being at that time no Earl of Flanders (commonly
England, nor any such Woman as a Countess of Warwick, whom King Henry the
seventh could be afraid of; the truth is, that the person here meant, was
Philip King of Castile, Duke of Burgundy, Earl of Flanders, etc. who in his
return from Spain, was driven by Tempest on the Coast of England, and being
Royally Feasted by King Henry the seventh, was detained here till he had
delivered into the Kings hands the Earl of Suffolk, who had fled into the
Nether-lands for protection, and began to work new troubles against his
Sovereign: The story whereof we have at large in the History of King Henry the
seventh, writ by the Lord Viscount St. Alban, from fol. 222. to 225.

Fol. 334 The fate of that Family evermore false to the crown] This spoken of
the Piercies, Earls of Northumberland, Henry, the second Earl of this Family,
lost his life fighting for King Henry the sixth, in the Battle of St. Albans,
as Henry his Son and Successor also did at the Battle of ^owton: And so did
Henry the fifth Earl, in the time of King Henry the seventh, for his Fidelity
to that King, in a tumultuous Insurrection of the Common People; not to say any
thing of his Son and Successor, who dyed without any imputation of such
disloyalty.

Fol. 362. Zutphen and Gelders did of right belong to the Duk^ Arnold, who
being Prisoner with the last Duke of Burgundy, who died before Nancy, that Duke
intruded upon his Possession, etc.] (40.) Not so, it was not Arnold Duke of
Gelders, that was Imprisoned by Charles Duke of Burgundy, but his Son Adolphus,
who having most ungratiously Imprisoned his aged Father, was vanquished by Duke
Charles, and by him kept Prisoner, and the old Duke restored again to his power
and liberty: In a grateful acknowledgement of which favor, he made a Donation
of his Estates to Duke Charles and his Heirs, to commence after his decease;
though it took no effect, till Conquered under that pretense by Charles the
fifth, uniting it unto the rest of his Belgic Provinces, Anno 1538.

Fol. 423. Sir William Seymour, Grandchilde to the third Son and the Heir of
the Earl of Hertford, created by Henry the eighth, whose sister he married,
etc. And being thus near ] In this business of Sir William Seymer, now Marquess
of Hertford, there are two mistakes. For first, the Earl of Hertford from whom
he derived his descent, married not any of the Sisters of King Henry the
eighth, he having but two Wives in all, the first, the Daughter of Filol of
Woodland, from whom comes Baronet Seymer of the West; the second, Anne Daughter
of Sir Edward, and Sister to Sir Michael Stanhop, from whom discends the House
of Hertford, still in being: Its true, King Henry married a Sister of Sir
Edward Seymer, by him created Earl of Hertford, but not e contra; the Earl of
Hertford married not with a sister of his.

Secondly, The nearness of this House to the Crown England, came not from any
such Marriage of this first Earl with that Kings Sister, but from the Marriage
of Edward the second Earl, with a Niece of that Kings, that is to say, with
(...), Daughter of Henry Duke of Suffolk, and of F^a^ces his Wife, one of the
Daughters of Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolk, and of Mary the French Queen, King
(...) Sister.

Fol. 427. The late French King, Henry the fourth, had three Daughters, the one
married to the Duke of Savoy, etc] This Marriage, both for the time and person,
is mistaken also.

First, for the time, in making it to precede the match with Spain; whereas the
cross Marriages with Spain, were made in the year 1612. and this with Savoy not
trans-acted till the year 1618.

Secondly, for the Person, which he makes to be the eldest Daughter of Henry
the fourth, and Elizabeth married into Spain to be the second, whereas
Elizabeth was the eldest Daughter, and Christienne married into Savoy the
second only: For which, consult James Howels History of Lewis the 13. fol. 13.
and 42.

Fol. 428. The story was, that his Ancestors at Plough, ^lew Malton, an
High-land Rebel, and dis-comfited his Train (using no other Weapon but his Geer
and Tackle.] But Camden, Danes: For speaking of the Earls of Arrol. he derives
the Pedigree from one Hay, a man of exceeding strength, and excellent courage;
who, together with his Sons, in a dangerous Battle of Scots against the Danes,
at Longcarty, caught up an Ox Yoke, and so valiantly, Camden in Scot. fol. 42.
and fortunately withal, what with fighting, and what with exhorting,
reinforced the Scots at the point to sh^ink and recoyl, that they had the day
of the Danes, and the King, with the States of the Kingdom, adscribed the
Victory and their own safety to his valor and prowess.

Ibid. But to boot, he sought out a good Heir (Gup my Lady Dorothy) sole
Daughter to the Lord Denny.] This spoken of James Hay, afterward Viscount
Doncaster and Earl of Car^^sle, who indeed married the Daughter and sole Heir
of the L. Denny of Waltham: But he is out for all that in his Gup my Lady, her
name being Honora and not Dorothy, as the Author makes it. And for his second
Wife, one of the Daughters of Henry Piercy, E. of North-Humberland; she was
neither a Dorothy, nor an Hei^: And therefore we must look for this Gup my Lady
in the House of Huntington, that bald Song being made on the Marriage of the
Lady Dorothy Hastings, Daughter of George Earl of Huntington, with a Scottish
Gentleman, one Sir James Steward, slain afterward at ^^^ington by Sir George
Wharton (who also perished by his Sword) in a single Combat.

Fol. 429. Amongst many others that accompanied Hays expedition, was Sir Henry
Rich, Knight of the Bath, and Baron of Bath at that time, but not Baron of
Kensington; this Expedition being placed by our Author in the year 1616. and
Sir Henry Rich not being made Baron of Kensington till the 20 year of King
James, Ann^ 1622.

Fol. 434. The chief Judge thereof, is called Lordchief Justice of the Common
Pleas, accompanied with three or four Assistants, or Associates, who are
created by Letters Patents from ] But Doctor Cowel, in his learned and
laborious work, called The Interpreter, has informed us otherwise: This
Justice, says he, (speaking of the chief Justice of the Kings Bench) has no
Patent under the Broad-Seal: He is made only by Writ, which is a short one to
this effect: Regina Iohanni Popham Militi salutem: Sciatis quod constituimus
(...) I^st^ciarium nostrum Capitalem, ad Placita coram nobis ter^^nandum,
durante been placito nostro, Test, etc. For this he cites Crompton, a right
learned Lawyer, in his Book of the Jurisdiction of Courts: And what he says of
that chief Justice, the practice of these times, and the times preceding* has
verified in all the rest.

Fol. 450. She being afterward led up and down the King^ Army, under oversight
as a Prisoner, but showed to the people (...) etc.] Not so, for after the death
of the Marquess D'Aucre, she retired to Blois, where (...) lived for some years
under a restraint, till released by the Du^^ of E^p^rnon, and prtly by force,
p^rtly by treaty, restor^ again into power and favor with her Son, which she
improv^^ afterward to an omne-regen^y, till Richeleu her great Assistant,
finding himself able to stand without her, and not enduring a Competitor in the
Affairs of State, mde her leave the Kingdom.

Fol. 45^. By his first Wife he had b^t one S^n, ris^^g no higher in Honor then
K^ight and Baronet: Yet af^erw^^ds he had preferment to the Government of
Ulster P^ovince in Ireland.] This spoken, but mistakingly spoken of Sir George
V^lliers, Father of the Duke of Buckingham, and his eldest son.

For first, Sir George Villiers had two sons by a former Wife, that is to say,
Sir William Villiers Knight and Baronet, who preferred the quiet and repose of
a Country life, before that of the Court; and Sir Edward Villiers, who by a
Daughter of Sir John St. John of Lidiard, in the County of Wilts, was Father of
the Lord Viscount Gra^d^son, now living.

And secondly, It was not Sir William, but Sir Edward Villiers, who had a
Government in Ireland, as being by the Power and Favor of the Duke his half^
Brother, made Lord President of M^nster, (not of Vlster) which he held till his
death.

And whereas it is said, fol. 466. that the Duke twi^te^ himself and his Issue,
by inter-marri^ges with the best and most ^noble: If the Author, instead of his
Issue, had said his ^^ndred, it had been more properly and more truly spoken:
For Mary and the Heir of Pembroke; but he had so disposed of h^s Female
Kindred, that there were more Countesses and ^onorable Ladies of his Relations,
then of any one Family (...) the Land.

Fol. 458. Henry the eighth, created Anne Bullen (...) of Pembroke, before he
married her.] The Author here ^nne Bullen to be the first in that kind,
whereas indeed it as the second, if not the third. For Margaret, Daughter (...)

^

Fol. 4^4 And that Com^t at Ch^ists birth was (...) But first the Star which
appeared at the birth of our (...), and conducted the wise men to Jerusalem,
was of condition too ^ub^ime and supernatural to be called a Comet: and so
resolved to be by all^learned men who have written of it.

And secondly, had it been a Comet, it could not possibly have portended the
death of Nero; there passing between the b^^th of Christ, and the death of that
Tyrant about (...) year^, too long a time to give unto the influences of the
strongest Comet. So that although a Comet did presage the death of Nero, as is
said by Tacitus; yet could not that Comet be the (...) which the Scriptures
speak of.

Fol. 48^ Ferdinand meets at Franckford, with the three (...), Men^^, Colen,
and Trevours; the other three Silesia* Moravia, and Lu^atia, failing in their
persons, sent^their (...) Silesia, Moravia, and (...)incorporated with the
Realm of (...) being never qualified with sending any Electors ^or the choice
of the Emperor. The three Electors which he means, were the Count Palatine
of the R^^ne, the Duke of Saxony, and the Marquess of Brandenburg, and they not
coming in Person to the (...) at Frackford, appeared there by their Ambassadors
as at other times.

A like mistake, but far more pardon^ble, o^curreth Fol. 484. Where Da^mstal is
said to be a Town of Bohemia; whereas indeed it is a Town of the Land of
H^ssen, the Saxony being interposed betwixt this Town and the nearest parts of
that Kingdom.

Fol. 489. The Lord Marchers after the Conquest were re^ident upon the Confines
and borders of the Welsh, and other places not subdued; men of valor, of high
blood of the Normans, with the name and privileges of the Earls of Chester]
That Wales were at first many in number as it after follows, is a truth
undoubted. But their power being contracted into fewer hands, one of them
(Roger Mortimer by name) was by King Edward the third made Earl of March. The
Earldome of Chester was of another foundation; conferrd by William the
Conqueror upon Hugh surnamed Lupus, Son to the Viscount of Auranches in
Normandy, with all the Rites and Privileges of a County Palatine to him and to
his Heirs for ever. So that this honor being appropriated to the Heirs of
that House, was not Communicable unto any of the rest of the Marchers, nor
could those Marchers claim the style and privileges of Earls of Chester.

Fol. 490. Sir. Edward Montague had three sons, Edward the eldest Knight of the
Bath etc.] The Author here Montagues.

For first, that Edward Montague* who was (...) etc. was not Brother to James
Bishop of Winchester, and Henry Earl of Manchester, but their Brothers Son,
that is to say, the Son of another E^ward their eldest Brother.

Secondly, besides that, Edward, James, and Henry, there was another Brother
whom the Author names not, though he could not choose but know the man, viz. Sir
Sidney Mon^^^^, one o^ the Masters of the Requests to the late King (...).
The^^fore to set this matter right, I am to let both him and his Rea^ers know,
that Sr. Edward Montague chief Justice ^n the time of King Edward the sixth*
was father of another Edward who lived peaceably and nobly in his own Country.
To whom succeeded a third Edw^rd, who (...) in the Wars, and gained the
reputation of a good Comma^der* the elder Brother of James, Henry, and (...)
before mentioned, and the father of a fourth Ed^^^^ who was made Knight of the
Bath, at the Coron^tion (...) Anno 1^03 and afterward created Lord (...) of
Bough^on in the nin^teenth year of that King Anno 1621. which honorable Title
is now enjoyed by his Son (another Edward) Anno. 1658.

And thirdly th^^gh ^ grant that Dr. James Montag^e Bishop of Winch^ster (the
second Brother of the four) was of great power and favor in the time of King
James, and might have free access into the Bedchamber of that King whenever
he pleased* ye^ that he was of the Bed chamber (as the Author says) that i^ to
say, admitted formerly thereunto and one of that number, I do more then doubt.

Fol. 506. Then comes John Howard etc. created by Richard ] In this and in the
^^st that follows, touching the succession of the Earls M^rsh^^ls, there a^e
many mistaken.

F^r first t^is John Lord Howard was by Richard the third ^ot only created
Duke of North-folk, but Earl Mar^^^ll also as appears by Camd^n Fol 483.

Secondly, as well Thomas Earl of Surrey the son of this (...), as an^th^r
Thomas, the son of that Thomas, were both advan^^d (...) the ^ffice of Earl
Marshal as is affirmed by such as have writ the Genealogies of this noble family

Thirdly, that Thomas Howard, whom queen Mary restored Marsh^l, was not the
Grand-c^ilde of Thomas M^wbray, ^ut the Grandchild of the Grandchild of the
Daughter of that Thomas Mowbray, as will appear to any who shall search that
Pedigree. But this perhaps may be an error of the Printer in giving us the name
of Thomas Mowbray for Thomas Howard.

Fourthly, though Robert Dev^r^ux Earl of Essex is by our Thom^s H^ward in the
Office of Marshal; yet sure it is, that Georg Talbot Earl of Shrewbury came in
between them, advanced unto that Dignity by Queen Elizabeth Anno 157^.

Fol. 507. He (...) the emine^t Stru^ture of the Library of St. John's in
Cambridge where he had been Master for many years.] This spoken of Dr. Williams
then Bishop of Lincoln Keeper, who certainly was never Master of that College;
though by his power and and party in that Society he advanced Dr. Gwin who had
been his Tutor, unto that place, as is affirmed in the Church History of
B^itain. Lib. 11. fol. 225. It may be Mr. Williams was at that time of the same
mind with ^harles Mart^l, of whom it is affirmed that he chose rather to make
a King then to be a King. Non ^word regn^re, sed R^gibus (...) as the old verse
has it. Or else perhaps we may say of him as T^citus does of Mutian^s. Cui
facil^us er^t (...); that is to say, that it was easier for him to procure the
mastership for another, then to obtain it for himself. But howsoever it was, it
seems to have been carried by strong (...) canvas, of which Nation both the
Pupil and the Scholar were, as appears by these H^xameters following, in
which the four Competitors are thus laid before us.

^

Fol. (...) The (...) of that Protestation (...) me^^ (...) Regni negotiis, but
left out Quibusdam, (...) particular cases as the King (...)] This spoken of a
Protestation entered b^ ^ome of the House of Commons Anno 1621. concerning (...)
of their pretended Rights and Privileges; in which they (...) mista^en, (and I
wonder the Author did not see it) in (...) the very grounds on which they built
it. For by the writ of summons the Commons were not called to consult of any
thing either great of little, difficult or not difficult, whatso^^ver it was;
but only (...) consentiendum, and faciendum, to consent to and perfo^m such
things as by the great Council of the Realm^ consisting of the Lords Spiritual
and Temporal, should be then ordained, as by the very ^writ it self does at
large appear. By which it seems that the Commons assembled in Parliament, were
of themselves so far from being any (...) o^ that supreme Count, that they were
not to be counted for a part of the Kings great Council. So that the founda^ion
being (...), the Superstructure could not stand which was built upon it. But
for the Protestation which gave the first hint to those bold demands, which
afterward were made by some of the Commons, it was this that follows.

The Protesta^ion of the Commo^s.
Ia^. 19. 1621.
THe Commons now assembled in Parliament, being justly occasioned thereunto,
concern^^^ (...) L^b^rties, Franchises, and Privileges (...) among others here
mentioned, do (...) Protestation following: That the Liber^^^ (...)
Privileges, and Jurisdiction of Parliament, are the Ancient and undoubted
Birthright, and inheritance of the Subjects of England, and that the arduous
and urgent affairs concerning the King, State, and defense of the Realm, and
of the Church of England, and the maintenance and making of Laws, and redress
of mischief and grievances, which daily happen within this Realm, are proper
subjects, and matter of Counsel, and debate in Parliament: And that in the
handling and proceeding of those businesses, every member of Parliament has,
and of right ought to have Freedom of Speech, to propound treat, reason, and
bring to conclusion the same: And that the Commons in Parliament have likewise
Liberty and freedom to treat of the matters, in such order as in their
judgments shall seem fittest: And that every Member of the said house has
like Freedom from all impeachment, imprisonment, and molestation, (other then
by censure of the house it self) for or concerning any speaking, reasoning or
declaring any matter, or matters touching the Parliament or Parliament
businesses. And that if any of the said Members be complained of, and
questioned for any thing done or said in Parliament, the same is to be showed
to the King by the advice and assent of all the Commons assembled in
Parliament* before the King give credence to any private Information.

Fol. 523. Hereupon the Members became Subjects again.] This I conceive to have
been spoken by the Author in the Irony, as in the same way of Irony, the
Members of the House of Commons were sometimes called by King James the Five
hundred Kings: For otherwise, our Author knows, as well as any, that the
Members are as much Subjects in the time of their sitting, as they are or can
be after the time of their Dissolution.

Fol. 527. And though Tiberius beheaded Cremutius for ] That Cremutius Cordus
was impeached in the Senate for words only, is affirmed by Tacitus: But that
he was beheaded for it by Tiberius, is affirmed by none; that Author telling
us, that having made his Defense in the open Senate, and returning home,
Abstinenti^ vitam finivit: He ended his life by a wilful abstinence from food:
Nor was (...) sentenced by the Senate to any other punishment, then that his
Books should be publicly burnt, (Libros per Aediles cremandos censuere Patres)
which was done accordingly, the shame and grief whereof, made him end his life
as before is said.

Fol. 528. But in a word, their great Wealth was one notable ba^^ to the Popes,
and the Gulf of other Orders, Hospitallers, Knights of the Rhodes, and St.
John's: All these together smack this Order, and swallowed their Riches at one
time; by consent of all the Princes in Christendom, where they had ] Where were
our Authors Wits when these words fell from him? Hospitallers, Knights of
Rhodes, and of St. John's, all these together; and yet all these together make
one Order only, as Marcus Tullius Cicero, made one only Orator: Called by
these several names, for several reasons; called Hospitallers, because they had
the charge of the Hospital at Jerusalem, erected for relief of Pilgrims to that
holy place.

Secondly, Knights of St. John's, because founded in the Church of St. John in
Jerusalem, and dedicated unto him as their Patron Saint.

Thirdly, (...) of the Rhodes, from the settled place of their ^abitation (after
their expulsion out of Palestin) from the year ^^09. till the year 1522. when
forced to leave that Island by Sol^man the Magnificent, they retired unto the
Isle of Malta, from whence now denominated.

Fol 529. From whom Digby had knowledge of that Kings Prog^ess toward ^he
North of Spain, to Lerma, a Town in Bis^ay.] That Lerm is situate toward the
Northern parts of Spain, I shall rea^ily grant; and yet not as a Town of
Bis^ay, Castile, situate not far from Burgos, the chief of that Province.

So also by a like error in Topography, St. Andrews, (Saint Anderos the
Spaniards call it) is made to be a part of Biscay, 530. whereas indeed it is a
well known Haven of the Realm of Leon and Ovi^do, neighboring on the Sea to
Bis^ay, ^ut no part thereof.

And now we are thus fallen on the Coast of Spain, I should ^ake notice of the
Procuration which is said by our Author ^o be left with the Earl of Bristol,
for impowring him to Espouse the Infant^, within ten days after the
Dispensation came from Rome, fol. 552.

But hereof th^re has so much been said by the Observator History of the Reign
of King Charles, published by Haimon L'Strange Esquire and the defense of those
Observati^ns against the Pamphleter, that nothing needs be added here on that
occasion.

Fol. 567. Indeed the Savoy Ambassador there said, That the ^ntention of the
King of Spain was, for a cross match with France for himself.^ It is not to be
doubted, but that the Spaniard Wales and a Daughter of France: But I cannot
look upon it as a thing conceivable, that he should pretend to any such cross
Alliance for himself, as is here alleged. He had before married the eldest
Sister, who was still alive, and therefore could not pretend to the younger
also: And if it was not for himself (as indeed it was not) it cannot be
imagined that he could give himself any hopes of it for any of his younger
Brethren; there being so vast a disproportion between the Heir apparent of
England, and any younger Brother of the House of Austria* The Ambassador of
Savoy might act something in order to the service and Designs of the Catholic
King, which could not be advanced by any such suggestion as is here laid downs*
And therefore our Author might have done very well to have spared his pains in
giving us such a reason for the Interruption* which was made in the Treaty of
this Marriage by the Agents of the King of Spain, as indeed cannot stand with
reason.

And thus far have I gone in running over the most materia^ errors and defects
of Mr. Sandersons Complete History, (as he calls it) of Mary Queen of Scotland,
and King James her Son* the sixth of that name in Scotland, and the first in
England* before the coming out of that large and voluminous piece, entitled, A
complete History of the Life and Reign of King Charles, from his Cradle to his
Grave; in the doing whereof, I proposed unto my self no other ends, then first
to vindicate the truth, and next to do some right to the Author himself, whom I
looked on as a man well principled, and of no ill affections to the Church or
State: And having finished it with as much brevity as I could, it was intended
only as an Appendix to the work precedent, though now upon the coming out of
the other piece, it serves as a preamble to that, as having the precedence of
it both in time and method; what moved me to the undertaking and examination of
the following History, I have declared at large in the Preface unto those
Advertisements which are made upon it, wherein I have carried my self, with
more respect unto his person, and far less Acrimony in the Phrase and garb of
my Expressions, there he has reason to expect.

His most unhandsome dealing with me in the Book it self; seconded by a more
ridiculous manifestation of his Spleen and Passion in his post has^e Reply,
etc. might well have sharpened one of a duller edge to cry quittance with him:
But I consider rather what is fit for me to do, then for him to suffer, and
have not yet forgot the Lesson which I learned in one of the Morals of my
Aesops Fables, where I was taught to imitate those generous Horses, Qui
latrantes caviculos cum contempt^ praetereunt, which said, I passed on with a
quiet and pacifick mind to the rest that follows.

ADVERTISMENTS On a Book Entitled THE COMPLETE HISTORY OF THE LIFE and REIGN
OF KING CHARLES From his CRADLE to his GRAVE.

Horat. De Art Poet: Nec sic incipies, ut scripsit Scythicus olim,
Fortunam Priami c^ntabo, and nobile Bellum!
Quid dignum tanto quaerit hic promissor hiatu?
A SHORT SURVEY OF Mr. SANDERSONS long HISTORY OF THE Life and REIGN of King
CHARLES. AS ALSO Of the Motives which induced the Author of these Advertisments
to engage in this business.
THere are two things as necessary to the writing Histories, as to the
Composing of Orations, or any other Philosophical, Civil, or Divine discourses;
that is to say, clearness of Method, and perspicuity of Language. For if the
Method be irregular and inartificial, the Reader will soon find himself in a
wood, in which he can neither travel with pleasure, nor stand still with
profit. Or if the Language be unpleasing, or rendered less intelligible to the
vulgar Reader, either by new affected words, not to be understood without the
help of a Dictionary, or by obscure expressions which require a Comment; he
stands deprived of that contentment which otherwise would beguile him to the
end of the work, before he thinks he is half way in it. In which respect a
perspicuous comeliness of words, and a regular (...)

N^r stand I singly by my self in this opinion of that H^^tory, but find it
seconded by others of good (...) and qua^ity. A judicious and learned friend
(...) mine having read it over, gave me this judgment of ^ without my seeking,
and as such time as I am sure (...) never dreamt of my engaging in this
business. I (...) spent some hours (says he) upon his other two Histories of
Ma^y Queen of Sco^s, and King (...) her ^on, wherein though I find not many
(...) untruthes, yet much stealing from (...) and Camden, and methinks he (...)
nothing like a Historian either (...) Compo^^^ (...) ^entences many time (...),
and his Digre^^ons ^edious and impertiment. But this being a private
Adver^^ment, and but la^ely given, could not come time enough to the ^ares of
this Aut^or (had it been so meant) that he might thereby have rectified any
thing which was observed to be (...) or method. And therefor I r^fer him to a
passage (...) Book entitled Ob^^^vatio^^ upon some particular pe^so^s and
passages in the Complea^ History o^ Ma^y Queen of Scots etc. which I am sure
came to (...) and^, because he returned an Answer to it. The Au^hor of which
observations tells us; That his whole Book is but a rapsody of notes and (...)
papers (...) other men collected without either Order or Method, being
exceedingly defective both in time, place ^and nominations, and written in so
unseemly and disjointed a style, that we may easily perceive he has taken up
other men's words without understanding their matter; and unless it be where he
raileth on persons of Honor, (which he does plainly and often, though
^ome^imes very falsely) his Language is dark, harsh, and unintelligible.

According to this last censure, the Author of this History stands not only
charged with want of ^are in the digesting of his matter, and the well
languag^ing of the same (as was observed in the private Letter before
mentioned) but with railing on (...) Persons of Honor without ground or truth.
So that being publicly forewarned, it might have been presumed that in (...)
he would have (...) and amended whatsoever was observed to be defective in the
other, or condemned in it. But some there are, who have to be reformed in the
Psalmists Language; others, who think it an acknowledgement of their wants and
weaknesses, if they persist not in the same way which before they walked in. I
am so charitable to the Author of the present History, as not to rank him with
the first, though I have reason to believe that he is willing to be reckoned
amongst the second. We might have otherwise expected such a Reformation in
those particulars as might very well have stood with ingenuity, and without
disparagement. But on the contrary, the Earl of A^undel, my Lord Finch, and Sr.
Francis Winde^anck, persons of eminence and Honor are brought under the Lash;
two of them being unjustly condemned for professed Papists, and the third for
doing somewhat, but he knows not what, which had lost his head if he had not
saved it by his heels. His Method as perplexed and confused, his Language as
rugged and uneven as before it was. It seems it did concern him in the point
of Decorum to make the History of this King alike both in form and matter, unto
those of his Ancestors, and that his picture should not be laid with better
colors then the others were; facies not omnibus una -- Nec diversa ^amen, as
we know who says.

I know some who affect Brevity, do many times fall into Obscurity. Brevis esse
laboro, Obscurus ^io, as (...) in his Book de Art poe ica. But in a piece of
such pro^ixity as this is, the Author had room and scope enough to express
himself clearly and intelligibly even to an ordinary Reader, which renders him
the more inexcusable amongst knowing men: His History made much longer by
Incorporating into it his late Majesty's most excellent Meditations and Divine
Discourses (those Men^is aureae (...)) comprised in the Book called (...), or,
The Portraiture of his sacred Majes^y in his Sol^^udes and Sufferings, A Book
which rather ought to have been preserved by its self, like Apples of Gold in
P^^^ures of Silver, etc. to be engraven on Pillars of Marble, with a Pen of
Diamond, then to be buried in the Grave of an obscure Writer, like a Pearl in
an Oister-shell, or to be sowed like a piece of the richest purple cloth
(purpureus late qui splendeat, in the Poets expression) to such a sorry Web of
homespun.

Yet these defects might the more easily have been pardoned, if he had either
been more careful in the choice of his matter, or diligent in searching for the
truth of those things which he has delivered: But on the contrary, his matter
is many times taken up without care or Judgment, wit^out consideration of the
fitness or unfitness of it; as if an History, which is to be the Storehouse of
time, were to be stowed with things unnecessary, unprofitable, and of no use at
all: And yet his failings in the truth of that which he delivers to us, are
more to be condemned, be^au^e more dangerous in themselves, and of worse
consequence in respect of the Reader, then his neglect in the choice of his
matter: For he that comes unto the reading of an History, comes with a
co^^idence that he shall find nothing b^^ the truth, though possibly the (...)
And it might have been presumed the rather, because (...) was r^solve^d before
^and ^o to provoke the (...) or his Alter (...) (^e he who he will) as might
(...) him that his Errors were not like to be con^^a^d from the eyes of other,
if such a provoca^ion should be ^^^banded to his (...).

But however he goes o^, and lays down many things for truth, which either have
been proved to be false by the o^s^rvator, or are contradicted by himself, or
easily disce^nable for Errors by a vulgar Reader, not studied (...) then (...)
Chronic^e, or the weekly M^r^uries: And this he does with so great confidence,
not giving the least acknowledgement of any Er^a^a, eit^er from the Press, or
from the Pen; that if the wilful (...) an Error may ^reat^ an Heresy, our
Author may deserve to be enro^^^ for the first Heretic in point of History:
And why ^^t Heresies ^n History; as well as Heresies in Law; with which last
crime John (...) stands accused in Print by Mr. Justice German, for saying that
the Jurors were Judges in point of Law, and not only ^n a matter of fact:
Errare p^ss^m, Here^ icus ess^ (...), was esteemed a piou^ resolu^ion in a Case
of Div^nity, and may be held for a good rule in any matter of History,
Philosophy, Law or Physic, or any other Art or Faculty of what ^ort soev^r.

But to reduce these several items to a (...) as in the History it self,
considering the length, (I (...) not say the tediousness) of it, there is much
which deserves to be laid up in the Registers of succee^ing Ages; so there are
many Errors ^it to be (...), and many unnecessary passages which might very
judiciously have been spared and suffered to pass by without remembrance: His
Hist. in this respect, may be compared to the French Army at the battle of
Agincourt, of which it was merrily said by old Captain Gam, who took a view of
it from an Hill, That there were men enough in it to be killed, enough to be
taken and kept alive, and enough to be permitted to run away; or to the
draw-net in the Gospel, which gathered of every kind of Fishes, out of which
the good ones being culled and preserved in Vessels, the rest were only good
enough to be cast aside.

I cannot but acknowledge, that he has done more right to the King and the
Church of England, then could be expected in these times: V^inam sic semper err
asset, as the learned Cardinal said of Calvin in the point of the Trinity: And
had he took but any ordinary care in performing those things whereof he had
been before advertised, or diligence in avoiding those Errors which he so often
falls into, it might have deserved the name of a Complete History, by which he
has been pleased to call it: But coming to us as it is, it is no other then a
Forest of Oaks, or a Quary of Marble, out of which materials may be hewn for a
perfect Fabric; a Moles indigesta like the ancient Chaos, which being without
Form it self, afforded Matter to the making of the most excellent Creatures: Or
if he will, it is an History of Ore, which being purged of the Dross, and
refined in the Language, may pass for current amongst the best pieces of this
kind.

Which said in reference to the Author and the present History, I must say
somewhat of my self, and my engaging in the survey and correction of it:
Concerning which, the Reader may be pleased to know, that about Midsummer last,
Mr. Sanderson found me out at my lodging in London, where after some ordinary
Civilities passed between us, he told me that he had undertaken the History of
King Charles, and that he was required by the Lord Primate of Ireland, to do him
some right in the business of the Earl of Strafford, which he resolved so to
do, and with such respect unto my person, that I should find no just cause to
be offended at his writing: I answered, that I was resolved to have nothing to
do in the Quarrels of the Observator, and therefore he might use his pleasure:
I had a purpose thereupon of perusing the History, and taking notice of such
Errors and Mistakes (if any such were) as possibly I might chance to meet with,
and having so done, to send them to him, with my Conceptions and Corrections in
a private way, that he might do himself the right of rectifying them in a short
Review, and joining that Review to as many of the Books as remained unsold: And
this he might have done with great advantage to the Reader, and without
disparagement to himself; two as great Clerks as any of the age they lived in
having done the like, viz. St. Austin in his Retra^lations, and Bellarmin in
his Book of Recognitions: But when I came to that part of it, which concerned
the Lord Primate and the Earl of Strafford, I saw my self so coursly handled,
and so despightfully reproached, that I found good cause to change my purpose,
and not to take such care to save his credit, who had so little care of his
own, and less of mine: Seipsum deserentem omnia deserunt, is an old
Observation, but as true as ancient. He gives me rost-mea^ and besprinkles me
with a little Court Holy Water in the end of his Preface; but beat me with the
spit, and basles me all over with gall and vinegar in that part of the History,
which made me change my first purpose and intentions toward him.

And yet I cannot choose but say, I was never at a greater conflict within my
self (in any matter of this kind) then in the publishing or not publishing of
these following papers. I had before justified my self against his Calumnies
and charges in an Appendix to my answer to the part of Dr. (...) Book,
entitled The ^udgment of the late Primate etc. in which I found my self
concerned, which was intended to come out in Print before Easter last. And
thereupon I thought it best to stand aloof, without engaging further against
this Author, in hope that I might have some satisfaction from him either
public or private. But understanding that notice had been given unto him of
some just cause for my dislike, and no acknowledgement or reparation following
o^ it* I conceived that it concerned me in point of Credit to let him see, that
I knew as well how to offend an unjust Adversary, as to defend my self. In the
pursuit whereof I have carried on the work with that sobriety in it self, and
such respect unto his person, as cannot be displeasing to the Author, or any
discerning friend of his, or unto any equal and impartial Reader.

His Errors I have corrected, rectified his Mistakes, and a^ded here and there
some Observations in the way of a Supplement. For which cause I have called
these papers by the name of Adver^sments, that I might use such honest freedom
as well in the last as in the first, as might conduce un^o the b^nefit of such
as should p^cale to read them. Hi^ History is not ma^e the wor^e, nor the sale
thereof retarded by such Additionals and Corrective^ as are here pre^ented.
Which though he may not thank me for, yet I am apt to flatt^r my self that I
may receive some thanks from others. Howsoever I shall comfort my self with
this, that I have not trespassed against good manners or the truth, the
vindicating of which last, has been the main impulsive to this under^aking.
And being com^ort^d in that, I shall the better endure such censures either of
pragmaticalnesse, or the love of revenge, which may perhaps be laid upon me by
such as do not understand me. Dele^a^it tame^se Conscientia, quod est A^imi
pa^ulum incredibili jucundi^ate persusum, as Lactantius has it. With which I
shut up this Survey, and proceed to the business.

ADVERTISEMENTS ON A BOOK Entitled A Complete HISTORY OF THE LIFE and REIGN OF
KING CHARLES From his CRADLE to his GRAVE.
THE Author of the History which we have before us entitles it, A complete
History of the Life and Reign of King Charles from his Cradle to his Grave. By
which the Reader might expect a complete Account of all the passages of his
life, not only from his coming to the Imperial Crown of this Realm, but from
his first coming into the world; In which intervall, besides the nature and
condition of his education, First, under Mr. Thomas Murrey, and afterward
under the immediate care of King James his Father; he had the conduct of one of
the most weighty Affairs of State that ever was managed by any prince in his
fathers life time. And if James Howel in writing the life of Lewis 13. thought
fit to begin his History with the acts of his Daulphinage, which could afford
no great variety of matter, considering he came unto the Crown at ten years of
age; assuredly the first part of the life of King (...) rash assuming of the
Crown of (...) and that it gave the Sp^niards a free pass for his Itali^n
forces to march toward the Netherlands* I shall adventure to lay down the
first cause of that Quarrel.

It was about the year 1^15. that a design was put into the head of the Bishop
of Spires, being an Homager and Feudatory of the Prince Elector Palat^^e, to
for^^fie the Town and Castle of Vdenheim; which by ^om little help of Art,
added unto the natural strength of the sit^ation, might be made impregnable. In
Order whereunto the Bishop invite^ the Prince and the Princess Elizabeth his
wi^e to a solemn feast: and after Dinner shows him from the top of one of the
^urrets of the Castle the prospect of the ^own and Country adjo^ning, telling
him, that if that Town were fortified by Art as well as by nature, it would be
a very strong Bulwark, not only to the States of his Highness, but unto all
the rest of his Neighbors in those parts of Germa^y; and that he had a great
desire to proceed to the acting of those thoughts, if his Highness were but
plea^ed to give way unto it. The Prince considering very wisely, that he was
now in his power, returned this answer, that if the fortifying of that place
did startle no other jealousies in the minds of the Neighboring Princes then
it did in his, he might go on with it when he pleased; which words being taken
by the Bishop for a permission and encouragement to proceed in the work, it
went on accordingly. But scarce were the works half finished, when the Duke of
(...), the Marquess of Baden, and other of the Neighboring Princes amazed to
see such preparations for a war in a time of peace, dispatched their Agents to
the Prince, desiring to know the reason why he suffered the Bishop to entrench
that place, which might in t^^e be made use of to their common (...). The
Prince made answer, that the Bishop had no permission from him, and that he
would send a servant of his to (...) the prosecution of the work, and to
com^^and the casting d^wn of that which was (...). And though he did perform
this promise, yet the work went forward, the Bishop having secretly obtained
license from the Emperor, (as the Lord Paramount of all) to proceed therein.
The Princes hereupon muster up their Forces, which under the command of Colonel
Ob^r^ra^d, a servant of the Prince Electors, came before the Town, and sent a
Trumpet to the Bishop, requiring him to give present order for the dismantling
of the place, or to give them leave to do it for him: The Bishop returns no
other Answer, but that they should go to such a post, where they should find a
copy of the Emperors Placard, in justification of his act touching those
Intrenchments: But the Soldiers, taking notice of no other authority then that
which they received from their several Princes, made themselves masters of the
place (the Ports and Circumvallations of it being unfinisht) without any
resistance; and having made all level again, disbanded, and went home to their
several Countries: For this contempt of the Imperial Authority, the Prince
Elector, who had the chief conduct of this Action, was cited to the Chamber of
Spires, where the cause went on so fast against him, that he was at the point
to be Proscribed, when the unfortunate Crown of Bohemia was offered to him, of
which more hereafter.

But through that spot, the Spaniard had free Passage with his Forces of Italy,
and other parts, to pass into the Netherlands, to reduce them to obedience.] No
freer passage through that Spot, (if so fair and large a Country may be called
a Spot) then he had before; the Spanish Armies finding an uncontrolled March
from the Alps to the Netherlands, without touching on any part of the lower
Palatinate.

And so it will be found by any who shall follow the tract of the Duke of Alva,
conducting an Army of old Soldiers, both Horse and Foot, some Germ^n and
Burgundian Forces being taken in by the way, from the Dukedom of Millain into
Flanders: So that if there had not been some other reason why the Spaniards
engaged themselves in the Conquest of this Country, then the opening a free
passage for their Armies, to march out of Italy into the Netherl. it might have
remained unconquered by them to this very day: But the truth is, that both the
Emperor and the Duke of Bavaria, being wholly acted by the Counsels of the
Jesuits, resolved upon some compulsory courses, to bring all Germany under the
obedience of the Pope of Rome; and to that end, thought fit to begin with the
Prince Elector Palatine (as appears by several Letters exemplified in the Book,
entitled, Cancellaria Bavarica, as being the chief head of the Calvinian party
in the Empire, and having made himself doubly obnoxious to a present
proscription, which Proscription being issued out, the Execution of it was
committed to the Duke of Bavaria, who was to have the upper Palatinate,
together with the Electoral Dignity, the better to enable him to carry on the
Design* and to the King of Spain, as best able to go through with it, who was to
have the lower Palatinate wholly to himself, that his Forces might be always in
readiness to carry on the War from one Prince to another, till the Emperor had
made himself the absolute Master of them all.

From Germany we pass into Scotland, where we find the busy Archbishop, (so
he calls him) in a time of high coffeehouse, pressing a full conformity of
the Kirk in Scotland, with the English Discipline: So here, and hereupon the
credit of hearsay only; but in another place, where he rather acts the part
of an Historian, then of one that is to speak in the Prologue, he relates it
thus: King James had a Design, not once, but always after his coming into
England, to reform that deformity of the Kirk of Scotland into a decent
Discipline, as in the Church of England, which received Opposition and
Intermissions, till the year 1616. Where at Aberdine their General Assembly of
Clergy made an Act, authorizing some of their Bishops to compile a form of
Liturgy, or book of Common Prayer; first, for the King to approve, which was so
considerately there revised and returned* for that Kingdom to p^actice, which
same Service Book was now sent for by this King, and committed to some Bishops
here of their own, to review, and finding the difference not much from the
English, he gave command in Scotland to be read twice a day, in the Kings
Chapel at Holy-Rood House at E^inburgh, that the Communion should be
administered in that form, and taken on their knees once a Month the Bishop to
wear his Rochet, the Minister his Surplice, and so to inure the people by
president of his own Chapel, there first, and afterward in all parts for the
public: The Scotch Bishops liked it reasonable well for the matter, but the
manner of imposing it from hence upon them, was conceived somewhat too much
dependancy of theirs on our English Church, and therefore excepting against the
Psalms, Epistles and Gospels, and other Sentences of Scripture in the English
Book, being of a different Translation from that of King James, they desired a
Liturgy of their own, and to alter the English answerable to that, and so
peculiar to the Church of Scotland, which indeed was more like to that of King
Edward the sixth, which the Papist better approved, and so was the rather
permitted by the King, as to win them the better to our Church: And so had it
been accustomed to the Scottish several Churches, for some years without any
great regret, and now particularly proclaimed to be used in all Churches, etc.
fol. 221. In all which Narrative, we find no pressing of the Book by the busy
Archbishop, how busy soever he is made by the Author in the Introduction.

None having power to carry away his nine parts, or any part, until the
propri^t^ry had set out his tenth part.] Our Author speaks this of the
miserable condition of the poor Scottish Husbandman, under the Lords of new
erection, as they commonly called them, who on the dissolution of Abbeys, and
other Religious Houses, to which almost all the Tithes in Scotland had been
appropriated, i^grost them wholly to themselves: And were it no otherwise with
the poor Husbandman then is here related, his condition had been miserable
enough; it not being permitted unto him, in default of the Parsone, or his
Bailyff, to set apart the Tithes, in the presence of two or three sufficient
Neighbors, as with us in England: But their condition, (if I remember it
aright) was far worse then this, not being suffered to carry away their own
Corn, though the Tithes had been set out in convenient time, before the
Impropriator had carried his, by means whereof, they were kept in a most
intolerable slavery by these their Masters, who cared not many times for
losing the tenth part, so they might destroy the other nine: By means whereof,
the poor Peasants were compelled to run, swear, fight, to kill, and be killed
too, as they were commanded. From which being freed by the Grace and goodness
of King Charles, they proved notwithstanding the most base and disloyal People,
that the Sun ever shined on.

This Bishop (John Maxwell) Minister of Edinburgh, was set up by Laud, then
Bishop of London, who finding him Eloquent and Factious enough, placed him a
Bulwark against adverse Forces.] This Bishop, (the Bishop of Ross he means)
was by the King preferred to great Offices of Trust, both in Church and State:
That he was Eloquent, is confessed by our Author, and that he was a learned
man, appears by his judicious and elaborate Treatise, entitled. Sacro-sancta
Regum Majestas, in which he has defended the Rights and Sovereignty of Kings,
against all the Cavils of the Presbyterian or Puritan Faction: But that he was
also Factious, was never charged upon him, but by those who held themselves to
the Assembly at Glasco; by whom he was indeed looked on as a Factious person,
for acting so courageously in defense of his own Episcopal Rights, the public
Orders of the Church, and the Kings Authority: According to which Rule or
No^ion, the generality of the Bishops in all the three Kingdoms, might be
called a Faction, if Tertullian had not otherwise stated it, by saying this,
viz. Cum pii, cum boni coeunt, non factio dicenda est, sed Curia.

The like unhandsome Character he gives us of Sir Archi^^^ Atchison, of whom he
tells us, That he was of such a^ (...) (he means his first coming out of (...)
to all th^se af^er-Seditions: But ce^tainly, the pa^^y whom he speaks of, was
of no such temper. For being of a judge in (...), made the Kings Solicitor or
Procurato^ for the Realm of Scotland, he diver^^d the King from (...) the
intended Act of Revocat^on, which indeed (...) have brought more fuel to the
fire, then could be suddenly extinguished, advising rather that he should enter
his Action in the Courts of Justice against some of the (...) of those who had
possessed themselves of the Crown ^ands in his ^athers Minority, in which course
he might hope to find good success, without noise or dange^* And ^f this may
be called the adding of fuel to the fi^e of (...) King will find a safe way to
recover his own, (...) from him by power and pride, unless he do (...) strong
hand which finds no resistance: For which good ser^ice, if he were afterward
Knighted, and made second Secretary of Estate (the principal being called Lord
Secretary in the style of that Kingdom) it was no more then he had worthily
deserved for his sound Advice.

from the Title and the Introduction, proceed we next unto the History it self,
in which the first mistake we meet with, (...) the placing of the ^uneral of
King James on the 14 of May, which Mr. H. L. in his History of the Reign of
King Cha^ls, had (...) on the fourth, in both erron^ously alike: But the (...)
of the ^ormer History has corrected his error by the (...), and placed it
rightly on the seventh, which the (...) Historian might have done also, having
so thoroughly (...) all the Passages in those Observations.

(...) land had nothing but foul weather (triste and lugubre Coelum) when she
was at the Sea, and the worst of foul weathers from the time of her landing to
the very minute of her death* The like tempestuous landing is observed to have
happened to the Princess Catharine daughter of Ferdinand and If bell^ Kings of
Spain, when she came hither to be married to Prince Arthur eldest Son to King
Henry 7* which afterward was looked on as a sad presage of those Cala^^ities,
which happened to that pious, but unfortunate Lady in the last part of her life.
And certainly such presages are neither to be rejected as superstitious, nor
too much relied on as infallible; such a middle course being to be stee^'d in
such conjecturals as is advised to be held in Prophetical or presaging dreams,
not wilfully to be slighted, nor too much regarded.

^ol. 6. The Parliament to be subordinate, not coordinate with the Prince etc.
though King Charles unadvisedly makes himself a member of the house of Peers,
which the Parliament would never acquit him. A passage which the Author likes
well enough, (and hopes the Reader will do the like) as it comes from himself,
but will not let it go uncensured in the O^servator. It is noted in the
Observations p. 62. that the King having passed away the Bishops votes in
Parliament, did after by a strange improvidence, in a Message or Declaration
sent from York the 17. of June reckon himself as one of the three Estates,
which being once slipped from his pen and taken up by some leading men in the
Houses of ^^^^ament, it never was let fall again in the whole agitati^n of
those Controversies which were bandied up and down between them. Our Author
says the same thing though in fewer words, and yet corrects the Observator, for
ta^ing notice of the Kings strange imp^ovidence in a message (...) June 17.
where he reckons himself as one of the (...) member of the House of Peers. Fol.
10^. for which he (...) to call him to a further account in (...) and so
perhaps he may in a second edition of his History, there being no such thing to
be found in this.

(...) Councels are privy and public, his Privy Council by his own (...)
election^^: public, his Parliament, Peers and people.

In these words there are two things to be enquired after, first, why the
Bishops are not named as Members of this public Council, and secondly, why the
people are admitted art thereof. That the Bishops are to be accounted of as
necessa^y members of this public Council, appears by the (...) writ of
Summons, by which they are severally and respectively called to attend in
Parliament. In which it is declared, that the King by the advice of his Privy
Council, has called a Parliament unto this end, ut cum Pralatis, (...) Reg^^
Colloquium ha^eret; that he for his part might confer with the Prelat^, Peers,
and great men of the Realm, and that they for their parts super dictis Negotiis
tractaren^ and co^^ilium suum impenderent, should debate of all such difficult
matters concerning the preservation of the Church and State, as the King should
recommend unto them, and give their faithful Counsel in them accordingly* So
that the Author dealt not well with the Bishops, in excluding them from being a
part of the Kings public Council, and putting the people in their room, who
never were beheld as members of it, till so made by our Author: the Commons
being called to Parliament to no other purpose, but ad consen^iendum and
faciendum, to give consent and yield obedience to all such things as by the
great Council of the Kingdom ((...) communi Concilio Regni nostri) shall be
then ordained.

But if our Author say that he includes the Bishops in the name of Peers,
though I allow his meaning, and am able to defend him in it; yet I must still
except against his expression, because not plain and full enough to the vulgar
Reader.

Ibid. But (...) James altered that course a^ best able of any his Predecessors
to speak for him self.] It was indeed the common usage of the Kings of England
to speak to their people in ^arliament by the mouth of the Chancellors; not
that they were not able to tell their own tales and express their own me^ning,
but that it was held for a point of State not to descend so much beneath
themselves as to play the Orators. Yet sometimes as they saw occasion they would
speak their own minds in Parliament, and not trouble their Chancellors; as
appears by that speech of King Henry 7. when he resolved to engage himself in a
war with France, a copy whereof we have in the History of his Reign writ by the
Lord Viscount St. Alban, which he thus begins. My Lords and you the Commons;
when I purposed to make a war in Britain by my Lieutenant, I made declaration
thereof to you by my Chancellor. But now that I mean to make war upon France in
person, I will declare it to you myself etc. Fol. 96.

But King James thinking himself an absolute Master in the Art of speaking, and
desirous that his people should think so too, in the opening of all his
Parliaments, and the beginning of each Session, and many occasions on the by
used no tongue but his own. Which though it might seem necessary at the opening
of his first Parliament to let the Lords and Commons see how sensible he was of
that Affection wherewith the whole body of the Nation had embraced his coming
to the Crown; yet the continual use thereof made him seem cheaper in the eyes
of the People then might stand with Majecty. Nor was this all the inconvenience
which ensued upon it, for first, it put a necessity upon his son and ^^^cessor
of doing the like, to whom it would otherwise have been imputed for a Defect,
that he was not able, or for a Crime, as if he thought himself too great to
speak to his people; and secondly, it put the Commons on a ^og of following the
Kings example, not only in making long speeches, but of printing them also, of
which more hereafter.

Ibid. His place being (...) of King William Rufus, where he is to (...) totius
Regni (...). Our (...) speaks this of the Speaker of the house (...), but he
speaks without Book; the Commons no^ being called to Parliament in the time of
Rusus, as all our (...) agree ^oyntly. He that was called (...) (...) might be
a speaker of the Parliament, though not of (...) in regard h^ delivered the
kings mind to the (...) and Peers of that great Counsil, and theirs (...) to
him. Which office was commonly performed by the lord Chancellor of the Kingdom,
who is therefore (...) the Speaker of the house of Peers. And when the Commons
had the Honor to be called to Parliaments* they also had their Sp^ak^ to
perform the same Offices betwix^ the King and them, as the Lord Chancellor
performed between the King and the Peers; who the^for^ was (as still he is) at
the Kings Nomination and appointment, admitted rather then elected on that
nomination by the house of Commons. It was not properly and Originally the
Speakers Office to sit still in the Chair and ^earken to those trim Oratio^s
which the Gentlemen of the House were pleased to entertain the time and
themselves with all* but to signify to the people the Command (...) the King,
and to present unto the King the desire of his people. It ^s from speaking not
from hearing that he taken his name, though none have spoken less in tha^
House since the time of King James, then the Speaker himself* as if he were
called Speaker by that figure in Rhetoric by which Lucus is said to take its
name a non lucen^^.

For. ^ (...) in the Prince Elector to (...) (...) Bohemia; so no justice in
the House of (...) to (...) Palatinate from him] Neither so, not so (...)
Prince. Elector had no color to accept of the Kingdom of (...) at our Author
plainly says he had not then was i^ no in^ustice in the House of Aust^^a to
^ade, conquer, and detain the (...) from him, as our Author plainly says it
was*

In the last of these two propositions the Author shall confute himself, and
save me the Labor; he telling us within few lines after that, an (...) (...)
(...) (...). Then for the first of the two propositions, I must needs tell him,
that the Prince Elector had not only some color to accept the Crown of ^^mia,
but a fair one too. The kingdom of Bohemia, according to the fundamental
constitutions of it, was elective merely. And though the Electo^^used
constantly to keep them selves to the royal family, (except only in the case
of George Pogibrachio) yet they reserved a latitude unto themselves of choosing
one rather then another, many times pretermitting the eldest son of the former
King, and pitching on a younger brother, and sometimes on some other more
remote from the Crown. But Mathias the Emperor being childlesse, adopted
Ferdinand of G^ats the next Heir male of the House of Austria for his Son and
successor, and caused him without any formal election (as the Bohem^ans did
pretend) to be Crowned King of that Kingdom, and put him into the actual
possession of it in his own life time. But after his decease, the Bohemians
rejecting Ferdinand as not lawfully chosen, elected Frederick the fifth Prince
Palatine of the Rhene for their King and Sovereign, as lineally de^cended from
Ladislaus 2. King of Poland and Bohemi^, from whom the House of Astria also do
derive their Claim. ^o that his Action was not so precipitae, and his ground
more justifiable in accepting that Crown, then our Author has been pleased to
make it Fol. 163. And had King James, espoused that quarrel, (as all generally
did expect he would have done* he might with far less charges have assured the
possession of that Crown, or at the least have preserved the (...) from the
hand of Ruin, then he did put himself unto by sending Ambassadors to excuse the
one, and mediate the restitution of the other. In which last point I grant him
to have been for some years deluded, not only by the Emperor but the K. of
Spain; but that he was deluded by the Spaniards also in the business and
treaty of the Match, I by no means grant, and could sufficiently prove the
contrary, if it had not been already done in the Observations on the former
History. But our Author has not yet done with the Spaniard, telling us, that.

Ibid The Crown of Spain has enlarged her bounds these last 60. years more
than the Ottoman. Not so neither. The House of Austria within sixty years from
the time that our Author writ this part of the History has been upon the
losing hand, the Kingdom of Portugal with all the appendixes thereof being
revolted from that Crown, as also are the Countries of Catalonia, and Rousillon
in the Continent of Spain it self; the lower Palatinate surrendered to its
lawful Prince according to the Treaty at Munster, and many of his best Towns,
if not entire provinces in the Netherlands extorted from him by the French;
besides the seven united Provinces, which within the compass of that time have
made themselves a free state, and are now rather confederates with that King
then Subjects to him; whereas upon the other side the Ottomans within that
compass of time have regained Babylon and all the Country there about from
the hands of the Persians, and conquered a great part of the Isle of Candy from
the State of Venice.

Ibid. The Kings Mercer infected and fled, no purple velvet to be had on the
sudden, and so the color of his Robes was changed by necessity.] This passage
is brought in out of season as not relating to the Parliament but the
Coronation. The Author of the former History had told us out of Mr. Prinne,
that the King upon the day of his Coronation was arraied in white Satin
contrary to the custom of his Predecessors who were clothed in purple, which
change although the King affected to declare the innocence of his heart, or to
express that Virgin purity wherewith he came unto the marriage betwixt him and
his Kingdoms; yet our Author would fain have it to be done upon necessity and
not upon design or choice. How so? Because (says he) the Kings Mercer being
infected and fled there was no purple velvet to be had on the sudden.

But first, though the Kings Mercer was infected, and fled, yet there were
other Mercers in the City who could have supplied the King with that commodity.

Secondly, at the time of the Coronation the infection had been much abated,
the Air of London being generally corrected by a very sharp winter, and most of
the Citizens returned again to their former dwellings; amongst which the Kings
mercer might be one for any thing which our Author can assure us to the
contrary.

Thirdly, it appears by another passage in our Author himself, that there was
Purple velvet enough to be had for this occasion, he telling us out of Mr.
Fullers Church History, (out of whom he borrows his description of the
Coronation) that the train of the Kings vest or Royal Robe consisted of six
yards of purple velvet. Some purple velvet then was to be had at the
Coronation, though the Kings Mercer were infected and had left the City.

And finally there was no such need that any such provision should be made on a
sudden neither, there being ten months from the Kings coming to the Crown and
his Coronation, and as much time for providing a few yards of purple, as for
preparing all the other royal necessaries which concerned that day.

Fol. 11. And so accounting to them the disbursmen^ of his Land and Naval
Forces with a clear and even au^^c of the charge and expense to come, they were
so candid, that the La^y gave him, without Conditions, two Subsidies from
Protestants, and four from Papists.] And candid they had been indeed, if on so
fair an auditing of the Kings Account for all expenses, as well past as to
come, they had given unto him such a present supply, as would have equalled
that account toward the carrying on of the War which themselves projected, and
given those two Subsidies over and above as a Testimony of their good
Affections to his sacred Person: But these two Subsidies from Protestants, and
four from Papists, were so short from carrying on that work, that there was
nothing of ^ngenuity or Candor in it.

The particular of the Kings Account stood thus, viz. 32000 l. for securing of
L^eland, 47000 l. for strengthening the Forts 37000 l. for the repair of the
Navy, 99000 l. upon the four English Regiments in the States Country, 62000 l.
laid out for Count Mansfield, total 287000 l. Besides which, he sent in a
Demand of 200000 l. and upwards, upon the Navy, 48000 l. upon the Ordnance,
45000 l. in charges of the Land-men, 20000 l. a month to Count Mansfield, and
46000 l. to bring down the King of Denmark; the total of which latter sum
amounts to 339000 l. both sums make no less then 626000 l. to which the grant
of two Subsidies from Protestants, and four from Papists, hold but small
proportion, especially considering to how low a pitch the Book of Subsidies was
fallen.

Our Author tells us somewhere in this present History, that in Queen
Elizabeth's time a single Subsidy amounted to Ninety thousand pound, and that in
these times, whereof he writes a single subsidy of four shillings in the pound,
amounts but to fifty six thousand only* and I am able to tell our Author, that
in the time of King Henry the eighth, a single Subsidy of four shillings in the
pound, amounted to eight hundred thousand pound sterling, as appears by this
passage in I. Stow^ In which we find that the Cardinal, (he means Cardinal
Wolse^) accompanied with diverse Lords, both Spiritual and Temporal, acquainted
the House of Commons with the Kings necessity of waging war against the Emperor
Charles the fifth, and thereupon required a Subsidy of 800000 l. to be raised by
4^. in the pound out of every man's Estate throughout the Kingdom; and that it
was accorded by the Commons after a long and serious debate upon the matter to
give two shillings in the pound, which by his calculation did amount to 400000
l. But then he is to know with all that in the raising of Subsidies in that
Kings time, there was not only an oath prescribed to the Assessors to give a
perfect valuation of all men's estates as far as they could understand them, but
an oath imposed also on the subjects who were to pay it, to bring in a true and
just account of their Estates, and several penalties enjoined if they did the
contrary, as of late times upon Delinquents, (as they call them) when they were
admitted to compound at Goldsmiths and Haberdashers Halls; which course held
also all the time of King Edwards Reign, but being intermitted in Queen Mary
and Queen Elizabeth's time, on good reasons of State, the Subsidies were brought
so low by little and little, that before the death of the last Queen, they came
not up to an hundred thousand, and sunk so sensibly in the time of King James,
that they came not to above sixty thousand or thereabouts; so that although the
Parliament, in the one and twentieth of that King, bestowed upon him three
Subsidies and three Fifteens, when they first engaged him in this War, yet King
Charles told them in his first Speech to this very Parliament, that those
supplies held no Symmetry or proportion with the charge of so great an
enterprise: And though the charges of the Enterprise which he was in hand with,
much exceeded his Fathers (as much as the addition of a Navy of an hundred and
twenty sail could amount unto) and that he pressed them earnestly at Oxford to a
further grant; yet nothing more could be obtained, but that sorry pittance,
sufficient only for advance money for engaging those Sea and Land Forces which
he had provided, by means whereof the Expedition proved dishonorable to the
King and Kingdom: Nor came these two Subsidies so clearly and so heartily from
them, but that the King was fain to gratify them in two points which they
mainly drove at; that (...) to say, the granting them a public Fast to begin
their Parliament, and laying some restraints on the Lords Day, which never
could be obtained from any of his Predecesso^s.

For when such Fasts had first been moved in Queen Elizabeth's time, and
afterward in all the Parliaments of King James, till the 21 of his Reign; it
was answered, that there were so^many ordinary Fasting-days appointed by the
Laws of the Land, on which they might humble themselves before the Lord, that
there was no necessity or use of any such extraordinary Fasts as they desired:
Such Fasts in those times were conceived to have too much in them of Aerius, an
old branded Here^ick, by whom it was held forth for good Catholic Doctrine,
Non celebrand* esse jejunia Statuta, Augustine de Haeres.
sed cum quisque voluerit jejunand^m. And when the Commons in the 23 of
Elizabeth, finding no hopes of gaining any such Fast by the Queens
Authothority, had voted one to be solemnized at the Temple Church, for such of
their own Members as could conveniently be present at it, upon notice thereof,
the Queen sent a Message to them by Sir Thomas Henneage, then Vice-Chamberlain,
declaring with what admiration she beheld that incroachment on her Royal
Authority, in committing such an apparent innovation without her privity or
pleasure first known: On the receipt of which sharp Message, the House desired
Mr. Vice-Chamberlain to present their submission to the Queen, and to crave her
pardon, for which Consult the Book entitled, The Freeholders grand Inquest,
page 57. No news of any such attempt in all the rest of her Reign, nor of any
Parliament Fasts (as far as I can remember) till the 21 of King James, when
they first engaged him in this War; whose example followed by King Charles, who
indeed was not in a condition to dispute the point, gave such encouragement to
the Commons, that no Parliament could begin without them, and gave them such an
head at last, as to appoint and continue Fasts by their own Authority, not
only without the Kings consent, but against the very express words of his
Proclamations: How well this Fast was kept by some leading Members when they
had procured it, that is to say, with a good neck of Mutton and broth in the
Morning, a Collation of sweet Meats between the Sermons, and a Sabbatarian
Supper in the Evening; I could make known by a very memorable story, had I list
and leisure: And what ill use was made of another in the Pulpits, Prayers and
Sermons, of many seditious Lectures, to stir up and continue the War raised
against this King, appears by his Proclamation of the fifth of October, Anno
1643. by which he endeavored to translate the then Monthly Fast, from the
second Wednesday to the second Friday in every Month, but without success: Of
this indulgence of the Kings, our Author takes no notice, as he does of the
other, viz. the laying of such a restraint from Recreations on the Lords day,
as never had been known in this Kingdom since the Reformation: Concerning
which, he tells us that,

Fol. 13. These Laws are enacted this Sessions viz against Abuses committed on
Sundays etc.] Now it appears by the Act that the Abuses (as he calls them)
which were prohibited at that time, were first the Concourse of people out of
their own Parishes on the Lord's Day for any sports or Pastims whatsoever; and
secondly the use of Bull-baiting, Bear-baiting, Enter ludes common plays and
other unlawful exercises and pastimes used by any person or persons within
their own parishes. In the composure of which Act, the first clause made
against the concourse of people out of their own Pa^ishes on that day was
purposely intended for a counterballance to the Declaration of King James about
lawful sports: and was afterward made use of by some public ministers of
Justice, to suppress the Annual feasts of the dedication of Churches, commonly
called and known by the name of Wakes. Such feasts of love, and entertainments
of good Neighborhood, though they drew some People out of their own Parishes,
were no abuses in themselves, though so called by our Author. And as for
Bull-baiting, Bear-baiting, and the rest there mentioned, they had been all
prohibited by a Proclamation of King James bearing date the 7. of May, in the
first year of his Reign Anno 1603. Nor were they used upon that day (for ought
that I am able to call to mind) in all the time of my Boyage. So that this
Parliament by interdicting those rude Sports did but actum agere, save that
they gained unto themselves the reputation of more then ordinary Zeal to the
day of worship, and laid the first foundation of those many Rigor^ which
afterward they imposed upon it. For in the next Parliament of this King, they
passed an Act that no Carrier with any horse or horses, no Wagon men with any
wagon or wagons, nor Carmen with any Cart or Carts, nor Wain-men with any
wain or waines, nor any Drovers with Cattle should forty days next after the
end of that Session by themselves, or any others travel upon the said day, upon
pain that every person or persons so offending should forfeit 20.s. for every
such offense committed; and that no Butcher after the said time should kill or
sell any Flesh upon that day, on the forfeiture of 6s. 8 d. toties quoties:
Matters whith had been moved in Parliament, in the 18 year of K. James, but
without success, the Lords unanimously opposing the Bill, when sent up by the
Commons, as tending to the disturbance of the Trade of the Kingdom, and some
inconveniences to the Poor: But having brought the King to a condition of
denying nothing, they obtained this also of him as they had done the other, and
at last became their own Carvers; imposing since the first beginning of the
long Parliament, by their Orders and Ordinances, so many several restraints on
that day from all kinds of lawful pleasure, and civil businesses, that greater
never were imposed on the Jews by the Scribes and Pharisees, nor by some
Casuits on the Papists, nor by Dr. Bound, (the first Broacher of these
Sabbath-speculations in the Church of England) on his Puritan Proselytes.

But notwithstanding these condescensions of the King to the desires of the
Commons, the Commons were resolved to condescend in nothing to the desires of
the King, unless as they had moved the war so they might also be made
acquainted with the Kings Design in the conduct of it, which point they pressed
with such importunity that the King commanded M. Glanvil. to serve as Secretary
to the Navy for that Expedition, that knowing all the secrets and intentions of
it when he was at Sea, he might acquaint the members with it at his coming back.

Fol. 20. For Mansel was Vice Admiral of the Narrow Seas, that's his Office, and
there indeed he succeeds to the Admiral:] Our Author is as much out in this
particular, as the Mariners had been in another. The Mariners thought (if Mr.
H. L. report them rightly) that Sr. Robert Mansel the then Vice Admiral had an
unquestionable right to the chief conduct of that Enterprise upon the Dukes
default. The Mariners in this point sailed without their compass, as is proved
by the Observator. And this our Author building upon the Observator calls a
Monstrous Error, although not half so Monstrous as that Error which himself
commits in making this, Sr. Robert Mansel, to be no other then the
Vice Admiral of the Narrow seas and restraining his Office and Authority to
those Seas alone. But had he consulted with the Sailers (as Mr. H. L. may be
thought to have done) they would have told him that Sr. Robert Mansel was vice
Admiral of England, and that it belonged unto his Office next under the
Admiral, to see the Royal Navy kept in good reparation, the wages of the
Mariners and shiprights to be duly paid, and that the ships should be provided
of all things necessary for any occasional expedition. They could have told
him also that there is no such Officer as a Vice Admiral of the narrow Seas,
but that those narrow Seas are commanded by two several Admirals, which hold
their places from the King, and not by grant or patent from the Lord Admiral of
England; and that one of these Admirals commands in the East and the other in
the Western part^ of those Seas: And finally, that at the time of his
Expedition Sr. Henry Palmer was Vice Admiral of the Eastern parts of those
Seas, and a West^country Gentleman (whose name I call not now to mind) of the
Western parts. Our Author may be good for land service, but we have some cause
to fear by this experiment, that if he should put forth to Sea he would easily
fall into Scylla by avoiding Charybdis.

Fol. 18. This Gentleman was second Son of Thomas Cecil Earl of Exeter. etc.]
Our Author speaks this of Sr. Edward Cecil, created by King Charles in the
first year of his Reign Lord Cecil of Putney, and Viscount Wimbleton, and by
the King made Commander General of his first Fleet against the Spaniards;
concerning whom he falls into several Errors.

For first, Sr Edward Cecil was not the second, but the third son of Thomas
Earl of Exeter, the second Son being Sr. Richard Cecil of Walkerly in the
County of Rutland, the Father of that David Cecil who succeeded in the Earldom
of Exeter, after the death of Earl William, eldest Son of Thomas aforesaid.

Secondly, this Sr. Edward Cecil was not of a Colonel made General of the
English forces in the unhappy war of the Palatinate. He was indeed made General
of the English forces in the war of Cleve, Anno 1610. the power which his Uncle
Sr. Robert Cecil Earl of Salisbury had with King James advancing him to that
employment. But that he was not General of the English forces in the Palatinate
war, I am very confident; Sr. Horace Vere, one of a more noble extraction, and
a far better Soldier being chief Commander in that service of the English
forces.

Thirdly, admitting this for true, yet could not the miseffects of that war be
charged on him or any other of the English Commanders; the English forces being
inconsiderable for their number, in reference to those which were raised for
that war by the German Princes, all of them under the Command of the Marquess
of O^alsback as their Generalissimo, to whose either cowardice or infidelity,
the mis-effects of that war (as our Author calls them) were imputed commonly.

And fourthly, it was not 27. years since his employment there, when he was
called home to be Commander of this fleet, there being not above five years
from the beginning of the war in the Palatinate and his calling home, and not
above fifteen from his being made General of the English in the war of
Cleveland.

Fol. 24. Dr. Williams outed of the Seal, but kept his Bishopric of Lincoln
and the Deanery of Westminster which indeed he had for his life.] Our Author is
as much out in this, as in that before; for though the Deanery of Westminster
was given at first to Dr. Williams for term of Life, yet when he was made
Bishop of Lincoln that Deanery fell again to the King, and by the king was
regranted to him to be holden in Commendam with that Bishopric. After which
being made Archbishop of York, in the year 1641. he obtained it in Commendam
for three years only, which term expired, he was a Suitor to the King at Oxford
for a longer term, and on denial of that Suit, retired into Wales, and openly
betook himself to the Parliament-party, concerning which consult our Author in
the latter part of his History. Nor did he only keep the Bishopric of Lincoln,
and the Deanery of Westminster, but also a Residenciaries place in the Church of
Lincoln, the Prebend of Asgarve, and Parsonage of Walgrove; so that he was a
whole Diocese within himself, as bing Parson, Prebend, Dignitary, Dean, and
Bishop, and all five in one.

Fol. 25. All settled and reposed: the Archbishop of Canterbury presented his
Majesty to the Lords and Commons, East, West, North, and South, asking them if
they did consent to the Coronation of K. Charles their lawful Sovereign.] Our
Author takes this whole Narrative of the pomp and order of the Kings
Coronation, out of the Church History of Britain, endeavored (and but
endeavored, by Mr. Fuller of Waltham^ and takes it all upon his credit without
so much as startling at that dangerous passage which is now before us: That
Author, and this also following him, conceive the peoples consent so necessary
to the Coronation of the King, that it was asked no less then four times by the
Archbishop of Canterbury, before he could proceed any further in that
solemnity.

But if we look into the form used in the Coronation of King Edward the sixth,
we shall find it thus, viz. That being carried by (...) noble Cour^iers in
another Chair unto the four sides of the Stage, he was by the Archbishop of
Canterbury declared unto the People (standing round about) both by Gods and
Man's Laws, to be the right and lawful King of England, France, and Ireland, and
proclaimed that day to be Crowned, Consecrated, and Anoi^ted, unto whom he
demanded whether they would obey an^ serve, or not? By whom it was again with a
loud^ery answered, God save the King, and ever live his Majesty.

And in the Coronation of King James, more briefly thus; The King is showed to
the people, and they are required to make acknowledgement of their Allegiance
to his Majesty by the Archbishop, which they do by Acclamations: Which being
so, it cannot possibly be supposed, that instead of requiring the peoples
obedience to the Kings Authority, the Archbishop should crave their consent to
his Coronation; as if the Coronation were not strong and valid, nor his
succession good in Law without their consent.

But though our Author follow Mr. Fuller in one Error, yet he ^orrects him in
another, though in so doing he require some correction also: Master Fuller
tells us, that the Kings Tra^^ was held up by the Lord Compton (as belonging to
the Robes and the Lord Vicount Dorchester, lib. 11. fol. 122. Mr. Sanderson
knowing that there was no such man then being as a Viscount Dorchester, must
play the Critic on the Text, and instead of Viscount Dorchester, gives us
Viscount Doncaster, whom he makes Master of the Wardrobe, and both true alike,
fol. ^ 5. The Master of the Wardrobe at that time was the Earl of D^^b^gh, and
the Lord Viscount Doncaster, (now Earl of Carstile) was then too young to
perform any Service in this solemnity; which had he done, Mr. Fuller, who has
some dependence on him, would not have robbed him of the honor of performing
that service, which none but persons of place and merit could pretend unto.

Fol. 25. The Sermon being done, the Archbishop invested in a rich Cope, goe^h
to the King, kneeling upon Cushions at the Communion Table, and asks his
willingness to take the Oath usually taken by his Predecessors, etc.] The form
and manner of wh Oath, as having afforded much matter of discourse in these
latter times; I will first subjoyn, and afterward observe what descants have
been made upon it: The form and manner of the Oath as follows, Sir, (says the
Archbishop) will you grant and keep, and by your Oath confirm to the People of
England, the Laws and Customs to them granted by the Kings of England, your
Lawful and Religious Predecessors, and namely the Laws, Customs, and Franchises
granted to the Clergy, by the glorious King St. Edward your Predecessor,
according to the Laws of God, the true profession of the Gospel establi^hed in
this Kingdom, and agreeable to the Prerogative of the Kings thereof, and the
ancient Customs of this Land.

The King answers, I grant and promise to keep them.

Archbishop, Sir, Will you keep Peace and godly agreement entirely, (according
to your power) both to God, the holy Church, the Clergy, and the People?

Rex, I will keep it

Archbishop, Sir, Will you (to your power) cause Justice, Law, and discretion
in Mercy and Truth, to be executed in all your Judgments?

Rex, I will*

Archbishop, Sir, Will you grant to hold and keep the Laws and rightful
Customs which the Commonalty of this your Kingdom have; and will you defend and
uphold them to the H^nor of God, so much as in you lies?

Rex, I grant and promise so to do.

Then one of the Bishops reads this admonition to the King before the People,
with a loud voice, Our Lord and King, we beseech you to pardon, and to grant,
and to preserve unto us, and to the Churches committed to our charge, all
Canonical Privileges, and due Law and Justice, and that you would protect and
defend us, as every good King in his Kingdom ought to be a Protector and
Defender of the Bishops, and the Churches under their Government.

The King answers, With a willing and devout heart I promise and grant my
Pardon, and that I will preserve and maintain to you, and the Churches
committed to your charge, All Canonical Privileges, and due Law and Justice;
and that I will be your Protector and Defender to my power, by the assistance
of God, as every good King ought in his Kingdom, in right to protect and defend
the Bishops, and Churches under their Government.

Then the King arises, and is led to the Communion Table, where he makes a
solemn Oath, in sight of all the People, to observe the premises; and laying
his hand upon the Book, says, The things which I have before promised, I shall
perform and keep, So help me God, and the contents of this Book.

Such was the Oath taken by the King at his Coronation, against which I find
these two Objections.

First, That it was not the same Oath which anciently had been taken by his
Predecessors, and for the proof thereof, an Antiquated Oath was found out, and
published in a Remonstrance of the Lords and Commons, bearing date the twenty
sixth of May, 1642.

And secondly, It was objected in some of the Pamphlets of that time, that the
Oath was falsified by D. Laud, Archbishop of Canterbury, to make it more to
the Kings advantage, and less to the benefit of the Subject then it had been
formerly.

For answer whereunto, the King remits the Lords and Commons to the Records of
the Exchequer, by which it might be easily proved that the Oath was the very
same verbatim, which had before been taken by his Predecessors, Kings and
Queens of this Realm.

And to the Pamphleters, it is answered by Mr. H. L. the Author of the former
History, That there was no variation from the old forms, but the addition of a
clause to a Prayer there mentioned; and that this var^ation was not the
solitary act of Laud alone, but of a Committee: And this (says he) I
positively assert, as minding the reformation of a vulgar Error thrown abroad
in loose Pamphlets, that Bishop Laud altered the Coronation Oath; whereas the
Oath it self was precisely the same, with former precedents: More heartily in
this, then the Author of the present History, how great a Royalist soever he
desires to be reckoned.

Fol. 31. This necessary Message produced no other supply then this insolency
from a Member, Mr. Clement Cook, It is better (says he) to dye by a foreign
Enemy, then to be destroyed at home.] And this seditious speech of his, was as
seditiously seconded by one Dr. Turner, of whom the King complained to the
House of Commons, but could find no remedy, nor was it likely that he should:
He that devests himself of a Natural and Original power, to right the injuries
which are done him, in hope to find relief from others, (especially from such
as are parcel-guilty of the wrong) may put up all his gettings in a Semtress
thimble, and yet never fill it* But thus King James had done before him, one
Piggot, a Member of the House of Commons, had spoken disgracefully of the
Scots, for their importunity in begging, and no less scornfully of the King,
for his extreme profuseness in giving, adding withal, that it would never be
well with England, till a Sicilian Vesper was made of the Scottish Nation: For
which seditious Speech, when that King might have took the Law into his own
hands, and punished him as severely by his own Authority, as he had deserved,
yet he past it over, and thought that he had done enough in giving a hint of it
in a Speech made to both Houses at White Hall, on the last of March, Anno 1607.
I know (says he) that there are many Pigots amongst them, I mean a number of
Seditious and discontented particular persons, as must be in all Commonwealths,
that where they dare, may peradventure talk lewdly enough; but no Scottish man
ever spoke dishonorably of England in Parliament: It being the custom of those
Parliaments, that no man was to speak without leave from the Chancellor, (for
the Lords and Commons made but one House in that Kingdom) and if any man do
propound or utter any seditious Speeches, he is straightly interrupted and
silenced by the Chancellors Authority. This said, there was an end of that
business for ought I can learn; and this gave a sufficient encouragement to the
Commons in the time of King Charles, to expect the like: From whence they came
at last to this resolution, not to suffer one of theirs to be questioned, till
themselves had considered of his crimes: Which (as our Author truly notes) kept
them close together, imboldned thus, to preserve themselves to the last, fol.
35. This Maxim as they made use of in this present Parliament, in behalf of
Cook, Diggs, and Eliot, which two last had been Imprisoned by the Kings
command; so was it more violently and pertinaciously insisted on in the case of
the five Members, Impeacht of High Treason by the Kings Attorney, on the fourth
of January, Anno 1641. the miserable effects whereof, we still feel too
sensibly.

Fol. 40 And though the matter of the Prologue may be spared, being made up
with Elegancy, yet rather then it shall be lost, you may please to read it at
this length.] Our Author speaks this of the Eloquent Oration made by Sir Dudly
Diggs, to usher in the Impeachment of the Duke of Buckingham, which being
amplified and pressed in six tedious Speeches, by Glanvil, Pim, Seldom, Wansford,
Herbert, and Sherland, was Epilogued by Sir John Eliot: A vein of Oratory not
to be found in the Body of the English Parliament, till the time of King James.
Its true, that on the Petition of the Commons, in the beginning of each
Parliament, the King was graciously pleased to indulge them a freedom of
reasoning and debate upon all such points as came before them, and not to call
them to account, though they delivered their opinions contrary to his sense and
meaning: But then it is as true withal, that they used not to waste time in
tedious Orations, nor to declaim against the proceedings of the King, and the
present Government; or if they did, the Speaker held it for a part of his
Office to cut them short, and to reminde them of their duty, besides such
after-claps as they were sure to find from an injured and incensed Sovereign.

But of this, take along with you this short passage, as I find it in a letter
written, ab ignoto, to King Charles, in this very business of the Duke, May it
please your excellent Majesty to consider, That this great opposition against
the Duke of Buckingham, is stirred up and maintained by such who either
maliciously, or ignorantly and concurrently seek the debasing of this free
M^narchy, which because they find not yet ripe to attempt against the king
himself, they endeavor it through the dukes sides: These men, though agreeing
in one mischief, yet are of diverse sorts and humors, Viz. 1. Meddling and busy
persons, who took their first hint at the beginning of King James, when the
Union was treated of in Parliament: That learned King gave too much way to
those popular Speeches, by the frequent proof he had of his great Abilities in
that kind. Since the time of H. 6. these Parliamentary Discourses were never
suffered, as being the certain Symptoms of subsequent Rebellions, Civil Wars,
and the dethroning of our Kings: But these last twenty years, most of the
Parliament Men seek to improve the reputation of their Wisdoms by these
Declamations, and no honest Patriot dare oppose them, lest he incur the
imputation of a Fool or a Coward in his Countries cause. But which is more, the
pride they took in their own supposed Eloquence, obtained another privilege
for them, that is to say, The liberty for any man to speak what he list, and as
long as he list, without fear of being interrupted; whereof King James takes
notice in his said Speech to both the Houses at White Hall. Nor did they only
take great delight in these tedious speeches, but at first dispersed Copies of
them in writing, and afterward caused them to be printed, that all the people
might take notice of the zeal they had to the common liberty of the Nation, and
the edge they head against the Court and the Kings Prerogative. But to proceed.

Fol. 47. To balance the Dukes enemies, three persons his confederates were
made Barons, to compeer in the Lords house, the Lord Mandevil, the eldest son
to the Earl of Manchester, created by Patent Baron Kimbolton, Grandison Son to
the created Baron Imbercourt, and Sr Dudly Carlton made Baron Tregate.] In
which short passage there are as many mistakes as lines.

For first, the Lord Mandevil was not created by Patent Lord Kimbolton, that
title together with the tite of Vicount Mandevil, having been conferred upon
his father by letter Patents, in the 18. year of King James Anno 1620. whom
afterward King Charles in the first year of his Reign made Earl of Manchester.
The meaning of our Author is, that Sr. Edward Montague, commonly called Lord
Mandevil was summoned to the Parliament by the Title of Lord Kimbolton, as is
the custom in such cases when the eldest sons of Earls are called to Parliament
by the style and Title of their Fathers Barony.

Secondly, there never was any such Baron as the Baron Tregate.

Thirdly, Sr. Dudly Carlton was not created Baron Tregat, but Baron of
Imbercourt, that being the name of a Manor of his in the County of Surry.

But fourthly, Grandison son to the created Baron Imbercourt, is either such a
piece of negligence in not filling the blanks, or of ignorance in not knowing
that noble Person, as is not often to be met with. And therefore to inform both
our Author and his Reader also, I must let them know that William de Grand^son
a noble Burgundian Lord, allied to the Emperor of Constantinople, the King of
Hungary, and the Duke of Bavaria, was brought into England by Edmond Earl of
Lancaster, second son to King Henry the 3. by whose bounty he was endowed with
fair possessions, and, by his power advanced unto the dignity of an English
Baron. The estate being much encreast by the Marriage of the Daughter and Heir
of the Lord Tregoz, fell by the Heir general to the Pateshuls of Ble^so in the
County of Bedford, and by a Daughter of that house to the house of the
Beauchamps By Margaret the daughter and Heir of Sr. John Beauchamp of Bletso,
the whole estate came by Marriage to Sr. Oliver St. John, from whose eldest son
descended that Sr. Oliver St. John whom Queen Elizabeth (descended from the
said Margaret by John Duke of Somerset her second husband) made Lord St. John
of Bletho in the first year of her Reign. From Oliver St. John the second son
of the said Margaret (estated by his mother in the Manor of Lydiard Tregoz
near Highworth in the County of Wilts,) descended another Oliver St. John, the
second son of Sr. John St. John of Lydiard Tregoz; who having in defense of his
Fathers Honor killed one Captain Best, in St. Georges fields near Southwark,
was fain to pass over into France, where he remained until his friends about
the Queen had obtained his pardon. To merit which, and to avoid the danger
which might happen to him by Bests acquaintances he betook himself to the wars
of Ireland; where he performed such signal service against the Rebels, that
passing from one command to another, he came at last to be made Lord Deputy of
Ireland, at what time he was created viscount Grandison, with reference to the
first founder of the greatness of his House and family. That dignity entailed
on him, and the heirs males of his body, and for want of Such Issue on the
Heirs males of Sr. Edward Villers begotten on the body of Mrs. Barbara St.
John, the new Viscounts Niece; according unto which remainder, that Honnurable
Title is enjoyed by that branch of the house of Villers. But being the Title of
Viscount Grandison was limited to the Realm of Ireland, to make him capable of
a place in this present Parliament, he was created Lord Tregoz of Highworth to
him and to the heirs males of his body without any remainder.

Fol. 62. Carlton gone upon this Errand, and missing the French King at Paris,
progressed a tedious journey after that Court to Nantes in Bohemia.] And here
we have as great an Error in Geography, as before in Heraldry, there being no
such Town as Nantes in Bohemia, or if there were, it had been too far off,
and too unsafe a place for a Summers progress. It is Nantes in Bretaigne which
he means, though I am so charitable as to think this to be a mistake rather of
the Printer than our Authors own. With the like charity also I behold three
other mistakes, viz. the Emperor of Vienna fol. 137. and the Archdutchesse of
Eugenia fol. 139. and Balfoure Caselie, for Bolsovey Castle fol 192. By which
the unknowing Reader may conceive, if not otherwise satisfied, that Balfour
Castle was the ancient seat of the Balfours from whence Sr. William Balfour
Lieutenant of the Tower (that false and treacherous Servant to a bountiful
Master) derives his pedigree; Eugenia (which was a part of that Ladies
Christian name) to be the name of some Province, and Vienna (the usual place of
the Emperors residence) to be the name of an Empire. But for his last I could
alledg somewhat in his excuse, it being no unusual thing for Principalities and
Kingdoms to take Denomination from their principal Cities. For besides the
Kings of Mets Orleans and Soissons in France, we find that in the
Constitutions of Howel Dha, the Kings of England are called Kings of London,
the Kings of South Wales Kings of Dyneuor, and the King of North Wales Kings of
Aberfraw, each of them from the ordinary place of their habitation. For which
defense if our Author will not thank me, he must thank himself. The mention of
Nantes conducts me on to Count Shally's Treason against the French King, who
was beheaded in that City; of which thus our Author.

Fol. 63. The Count upon Summons before the Privy Council without more ado,
was condemned and forthwith beheaded at Nantes: the Duke Momerancy then under
Restraint suffered some time after.] But by his leave the Duke of Monmorency
neither suffered on the account of Shalley's Treason, nor very soon after his
beheading, which was in the year 1626. as our Author places it. For being
afterward enlarged, and joining with Mounsier the Kings Brother in some
design against the King, or the Cardinal rather, he was defeated and took
prisoner by Martial Schomberg (created afterward Duke of Halwyn) and being
delivered over to the Ministers of Justice, was condemned and beheaded at
Toulouse, Anno 1633.

Ibid. Our Wine-Merchants ships were arrested at Blay-Castle upon the Geroud
returning down the River from Bordeaux Town by order of the Parliament of
Rouen.] That this Arrest was (...) by Order of the Parliament of Rouen] I shall
hardly grant, the jurisdiction of that Parliament being confined within the
Dukedom of Normandy, as that of Renes within the Dukedom of Bretaigne;
neither of which, nor of any other of the inferior Parliaments, are able to do
any thing Extra Sphaeram Activitatis suae, beyond their several Bounds and
Limits. And therefore this Arrest must either be made by Order from the
Parliament of Bordeaux, the Town and Castle of Blay, being within the
jurisdiction of that Court, or of the Parliament of Paris, which being
Paramount to the rest, may, and does many times extend its power and execute
its precepts over all the others.

Fol. 92. At his death the Court was suddenly filled with Bishops, knowing by
removes, preferments would follow to many, expected advancements by it.] Our
Author speaks this of the death of Bishop Andrews, and of the great resort of
Bishops to the Court, which ensued thereupon, making them to tarry there on the
expectation of Preferment and Removes, as his death occasioned, till they were
sent home by the Court Bishops, with the Kings Instructions: But in this our
Author is mistaken, as in other things: The Bishops were not sent home with the
Kings Instructions till after Christmas, Anno 1629. and Bishop Andrews dyed in
the latter end of the year 1626. after whose death, Dr. Neil, then Bishop of
Durham, being translated to the Sea of Winchester, Febr. 7. 1627. Dr. Houson,
Bishop of Oxon, succeeded him in the Sea of Durham, in the beginning of the
year 1628. Doctor Corbet, Dean of Christ-church, being consecrated Bishop of
Oxon the 17 day of October of the same year, so that between the filling up of
these Removes, and the sending the Bishops home with the Kings Instructions,
there happened about 15 Months, so that the great resort of Bishops about the
Court, Anno 1627. when they were sent back with the Kings Instructions, was not
occasioned by the expectation of such Preferments and Removes, as they might
hope for on the death of Bishop (...)

Fol. 105. In Michaelmas Term the Lady Purbeck, daughter and heir to the Lady
Hatton, by her former Husband, and Wife to the Viscount Purbeck Brother to the
Duke, passed the trial for adultery, etc.] Our Author is here out again in his
Heraldry, the Lady Purbeck not being Daughter to the Lady Hatton by her former
Husband, but by her second Husband Sr. Edward Coke, then Attorney General, and
afterward successively Chief Justice of either Bench. Yet I deny not but that
she was an Heir and a rich marriage, as it after follows. For being Daughter
to Thomas Cecil Earl of Exeter, she was married by the care and providence of
her Grandfather, the Lord Burleigh, to Sr. William Newport, who being the
adopted son of the Lord Chancellor Hatton, succeeded in his name as well as
in his Lands. In ordering of which marriage it was agreed on, that the vast
Debt which the Chancellor owed unto the Crown, should be estalled to small
Annual payments; and that in lieu thereof, Sr. William in defect of issue,
should settle on his wife and her Heirs, by any Husband whatsoever, the Isle
of Purbeck, and some other of the out parts of his Estate. By means whereof her
Daughter Frances which she had by Sr. Edward Coke was heir to Corse Castle in
the Isle of Purbeck, and so much of the rest of the Lands of Hatton, as the
mother (being a woman of great expense) did not sell or aliene.

Fol. 106. The King for all his former Arrears of loan, was put to it to borrow
more: of the Common Council of London 120000. l. upon Mortgage on his own land
of 21000. l. per an.] And here I think our Author is Mistaken also, the
Citizens not lending their money upon Mortgage, but laying it out in the way of
purchase. Certain I am, that many goodly Manors lying at the foot of
Ponfract-Castle, and appertaining to the Crown in right of the Duchy of
Lancaster, were sold outright unto the Citizens at this time; and therefore I
conclude the like also of all the rest. But whether it were so or not, I cannot
choose but note the sordid baseness of that City in refusing to supply their
King in his great Necessities, without Sale or Mortgage; especially when the
money was to have been expended in defense of the Rochellers, whose cause they
seemed so much to favor.

But for this and other refusals of this nature, the Divine vengeance overtook
them within few years after; the long Parliament draining them of a Million of
pounds and more, without satisfaction, for every hundred thousand pound which
the King desired to borrow of them upon good security, so penny wise, and so
pound foolish was that stubborn City.

Fol. 107. Which we shall refer to the subsequent time and place fitting. But
of those in their due place hereafter.] Our Author had found fault with the
Observator, for saying that the King had not done well in excluding the Bishops
from their Votes in Parliament; and that there was some strange improvidence in
his Message from York, June 17. where he reckons himself as one of the three
Estates, a Member of the House of Peers: But why he thus condemns the
Observator, we must seek elsewhere, which is a kind of Hallifax Law, to hang
him first, and afterward to put him upon his Trial: Seek then we must, and we
have sought (as he commands) in subsequent time and place fitting, in their
due place hereafter, as the phrase is varied: But neither in the latter end of
the year, 1641. when the Bishops were deprived of their Votes in Parliament,
nor in all the time of the Kings being at York, Anno 1642. can we find one
word which relates to either of those points: In which our Author deals with
the Observator, as some great Critics do with their Authors, who when they
fall on any hard place in Holy Scripture, or any of the old Poets or
Philosophers, which they cannot master, adjourn the explication of it to some
other place, where they shall have an opportunity to consider of both Texts
together: Not that they ever mean to touch upon it, but in a hope that either
the Reader will be so negligent, as not to be mindeful of the promise, or else
so charitable, as to think it rather a forgetfulness, then an inability in the
undertaker.

Fol. 115. To these he was questioned by a Committee, and in reason ^ustly
sentenced.] The party here spoken of is Doctor Manwaring, then Vicar of the
Parish of St. Giles in the Fields; his Crime, the preaching of two Sermons, in
which he had maintained that the King might impose Taxes and Subsidies on the
Subject, without consent in Parliament, and that the people were bound to pay
them under pain of Damnation; his Sentence (amongst other things) that he
should be Imprisoned during the pleasure of the Parliament, pay a thousand
pound Fine unto the King, and be made incapable of all Ecclesiastical
Preferments for the time to come, which heavy Sentence our Author thinks to
have been very justly inflicted on him, though the Doctor spoke no more in the
Pulpit, then Sergeant (...) in Queen Elizabeth's time had spoke in Parliament:
By whom it was affirmed in the Parliament of the 43 of that Queen, that He
marvell'd the House stood either at the granting of a Subsidy, or time of
payment, when all we have is her Majesty's, and she may lawfully at her
pleasure take it from us, and that she had as much right to all our Lands and
Goods, as to any Revenue of the Crown, and that he had presidents to prove it:
For which, see the Book called, The Freeholders grand Inquest, page 62. But
some may better steal a Horse, then others look on, as the saying is; the
Sergeant being never questioned, and the poor Doctor sentenced (and justly, as
our Author makes it) to an absolute ruin, if the King had not been more
merciful to him then the Commons were.

From Dr. Manwaring, our Author proceeds to the Observator, for saying, that
Doctrinal matters delivered in the Pulpit, are more proper for the cognizance
of the Convocation, or the High Commission, then the House of Commons, which
though it may consist most times of the wisest Men, yet it consists not many
times of the greatest Clerks: For, says he,

Fol. 116. That the Preacher is Jure Divino, not to be censured but by
themselves, smells of the Presbyter or Papist.] But Sir, by your good leave,
neither the Presbyter nor the Papist stand accused by our Orthodox Writers, for
not submitting themselves, their Doctrines and Opinions to the power of
Parliaments, who neither have, nor can pretend to any Authority in those
particulars: That which they stand accused for is, that they acknowledge not
the King to be the supreme Governor over all persons in all causes, as well
Ecclesiastical as Civil, within his Dominions; and consequently decline his
Judgment as incompetent, when they are called to answer unto any charge which
is reducible to an Ecclesiastical or Spiritual nature: How stiff the Papists
are in this point, is known well enough by their refusing to take the Oath of
Supremacy.

And for the peremptoriness of the Presbyterians, take this story with you: One
David Blake, at a Sermon preached at St. Andrews, in the time of King James,
had cast forth diverse Speeches full of spite, Hist. of the Church of Scor. ^.
41^. etc.
against the King, the Queen, the Lords of Council and Session, and among the
rest, had called the Queen of England an Atheist, a Woman of no Religion: For
which, being complained of by the English Ambassador, he was cited to appear
before the King and his Council, on the tenth of November, A^no 1596. Which
being made known to the Commissioners of the last general Assembly, it was
concluded, that if he should submit his Doctrine to the Trial of the Council,
the liberties of the Church, and Spiritual Government of the House of God,
would be quite subverted, and therefore that in any case a Declinator should be
used, and Protestation made against these Proceedings: This, though it was
opposed by some moderate men, yet it was carried by the rest, who cried out it
was the cause of God, to which they ought to stand at all hazards; and
thereupon a Declina^or was formed to this effect* That howbeit the Conscience
of his Innocence did uphold him sufficiently against the Calumnies of
whomsoever, and that he was ready to defend the Doctrine uttered by him,
whether in opening the Words, or in Application; yet seeing he was brought
thither to be judged by his Majesty and Council for his Doctrine, and that his
answering to the pretended Accusation, might import a prejudice to the
Liberties of the Church, and be taken for an acknowledgement of his Majesty's
Jurisdiction in matters merely Spiritual, he was constrained in all humility to
decline ^udicatory: Which Declinator being subscribed by the Commissioners, and
delivered by Blake, he referred himself to the Presbytery as his proper Judges:
And being interrogated whether the King might not judge of Treason, as well as
the Church did in matters of Heresy, i^ said, That speeches delivered (...)
Pulpi^s, albert alleged to be (...), could not be judged by the King, till the
Church (...) ther^of What became after of this (...) may ^inde it in
Archbishop Spotswoods History of the Church of Scotland: Had Dr. Manwaring
done thus, and the Observator justified him in it, they had both favored of the
Presbyter or Papist, there is no question of it: But being the Observator
relates only to the proceedings in Parliament, and encroachments of the House
of Commons, in matters Doctrinally delivered, without the least diminution of
the Kings Authority in Ecclesiastical Causes, there is nothing of the Presbyter
or the Papist to be charged upon him; as the Historian, to create him the
greater odium, would fain have it to be.

Fol. 115. But how suddenly the Commons House (...) upon the Lor^s liberties,
excluding the words, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, in the very grant of the
Bill of Subsidies, etc.] And to say truth, the Lords were but served in their
own kind, who having so unworthily joined with the Commons, in devesting the
King (from whom they derived all their Honors) of his just Prerogatives, are
now assaulted by those Commons, and in danger of losing their own Rights, which
by the favor of the King, or his Predecessors, were conferred upon them; which
might have given them a sufficient warning, (but that there was a Spirit of
In^atuation over all the Land) not to join with them any more in the like
Designs against the King, whose Authority could not be diminisht without the
lessening of their own, nor any Plot carried on toward his Destruction, by
which they would not be reduced to the same condition, with the rest of the
People. But Quos Jupiter vult perdere, dementat pr^us, so it proved with them.

Fol. 123. His body brought to York House, and after sumptuously intombed at
Westminster in St. Edwards Chapel.] The Church of Westminster was indeed
founded by King (...) the Confessor, whom they called sometimes by the name of
St. Edward the King; (...) that part of it that lies between the cross Isle and
the Chapel of King Henry (...) best known by the name of the Chapel of (...)
by reason of the many Kings and Queens which are there (...), In a side Isle or
enclosure whereof the Dukes body was Sumptuously interred with this glorious
Epitaph which in honor of his invincible fidelity to his gracious Masters,
(for I am otherwise a mere stranger to all his Selatious) I shall here Subjoyn.

P. M. S.

Vanae multitudinis improperium hic jacet, Cujus tamen

Hispania Prudentiam,

Gallia Fortitudinem,

Belgia Industriam,

Tota Europa mirata est Magnanimitatem. Quem

Daniae and Sweciae Reges integerrimum,

Germaniae Transilvaniae and Nassautiae Princip: Ingenuum,

Veneta Reipublica Philobasileia,

Sahaudiae and Lotharingiae Duces Politicum,

Palatinus Comes Fidelem,

Imperator Pacificum,

Turca Christianum,

Papa Protestantem,

Experti sunt. Quem

Anglia Archithalassum Cantabrigia Cancellarium Buckinghamia: Ducem
habuit

Verum siste viator, and quid ipsa Invidia Sugillare nequ^t, audi.

Hic est ille
Calamitosae virtutis
Buckinghamius.
Maritus redamatus, Pater ama^s
Filius obsequens,
Frater amicissimus, Affinis Beneficus,
Amicus perpetuus,
Dominus Benignus,
and
Optimus omnium servus.
Quem
Reges adamarunt, optimates honorarunt,
Ecclesia deflevit,
Vulgus Oderunt.
Quem
Iacobus and Carolus
Regum perspicacissimi, intimum habuerunt.
A quibus
Honoribus auctus, and negotiis onustus,
Fato succubuit
Antequam par animo periculum invenit.
Quid jam Peregrine?
Aenigma mundi moritur;
Omnia fuit, nec quidquam habuit,
Patriae parens and hostis audiit.
Deliciae idem and querela Parliamenti.
Quidum Papistis bellum infert, insimulatur
Papista,
Dum Protestantium partibus consulit,
Occiditur a Protestante.
Tesseram specta rerum humanarum,
At non est quod serio triumphet malitia,
Interimere potuit, laedere non potuit.
Scilicet has preces fundens expiravit,
Tuo ego sanguine potiar (mi Jesus) dum mali pascuntur meo.
Fol. 127. But the Religious Commons must reform Gods caus^ before the Kings
nor would they be prescribed their Consultations, but resolved to remit the
Bill of Tunnage and Poundage at pleasure.] This is another new incroachment of
the House of Commons, that is to say, the poasting off of the Kings business,
and the public concernments of the State, till they had either lessened his
prerogative, weakened the Authority of the Church, or advanced the interest of
the people. Which resolution of not being prescribed, their Cons^ltations
became at last so fixed amongst them, that when the King had frequently
recommended to them his Message of the 20. of January, Anno 1641. So necessary
for the settling of the peace of the Kingdom, they returned answer at the last,
that it was an infringing of their Privileges to be p^est with any such
Directions.

Fol. 128. And King James commended them over to the Synod of Dort, and there
asserted by suffrage of those Doctors, and were afterward commended to the
Convocation in Ireland. Our Author takes this Error from the former
Historian, but takes no notice of the correction of it by the Observator though
it ^ppears by his citation in the margin, that he had consulted with those
Observations in this very point. And therefore I must let him know, since
otherwise he will not take notice of it, that this is a strange Hysteron
Proteron, setting the Cart before the Horse as we use to phrase it. The
Convocation in Ireland, by which the Articles of Lambeth were incorporated into
the Articles of that Church, was holden in the Year 1615. the Synod of Dort not
held till three years after anno 1618. and therefore not to D^rt first, and to
Ireland afterward. The like mistake in point of time we find in our Author
fol. 134. where speaking of that wild distemper which happened in the House of
Commons on the dissolving of the Parliament Anno 1628. he tells us, That the
effects of those Malignities flew over Seas, and infected the French
Parliaments about this time, where that King discontinued the Assemblies of the
three Estates upon far less Provocations. Whereas he lets us know from the
Observator, within few lines after, that those Assemblies of the three Estates
in France were discontinued by King Lewis the 13. and a new form of Assembly
instituted in the place thereof Anno 1614. So that the malignity of those
distempers which happened in the Parliament of England Anno 1628. could not
about that time pass over the Seas and infect the French Parliaments, which
had been discontinued and dissolved 14. years before.

Fol. 133. This was rati^ied by the Contract of this Nation, which the
Conqueror upon his admittance, had declared and confirmed in the Laws which he
published.] Our Author speaks this of an hereditary Freedom which is supposed
to have been in the English Nation, from paying any Tax or Tallage to the King,
but by Act of Parliament. And I would fain learn so much of him as to direct me
to some creditable Author, in which I may find this pretended contract
between the Norman Conqueror and the English Subject, and in what Book of
Statutes I may find these Laws which were published by him to that purpose. The
Norman Conqueror knew his own strength too well to reign precario, to ground
his Title on his admittance by the people, or to make any such contract with
them, by which he might more easily win them to that admittance. He won the
Kingdom by his sword* and by that he kept It. It Is true, that the people did
petition him for a Restitution of the Laws of Edward the Con^essor, in which
such an immunity from extraordinary Taxes might be granted to them. But I
cannot find that either he or William Rufus who succeeded, did ever part with
so much of their powet as not to raise money on the Subject for their own
occasions whenever they pleased. And it is true also, that both King Hen. 1.
and K. Steven, who came to the Crown by unjust or disputable Titles, did
flatter the people, when they first entered on the Throne, with an hope of
restoring the said Laws; but I cannot find that ever they were so good as
their words, nay, I find the contrary. The first of our Kings which gave any
life to those old Laws, was King Hen. 2. the first granter of the Magna Charta;
which notwithstanding he kept not so exactly as to make it of any strength and
consequence to bind his Heirs. But the Commons having once tasted the
sweetness of it, and with the Lords in a long war against King John, from whom
they extorted it by strong hand, and had it confirmed unto them at a place
called Running Mead near Stanes, Anno 1215. Confirmed afterward in more
peaceable times by King H^n. 3. in the Ninth year of hi^ Reign. But so, that he
and his Successors made bold with the Subject notwithstanding in these money
matters, till the Statute de Tallagio non concedendo was past by Edward of
Carnarvon eldest Son to King Edward the third, at such time as his Father was
beyond the Seas in the war of Flanders: which being dis^llowed by the King at
his coming home, seems to have been taken off the File, to the intent it might
not pass for a Law for the time to come; nor is it to be found now in the
Records of the Tower amongst the Laws of that Kings time, as are all the rest.
But from the general position touching the hereditary freedom of the E^glish
subject from Taxes and Tallage, not granted and confirmed by Parliament, our
Author passes to such R^tes and Impositions as are laid on Merchandise, of
which he tells us, that

Ibid. Mo^^ly these upon Merchandise were taken by Parliament six ^r twelve per
pound f^r time and years, as they saw cause, for defense of the Sea, and
afterward they were granted to the King for life, and so continued for diverse
descents:] Our Author had before told us, that the Merchant in ^ormer times
usually gav^ consent to such taxes, but limited to a time t^ the ratification
of the next following Parliament to be cancelled ^r confirmed. By which it
seems that the Kings hands were so tied up, that without the consent of the
Merchant, or Authority of the Parliament, he could impose no tax upon any
Merchandise either exported or imported. But cer^ainly whatever our Author
says to the contrary, the King might impose rates and taxes upon either by his
sole prerogative, not troubling the Parli^ment in it, nor asking the leave of
the Merchant whom it most concerned; Which Taxes being accustomably paid, had
the name of Customs, as the Officers which received them had the name of
Customers. Concerning which we find no old Statute or Act of Parliament, which
did enable the King to receive them, though some there be by which the King did
bind himself to a lesser rate then formerly had been laid upon some
commodities: as appears by the Statute of the 14. of King Edward 3. where it is
said that neither we nor our Heirs shall demand, assesse, nor take, nor suffer
to be taken more custom for a Sack of Wool of any English man, but half a mark
only. And upon the Woolfels and Lether the old Custom. And the Sack ought to
contain 26. stone, and every stone 14. pound. By which it seems that there had
been both Customs and old Customs too, which the Kings of England had
formerly imposed on those commodities, now by the goodness of this King abated
to a lesser sum, and deduced to a certainty. The like Customs the Kings of
England also had upon foreign Commodities, (...) namely, upon that of wine,
each Tun of Wine which lay before the Mast, and behind the Mast b^ing du^ unto
the King by C^stome; received accordingly, and sic de c^teris. But being these
old Customs were found insufficient, in the times of open hostility betwixt u^
and France, both to m^intain the Kings Port, and to enable him to guard the
Seas and secure his Merchants; a Subsidy of T^nnage and Poundage imposed at a
certain rate on all sorts of Merchandise was granted ^^rst by Act of Parliament
to King Hen. 6. and afterward to King Edw. 4. in the 12. Year of his Reign, and
finally to all the Kings successively for term of life; Never denied to any of
them till the Commons beg^n to think of lessening the Authority Royal in the
first Y^ar of King Charles, whom they had engaged in a War with the King of
Spain, and me^n^ ^o make use of the advantage by holding him to hard meats,
till they had brought him to a necessity of yielding to any thing which they
pleased to ask. For in the first P^rliament of his Reign, they past the Bill
^or one Year only, which for that cause was rejected in the House of Lords. In
the (...) Parliament they were too busy with the Duke to do any thing in it:
And in the first Session of the third, the^ drew up a Remonstrance against it,
as if the King by pass^^g (...) Petition of Right, had parted with his Interest
in that Imposition. Nor staid they there, but in the ^umultuous end of the next
Session, they thundered out their A^athema's ^ot only against such of the Kings
Ministers as should act any thing in the levying of his Subsidy of Tunnage and
Poundage, but against all such as voluntarily should yield or pay the same not
being granted by Parliament, as betrayers of the Liberties of England, and
enemies to this Commonwealth. And though the King received it (but not without
some loss and difficulty) from the first year of his Reign to the sixteenth
current; yet then the Commons being backed with a Scottish Army, resolved that
he should hold it not longer but as a Tenant at will, and that but from three
Months to three Months neither. And then they past it with this clogge' which
the King (as his case then stood) knew not how to shake off, viz. that it must
be declared and enacted by the Kings Authority, and by the Authority of the
Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament. That it is and has been the ancient
Right of the Subjects of this Realm, that no Subsidy, Custom, Impost, or other
charge whatsoever, ought or may be laid or imposed upon any Merchandise
exported or imported by Subjects, Denizen^, or Aliens, without common consent
in Parliament.

As for the Imposition raised on C^rrans by Queen Elizabeth, it was done, as
our Author tells us to cry quits with the Venetians, who had raised the
Customs of our Cl^th. And this was done, says he, without regret or
complaint, the general prosperity of the Reign overshadowing, and her power
commanding, fol. 133. Here then we have an Imposition raised upon some
Commodities, by the sole will an^ power of the Queen, not only without Act of
Parliament, but without any regret or complaint of the Merchants, as our
Author tells us. And in the first he tells us true, but not so in the last. For
the Merchants having fee'd some Members of the House of Commons to befriend
them in it, it was moved that some course might be taken by the House to ease
the Merchants in that Point. When presently M. Secretary Cecil addressing
himself unto the Speaker, desired that that business might proceed no further;
affirming that it was a Noli me tangere, part of the Queens prerogative Royal,
and therefore not to be disputed within those walls; adding w^^hal, that if
(...) proceeded any further, he must (as he was in duty bound) acquaint her
Majesty with the matter, of whose displeasure they would quickly find
themselves to be very sensible. And so the business stopped for that time,
though it broke out afterward, but little to the benefit of the Merchant, as
in fine it proved. It seems by this story that the Commons challenged no such
privilege in Queen Elizabeth's time, as they did afterward in the time of King
Charles, that is to say, that neither the King nor Queen was to take notice of
any thing which was said or done within those Walls, until it was communicated
to them by the consent of the House: For whereas the King in a Speech made to
both Houses, on the 14 of December, 1641. took notice of some dispute which had
been raised in that House, about the Kings power in pressing Soldiers for his
Wars, the Commons voted this for a breach of Privilege, and gained so far upon
the Lords, that they joined together in this Declaration to his Majesty, viz.
That amongst other privileges of Parliament, it was their ancient and
undoubted right, that his Majesty ought not to take notice of any matter in
Agitation and debate in either House of Parliament, but by their Information
and Agreement: But yet as ancient as it was, the youngest man present had seen
the beginning; and as undoubted as it was, the oldest man there sitting lived
to see the end of it: And so much for that.

Fol. 136. But they were all ten committed to several Prisons, and on the first
of May, Attorney General Noy sent Process out against them, to appear in the
Star Chamber, and answer his Information there.] Our Author speaks this of
those ten persons who had been guilty of that most unparalled Riot, which was
committed in the House of Commons, at the dissolving of the last Parliament, at
what time Mr. Noy was not Attorney General, nor in three years after, and
therefore could not send out Process, or make any Info^mation against them, as
is here affirmed: The Attorney General was at that time Sir Robert Heath, who
not long after entered the like Information against the Earls of Bedford,
Somerset, and Clare, Sir Robert Cotton, Master Seldom, Mr. St. John, for
dispersing a Manuscript, containing sundry projects for raising money on the
Subject without the help of Parliaments; as if it had been some Design of the
King or his Council to enslave the Nation: Concerning which, our present Author
tells us one thing, and an absent Author tells us another; That which our
present Author tells us, is, That

Fol. 140. It was contrived at Florence by Sir Robert Dudley, who descended
from the Dudlies, Earls of Warwick, and so he styled himself.] That this Book
of projects was contrived by Sir Robert Dudley, I am well assured; and I am
well assured also, that he neither descended from the Dudlies Earls of Warwick,
nor ever called himself by that Title: There were but three that held the
Titles of Warwick, viz.

John, the first Baron of that House, created Earl of Warwick and Duke of
Northumberland, by K. Edward the sixth.

Secondly, John his eldest surviving Son, commonly called Earl of Warwick (as
the custom is) after his Father was made Duke, who dyed without Issue.

And thirdly, Ambrose the fourth Son of the first Io^n, created Earl of Warwick
by Queen Elizabeth, Anno 1552. who deceased without Issue also; so that there
was but one Dudley Earl of Warwick, from whom this Robert could descend, and
from him he did, as being the base or natural Son of Robert Dudley, Earl of
Leicester, the fifth Son of the said John Dudly Earl of Warwick, and Duke of
Northumberland.

Secondly, This Sir Robert Dudley, who contrived the Manuscript, did not style
himself by the name of Earl of Warwick, that being too low a title to content
his Ambition: For looking on himself as the only remaining branch of this
House of the Dudlies, he took upon himself the Style of Duke of Northumberland,
and was commonly called so by all sorts of People in the State of Florence: But
to proceed, our Author tells us of this Manuscript of Sir Robert Dudlies, That,

Ibid. It was a Rhapsody of several pro^ects for increase of the Kings Revenue*
and somewhat in prejudice of proceedings in Parliament; sundry copies whereof
were dispersed, etc.] And so dispersed, that there were few or none who were
inquisitive into matters which con^erned the public, that got not ^ Copy of
th^se Paper^: Which being found in the Study of the Earl of Strafford (as it
might have been in thous^nds more) gave an occasion to E. H. an obscure fellow,
composed of Ignorance and malice, to publish it in Print, with this following
Title, viz. Straffords Pl^t discovered, and the Parliament vindicated in their
Justice executed upon him, by the late discovery of certain Propositions
delivered to his Majesty by the Earl of Strafford, a little before his trial,
with this Inscription, Propositions for the bridling of Parliaments, and for
the increasing of his Majesty's Revenue much m^re then before, etc. And so much
for the harmless Errors of my present, and the malicious falsehood of my absent
Author: Amongst which harmless Errors of my present (but not to be excused in
any) Author, I reckon his naming of King Charles to be the Uncle of Frederick
Prince Elector Palatine, fol. 143. and within few lines after, his
Brother-in-law, as indeed he was, his making ^alcedon to be a City in Greece,
fol. 151. whereas it was a City of Bithynia in Asia minor, on the other side of
the Sea: But leaving these, I proceed to matters of more moment, and of greater
conseq^ence.

Fol. 148. And therefore draws a Pedigree of his right and title from King
James the first, etc.] Our Author speaks this of the Pedigree by which the
Marquess of Hamilton pretended a Right and Title to the Crown of Scotland, a
Title which had so many flaws, that if all the Issue of King James the sixth
were utterly extinguishe^, co^ld not serve the turn: For first, the Lady
Katherine Stuart, Daughter to James the second, from whom, (and not immediately
from James the first) he must fetch his pedigree, was first Married to Robert
Lord Boide Earl of Arran, from whom being forcibly taken by her brother King
James the third, and married in her said Husbands life time, Sir James
Hamilton, the especial favorite of that King, she carried with her for her
Dower the Earldom of Arran: The Children born of this Adulterous bed could
pretend no Title to that Crown, if all the Issue of James the first, second and
third, should have chanced to fail: And yet there was another flaw as great as
this, For James* the Grand child of this James, having first married a Wife of
one of the Noble Houses of Scotland, and afterward considering that Cardinal
Bet^n, Archbishop of St. And^ews, was the only man who managed the affairs of
that Kingdom, put her away, and married a Niece or Kinswoman of the Cardinals
(his first Wife still living) by whom he was the Father of John the first
Marquess of Hamilton, whose Grandchilde James by virtue of this goodly
Pedigree pretended to the Crown of Scotland.

Fol. 149. M. Rogers in his Preface to the 39. Articles, says, That since the
suppression of P^rit^ns by the Archbishops, Parker, Grindal, and Whitgift,
none will seems to be such.] That Archbishop Grindal was a suppressor of the
Puritan Faction is strange to me, and so I think it is to any who are verst in
the actions of those times; it being the general opinion of our Historians,
that he fell into the Queens displeasure for being a chief Patron and promoter
of it. Certain it is, that he wrote a large Letter to the Queen in defense of
their prophesyings, then which there could be nothing more dangerous to Church
and State. Nor does M. Rogers in his Preface to the 39. Articles, tell us, that
he had any hand in the suppression of the Puritans; it being affirmed by him on
the contrary, that they continued multiplying their number, and growing strong;
even headstrong in b^ldnesse and schism, till the dying day of this most
Reverend Archbishop.

Fol. 151. But w^y to a foreign Title, and not at as easy a rate to English,
as in Ireland he had t^ all Sees there?] Our Author makes a Quaery, Why the
Bishop appointed by the Pope to govern his party here in England, should rather
take his Title from Chalcedon in Greece, then from any one of the Episcopal
Sees in this Kingdom, as well as they do in that of Ireland? In answer
whereunto, though he gives us a very satisfactory reason, yet I shall add
something thereunto, which perhaps may not be unworthy of the Readers
knowledge. And him I would have know, that at such time as Prince ^^arles was
in Spain, and the Dispensation passed in the Court of Rome, it was concluded in
the Conclave, that some Bishops should be sent into England by the Name of the
Bishops of Salisbury, Gloucester, Chester, Durham, and sic de caeteris; the
better to manage and improve their increasing hopes; Intelligence whereof being
given unto the Jesuits here in England, who feared nothing more then such a
thing, one of them who formerly had free access to the Lord Keeper Williams,
acquaints him with this mighty secret; assuring him that he did it for no other
reason, but because he knew what a great exasperation it would give the King,
and consequently how much it must incense him against the Catholics. Away with
this Intelligence goes the Lord Keeper to the King, who took fire thereat as
well as he, and though it was somewhat late at night, commanded him to go to
the Spanish Ambassador, and to require him to send unto the King his Master to
take some course that those proceedings might be stopped in the Court of Rome, or
otherwise that the Tr^aty of the Match should advance no further. The Lord
Keeper finds the Ambassador ready to send away his packets, who upon hearing
of the News commanded his Carrier to stay till he had represented the whole
business in a Letter to the King his Master. On the receiving of which Letter,
the King imparts the whole business to the Popes Nuncio in his Court, who
presently sends hi^ dispatches to the Pope, acquainting him with the great
inconveniences and unavoidable dangers of this new design, which being stopped
by this devise, and the Treaty of the Match ending in a Rupture not long after,
the same Jesuit came again to the Lord Keepers Lodging, and in a fair and
facetious manner thanked him most humbly for the good office he had done for
that Society, for br^aking the bearing off which blow all the friends they bad
in Rome could find no Buckler, which Story as I heard from his Lordships own
mouth (with no small contentment) so seemed he to be very well pleased with the
handsomeness of the trick which was put upon him.

Fol. 162. The German war made by Gustavus a pretension (and but a pretension)
for liberty to the oppressed Princes. Which Proposition as it stands is both
true and false, with reference to the beginning, progress, and success of his
war. For when he first undertook the conduct of it, on the solicitation of the
Kings of England, France, and Denmark, and many of the afflicted and
disinherited Princes; he cannot be supposed to entertain any other thoughts
then to restore the Princes and free Cities to their former Rights, for doing
whereof his Army was defraid by the joint charges and expense of the
Confederates: In order whereunto he caused the Inhabitants of all the Towns and
Provinces which he had forced from the Emperors Forces before the overthrow of
Tilly at the valley of Lipsick, to take an Oath to be true unto the Liberty and
Empire of Germany. And hitherto his intents were real, not pretentionall only.
But after that great victory, and the reducing of all Franconia, and the lower
Palatinate under his absolute command; though he continued his pretensions, yet
he changed his purpose, swearing the people of all degrees and ranks, which
submitted to him to be true from thenceforth to the King and Crown of Sweden.
This as it first discovered his ambition of the first design which brought him
over; so was it noted that his affairs never prospered after; receiving first a
check from Wallenstein at the Siege of Noremberg, and not long after his deaths
wound and the battle of Lutzen.

Fol. 174. And now they revive the Sabbatarian controversy which was begun
five years since, Bradburn on the Sabbath day, and directed to the King.] In
this Discourse about the Sabbatarian Quarrels, our Author has mistook,
himself in several particulars. The business first is not rightly limn'd, the
coming out of Bradburns Book being placed by him in the year 1628. whereas it
was not published until five years after: But being published at that time, and
directed to the King, as our Author words is, it gave the King occasion to
consider of the general tendency of the Puritan doctrine in this point unto
downright Iud^^sme; and thereupon to quicken the reviving of his Fathers
Declaration about Lawful sports, in which the signification of his pleasure
bears date the 18. of October, in the 9. year of his Reign* Anno 1633. A
remedy which had been prescribed unseasonably to prevent, and perhaps too late
to cure the disease, if Bradburns Book had been published six years before, as
our Author makes (...).

Our Author secondly, relating this very business of Bradburnes Book (or
rather of Barbarous Books, as he calls them there, fol. 196.) must either be
confessed to speak Vngrammatically, or else the coming out of these Barbarous
Books must be one chief motive for setting out that Declaration by King James,
Anno. 1618.

Thirdly, This Bradbu^u was not made a Convert by the High Commission Count,
b^t by a private conference with some Learned Divines, to which he had
submitted himself, and which by Gods blessing so far prevailed with him, that
he became a Converts and freely conformed himself to the Orthodoxall Doctrine
of the Church of England, both concerning the Sabbath day, and likewise
concerning the Lords day. So Bishop White relates the Story in his Epistle
Dedicatory before his Book to the A^ch-Bishop of Canterbury, Anno 1635.

Fourthly, Whereas our Author tells us, fol. 175. That the Declaration was not
(...) on the Ministers to publish more proper for a Lay-Officer or a Constable;
I must needs grant that the publishing of this Declaration was not pressed on the
Minister by any express command of the King. But then I would fain know
withal how the Bishops could take Order that publication thereof be made in
all the Parish Churches of their several Diocesses, according to his (...)
will and pleasure, but by the mouth of the Ministers. The Constable and other
Lay-Officers, whom our Author thinks more proper for that Employment, were not
under the Bishop^ command as to that particular, and therefore as he ^ad n^
Authority, so he had no reason to require any such duty from them. And as for
the Churchwardens, which are more liable to the power and command of the
O^dinary, it happens many times, especially in Countrey-Villages, that they
cannot read, and therefore no such publication of the Kings pleasure to be
laid on them. The Ministers who had taken an Oath o^ Canonical O^edience to
their several and respective Bishops, must consequently b^ the fittest men for
that Employment, implicitly intended, though not explicitly named in the
Declaration.

As many mistakes there are concerning the decay and repair of S. Paul's Church
in London. For first, the high Spire was not burnt down by accident of
Lightning in the time of Queen Eliz^beth, as our Author tells us, fol. 176.
That vulgar Error has been confuted long ago, and no such thing as the
burning of Paul's Steeple by Lightning has for these twenty years and more
occurred in the Chronologies of our common Almanacks; that dreadful accident
not happening by the hand of H^aven, but by the negligence of a Plumber, who
leaving his pan of Coals there when he went to Dinner, was the sole occasion of
that mischief; Secondly, The Commission for the Repair of this Church, issued
in the time of King Charles, came not out in the year 1632. where our Author
places it, but had past the Seal, and was published in Print the year before,
Anno 1631. Thirdly, The Reparation of the Church began not at the West end, as
our Author tells us, fol. 177. the Quire or Eastern part of the Church being
fully finished, before the Western part, or the main body of the Church had been
undertaken. Fourthly, The little Church called S. Gregory's, was not willingly
taken down to the ground, the Parishioners opposing it very strongly, and
declaring as much unwillingnesse as they could or durst in that particular; and
fifthly the Lord Mayor for the time then being, was not named Sir Robert (...)
(as our Author makes it) but Sir Robert Ducy, advanced by ^is ^ajesty to the
d^gree of a Baronet, as by the Commission does appear; so many mistakes in so
few lin^^ are not easily met with in any Author but our present Hist^^rian: But
we proceed.

Fol. 179. ^he Turk^ h^ve Auxili^ry friend^hip of the (...) Tartar Chrim, from
whose Ancestors Tamberlain proceeded.^ A Proposition strangely mixed of truth
and falsehood; it being most true, that the Turks have Auxiliary Forces from the
Tartar Chrim, and no less false that Tamberlain d^^cended from him: All who
have written of that great Prince, make him the son of Og, or Zain-Cham, the
Cham of Zagathey, a Province some thousands of miles distant from the dwellings
of the Tartar-Chrim; which Og or Z^in-Ch^m was the Grandchilde of another
Z^in-Cham, the third great Cham of the Tartars, and he the Grandchild of
Cingis the first great Cham, who laid the foundation of that mighty, and (for a
time) most terrible Empire: Whereas the Chrim-Tartar, (or the Tartar-Chrim, as
our Auth^r calls him) derives (...) from Lochtan-Cham, descended from one Bathu
or Roydo, a great Commander of the Tartars, who during the Reign of Hoccata the
second great Cham, subdued these Countries: But this mistake I shall more
easily pardon in our Author, then another of like nature touching Vladislaus
King of Poland, of whom he tells us, that being the f^urth of that name, he
succeeded his Brother Sigismund in that Kingdom: Vladislaus the f^^rth (says
he) was after the death of his Brother Sigismund, by the consent of the States
preferred to the ^hro^e, fol. 182.

In which few words, there are two things to be corrected.

For first, Vl^disl^us who succeeded Sig^smund, was not his Brother, but his
Son.

And secondly, he succeeded not by the name of Vladislaus the fourth, but of
Vlad^sl^us the seven^h.

Add herein his making of Smolensko a Town of P^land, ib^d. which most of our
Geograp^ers have placed in R^ssia, A Town which sometime; by the chance of War,
or otherwise, h^th been in possession of the Pole, though properly belonging to
the great Duke of Muscovy, which can no more entitle it to the name of a Polish
Town, then Calice may be now said to be an English Colony, because once a
Colony of the English.

Nor does our Author spe^k more properly (I will not say more understandingly)
of the Affairs of Ireland, then of those of Poland.

For first, He tells us, fol. 185. That the Conquest of it was never perfected,
till its subjection to King Charles, whereas there was no other subjection
tendered by that People to King Charles, then by those of his other two Kingdoms
of England and Scotland.

Secondly, Forgetting what he had said before, he tells us, fol. 186. That
Mount^oy made an end of that War in the Reign of King James; and yet he says
not true in that neither: ^or the War was ended by Mountjoy at the Battle of
Kingsale, by which that great Rebel, the Earl of Tirone, who had the conduct of
that War, was forced to submit unto him upon condition of his Pardon, which not
without great difficulty was obtained of the Queen: After whose death, the Lord
Mount^oy returned into England, brought the said Earl of Tyrone with him, and
presented him unto King James; who by this means reaped the fruit of that
Victory, and settled Ireland upon a better foundation of Peace and Happiness,
then all the Kings which had Reigned before him.

Thirdly, There was never any such Lord Deputy of Ireland as Sir William
Fitzers, mentioned within few lines after; Sir William Fitz-Williams was once
Deputy there, whom I think he means.

Nor ^ourthly, was Sir George Carry, whom he brings in by Head and shoulders to
be the Governor of Ireland, f. 187. ever advanced unto that Honor; and our
Author being as much mistaken in the name of the Man, as of his Office: Sir
George Carry never had Command in Ireland, Sir George Ca^ew had, made by the
Queen Lord President of Mu^ster, (which place he worthily discharged) but not
the Governor of that Kingdom.

Fol. 192. The Queen was delivered of her second Son, the 13 of October, 1633.
( and not upon the 14 of November* 1634.) he was (...) ten days (...) James,
and created Duke of York by Letters Patents, etc.] Our Author here corrects the
former Historian, for making the Kings second Son to be born on the 14 of
(...), and de^erves himself to be corrected, for making him to be created Duke
of York by Letters Patents, on (...) day after his Birth. For though he was by
the King d^signed to be Duke of York, and that it was commanded that he should
be called so accordingly; yet was he not created Duke of York by Letters
Patents until ten years after, and above, those Letters Patents bearing date at
Oxfo^d, I^nuary ^7. Anno 1643.

The like mistake to that which he corrects in the former Historian, he falls
into himself, fol. 312. where he makes Henry Duke of Gloucester, the Kings
youngest Son, to be born on the twentieth day (...) July, An^o 1640. whereas it
appears by the Arch Bishops Brevi^t, that he was born on Wednesday the eighth
day of that Month, being the day of the solemn Fa^t.

And by this rule we may correct a pass^ge in the s^o^t view of this Kings
life, page ^3. where he is (...) born on the seventeenth of this Month, though
rightly, (...). 46. on the eighth day of it, he is said to be b^rn upon the
eighth.

And thus he fails, fol. 232. in making Edw^rd (...) the only Son of George
Duke of Clarence, to be Duke of Warwick, whom all our Heralds and (...) Earl of
Warwick.

The like mistake I find in the name of a Town, near unto which a great Battle
was fought between the (...) and the Swedes: The Town near which that Battle
was fought, being named Norlinghen* a City of that part of Svevia which is
called North-schw^h^n, mis^akingly by (...) Author called the Battle of
Norlington: The loss of which Battle, drew after it the loss of the Palatinate,
restored to the Electoral Family but the year before.

Fol. 209. And that Story (of truth) that John of Orleans of this Family, like
a second Judith, saved France from the Oppression of Strangers.] Not now to
quarrel the ungrammaticalness of this passage, nor the mistake of John of
Orleans for Iohane; I would fain know by what Authority our Author makes this
John or^ Ioane to be descended of this Illustrious Family of the Dukes of
Lorrein: Most of the French, who have written the Story of her life, report her
to be a poor man's daughter of Ocolieur, a Town in that Dukedom, instructed by
the Earl of Dunois, (commonly called the Bastard of Orleans) to pretend to some
Divine Revelations, the better to encourage that dejected Nation, and to take
upon her the Conduct of the French Armies against the English, in which she
sped fortunately at the first, but in the end was taken Prisoner, and burnt at
Rouen. Nor does the parallel between her and Iudish hold so well as our Author
would have it, that Lady adventuring into the Tent of Holophernes, accompanied
only with her Maid, this Damosel Errant never looking on the face of an Enemy,
but when she was backed by the best Commanders and united Forces of the French;
that Lady carrying back with her the head of her Enemy, which occasioned the
total overthrow of all his A^my, this Damos^l not being able to save her own
Head from the power of the Conqueror; that Lady dying honorably in the Bed of
Peace, and this ingloriously in a Ditch.

Fol. 219. A severe eye had been upon the Roman Catholics, and their numerous
r^sorts, etc. to the ancient Chapel at Denmark House.] An ancient Chapel
questionless, of not much above twenty years continuance, when our Author writ
this part of his History, and then built for the devotions of a small Covent of
Capuchins, whom the Queen had got leave ^o s^ttle there for her personal
comfort.

No Chapel anciently belonging to that House which our Author calls by the
name of Denmark, but is more commonly called Somerset House; It having been
observed of Edward Duke of Somerset the first Founder of it, that having pulled
down one Parish Church and three Bishops houses (each of which had their
several Oratories) to make room for that Palace for himself; he could not find
in his heart to build a Chapel to it for the Service of God: And though some
Room was afterward set apart in it for Family Duties and devotions, by the name
of a Closet; yet so incapable was that Closet of admitting any numerous resort
of Catholics out of other places, that it was not able to contain the Queens
Domestics at her first coming hither. But perhaps our Author will hit it
better in the affairs of Scotland, and therefore pass we on to them, where
first we find That

He makes Sir John Stewart Earl of Traquair, to succeed the Earl of Mar in the
Office of Lord Treasurer of Scotland, fol. 193. Whereas it is most undoubtedly
true (and acknowledged by himself in another place) that he succeeded in that
Office to the Earl of Morton: the Earl of Morton being made Captain of the
guard in the place of the Earl of Holland, and the Earl of Holland made Groom
of the Stool upon the death of the Earl of Carlisle; His making of Sir John Hay
of Scotland ^o be the Master of the Robes for that Kingdom, fol. 237. in stead
of Master of the Rolls ( Clerk-Register they call him there) I look on as a
mistake of the Printer only, though such mistakes condemn our Author of no
small negligence in not reviewing his own work Sheet by Sheet, as it came from
the Press, and making an Errata to it, as all Authors careful of their
credit have been used to do.

Fol. 230. And because the Earl of Strathern a bold man, and had the Kings ear,
and deservedly too, being faithful and true; these men set on John Scot (
Director of the Chancery) a busy person, to inform against his Descent:] In
the story of this Earl, not only as to his Original and descent, but as to his
being Earl of Menteith our Author is not to be faulted; but on the other side,
not to be justified in making him to be Earl of Strathern by the power of
Buckingham (that Duke being dead some years before) though by his power made
Lord President of the Council for the Realm of Scotland. Therefore to set this
matter right, and to add something to our Author that may not be unworthy of
the Readers knowledge, I am to let him understand, that after the death of
David Earl of Strathern second Son to King Robert the third, this Title lay
dormant in the Crown, and was denied to the Lord Dromond (created afterward
Earl of Perth) when a Suitor for it. But this Gentleman Sir William Graham Earl
of Menteith descended from an Heir General of that David, a man of sound
abilities and approved affections, was by the King made Lord President of the
Council of Scotland, as before is said; In which place he so behaved himself,
and stood so stoutly in behalf of the King his Master, upon all occasions, that
nothing could be done for advance of Hamiltons designs, till he was removed
from that place. In order whereunto it was put into his head by some of that
Faction, that he should sue unto the King to be created Earl of Strathern, as
the first and most honorable Title which belonged to his House; that his
merits were so great as to assure him not to meet with a denial, and that the
King could do no less then to give him some nominall reward for his real
services. On these suggestions he repaired unto the Court of England, where
without any great difficulty he obtained his Suit, and waited on the King the
most part of his Summers progress; no man being so openly honored and courted
by the Scottish Nation as he seemed to be. But no sooner was he gone for
Scotland, but the Hamiltonians terrified the King with the dangers which he had
run into by that Creation, whereby he had revived in that proud and ambitious
person the Rights which his Ancestors pretended to the Crown of Scotland, as
being derived from David Earl of Strathern before mentioned, the second Son of
Robert the Second by his lawful Wife: that the King could not choose but see
how generally the Scots slockt about him (after this Creation) when he was at
the Court, and would do so much more when he was in Scotland: And finally that
the proud man had already so far declared himself as to give it ou^, that the
King held the Crown of him. Hereupon a Commission was speedily posted into
Scotland, in which those of Hamiltons Faction made the greatest Number) to
enquire into his life and actions, and to consider of the inconveniences which
might redound unto the King by his affecting this New Title: On the Return
whereof, the poor Gentleman is removed from his Office, from being one of the
Privy Council, and not only deprived of the Title of Earl of Strathern, but of
that also of Menteith, which for a long time had remained in his Ancestors. And
though he was not long after made Earl of Airth, yet this great fall did so
discourage him from all public businesses, that he retired to his own house,
and left the way open to the Hamiltonians, to play their own game as they
listed. Faithful for all this to the King in all changes of Fortune, neither
adhering to the Covenanters, nor giving the least countenance to them, when he
might not only have done it with safety, but with many personal advantages
which were tendered to him.

Fol. 238. The Marquess now finds this place too hot for him, and removes to
Dalkieth, without any adventuring upon the English Divine Service, formerly
continu^lly used there for twenty years in audience of the Council, Nobility,
and Judges.] Compare this passage with another, and we shall find that our
Author has mis-reckoned no less then fifteen years in twenty. For in the
year 1633. he puts this down after the Kings return from Scotland, agreeable to
the truth of story in that particular. What care (says he) King James took
heretofore to rectify Religious worship in Scotland, when he returned from his
last visiting of them, the like does King Charles so soon as he came home. The
^oul undecent Discipline he seeks to reform into sacred worship, and sends
Articles of order to be observed only by the Dean of his private Chapel
there, as in England. That Prayers be performed twice a day in the English
manner. A monthly Communion to be received on their knees. He that officiates
on Sunday and Holydaies, to do his duty in his Surplice. No public reading of
the English Liturgy in Scotland, since the year 1562. but only during the short
time of King James his being there Anno 1617. therefore not read continually
twenty years together, as our Author states it; But twenty years is nothing in
our Authors Arithmetic. For telling us that the sufferers, viz. Dr. Bastwick,
Mr. Prinne, and M. Burton obtained an order for satisfaction to be made them
out of the Estates of those who imposed their punishments; that none of those
Judges being left but Sir Henry Vane the Elder, it was ordered that
satisfaction should be given by him to one of their Widows, and thereupon it
was observed for a blessed time when a single Counselor of State after twenty
years opinion should be sentenced by Parliament to give satis^action for a
mis-judgement, acted by a body of Counsel, fol. 867. But the punishment
inflicted on those sufferers, was in the year 1637. and this order made about
eight years after, Anno 1645. being but twelve years short of our Authors
twenty, which is no great matter.

Fol. 282. As for Sir John Finch Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, who
succeeded him (in the place of the Lord Keeper) he could not hold out so many
months as he did years from being in hazard to have forfeited his head.] But
first, this Gentleman was somewhat more then Sir John Finch, he being created
Lord Finch of Forditch in the beginning of the April before. Secondly, If he
were in any hazard, it was not for any thing he had done in the place of Lord
Keeper, but only for his zeal to the Kings service in the case of Ship money,
or to his actings under the Earl of Holland in Forest businesses, before he
came un^o that place; neither of which could have extended to the loss of his
head, though he thought not fit to trust that head to such merciless Judges.
With like prudence did Sir Francis Windebank, principal Secretary of Estate,
withdraw into France; of whom our Author tells us, That he remained there to
his death a professed Roman Catholic, fol. 338.

But first, Sir Francis Windebank remained not there until his death, for he
came over to the King when he was at Oxford, about the latter end of the year
1643. But finding his sufferings unregarded, and his Person neglected (as not
being suffered to appear as a Member of the House of Commons, when the
Parliament was summoned thither) he retired again into France to his Wife and
Children.

And secondly, He dyed not a professed Catholic, but continued to the last a
true Son of the Church of England; reproacht in his best fortunes by the name
of a Papist, because preferred by the Archbishop, a faithful servant to the
Queen, and a professed enemy to the Puritan Faction: For which last reason, the
Earl of Arundel must be given out to be a Papist (though I have seen him often
at Divine Service in the Kings Chapel) and is so declared to be by our Author
also; who tells us further, That finding his native Country too hot for him to
hold out, he went with the Queen Mother unto Colen, fol. 428. as if the Land
had been hotter for him, or his Zeal hotter then the place (had he been a
Papist, as he was not) then for any other Noble Man of that Religion.

Fol. 320. The English proposed a Cessation of Arms, but the Scots, as they
would obey his Majesty's command not to advance, so they could not return till
they had the effects of their Errand.] And all this while I would fain know
what became of the Irish Army, which had been raised in so much haste by the
Earl of Strafford, with the beginning of the Spring: An Army consisting of
10000 Foot, and 1500 Horse, kept ever since in constant pay and continual
Exercise, by which the King might have reduced the Scots to their due
obedience, as the Earl of Strafford declared openly at the Council Table,
immediately on the dissolving of the former Parliament; yet now this Army lies
dormant, without acting anything thing toward the suppressing of the Scots,
expressed in their invading England, their wasting the Northern parts of the
Kingdom, and their bold Demands: Which Army, if it had been put over into
Cumberland, (to which from the Port of Carick-Fergus in Ireland, is but a short
and easy passage) they might have got upon the back of the Scots, and caught
that wretched People in a pretty Pit-fall; so that having the English Army
before them, and the Irish behind them, they could not but be ground to
powder, as between two Millstones: But there was some fatality in it, or
rather some overruling providence, which so dulled our Councels, that this
Design was never thought of for ought I can learn; but sure I am that it was
never put into Execution: An Army, of which the prevailing Members in both
Houses stood in so much fear, that they never left troubling the King with
their importunities, till they had caused him to Disband it; the Scots in the
mean time nesting in the Northern Counties, and kept at most excessive charges
to awe the King, and countenance their own proceedings.

Fol. 334. The Book, whilst in loose Papers (^re it was complete) and secured
into his Cabinet, and that being lost, was seized by the enemy at Naseby fight,
etc.] Our Author here, upon occasion of his Majesty's most excellent Book,
called (...) (which he has wholly Incorporated part per part in this present
History) gives a very strange Pedigree of it, that being composed before Naseby
fight, it was there taken with the rest of the Kings Papers, and coming to his
hands again, was by the King committed to the hands of one Mr. Symonds, and by
him to the Press: In all which, there is nothing true but the last particular.

For first, That Book, and the Meditations therein contained, were not composed
before Naseby fight, many of them relating to subsequent Passages, which the
King, without a very h^gh measure of the Spirit of Prophecy, was not able to
look so far into^ as if past already. Besides, that Book being called, The
Por^rai^ure of his Majesty in his Solitudes and Sufferings, must needs relate
unto the times of his Solitude, and therefore could not be digested before
Naseby fight, when he had been continually exercised in Camp or Counsel, and
not reduced to any such Solitude as that Title intimates.

Secondly, These Papers were not found with the rest in the Kings Cabinet; or
if they were, there must be somewhat in it above a miracle that he should get
them again into his hands.

Assuredly those men who used so much diligence to suppress this Book when it
was published in print, and many thousand Copies dispersed abroad, would either
have burnt it in the fire, or use some other means to prevent the printing of
it, to their great trouble and disadvantage.

Thirdly, These papers were not delivered by the King to Mr. Symonds, who had
no such near access to him at that time: For the truth is, that the King having
not finished his Conceptions on the several Subjects therein contained, till he
was ready to be carried away from Carisbrook Castle, committed those papers at
the time of his going thence, to the hands of one of his trusty Servants, to be
so disposed of, as might most conduce to the advancement of his Honor and
Interest: By which trusty Servant (whosoever he was) those papers were
committed to the care of the said Mr. Symons, who had showed himself exceeding
zealous in the Kings Affairs, by whom there was care taken for the publishing
of them, to the infinite contentment of all those well affected Subjects who
could get a ^ight of them.

Fol. 372. The loss of his place, (viz. the City of Arras] animated the
Portugueses to revolt from the Spanish Yoke, and to submit themselves^ to the
right Heir, Duke John of Braganza.] Our Author is out of this also: For first,
it was not the loss of the City of Arras, but the secret practices and
solicitations of Cardinal Richelieu, which made the Portuguez to revolt.

And secondly, if the King of Spains Title were not good (as the best Lawyers
of Portugal, in the Reign of the Cardinal King Don Henry, did affirm it was)
yet could not the Duke of Braganza be the right Heir of that Kingdom; the
Children of Mary Duchess of Parma, the eldest Daughter of Prince Edward, the
third Son of Emmanuel, being to be preferred before the Children of Katherine
Duchess of Braganza, her younger Sister: He tells next of Charles, That,

Fol. 373. The Sovereignty of Utrick, and Duchy of Gelders, he bought; that of
William he won by Arms, with some pretense of right.] But first, the
Sovereignty of Vtreckt came not to him by purchase, but was resigned by Henry
of Bavaria, the then Bishop thereof, who being then warred on by the Duke of
Gelders, and driven out of the City by his own Subjects, was not able to hold
it: Which resignation, notwithstanding he was fain to take the City by force*
and to obtain a confirmation of the Grant, not only from Pope Ciement the 7.
but also from the Estates of the Country.

Secondly, he bought not the Duchy of Gelders neither, but possessed himself of
it by a mixed Title of Arms and Contract: The first Contract made between Charles
the Warlike Duke of Burgundy, and Arnold of Egmond* Duke of Gelders, who in
regard of the great Succors which he received from him (when deprived and
Imprisoned by his own ungracious son) passed over his whole Estate to him for a
little money: But this alienation being made unprofitable by the death of
Charles, the intrusion of Adolph, the son of Arnold, and the succession of
Charles the son of Adolph, this Emperor revived the claim, and pressed Duke Charles
so hotly on all sides with continual Wars, that he was forced to yield it to
him, upon condition that he might enjoy it till his death, which was afterward
granted.

Thirdly, if he had any right to the Dukedom of William, it accrued not to him
by descent as King of Spain, but as a ^ief forfeited to the Empire, for want of
Heirs male in the House of Sforsa; which not being acknowledged by the French,
who pretended from the Heir, General of the Galeazzo's, he won it by his Sword,
and so disposed thereof to his Son and Successor King Philip the second, and
his Heirs, by another right then that of Conquest.

The proceeding of the short Parliament, and the surviving Convocation, have
been so fully spoken of in the Observations on the former History, that nothing
need be added here: But the long Parliament, which began in November following,
will afford us some new matter for these Advertisements not before observed.
And first we find, That

Fol. 336. There came out an Order of the Commons House, that all Projectors,
and unlawful Monopolists, that have or had ^^tely any benefit from Monopolies,
or countenanced, or issued out any Warrants in favor of them, etc. shall be
disabled to sit in the House.] A new piece of Authority which the Commons never
exercised before, and which they had no right to now, but that they knew they
were at this time in such a condition, as to venture upon any new Incroachment,
without control: For anciently^ and legally the Commons had no power to exclude
any of their Members from their place in Parliament, either under color of
false elections, or any other pretense whatsoever: For it appears on good
Record, in the 28 year of Queen Elizabeth, that the Commons in Parliament,
undertaking the examination of the choosing and returning of Knights of the
Shire for the Coun^y of Norfolk, were by the Queen sharply reprehended for it;
that being (as she sent them word) a thing improper for them to deal in, as
belonging only to the Office and Charge of the Lord Chancellor, from whom the
Writs issue, and a^e returned. And if they may not exclude their Members under
color of undue Elections and false Returns, much less Authority have they to
exclude any of them for acting by virtue of the Kings. Letters Patents, or
doing any thing in order to his Majesty's Service: For if this power were once
allowed them, they might proceed in the next place to shut out all the Lords of
the Privy Council, his Counsel learned in the Laws, his Domestic Servants,
together with all such as hold any Offices by his Grant and Favor; because
forsooth, having dependence on the King, they could not be true unto the
Interest of the Commonwealth: And by this means they might so weed out one
another, that at the last they would leave none to sit amongst them, but such
as should be all engaged to drive on such projects as were laid before them.

But whereas our Author tells us in the following words, that it was Ordered
also, That Mr. Speaker should issue out new Warrants for electing other Members
in their places; he makes the Commons guilty of a greater incroachment then
indeed they were: All that they did or could pretend to in this case, was to
give order to the Speaker, that intimation might be given to his Majesty of the
places vacant, and to make humble suit unto him to issue out new Writs for new
Elections to those places: But the next Incroachment on the Kings Authority,
was far greater then this, and comes next in order.

Fol. 360. The Bill for the Trienial Parliament, having p^ssed both Houses, was
confirmed with the Kings Royal Assent, Febr. 16. And then also he past the Bill
of Subsidies, fol. 361.] The Subsidies here mentioned, were intended for the
relief of the Northern Counties, oppressed at once with two great Armies, who not
only lived upon Free Quarter, but raised diverse sums of money also for their
present necessities; the one of them an Army of English, raised by the King to
right himself upon the Scots; the other being an Army of Scots, who invaded the
Kingdom, under color of obtaining from the King what they had no right to: So
that the King was not to have a penny of that Money, and yet the Commons would
not suffer him to pass the one, till he had before hand passed the other; which
the King, for the relief of his poor Subjects was content to do, and thereby
put the power of calling Parliaments into the hands of Sheriffs and Constables,
in case he either would not, or should not do it at each three years end: But
the nex^ incroachment on the Power and Prerogative Royal was worse then this,
there being a way left for the King to reserve that Power by the timely calling
of a Parliament, and the dissolving of it too, if called within a shorter time
then that Act had limited.

But for the next sore, which was his passing of the Bill of Tonnage and
Poundage, there was no Plaster to be found; the King being for'd (remember
that the Commons had an Army of Scots at their devotion) to pass away all his
Right unto it, before he could obtain it but for three Months only, as was
said before: In which Bill it is to be observed, that as they deprived the King
of his Right to Tonnage and Poundage, so they began then to strike at the
Bishops Rights to their Vote in Parliament: For whereas generally in all former
Acts, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal were distinctly named, in this that
distinction was left out, and the Bill drawn up in the name of the Lord and
Commons; which being disputed by the Bishops, as well foreseeing what the
Commons intended by it, was notwithstanding carried for the Commons by the
Temporal Lords, who thereby made a way for their own exclusion, when the
Commons were grown as much too strong for them, as they were for the Bishops:
The secular Lords knew well, that the Lords Spiritual were to have the
precedence, and therefore gave them leave to go first out of the House, that
they themselves might follow after as they ought to do.

Proceed we next to the business of the Earl of Strafford, a^ whose Trial our
Author tells us, That

Fol. 376. The Earl of Arundel was made Lord High Steward, and the Earl of
Lindsey Lord High Constable.^ Our Author borrows this Error (as he does some
others) from the former History, and makes it worse by an addition of his own.

For first, The Earl of Lindsey was not made High Constable upon this occasion,
nor did he act there in that capacity^^ He had been made High Constable to
decide the difference between the Lord Rey and David Ramsey; which being an
extraordinary case was likely to be tried by battle. But in this case there was
no need of any such Officer, the Trial being to be made by proofs and
Evidences, the verdict to be given by the Lords of Parliament, and sentence to
be pronounced by the Lord High Steward, all ^ things being to be carried and
transacted in due form of Law. Secondly, The Court being broken up, which was
before the passing of the Bill of Attainder in the end of April, the Office of
Lord High Steward expired also with it. And therefore when our Author speaks
of a Request which was made unto the King in Parliament, that the Earl of
Pembroke should be made Lord High Steward, in the place of the Earl of Arundel
then absent, fol. 430. he either speaks of a Request which was never made, or
else mistakes the Lord Steward of the Kings household (which place might
possibly be desired for the Earl of Pembroke not long before turned out of the
Office of Lord Chamberlain) for the Lord High Steward of the Kingdom.

And now we are fallen on his mistakes touching these great Officers, I shall
add another, It being said in our Authors unfigured Sheets, that the King
having signed the Bill of Attainder, sent Sir Dudly Carlton Secretary of State
to acquaint him what he had finished. An error too gross and palpable for our
Author to be guilty of, considering his Acquaintances in the Court and
relations to it; which may persuade me to believe that these unfigured Sheets,
patcht in I know not how, between fol. 408. and 409. should be none of his. But
whether they be his or not, certain I am that there was no Secretary at this
time but Sir Henry Vane, Windebank being then in France, and his place not
filled with the Lord Falkland till the Christmas after Sir Dudly Carlton, Lord
Imbercourt, and Vicount Dorchester, was indeed Secretary for a while; but he
died upon Ashwednesday in the year 1631. which was more then nine years before
the sending of this message, and I persuade my self the King did not raise him
from the grave (as Samuel was once raised at the instance of Saul) to go on
that unpleasing errand. Sir Dudly Carlton whom he means (being Brothers son
unto the former) was at that time one ^f the Clerks of the Council, but never
attained unto the place and honor of a principal Secretary. Our Author
having brought the business of the Earl of Strafford toward a Conclusion,
diverts upon the Author of the Observations on the former History, to whom he
had been so much beholden for many of the most material and judicious Notes in
the former part of his Book; and he charge thus.

Fol. 406. I conceive it convenient in more particular to clear two mistakes of
our Authors concerning the Articles of Ir^land, and the death of the Earl of
Strafford, reflecting upon the late most Reverend Prelate, the Archbishop of
Armagh, Primate of all Ireland, whilst he was living, and worse pursued since
his decease, somewhat too sharp also upon D. Bernard.] What Fee or Salary our
Author has for this undertaking, I am no^ able to determine, but if he be not
well paid by them, I am sure he has been well paid by another; who in his
Answer to D. Bernards Book entitled, The judgment of the late Primate of
Ireland, Ac. has fully justified the Observator against all the exceptions,
which either our Author or D. Bernard, or the Lord Primate himself have made
against him in these two points. Which being extrinsecall as to the matter of
this History, shall not be repeated; the Reader being desired, if he want any
further satisfaction, to look for it there. All I shall here observe is this,
that our Author grounds himself in his whole Discourse of that business upon
somewhat which he had in writing under the hand of the said Lord Primate, and
more which he has took verbatim out of the said Book of D. Bernards, who being
both parties to the Suit, ought not to be admitted for Witnesses in their own
behalf. And yet our. Author having driven the matter to as good a conclusion
as he could from such faulty Premises, conceives an hope, that by the ^ight of
those Testimonies, he will be of more moderation, notwithstanding he has there
shown much disaffection to the Primate, in endeavoring to his utmost, to evade
diverse of those particulars, either in giving the worst sense of them, or
turning them to other ends. But as I can sufficiently clear the Observator,
from bearing any disaffection to the Lord Primates person, and the equal Reader
may defend him from the imputation of giving the worst sense of any thing which
he found in the Pamphlet called, The Observator observed, or turning it to
other ends then was there intended; so am I no more satisfied by this tedious
nothing, touching the Articles of Ireland, or the death of the Earl of
Strafford, as they reflect upon the Archbishop of Armagh, then I was before. As
little am I satisfied with the following passage in the last Folio of the
unfigured Sheets, viz. That

D. Iuxon Bishop of London resigned his Office of Treasurer of England into the
hands of five Commissioners more sufficient then he could be,] Our Author
might have spared these last words of disparagement and diminution, and yet
have left his Proposition full and perfect. But taking them as they come before
me, I must first tell him, that the Lord Bishop of London resigned not his
Office of Treasurer into the hands of any Commissioners, but only into the
hands of the King, who not knowing at the present how to dispose of it for his
best advantage, appointed some Commissioners under the great Seal of England to
discharge the same. And next I would have him tell me, what great sufficiency
he found in those Commissioners, which was not to be found in the Bishop of
London, how many of his debts they paid, what improvement they made of his
Revenue, what stock of money they put him into toward the maintaining of the
War which not long after followed. In all which particulars the Bishop of
London had very faithfully performed his part (though not as to the War of
England) to the great honor of the King and content of the Subject.

But to look back upon some passages in the busines^e of the Earl of Strafford,
which are not touched at by the Observator or his alterid^m, the first we meet
with is a very pretty devise of the Bishop of Lincoln, to cheat the poor
Gentleman of his head by getting a return of the promise which the King is said
to have made him of not consenting to his death. The sum of the story is
briefly this, viz. That the King had promised the Earl of Strafford under his
hand that his prerogative should sav^ him, that he would never pass the Bill,
nor consent to the acting of any thing to take away his life; that being
satisfied in all other scruples he rested in this only, affirming that in
regard of this promise he could not pass the Bill, though the Earl were
guilty; the Bishop of Lincoln finding him harping on that string, assured him,
that he thought that the Earl was so great a Lover of his Maj^sties peace, so
tender of his conscience, and the Kingdoms safety, that he would willingly
acquit the King of that promise; that though the King received this intimation
with a brow of anger, yet the said, Bishop in pursuance of the Earls
destruction, sends a Message to him to that purpose by the Lieutenant of the
Tower, or some other person whom he found attending near the place; that as the
devil and he would have it the Earl received that intimation with great
disdain, saying, that if that were all which bound the King, he would soon
release him, and thereupon opening his Cabinet, drew out that Paper in which
the Kings promise was contained, and gave it to the said Lieutenant or that
other person (but whether sealed or unsealed that he cannot tell) by whom it
was delivered to the Bishop of Lincoln; and finally that the Bishop of Lincoln
finding no other scruple to remain in the Kings Conscience, but the respect he
had to that promise, he put the fatal paper into the Kings hands, which as it
seems gave a full end to the conference and the Kings perplexities.

This is the substance of the Legend, and in all this there is nothing true,
but the names of the parties mentioned in it.

And first I would fain know from what Author he received this fiction,
unless it were from say I, and say some (as his own words are) that is to say,
either from himself, or from some body else, but he knew not whom. Most
certainly he had it not from any of the Bishops then present, the Lord Primate
affirming in the end of his first Narrative, that neither he nor the rest of
his Brethren knew what was contained in that Paper; and no less certain it is
that the Bishop of Lincoln was too wise to accuse himself of such a practice,
if he had been really guilty of it. And then as for the thing it self. no man
of reason can imagine, that the King would either make such a proviso to the
Earl, or that the Earl would so far distrust his own integrity as to take it of
him. If the Kings knowledge of his innocence, of his signal merits, and the
declaration which he made in Parliament to the Lords and Commons, that he could
not pass the Bill with a good Conscience, were not sufficient to preserve him,
there was no help to be expected from such Paper-promises. Such a Romance as
this we find in Ibrahim the Illustrious Bassa, who is said to have obtained
the like promise from Solomon the Magnificent; which notwithstanding the Mufti
or Chief Priests of the Turks devised a way to discharge the Emperor of that
promise, and to obtain from him an unwilling consent to the Bassa's death, as
the Bishop of Lincoln is said to do for the Earl of Straffords.

Secondly, There was no such scruple of conscience propounded to the Bishops in
the morning conference as the obligation which that promise laid upon him;
there being no other question propounded at that time, but whether he might in
justice pass the Bill of Attainder against the Earl; To which the Bishops gave
their Answer when it was again renewed in the Evening (as appears by the Lord
Primates first Narrative) that if upon the Allegations on either ^ide (at the
hearing whereof the King was present) he did not conceive him guilty of the
crime wherewith he was charged he could not in justice condemn him; and by this
answer it appears that no such scruple as the obligation of that Paper-promise
had been before tendered to the Bishops.

Thirdly, Admitting that the Bishop of Lincoln might be so bold as to make that
overture to the King, forgetting a release of that promise from the Earl of
Strafford, yet was he too careful of himself, too fearful of the Kings
everlasting displeasure, to pursue that fatal project, when he perceived his
Majesty to entertain it with a brow of anger.

Fourthly, Admitting this also, that the Bishop was so thirsty of the Earls
blood, as to neglect his own safety in pursuance of it, yet cannot our
Historian tell us, whether that intimation were sent by the Lieutenant of the
Tower or some other person. And certainly, as the Lieutenant of the Tower was
not so obscure a person, but that he might easily be known from another man; so
is it most improbable that he should go on such an errand without special
order from the King, or that the Earl should admit of such an intimation from
any other, who was like to run on the Bishops bidding, but only from the
Lieutenant himself.

Fifthly, It cannot be believed, that the Earl should fall into such a passion
when the Tale was told him, considering that he knew, that by a Letter sent
unto the King on the Tuesday before, he had set the Kings Conscience at
liberty, most humbly beseeching him for the prevention of such mischief as
might happen by his refusal to pass the Bill. So that the passing of the Bill
could be no News to him, which he had reason to expect, because it was a thing
so much pressed by his enemies, and so humbly and affectionately^ desired by
himself.

Sixthly and finally, Though our Historian make it doubtful whether that
Paper-promise were sent back sealed or unsealed, yet no man can suspect the
Earl to be so imprudent in his actions, so careless of his own honor, and so
untrusty to the King in so great a secret, as to send it open, by which it must
needs come first to the eyes of others before it came unto the Kings. And if it
were not sent unsealed, how came our Author to the knowledge that that paper
contained the Kings promise, as he says it did?

But nothing more betrays the vanity and impossibility of this fiction, then
the circumstance in point of time, in which this promise must be made, which
must needs fall between the passing of the Bill of Attainder and the Kings
conference with the Bishops sent to him for the satisfaction of his Conscience
by the Houses of Parliament. Our Author tells us that at the conference with
the Bis^ops, the King being satisfied in all other scruples, started his last
doubt, If in his Conscience he could not pass the Bill, although the Earl were
guilty; having promised under his hand that his prerogative should save him,
never to pass that Bill, nor to consent to the acting of any thing to take
away his life. By which it needs must follow* if the Bill of Attainder was
first passed (or at the least in probability to be passed) in the House of
Peers, before the King had given any such promise under his hand; for the words
are that the King had given him a promise under his hand, never to pass that
Bill. Now that Bill was not taken into consideration in the House of Lords till
Saturday the 24. of April, in which considering their own danger, and the
little satisfaction they are able to give themselves; M. St John the Kings
Solicitor General was appointed by the House of Commons to open the Bill
before their Lordships, and to give them information in it, which was done upon
Thursday the nine and twentieth of the same Month. On the next day some of the
Lords began to stagger in their resolutions, and to incline unto the Commons;
which moved the King to declare himself before both Houses on the first of May,
That he could not with a good Consci^nce condemn the Earl of High Treason
(which he must needs do if he pass that Bill) and therefore hoped that they
would not expect that from him, which neither fear, nor any other respect
whatsoever should enforce him to. Other assurance then this of not passing the
Bill, as the King never made the Earl, so indeed he could not; the Earl being a
close Prisoner, and so narrowly watched (especially after his Majesty's said
Declaration of the first of May) that no such Paper^promise under the Kings
hand could be sent unto him, if either the King had thought it necessary to
make any such promise, or the Earl to seek it; Adeo mendaciorum natura est, ut
coherere non possint, as Lactantius has it. This point thus cleared, and the
King discharged from making any such promise under his hand, there must some
other way be found out to preserve the Earl by devising some means for his
escape; and to this plot the King must be made a party also, our Author
telling us positively, That

Some Design there was no doubt of delivering the Earl of Strafford by escape;
in order whereunto Sir William Balfour Lieutenant of the Tower must be
commanded by the King to receive one Captain Billingsley with an hundred men to
secure the place.] If so, how durst Balfour refuse to yield obedience to the
Kings command? Marry forfooth, because three good Women of Tower-street,
peeping into the Earls Gallery through the Keyhole, could by the Spectacles of
their eyes, discern him talking with this Captain, and by the Otoco^sticon of
their ears, could hear them talk of some Desig^e for this escape; The Sum of
their Discourse being this, that a Ship of Captain Billingsleys Brothers should
be in readiness, which was fallen down on purpose below in the River, that
they three might be there in twelve hours, that if the Fort were but secured
for three or four Months, there would come aid enough, and that there was
nothing to be thought upon but an escape, and much more broken speech to that
purpose. It seems the women's ears must be very long, and the tongues both of
the Earl and Billingsly must be very loud; or else how could a practice of such
a close and dangerous nature be so plainly heard; Assuredly by the same means
by which the Zealous Brother in More, fields, discovered a dangerous plot
against the Parliament, discoursed of by some who were passing by (but he knows
not who they were) as he was sunning himself under an hedge. Of whom as
creditable an Author as Sir William Balfour, has told me this, That while he
was contriving some Querpo-cut of Church Government, by the help of his
out-lying ears, and the Otocousticon of the Spirit, ^e discovered such a Plot
against the Parliament, that Seldom intends to combat Antiquity, and maintain
it was a Tailors Goose that preserved the Capitol.

But in good earnest, I would fain know of our Author, or of Sir William
Balfour, or of both together, whether the three Good-Wives of Tower-street, did
hear these Passages in discourse, by their eyes or their ears: Not by their
Eyes, for the Eye is not the sense of hearing; nor by their Ears, for it is not
said that they laid their Ears to the Keyhole, but that they peeped through it.

And next I would fain know, whither they peeped or hearkened all at once, or
one after another: If all at once, the Keyhole must be wondrous wide (as
Heavenly-wide as Mopsus mouth in Sir Philip Sidney) which could admit of three
pair of hearing Eyes, or of three single seeing Ears, at one time together: And
if they peeped or hearkened one after another, they must needs have both very
quick Wits, and strong Comprehensions, that could make up so much of a set
Discourse from such broken Speeches, though they within spoke never so loudly.

Letting this pass therefore with a Risum teneatis Amici* we have next a more
serious discovery of this Design, by the Conference which the Earl of Strafford
had with Sir William Balfour, offering him but four days before his death, no
less then Twenty thousand pounds, and a Marriage of his Daughter to Balfours
Son, if he would assent to his Escape: And for this also, as well as for the
tale of the three Good-Wives of Tower-Street, and the command of admitting
Billingsley, with an hundred men, to secure the Tower; we must take Sir
Williams bare word (for he gave it not in upon his Oath) in the House of
Commons: And what the bare word of a Scot, a perfidious Scot, and one that
shortly after took up* Arms against his Master, will amount unto, we all know
too well: Nor was the Earl so ignorant of the hatred which generally the
Scottish Covenanters bare unto him, or of the condition of this man
particularly, as to communicate any such design unto him, had he been so
unprepared for death, as our Author makes him: And so this second Romance of
Sir William Balfour, and the three Women Good-Wives of Tower Street, being sent
after that of the Bishop of Lincoln; we leave the Earl of Straffords business,
and go on with our Author to some other.

Fol. 418. Then follows King Henry the fourth, etc. whom the Lords combined to
depose, for there were living of the House of ^larence Title to precede that of
Mortimer.] That some of the Lords combined to depose this King, I shall easily
grant, though not upon those grounds which our Author mingles with the Speech
of one Mr. Thomas, (a Member of the House of Commons) against the Bishops: For
though the Title of Clarence did precede that of the King, yet was not the
Kings Title derived from Mortimer, the Title of Mortimer and Clarence being one
and the same.

The Title of King Henry the fourth, came by his Father, John Duke of
Lancaster, the fourth Son of King Edward the third; the title of Mortimer came
by Philip the sole Daughter and Heir of Lionel Duke of Clarence, the third son
of the said King Edward, and Wife to Roger Mortimer Earl of March, from whom
the House of York laid their claim to the Diadem.

But our Author is as good at the Pedigree of the House of the Beauforts, as of
that of Mortimer, telling us, That Cardinal Beaufort was not only great Uncle
to King Henry the sixth, but Son to John of Gaunt, and his Brother Cardinal of
York. The first two parts whereof are true, but the last as false: Cardinal
Beaufort, I am sure, had no such Brother as our Author gives him (for so he
must be understood, though the Grammar of the words will not bear so much
sense) namely, a Cardinal of York, unless it were King Henry the fourth, whom
John of Gaunt had by Blanch of Lancaster, his first Wife, John Earl of
Somerset, or Thomas Duke of Excester, which two, together with this Cardinal
Beaufort, he had by his last Wife Katherine Swinfort: More Sons then these,
none of our Heralds or Historians give to John of Gaunt, and therefore no such
Brother as a Cardinal of York to be found out any where for this Cardinal
Beaufort, except only in our Authors Dreams.

Fol. 419. That in Anno 37. of Henry the eighth, Letters Patents were granted
to Laymen, to exercise all manner of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, as the Kings
Officers, not the Bishops.] These are the words of Mr. Thomas in his Invective
against the Bishops before mentioned, and these our Author swallows without
chewing, not searching whether Mr. Thomas had rightly given the sense of that
Act of Parliament or not, but telling his in his gloss upon it, That no Reason
or Justice are to be deduced from that Kings Actions, more like an Atheist then
a Christian, either Ecclesiastical or Temporal: But by the leave of good Mr.
Thomas, there can be no such matter gathered from that Statute of King Henry
the eighth, viz. That Letters Patents were granted to Laymen to exercise all
manner of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, as the Kings Officers, not the Bishops:
Before this time no man could be admitted to the Office of a Chancellor,
Vicar General, Commissary, or Official in any Ecclesiastical Court, or exercise
any Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, except he were a single person, and in Holy
Orders: To take away which curb, and thereby to give the better encouragement
to Students in the Civil Laws, it was Enacted by this Statute, that all such
Ecclesiastical Officers, whether made by the Kings Letters Patents as in the
case of Sir Thomas Cromwell, the Kings Vicar General) or by any Archbishop,
Bishop, or Archdeacon, within this Realm, might from thencforth lawfully
execute and exercise all manner of Jurisdiction, commonly called Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, and all Censures and Coercions appertaining, or in any wise
belonging unto the same, albeit such person or persons be Lay, married or
unmarried, so that they be Doctors of the Civil Law, lawfully created and made
in any University: Out of which premises, if Mr. Thomas can conclude, that such
Laymen, so quallified to exercise Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, were the Kings
Officers, and not the Bishops; he must have some new piece of Sandersons
Logic, which never was read in any of the Universities, in which those lay
persons did receive the Degree of Doctors.

Fol. 419. She was the right Heir apparent to her Brother, and the only right
Issue to the Crown, begotten no donbt in lawful Matrimony.] I dare not take
upon me to dispute of Titles to the Crown, but I dare take upon me to tell our
Author, that there was some doubt made by the most learned men of that time,
whether Queen Mary, (of whom he speaks) were begotten and born in lawful
Marriage: All the Bishops in this Realm, by a public Writing under their Hands
and Seals, declared the Marriage of King Henry the eighth, with Queen Mary's
Mother, to be unlawful; and so did the most eminent Divines in both the
Universities, as also in the Cathedrals, Monasteries, and other Conventual
Bodies within this Realm: The like declared also by several Universities in
France and Italy, under their public Seals: And so it was declared finally by
the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons assembled in ^ full and free
Parliament, in which it was pronounced, That the Marriage between the King and
the Lady Katherine of Spain, the Relict of his Brother, was null and void: to
that it seems there was some doubting in this case, though our Author makes no
doubt of it at all: Nor is it very certain, neither that Queen Mary was the
right Heir apparent to her Brother: For if the Law of the Crown diff^r not from
the Law of the Land in this particular (which I leave unto our learned Lawyers)
she could not be the Heir to her Brother King Edward the sixth, as being born
of another Venture, and consequently his Sister by the half blood only. Now as
he makes no doubt of Queen Mary's Title to the Crown, so he makes the Title of
Queen Elizabeth to be subject unto some dispute, which all the Estates of the
Realm convened in her first Parliament, declared in the way of Recognition, to
be past disputing: But I leave these inviduous Arguments, and proceed to some
other.

Fol. 429. Doctor Wren, Bishop of Ely, and Dean of the Kings Chapel, had been
accused of Misdemeanors in his Diocese, amounting to Treason: And being
committed to the Tower, there he has lain ever since.] But fitst, no
misdemeanors, how great soever, can amount to a Treason, nor ever was it so
adjudged, but only in the Case of the Earl of Strafford.

Secondly, There was no Evidence taken upon Oath to prove any of the
misdemeanors which were charged upon him; our Author confessing, that after he
had been Voted in the House of Commons unworthy and unfit to hold and exercise
any Office or Dignity in Churh or Commonwealth, there was no further speech of
him or his Crimes.

Thirdly, He was not committed to the Tower for any misdemeaners charged
against him by those of his Diocese but for subscribing to the Protestation
with the rest of the Bishops, in the end of D^cember, 1641. who were committed
at the same time also.

Fourthly, He has not remained there ever since his commitment neither, but
was discharged with the other Bishops about the end of February then next
follow^ng, and about three or four Months after brought back again, Anno 1642.
without any Accusation brought against him either then or since.

Fol. 430. And then they adjourned until the twentieth of October, and a
standing Committee of the House of Commons, (consisting of fifty Members)
appointed, during the Recess.] Of this Committee, Mr. John Pim was the
principal Man, without whom, all the rest were Ciphers, of no signification:
And by him there issued out an Order against Innovasions, extended, and
intended also, for taking down the Rails before the Communion Table, levelling
the ground on which the said Table stood, and placing the said Table in the
middle of the Church or Chancell. In which it is to be admired how eagerly this
Order was pursued by the Churchwardens generally in all the Parishes of the
Kingdom; notwithstanding they were told, that the Lords had never given their
consent unto it, and that it would be safest for them to suspend their
proceedings till the Parliament was again assembled. But so mighty was the name
of Pym, that none of them durst refuse Obedience unto his Commands. Nor did the
Lords ever endeavor to retrench this Order, but suffered their Authority and
privilege to be torn from them peece-meal by the House of Commons; as formerly
in imposing the Protestation of the third of May, so now in this great
Alteration in the face of the Church.

Fol. 432. The late Irish Army raised for the Assistance of the Kings Service
against the Scots, was disbanded, and all their arms brought into Dublin.]
This though our Author reckons not amongst the grounds and reasons of the
Irish Rebellion, yet was it really one of the chief encouragements to it. For
when the King was pressed by the Commons in Parliament for the disbanding of that
Army, a Suit was made unto him by the Ambassador of Spain, that he might have
leave to List three or four thousand of them for his Masters Service in the
wars. The like Suit was made also by the Ambassador of France, and the King
readily condescended to their several motions, and gave order in it
accordingly. But the Commons never thinking themselves safe, as long as any of
that Army had a sword in his hand, never left importuning the King (whom they
had then brought to the condition of denying nothing which they asked) till
they had made him eat his word and revoke those Orders to his great dishonor;
Which so exasperated that Army consisting of 10000 Foot and 1500 Horse, that it
was no hard matter for those who had the managing of the Plot to make sure of
them. And then considering, that the Scots by raising of an Army had gained
from the King an Abolition of the Episcopal Order, the re^cinding of his own
and his Fathers Acts, about the reducing of that Church to some Uniformity with
this, and settled their Kirk in such a way as best pleased their own humors:
why might not the Irish Papists hope, that by the help of such an Army ready
raised to their hands, or easily drawn together, though dispersed at that
present, they might obtain the like indulgences and grants for their Religion,
Tantum Religio potuit suadere Malorum, as true on the one side as the other.

Fol. 443. The next Morning the Upper house sent them down to the House of
Commons by the Lord Marshal, Privy Seal, etc. the Lords Goring and Wilmot.] Our
Author speaks this of the first Letter sent from Ireland, touching that
Rebellion, but is mistaken in the last man, whom he makes to be sent down with
these Letters. The Lord Wilmot at that time was no Peer of England, and
therefore had no place in the English Parliaments. The honor of an English
Baron being first conferred on his Son the Lord Henry Wilmot by Letters Patents
bearing date 29. of June, Anno 1643. And as I am sure that the Lord Wilmot was
not of that number, so I am doubtful whether the Lord Marshall were or not.
Our Author not long before tells us, that his Office of Lord High Steward was
like to be begged from him in regard of his Absence, which is to be understood
of his absence out of the Realm; and if he were then absent out of the Realm,
he could not now be present in the House of Peers. Either not absent then, or
not present now, is a thing past questioning.

Fol. 462. The King returns from Scotland, magnificently ^easted by the City of
London.] But while the Citizens at one end of the Town, were at their Hosanna,
some of the Commons at the other end were as busy at their Crucifige, intent
on hammering a Remonstrance, which they entitled, A Remonstrance of the State
of the Kingdom, in which they ripped up all the actions which they had complained
of in the King, and sum'd up all those services which they had done for the
common people. The whole so framed that it served for a pair of Bellows to blow
that fire which afterward flamed out, and consumed the greatest part of the
Kingdom. In the presenting whereof to the King at his coming from Scotland,
though the Lords refused to join with them in it, yet was it presented to the
King by some of their Members, an Order made for the publishing and dispersing
of it, and the Lords brought at last to justify what they had condemned. Nor
did the Citizens continue long in their good Affections: For though they gave
him Rost-meat now, yet they beat him with the Spit in the Christmas following,
of which our Author tells us, saying,

Fol. 471. The loose people of the City, and the Mechanic sort of Prentices
were encouraged by the Ministers and Lecturers, and other Incendiaries in
tumultuous manner, to come down to Westminster, and by the way at Whitehall to
be insolent in words and actions.] And insolent they were indeed both in words
and actions, some of them crying out as they past by* that the King was not fit
to live, others that the Prince would govern better; all of them with one
voice, that they would have no Porters lodge between them and the King* but
would come at him when they pleased, using some other threatening words, as if
they meant to break open the Gates: But so it happened, that some of the
Officers of the Kings late Army being come to the Court, some of them to
receive the Arrears of their pay, and others to know the Kings Commands, before
they returned into the Low Countries, to their several Charges, and observing
the unsufferable Insolences of this Rascal Rabble, sallied upon them with
drawn swords, in which scuffle some of that tumultuous Rabble were slightly
hurt, and others dangerously wounded. To these men being professed Soldiers, was
the Name of Cavaliers first given, communicated afterward to all the Kings
party and Adheren^s though never in Arms, or otherwise appearing for him then
in the Loyalty of their Affections.

Fol. 477. This fell out as many would have it, a l^^^ing case to their
confusion.] How so? Because, says he, at a conference desired by the Lords
with the House of Commons, they were told by the Lord Keeper, that this
Petition and Protestation of the twelve Bishops was extending to the deep
intrenching upon the fundamental privileges and beings of Parliaments, etc.
Upon which Declaration the Bishops were voted to be guilty of High Treason,
committed first to the custody of the black rod, and from thence to the Tower.
But first the Author is to know, that the Lord Keeper at that time was not
altogether so rectus in Curia, as might have been wished, and therefore having
received that Petition and Protestation from the hands of the King (to whom in
the first place it was addressed) he communicated it privately to such of both
Houses as were like to make the worst use of it; and the more to ingratiate
himself with the prevalent party, he aggravated the supposed offense to the
very utmost; And the supposed offense was this, that the Bishops having been
frequently reviled, pursued, and violently kept from the House of Peers,
protested by a Writing under their hands, That they durst not sit or Vote in
the House of Peers, until his Majesty should secure them from all affronts,
indignities and dangers; and therefore that all Laws, Orders, Votes,
Resolutions, and Determinations should be reputed null and of none effect,
which in their absence had passed or should pass in the said most Honorable
House, during the time of their forced and violent absence. Which Petition and
Protestation being (...) Records of Parliament, was thought to be a good (...)
of their place and right suffrage in the House of (...) ^^^withstanding the
Subsequent Act of Parliament* (...) deprived them of it. But how that
Protestation could amount to Treason (in the newest construction of the word)
was so impossible to be proved, that they who (...) so voted it, having served
their turns by the imprisonment of the Bishops for depriving them of their
place and vote in Parliament, and divesting the King of his power and
prerogative in pressing Soldiers for his wars, at once released them of the
imp^i^onment and accusation under which they suffered. Add hereunto that when
the Members of the House of Commons were seized upon and kept in custody by the
Officers of the Army, under the command of Sir Thomas Fairfax on the sixth and
seventh days of December, 1647. they made a Protestation to this effect, viz.
that all Acts and Ordinances, Votes and proceedings of the House of Commons
made after the said sixth and seventh of December, or after to be made, during
their restraint and forcible seclusion from the House and the continuance of
the Armies force upon it, should be no way obligatory, but void and null to all
^ntents and purposes whatsoever. Which protestation though it touched the
Officers of the Army to the very quick, yet had they so much modesty as not to
count it for high Treason. And when the Members which were left remaining in
that House for the present turn, had scanned over every particular of that
protestation, they only ventured so far as to Vote it to be scandalous and
seditious, as tending to destroy the present visible Government; and that all
that had a hand in it were unworthy of trust; for which consult Mercurius
Pragmaticus, Numb. 38. By which we see that which was counted Treason in the
Bishops, was not conceived to be such in these Members of the House of Commons;
No more then far worse crimes then those which (...) for Treason in the Earl
of Strafford, could (...) to be Treason in the Case of the Five (...) Lord of
Kimbolton. So true is that which Horace (...) Book De Art Poetica, viz.
Coecilio Plautoq^e dabit (...) Virgilio Varioque, which cannot be englished
more ^^^nificantly then by this old Proverb, that is to say, that (...) better
steal a Horse then others look on.

Fol. 478. The City taking heart and hands with the House of Commons, summon a
Common Council, where they debate their jealousies and fears.] The constitution
of the Common Council of the City, was of great concernment at this time, and
therefore it behoved the Commons (in order to the prosecution of their design)
that it should be new molded, most of the old ones laid aside, and creatures
of their own elected into their places. And by their Emissaries and Agents,
they prevailed so far, that on S. Thomas day, when the Common-Councell-men were
to be chosen for every Ward, in stead of those grave, sober, and substantial
men, which before they had, they chose a company of factious and indigent
persons, known only by their disaffections to Monarchical and Episcopal
Government. And whereas by the ancient custom of the City, the
Common-Councell-men then elected were not admitted unto Council till the
Monday after Twelfthday, when their Elections were returned and enrolled by the
Town Clerk; these men well knowing how much the Design of the Commons did
depend upon them, would not stay so long. And therefore when the King had
appointed a Common Council to be called on the last day of December for the
prevention of such tumults as had happened a few days before, they thrust
themselves in amongst the rest. The like they did, when the King gave a meeting
to a Common Council, appointed by him on the fifth of January, wherein he
acquainted them with the reason of his proceedings against the five impeached
Members, desiring that they might not have any retreat or harbor within the
City. At what time Fowke one of these Common Council men, as being the
Bell-weather to the rest, made a saucy and insolent speech unto the King,
concerning fears and ^^^lousies, touching the Members accused, the Privileges
of Parliament, and that they might not be tried but in a Parliamentary way. To
which, though the King returned a very mild and gracious Answer, yet the
Rabble being once inflamed by their seditious Orator, would not so be
satisfied, but at his coming out of the Hall, and as he past in his Coach
through the Streets, there was nothing ecchoed in his ears but Privileges of
Parliament, Privileges of Parliament. By the help and vote of these men also
was that Petition framed* and delivered to the King on the morrow after, which
follows immediately in our Author. And by the help of these men did they extort
the Militia of the City out of the hands of the Mayor and Aldermen, and put it
into the power of inferior persons, such as the Faction in the House of
Commons might best confide in. And for their Iealousies and Fears which were to
be debated in the Common Council, they were of no less nature then the
blowing up of the Thames to drown the City, or the beating it down about their
ears by Col. Lunsford from the Tower, or the sacking it by the King and the
Cavaliers. Horrible Gulleries, but such as were generally dispersed, and no
less generally believed by fools, women and children.

Fol. 482. Upon information of Troops of Horse to be gathered by the Lord Digby
and Colonel Lunsford at Kingston, where the County Magazine is lodged, they
order that the Sheriffs of the several Counties, etc. shall suppress all
unlawful Assemblies. etc.] Most true it is, that such an order was made by the
House of Commons, the better to amaze the people, and keep them in continual
Fears and Iealousies of the Kings proceedings. But nothing is more false, then
that any Troops of Horse had been raised by the Lord Digby or Colonel Lunsford,
or that they had any such design as to seize the Magazine at Kingston; which
they might easily have done, had they been so minded, before it could have been
prevented. But the truth is, that the King not knowing what the London Tumults
might amount unto, commanded the Officers of the late Army beforementioned, to
attend his pleasure, till he saw some issue of the practices which were held
against him. On which command they followed him to Hampton Court, January the
tenth, 1641. at his Removal from Whitehall, for avoiding such fresh
Insolences, as the people in their triumphant conducting of the accused
Members to the Houses of Parliament, might have put upon him. These Officers
now known by the Name of Cavaliers, were lodged at Kingston, and upon them the
Lord Digby, accompanied with Col. Lun^^ord in a Coach with six Horses, intended
to bestow a visit; no Troops of Horse being raised by him, nor any other
appearance of Horse at all, except those six only. His Majesty's Declaration of
the 12. of August, has so cleared this business, that I marvel our Author
could let it pass by without Observation.

Fol. 485. And so the breach between the King and Parliament was stitcht up.]
That is to say, that great breach of pretended privilege, in the Kings coming
to the House of Commons to demand the five impeached Members. And yet this
breach was not stitcht up now, nor in a long time after. For fol. 495. we find
the Parliament again at their five Members, insisted on in the preamble to the
Ordinance about the Militia, fol. 498. and pressed in their Petition delivered to
the King at Royston, fol. 501. and finally made one of the Propositions
presented to the King at Oxford, fol. 599. So far was this breach from being
stitcht up in the end of January, Anno 1641. that it was not made up in the
January following, at what time those Propositions were brought to Oxford. From
the five Members pass we to the Militia, of which he tells us, That

Fol. 496. The Parliament having now the Militia, the security of the Tower and
City of London, Trained Bands of the Kingdom, and all the Forces out of the
Kings hands.] Our Author places this immediately after the Kings coming back
from Dover, whither he went with the Queen, and the Princess Mary, there
shipped for Holland; at what time the Parliament had neither the command of the
Tower, nor of the Trained Bands in the Country, or of any Forces whatsoever
but their City-guards. For fol. 498. we find his Majesty sticking at it,
especially as to the Militia of London, or of Towns incorporate, and after fol.
502. when they petitioned him about it, being then at New Market (and not as
our Author says at Royston) he answered more resolutely then before, that he
would not part with it for a minute, no, not unto his Wife and Children. After
which time, finding the King too well resolved not to part with such a
principal flower of his prerogative, they past an Ordinance for entituling
themselves unto it, and did accordingly make use of it in the following war
against the King. Nor was the Petition any thing the better welcome for the men
that brought it, viz. the Earls of Pembroke and Holland, both of them sworn
Servants to him, both of them of his Privy Council, both in great favor with
him when he was in Prosperity, and both per^idiously forsaking him when his
Fortunes changed unto the worse. Particularly our Author tells us of the Earl
of Holland, That

Fol. 501. He was raised and created to become his most secret Counselor, the
most intimate in affection, the first of his Bedchamber, his constant
companion in all his Sports and Recreations.] Yet notwithstanding all these
favors, this Earl as much promoted the Puritan affairs of the Court, but
secretly and underhand, as his Brother the Earl of Warwick more openly and
professedly did in the Country. Of which thus Viscount Conway in a Letter to
the Archbishop of Canterbury, dated at Newcastle, June 8. 1640. I assure my
self (says he) that there is not any less your friend then my Lord of
Holland, and I believe that at all times you ought to take heed to your self
with him, etc. My Lord of Warwick is the temporal head of the Puritans, and my
Lord of Holland is their spiritual Head, or rather the one is their visible
Head, the other their invisible Head: Peradventure not because he means to do
either good or hurt, but because he thinks it is a Gallantry to be the
principal pillar on which a whole Caball must rely.

Fol. 511. And taking only a guard for his person of his Domestics and
Neighbor Gentry, went in person the 23. of April, but contrary to his
expectation the Gates were shut upon him, the Bridges drawn up, and Hotham from
the Walls flatly denies him entrance.] Of this Affront ( Hotham being first
proclaimed Traitor under the Walls of the Town) the King complains to the Houses
of Parliament, but he had more reason to complain of some about him. For in his
Answer to their Petitition about the Magazine of Hull, delivered to him in the
beginning of April, he had let them know, how confident he was that place
(whatsoever discourse there was of private or public Instructions to the
contrary) should be speedily given up, if he should require it: Husband^
Collect. page 139.
Being thus forewarned, it was no wonder that they were forearm'd also against
his Intentions, or that he was ^epulst by Hotham at his coming thither: For
which good Service, as Hotham was highly magnified for the present, so he had
his Wages not long after: For being suspected to hold intelligence with the
Marquess of Newcastle, he was knocked down on that very place on which he stood
when he refused the King admittance into the Town, sent Prisoner unto London,
together with his eldest Son, and there both beheaded* the Son confessing, that
he had deserved that untimely death for his Disloyalty to the King; the Father
whining out his good affections to the Parliament, and still expecting that
reprieve which was never intended.

Fol. 512. All which (that is to say, the Kings going to Hull) being by the
King a high breach of Privilege, and violation of Parlia^ent, they think fit
to clear, by voting it and Hotham justif^ea, and send a Committee of Lords and
Commons to reside there, for the better securing Hull and him, April. 28.] The
breach of privilege objected was, the Kings endeavor to possess himself of the
Town of Hull, (his own Town) and to get into his hands a Magazine of Arms and
Ammunition which he had bought with his own money: To hinder which, and to
justify Hotham, the Lord Fairfax, Sir Philip Stapleton, Sir Henry Cholmn^y,
and Sir Hugh Cholmnly, were sent by the House of Commons as a standing
Committee to reside at York: And had they come thither on no other business
then what was openly pretended, it had been such an extent of Privilege
(making the House of Commons as wide as the Kingdom) as never was challenged
before: But they were sent on another errand, that is to say, to be as Spies on
all the Kings Actions, to undermine all his Proceedings, and to insinuate into
the people, that all their hopes of Peace and happiness, depended on their
adhering to the present Parliament: And they applied themselves to their
instructions, with such open confidence, that the King had not more meetings
with the Gentry of that Country, in his Palace called the Manor House, then
they had with the Yeomanry and Freeholders, in the great Hall of the Deanery:
All which, the King suffered very strangely, and thereby robbed himself of the
opportunity of raising an Army in that County, with which he might have marched
to London, took the Hen sitting on her nest before she had hatched, and
possibly prevented all those Calamities which after followed.

To omit many less mistakes, as Sheffield for Whitfield, fol. 306. and Kit the
Tailor, for Ket the Tanner, fol. 540. Our Author gives unto Sir William Neve,
the title of Garter-Herald, which was more then ever the King bestowed upon
him; he having at that time no other title then Norroy the third King, Sir John
Buroughs being then Garter-Herald, and Sir Henry St. George the second King of
Arms, by the name of Clarenceux, to whom Sir William Neve succeeded in that
Office, at such time as he the said Sir Henry succeeded Sir John Buroughs (who
dyed sometime after this at Oxford) in the place of Garter: But we must now
return to matters of greater consequence; and first, we encounter with the
Battle of Edgehill, of which our Author tells us, That

Fol. 586. The question will be who had the better.] But the Parliament put it
out of question, by sending the Earl of Pembroke, the Earl of Holland, the Lord
Say, the Lord Wharton, and Mr. Strode, on the 27 of October, to declare to the
Lord Major, Aldermen, and Citizens, the greatness and certainty of their
Victory, how God had owned his own work, their Speeches being eight in all,
harping upon this String, That as the Cause had been undertaken with their
Purses and with their Persons, so they would crown the work, by following it
with the same zeal, love, care, nobleness, and Alacrity: And the better to keep
up the Hearts of the People, the Commons voted to their General a present of
5000 l* which he kindly accepted, to the no small commendation of his modesty,
in taking so small a reward for so great a Victory, or of their Bounty, in
giving him so great a sum for being vanquished: And yet this was not all the
Honor which they did him neither, a Declaration being past by both Houses of
Parliament, on the 11 of November then next following, Concerning the late
valorous and acceptable Service of his Excellency Robert Earl of Essex, to
remain upon Record in both Houses, for a mark of Honor to his Person, Name, and
Family, and for a Monument of his singular virtue to posterity: In which they
seem to imitate the Roman Senate, in the magnificent reception which they gave
to Terentius Varro, after his great defeat in the Battle of Cannae, the People
being commanded to go forth to meet him, and the Senate giving him public
thanks, Quod de salute Reipub. non desperasset, because he despaired not of the
safety of the Commonwealth: Which whether it were an Argument of their
Gallantry, as Livy tells us, or rather of their fear, as Sir Walter Raleigh
is of opinion, I dispute not now? Certain I am, that by this Artifice they
preserved their Reputation with the People of the City of Rome, which otherwise
might have been apt to mutiny, and set open their Gates to the Victor. And to
say the truth, the care of the Earl of Essex deserved all this, though his
Fortune did not: For having lost the Battle, he hasted by speedy marches
thither, to secure that City and the Parliament, which otherwise would not have
been able to preserve themselves.

But on the contrary, our Author lays down many solid and judicious Arguments,
to prove that the King had the better of it, as no doubt he had: And for a
further proof hereof, we cannot have a better evidence then an Order of the
Lords and Commons, issued on the 24 of October, being the next day after the
Fight, in which all the Citizens of London and Westminster, etc. were commanded
to shut up their Shops, and put themselves into a readiness to defend the City
and the Parliament: Which Order they had never made, if their fear of the Kings
sudden coming upon them with his Conquering Army, before their broken Forces
could reach thither, had not put them to it: And though the King might have
come sooner then he did, the taking in of Banbury, Oxford and Reading, (being
all possessed in the name of the Parliament) spending much of his time; yet we
find him on the 12 of day November, beating up their Quarters at Brentford,
where they had lodged two of their best Regiments to stop him in his march
toward London; some other of their Forces being placed at Kingston, Acton, and
other Villages adjoining: In the success of which Fight, our Author tells us,
That

Fol. 594. The King took 500 Prisoners, etc. and so unfought with, marched away
to Oatlands, Reading, and so to Oxford.]

By this we are given to understand, that the King retreated toward Oxford, but
we are not told the reasons of it, it being improbable that he should march so
far as Brentford, in his way toward Land. without some thoughts of going
further. Accordingly it was so resolved, (if my intelligence and memory do not
fail me) and order given for the advancing of the Army on the morning after,
which being ready to be put in Execution, News came, that at a place called
Turnham-Green, not far from Brentford, both the Remainders of the Army under
the command of the Earl of Essex, and the Auxiliaries of London, under the
conduct of the Earl of Warwick, were in readiness to stop his march: And
thereupon it was consulted, whether the King should give the charge, or that it
might be thought enough in point of Honor, to have gone so far.

On the one side it was alleged, that his Army was in good heart, by reason of
their good success the day before, that the Parliament Forces consisted for the
most part of raw and unexperienced Soldiers, who had never seen a War before*
and that if this bar were once put by, his way would be open unto London,
without any resistance.

On the other side it was Objected, That the King had no other Army then this,
that there was nothing more uncertain then the fortune of a Battle, and that if
this Army were once broken, it would be impossible for him to raise another;
which last consideration turned the Scale, that Counsel being thought most fit
to be followed, which was judged most safe, id gloriosius quod tutissimum, said
the old Historian.

And as for the five hundred Prisoners which our Author speaks of, they were
first moved to enter into the Kings pay, and that being generally refused, they
were dismissed with life and liberty, having first taken their Corporal Oaths not
to serve against him: But the Houses of Parliament, being loath to lose so many
good men, appointed Mr. Stephen Marshal to call them together, and to absolve
them from that Oath; which he did with so much confidence and Authority, that
the Pope himself could not have done it better: The King was scarce settled in
Oxford, the fittest place for his Court and Counsel to reside in, When

Fol. 597. The noble Lord Aubigny, Brother to the Duke of Richmond, dyed, and
was buried at Oxford.] This Lord Aubigny, was the second Son of Esme Duke of
Lenox, and Earl of March, succeeding his Father both in that Title and Estate,
entailed originally on the second Son of the House of Lenox: he received his
deaths wound at Edgehill, but dyed, and was solemnly interred at Oxford, on
the 13 of January then next following; the first, but not the last of that
Illustrious Family, which lost his life in his Kings Service. For after this,
in the year 1644. the Lord John Stewart lost his life in the Battle of
Cheriton, near Alresford in the county of South-Hampton: And in the year 1645.
the Lord Bernard Stewart, (newly created E. of Litchfield) went the same way in
the fight near C^ester: The Duke of Richmond, the constant follower of the King
in all his Fortunes, never enjoying himself after the death of his Master,
languishing and pining from time to time, till at length extremity of Grief
cast him into a Fever, and that Fever cast him into his Grave: A rare example
of a constant and invincible Loyalty, no parallel to be found unto it in the
Histories of the ancient or latter Ages: Philip de ^omines, tells us, of a
Noble Family, in Flanders that generally they lost their lives in the Wars and
Service of their Prince: And we find in our own Chronicles, that Edmond Duke
of Summerset lost his life in the first Battle in St. Albans, Duke Henry
following him, taken in the Battle of Hexam, and so beheaded; a second Duke
Edmond, and the Lord John of Somerset, going the same way in the Battle near
Te^xbury, all of them fighting in the behalf of King Henry the sixth, and the
House of Lancaster: But then they heapt not Funeral upon Funeral in so short a
time, as the first three Brothers of this House; in which, as those of the
House of Somerset did ^all short of them, so those of that Noble House in
Flanders, fell short of the House of Somerset.

Fol. 601. In this time the Queen in Holland now Imbarques for England, the
sixteenth of February, and with contrary winds and foul Weather, was forced
back again, and thereafter with much hazard anchored at Burlington Bay the
nineteenth, and Lands at the Key the two and twentieth.] In this our Author
tells the truth, but not the whole truth, the Queen enduring a worse Tempest on
the Shore, then she did upon the Sea. Concerning which, the Queen thus writes
unto the King, viz. The next night after we came unto Burlington, four of the
Parliament Ships arrived without being perceived by us, and about five of the
clock in the Morning, they began to ply us so fast with their Ordnance, that it
made us all (...) rise out of our Beds, and to leave the Village, (at least the
Women) one of the Ships did me the favor to flank upon the House where I lay,
and before I was out of my Bed, the Cannon Bullets whistled so loud about me,
that all the Company pressed me earnestly to go (...) of the House, their
Cannon having totally beaten down all the neighboring Houses, and two Cannon
Bullets falling from the top to the bottom of the House where I was: So that
clothed (as I could be) I went on foot some little distance out of the Town
under the shelter of a ditch (like that of New Market) whither before I could
get; the Canon-Bullets fell thick about us, and a Sergeant was killed within
twenty paces of me. We in the end gained the Ditch, and stayed there two hours,
whilst their Canon played all the time upon us; the Bullets flew for the most
part over our head^, some few only grazing on the Ditch, covered us with Earth:
Nor had they thus given over that disloyal violence, if the ebbing of the Sea,
and some threatenings from the Admiral of Holland, who brought her over, had not
sent them going.

Fol. 603. The next day the Prince marches to Gloucester, his hasty Summons
startled them at these strange turnings.] So says our Author, but he has no
Author for what he says. The Prince marched not the next day to Gloucester,
nor in many months after, having business enough to do at Cirencester where
he was; upon the taking of which Town, the Soldiers Garrisoned for the
Parliament in the Castles of Barkly, Sudely, and the Town of Malmsbury deserted
those places, which presently the Prince possessed and made good for the King:
Which done, he called before them all the Gentry of Cotswold, and such as lived
upon the banks of Severn betwixt Gloucester and Bristol; who being now freed
from those Garrisons which before had awed them, were easily persuaded by him to
raise a Monthly contribution of 4000. pound toward the defense of the Kings
person, their Laws and Liberties. It was indeed generally believed, that if he
had marched immediately to Gloucester, while the terror of sacking Cirencester
fell first upon them, the Soldiers there would have quitted the place before
he had come half way unto it. the affrightment was so general, and their haste
so great, that Massey had much ado to persuade the Townsmen to keep their
Houses, and the Soldiers to stand upon their Guard (as I have often heard from
some of good quality in that City) till the Scouts which he sent out to
discover the Motions of the Prince were returned again: But whatsoever they
feared at Gloucester, the Prince had no reason to march toward it, his Army
being too small, and utterly unfurnisht of Canon and other necessaries for the
attempting of a place of such a large circumference, so well manned and
populous as that City was; Contented therefore with that honor which he had
got in the gaining of Cirencester, and feeling the Kings affairs in that
Country, he thought it a point of higher wisdom to return toward Oxford,
then hazard all again by attempting Gloucester.

Fol. 604. The Scots Army marched Southwards, and crossed Tine, March 13.] If
so, it must be in a dream, not in Action; the Scots not entering into England
till December following, when the loss of Bristol, Exceter, and generally of
all the West compelled the Houses of Parliament, to tempt the Scots to a second
invasion of the Kingdom. And this appears most clearly by our Author himself,
who tells us, fol. 615. 'That Sir William A^min was sent to Edinburgh from the
Parliament to hasten the Scots Army hither, having first sworn to the Solemn
League and Covenant, each to other. Before which Agreement as to the taking of
the Solemn League and Covenant by all the Subjects of both Kingdoms, and the
payment of Advance-Money beforehand to the Sum of an hundred thousand pounds,
the Scots resolved not to stir a foot in their way toward England. They knew
in what necessity their dear Brethren in England stood of their Assistance, and
therefore thought it good to make ^ay while the Sun shi^^d, and husband that
necessity to their best Advantage; So that there was no Marching over Tine on
the 13. of March Anno 164^. where our (...) it, we must look for it in the Year
next following, if we mean to find it. And finding them there, we shall find
this of them.

Fol. 669. (...) (...) with a party of Horse to assault them in such places
where they lay most open to advantage, not doubting but to give a good account
of his undertakings: In all which (...) and desires, he is said to have been
crossed by General (...); an old experienced Soldier, but a Scot by Nation,
whom hi^ Majesty had recommended to the Marquess of Newcastle as a fit man to
be consulted with in all his Enterprises, and he withal took such a fancy to
the man, that he was guided wholly by him in all his Actions.

Had this man been employed in the Kings own Army, he might have done as good
Service as any other what^oever^ But being in this Army to serve against the
Scots, (...) own dear Contrymen, he is said to have discouraged and
dissuaded all Attempts which were offered to be made against them, giving them
thereby opportunity of gaining ground upon the English, till the Marquess his
retreat toward York: And those affections he is reported to have carried also
with him in the Battle of Marston-Moor, near York, where he is said to have
charged so faintly, that he not only lost all th^se Advantages which the
Prince had gotten, but gave the Enemy my opportunity to make head again, to the
loss of all; which brings into my mind the politic Conduct of Eumenes, once
one of Alexanders meanest Captains, but afterward a great Commander in
Asia-minor: He had an Army compounded of the Greek and Barbarous Nations, and
being to fight with Craterus, Alexanders great Favorite whilst he lived, who
had an Army made up of the like Ingredients* he placed (...) Asiatick Soldiers
against the (...).

Fol. 604. (...)] Our Author speaks this of the Divines as^embled at
Westm^^ster, by an O^din. of the Lords and Commons, to be advised withal in
matters which concerned Religion, for the establishing whereof, there was much
pretended by them, but little done: These men, besides their four (...) per
diem, were either gratified with Lectures in and about London, or (...) in the
Universities, or the best Sequestered Benefices in the Country; holding their
own preferment still, without sticking at such Pluralities in themselves, which
before they had condemned in others: But though they did little work for their
Wages, yet they did mo^e then our Author speaks of. Ce^tain I am, that they
rose not without (...) their intended Directory, published in Print, and
Authorized by an Ordinance of both Houses of Parliament: The ^itle of the Book
runs thus, viz. A Directory for the public Worship of God, throughout the
three Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland, etc. Printed at London for
the Company of Stationers: The Ordinance bears Da^e on the third of January,
Anno, 1644. and is thus Entitled, viz. An Ordinance of Parliament for the
taking away of the Book of Common Pra^er, and for the establishing and putting
in Execution of the Directory for the public Worship of God: By which we see
that their intended Directory was not only finished, but also Authorized and
published before they ro^e.

Though our Author speaking again of these Divines, fol. 974. and in the year
1647. tells us, That the Prince Elector was (...) by the Commons to sit
amongst them, for his (...) in the Composure of the Directory, which will come
out one day: The Directory was come out before, and if the Prince (...) sat not
with them till 1647. as our Author (...) it, he must needs come too late to
give them any assistance in that Composure.

(...), F^elding was questioned and committed at Oxford* and by a Council of
War sentenced to (...) his Head, etc.] But this I look upon as a Court Pageant,
only to entertain the People, and take off their edge against the man; who
certainly was a person of too much Honor, Va^or and Fidelity, to betray the
Town, if he could possibly have held it: Although the King knew well enough,
and knew withal how unable he was at that time to give him any ^it supplies, or
to ^aise the ^iege, though it con^ern'd him for the reputat^on of his Cause, to
march in Person unto Reading, and show his willingness to relieve it: But so
great a fear fell on all those that were in Oxford, and such a general Report
there was of Fieldings Treachery, that to appease their murmu^ings, and compose
their thoughts, Fielding was called in question, and condemned to die, a
Scaffold set up in the Castle Green for his Execution, and a day appointed on
which he was to be Beheaded: Before which time, the Earl of Essex not
advancing, and the ^it being over, the Execution was ^eprieved till a further
time, and Fielding by degrees recovered as much estimation amongst those at
Ox^ord, as formerly he had attained to in the Court or Camp: And to say truth,
the fear at Oxford was not (...), when the News came of the taking of Re^^ing,
the Town being ^o unfortified on the North side of it, the King so (...) at
that time of necessary Ammunition to make good the place, that it could not
possibly have been de^ended, i^ (...) had marched directly toward it, and (...)

Fol. 615. And brought to bed at Exceter of a Daughter the 16. of June, named
Henrietta Maria] Not so, but Henrietta only, Maria is added by our Author, who
was none of the Gossips, and therefore should not take upon him to name the
child. But such Misnomers are so frequent in him, as might make a sufficient
Errata at the end of his History, were there none else in it.

Fol. 622. And so a New one was framed, engraven thereon the picture of the
House of Commons and Members sitting; Reversed the Arms of England and Ireland,
^rosse and Harp pale.^ If so, this new Seal could not so properly be called the
Great Seal of England, but the great Seal of the House of Commons represented
in it, who are so far from being the High Court of Parliament (though were they
such they could have no Authority for a Great Seal of their own) that they are
not so much as Members of the Great Council. Most true it is, that the
prevailing party in both Houses of Parliament conceived it necessary to have a
Great Seal lying by them, as well for the dispatch of such Commissions as they
well to speed in in reference to the present War, as for the sealing of such
Decrees and processes as were to be issued out of the Chancery, which they
still kept open. But when it came to be debated in the House of Commons, it was
alleged by some sober men, that the counterfeiting of the Great Seal was made
High Treason by the Statute of the 25. of King Edward the third. To which it
was very learnedly replied by Sergeant Wild, that they intended not to
counterf^t the Old Great Seal, but to make a new one. On which ridiculous
Resolution of this Learned Sergeant (whose great Ruff had as much Law in it as
his little head) the design went forward; but not with any such alteration in
the Impresse as our Author speaks of. The Impresse of this New Seal was the
same with that in the old, the Feathers or Princes Arms being only added in a
void place of it, to Show the difference between them; that so their Followers
might disti^guish be^ween such Commands as came from his Majesty, and such as
came immediately from themselves in his Majesty's Name. But whereas our Author
speaks in some words foregoing of a Legislative Power which he conceives to be
in the Parliament, he shows himself therein to be no better a Lawyer then M.
Ser^cant. The Legislative power was only in the King himself, though legally he
was restrained in the exercise of it to the consent of the Lords and Commons
assembled in Parliament.

Fol. 623. lin. l^. (...), the one a Cripple, the other somewhat like a
Lunatic.] Our Author speaks this of the Children of M. John Hambden, one of
the five Members so much talked of ( the principal Member of the five, as our
Author calls him) but on what ground he speaks it, as I do not know, ^o neither
is it worth enquiry. And though I might leave the Children of M. Hambden under
this reproach, as an undoubted sign of Gods judgments on him, for being a
principal Incendiary in that fire which for a long time consumed the Kingdom;
yet so far do I prefer truth before private interesse, that I shall do him
that right in his post^^ity, which our Author, either out of ignorance,
easiness of belief or malice, has been pleased to deny him. And therefore the
Reader is to know that the surviving children of that Gentleman, are not only
of an erect and comely stature, but that they have in them all the abilities of
wit and judgment, wherewith their Father was endued, though governed with a
more moderate spirit, and not so troublesomely active in affairs of state.

Fol. 626. The five and twentieth of August the Earls of Bedford and Holland
went from London toward Oxford, etc. That the said two Ea^ls came to Oxford to
tender their s^bmission to the King, is a Truth undoubted (sooner then our
Author speaks of) but that they were received with favor and forgiveness,
may be very well questioned; not as in reference to forgiveness (which
considering the Kings good nature may be ^asily granted) but in relation unto
Favor. A point wherein our Author has confuted himself, telling us, fol.
639. of the Earl of Holland, that he had but slender Reception, though he put
himself in a posture of Arms with the King in the Field. And (...) this slender
Reception he complained in a Letter to the Lo^d Ierm^n after his departure,
wherein he did relate, that the King did not show so much countenance to him as
he had seen him do at the same time to some C^mmon Soldiers who had fled from
the Enemy to come to him. There came to Oxford also at or about the same time
the Earl of Clare, and found the like cold entertainment. It was conceived, and
by some reported, that if the King had showed good countenance to these three
Lords, most of the rest would have left the Parliament, and repaired unto him.
But the King considered well enough, that not so much the sense of their duty,
as his successes in the West, had brought them thither; and that if five or six
only of the Lords should be left in Westminster, those five or six only would
be thought sufficient to constitute a House* of Peers (as many times there were
no more present) for the passing of any Ordinance, which the Commons should be
pleased to commend unto them.

Fol. 630. And now was the King drawn down before the Town, attended by Prince
Charles, and the Duke of York, Prince Rupert, and General Ruthen, etc.] For
the Kings sitting down before Gloucester, and laying a formal Siege unto it,
there was given this reason, viz. that by the taking of this Town all Wales
would be preserved in the Kings Obedience entirely united unto E^gland, and
free passage given, on all occasions and distresses to assist each other. And
so far the design was not to be discommended. But on the contrary, it was said,
that the Kings unhappy sitting down before that Town, lost him the opportunity
of marching directly toward London, and ^^attering the Faction in the
Parliament; both which by reason of the affrightments which fell upon them by
the taking of Bristol and other places in the West, were ready to give up
themselves, even to desperation. And so much was affirmed by the Earl of
Holland when he was at Oxford, assuring Sir John Heydon Lieutenant of the
Ordinance (from whose mouth I have it) that the prevailing Members of both
Houses were upon the point of trussing up of Bag and Baggage, but that they
hoped (as some of them told him) that N. N. one of great nearness to the King,
an especial confident of theirs, would prevail with him at the last to lay
siege to Gloucester, and not to leave that Town at his back to infest the
Country.

Fol. 633. Two Spies sent out, long since returned from Warwick, giving them
News of the March of the Earl of Essex, but was not assured, he lodging then
under a Cloud of disgrace, being beaten out of the West.] But certainly the
Earl of Essex could not be under a cloud at that time, for being beaten out of
the West; his preparing to raise the Siege of Gloucester, happening in the end
of August, Anno 1643. and his being beaten in the West, not happening till the
beginning of September, Anno 1644. But we must think the Houses were endued
with the spirit of prophecy, and frowned upon the man beforehand, for that
which was to happen to him a Twelve month after. Nor was it any fault of his
that Bristol, Exceter, and so many places of importance, had been lost in the
West; he having no Forces able to act any thing against the King, till the
Pulpit-men in London preached him up an A^my for the Relief of Gloucester. An
Army which came time enough to do the work (the siege being very slackly
followed) and having done the work, were as desirous to return back to their
own Houses. But see what happened by the way.

Fol. 636. From Cirencester he marches to Chilleton, the Cavaliers facing them
on Mavarn Hills.] If so, then First, The Earl of Essex must be the Ianus of
this Age, and be presumed to have two faces, with the one looking toward
London, for which he was upon his march, with the other on Malvarn Hills, where
the Cavaliers faced him.

And secondly, We must think the Cavaliers to be very Cowards that durst not
face him (supposing still that he had two faces) at a nearer distance then from
Malvarn Hills, distant from Cirencester thirty miles at the least, and how far
from Chilleton, let them tell me who have searched the Maps. But though he makes
the Cavaliers to keep out of danger, yet he brings the Queen near enough unto
it, whom we find at Newle^y Fight, fol. 648. placed by him with the King on
the top of an Hill to behold the battle. But herein his intelligence failed
him, the Queen being at that time safe in Oxford, and the King venturing his
most sacred person with the rest of his Army. Mercurius Aulicus one of his best
Authors for a great part of the War, could have told him so, had he consulted
him in this as in other places.

Fol. 639. The Irish Forces coming under the command of Sir Michael Ernly, an
experienced Soldier, and landing in Wales, etc.] The Forces which our Author
speaks of, were not Irish but English, sent over in the beginning of the War to
defend the South-parts of Ireland against the Rebels. But being forced (for the
Reasons mentioned in our Author) to come to a cessation with them, four
thousand of them put themselves into a body under the command of Sir Michael
Ernly abovenamed, and came over into England to serve the King against the
Houses of Parliament, by which they had been so unhandsomely handled. Had they
been kept together in a Body, and served under their old known Commanders,
there is no question to be made, but that they might have much advanced his
Majesty's Service. But Prince Rupert who was all in all in the Council of War,
caused them to be divided from one another, distributed them into several
Regiments of his Majesty's Armies, and placed them under new Commanders, which
gave the Soldiers great displeasure, and their Offi^ers more, rendering their
Service less honorable to themselves, and of small advantage to the King. Of
these Officers Col. Monk was one, descended from a Daughter of Arthur
Plantaginet, Vicount Lisle, the Na^urall Son of King Edward the fourth, who
afterward falling off to the Houses of Parliament, much advanced their
affairs, defeating a great Fleet of the Hollanders, Anno 1653. and at this day
Commander in chief over the English Forces in Scotland.

Fol. 661. In all the Western Countries the Parliament had not a Soldier, but
at Plymouth and Pool.^ What think we then of Lime a Sea-Town in Dorsetshire,
and consequently in the West? Had there not been some Soldiers in it of the
Parliament party, and good Soldiers too, it could not have held out so long
against Prince M^urice; who wasted there the greatest part of the Cornish Army,
which had served so fortunately under the Command of Sir Raph Hopton, and yet
could not take it. But Lime was a Sea-Town, as before was said, and Prince
Maurice had only a Land^Army, which rendered the Design not more impossible then
imprudent; the besieging of a Haven-Town without a Navy to prevent all relief
by Sea, being like the hedging in of Cucko, or the drowning of a quick E^le by
the Wise men of Gotham.

Fol. 662. The Marquess of Newcastle for the King went into Darbyshire, where
he listed fifteen hundred Volunteers, assisted by Sir John Gell his Interest
thereabouts, and Sir John Harpers.] Worse and worse still: The Earl of
Newcastle assisted by Sir John Gell were brave News indeed. That Sir John
Harper might do his best in it, I shall easily grant. But Sir John Gell was all
along a principal stickler for the Houses of Parliament, and spent his whole
stock of Interesse in that Country to advance their Service. In the pursuit
whereof he was observed to be one of their first Commanders, which issued out
Warrants to the Tenants of the Lords and Gentry, who did adhere unto the King,
to bring in their rents, and be responsall for them for the time to come to the
Committee at Darby, one of which Warrants Dated in March 1642. was brought to
Oxford, and is this that follows.

To the Constable of Acmanton.
WHereas these unna^ur all Wars at this present are s^mented and maintained by
`Papists and Malignants, to the utter undoing of many honest men, and the ruin
of the whole Commonwealth; for the better preventing of which misery, and to do
the best we can to put a speedy end to these distractions according to the
trust reposed in us by the Ordinance of Parliament, we think sit to command
you; that presently upon receipt hereof, you give notice to all the Tenants
within your Constablery named in a Schedule herewi^h sent you, that
henceforward they pay all their Ren^s due to any of those persons, or to any
other that contribute or bear Arms against the Parliament, to the Committee
here at Darby, or to such other person or persons as the said Committee shall
nominate. And we all promise that such of those Tenants who show their
forwardness to bring in their Rents to the Committee at Darby by our Lady day
next, or within four days aft^rwards, shall have a discharge against their
Landlords of the whole rent, and shall have a fourth part aba^ed them. And
those Tenants that are refractory, and come not willingly to us, shall not only
be forced to pay their whole Rents, but also shall be p^occeded against as
malignant persons, and such as endeavor the continuance of these troubles.
Given under our hands March 1642. The Names of the Persons contained in the
Schedule abovementioned amou^t to the number of 46. viz. the Earl of
Shrewsbury, the Earl of Devonshire, the Earl of New Castle, (whom our Author
makes so much befriended by Sir John Gell) the Earl of Chesterfield, the Lord
Maltravers, Sir John Harper of Caulk, and Sir John Harper of Swarstone, Sir
William Savill, Sir John Fitz Herbert of Norbury, Sir Edward Mosely, etc. All
men of very great Estates, and therefore like to send in the more grist to the
Mill at Darby. So far did Sir John Gell act for the Houses of Parliament.


And he continued in those actings till the end of the War: After which,
falling into some suspicion to have changed his Affections, he was committed to
the Tower, in no small danger of his life, and came not off but with the loss
of former Actings.

Fol. 712. This, no question, caused their General Essex early the next day to
quit his glorious Command, and in a small Boat to shift away by Water.] If that
were it which caused him to shift away in a small Boat, he must needs play the
part of a Cowardly Soldier, whilst every one of the Soldiers stood ready to act
the part of a brave Commander: And therefore it is probable that there was
somewhat more in it then a Consideration of the straits he was driven unto by
the King, which he might easily have prevented, by keeping himself in the more
open Country of Devonshire, where he might have had Elbow room enough on both
sides, and a Country rich enough to furnish him with all sorts of Provisions:
His Army was every way equal to the Kings, if not superior, he drawing after
him no fewer then 50 Brass Pieces of Ord^ances, and 700 Carriages; and it
appears by the number of Arms delivered up by Composition, amounting to 8000 in
all, that his Foot could not consist of less then ten or twelve thousand: And
for his Horse, no fewer then 2500 made a clear escape* So that he might have
kept the Field, and put the King to it in a Battle, if there had not been
somewhat more in it then our Author speaks of. It was therefore thought by some
knowing men which understood the state of Affairs, that knowing his Horse were
gone off without any danger, and that his Foot might save themselves by a
Composition, he was willing to keep the Seas even as before was intimated: For
partly being discouraged from pursuing the War by his first success at
Edgehill, and partly coming to know more of the Intentions of such as managed
the design, then had been first imparted to him, he beg^n to grow more cold in
carrying things on unto the utmost, then before he was. Upon which ground, as
he had neglected the opportunity of marching directly toward Oxford, when he
had removed the Kings Forces out of Reading; so on the defeat of Waller at
Lands-Down, he writ unto the Houses to send Petitions to the King for Peace, as
appears by this History, fol. 625. For which coldness of his, so plainly
manifested, it was not only moved by Vassal in the House of Commons, that he
should lay down his Command, but many jeers were put upon him, and some
infamous Pictures made of him to his great dishonor: Considering therefore,
that on the defeat of Prince Rupert at Marston-Moor, all the North parts were
like to be regained to the Houses of Parliament; he was willing to let the King
remain as absolute in the West, as they were like to be in the North, which
since he could not do with Honor, by harkening to the Kings fair proffer,
seconded by a Letter from all the chief Officers of his Army, he cast himself
into such necessities, as might give him some color to shift for himself, and
leave his Foot to some Agreement with the King: No way but this, (as he
conceived) to bring the leading Members of both Houses unto such a Temper, as
might induce them to meet the King half way in the Road to peace; and if this
could not do it, the coming on of Winter might perhaps cool them into some
conditions which the King might be as willing to hearken to as they to offer.
This I remember to be the sum of such Discourses as were made at that time in
and about the Court, by men of the best knowledge and understanding in the
state of businesses; but whether they hit upon the right string or not, I am
not able to affirm. This I am able to aff^rm, that cur Author is mistaken in
telling us that the Earl of Essex did quit his glorious Command upon this
occasion. For afterward we find him in his glorious Command at the fight near
Newbery, and he continued in it till the Spring next following; when by the
Ordinance of Self-denial, and the new modelling of the Army under the Command
of Sir Thom^s Fairfax he was quitted of it. All that he did at this time was to
q^it his Army, for which the Houses of Parliament cried quits with him, as
before is said.

Fol. 714. The King regains Monmouth, and returns to Oxford, the 23 of
November.] That Monmouth was regained for the King, is undoubtedly true, but
that it was regained by the King, is undoubtedly false. Our Author in some
lines before, had left him at Hungerford, in the County of Berks, and now he
brings him through the air to the taking of Monmouth: But the truth is, that
Monmouth having been betrayed to Massey, then Governor of Gloucester, by Major
Kyrl, a Garrison of 600 Soldiers was put into it; who having a Design to
surprise Chepstow, left the Town so naked, that the Lord Charles Somerset (one
of the younger Sons of the Marquess of Worcester) taking with him 150 Horse from
Ragland-Castle, and assisted by some Foot from the Neighboring Garrisons which
held for the King, fell on the Town on Tuesday morning, the 19 of November,
Anno 1644. and makes himself master of the place, before our brave Adventurers
at Chepstow heard any thing of it.

Fol. 719. Next Morning, July 2. the Prince advances after them, resolving to
give them Battle by Noon, etc.] The Battle hear meant, is that of Marston-Moor
near York, between Prince Rupert for the King, the Earls of Manchester and
Leven, (better known by the name of Colonel Lesly) and the Lord Ferdinando
Fairfax, commanding over their several Forces fot the Houses of Parliament.

Concerning which, our Author tells us, That at first Prince Rupert got the
Ground, that those in the main Battle were so hard put to it, that they ^ell on
the Reserve, of Scots which were behind them; that the right Wing of the
Enemies Horse being as hard put to it by the Princes left Wing, committed the
like Disorder on the Lord Fairfax his Foot, and the Scotch Reserves, and were
pursued very fiercely by their Conquerors* and finally, that no Horse being
sent to make good the Ground, which those who followed the Chase had left, the
broken Army of the Enemy rallied again, and got the better of the day* But the
Gentlemen of York (...) who lived n^ar the place, tell us more then this, viz.,
That Prince Rup^rt had not only got ground at the first, and (...) the right
Wing of the Enemies Horse, but so disordered the main Battle, that he postest
himself of the Canon, the three Generals ret^^^ing out of the field with more
haste then Honor. And so the News came flying to Oxford, reported in diverse
places by such of the ^nemies Soldiers as had fled out of the field, and at
Oxford it was entertained with Bells and Bone-^^res, and the shooting off of
all the Ordnance about the Town.

But Prince Rupert better knowing how to get then pursue Advantages, and his
^oldiers busy upon Pillage, gave opportunity to Colonel Cromwell, who commanded
the Earl of Manchesters Horse, and who only had made a fair retreat in the
heat of the fight, to put new life into the Battle, and having put the broken
Foot into some good order, first gave a check unto the Prince, and after
pressing hard upon him, tu^n'd the whole fortune of the Day: For which good
service, Cromwell is cried up by his party to be^ the Savior of three Kingdoms,
of which the Scots who had done very well that Day, and bore the greatest part
of the brunt, did afterward very much complain in a Pamphlet of theirs, which
they call (...) Man^^est: How faintly General King carried himself in this
Battle, has been shown already, and what became afterward of Prince Rupert,
how he squandered away his great Body of Horse, the surrendry of York, and what
e^^e happened in that Country after this Fight, is referred to our Author. I
only add that I have heard from some Gentlemen of that County, who had
command to bu^y the dead, that they found no fewer then the Bodies of Eight
thousand Men, w^^ch had been killed in that Fight, the great^st number which
were slain in any one Battle in (...)

Fol. 802. To Blackington- House, where Colonel Windebank kept a Garrison for
the King.] But by his leave, Windebank never kept a Garrison at Blechington
(not Blackington) House, but only was commanded to remain there with a party
of Horse, and a few Foot-Souldiers, the better to keep open the Markets till
Woodstock House was fortified and made fit to be garrisoned. So far was
Blechington House from being held like a Garrison, that it had not so much about
it as a wooden Pale. And when Major Windebank (the second Son of Sir Francis
Windebank) had cut down two Trees to make Pallisadoes for defense of the place,
upon complaint made by the Lady Coghil to Col. William Leg then Governor of
Oxford, he was commanded to restore them. Which notwithstanding he was called
before a Court of War, for giving up an unde^enced place, which was impossible
to be made good; and partly by the eager pursuit of Col. Leg (whose
Contributions were diminished by Windebanks quartering in that House) and some
back friend which he and his Father had at Court, he was condemned to be shot
to death (his Fathers Services and Sufferings being q^ite forgotten) which
death he suffered on Saturday the 1. of May, with much Christian courage.

Fol. 719. And having leave to go to the King, they cause him etc. But the King
knew their minds not to engage for him, and so they returned.] It may be
collected from these words that this message was a matter of Lip^ business
only, the Ambassadors not having instructions to engage their Superiors for
him, nor the King any opinion of the reality of their intentions toward him.
But in the process of the business we shall find it otherwise.

For first, Our Author tells us, that they were both (...) K^ights and Barons
by the King, fol. 804. Not both made Knights and Barons, I am sure of that, but
the one of them a Baron, and the other a Knight Baronet, that is to say, John
de Remsworth of U^recht, des^^^ded from the Noble Family De Read in Cleveland,
created (...) by Letters Patents bearing date the 24. of March Anno 1644. and
William de Boreel created Baronet on the 22. of March in the same year.

And secondly, This appears more plainly by a Letter of Complaint sent from our
New States in England to the old States of Holland; In which they tell them how
their Ministers had abused their Trust to their prejudice* showing themselves
rather interessed persons then public Agents, no^ satisfied to reproach them
to their faces, but to glory in it. Certainly neither had the King conferred
those Honors on the Ambassadors, nor the Houses complained so much against
them; if they had been sent hither to no other end but to settle Trade, and to
see how the Game went, which our Author makes the only reason of their coming.
And though the King obtained not such helps from the ^tates of the Netherlands,
as their Ambassadors had engaged for, yet so much he effected by their
mediation, that the Houses had not such Assistances from those parts as they
had before, a matter of no small advantage to the Kings affairs.

Fol. 806. Whilst Rupert and Maurice with the Hors^e, and some se^ect Foot,
fetched off the King from Oxford.] By which words the Reader cannot but conclude
that Oxford was in no small danger, and the Kings person in as much, which must
necess^tate the two Princes with all their Horse, and a select number of Foot
to fetch him off. But at that time there was no Enemy near the one, nor any
danger appearing toward the other. The King was at that time in a gallant
Condition, and had drawn his Soldiers out of their Winter Garrisons, ready to
march into the field; attending only till the other part of his Army which was
employed about Glocestershire was in readiness also. News whereof being
brought unto him, he went out of Oxford, accompanied by the sa^d two Princes in
a more glorious and magnificent manner then ever fo^merly. The precise time
where of being noted by George Wherton a profes^ed As^^ologer, he erected a
Scheme according to the Rules of Art. And finding the Houses well disposed, and
the Aspects of the Planets and Constellations to be very favorable, he
prognosticated that this expedition should prove very fortunate to the King,
his Successes glorious, and his return to Oxford as magnificent as h^ going
out. Which being published in Print* and disproved by the sad events which
followed, gave great occasion unto Lilly, Culpepper, and others of that faculty
to deride him for it; Men every way as faulty in that kind themselves, as he
had been unfortunate in his predictions. Witness those terrible presagings
which they gave us of the Eclipse, happening in the end of March 1652. to the
great terror of of poor people, but without any visible effects. But above all
things, witness that Observation of M. Culpepper, in the end of his Dotages on
the Months of February foregoing, in which he signifies, that if the Emperor
died that month, we must remember who told us of it. But for all his great
insight into the Stars, the Emperor neither died that month nor in six years
after. Thus Augur ridet Augurem, as the Proverb is: the people in the mean time
being deceived and abused by both whilst they make sport with one another.

Gloucester Association in much want received three hundred and forty
Auxili^ries from the Grand Garrison, Newport pannell* o^t of Buckinghamshire.]
No such grand Garrison neither, as to be worthy of that name. A Garrison had been
formed there for the King, at the request of Sir Lewis Dives, the better to
secure his Rents and Tenants in Bedfordshire* But b^ing found to be too far off
to receive Relief, if any distress should fall upon it, the Ordnance and
Soldiers were removed to ^owcester, seven miles from Northampton, to restrain
the ^nsolencies of that Garrison, but at the opening of the S^^rng brought back
to Oxford, and mingled with the rest of the Army. On which deserting of
Newport-Pagnell by the Kings Kings Soldiers, ^ Garrison was put into it for the
Houses of Parliament, till the Kings Soldiers were removed to Towcester, to
counter-ballance which, this Garrison had been made at Newport, of which there
being then no longer use, and Gloucester standing in need of supply, the
Ordnance being drawn off, and the Works slighted, the men were sent away to
Gloucester* And these were the three hundred and forty Auxiliaries which were
sent from the grand Garrison of Newport Pagnel, the Town being small, and
consequently not capable of receiving any great number of Soldiers, or to give
those Soldiers the name of so grand a Garrison.

Fol. 809. About five a Clock in the morning, June 13. the King drew off from
Borough Hill toward Harborough and Pomfrait.^ He might as well have said that
the King drew toward (...) and Orkney in the North of Scotland, as that he drew
^oward Harborough and Pomfrait, both lying Northward from the place of his
remove. For though it would be thought by any ordinary Reader who is not well
studied in the Maps, that Harborough and Pomfrait toward which the King is
said to remove, did lie very near to one another* yet Harborough and Pomfrait
are at least eighty miles asunder; the one a Town of Leicestershire remarkable
for a great Fair of Horse and ^attle, the other a Town of great Note in
Yorkshire, renowned for a fair and ancient Castle; which being anciently part
of the possessions of the Lacies Earls of Lincoln, by Marriage and Capitulation
descended on the Earls of Lancaster, and is now part of that great Duchy.

Fol. 811. Naseby the fatal battle to the King and his party.^ Fatal indeed
whether we look upon the Antecedents or the Consequents of it. For if we look
on the Antecedents, there could be nothing but some unavoidable fatality in it,
that the King having taken Leices^er, and thereby put his affairs into a more
hopeful way (as he writ to the Queen) then they had been in at any time since
the Rebellion; should come back to Daventry, and there spend eight or ten days
without doing any thing. If it be said, that he returned back upon the noise
that Oxford was besieged by Fairfax, his staying so long at Daventry, was not
the way to raise that siege. Nor was the Town in any such danger (but that the
Ladies wanted fresh Butter for their Pease) as to bring him back from the
pursuit of his Successes; and thereby to give time to Cromwell, without whom
Fairfax could do little to come with 600 fresh Horse to the rest of the Army.
And yet being come, they had not made so fast after the King as to resolve on
^ighting with him when they did, if they had not Intercepted a Letter the night
before, sent from Col. ^oring to the King, in which he signified that he was
upon his march toward him, desiring his Majesty to keep at a distance, and not
to engage with the Enemy till he came to him. For which intelligence I am
beholding to Hugh Peter's, who in one of his Thanksgiving Sermons has informed
me in it. Upon the reading of this Letter, it was concluded to fall on with the
first opportunity, before these new supplies should be added to the rest of the
Kings Forces. And it was as fatal in the Consequents as it had been in the
Antecedents; neither the King no^ his party being able after that time to make
any considerable opposition, but losing battle after battle, and place after
place, till there was nothing left to lose but their Lives or Liberties.

Ibid. The Kings Coaches, his Cabinet of Letters and Pa^pers.] In the loss of
his Coaches there was no great matter, nor so much in the loss of his Cabinet
of Letters and Papers, as his Enemies did conceive it was: A Cabinet* in which
were many Letters and Paper, most of them written to the Queen; but they,
together with the rest, published in Print by Order of the Houses of Parliament.
The Design was to render the King odious in the sight of the People, by giving
license to the Queen to promise some favors for the Catholic party here in
England, if she could obtain any succor for him from the Catholics there: But
they lost more by it then they got.

For first, They drew a general obloquy on themselves, by publishing the secret
passages betwixt Man and Wife, contrary to the rules of Humanity and common
honesty.

And secondly, They gave the People such a representation of the Kings
Abilities, his Piety, Prudence, and deep foresight into Affairs, as raised him
to an high degree of Estimation with all sorts of men; as Mr. Pryn had done
before of the Archbishop of Canterbury, in printing the Breviat of his Life,
though intended otherwise. An error which the Houses were soon sensible of,
and thereupon gave Order that in the publishing of the great Volume of
Ordinances, etc. by Edward Husbands, in which were many passages also betwixt
them and the King, these intercepted Letters should be left out; though the
Letters in the Lord Digbies Cabinet which was taken at Sherburn were printed
there among the rest. So wise are men upon the post fact, when it is too late.

Fol. 826. But the same night at the very noise of the Kings coming from
Worcester, they prepared for flight, and the next morning not a Scot to be
seen, felt, or heard of; they were all fled.] The Scots had lain before
Hereford from the 30. of July to the first of September, and had so well
entrencht themselves that there was no fear of being beaten up by the King, who
since the fatal blow at Naseby had never been the Master of such Forces as to
give Battle to the Scots, and much less to assault them in their Trenches. So
that the noise of the coming of the Kings Forces from Worcester, might be the
pretense, but it could not be the real cause of his hasty raising of the
Siege. Lesly (unworthily made Earl of Leven at the Kings being in Sco^land, An.
1641.) had received Letter after Letter out of Scotland, touching the successes
of Montrosse. And now there comes the lamentable News of the taking of
Edinburg, and consequently the loss of all, if he hasted not toward their
Relief. On the receiving of which Letters he was willing to take the noise of
the Kings coming from Worcester, with all his Forces for an occasion to be
gone; and being gone marched directly Northwards till he came near enough to
Scotland to dispatch David Lesly with all his Horse, and without any noise to
set upon the Marquess of Montrosse at the first opportunity; By reason of
whose sudden coming, and coming with no less then 6000 Horse, the Noble
Marquess by the treachery of the Earls of Ro^burgh and Traquair (who were
acquainted with the plot) the Marquess was almost surprised, and the greatest
part of his Forces routed, himself escaping with the rest, and making an
orderly ma^ch to the North-parts of Scotland; where he continued in some
strength till he was commanded by the King to lay down his Commission and
dis^and his Forces. I add here only by the way, that the Sco^s had pretty well
scoured the Country who came in but with two thousand Horse, and had now
raised them to six thousand, besides such as they had lost in the course of the
War.

Fol. 828. Nor would they budg^ from the North parts, though they are called
Southwards for the Kingdoms security and service.] But just before we found the
Scots at the Siege of Hereford, a City beyond the Severn, on the borders of
Wales; and here we find them so fast r^ve^ed in the Northern ^ounties, that
they would not budge a foot Southwards for the Kingdoms safety Reconcile these
differences he that can, for my part I dare not undertake it. The like
irreconcileablenesse I find within few lines after, in which he tel^eth us*
that being entreated to march to the Siege of N^wark, they sta^ed not long
there, but marched in a pet Northwa^ds to Newcastle, where they stuck till they
got the King into their clutches, sold him, and so went home again.

But first, If the Scots marched toward Newark (whether upon entreaty or not
is not much material) they must needs budge Southward; the whole County of
York, and part of Nottinghamshire lying between Newark and the Scots Quarters.

Secondly, The Scots did not go from Newark in such a pet as to leave the
Siege, for aftewards we find fol. 892. that L^sly only went away in a p^t, but
left his Army there to attend the continuance of the Siege till the Town was
taken.

^

^

^

Secondly, he did not force the Town by firing one of the ^^ates, but had it
surrendered to him by Composition; the Capitulations being made on the Sunday
night, and his Sould^er entering into it on the Monday morning.

Thirdly, the Soldiers of the Garrison were not forced by him into the Castle,
who had time enough all that night to retire into it* or otherwise to leave the
Town, as all the Horse and many of the Foot had leave to do.

And fourthly, there was no such difficulty in the business, a^ to bring God
upon the Stage in the taking either of the Town or Castle, which the Governor
(Sir William Ogle wa^ resolved beforehand not to hold out long. He had bragged
(...) times, that he had so stored that Castle with Victuals, Arme^ and
Ammunition, that he durst bid defiance for six (...) to all the Armies in
England. But when the news ^am^ o^ the taking of (...) and Bridgewa^er, he
changed his (...) af^rming frequently that it could be no dishonor to (...)
affirmed expressly (being desired to show the truth in this particular) that
there were about 80. Women in it at that time when the House was stormed. So
that our Author in this point was extremely out, as much as the difference can
amount to between a Company of 80. and one single person. The words to be
explained are these, viz. a Godly Divine Protestant, for protection mixed with
some Popish Priests Profession; Which words have neither sense nor Grammar, as
they be before us, and therefore must be taught to speak English before the
ordinary Reader can understand them. And if the words were put into proper and
Grammatical English, we must read them thus, viz. A Godly Protestant Divine
mixed for protection with some Priests of the Popish profession. Which being the
Grammar of the words, will give a Logical dispute about the party to whom the
Character is given. I think our Author would not have it understood of D.
Griffiths Daughter (who though a very virtuous and godly Gentlewoman) cannot be
called a Godly Protestant Divine, in the common notion of the phrase; and yet
the current of the words does import no less. For it is said, that there was
but one woman amongst so many men: D Griffiths Daughter a Godly Protestant
Divine, etc. Nor can it properly be understood of D. Griffith, though a Godly
Protestant Divine, the following words depending on those before D. Griffiths
Daughter, and not relating literally and grammatically to the Doctor himself.
Had the tenor of the words run thus, The Daughter of D. Griffith a Godly
Protestant Divine, the adjunct of a Go^ly Protestant Divine must have related
to the Father, but as they he before us it relates to the daughter; With what
propriety of speech or sense let the Reader judge, and make himself as merry at
it as he pleases.

Fol. 836. For Digby was sometimes Secretary of State.] And so he was at this
time also, when he was discomfited at Sherburn in Yorkshire, when he lost that
Cabinet and those Letters which our Author speaks of. He had been made
principal Secretary of Estate in the place of the Lord Falkland, about the
beginning of October, Anno 1643. And continued in that office till his
Majesty's death; though by reason of the Kings restraint and his own enforced
absence, he was not able to act any thing in it, as neither could M. Secretary
Nicholas; who notwithstanding neither lost the Office nor name of Secretary. I
trow Sir Francis Walsingham, or Sir Robert Cec^l were not the less Secretaries
of Estare to Queen Elizabeth because she employed them sometimes in foreign
Embassies; nor was Digby sometimes only, but at that time Secretary of E^tate,
when he took upon him the Command of a Body of Horse in his Masters Service.

Fol. 871. And the West being cleared Fairfax returns back again to the Siege
of Bristol.] The west so far from being cleared, that except Bridgewater in
Somersetshire, and Sherburn- Castle in Dorsetshire, little or nothing was done
in order to it. The Counties of Devon and Cornwall still remained untoucht, in
which the Prince had not only a considerable Army under brave Commanders, but
many strong Towns and Garrisons well stored with Soldiers; so as at this siege
of Bristol it was conceived that two great Errors were committed, the first by
Fairfax in sitting down before a Town in which were so many able men well armed
and commanded by the General of his Majesty's Forces; and leaving an Army at
his back, which might have charged him in the Rear, while those within sallied
out upon him, and assailed him in the very front.

The second Error was in Rupe^t, in that being General of the Kings Forces,
he shut himself up within a Town, when it had been more proper for him to have
been abroad, gathering together the Kings old Soldiers, and raising new from
several places, by which he might have put himself into a Condition to raise
the Siege. But Fairfax knew well what he did, making no doubt to have the Town
delivered to him before the Prince could be informed of the danger in which it
was. For the delivery of which City so strongly fortified, so well manned, so
furnished with all sorts of necessary provisions, Prince Rupert incurred the
suspicion of Disloyalty both with the King and all his party. He had before
sent certain Letters to the King, in which he pressed him (somewhat beyond good
manners) to come to a speedy conclusion with his Parliament, without relating
either to point of honor or conscience; with which the King seemed more
displeased as appears by his answer to him, fol. 841. then was agreeable unto
his ordinary temper. And so much was the King startled when he heard of the
giving up of that City with the Fort and Castle, and that too in so short a
time, that he posted away a Messenger to the Lords at Oxford to displace Col.
Leg (a well known Creature of Prince Ruperts) from the Government of that City
and Garrison, and to put it into the hands of Sir Thomas Glenham; which was
accordingly done, and done unto the great contentment of all the Kings party,
except that Prince and his Dependents. But Leg was sweetened not long after by
being made one of the Grooms of his Majesty's Bedchamber, a place of less
command, but of greater trust.

Fol. 891. And now the Parliament consider of a Term or Title^ to be given to
the Commissioners entrusted with their Great Seal, and are to be called
Conservators of the Commonwealth of England.] Not so, with reference either to
the time or the thing it self.

For first, The Commissioners of the Great Seal were never called the
Conservators fo the Commonwealth of England.

And Secondly, If they ever had been called so, it was not now, that is to say,
when the Kings Seals were broken in the House of Peers, which was not long
after Midsummer, in the year 1646. But the truth is, that on the 30 of January
1648. being the day of the Kings most deplorable death, the Commons caused an
Act or Order to be printed, in which it was declared that from thenceforth in
stead of the Kings Name in all Commissions, Decrees, Processes, and
Indictments, the ^^tle of Custodes Libertatis Angliae, or the Keepers of the
Liberties of England, as it was afterward englished (when all Legal
Instruments were ordered to be made up in the English-Tongue) should be always
used. But who these Keepers of the Liberties were, was a thing much questioned,
some thought the Commissioners for the great Seal were intended by it, whom our
Author by a mistake of the Title calls here the Conservators of the
Commonwealth; others conceived that it related to the Council of State, but
neither rightly: For the truth is, that there were never any such men to whom
this Title was appliable in one sense or other* it being only a Second Notion,
like Genus and Species in the Schools, a new devised term of State-craft to
express that trust which never was invested in the persons of any men, either
more or fewer.

Fol. 892. ^o then the eldest Son, and the youngest Daughter, are with the Qu^^n
in France; the two Dukes of York and Gloucester, with the Princess Elizabeth at
St. James 's: The Prince in the Went with his Army.^ This is more strange then
all the rest, that the Kings eldest Son should be with his Mother in France,
and yet that the Prince at the same time should be with his Army in the West of
England: I always thought, till I saw so good Authority to the contrary, that
the Prince and the Kings eldest Son had been but one person: But finding it
otherwise resolved, I would fain know which of the Kings Son^ is the Prince, if
the eldest be not: It cannot be the second, or third, for they are here called
both only by the name of Dukes, and made distinct persons from the Prince: And
therefore we must needs believe that the Kings eldest Son, Christened by the
name of Charls-Iames, who dyed at Gre^nwich, almost as soon as he was born,
Anno 1629. was raised up from the dead by some honest French Conjurer, to keep
company with the young Princess Henrietta, who might converse with him as a
Play-Fellow, without any terror, as not being able to distinguish him from a
Baby of Clouts; (...) That he, and all that did adhere unto him, should be safe
in their Persons, Honors and^ ^onsciences, in the Scottish Army, and that they
would really and effectually join with him, and with such as would come in unto
him and join with them for his preservation, and should employ their Armies and
Forces to assist him to his Kingdom^, in the recovery of his ^ust Rights: But
on the contrary, these juggling and perfidious (...), declare in a Letter to
their Commissioners at London, by them to be communicated to the Houses of
Parliament, that there had been no Treaty nor (apitulation betwixt his M^^esty
and them, nor any in their names, etc. On the receipt of which Letters, the
Houses Order him to be sent to Warwick Castle* But Les^ly, who had been used to
buying and selling in the time of his Pedl^ry, was loath to lose the benefit of
so rich a Commodity; and thereupon removes him in such post-haste, that on the
eighth of May we find him at Southwel, and at Newcastle on the tenth, places
above an hundred Miles distant from one another; and he resolved beforehand
how to dispose of him when he had him there: ^o Scotland he never meant to
carry him, though some hopes were given of it at the first; for not only Lesly
himself, but the rest of the Covenanters in the Army, were loath to admit of any
Competitor in the Government of that Kingdom, which they had engrossed who^y to
themselves; but the (...) in an Assembly of theirs, declare expressly against
his coming to live amongst them, as appears, fol* (...) So that there was no
other way left to dispose of his person, but to ^ell him to the Houses of
Parliament, though at the first they made (...) of it, and would be thought to
stand upon Terms or Honor* The Ea^l of Lowdon, who loved to hear himself speak
more ^hen any man living, in some Spe^ches made before ^he Houses, protested
strongly against the d^livery of their Kings Person into their Power, (...)
what in (...) ^^amy would lie upon them and the whole Nation, ^f (...) should
to (...). But this was but a co^y of their Countenance only, (...) ^^vice to
raise the Mar^e^, and make is ^uch money (...) as they could. At last they came
to this Agreement, that for the sum of Two hundred thousand pounds, they should
deliver him to such Commissioners as the Houses should Authorize to receive him
of them, which was done accordingly. For

Fol. 939. The Commissioners for receiving the Person of the King, came to
Newcastle, June 22. etc.] Not on the 22 of June, I am sure of that, the
Commodity to be bought and sold was of greater value, and the Scots too cunning
to part with it, till they had raised the price of it as high as they could:
The driving of this Bargain took up all the time betwixt the Kings being
carried to Newcastle, and the middle of the Winter then next following, so that
the King might be delivered to these Commissioners (that is to say, from Prison
to Prison) on the 22 day of January, but of June he could not.

And here it will not be amiss to consider what loss or benefit redounded to
those Merchants which traded in the buying and selling of this precious
Commodity.

And first, The Scots not long before their breaking out against their King,
had in the Court two Lords High Stewards, and two Grooms of the Stool
successively one after another: And at their taking up of Arms, they had a
Master of the Horse, a Captain of the Guard, a Keeper of the privy Purse, seven
Grooms of eight, in his Majesty's Bedchamber, and an equal number, at the
least, of Gentlemen Ushers, Quarter-Waiters, Cup-Bearers, Carvers, Sewers, and
other Officers attending daily at the Table: I speak not here of those which
had places in the Stables, or below the Stairs; or of the Servants of those
Lords and Gentlemen, which either lived about the Court, or had Offices in it:
All which together, made up so considerable a number, that the Court might well
be called an Academy of the Scots Nation, in which so many of all sorts had
their Breeding, Maintenance, and Preferment: Abroad they had a Lieutenant of
the Tower, a Fortress of the most consequence in all the Kingdom; and a
Master-^unner of the Navy, an Office of as great a trust as the other; and more
of those Monopolies, Suits, and Patents, which were conceived to be most
grievous to the Subject, then all the English of the Court. In the Church they
had two Deanries, diverse Prebendaries, and so many Excclesiastical Benefices,
as equalled all the Revenue of the Kirk of Scotland: All which they lost, like
Aesops Dog catching after a shadow: For what else were those empty hopes of
engrossing to themselves all the Bishops Lands, and participating equally with
both Houses in the Government of this Kingdom (which drew them into England the
second time) but an airy shadow? And yet by catching at that shadow, they lost
all those Advantages which before they had, both in Court and Country; and
that not only for the present, but in all probability for the times to come.
The Presbyterians laid their Heads and Hands together to embroil the Realm, out
of a confidence, that having alienated the greatest part of the Tribes from the
House of David, they might advance the golden Calves fo their Presbyteries in
Dan and Bethel, and all other places whatsoever within this Land: And for the
maintenance thereof, they had devoured in conceit all Chapter Lands, and
parcelled them amongst themselves into Augmentations: But no sooner had they
driven this Bargain, but a Vote passed for selling those Lands, toward the
payment of the Debts of the Commonwealth. Nor have they lived to see their dear
Presbytery settled, or their Lay Elders entertained in any one Parish of the
Kingdom; for the advancement whereof, the Scots were first encouraged to begin
at home, and afterward to pursue their work by invading England.

Others there were who labored for nothng more then the raising of a New
Commonwealth out of the Ruins of the old Monarchy, which Plot had been a
carrying on from the first coming of this King to the Crown, till they had
gotten him into their hands; these being like the Husbandmen in Saint Matthews
Gospel, who said among themselves, this is the Heir* come let us kill him, and
let us seize on his Inheritance, Matthew. 21. 38. A Commonwealth which they had
so modelled in their Brains, that neither Sir Thomas Moors Vtopia, nor the Lord
Verulams new Atlantis, nor Plato's Platform, nor any of the old Idaeas, were
equal to it; the Honors and Offices whereof they had distributed amongst
themselves, and their own Dependents: And in pursuance of this project, they
had no sooner brought the King to the end they aimed at, but they pass an Act,
(for so they called it) prohibiting the Proclaiming of any Person to be King of
England, etc. That done, they passed another for the abolishing the Kingly
Office in England, etc. dated the 17 of March, One thousand six hundred forty
eight. A third, for declaring and a constituting the People of England to be a
Commonwealth and Free State, dated May 19. 1649 which last they solemnly
proclaimed by their Heralds and Sergeants, in the most frequented parts of
London, and made themselves a new Great Seal, with the Arms and Impress of
their new Commonwealth engraven on it. And yet these men that had the purse of
all the Kingdom at command, and Armies raised for defense of their Authority,
within the space of six years were turned out of all: And this was done so
easily, and with so little noise, that the loss of that exorbitant Power did
not cost so much as a broken Head, or a Bloody Nose, in purchasing whereof,
they had wasted so many Millions of Treasure, and more then an Hundred thousand
Lives: So that all reckonings being cast up, it will appear, that all were
losers by the Bargain, as it happens commonly to such men as love to traffic
in the buying and selling of prohibited Commodities, and thereby make
themselves obnoxious to all such forfeitures, as the severity of the Laws, and
the King Displeasure* shall impose upon them.

How he was carried by those Commissioners to Holdenby^House, and from thence
by a party of Horse to the Headquarters of the Army, our Author has informed
us in the course of this History* But being there, he tells us, that he was
permitted to give a meeting to his Children.

Fol. 995. And accordingly they met at Maidstone, where they dined together.
Well boul'd Vincent! as our Author knows who says in another place: He gives
us the Copy of a Letter in the very same fol. from the King to the Duke of
York, dated at Casam, July 4. 1647. in which he declares his hope that the Duke
might be permitted with his Brother and Sister, to come to some place betwixt
that and London, where he might see them; adding withal, that rather then h^
might not see them, he would be content they should come to some convenient
place to dine, and go back at night: So then, the place for this joyful meeting
must be some convenient Town or other betwixt Casam and London: But Casam is a
Village of Berkshire, distant about thirty Miles from London, Westward; and
Maidstone, one of the chief Town^ of Kent, is distant about thirty Miles from
London, toward the East; so that London may be truly said to be in the middle
betwixt Maidstone and Casam, but Maidstone by no means to be in any position
betwixt Casam and London: Perhaps our Author in this place mistakes Maidstone
for Madenhith, from Reading ten, and from London two and twenty miles distant,
and then he may do well to mend it in his second Edition.

And then he may correct also another passage about Judge Ienkins, whom fol.
836. he makes to be taken Prisoner in the City of Hereford; and fol. 976. at
Castle in Wales. So strangely does he forget himself, that one might think this
History had several Authors, and was not written nor digested by any one man.

Fol. 96^. Nay, did not Heraclius the Greek Emperor, call for aid of the^
R^ke-hell rabble of Scythians to assist him against the Saracens.^ I believe he
did not: For as I remember not to have read, that he called in any of the
Scy^hick Nations to assist him against the Saracens, so there was no reason why
he should: The Saracens in his time had neither extended their Conquests, nor
wasted his Empire so far Northwards, as to necessitate him to invite any such
Rake-H^ll Rabble of Scyth^ans to oppose their proceedings: By doing whereof, he
must needs expose as great a part of his Dominions to the spoil of the
Scythians, as had been wasted, (and in part conquered) by the Saracens.

I read indeed, That Cos^o^s, one of the Kings of Persia, the better to annoy
Her^^lius, in those parts of the Empire which were dearest to him, hired a
compounded Army of S^laves, Avares, Gepid^, and others, neighboring near unto
them, to invade Thrace, and lay siege unto Constantinople, the Imperial Seat;
to curb whose Insolences, and restrain their further progress into the heart
of that Country, Heraclius hired another Army, compounded of the like Scythick
Nations, which in those days passed under the common name of the Chasnari, and
it was very wisely done: For by that means he did not only waste those
Barbarous Nations (all of them being his very bad Neighbors) in warring one
against another, but reserved his own Subjects for some other occasions: And as
it was done wisely, so was it done as lawfully also, there being no Law of God
or Man which prohibits Princes, when they are either invaded by a foreign
Enemy, or overlaid by their own Subjects, to have recourse to such helps as are
nearest to them, or most like to give them their Assistance. Which point our
Author prosecutes to a very good purpose, though he mistake himself in the
instance before laid down.

The Irish were then upon the point of calling the French unto their aid, under
pretense that their own King was not able to protect them against the Forces of
those men who had con^iscated their Estates, and were resolved upon their final
extermination: And had the King upon the first rising of the Scots, poured in
an Army of the Danes to waste their Country, and fall upon them at their
backs, (as Heraclius poured in the C^snari upon the Selaves, Avares, and the
rest of that Rabble) he had done his work, and he had done it with half the
charge, (but with more security) then the bare ostentation of bringing an
English Army to the Borders of Scotland, did amount unto: Which as he might
have done with less charges, so I am sure he might have done it with far more
security: The Danes being Lutherans, fear nothing more then the grouth of the
Calvinian party, and therefore would have fought with the greater Zeal and the
fiercer Courage, on the very merit of the cause; And having no confederacies or
correspondencies with the Scots, in order to Liberty or Religion, as the Scots
had with too many of the people of England, the King might have relied upon
them with a greater confidence, then he could do on a mixed Body of his own, in
which the Puritan party being more pragmatical, might have distempered all the
rest: Such aids were offered him by his Uncle of Denmark, when the two Houses
had first armed his people against him: But he refused them then for fear of
justifying a Calumny which cunningly had been cast upon him, of admitting
Foreign Nations into the Kingdom, to suppress the Liberties of the people, and
to change their Laws: Afterward when he sought for them, then the could not
have them, the Houses no less cunning, hiring the Swedes to pick a Quarrel with
the Danes, the better to divert that King from giving assistance to his Nephew
in his greatest needs. But the consideration of this mistake in my Author about
the Scythians, has engaged me further in this point then I meant to have been.
I go on again.

Fol. 1002. But the Members were not well at ease, unl^sse some settlement were
made for them by Orders and Ordinances, etc.^ Nor were they at ease till they
had made the like settlement for some others beside themselves. Some sequestered
Divines, conceiving that all things were agreed on between the King and the
Army, had unadvisedly put themselves into their Benefices, and outed such of
the Presbyterians as had been placed in them by the Committee for Plandered
Ministers, or the Committees in the Country. And on the other side diverse
Land-holders in the Country conceivi^g that those Ministers who had been put
into other men's livings could not sue in any Court of Law for the Tithes and
Profits of those Churches for want of a Legal Title to them, did then more
resolutely then ever refuse to make payment of the same. For remedy of which
two mischiefs the Independent Members having setl^d themselves by Orders and
Ordinances, concur with the Presbyterian Members, to settle their Brethren of
the Clergy in a better condition then before. And to that end they first
obtained an Ordinance dated the 9. of August Anno 1647. in which it is
declared, That every Minister put, or which shall be put into any Parsonage,
Rectory, Vicarage, or Ecclesiastical Living, by way of Sequestration or
otherwise, by both or either the Houses of Parliament, or by any Committee or
other person or persons by Authority of any Ordinance or Order of Parliament,
shall and may s^e for the Recovery of his Tithes, Rents and other duties, by
virtue of the said Ordinance in as full and ample manner to all intents and
purposes; as any other Minister or other person whatsoever.

This being obtained to keep in awe the Landholders for the time to come, they
obtained another Ordinance dated the 23* of the same Month for keeping the
poor sequestered Clergy in a far greater awe then the others were, by which i^
was Ordered and Ordained: That all Sheriffs, Mayors, Bailiffs, Justices of the
Peace, Deputy Lieutenants, and Committees of Parliament in the several
Counties, Cities, and places within this Kingdom, do forthwith apprehend, or
cause to be apprehended all such Minister as by authority of Parliament have
been put out of any Church or Chapel within this Kingdom, or any other person
or persons who have entered upon any such Church or Chapel, or gained the
possession of such Parsonage Houses, ^ithes, and profits thereunto belonging,
or have obstructed the payment of Tithes and other profits due by the
Parishioners to the said Ministers there placed by Authority of Parliament, or
Sequestrators appointed, where no Ministers are settled to receive the same, and
all such persons as have been Aiders, Abettors, or Assisters in the Premises,
and commit them to prison, there to remain until such satisfaction be made unto
the several Ministers placed by the said Authority of Parliament for his or
their damages sustained, as to the said Sheriffs, Mayors, etc. shall appear to
be just, etc.

So little got the Sequestered Clergy by their Petition and Address to Sir
Thomas Fa^rf^x, that their condition was made worse by it then it was before,
in that the Acts of the Committees in the Country as well as that at London,
were confirmed by Ordinance. For though the General and the Army passed a
Declaration upon this Petition on the 22. of July, That the Estates of all
persons, of what rank or condition soever, whether r^all or personal, under
any Sequestration, howsoever or to whomsoever disposed, shall remain in the
hands of the Tenants, Parishioners, or any other persons from whom they are
legally due, until the General peace be settled, and then to be restored and
accounted for to those to whom they shall be justly and legally due; yet on
their piecing with the Presbyterian Members in the House of Commons, they did
nothing in it but left the poor Clergy as before, if not in a worse condition
then they found them.

Fol. 929. His Funeral Hearse rem^ining in Westminster Abbey Church* a
spectacle for the people, some bold Maligna^; on the 27. of November at night
most ^hamefully handlea his Effigies. That is to say, by breaking off his head,
disfiguring the face, tearing away his Sword and Spurs, and renting down his
Arms and Escucheons, as it after follows. That such an outrage was committed
on the Hearse of the Earl of Ess^x, is most notoriously true; and that it was
committed by some bold Malignant (that is to say, some person disaffected to
that Earl) is as true as that* But who that bold Malignant was, whether of the
Royal party, or any other who maligned his Estate and Honor, our Author
should have done well to have told more clearly, and note to have left him
under the general notion of a bold Malignant, by which name those of the Kings
party were most commonly branded. It seems by our Author that they were no
poor knaves who made this de^acement, con^idering they left all behind them
silk and velvet to boot. And it is more then probable that the Nobility and
Gentry who made up the greatest and most considerable number of the Royal
Party, were such as had too much sense of Honor to injure and deface the
monument of a Noble man, whom they had never otherwise beheld then as an
honorable Enemy in the course of the Wars. The conduct of which war, when he
first undertook for the Houses of Parliament, they published a Resolution in a
Declaration of theirs, August 4. 1642. that they would live and die with him in
pursuit of that quarrel; But after^a^ds finding that he did not prosecute the
war with so much ^^^ernesse and passion as by some desired, he was not only
^^^posed to the public scorn by scandalous jeers, Pictures, and Pamphlets,
while he was in the head of his command, ^ut finally divested of all that power
which he had in the Army, and reduced to the Estate of a private person* And
whether some of those who had so reproachfully treated him when he was alive,
might not commit this outrage on his Essigies when he was deceased, I leave to
be considered by ^he equal and impartial Reader

^ol. 1056. M. Palmer made D. of Physic at Oxford] The making of new Doctors
was one of the first works of the ^arl of Pembroke, at his Visitation of the
University of Oxford, that so they might enter on their intended Headships with
the greater honor. But Palmer the designed Warden ^or All soul^ was not at
that time to be made a Doctor. He (...) taken that Degree before in Cambridge;
and by the name (...) P^lmer I find him in a Reference from the Commit^^^^ of
Plundered Ministers to settle a difference betwixt a (...) Incumbent and the
intruding Minister, about tho fifths. Incorporated he might be at Oxford (as
the custom is) but not then made or created Doctor, as our Author would have
it. That which comes next touching the ejecting of many of the Commons of
Christ-Church gives us two mistakes; whereof I conceive the one to be the
Printers, and the other our Authors. The mistake of the Printer is the putting
down of the Common of Christ-Church for the ( anons of Christ-Church, unless
perhaps the meaning be that the old Canons were put out of Commons* that the
new ones might have the fuller Diet when they came into their places. The
mistake of our Author is in saying that many of the Canons of Christ-Church
were ejected, whereas they were all of them ejected, not a man excepted; the
Earl of Pembroke being so impartial in the executing of his Office, that he
would not spare D. Hammond though he were his God-son. And though D. John Wall,
partly by the mediation of Friends, but chiefly by his humble submission to the
power of the Visitors, was again admitted into the number of the Canons* yet
was he ejected with the rest, and came not into his own place at this new
admission, but into the place of some of the other Canons, to show that he
stood not on his old Right but this new Admission. The Earl of Pembroke having
done the business which he came about, returns to the Parliament, was first
thanked for his wonderful wisdom, and then they Vote,

That all such Masters, Fellows, and Officers there as refused to submit to the
power, should be expelled the University.] According to which Vote, a general
purge was given to all the Colleges in the same, working upon them more or
less, as they found the humors more or less Malignant; on none so strongly
as on Christ-Church and M^gdal^ne ^ollege, in which last they descended so low
as to the Choristers, and lower then that also to the very Cook. And yet the
storm fell not so heavy on those at Oxford, as the Earl of Manchesters
Visitation had done at Cambridge; For he not only cut off the heads, and
skinned the Fellows and Scholars of most Colleges, but in Queens College cut
off all the members from the head to the heel, leaving not one of the old
Foundation to keep possession for the new Comers; as if the House it self, and
all the lands belonging to it had been designed to an Escheat, as a forfeited
and dissolved Corporation; or like a Wrecca Mar^^ to be seized on by the Lord
Paramount of the shore adjoining, as having no living creature in it to
preserve the possession of it for the proper owner. But the Scholars at Oxford
howsoever made themselves merry with their misfortunes, publishing some unhappy
Papers, and amongst them a Speech made by the Earl of Pembroke (with some
additio^s of their own) which afterward drew on two or three others of the
same strain, though on other occasions to the great manifestation and applause
of his wonderful wisdom.

Fol. 1034. Yet not long after some one so well affected to the Kings Service,
that whilst he is a Prisoner, takes upon him the Kings Cause, and published an
Answer such as it is, which we submit to censure.] And being submitted unto
Censure, I conceive it deserves not such a diminution or disparagement, as to
call it an Answer such as it is. The Answer I never saw before, and cannot now
possibly conjecture at the Author of it. But upon the best judgment which I
am able to make, I conceive it to be so full, so punctual and satisfactory,
that our Author, calling all the Doctors of his own making to his assistance
is not able to mend it.

Fol. 1068. Some of these mutinied against each other, and in the dissension a
rumor was raised there of a Design to impoyson the King, etc.] Our Historian
makes very slight of this matter, disparaging both the Informer and the
Information. The Informer he disparageth by telling us, that he was but an
ordinary man, though Osburn himself in a Letter to the Earl of Manchester takes
on himself the Title of Gentleman, which is as much as our Author (though he
take upon himself the name of an Esquire) can pretend unto. The Information and
the Evidence which was brought to prove it, he censures to be disagreeing in it
self, and irregular in Law, of which more anon. In the mean time take here the
whole Information word for word, as Osburn published it in print, as well for
his own justification as the satisfaction of all loyal and well^affected
Subjects.

But not to leave your Lordship unsatisfied with this general account, the
Intelligence I speak of concerning his design, I received from Captain R^lfe,
a person very intimate with the Governor, privy to all Counsels, and one that
is very high in the esteem of the Army; he (my Lord) informed me, that to his
knowledge the Governor had received several Letters from the Army, intimating
they desired the King might by any means be removed out of the way either by
p^^son or otherwise: And that another time the same person persuaded me to join
with him in a de^igne to remove the King out of that Castle to a place of more
secrecy, profering to take an Oath with me, and to do it without the Governors
privity, who (he said) would not consent for losing the allowance of the House.
His pretense for this attempt was that the King was in too public a place,
from whence he might be ^escued, but if he might be conveyed into some place
of Secrecy, he said, we might dispose of his person upon all occasions as we
thought fit; and this he was confident we could effect, without the Governors
privity.

This N^rrative he enclosed in a Letter to the Lord Wharton, dated Iu^e 1.
1648. But finding that the Lord Wharton had done nothing in it, the better (as
he conceived) to give those time that were concerned in it to think of some
stratagem to evade the discovery; He enclosed it in another Letter to the Earl
of Manchester, by whom it was communicated to the House of Peers on the 19. of
June. But they in stead of sending for him to make good the Information on his
corporal Oath, as he earnestly desired in the said Letters, committed both him
and Rolfe to prison, there to remain till the next Assizes for the County of
Southhampton, and not the Southhampton Assize, as our Author makes it. At what
time M. Sergeant Wild, a man for the nonce (as we poor Country folks use to
say) was sent to manage the proceedings; who so cunningly entangled the
evidence, and so learnedly laid the Law before the Jurors, that Rolfe was
acquitted, and Osburn left under the disgrace of a salse Informer. But the best
is (I should rather have said the worst) though M. Ser^eant could find no Law
to condemn Rolfe for an attempt to poison the King; he could find Law enough
within few months after to condemn and execute Captain Burleigh, for an intent
to free him from the hands of those, who were suspected to have no good
intentions toward him, as it after proved.

Fol. 1069. The Earl of Holland is sent Prisoner to Warwick Castle, where he
continued until his Arraignment and execution at Westminster the 9. of March.^
Of this Earl we have said somewhat already, enough to show with what disloyalty
and ingratitude he forsook the King his Master in the time of his greatest
need: To which I shall add nothing now but this general Note, viz. that none
of those, who had proved disloyal to the King, or acted openly against him in
the Wars, or otherwise had ever so much blessing from Heaven as to prevail in
any thing which they undertook either for the re-establishment of his person or
the re-stauration of his posterity, witness in the first place Sir John
Hotham, accursed in his mothers belly, as himself confessed in an intercepted
Letter brought to Oxford, witness the fruitless attempts of Lougnern, Powell,
and Poier, not only in Pembrokeshire, but other Counties of Southwales, which
they had made themselves Masters of in order to his Majesty's Service, witness
the unfortunate expedition of Marquess Hamilion (of which more anon) and the
unseasonable rising of the Earl of Holland, of whom now we speak; witness the
frequent miscarriages of the Lord Willoughby of Parham (a man whom the King had
courted to Loyalty beyond all example) in his attempt to head a New Army
against the old, to employ some part of the Kings Navy against the rest, and to
make good the Barbador in despite of the Houses: I take no notice ^ere of the
miscarriages of such who had at first declared against him in set Speeches in
the Houses of Parliament, none of which prospered, either in their persons or
their actings, when they returned to their own duty, and endeavored the
Advancement of the Kings Affairs. And that I may not contain may self within
England only, or be thought perhaps to partial in this Observation, we have
the Examples of the Lord Inchequin in Ireland, and of the gallant Marquess of
Montross in Scotland: Of which the first, (for the actings of the other are
known well enough) was one of the first, if not the very first of all, who
openly read any Protestation at the Market-Cross in Edinburgh against the Kings
Proceedings in the Book of Common Prayer, and other subsequent Actions, which
concerned the happiness of that Kingdom.

Fol. 1071. The Estates of Scotland had formed a Committee of Danger, who had
of themselves Voted to raise Forty thousand Men.^ But the Vote was bigger then
the Army, though the Army were much bigger then our Author makes it, by whose
calculation, it amounts not to above Ten thousand five hundred men, besides
such additional Forces as were expected out of England and Ireland: An Army
gallantly appointed both for Horse and Arms, which they had plundered out of
England in the long time of their Service there for both Houses of Parliament,
the like being never set so out by that people since they were a Nation: And it
was big enough also to do more then it did, had it been under a more for^unate
Commander then the Marquess of Hamilton, who brought from Scotland a greater
Enemy within him, then he was like to find in England: And possibly that
inward Enemy might spur him on to a swift destruction, by rendering him
impatient of tarrying the coming of Monroe, an old experienced Commander, with
his three thousand old and experienced Scots, trained up for five or six years
then last past in the Wars of Ireland: By whose assistance, it is possible
enough, that he might not have lost his first Battle, and not long after his
Head, which was took from him on the same day with the Earl of Hollands: But
God owed him and that Nation both shame and punishment, for all their
^reacheries and Rebellions against their King* and now he does begin to pay
them, continuing payment after payment, till they had lost the Command of their
own Country, and being reduced unto the form of a Province under the
Commonwealth of England, live in as great a Vassalage under their new Masters,
as a conquered Nation could expect or be subject to.

Fol. 1078. This while the Prince was put aboard the revolted Ships, etc. and
with him his Brother the Duke of York, etc. the Earls of Brentford and Ruthen,
the Lord Cu^pepper, etc.] In the recital of which names, we find two Earls,
that is to say, the Earls of Brentford and Ruthen, which are not to be found in
any Records amongst our Heralds in either Kingdom: Had he said General Ruthen
Earl of Brentford, he had hit it right. And that both he and his Reader also
may the better understand the Risings and Honors of this Man, I shall sum them
thus: Having served some time in the Wars of Gustavus Adolphus King of Sweden,
he was Knighted by him in his Camp before Darsaw, a Town of Pomerella,
(commonly counted part of Prussia) and belonging to the King of Poland, Anno
1627. at what time the said King received the Order of the Garter, with which
he was invested by Mr. Peter Young, one of his Majesty's Gentlemen Huishers, and
Mr. Henry St. George, one of the Heralds at Arms, whom he also Kinghted. In the
long course of the German Wars, this Colonel Sir Patrick Ruthen, obtained such
a Command as gave him the title of a General, and by that title he attended in
a gallant Equipage on the Earl of Morton, then riding in great pomp toward
Windsor, to be installed Knight of the Garter. At the first breaking out of the
Scots Rebellion, he was made a Baron of that Kingdom, and Governor of the
Castle of Edinburgh, which he defended very bravely, till the Springs which fed
his Well were broken and diverted by continual Batteries. Not long ater he was
made Earl of Forth, and on the death of the Earl of Lindsey, was made Lord
General of his Majesty's Army; and finally, created Earl of Brentford by
Letters Patents, dated the 27 of May, Anno 1644. with reference to the good
Service which he had done in that Town for the first hanselling of his Office:
So then we have an Earl of Brentford, but no Earl of Ruthen, either as joined
in the same Person, or distinct in two: Not much unlike is that which follows.

Ibid. His Commissions to his Commanders were thus styled, Charles Prince of
great Britain, Duke of Cornwall and Albany.] Here have we two distinct Titles
conferred upon one Person, in which I do very much suspect our Authors
Intelligence: For though the Prince might Legally style himself Duke of
Cornwall, yet I cannot easily believe that he took upon himself the Title of
Duke of Albany. He was Duke of Cornwall from his Birth, as all the eldest Sons
of the Kings of England have also been since the Reign of King Edward the
third, who on the death of his Uncle, John of Eltham, E. of Cornwall, invested
his eldest Son Edw. the Black Prince into the Dukedom of Cornwall, by a Coronet
on his head, a ring on his finger, and a silver Verge in his hand: Since which
time, (as our learned Camden has observed) the King of Englands eldest Son is
reputed Duke of Cornwall by Birth, and by virtue of a special Act, the first day
of his Nativity is presumed and taken to be of full* and perfect age, so that
on that day he may sue for his Livery of the said Dukedom, and ought by right
to obtain the same, as well as if he had been one and twenty years old: And he
has his Royalties in certain Actions, and Stannery Matters, in Wracks at Sea,
Customs, etc. yea, and Diverse Officers or Ministers assigned unto him for these
or such like matters: And as for the Title of Duke of albany, King Charles, as
the second Son of Scotland, received it from King James his Father, and
therefore was not like to give it from his second Son; the eldest Son of
Scotland being Duke of Rothsay from his Birth, but none of them Dukes of
Albany, (for ought ever I could understand) either by Birth or by Creation.

Fol. 1094. And so the dignity of Archbishops to fall, Episcopal Jurisdiction
also.] Our Author concludes this, from the general words of the Kings Answer,
related to in the words foregoing; viz. That whatsoever in Episcopacy did
appear not to have clearly proceeded from Divine Institution, he gives way to
be totally abolished. But granting that the Dignity of Archbishops was to fall
by this Concession, yet the same cannot be affirmed of the Episcopal
Jurisdiction, which has as good Authority in the holy Scripture as the calling
it self: For it appears by holy Scripture, that unto Timothy the first Bishop
of Eph^sus, St. Paul committed the power of Ordination, where he requires him
to lay hands hastily on no man, 1 Timothy 5 22 And unto Titus the first Bishop of
Crete, the like Authority for ordaining Presbyters (or Elders, as our English
reads it) in every City, Tit. 1. v. 5. Next he commands them to take care for
the ordering of Gods public Service, viz. That Supplications, Prayers,
Intercessions, and giving of Thanks be made for all men, 1 Timothy 2. 1. which
words relate not to the private Devotions of particular persons, but to the
Divine Service of the Church, as it is affirmed, not only by St* Chrysostom,
Theophylact, and O^cumenius, amongst the Ancients, and by Estius for the Church
of Rome, but also by Calvin for the Protestant or Reformed Churches. Next, he
requires them to take care, that such as painfully labor in the Word and
Doctrine, receive the honor or recompense which is due unto them, 1 Timothy 5. 17.
as also to censure and put to silence all such Presbyters as preached any
strange Doctrine, contrary unto that which they had received from the Apostles,
1 Timothy 1. 3. And if that failed of the effect, and that from Preaching
Heterodoxies, or strange Doctrines, they went on to Heresies, then to proceed
to Admonition, and from thence (if no amendment followed) to a rejection from
his place, and deprivation from his Function, 1 Tit. 3. 10. as both the Fathers
and late Writers understand the Text. Finally, for correction in point of
Manners, as well in the Presbyter as the people, St. Paul commits it wholly to
the care of his Bishop; where he advises Timothy, not to receive an
Accus^ation against a Presbyter (or Minister of the Gospel) but before two or
three Witnesses: but if they be convicted, then to rebuke them before all that
others also may fear, 1 Timothy 5. 19, 20. And on the other side, he invests him
with the like Authority upon those of the La^ty, of what age or sex soever they
were; old men to be handled gently, not openly to be rebuked, but entreated as
Fathers, 1 Timothy 5. 1. the like fair usage to be had toward the Elder Women,
also v. 2. The younger men and Women to be dealt withal more freely, but as
Brethren and Sisters, v. 1, 2. A more ample jurisdiction then this, as the
Bishops of England did neither exercise nor challenge, so for all this they had
Authority in holy Scripture; those points of jurisdiction not being given to
Timothy and Titus only, but to all Bishops in their persons, as generally is
agreed by the ancient Writers.

So then Episcopal Jurisdiction fell not by this concession, though somewhat
more might fall by it then his Majesty meant. That the Dignity of Archbishops
was to fall by it, is confessed on all sides; and that the King made the like
concession for the abolishing of Deans and Chapters (though not here mentioned
by our Author) is acknowledged also* And thereupon it must needs follow (which
I marvel the Learned Lawyers then about the King did not apprehend) that the
Episcopal Function was to die with the Bishops which were then alive, no new
ones to be made or consecrated after those concessions. For by the Laws of this
Land, after the death of any Bishop, his Majesty is to send out his Writ of
Cong^ d'Eslier to the Dean and Chapter of that place to elect another. Which
election being made, signified under the Chapters Seal, and confirmed by the
Royal assent; the King is to send out his mandat to the Archbishop of the
Province, to proceed to Consecration or Confirmation, as the case may vary. And
thereupon it must needs be, that when the Church comes unto such a condition
that there is no Dean and Chapter to elect, and no Archbishop to consecrate
and confirm the person elected, there can be legally and regularly no
succession of Bishops. I speak not this with reference to unavoidable
Necessities, when a Church is not in a capacity of acting according to the
ancient Canons an established Laws; but of the failing of Epis^opall Succession,
according to the Laws of this Land, if those concessions had once passed into
Acts of Parliament.

Fol. 1099. The Headquarters were at Windsor, where the Army conclude the
large Remonstrance, commended by the Generals Latter, and brought up to the
Parliament by half a dozen Officers. But by the heads of that Remonstrance, as
they stand collected in our Author it will appear, that he is mistaken in the
place, though not in the Pamphlet That terrible Remonstrance (terrible in the
consequents and effect thereof) came not from Windsor but S. Albans, as appears
by the printed Title of it, viz. A Remonstrance of his Excellency Thomas Lord
Fairfax, Lord General of the Parliaments Forces, and of the General Council of
Officers held at S. Albans the 16. of November, 1648. Presented to the Commons
assembled in Parliament the 20. instant, and tendered to the consideration of
the whole Kingdom. Which Remonstrance was no sooner showed unto his Majesty,
then being in the Isle of Wigh^, but presently he saw what he was to trust
unto, and did accordingly prepare himself with all Christian confidence. For
that he had those apprehensions both of his own near approaching dangers, and
of their designs, appears by the ^ad farewell which he took of the Lords at
Newport, when they came to take their leaves of him at the end of this Treaty,
whom he thus bespake, viz. My Lords, You are come to take your leave of me, and
I believe we shall scarce ever see each other again, but Gods will be done, I
thank God, I have made my peace with him, and shall without fear undergo what
he shall be pleased to suffer men to do unto me. My Lords, you cannot but know
that in my fall and ru^ne you see your own, and that also near to you; I pray
God (...) you better Friends then I have found. I am fully inform^d of the
whole carriage of the Plot against me and mine, and nothing so much afflicts me
as the sense and s^el^^g I have of the sufferings of my Subjects, and the
miseries that h^ng over my three Kingdoms, drawn upon them by those, wh^ (upon
pretenses of good) violently pursue their own Interests and ends. And so
accordingly it proved, the honor o^ the peers, and the prosperity of the
people suff^ring a very great (if not a total) Eclipse for want of that light
wherewith he shined upon them both, in the time of his glories. But before the
day of this sad parting the Treaty going forwards in the Isle of Wight, his
Majesty's Concessions were esteemed so fair and favorable to the public
Interesse, that it was voted by a (...) or party in the House of Commons, that
they were (...) of the Kingdom, 12^. Voting in the affirmative, and 84. only in
the Negative; Which Vote^ gave such off^nce to those who had composed this
Remonstrance, that within two days after viz. Wednesday the 6. of D^cem^^r

^

But first, I would fain know why those imprisoned Members are said to be all
of the old st^mp, considering (...) those who were kept under custody in the
Queens (...) and the Court of Wards, there was not one man who e^ther had not
served in the War against the King* or otherwise declare his disaffection to
the autho^ized Liturgy and Government of the Church of England, as appears by
the Catalogue of their names in (...), N^m* 36. 37.

And s^condly, I would fain know why he restrains the number to 40 or 50 when
the imprisoned and secluded Members were three times as many. The imprisoning
or secluding of so small a number would not serve the turn; Non gaudet
tenuisanguine tanta sitis, as the Poet has it.

For first, the Officers of the Army no sooner understood how the Votes had
passed for the Kings concessions, but they sent a Paper to the Commons,
requiring that the Members impeached in the Year 1647. and Major General Brown
(who they say invited in the Scots might be secured and brought to justice; and
that the 90 odd Members who refused to vote against the late Scottish
Engagement, and all those that voted the recalling the Votes of Non-addresses,
and voted ^or the Treaty, and concurred in yesterdaies Votes, etc. may be
suspended the House. And such a general purge as this, must either work upon
more then 40 or 50. or el^eit had done nothing in order to the end intended.

Secondly, ^t appears by these words of the protestation of the imprisoned
Members bearing date the 12. of De^ember, that they were then above an hundred
in number, v^z. We the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the Common^^^ (...)
of Parliament (al ove one hundred in number) forcibly s^^ze* upon violently
kept out of and driven from the House by the Officers and Soldiers of the Army
under Thomas Lord Fairfax, etc.

And thirdly, We find after this that Sir John Temple, Sir Martin Lumley, C^l.
Booth, M. Waller, M. Middleton, and others were turned back by such Soldiers
as were appointed to keep a strict guard at the doors of the House. So that the
whole number of those who we^e imprisoned and kept under restraint, or
otherwise were debarred and turned back from doing their service in the House,
wa^ reckoned to amount to an hundred and forty, which comes to thrice as many
as the 40 or 50 which our Author speaks of. But to proceed, the Officers of the
Army having thus made themselves Masters of the House of Commons, thought fit
to make themselves Masters of the City also. To which end they ordered two
Regiments of Foot and some Troops of Horse to take up Quarters in Paul's Church
and Blackfriars on Friday the 8. of the same month; and on the ^unday
following sent diverse Souldriers to be quartered in the Houses of private
Citizens, which notwithstanding such was their tender care not to give any
di^turbance to them, that

lbid. Not to f^ighten the City, the General writes to my Lord Mayor, that he
had s^nt Col. Dean to seize the Treasuries of Haberdashers, Goldsmiths, and
Weavers, Halls (where they seize on 20000.l.) that by the Moneys he may pay his
Armies Arrears.] The Author whom our Historian follows in all these late
traverses of State, relates this business more distinctly and inte^ligently
then we find it here, viz. That two Regiments of Foot and some Troops of Horse
took up Quarters in Paul's and Black-frier, and seized upon 20000. l in Weavers
Hall, which they promised to repay when the Lord Mayor and Common Council
please to bring in the Arrears due from the City. They secured likewise the
Treasures of Haberdashers and Goldsmiths Hall. Here we have first a seizure of
the 20000. l in Weavars Hall for the use of (...) Army, and a securing of the
Treasures in the other two, that they might not be employed against it. The
20000 l. which they found in the first was the remainder of the 200000 l. which
was voted to be brought in thither, for the raising of a New Presbyterian Army,
under the command of the Lord Willoughby of Parh^^ as Lord General, and Sir
John Maynard as Lieutenant General, to reduce that Army to conformity, which
had so successively served under the command of Sir Thomas Fairfax. But the
other two being hard names and not very easy of digestion, require somewhat
which may make them lighter to the understanding of the vulgar Reader.

Concerning which we are to know, that several Ordinances were made by the
Lords and Commons for sequestring the Estates of all such who had adhered unto
the King, whom (to distinguish them from their own party) they called
Delinquents; and a severe course was taken in those sequestrations as well in
reference to their personal as real Estates; to make them the more
considerable in the purse of the House^. But finding no such great profit to
come in that way (when every Cook who had the dressing of that dish had lickt
his fingers) as they did expect, they were contented to admit them to a
Composition. These Compositions to be manag^d at Goldsmiths Hall, by a select
Committee consisting of several Members of the House of Commons, and some of
the most pragmaticall and stiff sort of Citizens, the parties to compound had
2. 3. 4. 5. 6. or 7. years purchase according as they either offered themselves
voluntarily, or came in upon Articl^s, or were forced to submit to mercy. What
infinite sums of money were brought in by these compositions, he that list to
see, may find them both in the several Items and the summa to^^al^s in their
printed Tables. And yet the payment of these Sums was the least part of the
grievance compared unto those heavy clogs which were laid on their Consciences.

For first, No man was admitted to treat with the Committee at Goldsmiths Hall,
till (unless he was privileged and exempt by Articles) he had brought a
Certificate that he had taken the Negative Oath either before the Committee for
the Militia of London, or some Committee in the Country where he had his
^welling. And by this oath he was to swear, that he would neither directly nor
indirectly adhere unto, or wil^^^gly assist the King in that War, or in that
cause against the Parliament, nor any Forces raised without the consent of the
two Houses of Parliament in that cause or War; for which consult the Ordinance
of the Lords and Commons bearing date April 5. 1645.

And secondly, It was Ordered by the said Lords and Commons on the 1. of
November 1645. That the Committee of Goldsmiths Hall should have power to
tender the Solemn League and Covenant to all persons that come out of the Kings
Quar^^^s to that Committee to compound, and to secure such as should refuse to
take it until they had conformed thereunto. And by that Covenant they were
bound to endeavor the extirpation of Popery and Prelacy (that is,
Church Government by Archbishops and Bishops, etc. and to defend the Kings
Person and Authority, no otherwise then in order to the preservation and
defense of the true Religion and Liberties of the Kingdoms. And if the party to
compound were a Roman Catholic there was an Oath of Abjuration to be taken
also before any such Sequestration could be taken off, if once laid upon him.
By which he was to swear, That he abjured and renounced the Popes Supremacy,
that he believed not there was any Transubstantiation, nor Purgatory, nor any
worship to be given to the consecrated Host, Crucifix, or Images, and that
salvation could not be merited by works, renouncing and abjuring all Doctrines
in defense of th^se points. To such a miserable necessity had they brought many
of that party, that they thought if safer (as they use to say) to trust God
with their souls, then such unmercifull men with their Lives, Fortunes, and
Estates.

And yet this was not thought to be a sufficient punishment to them, but they
must first pass through H^berdashers Hall (which is the last of my hard words)
before they could be free of the Goldsmiths. And in that Hall, they were to pay
the fifth and twentieth parts of their Estates as well real as personal in
present money; all men being brought within the power of the Committee, not
only who were called Delinquents, but such as had not voluntarily contributed
to the Parliament in any place whatsoever, as appears by the Order of the
Commons bearing date August 25. 1646. By which last clause more Grist was
brought unto that Mill, then can be easily imagined; their Agents being very
eager in that pursuit. So that it was accounted a great benefit, as indeed it
was, to them who came in upon the Articles of Oxford, Farington, Wallinford,
Exceter, and some other places, not only that they were discharged from the
payment of the fifth and twentieth parts of their Estates at Haberdashers Hall,
and admitted to compound at Goldsmiths Hall for two years purchase; but that
they were exempted also from all Oaths an^ Engagements, and consequently from
that accursed Covenant, and that Negative Oath, by which the Consciences of so
many distressed men had been most miserably entangled.

Fol. 1138. Thus fell Charles, and thus all Britain with him.^ And by this fall
there fell so general an Oppression on the Spirits of all sorts of people,
that the generality of those who played the principal parts in this sad
Tragedy, became ashamed of their actings in it. The Scots who played the parts
of Judas, and sold their natural King and most bountiful Master for a piece
of money, when they saw he was like to be condemned, repented, saying, that
they had sinned in betraying innocent blood. For in their Letter to the Prince
dated August the 10. they do acknowledge in plain words, that nothing did more
wound and afflict them then his Majesty's sad condition and Res^raint. But yet
we find not that they came to such a degree of compunction, as to bring back
the money for which they had sold him, and to cast it down before the chief
Priests and Elders, as Judas did. Or if they had there had been no such
purchase to be made with it, as was made with that; both Kingdoms having been
already an Aceldama, or Field of blood. The Presbyterians of both sorts as well
the Members of the House as those of the Assembly, and their confederates in
the City, who personated the chief Priests and Elders amongst the Jews, had
armed a great multitude with swords and staves (as well the Soldiers as the
Clubmen) for his apprehension. They reviled him in most sham^full manner* and
spit upon him all that filth which could be s^pposed to proceed from such foul
stomachs, They buffeted him and smote him with the palms of their hands,
assaulting him with all the Act, of violent hostility; and having pas^^d a Vote
amongst themselves, they put him over to be sentenced and condemned by Pontius
Pilate. But when the worm of conscience began to bite them, some of them
labored before hand by their Protestations to acquit themselves, and to redeem
the King from that inevitable danger into which they had thrown him Others
more^ou^ly clamored both from the Pulpit and the Press, crying out that they
were innocent from the blood of that just person, and casting all the guilt and
obloquy of it on the Independents The Independents who sat as ^udges on the
Bench, and pla^d the part of Pontius Pilate, alleged that they had nothing to
do with him, but as they were pusht forward by the unresistible importunity of
the Priests and Elders. And these men also took water and washed their hands
before the multitude, affirming positively that the KING had been murdered
long since by the Presbyterians, as appears by M. Mil^ons Book called
Iconoclaste^; where the case is stated and determined for the Independent^; and
therefore as Pil^ue did not say of Christ our Savior, when he brought him
before the people, Behold the (...), but only Ecce homo, or Behold the m^n; So
might the Independents say, when they brought the King before the people to
receive the heavy sentence of death, Behold the man, the man whom these of the
Presbytery had before (...). But it was neither shame nor sorrow which could
r^call him from the dead. All the favor which they now could show him was,
that some good (...) of A^imathea, who had begged his body, were permitted to
burr it, not ^n a Tomb where never man had l^in before, but as it happened in
the same Vault with King Hen. ^. and Queen ^^ne S^ymor. And yet it proved but
an half favor neither, as the matter was carried, the Governor of the place
not suffering him to be interred according to the Form prescribed in the Book
of Common Prayer, whereof he had been a most constant Observer to the very last.

And here I am to leave our Author, who has brought this great King to the
grave, though he has not followed him to it from the Cradle, as the Title
promised. And here I shall leave him to consult that passage in Horac^, against
he puts forth next to Sea on the like Adventures, which sta^ds thus recommended
to him in the Book (...) Sumite materiam vestris qui scribitis aequam
Viribus, and versate diu quid far recusent,
Quid valiant humeri; cui lecta potenter erit res
Nec sacundia deseret hunc nec lucidus Ordo.


Which may be englished to this purpose.

Elect such matter you that love to write,
As with your Bark may bear an equal Sail;
For he which on such Subjects does indite,
Of Phrase, and Method fit, shall never fail.
AN APPENDIX TO THE ADVERTISEMENTS ON Mr. Sandersons HISTORIES. In Answer to
some PASSAGES In a scurrulous PAMPHLET CALLED A Post-Haste, A Reply, etc.

Ovid. Metam. Lib. 1. -- pudet haec opprobria nobi^,
Et dici potuisse, and non potuisse ref^lli.
AN APPENDIX To the former ADVERTISEMENTS, In answer to some PASSAGES In a
scurrulous PAMPHLET CALLED The Post-haste Reply, etc.
WHen I first heard of Mr. Sandersons Post-haste Reply, etc. and had caused the
same to be read over, It was not in my thoughts to descend so much beneath my
self, as to make any Answer to it; such scurrulous Pamphlets dying soonest,
when there is less notice taken of them: Patience and contempt ( and tulere
ista and reliquere, as we know who did) are commonly the most approved remedies
against all such Calumnies, as for the most part do proceed from a petulant
malice: But being there is in it some matter of charge and Crimination, I have
been advised by some friends to acquit my self of the least, otherwise I might
be thought to confess my self guilty of the crimes objected, and wrong my
innocence by an obstinate and affected silence: I have therefore yielded so far
unto their desires, as to return an Answer to so much of the Pamphlet as
contains matter of accusation, which I shall ^ever from the rest, leaving the
rif-raf and scurrilities of it (which make up the greatest part of that two
penny trifles, either unto some further consideration, or to none at all.

But first I must remove a doubt, which otherwise may trouble the Gent^ whom I
am to deal with, who possible may think himself to be over-matched, not in
regard of any difference in such personal abilities as either of us may pretend
to, but in relation to those many hands which are joined against him in this
quarrel, for if it were too much for Hercules to contend with two, ne Hercules
contra duos, as the proverb has it) good reason has he to complain of being
pressed and put to it by so many Helpers as he is pleased to join unto me: He
tells me indifinitely of my Helpers, page 5. of the charitable Collections of
my numerous Helpers, page 23. Helpers import a plural number, and numerous
Helpers signify a multitude; and who can stand against so many when they join
together? But I would not have my Squire affright himself with these needless
terrors: my helpers are but few in number, though many in virtue and effect;
for though I cannot say that I have many helpers, yet I cannot but confess in
all humble gratitude, that I have one great Helper, which is instar omnium,
even the Lord my God: Aurilium meum a domino, my help comes even from the Lord
which has made heaven and earth, as the Psalmist has it. And I can say with
the like humble acknowledgements of Gods mercies to me, as Jacob did, when he
was asked about the quick dispatch which he had made in preparing savery meat
for his aged Father: Voluntas Dei suit ut tam cito^ occurre^et mihi quod
volebam, Genesis 27. 20. It is Gods goodness, and his only, that I am able to do
what I do: And as for any humane helpers, as the French Cour^iers use to say of
King Lewis the XI. That all his Council rid upon one Horse, because he relied
upon his own Judgment and Abilities only: So may I very truly say, That one
poor Hackney-horse will carry all my Helpers used, be they never so nume^ous.
The greatest help which I have had, (since it pleased God to make my own ^ight
unuseful to me, as to writing and reading) has come from one whom I had
entertained for my Clerk or Amanuensis, who though he reasonably well
understood both Greek and Latin, yet had he no further Education in the way of
Learning, then what he brought with him from the School, A poor Country
School: And though I have no other helps at the present but a raw young fellow,
who knows no Greek, and understands but little Latin, yet I doubt not but I
shall be able to do as much reason to my Squire, as he has reason to expect at
my hands: My stock of Learning, though but small, has been so well husba^ded,
that I am still able to wind and turn it to the vindication of the truth^
never reputed such a Banckrupt (till I was made such by my Squire) as to need
such a charitable Collection to set me up again, as is by him ascribed to my
numerous helpers.

Thus singly armed and simply seconded, I proceed to the examination of those
personal charges, which defect he is pleased to lay upon me; and first he tells
us how gladly Dr. Heylyn would take occasion to assume fresh credit of copeing
with ^he deceased now at rest, whom he has endeavored to disturb even the most
R^verend Name and living Fame, of that approved Learned Prelate, the late
Archbishop of Armagh, Primate of all Ireland, page 5. And still he might have
been at rest, without any d^sturbance either unto his Reverend Name or Living
Fame, if Dr. Barn^^d first, and afterward Squire Sanderson, had not rated him
out of his Grave, and brought him back upon the Stage from which he had made
his Exit with so many Plaudites: And being brought back upon the Stage, has
given occasion to much discourse about his advising or not advising the King,
to consent unto the Earl of Stra^^ords death; and his distinction of a personal
and political conscience, either to prepare the King to give way unto it, or to
confirm him in the justice and necessity of it when the deed was done: Both
these have been severally charged on the Observator by Dr. Barnard and his
Partakers, Page 18. and both of them severally disclaimed by him, both in the
Book called the Observator rescued, page 296, 297, 349. and in the Appendix to
the Book called Respond^ Petrus, etc. p. 143, 144, and 152. Nay, so far was the
Obse^vator of his al^er idem, from disturbing the reverend Name and living Fame
of that learned Prelate, that in the Book called Extra^e^s v^pulans, he
declares himself unwilling to revive that question: Whether the Lord Primate
had any sharp tooth against the Lord Lieutenant or not, in regard the parties
were both dead, and all displeasures buried in the same grave with them, page
292. And in the Book called Respondit Petrus, he affirms expressly, That having
laid the Lord Primate down again in the Bed of Peace, he would not raise him
from it by a new disturbance; and that having laid aside that invidious
argument, he was resolved upon no provocation whatsoever to take it up again,
page 124. Had not this promise tied me up, I could have made such use of these
provocations, as to have told the Doctor and his Squire to boot, that the Lord
Primate did advise the King to sign that destructive Bill, by which that
Fountain of Blood was opened, which has never been fully shut up again since
that ebolishion, for which I have my Author ready, and my witness too.

And as for the distinction of a political and a personal conscience ascribed
to the Lord Primate by the Author of the Vocal Forest, as Mr. Sanderson in his
History says nothing to acquit him of it, so neither does the Squire affect to
act any thing in it (if he speaks sense enough to be understood) in this
Post-Haste Pamphlet; for having told us that Petrus fancied him to act for Dr.
Barnard, in acquitting the Lord Primate from the distinction of a poli^ical and
a personal conscience, page 18. he adds, That it is confessed by himself (the
self-same Pe^rus) to have been done to his hand by Mr. Howels attestation of
his History, who was concerned in those words: In which passage, if there be
any sense in it, it must needs be this, that it appears by the attestation
which James Howell gave unto his History, that he had acted nothing toward the
discharge of the Lord Primate, from the fatal distinction which D. Bernard had
ascribed in his Funeral Sermon to the Vocal Forest; So that the Respondent
may conclude as before he did, page 144. of the said Appendix, that as well the
error of that distinction as the fatal application of it must be left at the
Lord Prim^te^ door, as neither being removed by D. Bernard himself, or by any
of his undertakers.

The next Charge has relation to the Lord Primate also in reference to the
Articles of the Church of Ireland, which he will by no means grant to be
abrogated, an^ those of England settled (inserted in his own word) in the place
thereof p. 17
How so? Because the Respondent has prevented any further confirmation of
either, by his own confessing of his being too much ^^edulous in believing, and
inconsiderate in publishing such mist then intelligence, Ibid.
which are his own words, fol. 87. And his own words they are indeed, but
neither spoken nor applied, as the Squire would have it, who must be thought to
be in very great Post-haste, when he read them over. For if the Squire had
marked it well, he might have found that the Responde^t did not confess himself
to be guilty of publishing any mistaken intelligence, in saying that the
Articles of Ireland were abrogated, and those or England settled in the place
thereof, but for saying that this alteration was confirmed in the Parliament of
that Kingdom, Anno 1634. were as it was not done in Parliament but in
Convocation; For which mistake (as the Res^ondent has observed in the place
before-cited;) though it be only in the circumstance not in the substance of
the Fact* he stands accused by the Lord Primate of no less then (...), and
that by M. S^nderson is thought to be but a gentle penance for so presumptuous
an assertion Ibid.
: An (...) which has no presumption in it, if you mark it well. For if it can
be proved (as the Respondent answers in his Appendix, page 88.) that the
Articles of Ireland were called in, and those of England were received in their
place; then, whether it were done by Parliament or Convocation is not much
material. And for the proof of this, that the A^ticles of Ireland were
repealed, and the Articles of the Church of England (as in the way of a
super-induction) were settled in the place thereof: there has been so much
offered in the Book called The Observator Rescued, and in that called The
Respondit Petrus, as may satisfy any rational and impa^tiall Reader. So that
the Squire might very well have saved the labor of taxing the Respondent for
want of ingenuity (which he makes to be a great rarity in him ibid.
) and much more in defaming a whole Nation p. 18.
, with a matter of truth, in saying the Articles of the Church of England were
not only app^oved but revived in the Church of Ireland, and consequently by
that reception they were virtually at the least, if not also formally
substituted in the place thereof; Against which, though the Lord Primate have
said something, he has proved just nothing, and both the Doctor and the Squire
prove as little as he, And here again I do desire, that this reverend Prelate
may not have his Name tossed like a Tennis ball between two Rackets, but that he
may be suffered to rest with quiet in his grave for the time to come, Et
placida compost^^, morte quies^a^, as the Poet has it. But were the Respondent
guilty of no other crime then by trespassing on the reverend name and living
^ame of this deceased but learned Prelate, (to show his malice to the dead)
there had not needed any thing to be added to his justification. The
Panm^phleter will not suffer him to go ^ff so quietly, and therefore tells us,
that it is no news for D. Heylin to be a disturber of pious and (...) men while
they are living. p. 5.
. It seems by this that D. Heylyn is a man of a troublesome nature, neither in
charity with the dead, no^ at peace with the living, I specially if they come
under the name and notion of emi^nent and pious men. but though it be no news
in the judgment of Squire Sanderson, yet I can confidently say, that it is
Novum crimen, and any hoc tempus in auditum, a crime which never was charged
before upon D. Heylin, who has hitherto appeared an Advocate for the dead and
living, as often as they have come under the unjust censures of some modern
Writers. And this the former Observations together with these Animadversions
and Advertisements (when he has any grounds of truth to proceed upon) do most
clearly evidence. Against which Declaration, the Squire is able to instance
only in one particular, whereas indeed he has but one particular Ibid
to make instance in; his instancing in no more but that particular being not
so much an argument of his super-abundant charity toward the Respondent, as of
his little store of matter wherewithal to charge him. And yet this one and
only instance touching D. Prideaux has so little truth in it, that it is only
one degree removed from a s^ander. For first (omitting that D. Heylin took his
degree An. 1633. and not in 1635. as the Pamphleter makes it, the said Doctor
never scandalized him at Court to the late King being then at Woodstock p. 6.
: the said Doctor never making any such information to the King against D.
Prideaux, either at Woodstock or elsewhere. Secondly, The said Doctor never
made any such information to any other person or persons (if every thing which
is delivered in the way of discourse may not be brought within the compass of
an information) by whom it might be carried to his Majesty's ear. And for the
proof hereof, since I cannot raise men from the dead to bear witness to it, I
shall only say,

First, That the Squire himself does seem to give no credit to that Paper, For
if he did, it would have found some place in that part of his History where it
might properly have been inserted, as well as he has told us of the whole
Story of some bustles in Oxon, Anno 1631. occasioned by M. Thorn of Bal^ol
College, and M. Ford (...) Magdaline Hall, in which D. Prideaux was concerned,
and for which he received a check from the King at Woodstock; In relating
whereof though the name of D. Prideaux be not mentioned but couched only under
the general name of other of their partakers who received a check; yet M.
F^ller (from whom he borrowed the whole relation) is more punctual in it, and
reports it thus, viz.

1. The Preachers complained of were expelled the Vniuers^y.

2. The Proctors were deprived of their places for accepting their appeal.

3. D. Prideaux and D. Wilkinson were thoroughly checked for engagi^g in their
behalf. The former of these two Doctors ingen^^^^^ (...) to the King, that Nemo
motalium omnib^s ho^is sapit, which wrought more on his Ma^esties affections
(...) if he had harangued it with a long Oration in his own (...). Church-Hist.
lib. 11. fol. 141. 142. The Respondent hereupon infers, That if M, Sanderson
had then given so much credit to that paper (in publishing whereof he ascribes
so much merit to himself) as he now seems to do, he would have given it some
place in his History, to show with what credit D* Prideaux came off from that
^econd encounter at Woodstock, and what discredit the Respondent got by his
false Information.

And secondly, The Respondent says, that he was then one of his Majest^es
Chaplains in ordinary for the Month of August, preaching before him at O^t
lands on Sunday the 18 of that Month, and officiating the Divine Service of
the Church in the great Hall of Woodstock-Mannor on the Sunday following,
during which intervall either upon the Thursday or Friday this business of D.
Prideaux was in agitation; to which there is no question but he had been
called, if he had been so much concerned in the information as the Pamphlet
makes him. And if he had been called to i^, it is not probable that the Doctor
had gone off so clearly with those eva^^ns, which he had put upon the Articles
in charge against him, or with those touches on the by, which are given to the
Defendant in the Doctors Answer, supposing that the Paper exemplified in the
Pamphlet ( never before published p. 7.
) (as the Author tells us) contain the substance and effect of that which he
delivered to the King for his justification, as indeed it does not. For the
truth is that this Paper was digested by D. Prideaux as soon as he returned to
Oxon, coppied out and dispersed abroad by some of his own party and persuasions,
to keep up the credit of the cause. And though at first it carried the same
Title which the Pamphlet gives it, viz. The Answer of D. Prideaux to the
Information given in against him by D. Heylin Ibid.
; yet afterward upon a melius inquirendum he was otherwise persuaded of it,
and commonly imputed it to one of Trinity College, whom he conceived to have
no good affections to him.

And here I might conclude this point touching the traducing and disturbing of
D. Prideaux, did I not find that by the unseasonable publishing of that
Antiquated and forgotten Paper, the Respondent had not been disturbed and
traduced in a far courser manner then he was, the Doctor had those passions and
infirmities which are incident to other men of less ability, and having twice
before exposed the Respondent to some disadvantages in the point of same and
reputation, he was the more easily inclined to pursue his blow, and render him
obnoxious (as much as possibly he could) to the public censure: The story
whereof I shall lay down upon this occasion, and hope that I may safely do it
without the imputation of affecting the fresh credit of coping with the
deceased, or purposing any wrong at all unto the reverend name and living fame
of that Learned man, Proximas egom^t sum mihi^, as the Proverb has it, my own
credit is more dear to me then another man's. And where I may defend my self
with truth and honesty, I have no reason to betray both my name and fame by a
guilty silence.

Know then that on tht 24. day of April Anno 1627. I answered in the Divinity
Schools at Oxon upon these two Questions, viz.

An Ecclesia unquam f^erit invisibilis, And

2. An Ecclesia possit errare; Both which I determined in the Negative. And in
the stating of the first I fell upon a different way from that of D. Prideaux
in his Lecture de visibilitate Ecclesiae, and other Tractates of and about that
time, in which the visibility of the Protestant Church (and consequently of the
renowned Church of England, was no otherwise proved, then by looking for it
into the scattered conventicles of the Berengarians in Italy, the Waldenses in
France, the Wicklifists in England, and the H^ssites in Bohemia, which manner
of proceeding not being liked by the Respondent, as that which utterly
discontinued that succession in the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, which the Church
of England claims from the very Apostles; he rather chose to look for a
continual visible Church in Asia, Aethiopia, Greece, Italy, yea, and Rome it
self, as also in all the Western Provinces then subject to the power of the
Popes thereof; And for the proof whereof he showed,

First, That the Church of England received no succession of doctrine, or
government from any of the scattered Conventicles before remembered.

Secondly, That the Wicklifsists together (which the rest before remembered)
held many Heterodoxes in Religion, as different from the established doctrine
of the Church of England, as any point which was maintained at that time in the
Church of Rome.

And thirdly, That the Learned Writers of that Church, and Bellarmine himself
amongst them have stood up as cordially and stoutly in maintenance of some
fundamental Points of the Christian Faith against the Socinians, Anabaptists,
Anti-Trinitarians, and other Heretics of these last ages, as any of the
Divines and other learned men of the Protestant Churches; Which point I closed
with these words, viz. Vtinam, quod ipse de Calvino ^ic semper errasset
nobilissimus Cardinalis, and this so much displeased the Doctor, that as soon
as the Respondent had ended his determination, he fell most heavily upon him,
calling him by the odious names of Papicola, Bellarminianus, Pontificius, and I
wot not what, and bitterly complaining to the younger part of his Audients (to
whom he made the greatest part of his addresses) of the unprofitable pains he
had took amongst them; if Bellarmine, whom he labored to decry for so many
years, should now be honored with the Title of Nobilissimus; The like he also
did ( tantaene animis caelestibus irae?) at another time when the Respondent
changed his Copy, and acted the part of the Prior Opponent, loding the poor
young man with so many reproaches that he was branded for a Papist before he
understood what Popery was. And because this report should not get footing in
the Court before him, in his first Sermon preached before the King, which was
in November next following, on the words Ioh 4. viz* Our Fathers worshipped on
this mountain, he so declared himself against some errors and corruptions in
the Church of Rome, that he showed him to be far enough from any inclinations
to the Romish Religion, as afterward in the Year 1638. when that clamor was
revived again, he gave such satisfaction in his third and fourth Sermon upon
the Parable of the Tares, that some of the Court (who before had been otherwise
persuaded of him) did not stick to say, That he had done more toward the
subversion of Popery in those two Sermons, then D. P^ideaux had done in all the
Sermons which he had ever preached in his life.

But to proceed, the Respondent leaving Oxon within few years after, the heat
of these reproaches began to cool, (...) he had reason to conceive that the
Doctors (...) might in so long a tract of time as from 1627. to 16 (...) cooled
also, but it happened otherwise, For the (...) being to answer for his degree
of Doctor in the (...) insisted then on the Authority of the Church (...) he
had done on the infallibil^ty and visibility of it. His Questions these, viz.

An Eccle^ia habeat authoritatem in determinandis ^idei controvers^^s?

2. Interpretandi Scripturas.

3. Discernendi ritus and ceremonias. All which he held in the Affirmative,
according to the plain and positive doctrine of the Church of England, in the
20. Article, which runs thus interminis viz, habet Ecclesiae ritas sive
ceremonias statuendi^us, and in ^idei controvers^^s authoritatem, etc. but the
Doctor was as little pleased with these Questions, and the Respondent stating
of them, as he was with the former. And therefore to create to the Respondent
the greater odium, he openly declared that the Respondent had falsified the
public Doctrine of the Church, and charged the Article with that sentence,
viz. Habet Ecclesia ritus sive Ceremonias, etc. which was not to be found in
the whole body of it; And for the proof thereof he read the Article out of a
Book which lay before him beginning thus, Non licet Ecclesia quicquam
instituere quod verbo Dei scripto adversetur, etc. To which the Res^ondent
readily answered, that he perceived by the bigness of the Book which lay on
the Doctors Cushion, that he had read that Article out of the Harmony of
Confessions, published at Geneva, Anno 1612. which therein followed the Edition
of the Articles in the time of King Edward the sixth, Anno 1552. in which that
sentence was not found; but that it was otherwise in the Articles agreed on in
the Convocation, Anno 156^. to which most of us had subscribed in our several
places, but the Doctor still persisting upon that point, and the Respondent
seeing some unsatisfiednesse in the greatest part of the Auditory, he called on
one M. Westly (who formerly had been his Chamber-Fellow in Magdalen^ College)
to step to the next Booksellers Shop for a Book of Articles: Which being
observed by the Doctor, he declared himself very willing to decline any further
prosec^tion of that particular, and to go on directly to the Disputation. But
the Respondent was resolved to proceed no further, Vsque dum liberaverit animam
suam ab is it a calumnia, as his own words were, till he had freed himself from
that odious Calumny, but it was not long before the coming of the Book had put
an end to that Controversy, out of which the Respondent read the Article in
the English Tongue, in his verbis, viz. The Church has power to decree Rites
and Ceremonies, and authority in Controversies of faith, etc. which done he
delivered the Book to one of the standers by, who desired it of him, the Book
passing from one hand to another till all men were satisfied. And at this point
of time it was, that the Queens Almoner left the Schools, p^ofessing afterward
that he could see no hope of a fair Disputation from so foul a beginning, and
not as being tired with the tedious Preface of the Respondent before the
Disputations begun, which whether it were tedious or impertinent or not, may
perhaps be seen hereafter upon this occasion.)

But to proceed, upon the breaking of this blow, the Doctor fell on roundly to
his Argumentation, and in the heat thereof insisted upon those extravagant
expressions (without any such qualification of them as is found in the Paper)
which made the matter of the Information which is now before us, and for which,
if he received any check from the King at Woodstock, it is no more then what he
had received at the same place but two years before, as before is said. Which
notwithstanding the Book of Articles was printed the next Year at Oxon in the
Latin tongue, according to the Copy in the said Harmony of Confessions, or to
a corrupt Edition of them, Anno 1571. in which that clause had been omitted, to
the great animation of the Puritan party, who then began afresh to call in
question the Authority of the Church in the points aforesaid: For which, as D.
Prideaux (by whose encouragement it was supposed to have been done) received a
third check from the Archbishop of Canterbury then Chancellor of that
University; So the Printers were constrained to re-print the Book or that part
of it at the least, according to the genuine and ancient Copies.

And here I should have parted with D. Prideaux, but that there is somewhat in
the Paper (as it is now published to the world by M. Sanderson) which is thought
fit to have an answer though not held worthy of that honor when it was
secretly dispersed in scattered Copies. The Paper tells us of a Hiss^ which is
supposed to have been given (and makes the Doctor sure that such a Hiss was
given, When the Respondent excluded King and Parliament from being parts of the
Church p 29.
. But first, The Respondent is as sure that he never excluded King and
Parliament from being parts of the Church, that is to say of the diffusive body
of it, but denied them to be members of the Convocation, that is to say, the
Church of England represented in a National Council, to which the power of
decreeing Rites and Ceremonies, and the Authority of determining Controversies
in faith as well as to other Assemblies of that nature, is ascribed by the
Articles: Which as it did deserve no Hiss, so the Respondent is assured no
such hiss was given when those words were spoken. If any hiss were given at
all, as perhaps there was, it might be rather when the Doctor went about to
prove that it was not the Convocation but the High Court of Parliament which
had the power of ordering matters in the Church, in making Canons, ordaining
Ceremonies, and determining Controversies in Religion, and could find out no
other medium to make it good but the Authority of Sir Ed. Cook (a learned but
mere common Lawyer) in one of the Books of his Reports. An Argument (if by that
name it may be called) which the Respondent thought not fit to gratify with a
better answer then Non credendum esse quoquo extra artem suam. Immediately
whereupon the Doctor gave place to the next Opponent, which put an end unto the
heats of that Disputation: In which if the Doctor did affirm that the Church
was Mera Chimaera p. 6.
, as it seems he did, what other plaster soever he might find to salve that
sore, I am sure he could not charge it on the insufficiency of the Respondents
answers, who kept himself too close to the Chur^h-Representative, consisting of
Archbishops, Bishops, and other of the Clergy in their several Councels, to
be beaten from it by any argument which the Doctor had produced against him.

And thus we have a full relation of the differences between D Prideaux and the
Respondent, forgotten long ago by those whom it most concerned, and now
unseasonably revived; revived as little to the honor of the reverend name and
living fame of that learned Doctor, as D. Bernards publishing the Lord Primates
Letters (never intended for the Press) has been unto the honor of that
emi^nent and pious Prelate. But the Squire will not so give over, he has
another piece in store, which must now be printed, though written as long since
as any of the Lord Primates Letters, or the Doctors Paper, and must be printed
now to show what slender account is to be made of his (that is to say the
Respondents) language that ways p. 12.
, in reference namely, to such eminent persons as he had to deal with. For this
he is beholden to some friend or other, who helped him to the sight of a Letter
writ by D. Ha^well in the year 1633. in which speaking of M. Heylyn (since
Doctor) whom he styles, The Parton of that pretended Saint George, he has
these words of him, viz p. 13.
.

In the second Impression of his Book where he has occasion to speak of the
Roman Writers, especially the Legendaries, he magnifies them more, and when he
mentions our men he vilifies them more, then he did in his first Edition, But
the matter is not much what he says of one or the other, the condition of the
man being such as his word hardly passes either for commendation or a slander.
Never was man so haunted with apparitions ( simulacra modis volitantia miris)
as the present Respondent, this being the third ghost which has been raised to
disturb his quiet. But being he is conjured up, we must lay him down again as
well as we can. First, passing by the Squires Absurdity, in making D. Hackwell
to be Archdeacon of Surrey, and of Exeter College at if he had been
Archdeacon of Exeter College as well as of Surrey, but such ungrammaticall
expressions are no rarities in him, and so let it go. But concerning D.
Hackwell of Exeter College, and Arch-De^con of Surrey, the Reader may be
pleased to know that in the year 1630. the Respondent set himself about the
Asser^ing of the History of the famous Saint and Soldier S. George of
Cappado^^^ the Patron-Saint, in the estimation of those times of the Renowned
Order of the Garter. In prosecution of which Argument he was encountered with
two contrary Opinions, the one of them headed by M. Calvin, who made S. Geo^ge
to be a Fiction, a No^ens, a mere Chimaera, the other set up by D. Reynolds,
who made him to be the very same with George the Arian, once Patriarch of
Alexandria, a bloody tyrant, and a great persecutor of the Orthod^x Christians.
Amongst the Followers of which last, he brings in D. Hackwell for one in these
words following, viz.

In the next place, take the assent of D. Hackwell in his examination of the
common error touching the decay of nature: The first whole Chapter of which
work is employed in this, That there are many of those Opinions which are
commonly received, both in ordinary speech, and in the Writings of learned men,
which notwithstanding are by others manifestly convinced of falsehood, or at
least wise suspected justly of it. And in particular, In History
Ecclesiastical (says he) it is commonly received, that S. George was an holy
Martyr, and that he conquered the Dragon, whereas D. Reynolds proves him to
have been both a wicked man and an Arian, by the testimony of Epiphanius,
A^hanasius, and Gregory Nazianzen. And B^^onius himself in plain terms
affirms, Apparet totam illum de actis Georgii ^abulam, fuisse commentum
Arian^rum. It appears that the whole story of S. George is nothing else but a
forgery of the A^ians; Yet was he received (as we know) as a canonized Saint,
through Christendom, and to be the Patron both of our Nat^o^, and of the most
honorable Order of Knighthood in the world; Which being all that had been said
of D. Hackwell in the first Edition of that Book (and more ther^ was not spoken
of him in the second neither) it is a wonder what should move the good old man
unto such a pet, as to speak so disgracefully of one who had never wronged him,
and had been always held as free from that odious crime of ^^^ndering others,
as D. Hackwell shows himself to be guilty of it.

For so it was that D. Hackwell finding himself concerned (but no otherwise
concerned then as before) in the first Edition bestirred himself in making a
confutation of that Book, and having finished it, commended it to the perusal
of D. Prideaux (whom he knew to be none of the Respondents best friends) to be
by him approved of and so passed to the Press, but it passed through so many
hands before it could come unto the Press^, that at last it came to the
Respondents, who found himself therein more uncivilly handled, then either by
the Squire himself, or any of those numerous Libellers, which exercised the
patience of the state for 7. years together: D. Hackwell neither treating him
with that ingenuity which became a Scholar, nor that Charity which became a
Christian. But on the reading of the Book, the Respondent found his Arguments
and Allegations, though many in number, to have been summed up by M. Pryn in
his Hist^yomastix. which he had ^ormerly perused, and without taking notice of
either adversary returned so full an answer to them, that he heard no more from
M. Pryn as to that particular. Not heard he any thing further from D. Hackwell
upon that Argument, more then the noise of some such Letters as M. Sanderson
has met with, purposely spread abroad (as D. Pri^e^ux his Paper was at the
same time also) to di^grace the Respondent, and ^^ep on foot those animosities
which they had against him. But (...) as we read in (...) D. H^ckw^ll having
thus wronged the Respondent, conceived he had not satisfied his desired
^eveng^, if he could not crush him at the last: And therefor at such time as
the Respondent was under the displeasu^e of the house of Commons, on the
complaint of M. Pryn (which was about the beginning of the late long
Parliament) he published a Discourse against him in answer to some p^ss^ges in
the Book Entitled, An idotum Lincolniense, etc. which he entitled by the name
of A Di^^ertation with D. Heylyn. Whether the Euch^rist be a sacrifice properly
so ^ermed, and that a^^^rding ^o the Do^trine and practice of the Ch^r^h of
England. One of which Books being brought to the R^spondent as soon as it was
come from the press, he found it no such knotty piece, but that it might have
been easily el^ft asunder without wedge or beetle, and had returned an answer
to it, if some of D. Hackwell^ Friends seeing how weakly it was penned, and how
unseasonably it was published, had not took order to suppress it; And they
suppressed it with such care and friendly diligence, that within three or four
days after the first coming of it out, there was not a book of them to be had
for love or money. The Narrative being thus laid down, the Respondent is to
make an answer to the charges in D. Hackwels Letter, as he has done before to
those in D. Prideaux his Paper.

For first, he says, that in his book of Saint George, he no where vili^ies
any of the eminent Divines or other of the Pro^estant and Reformed Churches
(our men as D. Hackwell calls them) unless to differ in opinion from them be a
vilifyi^g of them And if it be, then D. Hackwell may as well be said to vilify
Calvin, Chemnitius, Chamier, Tilenus, Perkin^, Boys, and Crakanthorpe, beside
many others, both of the foreign Churches, and the Church of England, who make
S. George to be a fiction, a Non-ens or a mere Chimaera, from whom he differs
in opinion in making him to be a wic^ed man, and an Arian, and therefore not a
fiction nor a mere C^ymaera. Assuredly the Respondent can see no reason why he
might not as well differ in this particular from D. Reynolds, D. Hackwell, and
the ^est of that G^ng as they from Calvin, and Chemnitius, and the (...) their
^ollowers; or as all of them differed in that p^int (...) ^ha^ which D.
Hackwell has ^on^est to have (...) received in Ecclesiastical History.
touching S. Geor^^, being a man and an holy Mar^yr.

And secondly, ^he Respondent ^aith, that as he villifies our men D. H^ckwell
should rat^er have said our Masters, so he magn fies (...) Roman Writers,
especially, ^he legendaries, that is to say, by concurring with them in some
^oints of S. George History, in which he finds them sec^nded by the
testimonies of more approved Writers then themselves. And if at any time he
speaks favorably of any of the Legendaries, as sometimes he does (and for
the credit of the cause he was bound to do) he did it not in his own words, and
speaking his own sense of them only, but in the words and sense of such ancient
and modern Authors as are of most unquestioned credit amongst the Learned:
Thus speaking of Simeon Metaphrastes he tells us what a high esteem was had of
him in the Greek Min^logies, and what high commendation had been given him by
Michael Psellus a man of great Learning in those times; and speaking of Iacobus
de Voragine, he lets the Reader know what had been said of him by Iohanno
Gerrard, Voscius, a man of too great parts for D. Hackwell to contend with, and
sic de c^teris; But whereas D. Hackwell tells his friend in that Letter that the
condition of the man that is to say, the Respondent) was such as his word
hardly passes either for commendation or a slander; The Respondent thereunto
replies. that he looks no otherwise on those words then as the extravagances of
a proud and passionate weakness. The Respondent stood at that time in as good
a condition for reputation and esteem with the generality of the Nation, as D.
Hackwell could pretend too; and would not have refused an encounter with him
upon any argument, either at the sharp or at the ^mooth, as the Pamphleter
words it. I am so^ry to have said thus much, but the indignity of the
provocation has enforced me to it, for which D. Hackwells Friend is to thank
M. Sand^rson, o^ condemn himself, in publishing those passages in cold blou^
(five and twenty years after they were written) which escaped the Doctor in his
heats. And so I leave my three great Names (those Magni nominis Vmbras in the
Poets Language) with a Tria sunt omnia, not looking for a Tria sequun^ur tria,
though the Squire should once again play the School boy, and rather fall upon
small games then none at all.

But the Pamp^leter will not leave the Respondent so. The Lord Primate in a
Letter to an Honorable friend had accused him of Soph^stry, and the Pamphleter
is resolved to make good the charge, assuring us, That in the judgment of
diverse he made it good throughout his book p. 18.
* and diverse they may be, though they be but two, Squire Sanderson and D.
Bernard, which are so many (so it follows) that they would find as much work
for an Observator, as he says my History will afford him. Never was Lillies
head so broken as it is by this Squire, who is so far from keeping the Rules of
Grammar, that he has forgotten his very Accidence, he would not else give us
two Adjectives, viz. which and many, which he knows cannot stand by themselves
without another word to be added to them for showing of their sense or
signification; Substantive I am sure there is none to own them, and therefore
we must take his meaning by his gaping only; Which though it be not wide enough
to speak out, does import thus much, That the Errors in the Book called
Respondent Petrus, are so great and many, that they would find as much work
for an Observator, as the Pamphleters History. It seems that the Respondent
Helpers being many in number (for he calls them by the Name of his Numerous
helpers) and all of them as subject unto error as the Squire himself, each of
them has committed one mistake at the least which will affo^d as much matter
for an Observator as the History does, what work the History has found for an
Observator has been seen by this time; And if ther^ (...) so many in the Book
called Respondet Petrus, as he (...) there are, why has not he or D Bernard
present^d them to the view of the world in so long a time? But yet w^ll fare
the Author for his wonderful cha^ity, who th^ugh he meet with many errors
and mistakes throughout the book (for such Helper on) yet is pleased to
satisfy himself with instancing in one, but such a one in such great
Ch^^^cters that he who rides Post (the Squire is always in (...)) may read it
without stopping p. 18.
.

Parturiunt montes. You have showed us the mountain, gentle Sir, but pray you,
Where is the mouse? Marry, says he, we find it page 63. where he rep^^ing a
quotation of the Lord Primate (in the end of his Letter to D. Twisse) ^orr^wed
from Gregory the Great, he had blindely mistaken the copulative And for the
Disjunctive Or p. 19.
. Had it been so, a man of any ordinary candor would have looked upon it as an
error rather of the Press then the Pen. B^t the Squire who has a quicker
sight, quam aut ^q^ila (...) serpens Epidaurius in the Poets Language, has in
this shown himself more blind then he makes the Respondent, for in page 63.
which the Pamphl^ter cites, we find the whole passage to be thus, viz.

The next Authority is taken from Greg^ry the Great, who tells us, that it is
the Doctrine of the Preachers of Antichrist, qui veniens, diem Dominicum and
Sabbatum ab omni opere faciet custodiri, who at his coming shall cause both the
Lords day and the Sabbath to be kept or celebrated without doing any manner of
work. Now let the S^uire ^who can see further i^to a millstone p. 5.
then the R^spondent and his Helpers are affirmed to do) resolve me when he
next sets out, whether the word and in S. G^egory be turned into* or by the
R^spondent; and if it be not, as it is not, what is become of that mistake so
gross, and written in such great characters that any one who rides Post may
read it. Our Squi^e for this deserves the Spurs, and to be made a Knight of
the advice then the nature of the offense required. What followed upon this
Appeal we are informed by both our Authors: In the relating of which story
from the first to the last M. S^n^^rson has dealt more ingenuously then the
(...)

For fi^^t, M. Sa^ders^n tells us, that the occasion of the Di^cont^nts which
increased at Oxon, An. 1631. arose from t^is, ^iz. Many (...) that the
Renovations reducing (...) times, was now no less then Innovation, (...) in
their Pulpits and (...). But M. Ful^er, according to his wonted manner of
reporting all things favorably for the Puritan party, will have the occasion
to be this, viz. That many conceived that Innovations ( (...) by others for
Renovations, and now (...) in the Primitive times) were multiplied in (...)
whereat they in their Sermons (...) into (what was interpreted) bitter
invectives. Lib. 11. Fol. 141. which puts a great difference in the Case,
seeming to justify the Offenders, in that which was reputed (and but reputed)
to be bitter Invectives, and to condemn the Church for multiplying Innovations
in the Service of God.

Secondly, M. Sanderson tells us, That their very Texts ga^^ just cause of
offense and mutiny, and many such reflecting upon the most em^nent in the
(^urch, and violating the Kings De^laration for the depressing of Armini^^
Controversies. But M. F^ller must needs mince the matter. And though he tell us
That their Texts gave some (and but some) offense, and that they had some tart
re^lexion on some eminent persons in the Church, adds next, that they are
apprehended to viol^te the Kings Declaration: Not that the Kings Declaration
for (...) (as his own words are) had been viol^t^^ by them, but that it was
apprehend^d so to (...) might be better Scholars then Lawyers, yet Law and
Learning must submit when power is pleased to interpose, which intimates that
the Archbishop carried this business by the hand of power, against Law and
Learning. Finally M. Sanders^n subjoyning the death of Archbishop Harsnet to
the end of the differences in Oxon, has told us of him, that he was a discreet
assertor of these necessary and useful Ceremonies: M. Fuller relating the same
story has told us only that he was a zealous assertor of Ceremonies, but
whether useful or unusefull, necessary or unnecessary, he determines not:
which shows more candor in the State then the Church-Historian, so farewell to
both.

Errata on the Advertisements.
PAge 30. line 13. for queint r. texit. p 34. l. 17. for by the History r. by
the Author of the History. p. 36. l. 29. for facies not. r. facies non. r.
facies non. p. 40. l. 27. for of ore r. in ore. p. 41. l. 3. for midsummer
last, r. Midsummer 1657. p. 70. l. 30. for D. Lawd Archbishop of Canterbury, r.
D. Lawd then Bishop of S. David's, and af^erward Archbishop of Canterbury. p.
75. l. 15. for Bleth or. Bl^so. p. 78. l. 12. for 1627. r. 1629. p. 84. l. 16.
for Nassautiae, r. Nassoni^. p. 94. l. 7. for but three, r. but three of the
Dudl^ys, p. 98. l. 14. for at the valley r. at the battle. p. 98. l. ^2. for of
the fi^^st^. of his changing of the first design. p. 106. l. 10. for Willain,
r. Millain. p. 120. l. 12. for pr^^iso. p^omise. p. 15^. l. 29. for seas r.
s^ales. p. 163. l. ult. for Toucester, r. from T^ucester* p. 1^9. l. 11. for
the first, r. the last. p. 205. l. 2. for the ^east, r. them, least.


