portrait of John Heydon Vera et Viva Effigies Johan^is Heydon Equitis (...)
Not: 1629: Die: Sept: 10.9:45: PM
Gaudet patientia duris. depiction of book (entitled) Otia Imperialia



depiction of book (entitled) The Idea of the Law



depiction of book (entitled) of Policy Government and War



depiction of book (entitled) Regio Lucis



depiction of book (entitled) The Harmony of the World



depiction of book (entitled) The Temple of Wisdom



depiction of book (entitled) The Holy Guide



Lilly


The Wise-Mans Crown: OR, THE GLORY Of the Rosie-Cross.

SHOWING The Wonderful Power of Nature, with the full discovery of the true
Coelum Terrae, or first Matter of Metals, and their Preparations into
incredible Medicines or Elixirs that cure all Diseases in Young or Old: With
the Regio Lucis, and holy Household of Rosy Crucian Philosophers.

Communicated to the World By JOHN HEYDON, Gent. A Servant of GOD, and
Secretary to Nature.

(...). (i. e.)

He that looks upon my Books, let him learn to be religious.

LONDON: Printed for the Author; and are to be sold by Samuel Speed at the
Rainbow in Fleetstreet. 1664.

THE LIFE OF John Heydon The Son of FRANCIS and MARY HEYDON Now of Sidmouth in
Devonshire.
John Heydon is not basely but Nobly descended, The Antiquaries derive them
from Julius Heydon the King of Hungary and Westphalia, that were descended from
that noble family of Caesar Heydon in Rome, and since in this Royal Race the
line run down to the Honorable Sr. Christopher Heydon of Heydon near Northwich
Sr. John Heydon late Lord Lieutenant of the Kings Tower of London, and the
noble Chandlers in Worcestershire of the Mothers side which line spread by
Marriage into Devonshire, among the Collin's, Ducks, Drues and Bears, he had
one Sister named Anne Heydon, who dyed two years since, his Father and Mother
being yet living: He was born at his Fathers House in Green-Arbour London, and
Baptized at St. Sepulchers and so was his Sister, and both in the fifth and
seventh years of the Reign of King Charles the First, he was educated in
Warwickshire among his mothers friends, and so careful were they to keep him
and his sister from danger and to their Books, that they had one continually to
wait upon them, both to the School and at home.

He was Commended by Mr. John Dennis his Tutor in Tardebick to Mr. George
Linacre Priest of Coughton, where he learned the Latin and Greek tongues, the
War at this time began to molest the Universities of this Nation, He was then
Articled to Mr. Mic. Petley an Attorney of Cliffords Inn with eighty pound,
that at five years end he should be sworn before Chief Justice Roll, now being
very young he applied his mind to Learning, and by his happy wit obtained
great knowledge in all Arts and Sciences, afterward also he followed the
Armies of the King, and for his valor Commanded in the Troops, when he was by
these means famous for Learning and Arms, he Traveled into Spain, Italy,
Arabia, Egypt and Persia, and gave his mind to writing, and Composed about 20
years since The Harmony of the World in two Books, The Temple of Wisdom in
three Book, The Holy Guide in six Books, Elhavareuna in one Book, Hampaneah
Hammeguleh in one Book, Ocia Imperialia in one Book, The Idea of the Law, The
Idea of Government, The Idea of Tyranny in three parts, The Fundamental
Elements of Morral Philosophy, Policy, Government and War, etc.

These Books were written near 20 years since, and preserved by the good hand
of God in the Custody of Mr. Thomas Heydon, Sr. John Hanmer, Sr. Ralph Freman,
and Sr. Richard Temple during the Tyrants time, first one had the Books, then
another, etc. And at last at the Command of these Honorable Learned, and
valiant Knights they were Printed.

He wrote many excellent things, and performed many rare experiments in the
Arts of Astromancy and Geomancy etc. but especially eighty one, the first upon
the Kings Death, Predicted in Arabia by him to his Friends, The second upon the
losses of the King at Worcester Predicted at Thauris in Persia, the third
Predicted the Death of ^liver Cromwell in Lambeth house to many Persons of
Honor mentioned in his Books, the fourth he wrote of the overthrow of Lambert,
and of the Duke of Albymarle his bringing again of the King to his happy
Countries, and gave it to Major Christopher Berkenhead a Goldsmith at the
Anchor by Fetter-lane end in Holborn, the fifth precaution or Prediction he
gave to his Highness the Duke of Buckingham two Months before the evil was
practiced: And his Enemy Abraham Goodman lies now in the Tower for attempting
the death of that Noble Prince. The sixth for Count Gramont when he was
banished into England by the King of France, and he predicted by the Art of
Astromancy and Geomancy the Kings receiving of him again into favor and of his
marriage to the Lady Hamelton. The seventh for Duke Minulaus a Peer of Germany
that the Emperor sent to him, when the Turk had an Army against him, and of
the death of the Pope the rest are in his Books, And therefore by these
Monuments the name of Heydon for his variety of Learning was famous not only
in England, but also in many other Nations into which his Books are Translated.
And it seems something difficult to determine, whether the sophistication of
truth, or the fucus of errors has of late years been the more Epidemical cheat
in Print, it being sufficiently notorious how this generation of Tailors
Almanacks, the under-wits go a whoring after the Press, and what a noisome
spawn of Brats are generated of the froth of illegitemate Brains, not less
numerous then spurious, that neither their male content Parents nor Religion,
Law, Reason, nor Charity are able to maintain. And although Mr. John Heydon's
works be of a more generous extraction, yet they are very far from
Complementing themselves with the least v^^n hopes of exemption from those
censures which are common to all men, It is worth an Asterisk to observe how,
infeazable it has been in all ages for the most innocent to escape this
Correction, Divine Plato that Prince of Philosophers is accused for being too
confused and immethodical, Virgil by some is counted but a shallow and weak
witted Poet, and by others charged as if he were wholly be holding to Homer for
his works, and Homer himself is derided by Horace, as if he were too drowsy a
Poet, Demosthenes could not please Marcus Tullius in all things, Trogas
Pompeius does accuse Titus Livius his Orations of fictions and falsities,
Seneca was Nic-named and called Lime without Sand; Pliny is compared to a
turbulent River that taste of many things but digests few, Hermes is called by
some the dark King, some affirm Zoroaster had no depth of Judgment.

An Astrologicall Tailor accuses Cornelius Agrippa Knight. John Heydon, Appolonius,
and Tritemius of inventing new and strange principles in Philosophy D. Brown is
reproved for inconstancy and instability of Judgment: And Mr. Moor and
Eugenius Philalethes for their too much subtilty in some things, Mr. Hobs is
thought too full of Reason in his Religion, and the Lord Verulam is taxed for
the length of Learning, Paracelsus is envyed for hard words, Sir Kenelm Digby
is censured by Tho. Vaughan Dr. Barlovv for his tedious distinctions, Des
Carts for the perplexity of his Method, and in a word these very learned and
most excellent Philosophers Physicians and Divines that by the profoundness of
their Judgment and splendour of their Eloquence have so illustrated the three
Kingdoms as that they have left the world Just cause of their Admiration, no
hopes of Imitations even these have not escaped the like Misreprehensions for
in the late years, invectives have been written against these men, yet who more
learned then Sir Kenelme Digby, more eloquent then Dr Barlow, who more witty
then Mr. More and Eugenius Philalethes, who more acute then Mr. Hobs who more
free and flued then Lord Verulam, who more delightful and satisfactory then
Gregory and Gafferell, who more profound in Philosophy then Henry Agrippa
Knight, who more Candid and ingenious then Roger L'Estrange, who more clear and
transparent then Paracelsus, who more distinct then Vincent Wing, and succinct
then Dr. Wallis yet all these in their respective and incomperable works have
met with the said undue reprehensions. If his works therefore shall chance to
meet with some waspish humors, let him consider the Climate, Nor is it more
then wants a president, or less then needs a Charitable Construction; which is
the worst revenge can possibly be executed by such as choose rather to suffer
then offend Mr. JOHN HEYDON, For the Tailors amongst the Almanac Makers carp
at all the rest and envy all, amongst Philosophers, Democretus laugheth at all
things Heraclitus weepeth at all things Pyrhias is ignorant of all things, and
Plato knows all things, Diogenes contemnes all things, This John Heydon,
fears none, contemns none, is ignorant of none, rejoices in none, grieves at
none, laughes at none is angry with none, but being himself a Philosopher he
has taught the way to happiness the way to long life, the way to health, the
way to wane young being old, and the way to resolve all manner of Questions,
Present and to Come; by the Rules of Astromancy and Geomancy, and how to raise
the dead.

He is a man of Middle stature tending to tallness, a handsome straight body an
Ovall ruddy face mixed with a clear white, his hair of a dark flaxen brown
color soft and curling in rings gently at the ends of the Locks, his hands and
fingers long and slender, his legs and feet well proportioned, so that to look
upon he is a very complete Gentleman; But he never yet cast affection on a
woman, nor do I find him inclined to marry, He is very often in great Ladies
chambers, and I believe his modest behavior there, makes them the more
delighted in his company, The Princes and Peers not only of England, but of
Spain, Italy, France and Germany, send daily to him, And upon every occasion he
shows strong parts, and a vigorous brain, his wishes and aims, and what he
points at, speak him owner of a noble and generous heart, this Gentleman's
Excellent Books are admired by the world of Lettered men, as the prodigy of
these later times (indeed his works before mentioned (if I am able to Judge any
thing) are full of the profoundest learning I ever met withal: And I believe;
who has well read and digested them, will persuade himself, there is no truth
so abstruse, nor hitherto conceived out of our reach, But man's wit may raise
Engines to scale and conquer, I assure my self he is owner of a solid head, and
of a strong generous heart, And if any should question my Judgment, they may
read the Comendations of both the Universities, Oxford and Cambridge, besides
the learned Thomas White and Thomas Revell, Esquire; both famous in Rome and other
parts beyond Sea, that have highly honored this Gentleman in their Books; yet
he has suffered many Misfortunes, his Father was sequestered, Imprisoned, and
lost two thousand pounds by Cromwell, this Oliver imprisoned this son also two
year and half or thereabout in Lambeth-House: For he and his Fathers Family
were always for the King, And endeavored to the utmost his restoration, And
indeed the Tyrant was cruel to him, but John Thurloe his Secretary was kind to
him, and pitied his curious youth, And Joshua Leadbeater the Messenger kept
him (At his request and Mr. John Bradley's) at his own house, And gave him
often leave to go abroad, but being yet zealous and active for the King, he was
again taken and clapped up in Lambeth-House, in these misfortunes it cost him
1000 l. and upwards, after this some envious villains forged Actions of debt
against him, and put him in prison, It seems at the beginning of these
misfortunes, a certain Harlot would have him to marry her, but denying her suit
or that he ever promised any such thing, and that he never spoke to her in his
life good or evil, She devised with her confederates abundance of mischief
against him: see him she did in some Gentlemen's company. Many courted him to
Marry but he denied, now there was left (amongst a few old Almanacks, and
scraps of other men's wit) Collected and bequeathed unto the world by Nic. Culpe
(as his own admired experience) Alice Culpeper his widow, she hearing of this
Gentleman that he was an Heir, to a great fortune Courts him by letters of
Love, to no purpose, the next Saint in order was she that calls her self the
German Princess. But he flies high and scorns such fowl, great beasts the first
of these two blessed birds in her life time caused one Heath to Arrest him, and
another after him laid Actions against him, that he never knew nor heard of.

In this perplexity was he imprisoned two years, for they did desire nothing
but to get money, or destroy him, for fear if ever he got his liberty he might
then punish them, He being of a Noble Nature forgave them all their malice and
devices against him, and scorns to revenge himself upon such pitiful things,
God indeed has done him the justice, for this Heath Consumes to worse then
nothing, and indeed if I can Judge or predict any thing) his Baudy-houses will
be Pawned and he will dye a miserable diseased beggar. His Mistress when he was
very young and a Clerk desired him to lie withher, but he like Joseph
refusing, she hated him all her life, God preserved him from their malice,
although one of these 3 lewd women swore this Gentleman practiced the Art
Magic, she told Oliver Cromwell, she saw familiar Spirits come and go to him
in the shape of Conies, and her maid swore she had often seen them in his
Chamber when he was abroad, and sometimes walking upon the house top in a Moon
shine night, and sometimes to vanish away into a wall or Air, and yet she
never saw him in her life, nor could she tell what manner of man he was. But
these stories were not Credited, and for all these and many more afflictions
and false accusations, I never saw him angry, nor did he ever Arrest or
imprison any man or woman in all his life yet no clyent of his was ever
damnifyed in his suit.

He was falsely accused but lately of writing a Seditious Book and imprisoned in
a Messengers Custody. But his Noble friend the Duke of Buckingham, finding him
innocent and always for the King he was then discharged, and indeed this
glorious Duke is a very good and just Judge: and although some speak slightly
of him, he studies the way to preserve his King and Country in peace plenty
and prosperity, it is pity the King has no more such brave men as he, a
thousand such wise Dukes as this (like Marshaled Thunder, backed with flames of
fire) would make all the enemies of the King and Christendom Quake; and the
Turk fly before such great Generals, in all submission we humbly pray for
this Great Prince, and leave him to his pleasure and return to our subject.

John Heydon is not of that vain and presumptuous Nature as the Tailors that
despise all Artists even Agrippa, Appolonius, More, Vaughan and Tritemius. And
yet they cannot read these and many other Learned Authors they so impudently
abuse, Rob of their Learning, and convert other men's parts to their own profit,
He lent one Ten pound in Gold, he in requital or return speaks ill of him, and
pretends to know many admirable Rules of Geomancy and impertinently adds them
to Nativities, and applies them to all manner of Questions in Astromancy, but
his Books being written so long since, viz. near twenty years by himself, their
greediness of great matters is discovered, and we now know them to be neither
Scholars nor Gentlemen, these hang up clouts with here are Nativities
Calculated, Questions resolved, and all the parts of Astrology taught by us --
For three pence, four pence, six pence, or higher if you please, thus are young
Apprentices, old women and wenches abused and that they may be found, for
money, they tell us the 12 Houses of heaven in the sign of a Coat of Arms are
to be let, when they might indeed set bills upon their brazen foreheads,
engraven thus, Here are Rooms to be let unfurnished, but our Author regards not
these men, all their scandals forgeries and villainous devices they contrive
against him, he slights and scorns and has purposely forsaken Spittle-Fields
and his lodgings there to live a private Life, free from the concourse of
multitudes of people that daily followed after him, but if any desire to be
advised let them by way of letter leave their business at his Booksellers, and
they shall have answer and Counsel without reward, for he is neither envious
nor enemy to any man, what I write is upon my own knowledge.

He writes now from Hermeupolis a place I was never at, It seems by the word to
be the City of Mercury, and truly he has been in many strange places, among the
Rosy Crucians And at their Castles, Holy-houses Temples, Sepulchers,
Sacrifices, all the world knows this Gentleman studys honorable and honest
things, and faithfully comunicates them to others, yet if any traduce him
hereafter they must not expect his Vindication, he has refered his quarrel to
the God of Nature, it is involved in the concernments of his Truths and he is
satisfied with the peace of a good conscience, he has been misinterpreted in
his writing with studied Calumnies they disparage his person whom they never
saw nor perhaps will see, he is resolved for the future to suffer, for he says,
God condemns no man, for his patience, the world indeed may think the truth
overthrown, because she is attended with his peace for in the Judgment of most
men, where there is no noise, there is no victory, this he looks upon as no
dissadvantage the estimate of such censures will but lighten the scales, and I
dare suppose them very weak brains, who conceives the truth sinks because it
outweighs them, as for tempestious out-crys when they want their Motives they
discover an irreligious spirit, one that has more of the Hurry-eano then of
Christ Jesus God was not in the wind that rent the rocks in pieces, nor in the
Earthquake and fire at Horeb. He was in Aura tenui, in the still small voice,
his enemies are forced to praise his virtue and his friends are sorry he has
not 10000 pounds a year, he does not resent the common spleen, who writes the
truth of God has the same Patron with the truth it self, and when the world
shall submit to the general Tribunal, he will find his Advocate where they
shall find their Judge, there is Mutual Testimony between God and his Servants,
or nature and her Secretary, If the Baptist did bear witness of Christ, Christ
did also as much for the Baptist; He was a burning and a shining light, when I
writ this Gentleman's life God can bear me witness it was unknown to him and for
no private ends, but I was forced to it by a strong Admiration of the Mystery
and Majesty of Nature written by this Servant of God and Secretary of Nature, I
began his Life some years since, and do set it down as I do find it, if any
man oppose this, I shall answer, if you are for peace, peace be with you, if
you are for War, I have been so too, (Mr. Heydon does resolve never to draw
Sword again in England, except the King command him.) Now let not him that puts
on the Armor boast like him that puts it off: Gaudet patientia duris is his
Motto, and thus I present my self a friend to All Artists, and enemy to no man.

Frederick Talbot Esquire;
March 3 1662/3,
To the Most Excellently Accomplished the truly honorable learned wise
virtuous etc, Bevis Lloyd Esquire; Eternal Health be wished.
I Would have you know, that I love and honor you beyond expression and shall
serve you in Art and Nature to my power, I have presumed to make you one in the
number of my Noble Patrons, because I hear the wickedness of some Pulpit
Politicians incessantly rageing against my person which they never saw, nor
perhaps will see, these sophistical Sicophants contend against me continually
with bitter hatred, envy and Malice, without any provocation on my part one
very proudly with a full mouth and loud voice aspersed me with Atheism in St.
Paul's Church in his morning Sermon the eight of May, before the Lord Mayor and
others, Amonst a promiscuous people, Railing against the Rosy Crucians, who
Art and Nature united, Others in Coffee discourse and stinking smoke of Tobacco
did fill the ears of the Ignorant with my infamy others in public and private
assemblies, I hear do instigate the Dukes Princes and Peers of England etc
against me, But my Religion being published, I would have you know my
Philosoply is to know God himself, the worker of all things, and io pass into
him by a whole Image of likeness (as by an Essential Contract and bond) whereby
we may be transformed and made as God, As the Lord spoke concerning Moses,
saying, I have made thee the God of Pharaoh, this is the true Rosy Crucian
Philosophy of wonderful works, that they understand not, the Key thereof is the
intellect: for by how much higher things we understand with so much the
sublimer virtues are we endowed, and so much greater things do work, and that
more easily and efficatiously But our intellect being included in the
Corruptible flesh, unless it shall exceed the way of the flesh and obtain a
proper Nature, cannot be united to these virtues (for like to like) And is in
searching into the Rosy Crucian secrets of God and Nature altogether in
efficatious; for it is no easy thing for us to ascend to the Heavens, for how
shall he that has lost himself in Morral Dust and ashes, find God. How shall
he apprehend spiritual things that is swallowed up in flesh and blood, can man
see God and live, what fruit shall a grain of Corn bear if it be not first
dead, for we must dye, I say dye to the world, and to the flesh, and all senses
and to the whole man Animal, who would enter into these closets of secrets, Not
because the body is separated from the soul, but because the soul leaves the
body, of which death S. Paul wrote to the Collossians: ye are dead and your life
is hid with Christ: And elsewhere he speaks more clearly of himself, I know a
Man, whether in the body or out of the body I cannot tell, God knows, caught up
unto the third heaven etc. I say by this death precious in the sight of God we
must dye which happens to few: and not always, for very few whom God loves, and
are virtuous are made so happy. And first those that are born, not of flesh and
blood, but of God? secondly those that are dignified by the blessed assistance
of Angels and Genii the Power of Nature Influence of Planets, and the Heavens
and virtues of the figures and Ideas at their birth, now this I humbly entreat
you, that you be not mistaken concerning me as if I at any time having received
such divine things should boast of them to you, or should arrogate any such
thing to my self, or could hope to have them granted to me, Although I have
hitherto kept my self unmarryed and free from the company of a woman, yet I
have been a soldier following the Armies of the King, and in other Countries
consecrated with man's blood, and exposed to all the blasts of inconstant
fortune, and being crossed in my flesh in the world and worldly afairs and
therefore could not obtain the sublime Gifts of the Immortal God. But I would
be accounted a director, who always waiting at the doors shows to others which
way they must go, And here I present my self your most humble servant and
honourer

May the 9th 1664 5 h ^^ A. M. John Heydon.

An Apologue for an Epilogue
ABout the year 1648 we Studied Astronancy and Geomancy, and writ the Harmony
of the World in two Books, the first Printed for Mr. Brom with the Temple of
Wisdom at his house in Ivy-Lane, The Holy Guide, Elhavareuna, being an
Introduction to the Rosy Crucian philosophy, and diversely Compiled in these
Books, in short words, yet sufficient for those who are wise; some of these
things are written Methodically, some without order pur posely some things are
delivered by fragments, some things are even hid and left for the search of the
wise, who more acutely contemplating these things which are written, and
diligently searching (the Harmony of the World, the Temple of Wisdom, and the
Holy Guide) may obtain the Complete rudiments of the Rosy Crucian Philosophy
and also infallible experiments: and if you desire to study these Books, keep
silence and Constantly conceal within the secret closet of your Religous
breast, so holy a determination; for (as Taphthartharath says) to publish to
the knowledge of many an Art wholly filled with so great Majesty of the Deity,
is a sign of an Irreligious spirit; and Divine Plato Commanded that holy and
secret mysteries should not be made public to the people, Pythagoras and
Prophiry consecrated their followers to a religious Silence, The Rosy Crucians
with a certain terible authority of religion, do exact an oath of silence from
those they initiate to the Arts of Astromancy Geomancy and Telesmaticall
Images, because by them the dead are raised to life, by them they alter change
and amend bodies, cure the deseased prolong Life, preserve Health, renew youth
in old folk, make dwarfs grow great men, make fools and Madmen wise and
virtuous, destroy the power of writchs, by these Arts they make men fortunate
in play, law suits love, victory over enemies, in Horse Races in Gameing, in
Merchandise and at sea, silencing the violent waves, by these Arts they know
all things and resolve all manner of questions present or to come, as says
Beata.

YOu that admirers are of virtue, stay
Consider well what I to you shall say,
But you, that sacred laws contemn, profane
Away from hence, return no more again,
But thou O my Eugenius whose mind is high
Observe my words and read them with thine eye,
And them within thy sacred breast repone
And in thy journey think of God alone,
The Author of all things that cannot die.
Of whom we uow shall Treat --
And Engenius The odidactus Proclaims
Beata Pulchra comes, hence, hence, all ye profane
Theodidatus cries, and from her grove refrain.
Now in celebrating the holy mysteries of Hester Heaton, and Beata Pulchra they
only were admitted to be initiated, Eugenius Theodidactus proclaiming the
profane vulgar to depart, of these goddesses you may read at Large in our
Temple of Wisdom; in Esdras we read this precept concerning the Cabalisticall
secret of the Hebrews declared in these verses, thou shall deliver those Books
to the wisemen of the people, whose hearts thou know can comprehend them and
keep those secrets, in the Temple of Wisdom you see obscure Figures of
Astromancy and Geomancy, whereunto is added the Alphabet of Angels or writing
and Language of Haeven, affording compendious words partly by Stars,
Characters set in manner of a wheel thick, the reading thereby being defended
from the Curiosity of the profane, therefore my worthy Scholars in this
science be silent, and hide those things which are secret in Religion, for the
promise of silence is due to Religion as Tertullian affirms but they which do
otherwise are in great danger, Now concerning these secrets my Ingenious
disciples, I would tell you, if it were lawful to tell you, you should know
all, if it were lawful to hear it; but both ears and tongue would contract
the same guilt of rash curiosity, the divine Goddess Hester Heaton sings in
those verses the power of God
The Heavens Jove's Royal Palace, he is King
Fountain virtue and God of every thing,
He is omnipotent, and in his breast
Earth, water, fire, and air do take their rest;
Both night and day, true wisdom with sweet Love
Are all contained in this vast bulk of Jove
His neck and glorious head if you would see
Behold the Heavens high, and Majesty


The glorious Rays of Stars do represent
His golden lock, and's head adornament.
And again she sings else where to her friend Eugenius Theodidactus,
Bright Phoebus and the Moon, are the two eyes
Of this great Jove by which all things, he spies
His head which predicts all, is placed in the sky
From which no Noise can whisper secretly
It pierces all; his body vast extends
Both far and wide, and knows no bounds nor ends
The spacious Air's his breath, his wings the wind
By which he flies far swifter then the mind
His belly is our Mother Earth, who swells
Into huge Mountains, whom the Ocean fills
And Circles, his feet are the rocks and stones
Which of this globe are the foundations
This Jove under the Earth conceals all things
And from the depth into the light them brings.
This goddess commands secrecy, and Theodorus the Tragic Poet, when he would
have reforced something of the mysteries of the Jews Scripture to the abhored
actions and deeds of harlots and villains upon the stage was deprived of
sight, and the Journimen Traitors or Tailors in their nativities, Almanacks,
and monthly Predictions verses and observations against their Sacred Majestyes
King Charles the first and second and the Duke of Buckinham are now deprived of
truth, and they cannot write or predict any thing against this Divine
government; but lies and my disciples concurred the displeasure of Beata
Pulchra and Hester Heaton, Because they interpreted the phaenomaena of Nature,
from the Harmony of the World, The Temple of Wisdom, and the Holy Guide and
published them, they dreamed next that the goddesses Hester Heatan and Beata
Pulchra stood in (whores habits before the Brothell house and they wrathfully
answered their admiration, that they were by them violently drawn from their
modesty and prostituted every where to all common, by which they are admonished
that the ceremonies of the Gods ought not to be divulged, Pithagoras Socrates
Plato Aristoxenus kept the Mysteries of God and nature inviolable, but Plotinus
as Porphiry relates, broke the oath which he made to his Mastera Ammonius, and
published his Mysteries, for the punishment of his transgression he was burnt
with lightning, and consumed alive to his bones with Lice, our Savior Christ
also himself while he lived on Earth, spoke after that manner and fashion,
that only the more intimate Apostles should understand the mystery of the word
of God, but the other should perceive the Parables only: Commanding moreover
that holy things should not be given to dogs, nor pearly cast to swine, I would
also warn you Readers of the Harmony of the World, The Temple of Wisome and the
Holy Guide, that even as the Divine powers detest public things and profane,
and love secrecy: So every Rosy Cruican experiment flees the public, seeks
to be hid, is strengthened by silence but is destroyed by publication, neither
does any complete effect follow after all these things suffer loss, when they
are powered into prating, and incredulous minds; therefore it behooves a
Philosopher, if he would get fruit from this Art, to be secret, and to manifest
to none, neither his work nor place, nor time, neither his desire nor will
unless either to a Master or partner or Compaion, who ought also to be
faithful beleiving silent, and Digified by nature and education: Seeing that
even the prating of a companion, his incredulity and unworthiness hinders and
disturbeth the effect of every operation, we have now delivered this Harmony of
the world, The Temple of Wisdom and the Holy Guide, in such a manner, that it
may not be hid from the prudent and intelligent, and yet may not admit wicked
and incredulous men to the Mysteries of the Rosy Crucian Philosophy but leave
them destitute and astonished, in the shade of ignorance and desperation, you
therefore sons of wisdom and Learning search diligently in the Harmony of the
world, The Temple of Wisdom and the Holy Guide, gathering together our
dispersed intentions, which in diverse places we have propounded and what is hid
in one place, we make manifest in another, that it may appear to you wise men;
For, for you only have we written, whose mind is not corrupted but regulated
according to the right order of living, unmarryed, who in Chastity and honesty,
and in sound faith fear and reverence of God: whose hands are free from sin and
wickedness, whose manners are gentle, sober, and Modest, you only shall find
out this knowledge contained in the Harmony of the World, The Temple of Wisdom
and the Holy Guide, which is preserved for you, and the secrets which are hid
by many enigmas cannot be perceived but by wise men, which when you shall
obtain the whole science of the invincible Rosy Crucian discipline will
insinuate it self unto you and these virtues will appear to you, which the
Rosy Crucians, who wrought miracles, obtained, but ye envious Tailors or
unworthy Scorpionists, Calumniators, sons of base Ignorance, Journimen
Traitors, foolish writers of Almanacks and other leudness, that deceives them
that trust him, railing down right and with studied lies disparages our person,
that was so kind to them as to lend them ten pound in Gold and bad lent them
100 l. if we had not found Them of an ungrateful ill Nature, we scorn to speak
how much our love was to the sending and giving great gifts, These in requ^^^^
Provoke men to anger, and quarrel, and pick words to advantage, and if any man
invite them to fight, then begargly cowardlike run to Law, and bring false
witnesses to justify their deceitful devices, to get money And so some of
these Astrologicals live, at this Lewd rate being not worthy of any regard, But
says a poet.

Since by thy late lost love. I have found out,
Thy frindships famed like the Common rout;
Who prise men's worths at an unconstant rate
Just as they se' them raised or pres'd by fate,
When we look upon his natural parents, Kindred, and relations, and consider
his education, we indeed must give him his due title i. e. a man that by his
own industry and a little instruction (of an Astrologer and our self) has
obtained knowledge in Astrology and Geomancy and can make an Almanac etc. but
he is so envious scandalous and malicious against others, that it clouds his
better parts, The late years of tirany admitted stocking weavers Shomakes,
Millers Masons, Carpenters, Bricklaiers Gunsmiths Porters, Butlers etc. To
write and teach Astrology and Physic, and what a noisome spawn of brates, (as
Mr. Talbot calls them) are generated of the Frothy brains of these illegitimate
scriblers, that went a whoring after the press, and railed against Monarthy and
all men, and cannot yet love one anothe, we forbid these to come nigh our
writings for they are your enemies and stand out a precipice, that ye may ere
and fall head long into misery; if any therefore through his incredulity or
dullness of intellect, does not obtain his desire let him not impute the fault
of his Ignorance to us, or say that we have erred, or written falsely and lied,
but let him accuse himself, who understands not our writings for they are
obscure, and covered with diverse mysteries, by the which it will easily happen,
that many may ere and loose their sense, therefore let no man be angry with us,
for we are envious against no man, but have folded up the truth of this science
with many Enigmaes, and dispersed it in diverse places, for we have not hidden
it from the wise but from the wicked and undgodly and have delivered it in such
words which necessarily blind the foolish, and easily may admit the wise to the
understanding of them thus being willing to teach any ingenuous man form our
Vergin palace in

Hermeupolis May. 3 1664. JOHN HEYDON.

To the most accoplisht Philosopher and learned Secretary of Nature, Mr. John
Heydon on his Elhavareuna or Hamaguleh Hampaaneah. The Harmony of the World,
The Temple of Wisdom, The Holy Guide, G^ia Imperialia, The Idea of the Law,
and his other Admirable works written about 17 years since, that are now
Published.
NOw the wits do sally, and attempt your guard;
OF how your busy brain does beat and ward;
Rally and reinforce! rout! and relieve;
Double reserves, and then an onset give
Like marshalled Thunder back-dwith flames of fire
Storms mixed with storms! passion with globes of Ire
Yet so well disciplined that Judgment still
Swai'd, and not rasht Commissionated will
No, words in you know order, time, and place,
The instant of a Charge, or when to face
When to pursue advantage and where to halt
When to draw of, and where to re-astault
Such sure Commands streams from you that it is one
with you to vanquish as to look upon
So that your ruined Foes grovelling confess
Your conquests were their fate and happiness
Nor was it here your business to war
With foreign Artists: But thy Active star
Does course a home bred mist, Astrology
And show its guilts degrees, wherein a lie
How Simple men abuse it and Geomancy
I challenge all against 'them can say
Sentence expel them, And let your sun
An ever lasting stage in honor run
By that its motion to thee ye of man
Wave still in a Complete a Miridion.
March 25 th 1664. at 10 A.M Sir. Kepple Drue Baronet.

To the Admirable Philosopher and Law-yer Mr. JOHN HEYDON
THis is no Wanton Gallant that lies
Angling for babies in his Mistris's eyes,
And think there is no heaven like a bale of dyce
Six horses and a Coach with a device
A cast of Lacquies, and a Lady-Bird,
An Oath in fashion and a gilded sword.
That smoke Tobacco with a face in frame
And speak perhaps a line of sense to the same,
That sleeps a sabbath over in his bed
And if his Play-books there will stoop to read,
Does kiss its hand, and Congey a-la-mode,
And when the nights approaching bolt abroad;
Unless his honor's worships rents not come,
So he falls sick, and swears the Carrier home:
Else if his rare devotion swell so high
To wast an Hourglass on Divinity,
It Is but to make the Church his Stage, thereby
To blaze the Tailor in his Rebaldry
Ask but the Parrot when his distress shall fall,
Like an Armed man upon him, where are all,
Those rose buds of his Youth, those antique toys,
Wherein he sported out his precious days;
What comfort he Collects from Hawk or Hound,
Or if amongst his looser hours he found,
One of a thousand to redeem that time
Perished, and lost for ever in his prime.
Or if he dreamed of an eternal bliss,
And swears God damn him he nere thought of this,
But like the Epicure adored the day
That shined rose up to eat and drink and Play;
The more sprightly Element of pure fire
Above that Gallant does advance this higher.
This Author's Noble great and wise
His Soul aloft does soar above the skies.
To God himself, And what is to come he knows,
So to prevent impendent dangers shows;
Sure Jove descended in a Leaden shower
To get his Perseus; hence the fatal power,
Of Tailors Almanacks; Planets thus Allied
Fear to commit an Art of Parricide.
Go on brave Sir, and let the world Consess,
You are the greater world, and that the Less.
Thomas Revell Esquire;

To his most Honored friend Mr. John Heydon upon his most Excellent Philosophy.
Here, here is philosophy; here you may read
How long the world shall live, and when it shall bleed
Oh' how I am rapt when I contemplate thee
And wind my self above all that I see
Pardon great sir for the Astrologicall Crew,
Gain, when made Bankrupt in the scales with you,
The spirit of your lines, infuse a fire;
Like the worlds soul, which makes me thus aspire,
As he who in his Chracter of light
Styled Gods shadow, made it fare more bright
By an Eclipse so glorious: light is dim
And a black nothing when Compared to him,
So it is illustrious to be Heydons Fool
And a Just trophee to be made his spoil
He span's the Heaven and Earth, and things above
And which is more join Natures with there love,
He Is proof against th'arttilory of verses
Whom neither Bilbo, nor invention peirces
You Are sure enchanted Sir, your double free
From Astrologers and th're squibbed Poetry,
For a new East beyond the Stars I see.
Where Breaks the day of thy Divinity,
He makes me Earth, Now a star and then,
A Spirit: Now a star and Earth Again;
He Crowns my soul with fire and their does shine,
But like the Rainbow in a cloud of mine,
Who sees this fire without his Mask, his eye
Must need be swallowed by the Light and dye;
August 4th at sun set 1663. Charles Potter Esquire;

To the most accomplished Philosopher and learned Secretary of Nature, Mr. John
Heydon on his Elhavareuna or Hamaguleh Hampaaneah. The Harmony of the World,
The Temple of VVisdome, The Holy Guide. The Idea of the Law,
MOst Learned Sir, it rather were my part,
At distance to admire not here insert
These rustic lines, which merit cannot raise,
What Mortal's able to set out thy praise?
The Deity's in explicable, so are you
All that you write we must confess is true,
Unless we have Chymaera's in our brain
And what we do not know is false maintain,
We may deny Rome is, Persia does stand
Say Euphrates no River, Africa no Land,
Though curious you, have from those places come
Whilst we our Ignorance do hug at home
The world and all therein you know so well
The great Caballs of Heaven and knacks of Hell
That we may safely affirm if that you please
You can another world make with much ease,
All that Dame Nature has, you know and more,
For she to make you rich is now grown poor
All that I fear; the fates will call you hence
Nature depose, and place you on her bench
Your knowledge is so great it may control,
More worlds then one, And all your wit can rule.
March 26 die ^ h 40 P. M 1664. Thomas Tilli^n a Philosopher by fire to the
Duke of Buckingham.

To his Loving Ingenious friend Mr. John Heydon upon his Harmony of the World,
Temple of VVisdome, and Holy Guide etc.
Mr Careless Phrase and words that lie Neglected
This virtue have, that they will not be suspected
Others may over praise your Book (for we
The best things often over-rated see)
So what I write will aequidistant lie,
From polisht wit, and servile Flattery,
Bees from a bruised Ox, says Maro, breed,
But you draw honey from a an envious Almanac Makers his deceitful enemy in.
Tattered weed
Who borrowed of you Gold, yet does complain
Much of poverty, whose empty Brain,
Measures the slow-part Planets by the glass
And when the Nativity's done its poor alas
But now theventricles of your pregnant brain
Give birth to a brave man issues without pain
Seeing your wit's so pure, your phrase so clean
Your sense so weighty that each lines a chain
Of Gold 'twixt Jupiter Hismael and the Gods,
Mercury and Mars that are now at odds
Your Book (like a young true born Eagle may
Behold the sun in public at noon day.
Colton May 13 8 h. 30. A. M. Die Frederick Talbot Esquire;

To his honored Friend Mr. John Heydon on his most excellent principles of
Philosophy, in The Harmony of the World, The Temple of Wisdom, The Holy Guide,
Hameguleh Hampaaneah, Elhavareuna, Ocia Imperialia and the Idea of the Law;
all written near 17 years since, and by Gods Providence now printed.
WOuld you those Pillars see (those Relics) have
[Ruins of time and knowledge] Seth did save,
From the impetuous Sea, when waves were all,
And all were waves within these Pages small,
You Will find them in their ancient Luster shine,
Not counterfeit, but rich and masculine.
Or what Fgyptian Sages sometime set,
In their Papyrus books (Rowls vastly great)
Whilst Arts and Letters were no common things
But Priests and Poets Princes were and Kings,
E're Learning a Ludibrium became
To the audacious Rout [oh hapeless shame!]
E're Sacred Page vulgar Thumbs could soil
Thence feeding black Seditions lamp with oil.
Books ( Monuments of banished winds) do live,
And (if from pure Minerva's born) survive
When titles, tryumphs, Arches Name, become
Silent in the ruins of a ruined tomb.
When Scipio's, Pompey's, Caesar's Laurels may
By long success of wasting years decay,
Good Books (eternal products of the brain
Not only live but may grow fresh again
March 26 1664. ^ h 30 A. M. W. Smith Master of Arts of Clare Hall in Cambridge

A Catalogue of those things contained in these Books
First Book. 1 The white Elixir of Quicksilver 2 The white Ferment 3 The red
Elixir of Mercury alone 4 The red Ferment 5 The Accurtation of the red Elixir 6
The Physical and Alchimicall Tincture of thered Lion and the glue of the
Eagle.

Second Book. 1 The Elixir of Copper 2 Of Augmentation and projection 3 Of the
Blessed stone or Elixir of Life and of its virtues and also of Malleable glass

Third Book. 1 The Elixir of Saturn white and red and also of Jupiter 2 The
Abreviation of the work of Saturn 3 The Elixir of Mars 4 A short work of the
Physical and Alchimicall Tinsture 5 The Magistry of Pearls 6 The Composition
of Carbunkles 7 Of Mineral Electrum 8 The Explanation of the Philosophers
words when they speak of the tenth number wherein the stone is perfected and
also the wonderful Secrets of the animiall stone with two other of his works

The Rosy Crucian CROWN Set with Angels, Planets and Metals etc.
The First Book.
CHAP. I.
1 Of the Gold Mercury or Argent vive. 2 Purification. 3 Sublimation. 4
Calcination. 5 Exuberation. 6 Solution. 7 Separation. 8 Conjunction. 9
Putrefaction into Sulphur. 10 Fermentation. 11 Multiplication in virtue. 12
Multiplication in quantity.

HE that can make the Stone of Argent vive or alone, is the greatest searcher
out of Art and Nature: because there is all that in which wise men do seek,
for, Quicksilver is the mother and sperm of all Metals and their nearest
matter: and it is not only a spirit but a body, it is also a middle Nature and
also a sulphur, it is a lingering, it dies and rises again and is fixed with
its own proper Elements: wherefore it is first necessary that it be purged from
its impurities.

The purgation or purification is on this wise; grind it upon a Marble with a
muller or a wodden Pestill in a wodden Mortar with common salt and a little
vinegar springled thereupon till the salt be black, then wash it well with
vinegar and dry it easily at the fire, or at the Sun, then strain it through a
double cloth or a new skin of a sheep till it be dry and the vinegar clear
taken away and be of a white color and clear.

Grind it upon a Marble with a little sublimate and let it mortify and in
corporate with it: then grind it with its equal weight of Saltpeter and green
Coperas till it be like a paste; Then put all into a subliming glass and in
Ashes sublime all the that it be white and clear as snow in the head of the
Limbeck sublime it again three times or oftener and i^ will be pure and
sublimate.

Put one pound of this sublimate into two pound of common Aqua fortis by little
and little at once as by two at a time till all b^ dissolved like sugar in wine
then shut the gla^ and set it in Balneo to dissolve the space of 1^ days then
distill away the Aqua fortis in a lenthe^ in Balneo and the will remain in the
bottom like butter of a white color. And calcined b^ corrosive water.

Put this calcined into an Earthen bod^ with a Limbeck and in ashes sublime the
whole dissolved substance three times which will then be very white and then it
is called Mercury Exuberate.

When you have three or four pound of this, receive the third part and fix it
by often sublimation till it remain in a hard mass and ascend no more but
remain fixed.

Which is called the Glue of the Eagle or the prepared body permanent and the
volatile made fixed which is to be reserved for the earth of the stone.

Dissolve the other two parts in Balneo or in a cold Cellar or put it in a
blader and hang it over suming hot water till it be all come to water.

Take this water thus made, and digest it in a Circulatory well closed the
space of nine days then put it in a body with a head and receiver well luted
and in ashes or Balneo distill the water of a white color or milkie and is
called Lac Virginis, dissolving all mettalls and so you have separated the
spirit of the stone which is also called the lingering spirit and the white
Tincture of the white stone of Mercury.

Take the third part which before you reserved and fixed called the glue of the
Eagle, as much of it as you please and add thereto equal weight of its spirit
or Lac Virginis and close up the glass and so you have joined the Man and the
woman, with his own Earth; the spirit with the body. See the Holy Guide.

Set your Lac Virginis thus joined with his own, Each in Balneo to putrine 150
days and there let it stand unmoved; after forty days it will be black, and it
is then called the head of the Crow: then it will be of a green color after
that the Peacocks tail, and many false colors for between this and white it
will appear red but at last you shall see it white and then increase your fire
and it will stick to the sides of the glass like fishes eyes Then have you
each in the nature of Sulpher, Read the Holy Guide.

Take of this Sulphur as much as you please and weigh it and add thereto two
parts of the white Tincture or Lac Virginis and set it in Balneo to dissolve
the space of six days then distill away the Lac Virginis or Tincture and the
Sulphur will remain in the form of Liquor for it is the Liquor of the white
sulphur of which is to be joined with the Liquor of the sulphur of Luna or
siver.

The Sulphur of the white Luminary or silver or Luna is made as the other
whereof we shall speak more in the next Branch. This Liquor of the sulphur is
the soul which is joined with the spirit and body which quickens the whole
stone. The other conjunction before was only the union of the spirit and the
body: but this is a threefold copulation viz. The uniting of the soul, spirit,
and body.

Add equal weight of these two Liquors of sulphur that is to say the liquor of
the sulphur of Mercury and of silver and Luna, and close well the glass and
set it in Ashes till it be white, for it will be of all colors again and at
last white; And then is it the perfect stone converting all Mettalls into
silver.

This stone or Elixir is thus multiplied in virtue dissolve it in your Lac
Virginis and distill it away and dry it and dissolve it again etc. And let it
be so often dissolved and dried till it will dry no more but remain in an
incombustible oil. And is then Elixer of the third Order.

Take one part of this Elixir and project it upon 100 or 1000 parts of melted
silver (according to the goodness and virtue thereof) and it will turn the
silver into a brittle Mass or substance, which beat to powder in an Iron or
brass Mortar or upon a Marble, and project one part of this powder upon 100
parts of purged made hot, and it will be perfect medicine whereof one part
turns 100 or 1000 parts of other bodies into good silver. And this way is
your Medicine multiplied in quantity.

A Corollary.
IT remains now that we speak of the Medicine or the Elixir of Life, which is
called potable silver. But although the Liquor of silver may be made potable
silver if it be corroberated before by digestion in Balneo 7 days with the
spirit of wine and then distill away the said spirit of wine that the oil of
the silver may remain in the bottom which may easily be given for medicine,
Yet the Philosophers would have us do otherwise for they teach us to bring the
mettalls first into their quintessence before they be taken inwardly, and that
their is no other quintessences but those that are of a second nature according
to the old saying, Elixir de te est res secunda
De quo sunt facta corpora munda.


That is to say the 4 Elements are destroyed and by putrefaction a new body
created and made into a stone, which is the quintessence as Ripley would have
it; But I do boldly and constantly affirm that there is no true silver or
potable silver nor Qintessence unless it be first Elixir and that is done in a
quarter of an hour by projection of the Elixir upon silver or pure gold molten
according as the Elixir was red or white. If therefore you desire after the
first composition of the Elixir to make the Arcanum of Argentum or Aurum
potabile project the Elixir or Medicine according to his quality or property
upon pure silver or gold molten, and then it is made brittle and frangible and
grind it to powder and take thereof so much as you please and dissolve it in
distilled vinegar (or rather in spirit of wine) the space of nine days, then
distill away the vinegar or spirit of wine, that which remains in the bottom
is the true Medicine, Quintessence, Elixir of life, Ferment of ferments and
incombustible oil converting mettalls and Man's body into perfect health from
all diseases of man's body which proceed from Mercury and Luna. And thus is the
true potable silver made cureing the Vertigo, Sincope, Spilepsy, Madness,
Phrency Leprosy. etc. And this is the right way of making the stone of Mercury
alone; but the Elixir cannot be made without the Addition of silver to the
white, and of gold to the red.

CHAP. II.
1 Luna. 2 pure Silver. 3 Calcination. 4 Solution. 5 Putrefaction. 6 The
Sulphur. 7 The Liquor of the Sulphur. 8 White Ferment.

HERMES says, The Elixir is nothing else but Mercury Sol and Luna, by Mercury
nothing is understood but the sulphur of nature which is called the true of the
Philosophers, and that sulphur gotten by putrefaction by the conjunction of the
spirit and of the body of imperfect bodies or metals.

By Sol is meant gold, by Luna silver, both of them are to be joined to
imperfect bodies, that is to say, white sulphurs and red, whence the same
Hermes in his treatise of Sol says there happens a conjunction of two bodies
and it is necessary in our Maistry; And if one of these bodies only were not
in our stone it would never by any means give any Tincture, Upon which Morienus
says. For the Ferment prepares the imperfect body and converteth it to its
own nature and there is no Ferment but Sol and Luna, that is, gold and silver.
Of which Rosinus Sol and Luna prepared (that is ^o say their sulphurs) are the
ferments of mettles in color, See the Holy Guide. But this is made more evident
by Raymund in his Apertory where he says there is no ferment except Sol and
Luna, for the Ferment of the stone to white is silver and to the red gold, as
the Philosophers do demonstrate because without ferment there does proceed
neither gold nor silver nor any thing else that is of its kind or nature,
therefore join the Ferment with its sulphur that it may beget its like, because
the Ferment draws the sulphur to its own color and nature also, and weight
and sound because every like begets its like. Because the Ferment even as
Sol tingeth and changes his sulphur into a permanent and piercing Medicine.
Therefore the Philosopher says he that knows how to tinge sulphur and
Mercury with Sol and Luna, shall attain to the greatest secret. And for this
reason it is necessary that Sol and Luna be the Tincture and Ferment thereof.
You may read in the Holy Guide.

And so also Arnoldus in his Rosary, There is no body more noble or pure then
Sol, or his shadow that is to say silver without which no tingeing Mercury is
generated. He that endeavors to give color without this gold or silver
goes blindly to work like an Ass to a Harp, for gold gives a golden and
silver an argentive color therefore he that knows how to tinge with Sol and
Luna comes or reacheh to the secret which is called white sulphur, the best to
silver which when it is made red, will be red sulphur to gold the best.

Take pure Luna, that is to say silver that is best which is beaten into leaves
and bring it into calx with And it is then called water silver then is the Luna
well prepared for Calcination. See the Holy Guide.

When you have your silver thus prepared, take 4 or 6 ounces thereof, and put
it in double proportions of Lac Virginis mixed with equal quantity of
corrasive water to dissolve in an egg glass. After it has dissolved so much
as it can in the cold, set in Balneo and there let it stand 9 days till the
whole substance of the silver be dissolved into a green water, then let the
Balneo cool and take it out, and put the dissolution into the body and set
thereon a head and distill of the water from the matter remaining which is the
oil of the silver Calcined not into a calx but a Liquor, because this Lac
Virginis if it be mixed or joined with common Aqua fortis or alone without it
(as it pleases the Operator) is so strong that the very Diamond cannot resist
it but is dissolved: Therefore this water is called the water of Hell and is
the only miracle of miracles of the World, because it contains such a fiery
nature in it self and propriety of burning of all bodies into Liquor whereas
the Elementall fire prevails no further then to reduce mettalls into calx or
ashes. But to return from whence we digressed I now come to the third operation.

To the end therefore that this liquor or oil of silver may be more perfectly
dissolved and that all the imperfection of adustion may be taken away, which by
the Ancients is called the corroberating of the lest humidity. Put this Oil or
liquor into another egg glass like the former power thereupon so much spirit
of wine above it 4 fingers then close well the glass and set it in balneo to
digest 7 or 10 days and you shall find the oil or liquor turned into a thin or
rare water oil: put this water into a still and in balneo draw away the spirit
of wine till none of the spirit of wine remain with the silver dissolved. And
thus have you your silver prepared for putrefaction.

This Liquor of silver is potable but not the Quintessence put this water into
a fit putrefying glass and seal it up and set it to putrify in balneo till
the time of putrefaction be past which is about 150 days, and when you see the
first sign of putrefaction which is called the head of the Crow increase your
fire a little till all colors begin to appear and you see it begin to be white,

When you see it white increase your fire yet more and it will rise up and
stick to the sides of the glass most transparent like the eyes of fishes which
is Sulphur of Nature or salt, or the putrified body of the white Luminary, viz.
Luna, which yet is not so hard as a body nor so soft as a spirit but of a mean
hardness between a spirit, and a body, and is called the Philosophers Mercury
and the Kay and mean of joining Tinctures.

But to come to the liquor of the white Luminary, this body being brought into
Quintessence is prepared for dissolution like the sulphur of the imperfect
body, but whereas that is done by the virtue of the white tincture or Lac
Virginis I rather do it by virtue of the fire natural which is the spirit of
wine and after the drawing away thereof it remains in a Liquor.

Now this liquor of Luna dissolved is the Quintessence which then is the liquor
of the white Luminary and the sole as Exinadius says quickening the whole
stone without which it is dead and will neither give form nor color.

Therefore the fourth part of this liquor of the white Luminary is to be joined
to three parts of the former liquor of the sulphur of and after to be kept in a
lent fire of Ashes Well closed till it pass through all colors and at last
come to its former color of whiteness and so the stone is fermented and turned
into the white Elixir.

The Residue of the foresaid dissolved sulphur keep diligently and therewith
ferment the white sulpher of other imperfect bodies or stones into Elixirs,
which when they are thrice dissolved and again congealed and remain in a liquid
substance then they are called incombustible oils and Elixirs of the third
order.

And thus the stone is made of alone.

A Corrollary.
HAving spoken of the white stone it now rests that we speak of the making of
the red Elixir, whereof there is two processes the first whereof is from the
Radix i. e. the long way: the other an accurtation that is much shorter and
more excellent, And this way the Elixir may be made in 80 days and excells all
other accurtations neither is there found therein any diminution of the virtue
but is a plentiful and perfect fullness of power and virtue having all the
properties which the Elixir ought to have. The process whereof these three
following Chapters will plainly show.

CHAP. III.
1 Vivum. 2 Sublimation. 3 Calcination. 4 Precipitation. 5 Solution. 6 Fixed
oil. 7 Inceration. 8 Desiccation. 9 Contrition. 10 Fermentation. 11 The Red
Elixir. 12 The third Table

IT is not necessary to speak in this place of the urgation of because we spoke
thereof before.

The sublimation is to be done otherwise then in the former work for that
which is called sublimation here is not done with vitrioll and salt peter but
is only the distillation of the in an earthen body with a limbeck and that by
it self without any addilament.

When the is once sublimed in ashes wholly into the head of the limbeck having
a retainer joined thereto take off the head and with a feather gather the
sublimed matter and you shall find your of a black color having lost his
fairness and like a dust or powder sticking to his body.

Put it again into the body and sublime it as before and reiterate this work 7
or 9 times until you have a sufficient quantity of this powder that is to say
a pound or more. And this is the Calcination.

When you see your will ascend no more but remain in the bottom of a black
color and that is dead and brought perfectly into calx let it cool and remove
your body into sand till it be turned into a red color; And this is the
perfect precipitation prose without the help of any corrosive water, take a
little of this powder upon a hot iron plate if it fume, dry it longer, if not
it is well.

Take of this red powder as much as you will dissolve and put thereupon at
least his double weight of Lac Virginis and set in Balneo till you see your Lac
Virginis stained a yellow or red color then filter it from its feces and keep
it by it self in a glass well stopped and dry the matter that remains in
Ashes and pour thereon new Lac Virginis and do as before till you have drawn
out all the tincture. And so your is dissolved.

Put these solutions into a body luting to a head and in balneo distill away
the Lac Virginis and the red oil precipitate will remain which is fixed and
needs no distillation but is the tinging oil of red Mercury and the red
tincture of the red stone of and the soul and spirit of the same stone joined,

Therefore take part of the white Sulphur reserved in the first Table and
rubify it in ashes till it be red then imbile it with equal weight of the oil
of the tincture of this red and set it to dissolve in Balneo, and when you see
it is dissolved into a liquid substance take it out.

Then set it in ashes or under the fire to fix till the matter being dried
remain fixed and fusible standing in a mean heat not over hot which try upon a
hot Iron plate and if it fume not it is well, if it do, increase your fire till
it be totally fixed and dry.

If this matter be imbibed again with its oil till it drink up as much as it
will and again dissolved in Balneo and then dried in Ashes, it will show many
colors and lastly appeared. And then it is the stone penetrating and fusible,
apt for form.

Join this imbiled matter (or stone) with the 4th part of the liquor or oil of
the red sulphur of Gold or the red Ferment, and dissolve it in Balneo, and dry
it again, and again dissolve it in a glass hanged in the fume of hot water or
Balneum and congeal it again till it stand like honey; Then it is the perfect
red Elixir of Mercury.

The Multiplication or Augmentation of the virtue and quantity is showed in the
former Chapter.

CHAP. IV.
1 Gold Sol. 2 Purged Gold. 3 Calcination. 4 Solution. 5 Putrefaction. 6
Filius, solis Coelestis. 7 Filia Lunae Coelestis.

THe putrefaction or purgation of gold is done as the Goldsmiths use to do by
melting it with Antimony that the gold may remain in the bottom pure and clear
from other mettalls which they call Regulus.

Take 4 or 5 ounces of this refined gold, leaf or fileings and dissolve it in
Lac Virginis, mixed with equal weight of Aqua fortis wherein salt Armoniack
sublimed is dissolved, and when it is dissolved into a red Liquor or deep
yellow then it is well calcined.

The solution and putrefaction is done as before you did with silver in the
preparation of the white Ferment.

When you have your white sulphur of nature (after putrefaction) sticking to
the sides of the glass, let it cool, and take out your glass and set it ^n
Ashes, and increase your fire but not too much lest your matter vitrifie, and
let your ashes be no hotter then you can hold your hand therein, and so let it
stand till the sulphur be of a perfect deep red color, Then have you the red
sulphur of the red Luminary.

If you resolve this red sulphur in spirit of wine or distilled Vinegar into an
oil it is then the Liquor of the, red Luminary, And Auram potabile curing all
infirmities if the spirit of wine or vinegar be destilled from it; But for this
work it were better to dissolve it in our red Lac Virginis spoken of in the
second Chapter of the second Book; distill away the Lac from the sulphur in
Ashes, and the sulphur remaining in an oil is the Ferment of all stones to the
red. The augmentation of this red Elixir in virtue is with his red Tincture as
before in the white Elixir with his white Tincture. The augmentation in
quantity is by projection upon the body of gold molten: And that brittle matter
of gold upon and if it be powdered and resolved with spirit of wine inan oil as
was said before of silver then it is the Quintessence of gold, and the great
Elixir of life and the spiritual ferment for the transmutation of metals and
for the health of man's body.

The 5 Chapter shows the abbreviation of the Red Elixir.

CHAP. V.
1 The Liquor of the red sulphur. 2 Fermentation.

ALthough Raymund writing to King Robert was pleased to say, That every
Accurtation diminishes the perfection: because Medicines which are made by
accurtation have less effect of transmutation, which I also ascent to with him
for a truth, if the work be begun from the first fountain: yet because this
work has its beginning from those things which before were brought to a
perfect degree of perfection, therefore in this there is no diminution of the
perfection as the same Raymund witnesses lib. Mecur. page 103. saying thus.

Therefore it ought to be declared unto thee, that if they be both well
prepared (and that thou begin with them) thou will do a wonderful work without
any great labor sooner then if thou should begin with one thing alone;
Therefore my son begin thy work of two things together as (...) showed to thee
in the greater stone, when we spoke of the twofold custody of the actions which
are caused by the bodies and spirits.

By that which is caused by the bodies and spirits he means nothing else but
sulphur, willing that we should begin with sulphur, to which I do so well agree
that I begin this my accurtation with sulphur alone and I add no other body to
this Elixir but only the sulphur of alone created of his own body and spirit.

Take therefore 2 ounces of the white sulphur that was described in the first
Chapter and set it in ashes to rubifie, in 30 days it will be turned into red
sulphur.

Which when you have done dissolve that sulphur in the red Tincture of Mecury
when it is dissolved draw away the Tincture, in the bottom remains the Liquor
of the sulphur.

To which if you add a due proportion of the liquor of the red Luminary it will
be perfect Ferment, which if you dissolve and congeal as before is showed, it
is then Elixir of very great virtue to the red work and no man can make a
shorter abreviation in the world; And when the sulphur of any body is prepared
it may this way very speedily be converted into Elixir by adding the liquor of
the ferment.

CHAP VI.
1 The Body. 2 The Spirit. 3 The Lion. 4 The Eagle. 5 The Philosophers Lead. 6
Antimony. 7 Antimony Mercury. 8 The Glue of the Eagle. 9 Solution of the red
Lion into Blood. 10 Solution of the Glue of the Eagle. 11 Solution of the Blood
of the red Lion. 12 Conjunction. 13 Putrefaction. 14 The Stone. 15
Fermentation. 16 In the Trinity of The Phisical and Alchimical Tincture The
Soul. 17 Is the Unity of the Medicine.

TAke Antimony calcined so much as you please, and grind it to a subtle
powder, then take twice so much Lac Virginis and put your powder of Antimony
therein and set it in balneo 7 days, then put it into a body, and set it in
sand or ashes till the Lac be turned red, which draw of and pour on more and so
let it stand, when that is colored red, pour it to the other and thus do till
you have drawn out all the tincture set all this water in balneo or lent ashes
to distill with a Limbeck, and distill it with a lent fire and first of all the
Lac will ascend, then you shall see a stupendous Miracle because you shall see
through the nose of the Alimbeck is it were a thousand veins of the liquor of
this blessed minere to descend in red drops just like blood, which when you
have got thou have a thing whereto all the treasure in the world is not equal;
Now you have the blood of the Lion according to Rupesissa, let us here rest a
little and speak of the Glue of the Eagle, of which Paracelsus thus says.

Reduce Mercury so far by sublimation till it be a fixed Crystal; this is his
preparation of Mercury and his way of reducing it into the Glue of the Eagle,
but above all I require that that way be used which is described by me before
in the first Chapter, or that hereafter set down after this.

Then says the foresaid Author, go on to resolution and coagulation, and I
again will you to observe the same manner of solution showed in the first
Chapter before.

Now let us come to conjunction after the solution of these two, take equal
weight of them and put them in a vessel well shut.

After you have thus joined them together set your glass in your furnace to
putrify and alter the space of certain days. Therefore Paracelsus says, then
at length and presently after your Lili is made hot in your glass it appears
in wonderful manners (or demonstrations) blacker then the Crow: after that in
process of time whiter then the Swan and then passing by yellow to be more red
then blood.

This being putrified and turned into red is to be taken for the stone, and
then it is time it be fermented.

Of which Fermentation Paracelsus thus speaks, one part thereof is to be
projected upon 1000 parts of molton gold, and then the medicine is prepared and
this is the Fermentation of it. But if the half or one part of the liquor of
the sulphur of gold before described be added to it then it would be spiritual
ferment, and would be much more penetrating in fortitude and fusible as
Paracelsus does testify in his Aurora where he would have us to join the star
of the sun or the oil of sol to this stone. And thus the phisical Alchimical
tincture is performed in a short time for curing all manner of Infirmities and
humane diseases (which is also the great Elixir for metals) so courtly
concealed by the Ancients. Which Hermes Trismagistus the Egyptian, Osus the
Gretian, Haly an Arabian, and Albertus Magnus a German, with many others, have
sought and prosecuted every one after their own method, and one in one subject
another in another, so much desired by the Philosophers only for prolongation
of life.

In this composition Mercury is made a fixed and dissolved body, the blood or
spirit of the red Lion is the ferment or soul, and so of trinity is made unity,
which is called the Phisical and Alchimicall tincture, never before that I knew
of collected or writ in one work And I swear: I had not done this except that
otherwise the composition of this blessed medecin had for ever been forgot.

A shorter way to make the glue of the Eagle. If you desire to make the glue of
the Eagle in a breifer way. Take part of the red precipitate prose as is taught
before in the table of Mercury and dissolve it in distilled vinegar and the
vinegar will be colored into a yelow or delightful golden color and after
you have destilled away the vinegar there will remain in the bottom a white
substance of the Mercury fixed and fair, which is to be joined to the oil of
the Lion; And this work is much shorter and less laborious, look more hereof in
the third Book.

The Calcination of Antimony into the red Lion. Take Antimony well ground so
much as you please and melt it in naked fire with salt Armoniack, and when it
is melted cast it suddenly into a vessel almost full of distilled vinegar
wherein salt Armoniack has been dissolved and thus melt it and cast it in
three times, then pour off the vinegar from the Calx of the Antimony and dry
it well and grind it small and dissolve it as before is taught, and so have you
the Red Lion of the Philosophers Lead or Antimony.

CHAP. VII.
1 Elixir. 2 Conjunction. 3 Separation. 4 the Stone. 5 Fermentation. 6 The
Earth. 7 Spirit oil, Blood of the Lamb. 8 Distillation. 9 Resolution. 10
Putrefaction. 11 Solution. 12 Vitrioll. 13 Calcination 14 Copper.

The first Chapter of the Elixir of Copper
MAny have sought out the way of the Mineral stone in vitrioll or green
Copperas, but they were altogether received which common vitrioll by the
Philosophers is called the green Lion of fools. But this our noble red Lion
takes its original from the Metallic body of Copper. Although I am not
ignorant how to draw an oil out of Romain vitrioll of a more sweet smell and
delightful taste then any balsome if the Tincture be taken out of the calcined
vitrioll in spirit of wine, yet the Philosophers will is, and command that it
do consist of a Metallic virtue wherewith the transmutaion of mettalls is to
be effected. Therefore they say it is to be made of bodies and not of spirits
as of vitrioll sulphur as well and the like. Whence I find it written in the
Philosophers Turba and in the first Exercitation: But the Philosophers stone is
a metallic matter converting the substances and forms of imperfect mettalls,
and it is concluded by all the Philosophers that the conversion is not made
except by its like, therefore it is necesary that the Philosophers stone be
made of a metallic matter, yet if any be made of spirits yet it would be
better and much more Philosophical and more near to a metallic nature to be
made of bodies then of spirits: but if by Art the body should be turned into a
spirit then the same body would be both body and spirit, and not to be doubled
but the stone might be made of such a body or spirit. but let us return to our
purpose; It being granted that this our vitrioll is such a body according to
which Paracelsus testifyeth in his Aurora Philosophorum under this Aenigura or
secret of the Ancient Philosophers.

Visicabis Interiora Terrae Reclificando Invenies
Occultum Lapidem Veram Medicinam.
Out of the first letter of every word of this Aenigura is gathered this word
VITRIOLUM by which is meant that thereof the stone or medicine may be made.

Therefore Paracelsus says, the inward parts of the Earth are to be visited;
not only the Earth which is vitrioll, but the Inward parts of the Earth, he
means the sweetness and redness, because there lies hid in the inward parts
of vitrioll a subtle noble and fragrant juice and pure oil.

And this is especially to be noted the production of this Copper into vitrioll
is not to be done neither by calcination of the fire nor distillation of the
matter, lest it be deprived of its greenness which being lost it wants both
power and strength.

Paracelsus speaks not one word of the preparation of this vitriol by whose
silence many have erred, therefore I determined to leave him here a little and
to prosecute and follow the order of the Table wherefore: begin with the
calcination of the metal. And note that this calcination of Copper is made
that it may be turned into vitrioll and not the calcination of vitrioll made of
copper.

Take therefore as much copper as you please and dissolve, Calcination it in
Aqua fortis to a fair green water, then set it 3 or 4 days to digest till the
matter be clear which pour out into a limbeck and in Balneo draw away the
corrasive water so that the matter remain dry for then it is calcined.

Then upon every 2 pound of this calcined matter pour a gallon of distilled
Vinegar and lute it up in a glass, and set it in balneo almost boiling the
space of 7 days, when it is cold put into a limbeck to distill away all the
vinegar in balneo, and in the bottom of the Alimbeck you shall have your
vitrioll very well congealed far fairer then Romain vitrioll which is corporeal
and metallic vitrioll.

Which Vitrioll I do not dissolve in rainwater like the Paracelsians, but
rather with Lac Virginis as before is taught in the former Chapters or in
Raymunds Calcination water, and after its dissolution and perfect digestion,
that is to say 15 days I put it into a limbeck and balneo draw off the Lac
virginis, which being done you shall find an oily water green and clear upon
which pour the spirit of wine and after it has been digested 7 days and the
spirit of wine distilled away in balneo you shall find your green water
perfectly rectified made pure subtle and spiritual, and apt for putrefaction,
for if it be not well dissolved and rarefied it will not putrify.

But now that I may join with Paracelsus in the manner of putrefaction I return
to him and say with him commanding to digest in a warm heat in a glass well
closed the space of some months, and so long till diverse colors appear and
be at length red which shows the termination of its putrefaction.

But yet in this process this redness is not sufficiently fixed, but is to be
more fully purged from its feces in this manner.

Resolve it or rectify it in distilled vinegar, till the vinegar be colored
then filler it from its feces. This is its true Tincture and best resolution
and rectification out of which a blessed oil is to be drawn.

This Tincture being thus resolved and rectified, is to be put into a body with
a limbeck and in balneo distill the vinegar gently away.

Then in sand or ashes lift up the spirit gently and temperately, and when you
see a fume ascend into the glass and red drops begin to fall out of the nose of
the limbeck into the receiver, then the red oil begins to distill, continue
your distillation till all be come over, when it is done you shall have the oil
in the receiver lifted up and separated from its Earth more delightful and
sweet then any balsom, or Aromatic without any sharpness at all, which oil is
called the blood of the Lamb. In the bottom of the body you shall find a white
shining Earth like snow, which keep well from dust and so you have the clear
Earth separated from its oil.

Take this white Earth and put it in a glass viol, and put thereto equal,
weight of the oil or soul and body, will receive it and embrace it in a moment.

But that it may be turned into a stone when you have joined these two
together, set it into our furnace the space of 40 days and you shall have an
absolute oil of wonderful perfection wherewith Mercury and other imperfect
metals are turned into gold. As Paracelsus was pleased to say.

The stone being thus made, I now come to the fermentation without which it is
not possible to give form to it neither will I adhere to the opinion of one man
alone contrary to all the Philosophers alone, that is to say, Paracelsus
repugnant to the rest of the Philosophers because they all of necessity have
decreed to give form to the stone by ferment and union, that is to say, of an
imperfect body, and by how much the ferment is more spiritual the stone will
be of so much more penetration and transmutation.

These things being promised I do not think it sit that you should proceed to
projection upon Mercury instead of fermentation as Paracelsus teaches, or that
the stone should be fermented his way with gold either corporeal or spiritual.

Which gold will be the foundation of the first projection. but what do the
Philosophers command us to do? that projection that is to say fermentation, be
made of a perfect foundation, and that upon imperfect bodies that medicines may
be made which foundation of the stone or Elixir is not except it be only the
white or red ferment, in respect of which both gold and silver are said to be
imperfect bodies, therefore this stone is to be fermented before it be
projected upon the corporeal foundation or imperfect, that is to say corporeal
gold.

Therefore join this oil to the fourth part of the oil of the sulpur of gold,
and this is the true fermentation or conversion unto the Elixir.

Then Augment it in virtue by solution and coagulation, and in quantity by
projection first upon the corporeal foundation that is to say gold, then that
upon purified Mercury and that medicine upon other bodies which are most sit
for projection, that is to say most fusible as Lead or Tin, which after they
are purified are most apt by reason of their easy melting.

And thus the Inward parts of the Earth are visited and by reflection the hiden
stone is found, the true Medicine out of the green Lion of the Philosophers,
and not of fools, and out of Corporeal and metallic vitrioll not terrestrial
and made of mineral coperas.

The Second Chapter of Augmentation and projection of the STONE.
FIRST, Let us speak of the Augmentation of the virtue or quality; of which
Raymund says, The Augmentation in quality and goodness is by solution and
coagulation of the Tincture, that is to say, by imbiling it with our Mercury
and drying it. But let us hear Arnoldus more attentively, take one part of your
prepared Tincture, and dissolve it in three parts of our Mercury, then put it
in a glass and seal it up and set it in ashes till it be dry and come to a
powder, then open the glass and imbile it again, and dry it again And the
oftener you do the thus so much sha you gain and gives more tincture.

And also as it is found in Clangor Buccinae, Dissolve it in the water of
Mercury of which the Medicine was made till it be clear then congeal it by
light decoction and imbile it with its oil upon the fire till it flow by virtue
whereof it will be doubled in tincture, with all its perfections as you will
see in projection because the weight that was before projected upon a thousand,
is now to be projected upon ten thousand, and there is no great labor in this
multiplication.

Again the medicine is multiplied two manner of ways.

By solution of calidity and solution of varity. By solution of calidity, is
that you take the Medicine put in a glass vessel and bury it in our moist fire
seven days or more, till the medicine be dissolved into water without any
turbulency. By solution of rarity, is that you take your glass vessel with your
medicine and hang it in a new brass pot full of water that boileth and close up
the mouth of the pot that the medicine may dissolve in the vapor of the
boiling water.

But note that the boiling water must not touch the glass wherein the medicine
is but hang above it three fingers, and this solution will be above it in 2 or
3 days after your medicine is dissolved, take it from the fire to cool fix and
congeal and be hard and dry this do often and and how much the more the
medicine shall be dissolved it will be so much more perfect, and such a
solution is the sublimation of the medicine and its virtual sublimation, which
the oftener it is reiterated so much more abundantly and more parts it tingeth.

Whence Rasis says the goodness of this multiplication consists in the
reiteration sublimation and fixation of the medicine and by how much more this
order is repeated it works so much more and is augmented for so often as you
sublime your medicine and dissolve it you shall gain so much every time in
projection one upon a thousand and if the first fall upon a thousand the third
upon a hundred thousand the fourth upon a million and so infinitely. For
Morienus the Philosopher says; Know for certain that the oftener our stone is
dissolved and congealed the spirit and soul is joined more to the body and is
retained by it and in every time the Tincture is multiplied.

Whence we thus read in Scala Philosophorum, which also the Philosophers say.
Dissolve and congeal, so without doubt it is understood of the solution of the
body and soul with the spirit into water and congealation makes the soul and
spirit mix with the body and if with one solution and simple congealation the
soul and spirit would be perfectly joined to the body the Philosophers would
not say dissolve again, and congeal, and again dissolve and congeal that the
Tincture of the stone may grow if it could be done with one congealation only.

The Medicine is another way multiplied by fermentation and the ferment to the
white is pure silver and the ferment to the red is pure gold, therefore project
one part of your medicine upon a of the ferment (but I say 3 parts of the
medicine upon one of the ferment) and all will be Medicine, which put in a
glass upon the fire and so close it that no air go in nor out, and keep it
there till it be subtiliated as you did with the first medicine and one part of
the second medicine will have as much virtue as one part, of the first medicine
had (but here again Clangor Buccinae has erred for it should be write thus)
one part of the second medicine will have as much virtue as ten parts of the
first medicine had. And thus by solution and fermentation the medicine may be
multiplied infinitely.

We have spoken enough of this multiplication, we now come to the other way of
augmentation which is called corporeal multiplication and according to Raymund
is thus defined.

Augmentation is the Addition of Quantity; whence Anicen writes, It is hard to
project upon a million and to preducate it incontinently wherefore I will
reveal one great secret unto you, one part is to be mixed with a thousand parts
of its nearest in kind (I call that nearest that is the body of the same metal
whereof the medicine was made or perfected) but to return again to Anicen,
close all this firmly in a fit vessel and set it in a furnace of fusion 3 days
till it be wholly joined together. Whereof it is more largely and better set
down by the said Author and the manner of the work is thus projected, one part
of the foresaid medicine upon 100 parts of molten gold and it makes it brittle
and will all be medicine whereof one part projected a hundred of any melted
metal converteth it into pure gold and if you project it upon silver in like
manner it converteth all bodies into silver.

In Scala Philosophorum all sorts of projection is set thus down in few words.
You must know that first it is said project, that is to say one upon 100 etc.
yet it is better to project nunc dimittis upon fundamenta and fundamenta upon
verba mea and verba mea upon diligans te Domine and diligam te upon attendite.
This brief Aenigua is thus expounded it is nothing else but the words and
opinion of the former Author concealed under the Aenigura. Therefore let us
repeat the words of this Aenigura or Oraccle.

Nunc dimittis super fundamenta
Fundamenta super verba mea
Verba mea super diligam te
Diligamte super attendite.
These are trifles for the hiding and concealing the perfection of the Art if
the expert Artist could be diverted with such simple words which though they
are hard at first to young Artists, yet they are thus explained. We therefore
begin with the first sentence.

Nunc dimittis super fundamenta. This is here Allegorically taken for the last
action almost of the work which is called the medicine or stone, which medicine
is to be projected upon the ferment that is to say upon the oil of Sol or Luna,
which are the ferments or foundations of the Art in spiritual augmentation (as
before was said) upon molten gold and silver. And that spiritual ferment
converted into medicine is to be projected upon molten gold or silver which are
corporeal ferments in corporeal Augmentation and the corporeal fundaments of
the Art upon quick silver.

Fundamenta super verbamea. This is also spoken allegotically because in the
Adage it is said words are wind, as if a word were nothing else but the motion
of the lips and exhaltation of the lungs which no sooner arise from motion but
fly away and are turned to air so likewise Quick silver or Mercury goes out of
the bodies of other mettalls and is so volatile in the fire or hear as words in
the air. And therefore Mercury is likened to words upon which the fundaments
are to be projected, Verbes mea (vir Mercury) super diligam te.

That is to say upon other mettalls which have most affinity with quicksilver,
and easy of fasion as Saturn and Jupiter that is to say Lead and Tin, which by
this concord and love are easily by the penetration and amiableness of the
medicine converted into medicine. And one part of this medicine converteth
other parts of mettalls into gold or silver according to the force and power of
the Elixir, which other mettalls because they are the substances of the former
bodies whereof the medicines were made. They are the attendants of those
medicines wherefore the Philosopher commands that.

Diligam te be projected upon attendite that the second medicine or this last
projected upon metal especially that whereof the medicine (that is to say the
stone) was made, should turn that metal into gold or silver according to the
proverty and quality of the medicine.

But to put an end to this projection, take it according to the opinion of
Arnoldus gathered out of the 31 Chapter who wills to project one part of the
Elixir upon 100 of Mercury purged and all will be medicine upon other 100 parts
of Mercury purged and all will be medicine, afterward project one part of this
medicine last congealed upon 100 parts of Mercury washed and all will be gold
or silver, in all trials according as the Elixir is white and red. Lastly that
I may briefly rehearse the absolute manner of projection. First the medicine is
to be projected upon gold or silver molten, then upon quicksilver purged so
long till it turns it into medicine and lastly upon metals most near, that
they may be converted into pure gold or silver according to the properties and
qualities of the medicine.

Because we have said something of the propinquity of mettalls that is to say,
that the Elixir is to be projected upon that imperfect body out of which its
Mercury and sulphur was first extracted, therefore it will not be unnecessary
to set down one example that is to say if the medicine was made of Mercury then
it is to be projected upon quick silver for making gold or silver because
quick silver is a near body to Mercury and so of the rest. Yet it is to be
noted, that all Elixirs may and ought to be projected upon quicksilver, because
quicksilver is the Mother and sperm of all metals therefore quick silver made
and turned into medicine, is to be projected upon a body, most near to it;
Which is Lead or Tin; Upon which the medicine is always to be projected,
whether white or red for the making and transmuting of metals, but both the
quicksilver and lead are first to be purged that they may be purified and
deprived of their filth. Enough has been said before of the purgation or
putrification of Mercury. We will now speak of the putrification of Lead.

Melt your Lead in a Crucible and when it is melted let it stand in the fire a
quarter of an hour and put therein a little salt Armoniack and let it stand a
while in the fire and stir it with an Iron spatnla till all the salt Armoniack
be gone away in sum then scrape the skin away out of the crusible, that is
upon the lead, then let it stand to cool and it will be much whiter and fairer.
And thus you must purify your lead or tin, before projection, because no
other bodies are so fusible and apt to melt wherefore every Elixir ought to be
projected upon quicksilver and upon Lead or Tin for making or transmuting of
metals.

But to the end the manner of projection may be yet more plain I will set down
two rules which must be carefully observed.

The first whereof is that the first medicine that is to say the stone be
projected upon the ferment always three parts of the medicine upon one of the
ferment and one part of this upon 10 or 100 of pure molten gold, and one part
of this medicine thus made upon 100 parts of an imperfect body, that is to say,
of Mercury for medicine. The later is that you must always consider the
fortitude and debility of your medicine for it is to be projected so often upon
quicksilver as it brings it into a brittle medicine and when it fails then
Project one part thereof upon Lead or Tin for making transmutation, according
to the order and form of the Elixir.

These being remembered you may easily conceive the order of Augmentation in
virtue and quantity.

These Chapters being ended the other three which follow are set down in the
next book, because we have spoken before of potable gold and silver, it is
therefore necessary after we have made an end of projection to set down another
table of the Elixir of life in the next place, and after speak of its virtue
and power as we find it among all the Ancient and modern Philosophers and so
make an end of the first Book.

FINIS.
Hammeguleh Hampaaneah, OR THE Rosy Crucian CROWN SET WITH Seven Angels, 7
Planets, 7 Genii, 12 Signs, 12 Idea's, 16 Figures, and their Occult Powers,
upon the 7 Mettalls and Miraculous virtues in Medicines; with the perfect full
discovery of the Pantarva and Elixirs of Mettalls prepared to cure the Diseased.

Whereunto is Added ELHAVAREVNA Presoria, Regio Lucis, and Psonthon Books much
desired by the learned of the world, Now Completed and Communicated to all
manner of Persons.

By John Heydon Gent (...) A Servant of God and Secretary of Nature.

London, Printed by P. L. for Samuel Speed, and are to be sold at the Rainbow
in Fleetstreet. 1665.

To the truly honorable and excellently Accomplished the most Renowned, John
Lloyd Esquire; External internal and eternal felicity be wished.
SIR.
I Dedicate my Books to you, and your Noble brother because wisdom and virtue
cannot be parted, but-being my two guards of safty or preserving Patrons to
defend me from ^nvie and Malice, I presume to call you Governor of my Regio
Lucis, and him Protector of Elhavareuna, or the High Priest of the Rosy Cross,
and the Harmony of the world, the Temple of Wisdom, The Holy Guide, Contain
the power of Natural science and the most absolute Consummation ther^ of, and
that which is the Active part (...) Figures which by the help of the natur^^
virtues of Mettalls, from a Mutual a^^ opportune application of them, brings
for^^ opperations even to Admiration, whi^^ sciences the Rosy Crucians taught
wh^^ they came to worship our Savior Chr^^ when he was born. The Princes of
all plac^^ did study these sciences, as Hiarthas Ki^^ of the Caldeans, Jespion
Prince of t^^ Brackmans, Phroates The Indian Prince^ Astaphon Duke of the
Gimnsophists, Bud^^ King of Babylon, Numa Pompillius Ki^^ of the Romans
Zamoxides Emperor (...) Thrace, Abbaris Priest of the Hiperbore^^ Jews,
Hermes Trismegist a King and La^ giver of Egypt, Zoroaster the son of ^^romasus
King of Persia, All these and ma^^ more were Lovers of these Rosy Cruci^^
Infallible Axiomata, and both writers an^ patrons of this Kind of Learning,
(...) Josephus The Hebrew Hermes Eranth^^ King of Arabia etc. And Plato relates
(...) Alcibiades that the sons of the Persian King^ were instructed in these
sciences, that th^^ might Learn to administer, and distribu^^ their Image to
the Commonwealth of t^^ world, and the Common wealth to it; and ^icero says
in his Books of Divination, ^^at there was none amongst the Persians ^id enjoy
the Kingdom, but he that had ^^rst Learned Philosophy, Rosy Crucians
^ontemplate the powers of Natural, and ^oelestial things, and searching
curiously unto their Simpathy do produce incredible ^owers in Nature into
Public veiw, so ^oupling Inferior Telesmes, Images, Ga^^hes and other things
as Allurements to ^he Gift of superior Angels Planets Genii, Idea's And
figures and other things, ^^at by the Mutual application of Angels ^lanets and
stars to Genji and figures of Geomancy upon Mattalls, arise wonderful
Miracles, not so much by Art as by nature, to which Art becomes an Assistant
^hilest it works these things eelctions being ^ade of hours when Angels and
Planets ^re strong, figures and Characters rightly ^ngraven or cast upon
prepared Spermatick ^ure Metal clear and fine, free from any Mixture. and all
fitted to the Angel ^lanet sign Idea, figure of Geomancy and these must be
applied to the person of ^he Querent or Native, signified by the Angel Planet
sign Genius Idea and figure, who shall then find the Celestial and
terrestrial powers, unite to his desire, and perform incredible extraordinary
things, at certain, times Naturally and Rosy Crucian^ as the most curious
searchers of Nature making use of these things that are prepared by Nature
only, by appling fiery active things to Earthly passive things, produce
oftentimes effects before the time ordained by Nature, which the envious
scribler^ think are Miracles and cry them down as Magical with and in their
under opinion termed Diabolical, which ineed are Natural works, the
prevention only of the time coming betwixt, as if any one should produce Roses
in the Month of March, and apple trees Blow and bear fruit in December and Ripe
cherries, Grapes and Beans in January or make parsley grow into perfect plant
within few hours, and cause greater things then these, as Clouds, rain,
Thunders, and animalls of diverse kinds and raise the Dead, And spot Horses
black and white like stars or any other color, and very many transmutatious of
things these Books and Arts I submit (you excelling in Jugment and Candor) to
your censure, that if I have wrote any thing which may end either to the
contumely of Nature, offending God, or injury of Religion, you may condemn the
error; but the scandal of Malicious persons being dissolved, you may defend
the tradition of Truth, and that you would do so with these Books, ^^d my self,
that nothing may be Concealed which may be profitable, and nothing approved of,
which cannot but do hurt, by which ^^eans the Harmony of the World, The ^emple
of Wisdom, The Holy Guide, ^egio Lucis and Elhavareuna, having passed ^ur
examination (as well as my other Pa^^ons) with approbation, may at Length be
^^ought worthy to come forth with good suc^^ss in public as my other Books,
and may ^ot be afraid to come under censure of ^^sterity, because I wear the
most Noble ^^tle of.

^prill the 5 th at noon 1664. Your most affectionate humble Servant and true
honourer. JOHN HEYDON.

The Rosy Crucian CROWN Set with Angels, Planets and Metals and^^
The Second Book.
CHAP. I. Of the blessed stone of the Philosophers (...) the Elixir of life,
and also the way (...) making malleable glass.
1 Elixir of life. 2 Gold dissolved. 3 Silv^^ dissolved. 4 Gold melted. 5
melted Silver. 6 Projection of the red Medicin^ 7 Projection of the white
Medicine.

HERMES Speaking of fermentation bids us to take the sun and (...) shadow by
the shadow he mea^eth the moon because in respe^^ of dignity luster and power
(...) is much more weak and inferior then the (...) And the moon follows the
sun as a shadow does the body and is not illuminated except by the light of the
sun, we will first speak of the body, that is to say of gold, and after come to
the shadow of which gold it is written in a book of Chimicall Art in this
manner. The Philosophers stone is made of gold alone and only by nature and is
more sublime then them, which the Philosophers affirm cures all infirmities.
According to the opinion of this Philosopher I purpose to begin with gold alone
and the medicine which is a new and sole nature, and ancient and sound
Quintessence.

But to the end this gold may be better and more pure, it may be purged two
manner of ways that is to say, by Antimony and by dissolution in corrosive
waters with which copper plates are mixed as Goldsmiths use to do which is
called water gold.

When you have thus prepared your gold project one part of your red medicine
(or red Elixir) upon 100 parts thereof when your medicine is augmented in
virtue and all that weight of molten gold will be converted into a red brittle
mass which grind upon a marble to an impalpable powder.

Then dissolve these hundred parts or so much thereof as you please in
distilled vinegar or in spirit of wine, and set it to digest in Balneo the
space of a day or two then distill the spirit of wine from it in Balneo, and in
the bottom will remain the fixed and pure oil of the gold which is then the
true Aurum potabile, and spiritual Elixir of life, if you would give to any one
of this powder presently before it be converted to oil, warm a little white or
Rhenish wine and dissolve in either of them so much of the red powder as will
tincture the same into a red color and the wine so tinctured will be Aurum
potabile, but it would be better and more penetrating if it were tinctured with
the foresaid oil.

In like manner is the white medicine to be projected after the purification of
the silver in a corrosive water as is before declared.

And so the melted silver will be converted into a brittle powder and white
mass which likewise is to be dissolved and turned into oy^ and thus the white
Elixir of life is made an^ potable silver curing and healing so far as i^ is
able humane diseases for it cannot be supposed that the Elixir of Luna has so
great virtue as the Elixir of Sol has.

Whence the Author of the book called correct^^ falnerum and Richard Anglicus
in his correct^ry. say whereas among the vulgar and Ph^losophers; God has this
report that being in his first disposition that it cures the Lepr^sy and many
other virtues, this is not exce^^ by its complete disgestion because the
excellenc^ of the fire acting in it consumes all evil h^mours that are in sick
bodies as well in hot (...) cold causes, But silver can not do this because
has not so much superfluity of fire and is (...) so much disgested and
decocted with natural maturity, yet notwithstanding this it has a fieriness
occultly and vertually in it, but not so fully because the fire causes not
such Elemental quallities as in gold. And therefore sil^er being in his first
disposition does not cure ^he Leprosy so potently unless it be first dis^ested
by Art until it have the chief degrees of ^old in all maturity. Wherefore
other sick ^etallick bodies more weakly cure infirmities according as they
differ more from them in ^erfection and maturity some differ more some ^^ss,
which is by reason of the sulphur infect^^ feid and burning of which they were
made (...) the beginning in their generation and coagu^^tion and therefore they
cure not whereas the ^^e in them is burning and so infected with ^^e Elementall
feces with the mixture of other ^^ementall quallities.

Seeing therefore that gold is of such vigor ^^ongst the vulgar and that being
in his first ^^sposcion what wonder is it if it being brought ^o medicine (as
is experienced) by Art and (...) virtue be subtiliated by disgestion of
decocti^^ and purgation of the quallities but it may ^^en cure more nay
infinite or all diseases.

It makes an old man young and revive, it ^^^serveth health strengthens
nature and ex^^leth all sicknesses of the body it drives poy^^^ away from the
heart it moysteneth the ^^teries and briefly preserves the whole ^^dy sound.

In the Ludas purorum it is thus written of the use of this medicine the manner
of useing it according to all the Philosophers is thus, if you will use to eat
of this medicine then take the weight of two florence Duccats of our Elixir and
one pound of any confection, and eat of that confection the quantity of one
dram in winter. And if you do thus it drives away all bodily infirmities from
what cause soever they proceed whether hot or cold, and conserve^^ health and
youth in a man, and makes a^ old man young, and makes gray hairs to fall it
also presently cures the Leprosy, and dissolveth Phlegm mundifieth the blood it
sharpe^eth the sight and all the senses after a mo^^ wonderful manner above all
the medicines (...) the Philosophers.

To which purpose we thus find in the R^sary of the Philosophers, In this (that
is to (...) in the Elixir) is completed the precious gi^^ of God, which is the
Arcanum of all t^^ Sciences in the world, and the incomperable treasure of
treasures (for as Plato says) he th^^ has this gift of God has the dominion
(...) the world (that is to say of the Microcosm (...) because he attaineth to
the end of Riches (...) has broke the bonds of nature, not only (...) that he
has power to convert all imperf^^ mettalls into pure gold and silver, but
rath^^ because he can convert and preserve b^^ man and every Animal in perfect
health.

To this purpose speaks Geber, Hermes Arnoldus, Raymundus, Lullius, Ripley,
Penotus, Augurellus, Aegidius, Valescus, Roger Bacon, Scotus, Laurentius,
Ventura; and diverse uncertain Authors.

Lastly, I now come to the general consent of all the Philosophers and repeat
what is found in their writings in the Book de Aurora consurgeat, and in
Clangor Buccinae, It is to be noted that the Ancient Philosophers have found 4
principal effects or virtues in the glorious repository of this treasure.

1. First, it is said to cure man's body of all infirmities. 2. Secondly, to
cure imperfect mettalls. 3. Thirdly, to transmute base stones into precious
gemmes. 4. Fourthly, to make Glass malleable.
Of the first. All Philosophers have consented that when the Elixir is
perfectly rubified it does not only work miracles in solid bodies but also in
man's body of which there is no doubt, for being taken inwardly it cures all
infirmities, it cures outwardly by unction. The Philosophers also say, if it
be given to any in water or wine first warmed it cures them of the Phrensy,
Dropsy, and Leprosy, and all kind of Fevers are cured by this Tincture and
takes away whatsoever is in a weak stomach it binds and consumes the Flux
of peccant humors being taken fasting it drives away malencholly and sadness
of the mind it cures the infermities of the eyes and dries up their
moisteness and blearedness, it helps the purblind, red or bloodshot eyes it
mollifieth the primy or web the Inflammation of the eyes and all other incident
diseases are easily cured by this Philosophical medicine.

It comfort the heart and spiritual parts by taking inwardly it mittigateth
the pain of the head by anointing the temples therewith makes the deaf to hear
and succoreth all pains of the ears it rectifieth the contracted Nerves by
unction, it restores rotten teeth by washing also all kind of imposthumes are
cured with it, by ointments or emplaytors or injecting the dry powder therein.

It cures Ulcers wounds Cancers Fistulas noli me tangere, and such like
diseases and generateth new flesh if it be mixed with corrupt and sower wine it
restores it, it expels poison being taken inwardly it also kills worms if
it be given in powder it takes away wrinkles and spots in the face by
anointing therewith and makes the face seem young, it helps women in travail
being taken inwardly and brings out the dead child by emplaister, it provketh
Urine, and helps generation it preventeth drunkenness, helps the memory,
and Augmenteth the radical moisture it strengthens nature and also
Administreth many other good things to man's body.

2. Of the second it is written that it transmuteth all imperfect metals in
color substance lasting weight ductibility melting hardness and softness

3. Of the third, that is to say of transmuting base and ignoble stones into
precious gems, I will not speak of in this place, because I have reserved it
for another place, that is to say the third Book.

Of the fourth it is writ that it makes glass malleable by mixture (that is
to say of the powder of the white corporeal Elixir) when the glass is melted.
Thus far Aurora Consurgeus and Clangor Buccinae.

Now if you desire to make pure and clear malleable glass learn this of me, and
beware of what glass you make your metal for you must not take glass of
Flints, wherewith glass of windows are made but such as your Venice glass is
made of, and that is to be chosen out of the first metal of the glass, which
has stud molten in the fire, in the glass makers furnace the space of a night
and then it will be without spots and pure therefore take as much of the said
glass out of the furnace with your Iron rod, as you have a desire to convert,
and when it is cold weigh it, and melt it by it self in a pot, and when it is
well molten project your white corporeal Elixir upon it and it will be
converted into malleable metal and fit and apt glass for all Gold Smiths
operations. And thus is glass made malleable and prepared for any use but if
this were done with the red Elixir it would be much more during, for there is
nothing more precious of which we will not now speak.

Therefore Son or or Reader whosoever thou art who read my Books give credit
to me and believe me, because all things that you shall find writ here are
either the most approved writings and collections of all writers or the Authors
own experiments. For I have tried many things and found many things true. I
believe no man lives amongst Mortals that knows more ways of prepartions
which are concealed by almost all the Philosophers.

For that which perfecteth the great work that they have all concealed which
truly is the error of all Artists. And this is all I would have you to do. To
calcine, dissolve and separate the Elements after join them together putrify
them or reduce them into sulphur ferment, project, Augment in virtue and
quantity. This is only the work of the Philosophers of which the whole Company
of Philosophers have writ in a continuate course.

The End of the Second Book.
Hampaaneah Hammegulleh: OR, The Rosy Crucian CROWN: In which is set down the
Angels of the Seven Planets, and their Occult Power upon the Seven Metals, and
miraculous Virtues in the Coelum Terrae, or first matter of all things.

Whereunto is added, A perfect full DISCOVERY OF THE Pantarva, and Elixirs of
Metals.

By EUGENIUS THEODIDAGTUS. (...). A Servant of God, and Secretary to Nature.

Vbi est scientia, ibi est invidia. LONDON: ^rinted for the Author, and are to
be sold at the Rainbow in Fleetstreet. 1664.

To the Worthy, Learned, Noble, and Valiant Colonel Samuel Sandys, late
Governor of his Majesty's Garrison in the Famous City of Worcester, and now one
of the Right Honorable Members of Parliament, etc.
YOur late respects to me have commanded my Soul to serve you: and knowing you
are as well a Philosopher and Learned, as a Soldier that can command Armies of
^orse and Foot into good order for War; I therefore humbly present this little
Piece of Philosophy to your pleasure: As the Book is Art and nature united to
serve you, so the Epistle may ^ake you merry, by the great power of Natural
^^ings, for you know they not only work upon all things that are near them by
their Virtue, but ^^so besides this, they infuse into them a like ^ower,
through which by the same Virtue they ^^so work upon other things, as in the
Load^^one, which stone does not only draw Iron ^ings, but also infuseth a
Virtue into the Rings themselves, whereby they can do the same: Af^^r this
manner it is, that the common Harlots and Villains, grounded daily in boldness
and im^^dence in Stage Plays, infect all that are near them by this property;
whereby the spectors are made like them, therefore they say that if any one
shall put on the inward Garments of a Stage Player, or shall have about him
that Looking-glass which they daily look into, he shall become bold, Confident,
Ignorant, Impudent and Wanton; so a Cloth that was about a dead Corpse, makes
him that carries it sad and melancholy: And if you put a Green Lizard made
blind, together with Iron or Gold Rings into a Glass Vessel, putting under them
some earth, shutting then the Vessel; and when it appears that the Lizard has
received his sight, shall put them out of the Glass, that those Rings shall
help sore eyes; the same may be done with Gold Rings: and a Weesel, whose eyes
with any kind of prick are put out, it is certain are restored to sight again;
upon the same account Rings are put for a certain time in the Nest of Sparrows
or Swallows which afterward are used to procure Love and Favor: These
observations and ten thousand more I made to serve you, and they shall
testify, you shall know you have power to command,

Your most affectionate humble servant JOHN HEYDON.

The third Book. Of Saturn or Lead the first Direction.
CHAP. I.
Of the Elixar, Putrefaction into Sulphur, the Oil of the Sulphur, of the
Conjunction of the Salt and Oil of the Spirit, or Salt of Saturn, which
contains the Oil or soul of the Menstruum of white Mercury and red water of
Paradise, Resolution, Solution, distillation, Hyl, Purgation, resolution of
Sericon, of the Gum of Sericon, of the solution of the Minium or Adrop, of
Calcination of Minium into Adrop and red Lead, of Calcination of Lead with Aqua
Fortis.

VEry many have writ of Saturn or Lead, but none that I know of have writ
fully thereof in any particular Treatise; therefore I do not here only set
down ^^at I have gathered from them most briefly and ^^ely, but also those
things which I have found (...) proved by my own experience, which I have
^^exed to them, that the work may be absolute (...) complete.

Of which, as they say, Mary the Prophetess, and the Sister of Moses in her
Books of the work of Saturn is thus said to write, Make your water running
like the water of the two Zaibeth and fix it upon the heart of Saturn: And in
another place, Marry the Gum with the true Matrimonial Gum, and you shall make
it like running water. Of which process of Mary, George Ripley our Country man
has these verses.

Maria mira sonat
Quae nobis talia donat
Gummis cum binis
Fugitivum fugit inimis
Horis in trinis
Tria vinclat fortia finis
Fila Plutonis
Consortia jungit Amoris.
Or thus, Maria mira sonat, breviter qui talia donat
Gummi cum binis fugitivum fug it in imis
Horis in trinis tria vinclat fortia finis.
Maria lux roris ligam ligat in tribus horis
Filia Pluton is consortia jungit Amoris
Gaudet inassala sola per tria sociata.


The heart of Saturn, says Ripley, is his whi^^ and clear body, out of whose
doctrine the wo^^ does briefly thus proceed, that is to say, that water he made
out of the body of Saturn, lik^ the water Zaibeth, and that water fixed upon
the heart of Saturn, but because the practice (...) drawing out this water of
Zaibeth, does not appear out of this, nor the way of making the heart ^f
Saturn, therefore the foregoing direction in ^^e Holy Guide will show them
both.

Therefore I have joined two Tables, in one ^f which the shorter is the
demonstration of the deduction of the body of Saturn into his heart or ^alt,
the other longer and greater, is the extraction of the water Zabieth, and the
consummation of the work of Saturn.

Having thus described this work, I now come ^o the explanation, and say, that
the Calcination ^f the Body is twofold; for the Calcination thereof in the
shorter work, for extracting the heart of Saturn, is done on this wise by Aqua
Fortis.

Take 8 or 10 Ounces of Lead in Filings, and dissolve it in Aqua Fortis in
double proportion, and fortified with Salt Armoniack in an Earthen Vessel with
a narrow neck, and set in ashes till it be totally dissolved; and there will
remain a white matter in the bottom like Grains of white Salt, which is a
figure of perfect solution; then pour your matter that is dissolved in the
water into a body, and set thereon a Limbeck, and in Balneo draw away the
corrosive water, till there remain a dry substance in the bottom; and so you
have the body converted white by Calcination with corrosive water, out of which
the heart of Saturn is to be drawn.

The way to wash away and purge the corrosive water from the body, pour warm
water upon the substance in a Limbeck, and pour it often off till it have no
sharpness at all upon the tongue, and then your body is prepared for drawing
out the Salt.

When your matter is well dried, dissolve it (...) it again in distilled
Vinegar, and distill the Vinegar twice or thrice from it, and in the bottom you
shall have a lucid clear and white shining Salt, which is then called the heart
of Saturn.

Now I come to the practice of the other greater work, that the verity of the
stone may be found, of which many have made mention i^ their Books, as
Raymundus, who calls it the Vegetable Mineral, and Animal Stone; Geb^^ says
there grows a Saturnian Herb on the top of a Hill or Mountain, whose blood if
it be extracted, cures all infirmities.

Ripley writ a whole Book, called his Practical Compendium, of the practice of
the Vegetable Stone, teaching the manner and form of operation; but because he
neither set down the solution plainly nor perfectly, he has been the cause of
much error, and has not only deceived me but all those that followed him,
until after a long time I found a way to dissolve Saturn, so that it could
never after by distallation be turned into Lead again, which is the chiefest
and greatest secret of the Vegetable Stone.

But let us hear the words of Mary the Prophetess, and Ripley taken from her:
The Radix of our matter is a clear and white body which putrifieth not, but
congealeth Mercury or Quicksilver, with its odor makes its water like the
running water of the two Zabieth ( alis Zubech) and fix it upon the fixed heart
of Saturn: which words do most aptly agree with the properties of Lead; for if
any one be smit or wounded with a Bullet, and the Bullet remain in the body, it
will never putrify.

And also if Quicksilver be hanged in a Pot over the fume of molten Lead, so
as the fume of the Lead touch the Quicksilver, it will congeal it.

Thus far of the preparation of Lead, we now come to its denomination, They bid
us fix the water Zaibeth upon the fixed body of the heart of Saturn; now for
the exposition of the body, for the name of Saturn, Ripley calls it Adrop,
of which that is made which the Masters call Sericon; the water of Sericon they
call their Menstruum, the two Zabieths joined together in one water, are the
two Mercuries, that is to say white and red contained in one Menstruum, that is
to say of the water and Oil of the fixed body or heart of Saturn: Follow what
I have written concerning the imbibition of the earth, our operation is no
otherwise then in the Practical Compendium of Ripley.

Isaacus also writ a Treatise of Lead, he works chiefly according to the
doctrine of Mary the Prophetess, and laboreth much to fix the earth of Saturn,
and after to dissolve the body in distilled Vinegar; that by the addition of
corroding and sharp things, his red Oil may be distilled, which he calls the
water of Paradise, that he may imbibe his fixed earth therewith: which way is
much shorter then Ripleys, but the rubification and fixation of the earth is
long and uncertain; wherefore I have both forsaken Isaacus and Ripley in making
the earth, in stead of which I have given the fixed heart of Saturn, as you
may read in the Holy Guide.

But that the body may be prepared according to this Table, and after my
intention and the desire of Ripley, we both will that the Oil or Water of
Paradise be drawn out of the Gum of Sericon (whose father is Adrop) Sericon is
made of Red-lead; therefore it is first necessary to show the way of making
Minium of Lead, which Thomas Juc an Englishman has described, together with
the Composition of the Gum of Sericon, which Author I purpose to follow, as
being the best.

Take ten or twelve pound of Lead, and melt it in a great Iron vessel, as
Plumbers use to do, and when it is molten, stir it still with an Iron Spatula
till the Lead be turned to powder, which powder will be of a green color; when
you see it thus, take it from the fire and let it cool, and grind that powder
upon a Marble till it be impalpable, moistening the powder with a little common
Vinegar, till it be like thick honey, which put into a broad Earthen Vessel,
and set it on a Trevet over a lent fire, to vapor away the Vinegar and dry the
powder, and it will be of a yellow color; grind it again and do as before,
till the powder be so Red as Red-lead, which is called Adrop: And thus is
Saturn calcined into Redlead or Minium.

Take a pound of this Read-lead and dissolve it in a Gallon of Vinegar, and
stir it with a stick three or four times in a day, and so let it stand in a
cold place the space of three days: then take your Earthen Vessel and set it in
Balneo twenty four hours, then let it cool and filter the liquor three times;
and when it is clear, put it in a body with a Limbeck thereupon, and distill
the Vinegar so long as it will ascend, and in the bottom the Gum of the Sericon
will remain like thick honey, which set apart, and dissolve more new Lead as
before for more Gum, till you have ten or twelve pound thereof.

Now give careful attention, for we now come to the point and period of Ripleys
error, for if you put four pound of this Sericon to distill in a Limbeck, and
from thence would draw a Menstruum, as Ripley teaches, perhaps you would have
scarce one ounce of this Oil, and some part of a black earth will remain in the
bottom, and most part of the Gum melted again into Lead, by which you may know
that the Sericon is not well dissolved, nor as yet sufficiently prepared, that
a Chaos may be made thereof fit for distillation, because it is not yet well
dissolved; therefore in Isaacus there is found a way of resolving this Gum with
distilled Vinegar, acuated with calcined Tartar and Salt-armoniack; Wherefore,
says he, if thou be wise, resolve thy Gum; but I like not this acuation of the
Vinegar, as I may call it, I rather choose to resolve the Sericon in Raymund's
calcinative water, which is a compounded water of the Vegetable Mercury or fire
natural, with the fire against nature, as Ripley testifies, and it is more
verified by Raymund in his Book of Mercuriis, where he teaches how to dissolve
bodies with his calcinative water.

I will reveal unto you this water, which is almost unknown: Note therefore,
that the Vegetable Mercury is the spirit of Wine (instead of which we may
sometimes use distilled Vinegar) and that the fire against Nature is a
corrosive water made of Vitriol and Saltpeter.

Therefore take which you will, either spirit of Wine rectified (or Aqua Vitae)
or distilled Vinegar four pound, and two pound of corrosive water, and mix them
together.

In this watet thus compounded, resolve half a pound of Gum of Sericon in a
circulatory, and set it in Balneo four or five days, and the Gum will be
totally dissolved into the form of water or Oil of a duskish red color.

Then distill away the water in Balneo, and there will remain an Oil in the
bottom, which is then the Chaos, out of which you may draw a Menstruum
containing two elements; and this is the true resolution of the Gum of Sericon,
in this water you may resolve so much Gum as you please by reiteration.

Take two pound of this Chahodical substance, and prepare it for distillation
in naked fire or sand, and lift up the clear red Oil, wherein both the spirit
and soul does secretly lie hid, which Isaacus calls the water of Paradise,
which when you have you may rejoice, for you have gone through all the gross
work, and come to the Philosophical work.

Therefore now proceed to conjunction, and join the white heart of Saturn with
the red Oil, as it is found in the Rosary.

Candida succincto jacet uxor nupta marito, That is to say, the red Mercury to
the Salt, if you proceed to the red work.

Therefore take four ounces of the Salt or heart of Saturn, and as much of the
red Oil or water of Paradise, and seal them up in a Philosophers Egg, and so
soon as they shall feel the heat of the Balneum, the Salt will dissolve and be
made all one with the Oil, so as you shall not know which was the Salt, which
was the Oil.

Set your glass in Balneo, and there let it stand in an equal degree of fire,
till all your matter be turned white and stick to the sides of the glass, and
shine like fishes eyes, and then it is white Sulphur of Nature; but if you
proceed to the red work, then divide your white Sulphur into equal parts,
reserving one part for the white work, and go on with the other part, and in a
new glass well sealed up, set it in Ashes till it be turned into a red color.

When your Sulphur is thus converted, imbibe it again with equal weight of its
soul, dissolving and congealing till it remain in an Oil, and it will congeal
no more, but remain fixed and flowing.

This then is to be fermented with the fourth part of the Oil of Gold, as is
often mentioned before.

We have set down already before of the augmentation in quantity and quality,
therefore it is not necessary to repeat it here.

We will now return to the white Sulphur before reserved, that we may set down
the manner of the white work.

When you have your red Oil or Soul, if you desire to make the white Elixir,
set part of the said Oil in a glass in Balneo to digest, then take it out and
put it into a body, and in a lent fire distill away the spirit or white
Mercury, which you must try, that you may know whether it arise pure without
water or not, as you do when you try the spirit of Wine, for if it burn all up,
it is well; if it do not, rectify it so often, till it be without any
wateriness at all; then have you rectified your spirit, wherewith dissolve your
white Sulphur, till it remain fixed, and flowing, as you did before in the red
work, then ferment it and augment it with the fourth part of the Oil of the
white Luminary or Luna, as you did the red, and it will be the white Elixir,
converting imperfect bodies into perfect Silver.

A Corollary.
Ripley divided the scope of this work into four operations, whereof the first
is the dissolution of the body, the second, the extraction of the Menstruum and
the separation of the Elements; the third is not necessary in our work, because
we cast away the earth after every distillation, instead of which we use our
Salt or heart of Saturn; the fourth is, that there be a conjunction of our
Salt as is before described.

Hereafter follows the Accurtation of the work of Saturn.
The way of extracting Quicksilver out of Saturn is found in Isaacus, of
which I know how to make a special accurtation with his water of Paradise,
which I gathered partly from the foresaid Author and others; Ripley made his
accurtation with Quicksilver precipitated with Gold, and the imbibition with
Corrosive water, which I like not, because the Elixir so made will be the
greatest poison, as himself confesses, that it were better for a man to eat
the eyes of a Basilisk, then taste that Elixir.

But because I desire to set down this accurtation of Lead alone and his
Elements, that no strange body may be added to our Elixir, and also that it may
be made a Medicine for all uses, I have found out the way of making alone with
the Mercury of Saturn and his own proper Tincture; for I make a body of one
thing which is a spirit, and make that Medicine with its own proper spirit.
Read all the Philosophers, and you shall never find a word of this process, nor
none of the Ancients will teach thee how to make the Mercury of Saturn, which
that it may be briefly done, this following work will show at large in our Holy
Guide.

CHAP. II.
The Medicine, Elixir, Fermentation, Imbibition Precipitation, Quicksilver,
Saturn, Lead, The Toad.

MY great Grandfather Christopher Heydon, says in a certain Manuscript of his,
Levi enim Art norunt Alchimistae Mercurium currentem conficere explumbo, that
is to say, the Alchimists knew how by an easy Art to make current Mercury out
of Lead; but what Art that was, neither he nor any of the ancients have showed
unto us, Quaerite, quaerite, says the first Alchimist (so Paracelsus was
pleased to say in imitation of him) and invenietis, pulsate and operietur
vobis, that is to say, Seek and you shall find, knock and it shall be opened
unto you; which may rather seem to be the words of an envious Master, then the
precepts of a Teacher. But having learned this, I learned to seek, that is to
say to read; I read, I knocked, that is, I tried many experiments, although
they were repugnant to doctrine and Philosophy, therefore although I almost
despaired of that Art, yet because nothing is difficult to the industrious, by
often knocking, at last I found it apart, by what means I attained to the Art
of such a facility, that is to say, of making Quicksilver of Lead; and when
the process is read to the operator, it will be rather rejected then believed:
but to the end this Art may be revealed as a great secret, I thought it
necessary to speak first of the Instruments necessary in this work, before I
come to declare the doctrine, which are three in number, that is to say, a
Furnace, a Crucible and a pair of Tongs, as appears in the Holy Guide.

CHAP. III.
The Crucible, the Furnace, the Hole in the Top of the Furnaee, the Tongues,
the Coals.

LEt the Furnace be D, the place filled with Coals E, whereunto put fire and
when the Coals are well burnt, so that they give a clear flame and fire, take
your Crucible A, well anailed that it break not with the sudden heat, and put
therein three ounces of filed Lead, having twelve ounces of Mercury sublimate
well ground, and Salt Armoniack six ounces mixed together, which put upon the
filings of Lead into the Crucible A; and when the fire is strong and glowing
hot, ^ake your Tongs C, and presently take up your Crucible, and put it in B,
the hole in the top of the Furnace till you hear a great noise and buz^ing,
then so soon as you can (least the Quicksilver fly away with the spirits) take
away the Crucible with the matter therein, and set it in an earthen dish filled
with ashes to cool, and when it is cold strike the lower part of the Crucible,
so that the matter of the Lead may fall into an earthen dish, and you shall
find your Lead con^erted into Quicksilver.

This Crucible and Furnace is at large characte^ed in the Holy Guide.

This work is to be reiterated with new spirits ^ill you have a sufficient
quantity of Quick-sil^er, with which proceed as follows to precipitate this
Quicksilver, that from a spirit it may be converted into a fixed body by
fixation.

Take of this Quicksilver so much as you please, and put it to precipitate in
a round glass well luted, and set it in ashes to the top of the glass: yet let
us stay here a while, that your unstanding may be the more enlightened.

Therefore understand that the intention of this work is to fix the spirit,
which may sooner be done with the spirit of a fixed body, which before was
Homogeneal with the body, and which of its own nature desires to join again
with its body.

Therefore nature requires that she may be helped by Art in this work, to which
the Artist consenting, he adminstreth thereto the pure and desired metal, which
it delights to adhere unto* which metal is Gold, which is thus prepared, tha^
it be sooner parted by the Quicksilver and stic^ thereunto.

Take as much pure Gold as you please, and dissolve it in aqua regis mixed with
equal part o^ acetum acerrimum, or Lac virginis, then set (...) to digest the
space of a day, then put your dissolution into an Alimbeck, and set it Balneo,
t^ distill away the water as dry as you can, and d^ thus three times, and the
third time distill it i^ ashes, that the Salt Armoniack may sublime. The^ put
distilled Vinegar upon the matter remaining and after it has stood three days
in Balneo, disti^^ the Vinegar away in ashes, that all the substanc^ of the
Salt Armoniack may sublime: and do th^^ three times, always putting in new
Vinegar, u^till the Oil of the dissolved Gold remain in the bottom; then take
of your Quicksilver three times so much as your Gold, and pour it upon the
solution of the Gold, that they may mix together and be united: then put your
quicksilver with the solution in a round Glass stopped only with a piece of
Cotton, and with a stick put it down every day as it does ascend, and keep your
Glass ^n ashes the space of a month, till your quicksilver be turned into a
red precipitate, then again dissolve it in new distilled Vinegar, till the
whole substance of the quicksilver be dissolved, and the Vinegar be colored
in a golden color, then di^^ill away the Vinegar in ashes, and again
pre^ipitate the quicksilver, which is in the bottom ^f a Gold color, into a
red and fixed body; and (...) have you the Mercury precipitate of Sa^^rne.

It remains now that the body be imbibed ^ith its soul, that this being from
a spirit redu^^d into a body, may again imbibe its soul, that it ^ay be
dissolved therewith; therefore put it into (...) Glass, and add thereto equal
proportion of its ^ul or water of Paradise, and shut your Glass ^ell the space
of five days, till the body be dis^^ved with the soul.

Then dry it in ashes till it penetrate and flow; ^^d when it is dried, try it
upon a hot Iron plate it be fixed and melt, if not, imbibe it again with ^f the
weight of its water, and do so till you ^^ke it fusible and piercing by
imbibing and ^^ying it, and when it will melt in the fire, and penetrate, it is
then the stone, and fit for fermen^ion.

We have said enough of the manner of fermentation in the second Book, and
therefore it is not necessary to repeat it here: and so after fermentation it
will be the Elixir.

Then it is to be augmented and projected, as is before declared; and thus the
work of Saturn is accurtated, of which George Ripley says,

Adrop is the father of the stone, Sericon his brother, Lympha his fister, the
earth its mother.

But if you desire to know all the secret of Saturn or Lead, I will set you
down one process out of Paracelsus: when you have well prepared the heart of
Saturn, says he, take two or three ounces of that heart and grind it small
with double weight of Saltpeter, and put it in a subliming Glass, with a head
well luted to sublime, increasing the fire by little and little as long as any
thing will ascend or sublime; thus far Paracelsus: now if you find this true,
Ripley will tell you what you shall do with it, in these words.

When by the violence of the fire in the distillation of the Gum of the
Sericon, a certain white matter shall ascend sticking to the head of the
Limbeck, like Ice, keep this matter which has the property of Sulphur not
burning, and is a fit matter for receiving form, you shall give it form after
this manner by rubifying it in ashes, and when it is red Sulphur, give it of
its soul, until it pierce and flow, then ferment it.

Here I have delivered unto you all the ways and manners of Saturn, which are
found in any of the Philosophers Books: to the end therefore that the work may
be completed with a demonstration of this word Plumbum Philosophorum, at
appears in the Practical Compendium of Ripley, we say that the Philosophers
Lead is not taken for Antimony but for Adrop, being converted into the Gum of
Sericon.

It remains now that we in order treat of the third termination of this Book:
therefore after we have done with Saturn, it is necessary to speak of Jupiter,
viz. Tin: but because there are many other ways of handling Saturn besides
those we mentioned, therefore we refer the Reader thither, seeing he follows
his footsteps: for he is the offspring of Saturn and naturally born from him.

CHAP. IV.
The third Table of the Elixir of Iron.

IT is not necessary to prefix a peculiar Table to this metal alone, because it
is set down before this book, nevertheless I will here reckon up its parts and
operations as follows.

1. Calcination. 2. Solution. 3. Separation. 4. Conjunction, 5. Putrefaction.
6. Sulphur. 7. Fermentation. 8. Elixir.
Exaltation or augmentation and projection is spoken of sufficiently in the
former Books.

Mars being most earthly of all the Planets or bodies, it is not to be doubted
but that it may easily be reduced into a body with little labor; and therefore
most easily converted into Salt, which is done by Calcination: therefore we
will first show his conversion into Salt.

Understand therefore, that hence arises a twofold consideration, that is to
say, that it be calcined one way into its body or Salt, the other way that the
body be prepared for solution by calcination.

The practice differs but a little, for whether you calcine Iron for its Salt
or its Menstruum, one only manner of preparation suffices.

That is to say, that you take filings of Iron or Steel, as much as you please,
and mix therewith equal weight of Sulphur in an earthen body with a Limbeck
will luted thereto, then set it in ashes to sublime till all the Sulphur be
sublimed from it, then dissolve the filings which remain in the bottom in Aqua
Regia, and it will be converted into Salt, which will be cleansed from the said
water, if you put thereon distilled Vinegar and distill it away; do thus three
times with new Vinegar, and you shall have a yellowish red Salt in the bottom,
which then is a body to be joined to the soul, which keep in warm ashes till
you use it.

Now for the practice of Iron for dissolution take filings of Iron or Steel, so
much as you please, and put it in an Iron dish filled with Vinegar, and set it
in the flaming fire the space (...) three hours, then take it out and let it
cool reiterate this work four or five times, the calcine it with Sulphur as you
did before.

When it is thus calcined, set it to dissolve in a corrosive water, by adding
equal weight of our acetum acerrimum, and let it stand till it have dissolved
so much as it can in the cold, then set it in hot ashes, and let it stand there
the space of four or five days, pour off the water and dry which is not
dissolved, and again calcine it and dissolve it, and when it is dissolved, so
as the water be colored red, pour it out into a body, and keep it till you
have dissolved as much calcined Iron as you please.

Then take all your dissolutions, and with an Alimbeck distill away the water
in Balneo, and put distilled Vinegar upon the matter remaining in the bottom,
and let it stand upon it in Balneo the space of seven days; then take out your
Glass and filter the dissolution, and then again in Balneo distill off the
Vinegar, and in the bottom will remain a thick Oil of the Iron or Steel; but if
it be not dissolved to your mind, reiterate your solution in Raymunds
calcinative water, but it would be better if it were edulcorated with Aqua
vitae, drawing it away again in Balneo, and so you have your Iron dissolved
into a liquor.

Therefore proceed to distillation, that there may be a separation, and distill
it in an earthen Vessel in a strong fire, increasing the fire as much as you
can, and receive the oil, or soul, or red tincture of Mars separated from the
remaining feces by the nose of the Limbeck, which oil is the most permanent
tincture for coloring Sulphures for the red work, or for exaltation of all
Elixirs in color, for it makes it tinge and color higher.

When you have thus prepared the tincture, then proceed to conjunction, and
work with the Salt before reserved, taking three or four ounces of the Salt,
and equal weight of the soul.

Then seal it up and set it to putrify in Balneo, and keep it there till it
pass through all colors and be white, and then it is Sulphur of Nature.

Then take out your Glass and set it in ashes in a greater degree of heat till
it be red, then dissolve the red Sulphur with its own soul, and again dissolve
and fix it; dissolving it in Balneo, and fixing it under the fire, and so it is
prepared for fermentation.

The fermentation is, as has often been spoken of before, with the resolved
oil of the Sulphur of Gold in a fourfold proportion to the Medicine, that by
the addition of the ferment, it may be made Elixir transmuting all bodies.

And note that this Elixir of Iron excels all other Elixirs, for it
rubifieth more, and tingeth higher, and is better for man's body, for it
prevails against the spleen, constringeth the belly and cures wounds, it
knitteth broken bones together, and stops the superfluous Flux of the
Courses.

CHAP. V.
The fourth Table of the Physical and Alchymical Tincture out of the red Lion
and Glue of the Eagle, drawn out from the Authors experience.

IT is chiefly to be remembered how we first taught you to dissolve Antimony
with out acetum acerrimum, which may be also well done if you dissolve it in
our calcinative water, and after that Antimony is calcined which we spoke of in
the end of the second book; it is also to be remembered that in the end of the
book I spoke of the Glue of the Eagle in the sixth Table of the first book;
these being remembered, it is to be understood that we attribute no other
beginning to this accurtation, except that where before we took the blood of
the red Lion and the Glue of the Eagle when they were both destroyed; we now
join them sound and not hurt together, that they living may mortify and
dissolve themselves, which I have fitly called Corporeal Matrimony, or the
Union, for in this wedlock they dye together, that they may be vivified in the
Celestial Matrimony; therefore it is not to be wondered if this Table differ
from the other, for this pertains to the handling of spirits, the other way
teaches the manner of making the Elixir of bodies; therefore we now come to
demonstrate the foregoing Table.

Therefore that I may plainly reveal all things unto you, take Antimony well
ground, half a pound, and as much Mercury sublimate, likewise ground, and grind
them both togeth upon a marble, till you cannot know them one from another;
then set them in a cold place, that the matter dissolving may drop into a Glass
set underneath, for when the matters are well mixed together, then say, that
they will both shortly be dissolved when the water is perfectly dissolved, it
will be of a greenish color and loathsome smell.

Put this water with the thick part with it into a Glass, and let it stand the
space of three days in a fixatory under the fire, and in short time you shall
see your dissolvedness of a brownish black color, and after, that is to say,
in the foresaid time it will be red, something higher then red Lead.

Dissolve this calcined matter in Raymunds calcinative water, and when you have
dissolved it all into a red liquor or deep yelow, then is your matter brought
well into its Chaos.

Put this liquor into a fit body with an Alimbeck and receiver, and by
distallation separate the red oil or the red Mercury from the white body which
remains in the earth; and if any matter ascend into the head of the Alimbeck,
despise it not, but try if it be fixed; and if it be not fixed enough, sublime
it till it be fixed.

Whereunto join equal weight of its soul, for the Celestial Matrimony, and
always leave out the earth in the bottom if you have any sublimate fixed, if
not, take the white earth remaining in the bottom, with which proceed as before
is said, and join the white body with the soul; when they are thus joined or
married, set them to impregnate and revivifie in Bulneo, till it pass through
all colors, and at last be converted into red, which then is the stone.

The manner of Fermentation, Augmentation, both in quantity and quality, and
projection, is spoken of before in other works.

And thus Sons, Brethren and Reader, I have delivered and opened (and also have
amended many things) all the secrets of the Ancient Philosophers, whose
writings were rather published to conceal the Art, then to make it manifest or
teach it; although it pleased Hermes Trismegistus, the first writer of this
Art, both to say and protest that he had never revealed, taught, nor prophesied
any thing of this Art to any, exept fearing the day of Judgment or the
damnation of his Soul, for shuning the danger thereof, even as he received the
gift of Faith from the Author of Faith, so he left it to the faithful; yet when
you read his writings, either in his Smaragdine Table, or in his Apocalips, or
his twelve Golden Gates, and shall find nothing plain or manifest, what will
you think of such an Author? Believe me all the Ancients have concealed the
secret of their preparations in the gross work, although they writ most
famously of the Philosophical operation; therefore I have used my endeavor to
try, for out of their writings I found that the Elixir might be made of the
Planets or Metals, and also of mean Minerals, which came more near to a
metallic nature, then reading more, I found a certain method amongst them all,
as it were with one consent or voice on this wise.

First and principally, that bodies should be made incorporeal, that is to say,
discorporated, or discompounded, which then is called the Hyle or Chaos.

Secondly, That out of this Chaodical substance, which is one thing, three
Elements, should be separated and purified.

Thirdly, That the separated and purified elements should be joined, the man
and the woman, the body and the soul, heaven and earth, with infinite other
names so called, that the ignorant might think they were diverse, which only
were nothing else but water and Salt, or the body and spirit or soul, that is
to say, white Mercury and red, which they joined together that a new and pure
body might be created in putrefaction, that a Microcosmical infant might be
created in imitation of the Creation, that is to say, Sulphur of Nature.

Fourthly, That it should be fed with Milk, that is to say, with its own proper
Tincture, and after nourished by Fermentation, that it may grow to its perfect
strength.

Having learned these, I begun to practice, and in the practice of every body
and spirit, I found diverse errors; but reading more and trying more, at last I
found the manner and true way of dissolving all bodies, separating and
conjoyning them; finding the composition of their secret of secrets, that is to
say, Lac virginis, or Acetum acerrimum, and Raymunds calcining water, wherewith
I dissolved all bodies at pleasure, and perfected the gross work; wherefore I
purposed, contrary to the custom of the Philosophers, to reveal the whole
work, lest I being envious, should be the Author of error like them; therefore
I have added their works to my own experiments and inventions, which are
plainly and truly writ, that the Artist need to read no books but mine, for
herein is almost all things contained, which are found plainly writ by the
Philosophers; and also those things which are found true by my own experience.

Now you have all things methodically in this Art without error, with which by
the help of God, you may attain to the end.

Alchymy reveals and opens unto us four other secrets.

The first is, the composition of Pearls, far greater and fairer then natural
ones, which cannot be perfectly done without the help of the Elixir.

The second is the manner of making precious Stones of ignoble ones, by the
same Art which we taught before in malleable Glass.

The third is the manner of making artificial Carbunckles in imitation of
natural ones, which few or none have spoken of.

The fourth is the manner of making Mineral Amber, of which Paracelsus has
only writ in his book of vexations of Philosophers, and in the last Edition of
his works in the six of his Archidoxes: but because they cannot be made without
the help of the Elixirs, therefore they deserve a place amongst the Elixirs; of
the fourth, that is to say, of the virtue or rather the vice of making Amber, I
shall handle it coldly: I have reserved the explanation of this Aenigma, till
the last place, wherefore it is said, that the Elixir is perfected in the
Decimal number.

CHAP. VI.
The fifth Table, of making of Pearls.

THis Table of making Pearls, consists of these parts, that is to say, Lac
Virginis. Dissolved Pearls, Quicksilver, And The White Elixir.


Take Lac Virginis, or Acetum Acerrimum, so much as you think sufficient for
dissolving the Pearls, as in double proportion to the Pearls; as if there be
three ounces of the Pearls, let there be six ounces of Lac Virginis, wherein
dissolve the Pearls, and set the Glass in Balneo to digest the space of a day,
then pour out the solution, and distill it in Balneo, and in the bottom of the
Glass you shall find the thick Oil of the Pearls, whereunto add so much of your
white corporeal Elixir as sufficieth to make the matter like paste, and put
thereto equal weight of the Pearls of Quicksilver; if the matter be too thin,
put more powder of the Elixir, if it be too thick, add more Lac Virginis or
Quicksilver, till it be like Liver; grind this mass upon a stone till it be
brought to a fit thickness.

Then make it up in what form you please, therefore it is necessary that you
have a pair of Brass or Iron Moulds in readiness (but it would be better they
were of Silver) of what form you will, and fill them with this matter while it
is soft; then pierce them through with a needle, or such like thing, and put as
many of these in a Glass as you will (but first hang them upon a thread) and
close well the Glass, and bury it with the Pearls therein two foot under the
earth, and let it stand there the space of six months till they be congealed
with the cold into a shining and clear substance like natural Margarites. These
Pearls made and compounded in this manner, are no less then natural ones, but
much greater and more excellent by reason of the white Elixir.

CHAP. VII.
The sixth Table of the Magistery of Carbunckles.

WE now come to speak of Carbunckles, which have their birth or original in the
pits, and Golden Mines of the earth, of the spirit of Gold and Mineral Salt
indurated and corporeal, being ^ecocted and disgested into the hardness of
stone ^y the Archeus of Nature, as well by the heat ^f the Climate, as by the
great heat of the Sun; ^or they arise from the spirit of the Minere of Sol or
Gold under the earth, by whose influence they shine, as also from the hard
Mineral Salt, by the mixture of which they are hardened into the nature of
stone; whence the Philosopher intends and endeavors as near as he can to
imitate nature by Art, and to make and compound artificial Carbunckles above
the earth, with the same materials which Nature forms them of under the
earth; therefore he uses the same principles, operating with the spirit and
soul of Sol undivided, and the most hard Salt of the earth, whereof Venice
Glass is made, which two are the material Organs for Manuals: three things are
required, that is to say, a Glass-maker, Furnace, a flaming fire, and a
Crucible.

We now come to the materials, which are two, and are to be joined together;
the first gives the form, the other receives it: that which gives the form
is the spirit and soul of Sol or Gold joined together in the red Elixir, and is
the agent, as it were the man; that which receives the form, is the hardest
Salt of the earth contained in Glass, and is the patient, as it were the woman;
the agent is the power of heaven impregnating the earth, the patient is the
power of the earth, retaining the impression of the heaven.

Having thus demonstrated the Theory, w^ now lay the foundation of the
practice, which are two, whereof the first is the preparation o^ the Elixir,
the other of the Glass.

Therefore your red corporeal Elixir is to b^ dissolved with the oil or
tincture of Mars o^ Iron, because it has the greatest virtue above all other
bodies, by whose Celestial power the Earth, that is to say the glass, is
brought to the hardness of stone, and converted into a stone: And so the
Elixir is prepared for projection upon glass; but for the preparation of
glass there is no more required but that it be made of the same matter that
Venice-glasse is made of; the composition of which if you know not, Take as
much Venice-glasse as you please, and weigh it exactly, upon which project your
Elixir: when you have so done, put your glass in the Crucible to melt; and
when it is well molten, then take your Corporeal red Elixir dissolved as before
(or if you will, undissolved) as much as suffices to ^inge the molten glass,
and put it tied up in a paper into the Crucible upon the molten glass,
stirring it a little with a rod; and there let it stand the space of one hour:
then take out the Crucible, and pour the matter into an ingot, and it will be
malleable, but as hard as glass, and stonelike ^o the sight: and you may
either cut it like a ^^one, or work it with a hammer. This Carbunckle-stone or
metal has the property of a Carbunckle in shining and glistring above all
natural Carbuncles; and if it touch a Toad or Spi^er, they presently die,
because it takes virtue from the Elixir against all poison: And if the ^^ck
carry this Carbunckle about him, so that (...) does touch the region of his
heart, it takes away the Cardiack passions, and diminishes the ^^rength of the
disease.

CHAP. VIII.
The seventh Table denoting the composition of Mineral Electrum or Amber, as
well natural as Artificial; and also speaks of a Bell made of Amber used by
Tritemius.

HAving finished these two Secrets, we now come to the Electrum: but whether it
is to be reckoned amongst stones, or amongst bodies, it may be doubted, because
in the West Indies it is found writ in the Spanish Decads of the virtue
thereof; it is affirmed to be the greatest Antidote against all poison, and far
more noble then Gold: but if it be a metal, it must necessarily be the chief
and supreme of all metals; for other metals have their original from Sulphur
and Mercury, but this metal consists of seven metals, and is the best of all
those which grow in the Archaeas of the Earth. For where Gold is taken for the
most noble of all metals by reason of its perfect digestion and color, this
has a greater degree of digestion and color, having a higher color, that is
to say, clear red, approaching nearer to the true color of the Sun. For a^
Gold is the Sun of other metals, so this Electrum is to Gold as the Heaven to
the Sun, wherein Nature as it were in Heaven has created certain stars shining
with clear beams of a Silverish color, showing plain to the eye that it
consiste^^ of red and white metals mixed in the highest degree of digestion.

On the Contrary it may be objected,

Ob. 1. That there are only six metallic bo^ies, amongst which this is found
to be none; therefore it is rather a Spirit then a body.

Also thus.

Ob. 2. The minere of every body or metal is ^onverted into metal by fusion,
but the minere ^f Electrum in melting always remains; therefore it is no
metal.

Otherwise thus:

Ob. 3. There is nothing generated in the ^^rth but stones, spirits, metals, or
mean mine^^ls: but Electrum is none of these; therefore it ^ems to be no
mineral.

1. To the first objection it is thus answered. We say, that it is not apparent
out of the books (...) any of the ancient Philosophers, that they e^^r dreamed
of this natural and mineral Electrum. ^^t more to the purpose: those are called
Spi^^^s, which fly from the fire; but the Electrum ^^eth not from the fire:
therefore it is no Spirit, (...) Quicksilver and the rest, and also mean
mine^^^s.

2. We now come to the next. We grant ^^t the minere of every metal is
converted in^^ metal by the fire, which consists of Mercury ^^d Sulphur. This
Axiom is evident in those ^^tals which are imperfect, and fly from the fire
^^her in their minere or in themselves, after they (...) reduced into metal;
and also the Gold mi^^^e, although before melting it fly from the (...),
before the Gold be molten and converted into metal; yet because Gold never
flies after it be molten, but is found fixed in all probation, therefore it is
accounted the worthiest of all metals which consist of Sulphur and Mercury.

3. Now to the third, I say, that I think it rather is of a stony and metallic
nature joined together; by which mixture it differs from a stone, and also from
metal: but because it consists of Mercury, Earthly Salt and Sulphur mixed,
therefore it gets unto it a mixed nature of them; so that it is half stone, half
metal.

Wherefore it is to be judged that it consists of three natures mixed
together; that is to say mineral, metallic, and stony; and is the best o^ all
those which grow in the Archeas of the Earth for it exceeds mean minerals in
fixation and constancy, because they pass away in fume by long melting, and
vanish to nothing; or else they me^^ easily in moisture, as salts, etc. But
this Electrum or Amber remains fixed and constant as well i^ the fire as
water.

It exceeds metals in digestion, color and dignity. In digestion, because it
is endewed with the sign of greater and more perfect digestion^ for as Gold is
more yellow by reason of his greater heat and more perfect digestion; So this
Electrum, because it has a higher color then Go^ has, therefore it is more
digested in color; (...) as Gold exceeds other metals in color, so Electrum
exceeds Gold; for Gold is yellow, but Electrum red, which is a higher color
then yellow. And as Silver is the Luna of white metals, (...) Gold is the Sol
of red metals: So Electrum is (...) Gold, as the heaven is to Sol in dignity or
val^^ for by how much Gold is more noble then Silver, so much this Electrum is
more noble then Gold.

Lastly, it excels stones in shining, and virtue. In shining, because they
shine by reason of their hardness; so this Electrum shows many sparks, not
by reason of its hardness, but by reason of his compleatnesse. And as the
heaven is a^orned with Stars, so this Electrum with sparking, because it has
the clearness and brightness of all metals. And as the Heaven contains all
^he Stars and Planets, so this Electrum, which is ^he Heaven of metals,
contains the Sun and Moon, and the rest of the Planets in it self; Gold and
Silver as it were the greater Luminaries, the other bodies or metals as the
rest of the Planets, ^ean minerals as Stars in virtue. For although ^any stones
have singular properties and virtues, (...) that some help the sight, others
the Spleen, some the Heart; some stop blood, some hinder ^^ortivenesse, some
hasten childbirth, some resist ^oyson: yet there is no one found which takes
^way all infirmities, as Electrum does, more then ^^l mean minerals, metals or
stones, according to ^^^s threefold conjunction, that is to say, Mineral,
^etallick, and Lapidifick.

Therefore whatsoever others please to think of ^^is Natural Electrum, this
seems most probable (...) me, that it is not simply a metal, but of a nature
exceeding metal: for whereas stones, mean ^^nerals and metals are generated of
Salt, Sulphur and Mercury, this Electrum takes his original from Stones,
Minerals and Metals: from ^^nes it takes Salt, from Minerals Mercury, ^^m
Metals Sulphur. These three being brought into one by the Archeas of natute,
are its Elements, from a greater virtue and power of nature; which Elements
have formed a higher degree of perfection then in any other stone, mineral or
metal, as it were by the Commandment of God Nature should ascribe a Crown of
virtue and dignity above all minerals.

But however it be, it is taken two manner of ways amongst the later Magitians
and Alchymists, that is to say, that which is made naturally, and artificially;
naturally is that which grows in the natural Archeas of the Earth; the
Artificial i^ that which is made by Art above the Earth i^ imitation of Nature.

Whence Paracelsus a worthy Master in M^gick seeing fully the nature of it, and
the utility of Alchymy, commanding to make the Elixir thereof when as its
natural body cannot be ha^ in his book of the Vexations of Philosophers, and
the sixth of his Magical Archidoxes, teaches t^ compound an Artificial
Electrum, that the Elixir must be made thereof, as appears more (...) large in
the said Books; which I like not at all He teaches how to make the Elixir out
of Electrum; I contrarily, the Electrum out of the Elixir: he would make the
Elixir of the virtue of the Electrum; and I the Electrum of the virtue of the
Elixir. I leave his way to his own fo^lowers, but I desire mine not to weary
and (...) themselves in such a weak, but a more stron^ principle.

I make two kinds of Electrum one way; t^ first whereof is Spiritual, the
other Corpore^ First of the former: after you have made your (...) Corporeal
Elixir by projection, in the same Crucible melt one ounce of Lead, and likewise
another of Tyn; and when they are hot, take the Crucible from the fire, and
pour therein one ounce of Silver melted in another Crucible; and when these
three white metals begin to be cold, take two ounces of Mercury well purged,
and put those two ounces of Quicksilver upon the molten metal by drops: then
increase the fire gently, that too much of the Mercury do not fume away: then
in three other several Crucibles melt Iron, Copper, and Gold, of each one
ounce, which you must have in readiness molten. And first, put your molten Gold
into the Crucible, where your four white metals stand molten, and pour it upon
them; then your Copper, and last of all your Iron, stirring the whole mass
with a stick, that it may mix together; and let it stand in a melting heat the
space of an hour: then take all out that is melted in the Crucible, and
consider well the weight of it; and according to the goodness of your Elixir,
make projection for medicine. And thus you have created and compounded
spiritual Electrum of the weight of seven ounces, consisting of seven metals;
which metals so converted into medicine, will be the Elixir of Electrum, and an
Universal medicine, for you need not after regard upon what body (or metal)
you project it. It is also the chiefest medicine for man's body: for although
three or four of all the Diseases of the Microcosm were united together, yet
they may be cured with this one medicine. If you dissolve part of this in
Spirit of Wine, and distill away the same spirit in Balneo, and the Oil of the
medicine or Elixir remain in the bottom, as is taught in the second book, you
shall have the chiefest medicine of life, and most Noble Aurum potabile.

Note that if your Iron melt not well, then dissolve your Electrum in the Oil
or Tincture of Mars, dissolving and congeling until it have imbibed a
sufficient quantity.

But if you desire to make corporeal Electrum, when your medicine begins to
fail to convert metals any more into medicine, then in like manner project your
medicine upon your melted metals or bodies, and they will be converted into
corporeal Electrum metallic and malleable; of the virtue of which as I do
endeavor to write nothing; so also of its vice, or rather of the viciousness
of those that abuse it, I will touch a little sparingly.

Paracelsus writes, that Virgill Hispanus and Trithemius made a Diabolical
Bell of this Artificial Electrum, upon which when they would invocate Spirits
(which they called by a more decent name of Intelligences) they writ the
Character of what Spirit they desired; and at the third ring of the bell the
Spirits obeyed their desires so long as they desired to talk with them; and
when they would talk no more, they hid the Character, and by the reverse
ringing of the bell the Spirits departed. He that will forsake God, and require
knowledge, aid and assistance from the Devil, let him share with Arbucell, and
with him descend to the Infernal Lake. But we that are true Magicians, or
rather Philosophers, confiding in God the Father, and the holy Trinity,
approving of Natural and lawful Magic or true Philosophy, but accounting the
supernatural altogether infamous and unlawful. And we require the doctrine and
wisdom of divine goodness, and the holy Spirit, to whom be honor and glory
for evermore. Amen.

CHAP. IX.
The eighth Table, which explaineth the meaning of the Philosophers when they
speak of the tenth Number wherein the Elixir is finished: And also shows the
wonderful secret of the Animal stone, out of George Riply, with two other of
his works.

WE now come to the Last Chapter of this Book, wherein is declared what the
Philosophers mean when they bid us finish the work in the tenth number: it is
to be understood that as out of the Hyle or Chaos four are divided; so out of
the Hyle or Chaos of metals. Because metals or bodies when they are dissolved
into liquor, then they are contained in the first or one number, which is the
solution of the body, of which by distillation is made two, (That is to say,
Heaven and Earth, the Menstruum and Salt) that which remains in the bottom
is the Earth or Salt, that which is distilled over is the Menstruum and Heaven.
And so you have One, two.

When the Menstruum is separated, it is divided into Three, that is to say,
into Water, Air, and Fire: Yet it is to be noted, that the Air, which is the
first part of the water containing an aerie disposition, although it be in the
form of water, yet it is reputed aer, by reason of the consimilitude of the
quality; and after its perfect rectification, it is a tinging Mercury, and the
white Spirit of metals. In like manner is to be considered of the Oil, which
although it is not in the form of fire, but a liquor; yet by reason of its
Ardent heat, it is called fire, and the Soul or red tinging Mercury. And so
there is One, Two, Three.

When there is a Conjunction of these three, that is to say, the air and water
with its Salt or Earth, in putrefaction, these three are united into one
quintessence, and are made a new body; in which three are united in one
Sulphur, which Sulphur is the true Philosophers Mercury: and in making this
white Sulphur, you have once turned the Philosophers wheel.

But that the work may be perfected in the tenth Number, if you add the fire
which is the fourth Element, to these three concluded in the foresaid unity,
and rubified; then if these four in a new Conjunction be putrified in a lent
fire of ashes, then it is the stone: for in this work it changes colors
again, and is converted into a red stone: and by this means you have joined
four into one, that is to say, 1.2.3.4. make ten: And so the stone is finished
in the tenth number, because you have turned the Philosophers wheel twice, as
Ripley witnesses thus.

But yet again two times turn about the wheel. The stone is to be dissolved
again with the fire, or Soul, or Tincture, and dried again until it pierce and
flow; then it is to be fermented into Elixir with the Oil of the Luminary; and
so you have turned the Philosophers wheel again, which is then called the
medicine of the third order. Of the solution of this, Ripley has writ these
verses, teaching the resolution of the white and red stone before it be
transmuting Elixir, calling them his Bases, saying, Do as I bid thee, then
dissolve these foresaid Bases witty,
And turn them into perfect Oils with our true water Ardent:
By Circulation that must be done, according to our Intent.
These Oils will fix crude Mercury, and convert bodies all
Into perfect Sol and Luna when thou shall make projection:
That Oily Substance pure and fixed Raymond Lully did call
His Basilisk, of which he never made so plain detection.


By which verses it plainly appears, his Bases were only two Sulphurs, or
two stones, which in another place he called his Mineres: and these mineres
ought to be dissolved by his Ardent water, by circulation of the Oil or soul
upon the Sulphur, until it become a stone: for in this place he takes both the
spirit and the soul for the Ardent water, willing that the spirit and soul be
administered according to their tinging natures, for the resolution of the
proper Basis. And thus have you the words of this Aenigma explained of the
tenth number; which seeing it is the end of the Art, I have reserved it till
the end.

It now remains that we reveal one secret of Ripley, which was never spoken
of by any Philosopher; that is to say, the manner of making the Sulphur of
Nature out of the Minere of the Microcosm, which is man's blood, of which he
writ the whole practice in his book of the twelve gates, but most chiefly in
his Medulla, where he teaches its preparation and work more plainly. And
because I have proved it to be true, therefore I tell it more confidently,
because I desire to write nothing of my own fancy, but that which I have first
proved. Hearken almost the last verses which he writ in his Twelve gates: 1. I
never saw true work truly but one,
Of which in this Treatise the truth I have told:
Study only therefore how to make our stone,
For thereby may thou win both Silver and Gold.
Upon my writing therefore to ground thee be bold.
So shall thou loose naught, if God be thy guide:
Trust to my doctrine, and thereby abide.
2. Remember that man is most noble Creature
Of Earthly composition that ever God wrought,
In whom is the four elements proportioned by nature,
A natural Mercuriality which costeth right naught,
Out of his minere by Art it is brought:
For our metalls be naught else but our mineres two,
Of Sun and Moon, wisely Raymund said so.
The clearness of the Moon and of the Sun so bright,
In these two mineres descends secretly;
Howbeit the clearness is hid from thy sight,
By craft thou shall make it appear openly.
This hid stone, this one thing therefore putrify,
Wash him in his own broth till white he become,
Then ferment him wittily. Lo here is all and sum.


Out of these only words there are two points observed, whereunto the Author
steereth: The first is, that man's blood be put to putrefaction, that Sulphur
may be made thereof. The second is, that it be fermented wittily; As if he
should say, the Artist should prepare it, that it may be fit for fermentation.
Thus far of the Theory; Now we come to declare the practice out of Ripley's
medulla.

Take Man's blood drawn out of the Vein in March, and of a Martial man the
Author means (as I think) of a Choleric complexion; and when the blood is
drawn out of the vein, let it cool, that the Green water may be drawn from it,
which is saltish: for as long as that saltish water remains with the blood,
it will not let it putrify, because the water preserves the blood from
putrefaction while it is in a man's body.

When it is thus prepared, put it in an Eggeglasse well closed, and set it in
Balneo to putrify, in forty days or less it will be black; and so go on till
it be white. When you have your white Sulphur, divide it into two parts, and
keep one for the white stone, and rubifie the other for the red work. And so
you have two mineres, of which it is said, For our metals be naught else but
our mineres two
Of Sun and Moon, wisely Raymond said so.


And so to the end of the verses, as before. Yet here it is to be understood,
that the Philosophers Sulphur is not mineral or metallic Sulphur, from which
metalls grow under the Earth: but it is a purified Sulphur drawn out of metalls
made by Art above the Earth: out of which and the Mercury of the body the stone
arises. For believe me, I had never writ any thing of this Art, except I had
seen the Sulphur of the Microcosm, and the perfect solution of other bodies and
Sulphurs.

Now have you prepared your Sulphur out of the minere of the Microcosm: If you
be a Philosopher, proceed to the end, and conclude your work in the tenth
number: If not, you are not born to our Philosophy; therefore give the Sulphur
Mercury, that the work may be complete.

I believe there lies not any Secret in the Chymicall Art, which thou have not
truly declared and plainly taught. But to the end that these things which we
have spoken may be more surely committed to memory, we will repeat the general
process of the parts as it is described in the beginning of this third book.
And because there is not one, but diverse handling of the bodies, therefore the
Table is divided into three parts; the middle whereof discribeth the process of
imperfect bodies to the stone; the other two teach the preparation of perfect
metals for fermentation of the stone of imperfect bodies.

The manner of preparing imperfect bodies. CAlcination of the body.
Solution of the body into Hyle.
Separation by Distillation.
Conjunction of the separated.
Putrefaction of the conjoined.
Sulphur by putrefaction to the Stone.
Fermentation of the Stone to the Elixir.
Augmentation of the Elixir.
Projection of the Elixir.
Some make twelve parts, as Ripley and others, who call them twelve gates: but
because three other degrees are contained in these, it would be ridiculous to
repeat them: and because the way of both ferments, whether white or red, is the
same.

The Table of Fermentation. CAlcination. Solution. Putrefaction. Sulphur.
Solution of the Sulphur. Red ferment. Aurum Potabile. Quintessence. Elixir
vitae.
So likewise it is said of Silver when it is prepared.

White Ferment. Argentum Potabile. Quintessence. White Elixir of Life.
Now the Radiant Sun of the Philosophers arises, which will drive away the
dark Chimera's, and disperse the black clouds. Here the Aenigma's are opened,
thistles and thorns are cut up and burned. Now Reader may thou safely walk
in the Philosophers gardens, and gather most wholesome fruit. Here grow most
fragrant roses both white and red. Here grow Vines bearing full grapes, of
which is made the wholesome Nectar. Here are found trees of health and wealth,
Trees of the Sun and of the Moon. Here spring two cool fountains of Sciences
and Knowledge sliding artificially through the garden upon the most precious
gems, and Silver and Golden Sands. Thou have one field of Paradise given thee
from God, that during the Life of his elect they may be kept in health, free
from all sickness. Here the corrupt Nature puts on an incorrupt Nature. Here
impure things are turned into pure things. Here are all diseases lost, and
health increases. Here the perfect unity and harmony of body dwell, and here
is also all the most excellent treasures. Therefore let us always praise God
for his gifts: let us worship him, obey him, love him, and beseech him to
establish his grace upon us; and conduct us to eternity through all his ways of
goodness, knowledge and faith, to Life eternal. Amen.

FINIS.
Paracelsus OF The TRANSMUTATION OF METALS.
CHAP. I. Of the Scale of Transmutation.
TRansmutation is an alteration or changing of the forms of natural things into
other forms, as of Metals or Wood, into Stones or Glass; the changing of Stones
into Coals, etc. It has been ^^^nd out, That Metals that have been first
^^yned into Money, have been by Nature ^^anged under the Ground into a stony
sub^^^nce; and yet have retained the impression of (...) Image that has been
stamped upon them: ^^d, That the Roots of Oaks, being smitten ^^h Thunder, or
some other influence of the (...)


