Israel's Lamentation After the Lord: OR, A DISCOURSE, WHEREIN

Every well-wisher to Zion is excited, and directed how to lament after the
Lord with Prayers and Tears,

To maintain the Ordinances of God, or God's presence with his Ordinances
amongst us.

BEING Some Meditations upon 1 Samuel 7.2.

Psalm 80.4. O Lord God of Hosts: how long will thou be angry (Heb. smoke)
against the Prayer of thy People? LONDON, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, at the
three Crowns and Bible at the lower end of Cheapside. 1683.

AN Humble Address TO THE Righteous GOD.
RIghteous art thou, O Lord, Psalm. 145.17. Jer. 12.1.
in all thy ways, and holy in all thy works, must Dust and Ashes say when they
speak to thee, or plead with thee; All Israel have transgressed thy Law, Dan.
9.11, 12.
and despised thy Gospel, therefore have thou brought upon us a great Evil,
such as has scarce ever been done under the whole Heaven; not three Shepherds
cut off in a month, Zech. 11.8.
but some thousands in one day, and this not for a day, or month, or year, but
even twenty years already; Psalm. 74.9.
neither is there any among us that knows how long this sad Cloud may be upon
us: Thy will be done: Thou have punished us less than our iniquities deserve;
Ezra 9.13.
but to the Lord our God belong mercies and forgivenesses, Dan. 9.9. Genesis 18.25.
though we rebelled against thee; and shall not the Judge of all the Earth do
right? Look down from Heaven, and behold from the habitation of thy Holiness,
Isa. 64.15. Psalm. 9.18.
and of thy Glory: Shall the needy always be forgotten? shall the expectation
of the Poor perish for ever? Be not wrath very sore, Isa. 64.9.
O Lord, neither remember iniquity for ever: Behold, see we beseech thee, we
are all thy People; though our iniquities testify against us, Jer. 14.7.
do thou this for thy Names sake; for behold for thy sake we are killed all the
day long. The Lord God of Hosts, Psalm. 44.22.
the Lord God of gods, he knows, and Israel he shall know, Josh. 22.22.
if it be rebellion, or transgression against the Lord. Judge, Psalm. 26.1.
O Lord, them that have walked in their integrity: Recompense thy Servants
according to the cleanness of their hands in thine Eyesight, Psalm. 18.21, 24.
that have not wickedly departed from their God; or, by the grace of God have
acknowledged their offense, returned to thee, Hos. 5.15. Hos. 6.13.
and who at last are following on to know the Lord, and pleading and hoping for
a reviving and raising up after these days or years of death, let thy dead men
live, Isa. 26.19. Rev. 11.11, 12.
thy slain Witnesses be called up, and ascend to Heaven in a Cloud; let there
be a shaking, Ezekiel. 37.6, 9.
that these dry Bones may come together: Come O Wind, and breath on them, Dan.
9.17.
that they may live: Cause thy face to shine upon thy Sanctuary, for the Lord's
sake. In midst of Judgment remember mercy, and at last revive thy work. Give us
the opening of the mouth. Hab. 3.2. Ezekiel. 3.27. Mat. 5.15.
Set thy Light on a Candlestick. Hold the Stars in thy right hand. Rev 2.1.
Let thy Peoples Eyes see their Teachers. Isa. 30.20.
Give us help from trouble, Psalm. 60.11.
for vain is the help of man. Purify the Sons of Levi, Mal. 3.3.
that they may offer to the Lord an Offering in Righteousness. Mal. 3.6.
Thou art Jehovah, and changest not, therefore we the Sons of Jacob are not all
consumed. Thou art the Creator of the Ends of the Earth, Psalm. 40.28. Psalm.
44.4.
and therefore can command deliverance for Jacob. There Is no searching of
thine understanding, 2 Samuel 14.14. 1 Cor. 10.13. Isa. 44.26. Isa. 30.18.
therefore can devise ways for the banished to be restored; a faithful God,
and wilt perform thy Promises, and confirm the Word of thy Servants. But our
God is a God of Judgment; blessed are all they that wait for him. He which
testifies these things, Rev. 22.20.
says, Surely I come quickly, Amen; even so come Lord Jesus.

TO All the Mourners IN ZION, That wait for The Consolation of Israel, Grace,
Mercy, and Peace.
THe sharp rebukes that Divine displeasure has laid us under these many Years,
have caused many thoughts of heart; whilst profane men have shot their Arrows,
bitter words, it becomes Gods Children to have many solemn searchings of hearts
and serious Enquiries after the Reason of the Lords Controversy with the
Daughter of Zion, Hag. 1.5.
word and Rod call to us to consider our ways, and Gods People have called on
themselves and one another saying. Lam. 3 40.
Let us search and try our ways and turn again to the Lord: Doubtless the
occasion is given by us, we turned away from God before he turned his back upon
us. 1 Pet. 4 17.
Judgment is begun at the house of God, and he expects repentance should begin
there; That pacification: may be first begun there: God says, You only have I
known of all the Families of the earth, Amos 3.2.
therefore I will punish you for your iniquities: And well he may for the
provocation of his Sons and Daughters goes nearest his heart, Deuteronomy. 32.19.
as being against greater light, and love, means, mercies, obligations and
expectations then any others; surely it is high time for us to awake out of
sleep: Romans 13.11
The charge is drawn up, the indictment is read, Scourges have been laid on,
yea of such a nature as have come nearest the hearts of the Godly. Loss of
Gospel-priviledges, is a greater affliction then loss of Gold, Goods, Houses,
Liberties, Relations, Yea of life it self; Hos. 9.12.
Yea says God, Woe, also unto them when I depart from them. God does not use
to depart till he be slighted, or thrust away; This has been a long dark and
gloomy day, a day of rebuke and Blasphemy, a day of Scattering and treading in
down the valley of Vision. Ministers and their dear flocks rent asunder; Solemn
assemblies sorrowfully broken up; Sad and silent Sabboths, by some profaned;
Ignorance increasing, conversion work stopped, Sinners hardened, Young
beginners in Religion discouraged, Atheism abounding, Presecution revived, and
thousands of precious Souls wandering about as sheep that have no shepherd;
Many public uplaces being ill supplied, and guilt broaght upon the nation,
pressing us down tow ords destruction, yea such sins as leave a People
remediless, mocking the messengers of God, despising his words, misusing his
prophets, 2 Chronicles. 36.16.
till the wrath of the Lord arise against us, till there be no remedy, or no
healing; this brought Israel into captivity out of their own Land. Yea this
has brought the final scattering of that forlorn Nation to this day, killing
the Lord Jesus, their own Prophets persecuting the Apostles, forbidding them to
speak to the gentiles that they might be saved, to fill up their sins always,
for wrath is come upon them to the uttermost: 1 These. 2.15, 16,
and surely this lies nearest the hearts of real Saints next to Gods glory and
their own Souls, that poor sinners damn themselves and destroy the Nation. It Is
dreadful indeed to see debauchery in the land abounding, and basest of men vent
personal malice against Gods dearest Children for no other fault but
worshipping God and praying for their persecutors.

Men write voluminous treatises of invectives against us, charging us with
Schisms, Sedition, Faction, and Rebellion which, God knows, our Souls hate, and
we durst appeal to our worst adversaries in their sober intervals, that they
cannot but know the contrary; and after all these longlasting and
heavy-pressing evils come upon us, Jer. 8.20.
one barvest is passed, and many summers and winters ended, and we are not
saved. As for us, our eyes as yet failed for our vain help, in our watching we
have watched for a Nation that cannot save us: Lam. 4.17.
We looked for peace, but no good came, for a time of health, and behold
trouble. Jer. 8.15.
And we may discern Gods anger in the wrath of men: And after all this shall we
sit still, and be sottish under this astonishing hand of God? Surely our work
is not to complain of, much less oppose men but look into our own hearts and
lives by self examination, Humiliation, Reformation, for these vapors that
darken the Heavens arise from our filthy hearts and lives, these Arrows are
winged with our own feathers, Hos. 13.9. Jer. 4.18.
it may be said to every individual, thy way and thy doings have procured these
things unto thee, this is thy wickedness; Because it is bitter, because it
reaches unto thine heart, yea to thy Soul: Salvian complained of old, that by
our sins the enemies were strong; this is the Achan, in the camp, the Jonah in
the ship, the worm in the gourd; if sin abide still in us, we cannot be safe,
it is in vain to expect deliverance till the cause of the provocation on our
part be discarded and purged away: It Is true God is the inflicting cause,
wicked men the instruments, but our own selves are the deserving and procuring
cause of all our woes: The protestants in Queen Marys days lamented that their
unprofitableness, contempt of the Gospel, under King Edward 6th brought on them
those bloody days of Persecution, and if we do not mourn, and reform, we may
conclude these are but the beginnings of sorrow, as drops before the shower of
blood, that after this prophesying in sackcloth, witnesses shall be slain, and
the number of Martyrs accomplished, and Antichrists sins filled up; By setting
up the abomination of desolation, which God Almighty prevent.

These things considered, and often rolled in my thoughts, I cast about what
was the fittest course to be taken for preventing God's further Removes, and
reduce him back to our Souls, and Assemblies; and I find that 1. God purposely
removes to make us follow him, Hos. 5.15.
as a wise Nurse does by a weak Child. 2. He stops and halts, as in suspense
what to do, that he may both alarm us, Hos. 11.18.
and afford us leisure to consider what course to take. 3. He makes a gracious
promise, that if we do follow on to know the Lord, Hos. 6.3.
his going forth shall be prepared as the morning. And 4. He complains that
there is none that calls on his Name, Isa. 64.7.
that stirs up himself to take hold on God, i. e. to keep him from
departing, or to fetch him back. Considering the Premises, I was desirous in my
poor measure, to promote God's work in the Souls of his People, and engage all
that have any Interest in God, to improve it at this day for the preventing of
his total Removal, and detaining of God with us; not as the Inhabitants of
Tyrus, when Alexander besieged it; and one of their Diviners told them, that it
was revealed to him in a Dream, that Apollo their god was shortly to depart
from them, thereupon they take the Image of Apollo, and bind it with a Chain of
Gold to a Post, thinking thereby to detain him. No, no, we cannot force God
against his will to tarry, but we are in obedience to God's command, and
discharge of our duty, and in performance of the Condition of his Promise, to
lament after the Lord with Prayers, Tears, Confessions, Reformations, pleading
with God through the Intercession of his Son, for his Return, and Residence
with us. While wicked Gadarens are by words and works bidding blessed Jesus
depart out of our Coasts, it becomes us solemnly to invite him, open the doors
of our hearts to him, and give him free welcome, saying, Lord abide with us:
Luke 24.29.
thus he may be constrained to tarry with us. And though in this horrid
Tempest, that the Ship of the Church is sorely tossed with, Mat. 8.24, 25.
so that it is covered with Waves, our Lord be asleep, yet Faith and Prayer will
awake him: And though we cannot peremptorily say, he will save our Persons,
Privileges, or his Church in England, yet we may with some confidence say, he
will certainly save Zion, and build his Church somewhere in the World; he will
save our own Souls, and it may be we shall be hid in the day of the Lord's
anger; Zeph. 2.3.
it may be that the Lord God of Hosts will be gracious unto the Remnant of
Joseph. Amos 5.15.
Who knows if he will return and repent, Joel 2.14.
and leave a blessing behind him? Even an Heathen King took this course, Jonah
3.7, 8. Ezra 10.2.
and upon no other assurance, than a [Who can tell?] There is hope in Israel
concerning this thing, only it becomes us to wait God's leisure, and patiently,
yea valiantly pass through the Fiery Trial before us; wherein Papists will far
exceed Protestants in rage: However Mr. Greenham said, He that will suffer by
Papists, must learn to suffer by Protestants; and he that has well passed the
Pikes in Campfight, may hope to pass safe through the Fire-Ordeal. Integrity
and uprightness will preserve us, seconded by a Divine manutenency in sharpest
Trials. The God of all Grace, who has called you into his eternal Glory by
Christ Jesus, after that ye have suffered a while, 1 Pet. 5.10.
make you perfect, stablish, strengthen, settle you.

May it please the Lord to own these weak (though seasonable) Labors for
quickening the Spirits of his People to lament after the Lord; it may be he
will return to the many thousands of his People in these Nations. And after we
have been digging Esek [Strife] and Sitnah, [hateful opposition] God may cause
us unanimously to digg Rehoboth [Room] that the Lord may make room for us, Genesis
26.20, 21, 22.
and make us fruitful in the Land. Oh for such a day! There is a day wherein
they shall not hurt nor destroy in all God's holy Mountain; Isa. 11.6, 7, 8, 9.
wherein the Wolf shall dwell with the Lamb, and the Leopard shall lie down
with the Kid, etc. Wherein his People shall see Eye to Eye, and serve him with
one consent, or shoulder, Zeph. 3.9. v. 13.
and that he will turn to his People a pure Language, or Lip; that they shall
feed and lie down, and none shall make them afraid. It becomes God's People to
make a Catalogue of these and such like Promises, and spread them before the
Lord; for he is a faithful God, and will perform his Promise, which says, Jer.
30.17. For I will restore health unto thee, and I will heal thee of thy wounds,
says the Lord, because they called thee an outcast, saying, This is Zion,
whom no man seeks after: And let all that love her say Amen. Then the Angel
of the Lord answered and said, Zech. 1.12, 13.
O Lord of Hosts! how long will thou not have mercy on Jerusalem, and on the
Cities of Judah, against which thou have had indignation these threescore and
ten years?

And the Lord answered the Angel that talked with me, with good words, and
comfortable words.

That this may be the Issue of this Dispensation, Intercession, Lamentation, is
the hearty Prayer of

Thy Soul-Friend, O. H.
Aug. 22. 1682.
Israel's Lamentation after the Lord.
1 Samuel 7.2. -- And all the House of Israel lamented after the Lord.


THe whole series of the History of the Times in which this Scripture was writ,
take in short thus: After the Judges in the preceding Book (so called) God
raised up Eli, who was both a Judge and Priest, who though he was a good man
himself, yet his Sons were profane, c. 2.12-17.
and oppressed the People, by requiring both boyled-flesh and raw for roasting,
abusing the women that came to the door of the Tabernacle so that their sin was
very great, and of bad consequence, for men abhorred, the offering of the Lord.
Eli being informed of his Sons profligate courses, 1 Samuel 2.23. Ser. 10.
desects in this reproof. Polirit. in los.
too much indulged them, or too mildly rebukes them; Why do you such things?
too soft words for such hard and heinous acts: there wanted deeds, he being a
Magistrate ought to have punished or removved them, c. 2.27.
if not put them to death: well, God sends a man of God to Eli, [Whether Elias,
or an Angel, or Phinehas or Elkanah, I dispute not] to rebuke and threaten him
and his house, but he not reforming God inspires and commissions young Samuel
to give him a Sound admonition, c. 3.18.
and warn him, as immediately from the Lord: the good old man falls under the
Admonition though by a Child, but now the disease was grown past his curing,
his counsel did no good, and he could not correct them, 1 Samuel 3.18.
no doubt he acknowledged his fault, and since it will be no better he puts the
matter over into Gods hands, let him do what seems him good: God can by his
grace curb and cure them, or by his power he can crush and confound them, let
him use his pleasure, I give my children into his hands, let my Lord get to
himself a name of Glory by them or upon them, I freely submit: a speech
becoming a man of God and religious Priest:well, God himself undertakes to deal
with them; in the 4th Chapter the Israelites and Philistines join battle, 1 Samuel
4.2, 3, 4.
four thousand Israelites are slain, the Ark is sent for into the Camp, the
Tables of the Law within it are broken, yet the Ark must be their Palladium.
They doted on the Ark, but provoked the God of the Ark: they repent not of
their corrupt manners or defiling Gods Worship, they neither used outward means
by recruiting their Army, which was a tempting of God, nor do they use proper
religious means, to get reconciliation with God, but fondly presume upon Gods
lenity and indulgence to them because of the mere presence of the Ark: the Ark
comes, Hophni and Phinehas carry it, Israel shouts for joy, 1 Samuel 4.9. v. 10.
the Philistines animate one another, imagining, if they now prevailed, they
conquered the God of Israel, v. 10.
looking on the Ark to be Isreal's Idol, or at least, that Gods power was tied
to it, after the conceit of Idolaters; 1 Samuel 4.10, 11, 12.
they fight, prevail, kill, thirty thousand Hebrews, and Hophni and Phinehas,
take the Ark prisoner, the tidings whereof broke Elies heart, then his neck, v.
18, 19.
brought pangs on Phinehas wife, and though she was a mother, yet full of
grief, which she bequeathed to the world in the name of her surviving child,
Ichabod: Well, the Philistines now lead Isreal's God in triumph, as they judge,
they bring it to Dagon they God in Ashdod, in reproach of the true God; 1 Samuel
5.1, 2.
but the triumphing of the wicked is short, though Israel be a loser, yet Dagon
and his Worshippers are no gainers by the Ark of Gods presence: 1 Samuel 5.3, 4.
Dagon falls on his face, prostrated in homage thereto, beaten on his own
dunghill; being crected again, his head and hands were knocked off by another
fall. So that now he had neither wit nor strength to help himself the fair
Venus, or womanish part was gone, the fishy part only is left; but this was but
a sport in comparison of what befell Dagons Worshippers, 1 Samuel 5.6.
for Gods hand was heavy on them all; Ashdod or Azotus, as the Spartan Boy
carried the Fox in his bosom till he stopped his vitals, so these, the Ark that
was salutiferous to its observers, was mortiferous to its contemners; even as
the Lords Supper is profitable to due partakers, but unworthy receivers find it
to turn to their judgment here, 1 Cor. 11.29.
and damnation hereafter. Carnal hearts pretend a fond respect to ordinances,
but find the Lord a jealous God upon their perverting his institutions or
unsuitable carriage: Ashdod was soon weary of Gods Ark, they hold a council of
their Lords: they post it away to Gath, which was their Metropolis, thinking
belike, that to be a better air, or under a more benign influence of the stars:
1 Samuel 5.9.
But here also Gods hand was upon them with a very great destruction, they had
painful and incurable Emerods in their secret parts; being weary of the Ark,
they would shift it off to Ekron, v. 10.
but the Ekronites were wise by others harms, and a consultation was had to
carry back the Ark into its place, 1 Samuel 6.2.
for all the five citys of the Philistines were sharply punished, those seven
months it was in their country. And they were weary of it; only consulted the
Diviners how to send it back, they advised to send it with a trespass offering,
1 Samuel 6.4.
i. e. five golden Emrods and five golden Mice, give glory to the God of Israel
upon a new cart, drawn by two milch Kine, and by their motion they might know
whether it was Gods hand or a chance, and peradventure they might be healed;
they did so, 1 Samuel 6.12.
the Kine went straight to Bethshemesh a city of the Levites, they rejoiced to
see it coming, but though they offered a burnt-offering to the Lord, yet
looking into the Ark, the Lord smote fifty thousand threescore and ten men with
death; and they lamented it, and cried out, v. 19.20.
Who is able to stand before this holy Lord God? But alas, they lament not
their Sacriledg and injury to the Ark, but the death of their People, imitating
the Philistine (qui propter culpas non dolebant, sed propter paenas ululabant)
they houled for the punishment, not kindly mourning for their offenses: they
reflect not on their own miscarriages, but transfer the cause to Gods holiness:
And now they also would be glad to be rid of so chargeable a Guest, and send
messengers to Kiriath-jearim, to fetch it to them: who came and fetched it.

Qu. Why did they not send it to Shilo where it was before?

Ans. 1. That was far off, this near, they in have to get delivered of that
burden.

2. Divine providence removes from Shilo for the impiety thereof, Jer. 7.12.
you see ordinances are not perpetually entailed on one place: the Gospel is a
flitting Gospel, God sometimes breaks up house and is gone to another coast:
Psalm. 78.58, 61. Mat. 21.43.

Qu. Why were not they of Kiriath jearim afraid of Bethshemesh's punishment?

Ans. they knew that plague was not for the Arks sake but for their Irreverence
and Curiosity; now they resolve to reform that and take warning as David did, 1 Chronicles. 15.13. it becomes persons that suffer in Ordinances, not to find fault
with God or them, but Charge it on themselves, and amend what is amiss; men's
own sins are the procuring Gods justice, the imposing cause of troubles; that is
a good Scholar that learns these two Lessons under Gods hand.

I shall not trouble you with enumerating the several places in which the Ark
rested amongst the Isralites before it was brought by David into Obed Edoms
house, 2 Samuel 6.10. Nor what this Sanctifying Eleazar, or ordaining him to the
Sacred Ministry: what this keeping the Ark is, that nothing be taken away, or
no uncomly thing be done to it or about it: nor why Eleazar the Son, and not
Abinadab the father was employed about it: whether Abinadab was old and
decrepid, or dead, or busy about household affairs, or Eleazar was more holy,
is not much material to inquire. But it may be asked whether the Ark was only
twenty years there? Ans. 1. The Ark was there all the days of Saul, which was
above forty years, Act. 13.21.
but this was [ jam annus vigesimus] the twentieth, till this time of Samuels
Preaching his Sermon, in the following verse: or before Israel much inquired
after it, or were sensible of their loss of it: So deeply were the roots of
impiety and idolatry fastened in them.

The text contains 1. The Ark's recess. 2. Israel's repentance.


1. for the former in the Arks recess.

Observe 1. The place where; in Kirjath-jearim, more particularly, Abinadabs
house, v. 1, 2. 2. The time or duration; 20 years; a long time indeed.


Qu. 1. What Is meant by the Ark here?

Ans. It Is needless to explain the word (...) which signifies a Chest or
Coffin, Gen 50.26. or to put money in, 2 Kin. 12.10. but this Ark was appointed
by God, where the Tables of the Law were laid up, therefore called the Ark of
the Testimony, there God communed with Israel, hence called the Ark of his
presence, Exodus 25.22. here the People of Israel were to Worship, and inquire
Gods mind at it, and it guided their journeyings, Numb. 10.35, 36. And though
the Ark have many significations, yet good Expositors think that what the Ark
of God was to the Israelites of old that the Gospel Ordinances are to us: which
are means of grace, tokens of Gods presence, and institutions of Worship.

Qu. 2. What Is meant by the Arks being in Aibnadab 's house in Kirjath-jearim?

Ans. It imports its privacy, Solitude, i. e. comparatively, few could few
would frequent it, as formerly at Shiloh.

1. Because this city was near the Philistines upon the borders of the land, and
so the other tribes could not so commodiously resort to it for devotion, or
they durst not, lest the Philistines should set upon them, if any numbers come
together for that end, as indeed they did, v. 7. Never is the Devil and his
Imps more enraged against God's people than when they meet to worship God: for
the Philistines had interdicted Israel to meet together, and now they suspect
them of Sedition and Rebellion:

2. Because the Ark being but in a private house, few could meet there at once
to worship God, or hear the word; some (it is possible) cared not for it, had
other ways of their own hearts they followed, others had a months mind to it,
but being aged or infirm, could not get thither, or continue comfortably before
the Lord there, but were subject to many inconveniences: others were afraid of
the scoffs and reproaches of their adversaries, and few would be at the pains
to go attend on God in his appointments.

Qu. 3. had the People no public Ordinances or Instructions all this time?

A. It Is likely they had ordinary Levites and Priests to offer Sacrifices, and
instruct the People, though in the time of several Judges, there was sad work
both in civils and spirituals; Judge. 17.6.18.1.19.1.21.25.
sometimes there was no King or public Magistrate in Israel, and then every
man did that which was right in his own eyes; hence Micah gets a house of
graven Images and a Levite to be his Priest, Judge. 17.5 -- 18. certainly there
was sad ignorance and woeful degeneracy into impiety and Idolatry as is aparent
by many instances.

Expositors observe but two Prophets, in all the time of the Judges which was
450 years, Act. 13.20. the one was Debora a Prophetess, Judge. 4.4. and that
Judge. 6.8. the Lord sent a prophet, except that Angel that came up from Gilgal
to Bochim, chapter 2.1. by a Prophet; So that Peter begins to number the Prophets
from Samuel, Act. 3.24. and Paul mentions Samuel the Prophet as not an ordinary
Person, yea he broke forth like a certain glorious Sun out of the night of
darkness both of sin and error; and till those days the word of the Lord was
precious, 1 Samuel 3.1. i. e. it was, [1. rarus, 2. charus] either rare, because
there were few Prophets to declare Gods Word to the People; rarely did the Lord
reveal himself, and therefore was it the more precious and highly esteemed by
all; but that text says further, there was no open vision, that seems to be an
interpretation of my Text; no Vision diffused, or sprinkled abroad, common,
multiplied, but shut up in a fence, Erumpere i.e. copiose producere.
pail or within walls, so the word signifys, (...), no broken vision; a loaf
that is whole, nourishes not; a book closed up instructs not; a fountain shut
up waters not; the open preaching of the word distributes it abroad to all
parts, and members of the mystical body, this is the multiplication of seeds,
bread, as in Christ's miracles, distributed amongst thousands, but alas there
was none to break the bread of life to souls, till Samuel arose, and then the
word of Samuel came to all Israel, 1 Samuel 4.1. he now preached repentance to
all, and that they should make an expedition against the Philistines, however
for want of reformation it proved not successful, but that evil was brought on
them to promote their humiliation: possibly Samuel foretold this fall to them
as a punishment of their Sin.

And now Samuel renews his Exhortation, providence producing this Argument, to
reinforce the duty of Repentance, and though this lamenting after the Lord be
mentioned before his Sermon, yet it is probable it was the consequent thereupon,
as their reformation also was ver. 4. yea it may be this is the same with their
drawing water, and pouring it out before the Lord ver. 6. which some understand
of penitent tears. Vid. Pol. Syn. in loc.


Take some general observations from the context thus explained:

1. God gives his People sensible tokens of his special presence, visible Ark,
audible voice betoken spiritual invisible grace; so the Ark, and, preaching.

2. God thinks good sometimes to abscond and hide these tokens of his presence
from a professing people.

3. This with drawing may be continued a long time, 2 Chronicles. 13.3. so in
Babylon Zoch. 1.13. in latter days, Hos. 3.4.

4. God takes particular notice of the duration of his Churches affliction, in
Egypt 400. years, so Rev. 11.11.

5. Peoples Privileges may be long removed before they be kindly sensible of
their loss, long before they recover themselves.

6. When Gods Ordinances are but privately dispensed, it is a great loss to the
body of a People, such as need them most have then least of them:

7. Continuance in sin prolongs deliverance, and absence of the Ark or
Ordinances is an occasion of continuing in sin. Men do withdraw their hearts
from God, that is sinful; God withdraws helps from them, that is poenal; men
repent not ordinarily without helps; God denies helps, and is just therein.

8. Attendance on Ordinances raises the envy of wicked men; this has been the
quarrel from the days of Cain and Abel, successively to this day, Genesis 4.5, 1
King. 18.
Exodus 9.1. Ezra 4.12, 13. Gal. 4.29. Esther 3.8. Dan. 3.12. and 6.13.

9. One stirring active Instrument for God, may by God's blessing promote
Repentance and Reformation amongst a people. Oh what hurt may one sinner do! So
what good may one useful man do when God stirs up their hearts. Samuel sets
things a working, so Ezra 5.1, 2. Hag. 5.12.

10. When God designs a Reformation and Restitution of his Ordinances, he
orders an harmonious concurrence of providence for that end. The
accomplishment of God's threats affright, awaken. Samuel comes in the nick of
time, speaks words upon the wheel; God moves, things go on apace, 2 Chronicles.
29.36. and 31.21.

These I pass briefly, and pass on to the main Point from the last clause of
the verse [ And all the House of Israel lamented after the Lord.]

They did not lament so much under their pressing burdens, grievous oppressions
by the Philistines, but after the Lord, i. e. for the Ark of the Lord, and the
Lord of the Ark; for the recovery of God's gracious presence, and the visible
tokens thereof; [ lachrymis deplorarunt summam miseriam Religionis and
Reipublicae] they bitterly lamented the calamities of Church and State,
Religion and Polity. This, say Interpreters, is an admirable place, by reason
of the general Conversion and Repentance of the whole People; we have scarce
the like in all the Scripture, except Acts 2.

From the words then results this Doctrine.

That when God's Ark is long obscured, or Ordinances obstructed, it becomes
God's Israel, or professing People, to lament after the Lord.

Serious lamenting after God is well becoming those whom God afflicts in the
loss of Privileges.

The Text presents to us, 1. The Persons lamenting, God's peculiar People,
these only love, and mind God's presence, when the Lords and Cities of the
Philistines are weary of him and send him away, yea and the Bethshemites, though
a city of the Levites belonging to the Church of God, through their ill
management of matters send to get a release, yet Gods Israel will look after
their God.

2. Here Is the object they lament after; not peace, plenty, victory over
enemies, but after the Lord, Jehovah is the object of their affections, it is
him they love, and long for communion with, Psalm. 63.1, 2. O God thou art my
God, early will I seek thee, my soul thirsts for thee to see thy power and
thy glory so as I have seen thee in the Sanctuary.

3. Here Is the Universality of these; all Israel; the whole house of Israel
come; they that had woefully degenerated, and were gone after their Idols; what
a wonderful act of Gods power and sovereignty was this upon their spirits? by
this he manifests that he is the true God, and that Samuel was his Servant; the
like see in Elijahs prayer, preaching, Sacrifice and success of all 1. Kin.
18.21, 37, 39.

4. Here Is the manner and nature of the Peoples repentance, they lamented after
the Lord, which is a very comprehensive word, and I shall open it anon.

In prosecuting this point I shall proceed in this method.

1. Show how ordinances are obstructed, obscured.

2. What Is employed in lamenting after the Lord.

3. How and why Gods Israel thus lament.

4. Answer an objection.

So make application.

1. What is it for ordinances to be either

1. Obstructed, or 2. obscured, both which may be a great affliction to Gods
People and often occasion a lamentation.

1. For Ordinances to be obstructed is a prevention of the liberty of
dispensation of them, and suppression of its dispensers, by imprisonment,
banishment, inhibition, or suspension, as in Ahab's days, Jezabel cut off the
prophets of the Lord, the rest werehid by fifty in a Cave, and fed with bread
and water, 1 Kin. 18.4. yea such scarcity was there at that day, that Elijah
thought he was left alone, 1, Kin. 19.10. Such as were left were latent, and
had indeed their lives, not liberties, to proclaim the Word, or to celebrate
God's Ordinances openly. It Is true, Truth seeks not corners; yet publishers of
Truth may be driven into corners. God's Candles may be put under a Bushel; the
Church's pleasant things may be taken away; Sabbaths and solemn Assemblies may
be forgotten in Zion, and the ways of Zion mourn, Lam. 1.4, 7. The Church
complains, Psalm. 74.9. We see not our signs, Rev. 12.14. Rev. 11.7.
there is no more any Prophet -- The Church may flee into a wilderness of
obscurity and persecution, her witnesses may be slain by a natural or civil
death, some time or other these prophecies have an accomplishment; Jeremah and
Ezekiel may both have their mouths stopped by their brethren, and God himself
may be a little Sanctuary to such as want the open Sanctuary-priviledges, Ezekiel.
11.15, 16. Gospel-course may be stopped, obstructed, so that Paul is putting
believers on to pray for him that the word of the Lord may have free course, 2
These. 3.1. intimating that it had met with a stop; by what? by men's rage, or
the Devils subtilty, or both 1 These. 2.16. forbidding us to speak to the
Gentiles, and v. 18. Satan hindered us. Some times the Devil stirs up men to
obstruct the course of the Gospel. The histories of the Church in all ages will
offer their Service to bear witness to this truth, that liberty of Ordinances
is sometimes infringed, and so the Ark is retired into private; for where God
has a people they must and will worship God, and attend his Institutions, if
they cannot do it openly, they act more privately, as Christ's Disciples
frequently met in houses, in the night, the doors being shut, and that for fear
of the Jews. Joh. 20.19. And it may be that word in Isa. 8.16. refers to such a
day, Bind up the Testimony, seal the Law among my Disciples.

2. The Ark and Ordinances may sometimes be obscured, as well as obstructed;
this refers to the Purity, as the former, to the liberty of God's Appointments.
The light may be dimned, as well as diminished. Painted Glass obscures the
Light: So Humane Inventions corrupt God's pure Worship. Jeroboam's Golden
Calves hindered the purity of Ordinances; so that Religious People, and
Priests, fled to God's sincere Worship at Jerusalem, 2 Chronicles. 11.13, 16. This
defilement of Ordinances makes God's poor Children cry out, Death is in the
Pot. Our Savior says of the Scribes and Pharisees, Thus have you made the
Commandments of God of none effect, by your Traditions, and therefore in vain
did they worship God, Mat. 15.6, 9. God's Institutions are ours, but men may
mar and spoil them with their fond Additions, or Alterations, Ezekiel. 7.20. As
for the beauty of his Ornament, he set it in Majesty, but they made the Images
of their abominations, and of their detestable things therein, (though they
call and account them delectable things) therefore have I set it far from them.
Men may be guilty of (crimen laesae Majestatis) treasonable practices, by
adulterating the King's Coin, or setting their own stamp thereon, or by
Clipping it. There Is a sad woe, both in the beginning, middle, Deuteronomy. 4.2. Prove.
30.6. Rev. 22.18, 19.
and end of the Bible, against those that add to, or diminish from God's Word
or Institutions. It Is a dangerous thing to think to mend what God has thought
good to enjoin. Antichrist has so corrupted God's Worship (as well as Truths)
that they that love their Souls or Safety, are called upon to come out of her,
Rev. 18.4. God is a jealous God, and will not hold such guiltless ( i. e. will
deal with them as guilty malefactors) as take his Name in vain. Nay, God bids
men rather go serve their Idols, than pollute his holy Name, Ezekiel. 20.39. Yea
some Shepherds also are said to tread down with their feet the residue of the
Pastures, and soul the Waters with their feet; so that God's Flock is in danger
of pining, Ezekiel. 34.18. God's Children know how to avoid a sinful Separation on
one hand, and a Communion that necessitates them to sin, on the other hand;
there is danger of both extremes. Poor scrupulous tender Consciences are too apt
to run into the former, and adventurous Spirits are too apt to run into the
latter for by and base ends. Sometimes the latter falls out as well as the
former, that godly Ministers and Christians must either sin, or suffer; and to
a conscientious Soul, the case is soon determined; and hence it comes to pass
that their Persons and Ordinances with them have been forced into retirements.
The Witnesses will rather choose to prophecy in Sackcloth with purity, Rev.
11.3.
according to God's Will, than live in the greatest pomp and splendor in
betraying the Truths and Appointments of God, by Superstition or Idolatry, to
gratify the flesh, or comply with the humors of men: They judge it safer to
be banished from the Altar, than bring strange fire to it; they think it safer
to venture on men's displeasure, (though the Furnace be heated seven times
hotter) than cast themselves into the dreadful vengeance of the great God, by
sinning against him, and provoking the Eyes of his glory. They resolve to stick
to the Ark, though in Abinadab's house, Rev. 14.4. Rev. 12.4.
and follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes, rather than be dragged down to sin
and Hell with the Dragon's Tail: Though Persecution attend the former, as in
the Marian days, and Preferment wait on the latter.

2. General Head to be explained in the Text and Doctrine, is, what is this
lamenting after the Lord? The word (...) comes from (...) quiescere, the same
word with Noach, which signifies rest; They rested after the Lord, it is in
Niph. which increases its signification, and notes these seven things.

1. They inclined after the Lord; they had wandered away from the Lord, and
never thought after him; they had turned aside after vain things, but now they
begun to hearken after Samuel's preaching, and begun to look about them,
consider what they were doing, had a months mind (as we say) after God, and his
ways and worship, and a heart to inquire after the Lord, is a good step; as
it is said of the men of Shechem, their hearts inclined after Abimelech, or to
follow him, Judge. 9.3. It Is well so, for when people stand still, pose
themselves, what have we been doing? have we done well or ill? what course is
best to be taken? and begin to have some inclinations after God more than
formerly, this is the first step.

2. They were settled, established after the Lord; they staggered formerly, were
but in suspense, wavering, like the Apostle James's double-minded man, Jam.
1.18.
not knowing which way to take, like those in 1 King. 18.21. Why halt ye
between two Opinions? one while leaning to Baal, another while to God, reeling
like drunkards, halting like lame men, whose Legs are not equal, fluctuating
to and fro with diverse thoughts: But now this people is firm, well resolved,
with purpose of heart determined to cleave to the Lord, Acts 11.23. The
trembling Needle fixes toward its center; the Tree is rooted; the Will is
bowed; the Affections settled; the Conscience resolved; nothing shall obstruct
their course; they have set down the Staff, and say as Ruth to her
Mother-in-law, Ruth 1.16, 17. Entreat me not to leave thee, or to return from
following after thee, for whither thou go I will go, etc. So these, though
they had been haesitating and doubtful what to do, yet [ jam in Dei obsequio
gradum figunt stabilem and certum] they get a sure footing in their motion
God-wards.

3. They were congregated and assembled after the Lord; so some read it; they
now begin to flock like Doves to their windows, they troop after him, [
collecti sunt post Dominum] Jer. 3.17. -- All Nations shall be gathered to it,
to the Name of the Lord God; yea Judah shall go with Israel, v. 18. See also
Jer. 50.45. They had been broken, now they are united. Some went after some
men's commands and examples, some after others; but now the great God makes an
Act of Uniformity and Unanimity, Zech. 14.9. In that day there shall be one
Lord, and his Name one: One Sovereign Commander, one Way, one Worship. That
great God does not only enjoin one thing, but does join them in one bond and
mind. Oh happy day! when the Grace of God heals the breaches that are in men's
spirits, and divisions in the Church!

4. They groaned, complained, bemoaned themselves in their following the Lord,
as a Child follows his departing Father, and as Phaltiel followed his Wife
Michal, weeping behind her to Bahurim, 2 Samuel 3.15, 16. or as Micah followed
the Danites that took away his Idols, crying after them; they said, What aileth
thee? he said, Ye have taken away my Gods -- and what have I more? and what is
this that ye say unto me, What aileth thee? Judge. 18.23, 24. q. d. You could
not have done me a worse turn; lay your hands on your hearts, ask your selves
whether any loss can parallel this, of losing ones God! You need not be
inquisitive for a reason of my solicitude and complaint, when all good is
comprehended in this chiefest good, whether real or imaginary. Thus, this
people lamented, laid to heart this great evil of God's departure, the which no
temporal good can compensate or countervail.

5. They called, cried, and shouted after the Lord, by earnest prayer and
supplication; so the word imports sometimes sighing; Let the sighing of the
Prisoner come before thee, Psalm. 79.11. Sometimes it is rendered [ inclamarunt]
for lifting up the voice, as Lam. 2.18. not only their hearts cried unto the
Lord, but tears run down like a River day and night: Yea, v. 19. Arise, cry out
in the night pour out thine heart like water; lift up thy hands toward him:
Yea, Lam. 3.8. She did both cry and shout, not that God is deaf, or busy, or
pursuing enemies, or sleepy, and must be awaked, 1 King. 18.27.
as Elijah ironically twits Baal's Worshippers with their God, but for our own
sakes, to evidence the honesty and zeal of our hearts, and as a gracious
disposition to which mercy is promised. Hence it was that when the Children of
Israel cried, and their cry came up unto God, Exodus 2.2, 3. Crying is the
Accent of Prayer. A crying Prayer sounds loud in God's Ear. The tender Mothers
bowels make her look back on her crying Child. God loves to be called back by a
fervent affectionate Prayer.

6. They betook themselves to the Lord, [ Receperunt se ad Dominum] i. e. by
faith, by repentance, covenanting with God, returning from sin, having recourse
to God by a sincere Reformation, and without this all the former were
insignificant; but thus did the Children of Israel, according to Samuels
command, and supposition, in this Chap. v. 3. If ye do return with all your
heart to the Lord, then put away the strange Gods, and prepare your hearts unto
the Lord, and serve him only, and they did so, v. 4. This was their best way of
lamenting after the Lord: No coming after God with a lie in our right hand, or
our Idols in our hearts; if we do, God will spurn us back into confusion, for
nothing keeps persons at a distance from him, but sin; they that hold fast sin
and pretend to follow God do either run from him, or follow him with a Sword in
their hand to wound him, but such as cast away their abominations follow the
Lord aright and shall overtake him; this is the method prescribed by God
himself, Jer. 4.1, 2. If thou will return O Israel, faith the Lord, return unto
me, and if thou will put away thine abominations out of thy sight, then shall
thou not remove, and thou shall swear the Lord lives. Then, and never till
then are Souls fit to join in covenant with God when they are divorced from all
besides.

7. They were acquiescing in, and fully satisfied with the Lord; this is the
proper notion of this word, [ Chald. quieti fuerunt post cultum Domini] their
hearts were abundantly quieted in the manner of Gods worship, and much more in
the object of their worship, and in the union of their hearts to God, and
communion with him; no Satisfaction like this. David says, Return unto thy
rest Oh my Soul, Psalm. 116.7. No such rest, as God is, who is the Souls only
Center and Sabbath, Jer. 31.25. I have satiated the weary Soul, and I have
replenished every sorrowful Soul: As God rests in his Love to his Saints, so
they are well satisfied with their choice of God, and look not out other ways,
or beyond him for any contentments to their Spirits. Thus then these good
Souls, these lamenting penitents, might say, Alas we have been like wandering
sheep that have gone astray, every one wandering in his own way, or as a bird
wandering from its nest, or as Prodigals from our Fathers house, but now, now at
length by Samuel's Prophecy we are thoroughly informed that God is the true God,
that this his prescribed Worship is of his Institution, and the mean of
communion with him. At our first hearing this man of God we were touched, and
began to incline toward him, at last came to fixed resolution to follow the
Lord in this his way, we were assembled together to this purpose, bemoaned our
state in the loss of so dear a friend, cried after him, Put away our Idols and
lusts, returned to the Lord by faith and repentance, and now we see it is not in
vain, it is good, yea very good for us thus to draw near to God, we find, full
content in him, we find the enjoyment of him a full recompense for all this
pains in a mournful pursuit of him: We have found him, at last we have found
him, and happiness in him, he is come whom we sought, we need not look for
another, we care not for any other. We fear nothing since we we have found our
God.

From hence we may discern, (...) doluit, poenituit, (...) Neque per Antiphr.
dedoluit, dolere desiit, consolari non meruit.
the reason why the same word in Heb. signifies both to repent and to comfort,
to mourn and to cease mourning, to lament and rejoice, for as true comfort
belongs only to penitent Souls, so sorrow is the porch and inlet to joy; none
are exalted but they that are first cast down, none bring forth the blessed
babe of joy but such as Travel in the pangs of sorrows, Joh. 6.21. The Painter
can with a touch of his Pencil turn a crying into a laughing face, thus says
David, Thou have turned for me my mourning into dancing; thou have put off my
sackcloth, and girded me with gladness, Psalm. 30.11.

This is the second general head, what is implied in this Lamenting after the
Lord.

3. Another head in the prescribed method is the Reasons why it is so fit that
Gods Israel or professing People should thus lament after the Lord, when Gods
Ark is obscured or his Ordinances obstructed. In confirmation of this Point, I
must demonstrate,

1. That they must lament after the Ark of the Lord. 2. After the Lord of the
Ark, Briefly for both these.

1. Gods Israel or professing People must lament after the Ark i. e. the
Ordinances of the Lord, when obscured, or obstructed:

1. Because the Ark or Ordinances of the Lord are a Peoples greatest glory,
their beauty, strength and honor. Wherein is Israel better than other Nations,
then by having Ordinances of God among them, Psalm. 147.19, 20. He showed his
word unto Jacob, his statutes and his judgments unto Israel, he has not dealt
so with any Nation -- q.d. This, this is that that exalts Israel above all
other Kingdoms, that they have the visible tokens of Gods presence, which is a
peoples only glory; so faith the Apostle, Romans 9.4. To the Israelites pertain
the Adoption, and the Glory, and the Covenants, and the giving of the Law, the
Service of God, and the Promises. This is Israel's Heritage, Patrimony, and a
rich one it is: hence when the Ark was taken, Phinehas's Wife breathed her
last, with that heavisom Ditty, The Glory is departed from Israel, for the Ark
of God is taken, 1 Samuel 4.21.

2. Because the obscuring and obstructing of Ordinances is an heavy Judgment,
worse than all other Plagues, both absolutely considered in it self, and
comparatively, if it be compared with other Judgments. God threatens to do by
Jerusalem, as he did by Shilo, Jer. 7.14. How that was this context shows. And
Ezekiel. 24.21. I will profane my Sanctuary, the excellency of your strength.
Many other threats speak God's hot displeasure in this case, and the evil is
greater, because it reaches to the Soul, which is the best part of man. Hence
Amos 8.11, 12. Behold the days come, says the Lord, that I will send for a
Famine in the Land, (which surely is a dreadful Judgment, worse than the Sword,
Lam. 4.9. But what a Famine?) Not a Famine of Bread, or a Thirst for Water, but
of hearing the Words of the Lord: This, this is the forest Judgment; this
Judgment on the Soul is the Soul of Judgments, when poor sinners are in danger
inevitably to die and be damned in Hell without means or remedy. Where no
Vision is the people perish, Prove. 29.18. Hos. 4.6. My people are destroyed for
lack of knowledge.

3. Because there is much advantage in the enjoyment of Ordinances: Herein
consists the Kingdom of Heaven; so is the Preaching of the Gospel frequently
called; and this Word is the Word of the Kingdom, and Gospel of the Kingdom,
because it is an introduction or means to enter Persons into the Kingdom of
Grace, and so of Glory; and that is a dreadful Threatening, Matthew. 21.43.
Therefore shall the Kingdom of God be taken from you, and be given to a Nation
bringing forth the fruits thereof. If any ask me, as Romans 3.1, 2. What
advantage has the Jew? (so the professing Christian under the
Gospel Dispensation) or what profit is there of Circumcision, or of Spiritual
Privileges? I answer, much every way, chiefly because that unto them were
committed the Oracles of God, Joh. 4.22.
and so Salvation is of the Jews; as our Lord faith; even so those that have
Gospel Ordinances, have great helps for the conversion, edification, and
salvation of their Souls; Isa. 11.10.
for Christ has set up his Ensign among them for Souls to flock unto. These
are Wells of Salvation, Isa. 12.3. and 25.6. and 66.11. Mat. 16.9. Isa. 60.1.
Act. 14.27.2 Cor. 3.8.2 Cor. 6.2.
a Feast of fat things, breasts of consolation, where Souls may milk out, and
be abundantly delighted, here are the Keys of the Kingdom, by which
Heaven-gates stand open continually; the door of Faith, the ministration of the
Spirit, the day of Salvation, etc. And is not all this worth lamenting after
the Lord to enjoy? then what is?

4. Because this is the character and property of a Child of God to lament
after the Ark and Ordinances of God. I have, says David, loved the habitation
of thy house, Psalm. 26.8. Therefore makes this his [ unum magnum] one Thing
which he desires of the Lord, to dwell in the house of the Lord, Psalm. 27.4.
Two things put on a Christian Spirit to lament after God for the Ark; 1. His
Principles; 2. His Experiences. 1. He has a gracious Principle, an enlightened
Eye to see what others cannot discern; the Christian calls such places and
ways, Beer-la-hai-roi, as Hagar, Genesis 16.14. The Well of him that lives and
sees me. So the Christian sees God's way in the Sanctuary; Psalm. 77.14. Psalm.
27.4. Psalm. 60, 24.
there he beholds the beauty of the Lord. They have seen thy goings, O God,
even the goings of my God, my King, in the Sanctuary. Yea the devout Soul has
a stomach and taste suitable to what he meets with in the Ordinances of God,
Faith, Love, Desire, Joy; as newborn Children have a natural instinct to their
Mothers Milk for conservation of life, so 1 Pet. 2.2. The Saints as newborn
Babes desire the sincere Milk of the Word, that they may grow thereby. The Law
of God engraven in his heart, bears proportion to the Word he hears opened by
Ministers, Christ within him (by his Spirit and Graces) as the hope of Glory,
prompts him to a love and longing to Christ, in the holy Supper, and all other
his Institutions. 2. Add to this the frequent Experiences the believing Soul
has had of the sweetness of Divine Grace in Ordinances, which cannot but set
him a longing for the like Experiments again, Psalm. 63.1, 2. My Soul thirsts
for thee, my flesh longs for thee, in a dry and thirsty Land, where no water
is, to see thy power and thy glory so as I have seen thee in the Sanctuary. So
Song 2.3, 4. I sat down under his shadow with great delight, and his fruit was
sweet to my taste; yea, he brought me into his banqueting house, and his banner
over me was Love. No wonder if she was so sick when she wanted him.

This leads me to the next Head.

2. That Christians must lament after the God of Ordinances, or God in
Ordinances; so says the Text, The House of Israel lamented after the Lord. Why?

1. Because God is infinitely more worth than all Ordinances; his presence is
prizable for it self. The Ark is but to be esteemed for his gracious presence;
In his favor is life, Psalm. 30.5. His lovingkindness is better than life,
Psalm. 63.3. This is the marrow of Heaven, the want of this is Hell. Woe also be
to them when I depart from them, Hos. 9.12. And this the Child of God knows.

2. God purposely withdraws that men may lament after him; as a Mother steps
out of the Child's sight, that it may see she is gone, and cry after her, Hos.
5.15. I will go and return to my place, till they acknowledge their offense,
and seek my face; in their affliction they will seek me early.

3. Because due lamenting after the Lord may fetch him back; he purposely
hovers, waits and expects, that his people should call him back by their
prayers, entreaties, moanings; not as though God were moved, or changed by men's
pitiful complaints and out-crys, but that such an earnest lamenting qualifies
the subject, capacitates for mercy, and puts Souls into the condition of the
promise, Jer. 29.12, 13. Then shall ye call upon me, and shall go and pray unto
me, and I will hearken unto you, and ye shall seek me and find me, when ye
shall search for me with all your heart.

4. God blesses his People usually in and by Ordinances, with his best
blessings, Psalm. 133.3. There the Lord commanded the blessing, Even life for
evermore, Ephesians. 1.3. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who
has blessed us with all spiritual blessings ((...)) in heavenly (places,
things, means) in Christ. It would be needless to reckon up all the blessings
that our dear Lord conveys to his People by Ordinances, and that it becomes us
to lament after the Lord for, in his Appointments; (for now I join them
together.)

1. Sometimes God gives outward blessings with his Ark. So the Lord had blessed
the House of Obed-edom, and all that pertained to him because of the Ark of
God, 2 Samuel 6.12. The Gospel of Peace often brings outward Peace and Plenty,
though through the corruption of men's hearts it stirs up opposition
occasionally.

2. But the chief blessings are spiritual, as, Conversion of the Soul to God,
Regeneration, effectual Vocation; so that it may often be said, as of Zion, This
and that man was born there, Psalm. 87.5. So also increase of grace, 2 Cor.
3.18. We all with open face, beholding as in a Glass (this broader Glass of
Ordinances, and the secret Glass of private Duties) the glory of the Lord, are
changed into the same Image from glory to glory (i. e. from grace to grace) as
by the Spirit of the Lord, or of the Lord the Spirit [(...):] Besides,
Ordinances discover, and help to cure those foul spots that are in the face of
the Soul, Jam. 1.23, 24. Sanctuarydiscoveries resolve many intricate cases in
the providence of God. See Psalm. 73. v. 17. Here also the hearts of God's
People may be abundantly satisfied, Psalm. 36.8. for here is goodness from God to
do it, Psalm. 65.4. Ordinances are [ Canales gratiae] Channels through which
Divine Grace and Influences flow to Souls, Zech. 4.12. These display Christ;
open Gospel-priviledges, Promises, Terms of Salvation, are as the gate of
Heaven; well then may, and must the observant believing Soul, lament after both
the Ordinances of God, and God in his Ordinances.

4. Head is an Objection, which may be framed against all I have said. You Will
say, What Is all this Canting for? How does it concern us? Have we not public
Ordinances? Does not the Gospel flourish? Is there not excellent Preaching in
Public Places? The generality have no reason to complain, since we have
Christian Magistrates, a glorious Church, Learned Preachers; nay, others that
pretend Tenderness of Conscience; these do complain before they are hurt; Have
they not their Separate Meetings in a Public way without disturbance? Little
reason have any to make this ado in lamenting: What cause have you to lament?

I answer as Cleophas, Art thou only, a stranger in Jerusalem [in England] and
have not known the things which are come to pass there in these days? Luke
24.18, 19.
If you ask what things? Do I need to inform you, or rub up your memories by
telling you, that twenty years ago two thousand Ministers then found in
peaceable possession of their public places were dispossessed and ejected by
the Act of Uniformity commencing Aug. 24. 1662. and shortly after 1665. were
prohibited meeting together above four for Religious Worship, and another Act
prohibited them from coming or being within 5 miles of any such place where
they had preached, or a Corporation, and were severely menaced and punished by
a Second Act, against Conventicles, with Sharper penalties; and though the
Kings Majesty set them at liberty for a season, yet that was quickly retracted,
and many could have little benefit by it, and whether the silencing of
Ministers be not an obstructing of the Gospel, and of Ordinances, judge you;
and if you say you are not concerned in this case, I shall not speak to you,
but turn my discourse to others: Only I shall briefly propound some Questions,
1. About the Ordinances of God; 2. The God of Ordinances, and leave it to you
to judge whether there be not some cause to lament after the Lord.

1. Are all congregations, supplied with able faithful Ministers? God forbid I
should condemn all, or censure any; blessed be God there are some gracious men
in public station, whose main design is to win Souls to God: but Oh how small
is their Number; I would rather you read an account of this in Ichabod; or five
groans of the Church writ by a conformable Minister A. Dom. 1663. lamenting
3000 raw young heads, that teach before they have learned, 1500 debauched
Ministers, many factious men, some illiterate tradesmen, Simonists, Pluralists
and Non-Residents particularly described; God knows whether these things be
true; but it is well if many have not cause to complain as our Lord, Matthew.
9.36. Who when he saw the multitudes, he was moved with compassion on them
because they fainted and were scattered abroad as sheep having no Shepherd; you
know what follows: If all public places were well supplied there would be less
need of us: If there were no need, we should be glad of a Supersedeas.

2. Yet is there not work enough for all the Ministers in England, if all were
faithful, conscientious, and set themselves seriouslly to the work of God; Oh
how many thousand ignorant Souls to be instructed! Obstinate, See Ezekiel. 34.4.
to be admonished, careless to be quickened, weak to be strengthened, wandering
to be reduced; surely they that know any thing of the worth of Souls, of the
work of the Ministry, and of the importance of eternity cannot but bitterly
lament that so little is done for saving of sinners, and that there are so few
to lay out themselves, or that do actually or effectually, the work of faithful
Pastors, for the conviction and edification of sinners Souls: If every Minister
in England were gracious, and had an hundred persons under his cure and charge,
he would find it as difficult to manage as a Physician, dealing with so many
patients under several diseases:hic labor, hoc opus.

3. Is not the liberty that some take in their dispensing Ordinances under many
disadvantages? Are they not subject to fines, confiscations, imprisonments,
banishments, censures, and all have not equal opportunity of feeding Christ's
flock, where there is as much necessity: What liberty is taken, it is but stolen,
and upon courtesy; still they are exposed to the rage of malevolent spirits,
and under the lash of the Law, and censures of being undiscreet Zealots, that
adventure further than their more prudent Brethren; yet still the Candle is
under a bushel, and they that need it the most, have least share in it, and are
glad they are out of the sound of it, and are furnished with stones enough, even
from present constitutions, to cast at such as would disturb them in their
career of sin, and posting to Hell; and they whose Eyes are opened to see the
blind running into a Pit, cannot but lament that their hands are so bound that
they cannot stop them.

4. Are there not sad symptoms upon us of a departing Gospel? It would not now
be seasonable to enumerate the Prognostics of God's taking away his Ark and
Ordinances. Christian in Complete Armor, part 2. p. 325.
Mr. Jurnal speaking of the unkind welcome the Gospel has found among us,
adds; Oh what will God do with this degenerate Age we live in! O England,
England! I fear some sad Judgment or other bodes thee! If such glad Tidings as
the Gospel brings be rejected, sad news cannot be far off. I cannot think of
less than a departing Gospel. God never made such a settlement of his Gospel
amongst any People, but he could remove it from them: He comes but upon liking,
and will he stay where he is not welcome? who will that has elsewhere to go?
Read the rest.

Two words on this, observe, 1. Have there not been great Attempts made to
quench the Light amongst us? Oh what a Combination is there at home and abroad,
of Papists and Atheists, Psalm. 83.3-8. Isa. 30.10, 11.
to rout out the Name of Israel, and to banish the God of Israel, and cause him
to cease from amongst us! Oh what crafty Councels, and potent Confederates,
animated with devilish hatred, may we espy in this our Native Country!
Antichrist makes many furious Assaults, with a Design to kill the poor
Witnesses, after they have been Prophesying in Sackcloth, Rev. 11.3, 7. Yea
among our selves, Is there not some that are indifferent whether the Ark or
Mass, Gospel-preaching, or dumb Idols take place? Job 21.14.
Yea some say unto God, Depart from us, we desire not the knowledge of his
ways. Rev. 16.9.
Men are scorched with the glorious Rays of the Gospel-Sun, and blaspheme God,
rather than kindly melted by its warm and benign Influences. How many Ahabs
hate Micaiah's, or Felix's? at best that adjourn the Court of Conscience, and
Plain-Preaching: Or Gadarens, that prefer their Swine-Sty to God's Sanctuary,
and desire blessed Jesus to depart out of our Coasts. God's Ark is a troublesome
Guest to graceless Philistines. 2 These. 2.10.
Some that received not the Truth in love, are in danger to be given up to
Popish Delusions, and the mixed multitude that fell a lusting or longing for the
Onions of Egypt. If the Gospel may be sinned away, surely it is in hazard now
to depart. If prodigious lusts, daring Heaven, unfruitfulness, decay of Zeal,
loss of first Love, carnal confidence of Privileges, and contempt of the Power
of Godliness, neutrality, empty Formality, have robbed People of this Pearl;
surely without a prerogative, add, of mercy, we cannot keep it long.

2. Where are the Souls that stir up themselves to take hold of a withdrawing
God? Isa. 64.7.
Some I hope there are that stand in the gap, but oh how few, and how faintly!
Where is there a Moses, to hold up his hands, a Joshua to fall at God's feet, a
Phinehas to execute Justice? God sees that there is no man, Isa. 59.16.
and may wonder that there is no Intercessor. Strange! That there should be
none to guide her among all the Sons she has brought forth; What! Isa. 51.18.
none to take her by the hand, of all the Sons that she has brought up: What!
Is there no Rod strong enough for bearing such a weight? Well, this is a
lamentation, and shall be for a lamentation.

But may not the Innocent deliver the Island? May not the poor wise man deliver
the City? Are not Saints Prayers effectual? Ans. Yes. But where are they? The
old Stock is worn out, and few new ones come in for a supply. Strong Torrents
are carried by the dead Sea into the Ocean of Eternity; and new Springs are yet
rare and faint. Where shall we find Elijah's Spirit doubled on succeeding
Elisha? Though a Kingdom may have much Treasure in it, yet if Trade cease, no
Bullion or Merchandise be imported, it will decay, because it spends upon the
old Stock. This is our case, old Saints are worn away, few Converts fit to
plead with God, come in their room. And this is the Devils design, to wear out
the Saints of the most High, and extirpate the genuine Seed of Jacob. But alas!
By whom shall Jacob arise? for he is small. His face waxes pale, having of
late lost so much good blood. And does not our Lord sometimes withdraw the
Spirit of Prayer, which is an interpretative saying, Pray not for this People.
Does not stupidity and sleepiness seize on the Disciples, even when Jesus is in
his Agony? Does not this bode evil? Is there not in them, even in them, sins
enough to weaken and evacuate their own Prayers? Alas! What Divisions, what
Decaies, Deadness, Unprositableness! The Old Puritan-Spirit is gone; we are
woefully degenerated: Professors are grown like the world: How unlike are we to
Primitive Saints? Abraham is ignorant of us, Israel would not acknowledge us
for their genuine Seed. But may we not think our disease is grown so stubborn
and inveterate, that no Doses will conquer the Disease, though [ ultimi
conatus] these hard struglings of Nature may maintain Life for a season?
Judgments have been prorogued upon the Vinedressers interposing importunity,
three years longer, but beware the forth. God's Patience has bounds; his
Spirit will not always strive. We look like a people ripe for ruin. However
Noah, Ezekiel. 14.14.
Dantel and Job may deliver their own Souls (though none besides) by their
righteousness. God can make those few Names in Sardis to walk in white, Rev.
3.3, 4.
though he come against her as a Thief, and leave her in Egyptian darkness: He
can find harbor for his Children, though he pull down the house upon the heads
of formal Hypocrites: And if there be not cause of lamenting after the Ark when
its removal is feared, to be sure men will see cause to lament when this evil
is felt. The Anger of the Lord shall not return, until he has executed, and
till he has performed the thoughts of his heart; In the latter days ye shall
consider it perfectly, Jer. 23. v. 20.

2. Is not the God of Ordinances much removed from amongst us? And is not he
worth lamenting after? God makes gradual removes. Amos 8.9.
It Is true, sometimes the Sun sets at noonday; yet ordinarily the Sun leaves
the Horizon by sensible declinings. Ezekiel. 9.3.
The glory of the Lord goes up from the Cherub, to the Threshold of the house,
c. 11.23.
thence to the middle of the City, thence to the Mountain.

I shall briefly mention four Removes which our Lord has taken from us: By way
of Query.

1. Is not restraining grace much gone from amongst us? Some persons in former
times were wont to be civil, orderly, and in many things conformable to the
letter of the Word; but now God has cast the Reins in their necks, and they
get the Bit of Conscience betwixt the teeth of sensual affections, and
obstinate sinning, and there is no hoe with them; they run mad in their own
ways; petty Oaths of Mass or Troth, are commence to Dam me, and full mouthed
blasphemies; tippling to down-drive Drunkenness, and open reeling; wanton
dalliances to defended Adulteries; squibbing Strictness, to open persecution of
all that looks like seriousness; from questioning Divine Providence, men
advance to avowed Atheism, and open defiance of Heaven. Some men are given up
to such sins as are not fit to be named, and which themselves formerly would
have blushed at the mention of; and if any had predicted their committing them,
would have said as Hazael, Is thy Servant a Dog? 2 King. 8.13.
Sinners that used to walk under a Vail or Mask, now go barefaced, and men
glory in their shame. Phil. 3.19.
Many abhor Sobriety, Justice, Temperance. We overpass the deeds of the wicked;
the Moral Heathens would be ashamed of us. Men work all uncleanness with
greediness: Yea, if they court God in a few formal Prayers, they think they are
delivered to do all these abominations; as though they had got a Popish
Indulgence and Dispensation to sin. As Breerwood in his Enquiries tells us, The
common people think they do the Priest a kindness to find him work by new
sinning to get pardons. Yea, 1 Pet. 4.4.
some think strange at others, that they are not as bad as themselves: Terras
Astraea reliquit.
And is not this matter of lamenmentation, to see the Earth thus for saken by a
righteous God, and possessed by so many Bears, Lions, Tigers and Goats? that
men are grown Wolves, yea Devils to each other! Is it not time to lament after
that God that gives up men to such profligate and prodigious courses as hasten
their own damnation, and England's desolation? Is it not time to seek God till
he come and Rain Righteousness upon us? Hos. 10.12.

2. Is not converting grace much withdrawn from the Ordinances of God? And does
not this call sensible Souls to lament after the Lord? Rev. 6.2.
Time has been that our Lord has mounted his white Horse, Psalm. 45.5.
and has bent his Bow, and shot his Arrows of Conviction, and made them sharp
in the hearts of the King's Enemies, Song 3.11.
and caused people to fall under him, going forth conquering; has had his
Crown set upon his head by the Daughters of Jerusalem. But alas! now the Church
has a miscarrying Womb, Isa. 55.1. 49.4.
and dry Breasts. Ministers cry out, Who has believed our Report? I have
labored in vain. God does not go forth with his Word as formerly. The Apostles
were Fishers, enclosed many at a draught; present Ministers Hunters, shout and
run all day, and catch but one or two, and well too. It Is worth a whole life's
pains. Though it cannot be denied, God's despised Servants have now and then
seals of their Ministry to God's glory, their encouragement, and the stopping
of the mouths of slanderers. Jerusalem is built even in troublesome times: The
Gospel is not bound, though Ministers be. Men civilly dead, may convey
spiritual life. God has not left his Servants without some Testimonies in the
Consciences and Conversations of their Hearers, that God is in his Ordinances
of a truth. But alas! how few gleanings has our dear Lord, compared with the
full Vintage Satan gets among men? We take these first fruits thankfully till
the full Harvest come. Let Ministers and People lament after the Lord, that he
would fill his House with glory, hasten the day of his Power, to make People
cheerful Volunteers in the Lord's Warfare. Oh that more might knock at our
doors with a [ What must I do to be saved?] Where is the Lord God of Elijah?
Lord, cloth thine Ordinances with thy Power. When shall Aaron's Rod bring
forth ripe Almonds? Lord, let the Children of the Covenant own the God of their
Fathers, and be sprinkled with Covenant grace. Lord, break up that blessed Writ
of Electing Love, in converting grace. Let Sermons be seconded with power. Make
thy Word the Arms of God unto Salvation.

3. Does not God much withdraw from the Societies of his Servants? Is there to
be sound that entireness, singleness, faithfulness amongst God's People to each
other as in former days? Is there not much pride, worldliness, decay of love
to God, abating spiritual zeal for God, such as was in the days of old? Alas!
we have reason to think the Spirit of Prayer is much withdrawn; that close
walking, that distance from appearances of sin, that entireness for God, that
endearedness and usefulness of Christians amongst themselves, as is wont to be.
Yea, has not God seemed to take Peace from the Earth? Is not Manasse^ against
Ephraim, Isa. 9.21.
and Ephraim against Manasseh, and they together against Judah? Papists against
Protestants, and Protestants against Papists, and they together against zealous
Worshippers, and exact walkers according to pure and Primitive Institutions?
Are not some Members of the same Church, that desire to keep close to the Rule,
Song 1.6.
rendered black, while the Sun has looked upon them with some malignant aspects
and reflections of displeasure? Yea even the same Mothers Children are angry
with them. Yea their own Shepherds pity them not: Nay, some Watchmen are so
rigid and censorious, Song 5.7.
that they find them out, wound them, take away their vail from them, expose
the Members of the same Church, as if they were factious, traitorous, or
heretical, and will hold no communion with them that have much charity for
them, and pursue them with entreaties to beg their consent to walk with them
toward Heaven, and join in God's work for winning of Souls; and alas, they
browbeat them, and seem to deny them liberty to worship the same God, own the
same Bible, or partake of the same common Savior: If this be not for a
lamentation, what is? Methinks some deal with their Brethren, as Readiness
Courtiers with honest David, 1 Samuel 26.19. -- They have driven me out this day
from abiding in the Inheritance of the Lord, saying, Go serve other gods: Or,
as it is, Ezekiel. 11.15. Son of Man, thy Brethren, even thy Brethren, the men of
thy kindred, and all the house of Israel wholly are they unto whom the
Inhabitants of Jerusalem have said, Get ye far from the Lord, unto us is this
Land given in possession. Monopolies are dangerous in Spirituals. What envy
has excluding others begot in these cases? Lamentable is the Story here in
England of the haughty carriage of Austin the Monk, Mr. Clark's Martyrol. part
1. p. 13.
and petulant behavior of the British Bishops, who neglected to join with the
other upon private animosities to Preach the Gospel to the Idolatrous Saxons.
Austin predicted and menaced, that if they would not have Peace with their
Brethren, they should have Wars with their Enemies. Shortly after Ethelbert
King of Northumberland, being a Pagan, went with a great Army against the City
of Chester, (whether animated by Austin, God knows) overcame the Brittans, slew
eleven hundred Monks ( i.e. persons religiously devoted to God) for praying for
the Brittans, only fifty escaped with Brockmail Mayor of Chester. A Spirit of
Aemulation in so good a work, has always bad Effects; and Pride has dreadful
consequences. Church-Divisions are much to be lamented, and very rarely issue
without Civil Dissentions. For the Divisions of Reuben there ought to be sad
searchings, Judge. 5.15, 16.
and heavy thoughts of heart. Lord, when shall Conscience-racking Oaths be
broken? How long shall intangling Orders for decency rend the bowels of thy
Church? When shall Subscription to Christ's Laws suffice?

It Is sure a matter of lamentation that the Devil casts the Bone among
Professing Christians, and they snarl at each other about it. How long shall
the pride and wrath of men make and blow up that spark into a flame, that Satan
the great make-bait casts among them? When will men see the hand of Joab is in
all this? and discern at last that among all these contending Clients, none is
gainer but that common Barreter? Lord open men's Eyes, heal our bleeding wounds,
and bring back that ancient Christian Spirit of Love, and Peace, Charity and
Humility.

4. Once more; Is there no cause for Gods Children to lament after the Lord for
his return to their Spirits? Is not God much withdrawn from the hearts of his
People? If a Child of God say as Sampson, I will go out as at other times
before, and shake my self; Judge. 16.20.
But he wisteth not that the Lord is departed from him. When he reflects on
himself and and finds it so, will he not see sad cause to lament? And have not
some Godly Souls cause to say as Gideon, Judge. 6.13. Oh my Lord, if the Lord be
with us, why then is all this befallen us? And where be all his miracles which
our Fathers told us of! But now the Lord has forsaken us:

1. In point of quickening, exciting, and actuating their graces: May not that
sad complaint be taken up, Isa. 64.7. There is none that calls on thy name,
that stirs up himself to take hold on thee. For thou have hid thy face from
us, and have consumed [ Heb. melted] us because of our iniquities. Where is
that flaming love, that working faith, Gospel-repentance that lively hope, that
filial fear, that spirit of adoption, that found mind, tender conscience, and
working affections as in former days? It Is much to be feared there is a general
decay of grace, or damp in point of exercise on the Spirits of living
Christians: it is well if the Bridgroom find not even the wise Virgins asleep.

2. As to strength and assistance, against the assaults of temptation, and
outbreakings of corruption: many Thorns in the flesh, 2 Cor. 12, 7, 8.
Messengers of Satan do too prevalently push forwards Gods Children to sin, and
they find not his grace sufficient for them as sometimes, but stumble, and
fall, and are broken, snared and taken; Yea sometimes to the breaking of their
bones, dishonouring of God, scandal of their profession, and endangering of
their precious Souls: Oh let not such things be told in Gath, or published in
Askelon, lest the uncircumcised Philistines triumph over Gods People, and be
hardened in their sinful ways. Alas, where shall Gods tender Spirited Children
hide their faces when their brethren profane Gods holy Name, and men shall
say, These are the People of the Lord, and are gone forth out of his land,
Ezekiel. 36.20. These are your Praecisians, and scrupulous Zealots that will not
do as others; now they show that they are a pack of Hypocrites. This cuts deep,
and wounds to the heart.

3. As to communion with God, Gods People of old could assert it with a
[truely] however carnal men scorn it now, 1 John 1.3. Truly our fellowship is
with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ; Not only in that secret,
essential fundamental communion whereby grace is maintained in its being and
life, but that sweet, sensible, Soul-refreshing fellowship that gives grace its
activity, and maintains intercourse betwixt God and the Soul in duty: But alas!
have not Gods Children cause to complain as the Church, that God withdraws
himself; Song 3. 1. c. 5. 6.
She seeks him but finds him not, in public Ordinances, in secret Duties, in
communion of Saints, Gods Children complain with Job, chap. 23.8, 9. Behold, I
go forward, but he is not there, and backward, but I cannot perceive him, etc.
He looks East, West, North, South but in vain; This is strange that God who is
every where should be found no where -- but though the Child of God be aware of
Gods general Omnipresence, and feel his common Providence, yet is not satisfied
without his special presence, and gracious influence; And missing this, he has
reason to lament after the Lord when he hides himself.

4. As to assurance, settlement and comfort sometimes Gods Children are left to
a sad, unsatisfyed and doubting frame, full of fears, troubles, jealousies, are
much in the dark in point of state; this is a very general complaint at this
day. Many have blurred their evidences by sins, or carelessness, and cannot give
any distinct account how their principles are stated, what condition their
Souls are in, are damped and daunted as to their interest in Christ, title to
the promises, hopes of Heaven; Have not these great cause to lament after the
Lord? And surely these must say as David, Psalm. 51.8. -- 12. Make me to hear
joy and gladness, that the bones which thou have broken may rejoice; restore
unto me the joy of thy salvation, and uphold me with thy free Spirit: O my God!
Psalm. 49.6.
My Soul is cast down within me, one while I argue with my own heart communing,
expostulating challenging, charging my Spirit, and alas, I can do no good with
it, other whiles turning me to God, but still I am restless, cannot be quiet,
but am tossed with tempests, and not comforted. Well, Jon. 2.4.
I am determined to look toward Gods holy temple, and cast my self at Gods
feet in the virtue of that promise, Hos. 6.3. Then shall we know, if we follow
on to know the Lord; his going forth is prepared as the morning, and he shall
come unto us as the rain, as the latter and former rain unto the earth.

Thus much for the Doctrinal part, and the clearing of an objection.

All the Application I shall make of this point shall only be of Exhortation,
to put us all upon this so seasonable and needful a duty of lamenting after the
Lord; the Ark of the Lord and the Lord of the Ark.

In prosecuting this, I shall do these four things.

1. Propound some Motives and Arguments to press this duty upon our Spirits.

2. Discover what sort of Persons are concerned thus to lament after the Lord.

3. Lay before you some Helps to carry on this work of serious lamenting.

4. Propound some Cordials to encourage our hearts till we overtake the Lord.

1. For Motives to persuade, prevail with our hearts to practice this duty,
once at last; and indeed it is a very sad consideration that this People of
Israel were twenty years before they began to feel their feet, or come to
themselves. This shall be the

First Argument, That a professing People may lie long under dreadful Spiritual
judgments without a sensible Spirit; It was so with them here, it is well if it
be not so with us: And this senseless frame is greater evil than any other
judgments.

Qu. But how comes it to pass that men may be so long senseless and not lament
after the Lord all this while?

Ans. 1. From the nature of sin; sin is of an hardening, stupifying, brutifying
nature, when men fall into sin, their hearts are hardened by it, Heb. 3.13. Sin
is of a cold congealing nature, it freezeth the Soul, rocketh conscience
asleep, and like the Fish Torpedo, that diffuseth its benumming poison through
the hand, arm, and creeping at last to his heart, kills him; so does sin. It Is
not to tell how David's sin rockt him asleep, and led him on to other sins,
till it endangered his Soul's sleeping the sleep of death.

2. From the worldly enjoyments men have in room of Ordinances; as the Captives
in Babylon being well settled in their conveniences, forget God's Appointments,
and Jerusalem comes [not] into their mind, while their enjoyments afford
contentment. Yea, though some returned, they can sleep quietly in their Cieled
houses, while the House of God lies waste, Hag. 1.4. God's Ark is forgotten,
when men's private Chests are full. Personal comforts thrust our spiritual, as
the Sun Beams eat out the Kitchen fire.

3. From the want of quickening Means in the want of Ordinances. When the
Prophets are dead naturally or civilly, their Monitors to duty are taken away,
Psalm. 74.9. We see not our signs; there is no more any Prophet, neither is there
any among us that knows how long. When men want an Haggai or Zechariah, they
lie still asleep, for want of awakening Helps. It Is Samuel that promotes this
lamenting after the Lord.

4. From the withdrawings of God's grace, Psalm. 80.18. -- Quicken us, and we
will call on thy Name. As long as God turns his back on us, we shall be so far
from kindly lamenting after him, that we shall turn, go back from him. My Soul
follows hard after thee, Psalm. 63.8. How comes that to pass? why, Thy right
hand upholdeth me. It Is God that gives a repenting heart, a lamenting Soul. Oh
what are we if God leave us to our selves! Study these causes of senslesness,
and let our Souls be ashamed. Tremble at these causes, and their effects;
bewail sin; settle not in worldly enjoyments; beg quickening helps, and above
all, Divine grace for our assistance in lamenting after the Lord. This is the
first.

2. That God's Professing People may, and must stir up themselves to lament
after the Lord. All men have rational faculties. Gracious Souls have spiritual
Principles, sloth kills both: Self excitation is possible, and a furtherance to
this lamentation after God. Men as men have Consciences, and Conscience is the
Candle of the Lord, Prove. 20.27
searching all the inward parts of the belly, by self-reflection, discovering
the want of God and goodness, checking for evil, putting on to what is good; if
you follow it not as far as it leads you, you wrong it, rebel against its
Master, and deprive your selves of further helps: Contradict this Preacher in
thy bosom at thy peril. Means intervene betwixt a man's can, and his cannot; if
thou can not move a spiritual step, thou must move a natural step after the
Lord; if thou can not create a new heart, Ezekiel. 18.31.
yet thou can and must endeavor to make thee a new heart, and a new spirit.
If thou be not able to do God's work, thou must be doing thy own work; bemoan
thy self, tell him what an unruly Bullock thou art, and desire him to turn
thee, and then thou shall be turned. Jer. 31.18. Isa. 64.7.2 Tim. 1.6. Psalm.
62.5. Ephesians. 5.14.
Stir up thy self to take hold on God. Stir up the Gift of God in thee. Charge
thy self as David, My Soul, wait thou only upon God. Awake thou that sleep,
arise from the dead, and Christ shall give thee light. Awake, awake, put on thy
strength, oh Zion! put on thy beautiful Garments, oh Jerusalem! -- shake thy
self from the dust; -- loose thy self from the bands of thy neck, oh Captive
Daughter of Zion! Isa. 52.1, 2. Now at last God expects you should labor to
work your hearts to a discovery of your misery, the necessity you have of God,
of his presence and Ordinances. You may rouse your selves to this work, you
must, and if you do, God will help, if not, your destruction will be of your
selves.

3. This lamenting after the Lord and his Ark has been the practice, and is
the true Character of God's Children. Eli's heart trembled for the Ark of God.
1 Samuel 4.13, 21.
Phinehas's Wife thought it not worth the while to live when the Ark was gone:
I will wait on the Lord that hides his face from the house of Jacob, and will
look for him, Isa. 8.17. This was when it was said, Bind up the Testimony, seal
the Law among my Disciples, v. 16. Yea, if you would seek and find God, seek
not to familiar Spirits -- but to the Law, and to the Testimony, v. 19, 20.
For, should not a People seek unto their God? Sirs, show what you are, and act
as you seem: If you be God's Children, Jer. 17.17.
run weeping after your Father; cry after him, and say, Be not a terror to me.
Yea, why should thou be as a stranger in the Land, and as a wayfaring man
that turns aside to tarry for a night? Lord, art not thou in the midst of us?
We are called by thy Name, leave us not, Jer. 14.8, 9. Be not thou far from me,
Psalm. 22.11, 19.
O Lord, for trouble is near, for there is none to help. Oh! where is that
ancient serious Spirit of lamenting after the Lord? Where are those genuine
workings of Child-like bowels after such a Father? What Is become of that
sighing frame of heart, that Spirit of Adoption, that God's Children of old
were endued with? It Is well if new Notions do not drive out that old Spirit of
lamentation. Show you are Saints by this, as those few declared themselves
Readiness faithful Soldiers whose hearts God had touched, 1 Samuel 10.26. and 13.7.
following him trembling, or trembling after him. So Hos. 11. v. 10. They shall
walk after the Lord; he shall roar like a Lion, when he shall roar, then the
Children shall tremble from the West. Observe it, God's roaring in terrible
threatenings or executions, drives not God's Children from him, but to him, only
they come trembling, appealing from God to God, from an avenging Justice
offended, to tender Mercies through the Merits of Jesus. Learn this Mystery an
Christian Property.

4. This is no controverted Point, but a granted duty on all hands, I am
persuading to: Who dare contradict it? Yea, who dare dispute it? What
exceptions can any bring against this, of lamenting after the Lord? I challenge
any Caviller to produce any show of reason against either branch of it; either
as to the Ordinances of God, or God in his Ordinances. I think all Parties are
agreed in the Theory. Oh that all were also agreed in the practice of this
duty! whatever disputes men make about other Rules, or Canons of practice,
methinks there should be none about this. Let us therefore; as many as be
perfect, be thus minded, and if in any thing ye be otherwise minded, God shall
reveal even this unto you; nevertheless, whereto we have already attained, let
us walk by the same Rule, let us mind the same thing, Phil. 3.15, 16. Whence I
discern, 1. That it is a vain praeposterous thing for persons to spend time in
disputing about abstruse and dark Points, while they neglect momentous and
palpable duties. 2. The only way to get Unity in less material Truths or
Duties, is conscientious practice of what is necessary and indubitable. I may
truly say, that nothing is more likely to make us cordial Friends; than the
practice of the Duty in my Text; when Judah and Israel fall a weeping and
seeking the Lord then they go together. Jer. 50.45.
How amicable does converting grace make those that were at deadly and
desperate feud? Mal. 4.6.
for Repentance turns the hearts of Parents and Children to each other. Alas!
till our faces be set toward the Lord, our backs will be on each other, and we
shall rush with fury one against another: But if we agree in this best act and
object, we shall agree amongst our selves: Lamenting together would clear up
our eyesight, and beget an harmony of hearts.

5. Other persons in all other cases do lament after the Objects that their
hearts are set upon. David followed his dead Friend Abner with sorrow, and
bitterly lamented his dead Son Absalom. The Companions of Jephthah's Daughter
yearly lamented her. Yea David much lamented Saul (though his Enemy while
living) and his sworn Brother Jonathan, Jeremiah lamented for Josiah, and all
the singing-men, and singing-women spoke of Josiah in their lamentations to
this day. Yea, they made them an Ordinance in Israel, 2 Chronicles. 35.25. And which
of you are so hard-hearted, but you would lament a dead Friend, or Brother,
Sister, Wife, Child, Parent? And can thou not find in thy heart to spend some
sad thoughts on thy departing Lord, or follow the sad Hearse of deceased
Ordinances? Ah carnal hearts! Ah hard hearts Woe be to stupid wretches! Shall a
poor Idolatrous Micah cry out after his Teraphim? And shall we let the only
true God go with silence and dry eyes? Is not our God worth lamenting after?
Will even careless women lament at last for the teats, Isa. 32.12.
for the pleasant fields, for the fruitful vine? And shall not Gods Children
lament for those full breasts of Gospel ordinances? Shall not Children cry and
long for the sincere milk of the word that they may grow thereby? 1 Pet. 2.2.
If you were sensible, you would cry out, my Father, a little bread to an
hungry Soul, my Mother, let me suck those breasts of consolation: I am pining,
languishing, famishing to death, let me be nourished to eternal life.

6. If we lament not after the Lord and his Ark, he will go yet further from
us, if not totally leave us. There was never such symptoms of Gods taking away
the Candlestick, and leaving us to the Idolatry, and Cruelties of Popery, in
this Kingdom, since the Reformation as there is at this day: horrible
Abominations and Atheism preparing for it, our ingratitude for prevention thus
long, the general Antipathy to a Sound Ministry, a Spirit of giddiness to
entertain the most senseless fopperies, a mincing some grosser Popish doctrines
by pretended Protestants, humane Inventions coined in darkest times of Popery
retained, Courts, Fees, Officers, Ceremonies; Popish names places, Customs
defended; Want of Sympathy with our suffering brethren abroad in that kind;
attempts for Reformation not succeeding opposed: Instruments reserved, prepared
for Scourges; denying plots as clear as the Sun; Preferring Popish Tyranny
before Christ's Government; most debauchery in some that should be best; Popish
Emissaries swarming; Popish Families increasing; Honest Ministers much laying
aside Weapons, Antidotes; fearlesness in many, unpreparedness of all for such a
dispensation; impressions on many of Changes; Freedom of Ordinances to lay in
for a storm; unprincipled professors must pass an Ordeal-Tryal; judgment
beginning at God's house; Choice stakes taken out of the hedge, transplanted to
Heaven; Witnesses prophesying in Sackcloth; must be slain, the Whore must sit
as a Queen, and see no loss of Children; Antichrist must render himself more
cruel and odious, to stir up Kings hearts against the Church: indifferency of
great potentates in the cause of Religion, Policy for outward security, the
compass that most stear by; Christ's interest is low in Protestant Countries;
God's laying them under severe rebuke by his immediate hand; Little notice
taken of providence, no public fastings and humiliations, former guilt of
blood unwiped off; Such things as these speak black showrs of Popish darkness
and barbarous showrs of blood; God almighty prevent; But certainly these things
call for bitter lamenting after the Lord; either to prevent them or prepare our
hearts for them, or both. I shall add,

7. There is no way to bring our Lord or his Ark back to us, but this course of
lamenting after him. God has withdrawn himself purposely to make us follow him
mourning; And he seems to stand still and hearken what we do in this case Jer.
8.6. I hearkened and heard says God, but they spoke not aright: What was that?
certainly repenting of their sins, and lamenting inquiries after God; And Jer.
31.18, 19. If God can but hear persons bemoan themselves, follow God, desire
the Lord to turn them, and turn to them, see what kind language he gives them,
ver 20. Is Ephraim my dear Son? Is he a pleasant Child; for since I spoke
against him, I do earnestly remember him still; therefore my bowels are
troubled for him, I will surely have mercy upon him, says the Lord. God does
carry in this case as a loving Father, being provoked to Whip or leave his
offending Child, looks back on his sobbing, brokenhearted lamenting Child,
saying, Alas, my Child what ails thee! What Is the matter with thee? What
want thou? Do thou want an heart, to repent, friendship with me? Do thou
lament so sadly after reconciliation with me, and return to thee? I am glad of
it, that was all I aimed at; I have attained mine end; come, come, thou art
welcome to me, come my dear; my lovely Child, let me wipe thy blubbered cheeks,
and kiss thee again; I am glad my rod and anger work so kindly, I will return
to thee with love and sweetest embraces: Thus does our Lord return with loving
kindness and mercies, and they shall be as if he had not cast them off: There Is
no way probable or possible to bring God or his Ark back but this, and shall we
not take this course? It Is true its a doubtful and dangerous case, we are not
certain he will return, but yet there is a May-be, a who can tell in it: We are
sure, running from him, and sinning against him, with an hard-heart, will
undoubtedly rob us of him, and ruin us, but we have lost more labor to less
purpose, therefore let us turn to the Lord, with all our heart, with fasting,
with weeping and with mourning, etc. Joel 2.12, 13. and then say, as Gods
directs them, v. 14. Who knows if he will return and repent, and leave a
blessing behind him, even a meat offering and a drink offering unto the Lord
our God? Oh how well does God take such a carriage! How willing is he to return
back to us! Only he expects we should be sensible of his withdrawing, and
bitterly lament after him.

8. If we do not lay to heart the loss of God's Presence and Ordinances, God
will make us to lament upon other accounts: If he design us good, he will pinch
us till we feel, and cry out, if not, we shall be left to lament hopeless, and
helpless in Hell torments. If we will not lay to heart spiritual Judgments, God
threatens to send a Curse upon us, and to curse our blessings, Mal. 2.2. How?
why, if men prize not their Temple Privileges, God can blast the fruits of the
Earth, Hag. 1.9. We looked for much, and lo it came to little, and when ye
brought it home, I did blow upon it [or blow it away;] why? says the Lord of
Hosts; because of mine house that is waste, and ye run every man to his own
house. Self-seeking here is self-undoing: Men ruin themselves by neglecting
God's Interest: Lam. 1.3.
If men will not lament the Ark's Captivity, God will make Judah go into
Captivity. If men lay not to heart the mourning ways of Zion, Lam. 1 4, 6.
God has a way to make them go without strength before the pursuer. Men can
well dispense with the loss of the pleasant things of the Sanctuary, Lam. 1.7,
10, 11.
it shall be tried how they will resent the loss of their temporal pleasant
Enjoyments. If men lament not the Gates of Zion, the Gates of the City shall
lament and mourn, Isa. 3.26.
and being desolate, shall sit upon the ground. 2 Chronicles. 36.21.
If professing People lay not to heart sad and silent Sabbaths, God may make
the Land to keep her Sabbaths. Isa. 5.9.
Great and fair Houses must be desolate without Inhabitant, because God's House
is desolate, and none regards. God can tell how to meet with the selfish,
heedless persons: If they regard not God's Interest, God will care as little
for theirs. See Micah 2.4, 5.
He can tell how to come near you in matters of sense, that can make nothing of
what concerns your Souls. And Ordinances of God will then be good, when
sickness, pain, poverty, death arrest you: Or these spiritual things will be
good when out of your reach, and you shut up in the Prison of Hell, where there
is weeping, wailing, and gnashing of teeth, Psalm. 141.6. When their Judges are
overthrown in stony places, they shall hear my words, for they are sweet. When
that sad Plague of Sweating Sickness was here in England, how much were proud
Nobles in seeming love with faithful Ministers? how glad were they of advice
from them? then Ordinances were of more worth than purses full of gold. God can
make his Ministers to be prized by the prophanest Scorners; yea, he knows how
to make a wounding Sword to make way through their bleeding sides, for
instructions to enter the most flinty hearts, as Bernard told his ranting
Brother.

9. How long must the Lord wait for your sensible lamentings? we are soon weary
of the yoke, and think it long to wander in the wilderness: Sometimes we are
for returning back into Egypt, Numb. 14.4. with v. 40.
and then all in post-hast for Canaan, as Israel in the Desert. The captive
exile hasteneth that he may be loosed, Isa. 51.14.
that he should not die in the Pit; but then we would break Prison, and are
loath to take God's way, or stay God's time; this retards us rather than
quickens our deliverance. God puts us to our [how longs] because we put him to
his [how longs.] How long shall thy vain thoughts lodge within thee? Jer. 4.14.
How long will it be ere you attain to innocence? Oh Jerusalem! Hos. 8.5.
will thou not be made clean? Jer. 13.27.
when shall it once be? We were in post-hast for a Restitution many years ago,
as Moses for Miriam; Heal her now, O God, I beseech thee. God says, Numb.
12.13, 14.
If her Father had but spit in her face, should she not be ashamed seven days?
But our heavenly Father has spit in our face in the open sight of the world,
and we have been shut out of his house well near three times seven years; yet
alas, it is to be feared we are not Evangelically ashamed. 2 Samuel 13.38.14.28.
Absalom was three years at Geshur, and two years at Jerusalem, and saw not the
King's face; and pretended dissatisfaction therewith. Oh! but where is our real
longing to enjoy the Lord in his Ordinances? Alas! it is not length of time that
will put our hearts into frame. When at last will God raise up some awakening
Samuel, that shall sound the Alarm in the Ears of all Israel? Oh! when shall
we awake out of our long sleep? when shall we see our need of God in his
Ordinances? when shall our Souls lament after God to purpose? Surely it is time
to bestir our selves once at last.

10. Can we lament to any else that will or can hear or help us? May not Kings
or great ones say as that King once to that crying Woman, that said, Help my
Lord, 2 King. 6.26, 27.
O King; he said, If the Lord do not help thee, whence shall I help thee? Alas!
we may say, Truly in vain is Salvation hoped for from the Hills, and from the
multitude of Mountains. Truly in the Lord our God is the Salvation of Israel,
Jer. 3.23. The greatest Princes are not to be trusted in. God thinks fit to
frustrate our expectations from men; to confute our carnal confidence in man.
Surely men of low degree are vanity (if they have a mind to help they cannot)
and men of high degree are a lie (if they can help; yea, if they promise to
help, they will not) our best course then is to pour out our hearts before him,
and say, God is a refuge for us, Selah, Psalm. 62.8, 9. For all Power is God's,
v. 11. We may say as David, I looked on my right hand, and beheld, but there
was no man that would know me; refuge failed me; no man cared for my Soul; I
cried unto thee, O Lord, Psalm. 142.4, 5. The Comforter that should relieve our
Souls is far away. There Is none to guide poor Zion, of all the Sons whom she
has brought forth; neither is there any that takes her by the hand of all the
Sons that she has brought up, Isa. 51.18. As for us, Lam. 4.17.
our Eyes as yet failed for our vain help; in our watching, we have watched for
a Nation that could not save us. We are as Napthali, and have been struggling
as sore for a Masculine Parliament, as the Ancient Primitive Church long
traveled for a Man-child, a Christian Emperor; we had one; they also
struggled for uniting the Protestant Subjects, and alleviating our grievances;
they were broken off by breaking up: We had a second which set themselves to
help us; but the Children were come to the birth, and there was no strength to
bring forth; all Attempts proved abortive, since our Moses and Aaron (by Votes
or Disputes) have represented our case, sought favor, and used means of help,
our Bricks are doubled, Spirits are more enraged, and our savor is abhorred,
and a keener Sword is put into some men's hands to execute the Law with more
severity; and is it not time to have recourse to God? We are not permitted so
much as to petition to men, and make a true representation of our case; that
way is barred, and all other doors are locked up; what else can we do but lament
after the Lord; he is able to help, he is willing, and has promised. Oh! let us
go to our God. There and there only we may ease our hearts, and find help: let
us lift up our Eyes above the Hills, from whence comes our help; Our help
comes from the Lord which made Heaven and Earth, Psalm. 121.2.

2. Head is, Who are the Persons, People, that are to lament after the Lord?

I answer 1. Graceless persons, these have the greatest reason to lament after
the Ordinances of God, and the God of Ordinances; For alas, these poor Souls
are without Christ, being Aliens from the common wealth of Israel, strangers
from the covenants of promise, having no hope, and without God in the world,
Ephesians. 2.12. Ah poor sinners what will become of you if you live and dye without
God? You had better be without money, trades, credit, ease, house relations,
clothes, meat, every thing all things in the world, then without God, what will
your lives or any thing advantage you without God? Alas! have you lived thus
long in the world without an interest in God! How know you but death is at the
next door? And what will you do in the day of visitation, and in the desolation
that shall come from far? To whom will ye flee for help, and where will ye
leave your glory? Isai. 10.3, 4. Without me says God they shall bow down under
the prisoners 'and they shall fall under the slain: Woe to you, if death the
King of terrors meet you, and God the King of heaven be not on your side: What
a woeful case was Saul in when the Philistines were upon him and God was departed
from him? Oh when sickness, diseases, 1 Samuel 28.15.
death, thy own conscience make war against thee, and thou have no God to flee
to what a sad case will thou be in? Alas friends, estate, honors or all that
the world can do for thee will be insignificant: If thou live and dye without
God, thou must be for ever banished from him: And how can thou in an ordinary
way expect to have relation to God without the means of his appointment for
obtaining that end? The Ark of the convenant is the way of convenanting: Romans
10.14.
the preaching of the Gospel is the door of faith, saving faith (by which the
Soul is entitled to God) comes by hearing, 2 Cor. 4.3.
and if our Gospel be hid it is hid to them that are lost: Little reason have
the mad-frantick world, to rejoice over the slain witnesses, to make merry,
Rev. 11.10.
and send gifts one to another because these Prophets tormented them, i. e.
would not let them go quietly to Hell, but would be jogging them out of their
security, and summoning them to repentance. No, no, their departure, may be
like Ezekiel's book, Ezekiel. 2.10.
written within and without with lamentation and mourning and woe: Ezekiel. 3.26.
Ah poor Soul! God seems to stop Ministers mouths, and says, thou shall not be
to him a reprover, Genesis 6.3.
my Spirit shall strive no more with them, feed them no more; Zech. 11.9.
that that dies, let it dye, and that that is to be cut off, let it be cut
off, q. d. I will concern my self no further about them, they regarded not my
Counsels, and slept away the day of grace and refused the calls of God, now
they shall be given up, as a branch cut off from the Tree, I Will prune it no
more, but take it away and lay it under that Gospel-curse, Never fruit grow on
thee from henceforth for ever. Joh. 15.2.
Or like the flourishing vineyard of the Jewish Church, Take away the hedge
thereof, Isa. 55.9.
break down the stone wall, lay it wast, it shall not be pruned, nor dug,
but there shall come up briars and thorns, I will also command the Clouds that
they rain no rain upon it. And have men cause to rejoice in this? Is it not
rather, ground of the greatest lamentatation, as a prologue, and pledge of
damnation, and a token of rejection? Will any but Mad men rejoice at the
approach of calamity, upon themselves? Or will any but frantic Bedlams triumph
that those are gone that stopped them from running into a pit, fire, or that kept
them from dashing out their own Brains? We think those young men fools that are
glad their parents are dead that restrained their vicious courses. If carnal
men's eyes were open to know the advantages of a powerful Ministry, or pure
Ordinances, they would lay it to heart as the dreadfullest evil that ever befell
them, and lament after the Lord with bitter cries for the return of the Means of
Grace; And say, O Lord, is light gone, and my Soul left still in darkness? is
life gone, and I dead still? Are means of Salvation departed, and my Soul left
under a necessity of perishing? Many tears did Ministers shed for me: Oh what
prayers to God! what beseechings of me to be reconciled to God! But I regarded
not; Woe is me, these ambassadors of peace are called home, or have their
mouths stopped, what can I now expect but a Proclamation of war! Lord have mercy
on me, and send those men of God to knock again at my door, and I hope I shall
give them and their message better entertainment. Thus carnal Persons should
say; But alas such as most need, do often least regard these things, God knows,
and after twenty years lying in the grave we may fear they will not still
believe, tho we should arise from the dead; And if after all this, there be
little or no hopes of these laying this matter to heart I will turn me to
another sort.

2. Ye gracious Souls, lament you after the Lord, though Israel play the harlot
yet let not Judah offend; Though wicked men will not understand nor lay any
thing to heart, yet let Gods People, his Children lay to their hearts the
displeasure of God and with bitter cries lament after their departing father:
Oh that it could be said in this case as Gods own testimony is, Hos. 11.12.
Ephraim compasses me about with lies (pretending to worship God, when they
intend nothing less) And the house of Israel with deceit, cheating men,
thinking to deceive God, himself) but Judah yet rules with God, ( i. e. keeps
up his interest at the throne of grace and prevails with me) and is faithful
with the Saints (in point of communion and repute, or with the most holy: Marg.
Oh blessed Judah! but does not Gods Judah need stirring up to lament after the
Lord! Alas! how senseless, and slack are the best hearts in this work! Who
would have once imagined that such a Spirit of worldliness, security neutrality
would have seized on Gods own Children? Ah friends! Can you let God depart
either from your spirits or from the Assemblies of his People and not stir up
your selves to take hold of him? Who would have thought that God himself or the
tokens of his presence should go from you without weeping eyes, or mournful
complaints? Who must hold him if you will not? Who must fetch him back if you
will not follow him, and call after him: You that have interest in him: You
that have given up your selves to him: You that have had sweet experience of
his presence; And now pretend more love to him than any else; You that he has
drawn with cords of Love, will not you lament after him? Have not you some
reason to say, as she Hos. 2.7. I will go, and return to my first husband, for
then it was better with me then now, Especially considering how he has hedged
your way with hewn thorns, disappointed you in your overtaking your other
lovers: have not your Souls grown lean, and ready to famish in other ways?
Have you not in all this time discerned some difference betwixt the pure and
wholesome waters of the Sanctuary, and the impure puddle-water of men's
Traditions? Yea, have you not to your cost discerned some difference by your
dearbought experience betwixt the powerful Ordinances, and the very same or
like thereto formally, heartlesly, lifelesly carried on? Tell me, deal
ingenuously and heartily in the case; Have not your Souls been ready to pine
for want of provision? Yea, have you not been tempted to loath some dishes
handed to you by blind or Slovenly Cooks? Have you not been in danger to be
rockt asleep by such Truths as should have awakt you, and would, if faithfully
managed? Have you not been forced to eat that which some have trodden under
their feet, Ezekiel. 34.19.
and to drink that which some men have fouled with their feet? Alas, Sirs!
Whatever others have, have not you some reason to lament with holy David, Oh
God thou art my God, Psalm. 63.1, 2.
early will I seek thee: My Soul thirsts for thee, my flesh longs for thee
in a dry and thirsty land, where no water is, to see thy power and thy glory so
as I have seen thee in the Sanctuary: Oh my Lord, time has been that my Soul
has been satisfied as with marrow and fatness, and my doubts resolved, graces
quickened, lusts discovered, weakened in thine Ordinances, so that I could
truly say in my own experience, God was in them of a truth: But alas for this
long time matters have been otherwise, I have attended (as I judged) in
obedience to thy command, and have sometimes met with aerie notions or sapless
stuff, or mixture of errors, or such complementing with God in a dry
formality, that methinks my soul is dried with this light food; I have reason
to lay the blame upon my self, and charge my own unprofitable heart as the
proper cause, but Oh my Lord, I long for an heart-Searching,
state-distinguishing, sinrebuking word, Oh when shall my Soul enjoy
heart-melting Ordinances! Thou that adaptest means to the end, and do use to
work conversion, consolation, confirmation, by most proper probable
instruments, give suitable means of grace, and grace by the means; Oh Lord,
revive thy work in the midst of the years, Hab. 3.2.
in the midst of the years make known, in wrath remember mercy: Let all thy
Children say, Amen.

3. You that are young, of the rising Generation, that are coming up, and
coming on, in the rooms of your Ancestors, it becomes you to lament after the
Lord and his Ark; be it known to you, that your Predecessors Piety will not be
your Sanctuary or Security. You may please your selves with being the Children
of the Church, but think not to say within your selves, Mat. 3.9.
We have Abraham to our Father; for God is not bound to you; Joh. 8.44. Luke
16.25.
you may be Children of the Devil, and may be cast into Hell under that title:
No, no, you must have a Faith of your own, a personal, as well as a foederal
relation to God. It Is disputed at what Age Children are to stand on their own
legs for personal Faith, at five, or seven, or ten, or twelve; to be sure, at
years of discretion, when they can discern betwixt good and evil, they are to
choose for themselves, and are not to stand upon heir Parents bottom any longer,
however they may improve their Parents Covenant. But, oh you young persons!
begin betimes to cry after your Father: God loves to be followed (as with the
Hosanna's once, so) with the small voice, and to be held with the little hands
of young Children: Try what you can do with him; say not, you need him not, you
cannot set up without him, you cannot live safely without him; and I am sure
you are undone if you die without relation to him, and you may die young. Oh
then make sure of God, you are cast upon him from the womb; say to him, Thou
art my God from my Mothers belly, Psalm. 22.10. v. 30.
so shall you be a seed to serve him, and shall be accounted to the Lord for a
generation. What an advantage will it be when your Father and Mother forsake
you, Psalm. 27.10.
(by unkindness or death) if you have a God to take you up. Psalm. 71.7, 9, 17,
18.
If God has been your trust from your youth, he will not cast you off in old
Age: But if you run away from God, all your younger days, with what confidence
can you lament after him in old Age? May he not say, Go to the gods and lusts
which you have served, gratified? you come but to me for a reserve, with
self ends, and because you can follow your sensual pleasures no longer; I
should never have had your company, if you had been capable still to have made
as good a bargain of the World as you are wont: You followed your lusts with a
young and swift foot, but me you can but follow with a slow, Snails-pace; a
little of this lamenting more early, had been more acceptable: It Is an hard
venture (if you now go laughing in the Devil's ways) whether you will be cordial
in lamenting after God in Old Age, and so whether the Lord will entertain you:
And as you would enjoy God, lament after the Ordinances of God. Thy
Testimonies, says David, have I taken as an heritage for ever. O blessed
Heritage! Oh precious Patrimony! beg it, plead it, be not content without it.
Whatever other Inheritance you have, say, Psalm. 44.13.
Lord, mine Ears have heard, our Fathers have told us, what work thou did in
their days, in the times of Old. What Providence were produced to settle
Ordinances? What excellent, powerful, heart-warming Preaching they had; how God
wrought wonders on Consciences by his Word and Spirit; what pure Worship they
had, Communion of Saints, wholesome Discipline, and what sweet intercourse with
thy self in all; now Lord, thou have threatened, in part executed this Spiritual
Plague of the Famine of thy Word, obstructing and obscuring Ordinances, and thy
hand is still upon us; thy end is not attained: Papists threaten to darken our
Heaven, and totally to put out our Lights, and thy self seems to menace the
removing of the Candlestick; stop, O Lord! execute not thy whole displeasure.
Alas! shall we be that cursed Generation that must again be involved in worse
than Egyptian darkness? Alas! who shall live when God does this? God forbid
that we should outlive this bright Sunshine of the Gospel, that we should not
be Heirs of our Fathers spiritual Privileges, as well as earthly Patrimonies.
Oh! when these are lost, we must sadly sigh and say, What have our Forefathers
been doing that they have deprived us of the Means of our Souls good? Must they
and we meet in Hell? they for non-improvement, we for non-enjoyment? Woe is us!
cursed Children, of cursed Parents! Lord, if we have not peace, or plenty, let
us have the Gospel of Peace and true Piety; the Gospel of Grace, and Grace by
the Gospel, and then we shall say, Psalm. 16.6.
The Lines are fallen to us in pleasant places, we have a goodly Heritage.

4. Aged persons, and householders; you that are Parents have reason to lament
after the Lord of the Ark, and the Ark of the Lord, that the Waters of the
Sanctuary may run both with a clear and strong stream to your Families and
Posterity. Alas! we that have Children, have been Instruments to propagate
filth, and guilt, and wrath to our Offspring, and what can we do to heal and
help them? But if the Lord would be our God, he has promised to be the God of
our Seed. God forbid we should intail a Curse on our Posterity, and give them
occasion to curse us to all eternity. What unworthy Parents are those that have
fair Estates left them, and by their Prodigality leave their Children Beggars
or Bankrupts! But oh! how sad would this be to deprive our Posterity of this
Gospel-Legacy? it will be both their loss, and our own. Lord, suffer us not to
go off the Stage in a snuff, and leave such a stink behind us: Better we had
never been born, than to fry and blaze in Hell flames, we and our poor Children
bundled up in Faggots together. God thinks good to bind up Parents and their
Seed in the Bond of the Covenant. Oh Lord! we are resolved to follow after thee
for the sure mercies of David: Be thou our God, and we shall have better hopes
for our Seed. O remember that word, Isa. 59.21. As for me, this is my Covenant
with them, says the Lord, my Spirit that is upon thee, and my words which I
have put in thy mouth shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth
of thy Seed, nor out of the mouth of thy Seeds Seed, says the Lord, from
henceforth and forever. This word is full and satisfying: 1. Thy Spirit shall
be upon me and mine in Sanctification. 2. Thy words in my mouth, and Childrens
mouths in profession, solemn Worship. 3. They shall not depart from my Seeds
Seed to many Generations. 4. No, not for ever. 5. God, even Jehovah undertakes
this. 6. It Is through Christ the Redeemer that is come to Sion. 7. It Is a new
Covenant-mercy. 8. It does concern all Converts, and such as turn from
transgression in Jacob; and am not I one of these? My dear Lord, make thou this
word good to me and mine, thou that live for ever and ever. I shall live in
my Posterity, when I shall be here no more, let the Gospel-message survive me,
and the Gospel Grace live in them when I am gone. Oh! cut not off thy kindness
from my Seed; let not them that follow me be deprived of that which I have
found so much sweetness in. Genesis 17.18.
O that Ishmaels may live in thy sight! What will become of such as are born in
sin, if they want means of Conviction and Conversion? There Is much ado to awake
the sleepy Consciences of our dead Posterity under quickening Ordinances. Oh!
what then will become of these, when such helps are gone? How can I endure to
see or foresee the destruction of my own bowels? Oh! it cuts me to the heart to
think of the damning of any, much more my own flesh. Lord prevent; I will pray
in hope, live in hope, die in hopes of the continuance of Gospel-Priviledges.

5. Ministers must make it their work to lament after the Lord; You, you are
the Persons mainly concerned; You must sound an alarm, to awake others; you
are appointed by the Lord as Instruments to carry on this work; and if ever God
do return, he will excite his Servants to quicken themselves and others to this
work, as Samuel here; Gird your selves and lament, Joel 1.13.
ye Priests, howl, ye Ministers of the Altar, come lie all night in sackcloth
ye Ministers of my God. Yea let the Priests, the Ministers of the Lord, Joel
2.17.
weep between the Porch and the Altar, and let them say, Spare thy People, O
Lord, and give not thine heritage to reproach, that the heathen should rule
over them, wherefore should they say among the People, Where is their God? Alas
my brethren! have you been so long cast out of Gods public Work and Worship,
even twenty long years, and have you not yet leavned to lament? Josh. 6.8.
shall our Master cashie us his service, and not judge us worthy to blow our
triumpets of Rams horns, break a pitcher, or hold the lamps for him? Surely he
is very sore provoked, shall I say, three Shepherds he cut off in one month;
Zech. 11.8.
nay near three thousand in one day. And has drawn out his wrath a great
length, and is there no fault in us? Yes, certainly our Father would not have
spit in our face, or poured contempt upon us, upon us peculiarly, but he has
found great fault in us; he has doubtless seen much amiss in us: He does not
use to single out a sort of men to shoot his arrows at, without fault; we
cannot excuse instruments, but certainly we have deserved all this at God's
hands; is not God punishing Eli's house for the iniquity he knows of? Let us
my Brethren, 1 Samuel 3.
deal faithfully and impartially with our selves before God and the world, cast
the first stone at our selves, at last justify the Lord by taking shame to our
selves. Has God set us in this office only to tell others of their faults?
Have we not reason to call to remembrance our own faults this day? I hope such
as are truly gracious have made this reflection many times; Nor is this my
present work to rake in this dirty Channel; only it becomes us to enquire why
God has made us contemptible and base before all the People, Mal. 2.1 -- 9. My
present work is to quicken our lamenting after the Lord, that if it be possible
we may fetch him again. I may say as Mal. 1.9. And now, I pray you, beseech God
that he will be gracious unto us. This has been by your means. O it is well if
our People have not reason to say so of their Ministers (how beit sincere
Repentance will not make men throw it off themselves by laying it on others)
but we may sadly echo, Yes, yes, it has been by our means, we have put out
our Candles, by the Thief we have lodged therein; We having obscured our glory
by sinning; We have robbed our People of the Ark, and exposed them to Seduction
and destruction by the abominations that have been found amongst us. Let us
fall close to our work of Preaching, reforming, praying, calling God again; who
knows but if we mourn to our People but they may lament? Mat. 11.17.
Our watery eyes may affect Peoples hard hearts; If the Fishers mourn and such
as cast angles into brooks lament, Isa. 19.8.
our People will be moved, and God will hear our universal cry, and awake for
us. Some will needs have our wearing black to import our mourning; If so, let
us not be Hypocrites, but lament indeed, not in show. Some observe, that People
are much formed after the preaching, examples, dispositions of their Teachers;
But it is to be feared they will sooner dance after our wanton Pipes, then mourn
after our pious Elegies: But God forbid the blame or blemish should proceed
from us: However for Zion's sake let us not hold our peace and for Jerusalems
sake let us not rest until the righteousness thereof go forth as brightness,
and the Salvation thereof as a Lamp that burns, Isai. 62.1. For God says,
ver. 6.7. I have set watchmen upon thy walls, Oh Jerusalem which shall never
hold their peace, day nor night; Ye that make mention of the Lord, keep not
silence and give him no rest, till he establish and till he make Jerusalem a
praise in the earth:

6. Magistrates, supreme and subordinate, must lament after the Lord. It Is not
a work below them, though they may think it a work above us to mind them of it;
but mean persons have been Monitors to mighty Princes. An inconsiderable Page
rouzeth up Philip King of Macedon with this Alarm; Remember, Sir, you are a
man. Daniel's Counsel was seasonable (he wishes it may be acceptable) to the
Babylonian Monarch, to break off his sins by righteousness, and his iniquities
by showing mercy to the poor, if it might be a lengthening of his tranquillity,
Dan 4.27. God gives Jeremiah a Commission, to say to the King, and to the
Queen, Jer. 13.18.
Humble your selves; sit down. It Is not unbecoming the greatest Princes to
adore at the Footstool of the King of Kings. It Is prophesied of the
GospelChurch, that Kings shall be her Nursing Fathers, and Queens her Nursing
Mothers, Isa. 49.23. Yea, says the Lord, They shall bow down to thee with
their faces toward the Earth, etc. Which is to be understood not in a literal,
Popish sense, of a civil subjection of their Power to the proud Usurpations of
that Man of Rome, but a voluntary resignation of all to the great Jehovah, and
our blessed Jesus; an undervaluing their earthly Honors in comparison of
spiritual Privileges; as Constantine the Great, and Theodosius, who professed
he would rather be a Member of Christ, than Head of the Empire. It Is not below
Majesty on Earth to lament after the God of Heaven. David, Asa, Jehosaphat, and
Hezekiah followed the Lord with cares and prayers, fears and tears, and how
does God approve and applaud that tenderhearted Josiah, 2 Chronicles. 34.27, 28.
Because thine heart was tender, and thou did humble thy self before God, when
thou heardest his words against this place, and against the Inhabitants
thereof, and humbledst thy self before me, and did rend thy clothes, and weep
before me (mark the outward tokens of inward sorrow) I have even heard thee
also, says the Lord. 2 Chronicles. 33.11, 12.
And when Josiah's Grandfather, Manasses, was unruly, God took a course to
humble him, and set him a following God by hearty prayer, and great
humiliations: But when his Father Ammon, 2 Chronicles. 33.23, 24. c. 36.12, 13.
and his Son Zedekiah did not walk in these mournful steps of penitent
lamentings after the Lord, God took another course with them, and cut them off.
Yea, God has brought Heathen Kings upon their knees, to lament after God in
the best manner they could; as the King of Nineveh, Jonah 3.5, 6. and God took
it well, v. 10. Yea, this outward humiliation prevented Ahab's temporal
destruction, 1 King. 21.27, 29. And when God threatened Rehoboam by Shishak's
Invasion, and Shemaiah's Commination, the Princes of Israel, and the King
humbled themselves, and said, The Lord is righteous 2 Chronicles. 12.6, 7. And God
says, I will not destroy them, but grant them some deliverance, or for a
little while. Much more if Princes and Nobles be sincere in humiliations for
sin, and lamentations after the Lord, and universal Reformations: Oh what mercy
does the Lord reserve for such! Thus in the days of Ezra, Nehemiah, and
Esther: The Instances are numerous and pregnant. Oh that God would stir up the
hearts of the Governors of his People, to say, Surely we and our People have
provoked the Lord against us. Yea, it is well if our hands have not been chief
in the trespass. Oh that, as we have been exemplary in sinning, we might be
exemplary in our repentings; as we have driven God from us and our People, so
we might be the first to fetch him back again. God forbid that we should say
with Pharaoh, Who is the Lord? or refuse to let the Servants of the Lord to go
and serve him according to Scripture-Rules, though they may differ from us in
some modes of Worship. Yes, Zech. 12.3.
it is fit the Governors of Judah should say in their hearts, The Inhabitants
of Jerusalem shall be my strength in the Lord of Hosts their God. These, 2
King. 13.14.
these are the Chariots and Horsemen of Israel, as once a King said of a
Prophet. God forbid we should arm or animate some Protestants against their
Brethren, while Papists are putting us on, and warming themselves by the fire
of their own kindling; and when they spy their opportunity, will snatch up both
the Cocks they have set a fighting, and writhe off their Necks, and feast on
them. Let Us rather improve our utmost Interest to make them Friends, and
bespeak their joynt-prayers for us. And since we need the Lord, and his
Appointments as well as others, as much as the meanest of our Subjects, let us
also follow the Lord with bitter cries and lamentations: The Princes dug the
Well, Numb. 21.17, 18.
the Nobles of the People dug it, by the direction of the Lawgiver with
their Staves. Why may not we also work hard in these Sacred Wells of
Ordinances? and then cry out, Spring up, O Well! And then also put on others,
saying, Sing ye unto it? May we also pass through this Valley of Bacah (or
weeping) and make a Well? Psalm. 84.6.
The Rain also fills the Pools; [ Benedictionibus amicietur Doctor] or
Teachers shall be clothed with blessings. And so this Valley of Bacah, will be
a Valley of Berachah, our speaking comfortably to those laborious Levites that
teach the good knowledge of the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 30.22.
will reach their hearts, and so we shall bring upon our selves the blessing of
them that were ready to perish: Yea, may call them up hither into public
Worship, and send them to the People in the fullness of the blessing of the
Gospel of Peace. We, even we have need of Ordinances as well as others; we have
ignorant minds, stubborn wills, strong lusts, violent temptations; Neh. 3.5.
and of all sorts of persons, Nobles are most unwilling to put their Necks to
the work of the Lord. We have greater hindrances in the way to Heaven, and
therefore need better helps than others. Oh! let it never be said of us, that
when the poor are but ignorant Souls, foolish, Jer. 5.4, 5.
and know not the way of the Lord, that we, the Great men, Noblemen and
Gentlemen, that know much indeed, but do less for God, nay more against him,
that we should altogether break the Yoke, and burst the Bonds: Our Interest is
greater, and Influence more upon others, therefore our sin of neglect will be
greater, and Account heavier. Lord, let us have Means of Grace, and Grace by
Means: Be thou our Portion in this, and another World, or of all men we shall
be most miserable; our loss will be more dreadful, our torments more
intolerable; as we read of one of our own degree in Sacred Writ, that in this
World was clothed in Purple, and fine Linen, Luke 16.19, 23, 24.
and fared sumptuously every day, but in the other World was found in Hell, and
being in torments, was denied one drop of Water to cool his Tongue. Oh Lord!
suffer us not to riot and rant it here, and be cast out from thy presence
hereafter; but let us lament after thee now, that we may everlastingly enjoy
thee.

7. Let Christian Churches, Congregations and Societies lament after the Lord.
Our dearest Lord seems to depart from these: Oh that once at last we could
discern the sad Symptoms of his Removal! This is the case in the Text, 1 Samuel
7.5. Gather all Israel to Mizpeh, v. 6. and they gathered together to Mizpeh,
and drew water, and poured it out before the Lord, and fasted on that day --
Why they met in Mizpeh, Vid. Poli Syn. Crit. in loc.
whether because Samuel judged Israel there, or it had an Altar or place of
Prayer, I shall not dispute: Or what this drawing out Water was, whether it was
the Water of Trial, or a Ceremony used at such Solemnities, or Water of
penitential tears, which is most likely: These tears running from their Eyes,
betokened and accompanied their affected and affectionate hearts running after
the Lord; one while mourning for the sins that banished him; another laying to
heart their loss of him, and with a greedy eager heart breathing in prayers
after him: This was their practice, Judge. 2.1 -- 5. Where an Angel of the Lord
does 1. Reckon up God's kindnesses to them; 2. Their duty to God; 3. Their ill
requital of God by disobedience; 4. God's displeasure against them; upon which
the People lift up their voice and wept; and so great was that weeping, that
the place received its title from it; they called the name of that place
Bochim, i. e. Weepers; they were baptized in their own tears: Oh! cried they,
one to another, Brother, Neighbor, do not you hear these heavy Tidings? God is
angry; the Almighty commenceth a Suit against us; he has sent a Summons to us,
drawn up an Indictment against us; who is able to contend with him? We are
conscious to our selves that we are guilty, deeply guilty; we deserve to be
forsaken of God, for we have forsaken him: Thus they looked at one another with
grieved hearts, seeing others weep, they fell a weeping, and cried bitterly
with an harmonious outcry, Lord come, come again, leave us not into the hands
of these cursed Canaanites, who bear a mortal grudg against us; a bitter and
hasty Nation, a People cruel and skilful to destroy. Another Instance you have
in Exodus 33.1 -- 6. where God chides them, seems to disown them, as if they
were not his People, but Moses's; tells them, he will send an Angel, but he
will not go with them, for they are a stiff-necked People. The Text says, When
the People heard these evil Tidings, they mourned, no man put on him his
Ornaments. Alas! alas! say they, does God take his leave? will he depart, and
not go with us, but substitute an Angel in his room? What can an Angel do? Can
an Angel bear our manners, forgive our sins, and supply our wants? No, no, all
the Angels in Heaven cannot do that for us that we need: An Angel of the Lord
may do much in opposing and destroying our enemies, defending us, but we are
conscious to our selves that we are a rebellious People, have a stiff Neck that
none can break or bow but God; and though it is a fearful thing to fall into the
hands of a sin-revenging Judge, yet there is some encouragement if we have in
the midst of us a covenanted God, yet, yet we have hopes thou will be a
tenderhearted Father. Exodus 32.25.
Lord, we follow thee naked, quite stripped of any Aid but thine; our late guilt
has made us naked as to defense, and we make our selves naked as to Ornaments,
and have no manner of excuse for our wicked act; Whip us, O Lord, upon the
bare, but forsake us not. We broke off our Earrings to make a golden Calf, now
we put off the rest of our garments, as not worthy of one ragg, and forfeiting
all our mercies: However, our fine Attire shall go, we will strip our selves in
an holy revenge, that having put off our cloths, we may follow the faster after
thee with sighs and tears. Oh that we could also put off our sins with our
garments, and so put on the Lord Jesus.

But this is that I urge, that Christians in their Societies and Assemblies do
unanimously, socially join together to lament after the Lord. God is greatly to
be feared in the assembly of the Saints, and to be had in reverence of all them
that are about him, Psalm. 89.7. Let Christians provoke one another to this love
of God: Let them bring spurs to quicken; Yea let them shore up one another by
mutual Supports in this holy pursuit of God, with prayers and tears, as Iron
sharpens Iron, so let us sharpen one another, taking each other by the hand;
Zech. 3.10.
Let us every one call his neighbor under the vine and under the Fig Tree;
Joh. 3.45, 48.
As Philip found Nathaniel under the Fig Tree and tells him the joyful tidings
of Messiah; Let Persons in the same family get together in Gods solemn Worship,
and lament after the Lord; Husbands apart, and Wives apart; Zech. 12.12.
Children a part, and Servants apart, and sometimes all together; let families
and neighbor houses get together, and humble themselves and say, Come
neighbors, God is gone or going, let us lift up our voices, hands and hearts
together to fetch him back: Alas! We have conversed about our Farms, Oxen,
Sheep, Trades together, shall we not at last begin to converse with each other
as Christians? We have drunk shots feasted, played, been sinfully merry
together, and by our sins banished God, and shall we find no time to mourn for
our sins and lament after the Lord together? Let Villages, Towns, and Cities
gather into assemblies, and Christian Societies, and do as those Zech. 8.21.
The inhabitants of one City shall go to another [not stay till they come to
them] saying [they are not dumb images, but lively monitors] let us go [ let us
Travel for it to the place of Gods Solemn Worship] speedily, [alas, we have put
off such exercises too long, till God be almost past calling back] to pray
before the Lord [not go to such a City, to buy and sell, and get gain] and to
seek the Lord of hosts. [Alas! We have lost him, him who is the God of Armies,
who arms our foes against us.] I will go also, [ i.e. I will put you upon no
other work then I will undertake my self; I will contribute my best assistance
to further this so good a design:] All this shows great zeal for God and
flaming charity to each others, as when men are converted, they will draw
others to God in his Worship, and give a lively example of it in practice.

Obj. But this practice is uncouth, this path is untrodden, few it use in the
place where we live, we shall be laughed to scorn for our labor. It Is Answered
ver. 22. Yea many People and strong Nations shall come to seek the Lord of
hosts in Jerusalem, and to pray before him. God will greatly multiply Converts
and so take off the scandal of paucity of Worshipers; it is not a few giddy
headed, factious Spirits, but it is Nations, many and strong, Nations rich and
potent. Gentile Converts flock like Doves to the windows (not by compact and
frand, but) by peculiar operations of the Spirit in the Ministry of the Word,
People of Diverse languages, at great distance; The same Spirit acts in all
Gospelworshippers to flock to God in Ordinances; Yea warlike Nations, and
Islands afar off, unapproachable or invincible by men, shall be conquered by
the Gospel; as it is said of Britain [ Romany inacessa, Christo vero Subdita]
though the Romans could scarce come to it, yet our Lord Subdued it: You need
not fear want of Good company; Yea your zeal may provoke others; One forward
Christian in a place shall have companions in Gods work in due time; And how
do thou know but thou will find some spark of goodness in some of thy
neighbors that thy invitation may blow up, and draw forth? Try them by a
gentle call, and thou may find more of God in them than ever thou wast aware
of; possibly, bashfulness, sense of weakness, want of acquaintance with
Christians; Want of a call and opportunity have kept Some lights under a
Bushel, which if called out of their retirements and alittle snuffed, might
shine bright in the Church.

Obj. But alas, I am a person of weak gifts, cannot lament after the Lord in
any societies, can be of no use, but a burden!

Ans. Thou need help so much the more; Hence the Text says ver. 23. That
ten men shall take hold of the skirt of him that is a Jew; Like little Children
that are not able to go of themselves, afraid to fall, will get hold of the hem
of their Fathers garment, to hold them up from falling, and strengthen them to
walk more securely, or to direct him in a way that he has not known. Sincere
proselites will look after communion of Saints. The Apostle mentions fellowship
in the Gospel from the first day, Phil. 1.5. And there is great advantage by it,
for Solomon says, Two are better then one, Eccl. 4.9, 10, 11. Which he
Illustrates there in several cases, which I must not enlarge upon; But it is
certain, you may find great help in communion of Saints.

But how shall I know they are Saints, or fit to join with? I may be deceived
and misled into by-ways of error?

Ans. We have heard that God is with you, with his Apostles by strange signs,
gifts, miracles, holiness in conversation; What appearances of God for you, by
you, in you; You may safely join in with such as God thinks fit to own, and
communicate himself to; I am convinced from the bright beams of Gospel Light,
and from the powerful influences and convictions of the Spirit, that this is
indeed the way of God. I am therefore resolved to inquire after God in it, and
join with them that travel in it heavenwards: Thus much for the second head,
who are the Persons concerned in this work.

3. Another Head is the helps and furtherances in this lamenting after the
Lord. What course shall we take both to perform this duty aright, and to obtain
what we lament after, viz. either the God of Ordinances, or the Ordinances of
God?

Here I might repeat what was mentioned in the Explication, by way of
Instruction: As,

1. They were inclined after the Lord. It were well if poor Sinners would but
stop their vain career, stand still, pause upon it, bethink themselves, have a
tendency God-wards; this is the first step to Repentance. See Jer. 8.6.

2. Settled after the Lord. Oh that men were well resolved upon good grounds,
that their hearts were well fixed, inflamed, designed for God! as our Savior,
Luke 9.51.
that steadfastly set his face to go to Jerusalem, or as Paul, Acts 21.13.

3. Congregated, gathered, united together, to go hand in hand after the Lord,
Zeph. 2.1. Gather your selves together, yea gather together, O Nation not
desired! (...) colligite a (...) palea, i. e. contrahite vos, ne sitis siout
palea.
Gather your selves by mutual accommodation, and sincere repentance, to get
under the wing of God, as Chickens under the Hen, or (as the allusion in that
Text is) that ye be not as Chaff that is dissipated by the wind, v. 2. for
there is an affinity in the words; sincere Repentance unites to God and his
People.

4. Groaned, complained, bemoaned themselves after the Lord, as Israel, Jer.
31.18. I have surely heard Ephraim bemoaning himself: Oh that I should by my
sin forfeit God's presence, and for sin lose it! how miserable am I in this so
sad and astonishing loss!

5. They cried, called after the Lord, by earnest supplication, expostulation;
and it becomes a Child to follow his Mother with bitter out-crys to fetch her
back, Jer. 31.9. They shall come with weeping, and with supplications will I
lead them, Marg. with favors, (so the word (...)signifies from (...) misertus,
gratificatus, doluit) That Is the best Prayer that flows from love, and follows
God with grief and tears from an earnest good will to God, without outward
constraint, and slavish fear.

6. They betook themselves to the Lord by Faith, Repentance, Reformation. Oh
what efficacy is in this course! Judge. 10.13. God says, I will deliver you no
more, but bids them cry unto the gods whom they had chosen, v. 14. For they had
cried to the Lord, v. 10. and confessed sin, yet God seems peremptory in
denying aid then they reinforce their confession, and supplication, and withal
added Reformation, v. 6. They put away the strange gods from among them, and
served the Lord, and see the blessed effect, his Soul was grieved for the
misery of Israel; and he delivers them. No way like this.

7. They acquiesced in the Lord, were fully contented and satisfied with the
Lord, both as to the object of worship, and manner of worshipping: And oh for
such a frame as that! Isa. 26.13. O Lord our God, other Lords besides thee have
had dominion over us, but by thee only will we make mention of thy Name, i. e.
by thy Precepts, according to thy Institution will we worship thee; our fear
toward thee shall be no more taught by the Precepts of men; Isa. 29.13.
we will worship thee only in thy own way; and by thee i. e. in thy strength,
by the assistance of thy grace, thou alone shall be the Author and object of
our love, desire, pleasure and delight. Ashur shall not save us, we will not
ride upon Horses, neither will we say any more to the work of our hands, ye are
our Gods, for in thee the fatherless finds mercy, Hos. 14.3.

These are the Duties implied in the Text spread before you, required of us all
in this World, work of lamenting after the Lord.

But to help our hearts to, and in the due performance of these required
Duties, I shall propound some qualifications, as so many Directions to carry on
this work successfully.

1. See to your State and Principles; except you be related to God, you will not
lament after him, nor be much concerned about him, or his Ark, whether going or
coming. Relation is the foundation of Affection. A Child will cry after his own
Father. Now God is not our Father since the Fall, till Regeneration make a
real, and Adoption a relative change of our State; and when we have received
the Spirit of Adoption, then, never till then, shall we cry, Abba, Father, Romans
8.15. They only will cry after God that love him, fear him, honor him, as a
Father, with a filial Affection, and they only shall be entertained by him; as
for others, he owns their out-crys no more than the howlings of a Dog. Oh
therefore examine your State God-wards! Has Converting Grace under Ordinances
changed your hearts? Has the Spirit awakened your Consciences, convinced you
of your undone State by Nature, transformed you by the renewing of your Minds,
translated you out of darkness into light? deal faithfully with your Souls in
this case; you come into the World with your backs turned upon God, and you
will never lament after him without a turn: Yea naturally there is an enmity and
antipathy in our hearts to God and his ways. Has God crushed and conquered
that, and planted right Principles in you, to incline you to him? if yet you
find not a Divine Nature, a new Nature begot in you, flatter not your selves,
you will rather run farther from him, than lament after him. Let your Souls be
chiefly concerned for this first, then for the rest. Union precedes Communion:
A real Title is antecedent to laying Claim: A Principle of Grace is before an
actual exercise of it: There must be life, before there can be any desire of,
or nutrition by food. I have no hopes of prevailing with graceless Souls to
lament after God, till they have life and breath, voice and lungs, except
formally, for company, or for carnal ends, which is insignificant. Oh for
grace, truth of grace, and a reality of interest in Christ, and all the
Privileges he has purchased.

2. Inform your selves thoroughly of the terms we stand in with God. Consider
how the Lord carries toward us, as to our particular Souls, and the Nation in
general. We shall never lament after him till we see him withdrawn. Ignorance
of the State of things with us keeps Persons in senslesness. What the Eye of
(body or mind) sees not, is never laid to heart: Make some collections and
constructions of things at this day: Yea, make comparisons betwixt former and
present Times. What think you? Has not God manifested himself more in his
Providence for us, than of late? Have we not reason to take up the Church's
complaint, in Psalm. 44.1 -- 9. or to expostulate as Gideon, Judge. 6.13. Oh my
Lord! If the Lord be with us, why then is all this befallen us? and where be
all his Miracles which our Fathers told us of? I have told you how much
restraining grace is withdrawn from many; how rare Conversion is by Ordinances;
how much God has withdrawn both from the Societies and Spirits of his
Servants. I shall not trouble you with repetitions; look over these things,
compare them with what you see and observe, and if you find the Lord as
formerly, be thankful; if otherwise, be humbled, and lament after him. It Is to
be feared, that if you be observant discerning Christians, you will yet find out
more than hitherto has been mentioned, both demonstrations of God's remove,
and Prognostics of future removes. The most excellent and eminent Servants of
God plucked away by death from amongst us, and God says, They are taken away
from the evil to come, Isa. 57.1. The Spirit of Giddiness, Atheism and Idolatry
spreading at a strange rate, beyond all parallel. Other things I might mention,
but I leave them to your inquiry: Only there is one Text methinks is
astonishing, Zech. 11.8. Three Shepherds also I cut off in one month, and my
Soul loathed them, and their Soul also abhorred me. It Is one of the saddest
words in all the Bible. Whether they were good or bad Shepherds that were cut
off, it is dreadful that it has no better effect than mutual abhorrency. Oh
that this were not our case! We lie under woeful fruits of God's loathing us,
and it is well if men do not loath him. A Spirit of opposition to Godliness is
the sad fruit of Divine dereliction, which produces greater Spiritual and
Temporal Plagues. Hence he adds, v. 9. Then said I, I will not feed you, that
that dies, let it die, and that that is cut off, let it be cut off, and let
the rest eat every one the flesh of another. They shall have no Gospel-Pastors
to feed their Souls; that is a Spiritual Plague which fell on the Jews for
rejecting Christ. They shall devour one another with cursed rage and malice, as
in seditions, conspiracies, or in their necessity of food by the terrible
Famine. Thus the Jews were destroyed in Jerusalem's miserable Ruin. The like
Prognostics are upon us. Lord prevent the fame effects, and awake our hearts
to use God's appointed Means for prevention.

3. Make diligent inquiry into the Reason of our present and approaching
calamities. Is there not a cause? Surely affliction comes not forth of the
dust, neither does trouble spring out of the ground. Job 5.6.
Sin is the Mother and Nurse of sorrow. Is not God bringing our iniquities upon
us? Does not our own wickedness correct us, and our backsliding reprove us?
Does not this Rod say, Jer. 2.19.
Thy ways and thy doings have procured these things unto thee, this is thy
wickedness, because, it is bitter, because it reaches unto thine heart, or
Soul, Jer. 4.18. Let Ministers and People, lay their hand on their heart, and
search our Consciences and Conversations? Is it not I that shut out Ministers,
as the good Woman said, I broke my Ministers Leg; My pride, unteachableness,
unprofitablebleness, formality, neglect of duty, censurings and
uncharitableness, sensuality and worldliness, hypocrisy and lukewarmness, vain
glory and mindlesness of Gods glory and my Souls eternal good; these, these
made all the excluding, banishing, fining imprisoning Laws that ever came out
against God's Servants; These chiefly have broken all assemblies, scatterred
meetings, armed all the Officers, retarded our deliverance: By our sins are our
enemies strong, and the hands of our friends weak: Peccatis nostris fortes sunt
Barbari.
Alas! It Is my own iniquity that has brought us, low, set back a good work,
banished God, lift up the right hand of our enemies; Nor is it the Sins of
profane, but professors, Of the Rock that begat us we have been unmindful, and
forgotten God that formed us, Deuteronomy. 32.18, 19. Therefore, when the Lord saw it
be abhorred us, because of the provoking of his Sons and of his daughters, Oh
our wretched ingratitude, rebellion, covenant breaking, our sins have reached
to heaven; therefore our judgments are unparalled. We may say as Dan. 9.12.
Under the whole heaven has no: been done, as has been done upon us: It Is well
if we have not reason to add also ver. 13. That all this evil is come upon us,
yet made we not our prayer! [ Heb. entreated the face] before the Lord our God,
that we might turn from our iniquities and understand thy truth: It Is true, we
have prayed, but it is well if we have so prayed. Is not the accursed thing to
be found amongst us to this day? We have been long in the fire, but are we
cleansed? Alas, alas, May not that sad complaint and charge be brought in
against us, as in Jer. 6.28, 29, 30. They are grievous revolters, walking with
Slanders, brass and Iron, they are all corrupters, the Bellows are burnt, the
Lead is consumed of the fire; the Founder melts in vain, for the wicked are
not plucked away, Reprobate Silver shall men call them, because the Lord has
rejected them. Oh that this were not our case, and that Character also given of
that professing people, Jer. 9.3 -- 7. But I shall leave Christians to this
heart-searching work, beseeching, requiring and charging all persons to deal
faithfully with their own Souls; find out the Achan that troubles the Camp,
stone it; Cast lots to find the Jonah that raises this tempest, cast it
overboard, confess, bewail, reform, get pardon of Sin, and who knows but we
shall have a calm?

4. Get your hearts sensible of the evil of God's departure from us: Otherwise
you will not think it worth the while to spend time in lamenting after him:
Come to an heart, an house, a society, a congregation, or the nation, and make
inquiry, is God there? If it be answered, no, he is gone in whole or in part,
what is then left that is good? Surely if God go, all good goes, and all evil
comes, 2 Chronicles. 15.3 -- 6. Now for a long season Israel had been without the
true God. and without a teaching Priest, and without Law [whether this was
under Jeroboam, and his Successors, or some other time] and in those times
there was no peace to him that went out, nor to him that came in, but great
vexations were upon all the inhabitants of the Countries -- For God did vex
them with all adversity. Mark it, when God goes, all evil comes. They that were
without the true, pure, public Worship of God, and with a standing Ministry,
to teach publicly, plainly, powerfully, but had in their places, false
Prophets, lying Rabbis, or graceless Loyterers, and it may be the People loved
to have it so. No wonder if they had Civil Discords, Foreign Invasions,
Ecclesiastical Dissentions, all things going to wrack, setting up one Ruler
against another, so joining in Parties, Factions, using barbarous cruelties,
imbroyling all in sad contentions, imbruing their hands in one another blood:
When God goes he breaks down the hedge of his protecting providence, Psalm.
80.12, 13.
so that the Boar out of the Wood wastes his Vineyard. Isa. 55.6, 7.
Then it is eaten up, trodden down, it shall not be pruned nor dug, but there
comes up Briars and Thorns, yea he commands the clouds that they rain no rain
upon it; what then will become of it! Surely the enclosed Vineyard of the
Church soon becomes a a wild Common of barbarous Infidels: When God removes his
Candles, darkness comes, Rev. 2.5.
but when he removes Candlesticks also, Mahomet fills up the room: The famous
Asian Churches are a dreadful instance: If the sun set, night comes on: If the
King be absent, what Court can be kept? If Christ stay not where is the Church?
If God should leave his glorious mansion in heaven; It would instantly become a
dark dungeon of hell: Yea if God depart from a People as a friend, he comes
against them as a dreadful foe: If he go away he tears as a Lion; Hos. 5.14.
consumes as a Moth: If he hide his face in Love, he comes in wrath, and fury
to slay them, 1 Samuel 28.15.
Jer. 33.5. Saul was in a woeful plight when God was departed from him, and the
Philistines were upon him. Yea, if God depart the Devil comes. When the good
Spirit went from Saul, an evil Spirit from the Lord troubled, tormented him, 1 Samuel 16.14, 23. Satan was from God, as framing his nature, commissionating him
to punish Saul, but his wickedness and malignity in his designs and actings
from himself: Oh how glad is the Devil to take up that room that God leaves?
truly then says the Lord, Hos. 9.12. Yea woe also to them, when I depart from
them: There Is a woe of sinning, and suffering attends God's departure: Whither
will not men run when God forsakes them? If the hand withdraw, the staff falls;
if the glass without foot be not held up, it falls, and breaks, and the liquor
Spills, the very best man is no more daily, but as the Lord makes him: Sampson,
David, Peter, will fall if God go: Much more they that have no hold of God, or
God of them in a covenant-way, they will not stop till they commence at the height
of Sin and fall into the depth of Hell! Hos. 9.17. My God will cast them away
because they did not hearken to him: Hos. 7.13. Woe unto them, for they have
fled from me, yea destruction to them, because they have transgressed against
me: Yea everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord and from the
glory of his power. 2. These. 8.9. Were we kindly affected with all this, we
should lament after the Lord: We have reason to tremble, left it prove our
case, and removing his ordinances is a great step to all this: And if we knew
what it meant, we should with old Eli have trembling hearts for the Ark of God,
1. Sam. 4.13.

5. Study the advantages and benefit of having God present with us; as fear of
evil is one motive to avoid it; so a desire of the contrary good, adds wings in
seeking earnestly for it. When God goes, all good goes: So when God returns or
continues with a People, they enjoy all good, inward, outward. The People that
have God with them, have a strong Guard to defend them, a wise Guide to direct
them, rich Grace to supply them, high Honor to advance them, full Rest to
content them, an abundant Reward in the enjoyment of him: They have enough,
they need no more. Happy is the People whose God is the Lord. Psalm. 144. ult.
Luther's Psalm, that Song upon Alamoth, Psalm. 46. is admirable for this; for
when the Church can say, God is our refuge and strength, a very present help in
trouble; verse. 1. She builds great confidence and comfort on this solid
foundation; verse. 2. Therefore will not we fear though the Earth be removed,
etc. Yea, she stands upon this impregnable Rock, triumphing over all dangers
and enemies, with this word repeated, verse. 7, 11. The Lord of Hosts is with
us, the God of Jacob is our refuge. Selah. And if God be for us, who can be
against us? Romans 8.31. Who would not follow after such a God with prayers,
tears, groans, and hearty lamentations, that he would return to us, continue
with us? Oh! who would not have an hand in bringing back the King, such a King
as by his presence can make us truly and eternally happy? See what it is to
have God with us, Isa. 42.13, 14, 15, 16. Yea, it becomes every one to study
the usefulness of God's Ordinances, that their hearts may be engaged to, and
enlarged in lamenting after the Ordinances of God? Both these are larger
Subjects than I can prosecure, to explain the advantages coming to a People by
the presence of the Ordinances of God, or the God of Ordinances. You must look
on the Ordinances as fruits and tokens of God's special favor, for all have
not the Ordinances of God, Psalm. 147.19, 20. He shows his Word unto Jacob,
his Statutes and his Judgments unto Israel; he has not dealt so with any
Nation; and as for his Judgments, they have not known them. That this Sunshine
of Gospel Light is on one place, and not on another, proceeds from
discriminating Providence, who sent Ambassadors for the Gospel to be brought
to them. Surely that is preventing kindness: Song 5.5.
But when it has left some impression on hearts, some Mirth upon the handles
of the Lock, such should, yea will lament after him, when he is gone, as the
Church did: For such have tasted how good the Lord is, and look on the
Ordinances as their Heritage and highest Privilege. Oh that you knew what
helps Ordinances are to promote God's work in our hearts, in begetting and
increasing Faith, Repentance, Love, new Obedience; this is that clear
Chrystalglass through which we may see the face of God, 2 Cor. 3.18.
and be transformed into his Image; Jam. 1.24.
that Glass in which we may see the face of our Souls, and be humbled and
ashamed: Here you may have your doubts resolved, fears dispersed, hearts
satisfied, graces quickened, fellowship with God promoted, our Souls prepared
for Heaven. Oh that your eyes were opened to see the necessity, excellency,
utility of God's Ordinances! I am very confident, that if your Souls be as new
born Babes, you will desire after the sincere Milk of the Word, if so be ye
have tasted that the Lord is gracious, 1 Pet. 2.2, 3. As for others that want
spiritual life and light to discover and feel the marrow of Ordinances, no
wonder if they slight or despise both the Appointments themselves, and such as
long for them, and lament the want of them; and therefore I urge this, that you
learn by your own experience the sweetness and advantage of enjoying the
presence of God in the Ordinances of God.

6. Get and maintain public Spirits. Oh take heed of private Spirits, to look
only after your own concerns, and worldly Interests! This has been the Ruin
of the Church, and also of particular persons at last, Hag. 1.4. Is it time for
you, O ye! to dwell in your cieled Houses, and this House lie waste? therefore
ye have sown much, and bring in little, q.d. You think to secure your personal
and domestical comforts with neglect of my concernments, but I will cross you
in that which concerns you, because you are heedless in what concerns me. On
the contrary, David concerned himself about God's House, and God built his
House, 3 Sam. 7.2 -- 11. So true is that of our Savior, that whosoever will
save his life shall lose it; Mat. 16.27.
and whosoever will lose his life for my sake shall find it. Self-seeking is
the way to selfundoing; self-denying is the only way to self-advancing:
Scripture and Experience prove this. Well then, my advice is, that you chiefly
mind the Interest of our Lord in the World; and put as great an accent on this
in your prayers, as if it were your own case; and indeed it is your own: Your
little Boat hangs on the great Ship; but all judge not so, therefore there are
few lamenters after the Lord: But if you would look on Zion's case as your own,
and so carry it as having yours really involved in that bottom, it would be
both an help and spur in your lamentings. The more gracious persons have been,
the more have they forgot themselves to think on the Church. 2 Cor. 11.28.
Numb. 11.11.
Upon me, says St. Paul, comes daily the care of all the Churches. Upon Moses
lay the burden of all the People. Uriah will sympathize and suit himself to the
Ark, 2 Samuel 11.11.
and Israel, and Judah in the Camp, and not suit himself to the delights of the
City. Nehemiah inquires after, Neh. 1.24.
and condoles with his suffering Brethren. Look through the Bible, and you will
find this gracious public Spirit breathing in all the Servants of God, Psalm.
137.5, 6. If I forget thee, O Jerusalem! let my right hand forget her cunning:
If I do not remember thee, let my Tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth, if I
prefer not Jerusalem above my chief joy, Marg. the head of my joy, q.d. I
profess my self to be a Member of that Mystical Body the Church, and how can a
Member rejoice when the whole Body mourns? If the touching of one String of an
Instrument make the rest move, how can I forbear a sad Echo to the Church's
mournful Elegy? Shall not her dewy Eyes cause mine Eyes to water? How can it go
well with me, when it goes ill with the Church? Mr. Rutherford's Letters, p. 17.
Oh that I could set self aside! We have need, says one, to be redeemed from
our selves, rather than from the Devil, or World. I should make a sweet
bartering, and give old for new, if I could shuffle out self, and substitute
Christ my Lord in place of my self. Oh wretched Idol! when shall I see thee
wholly decourted, and Christ wholly put in thy room? Nobis non nati sumus.
Oh that I had but gone as far yet as the Heathens Primar, we are not born for
our selves; surely then I should not be so much taken up with my own matters,
but think on the Church. Alas! what is my danger to Zion's damage? if it go well
with Zion, it shall comfort my heart, whatever my personal troubles be. But I
must hang my Harp on the Willows, while the Church is in Captivity. Lord, Psalm.
51.18.
do good in thy good pleasure to Zion, build thou the Walls of Jerusalem;
though my broken bones be not set, or though my heart still keep bleeding.

7. Learn the right Art of praying and pleading with the Lord! this lamentation
is in the way of supplication; that a gracious promise, Zech. 12.10. I will
pour upon the house, of David and the inhabitants of Jerusalem [Princes and
People] the Spirit of grace and of Supplications; And then follows a great
mourning, both in families and in closets. Oh that this work were set forward?
Surely if all the People of England, yea professing People; could set forwards
in this so needful a work, what mercy were it! prayer is needful at all times,
in all cases, but much more now; If any thing fetch back a departing God, it
must be a believing prayer, 2 Chronicles. 7.14. If my People which are called by my
Name, shall humble themselves, and pray, and seek my face, and turn from their
wicked ways, then will I hear from heaven, and will forgive their sin, and will
heal their Land. You see the duty; You see the encouragement; prayer is suitable
to a sad disposition, and dispensation: Prayer is the Conduit of comfort.
Afflictions make us seek out Promises, Promises to seek Faith, Faith to seek
Prayer, Prayer to seek and find God. What should God's Children do, were it not
for this privilege of praying? When they cannot preach, and hear, they may
pray; when they cannot meet together, they may meet at the Throne of Grace;
when they are shut out from petitioning men, they may be admitted to the Court
of Heaven, Psalm. 34.15.
and the Lord's Ears are still open to their cry. I should think the Spirit of
Prayer to be the best token for good to us, Thou will prepare their heart, thou will cause thine Ear to hear, Psalm. 10.17. Exodus, 32.10, 11.
Moses besought the Lord, and the Lord seems as bound fast by his prayer; Let
me alone, says God. The People here entreat Samuel, 1 Samuel 7.6.
not to cease to cry to the Lord for them; and he did pray, and you see the
issue. Oh that we could not only pray, but lift up a prayer for the Remnant
that is left! 2 King. 19.4.
If God return to us, it must be upon the wings of such an advanced Prayer. 2 Chronicles. 32.19, 20.
When Sennacherib had sent Rabshakeh to blaspheme God, the Text says, For this
cause Hezekiah the King, and the Prophet Isaiah, the Son of Amoz, prayed, and
cried to Heaven. For this cause: If any thing will quicken God's Children to
Prayer, surely it will be the dishonor of their Father; they would not answer
them, but complain to God; this was then, and is still, the most effectual
course to speed. When Nehemiah was to make request to a great King, he says,
Neh. 2.4.
Then prayed I to the God of Heaven. It was an ejaculatory Prayer, for he spoke
it not, yet it was effectual; he thought if by Prayer he could move the main
wheel, all the rest would move. This is a way to set a work all Second Causes.
Indeed we have no other means in prospect; let us betake our selves to this
spiritual Armor, for Prayers and Tears are the Church's Weapons, Ephesians. 6.18,
19. Praying always with all Prayer and Supplication in the Spirit, and
watching thereunto with all perseverance and supplication for all Saints, and
for me, that utterance may be given unto me, that I may open my mouth boldly to
make known the Mystery of the Gospel. This is our case, we beg our Peoples
Prayers for our restitution. Oh that Ministers and People could strive (or be
in an Agony) together in their mutual Prayers to God for each other! Romans
15.30. v. 29.
If you could pray more and better, we should come the sooner, and with a
greater blessing, even in the fullness of the blessing of the Gospel of Christ;
and for your encouragement to pray for us, we hope we can truly say, as Heb.
13.18. Pray for us, for we trust we have a good conscience in all things,
willing to live honestly. Though we suffer as evildoers, and are reproached as
factious, seditious, schismatical; as Paul was accounted an Apostate, an enemy
to the Law; but we carry our selves as Subjects, as Ministers, living orderly
in our places, giving none offense, so that none can challenge us in any thing
save in the matters of our God, and in that they must excuse us, if we cannot
in all things see with their Eyes, nor swallow down such Oaths, Subscriptions,
as some dare, whom we judge not, but are afraid of nothing so much as sin; and
as for our Preaching to you, though prohibited by men, it is our obligation to
duty: For, woe be to us if we Preach not the Gospel. Zeal for God's glory, and
love to your Souls, that exposes us to all these censures and oppositions; it
is for your sakes that we bear all these affronts, and will not you pray for
us? Surely your selves are concerned in our work; we are content to endure all
for the Gospels sake; we ask nothing of you but your entertainment of our
Message and Prayers for our persons; we spend our time, and strength, and lungs
for you; will not you pray for us? If God help us, will not this turn to your
advantage? Your Prayers will return into your own bosoms. We have been serving
almost three Apprentiships in our divorcement from Public Places and
Employments, yet our God has not forsaken us, but secured our Persons, and
some Liberties; he has delivered us, does, and will deliver liver us, 2 Cor.
1.10, 11, 12. You also helping together in prayer for us, that for the gift
bestowed upon us by the means of many persons, thanks may be given by many on
our behalf; for our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our conscience, etc.
Having obtained help of God, we continue to this day at great uncertainties;
Melch. Adam, vit. Melanct. p. 357.
as Melancthon said [ Ego jam sum hic, Dei beneficio, quadraginta annos, and
nunquam potui dicere, aut certus esse, me per unam septimanam mansurum esse.]
So we may say, we have continued, by Divine bounty and care of us twenty years,
and could never say assuredly, nor upon any probable grounds, that we should
abide one week to an end: Much of this may be ascribed to the effectual Prayers
of the Church, as a mean under God. Who can tell but in a short time your
Prayers may fetch us back again: Howsoever, we are persuaded that these things
shall turn to our [and your] Salvation, through your Prayer, and the supply of
the Spirit of Jesus Christ, Phil. 1.19. Only see that your Prayers be such as
God will accept. I cannot enlarge on this Head, but hint the due qualifications
of such a Prayer as shall undoubtedly prevail.

1. Your Persons must be in covenant. Joh. 9.31.


2. You must act Faith upon the Mediator Christ. Joh. 16.23.


3. You must pray in the Holy Ghost. Jude 20.


4. Ask what is according to God's Will. 1 John 5.14.


5. Aim at God's Glory as your main end. 1 Cor. 10.31.


6. Cast away all sin in heart and life. Psalm. 66.18.


7. Live in the daily exercise of Repentance. Heb. 10.22.


8. Maintain an holy Awe of God in your hearts. Psalm. 2.11.


9. Set your hearts in order for the duty. Job 11.13.


10. Pray with understanding, minding 1 Cor. 14.15.
the object.

11. With fervency, importunity. Luke 11.8, 9.


12. Forgiving others that have offended you. Mark 11.25.


13. Watching against Temptations. Col. 4.2.


14. Living up to your Prayers. Joh. 15.7.


15. Maintaining communion with God. Luke 2.37.


16. Coming with hopes to speed. Jam. 1.6.


17. Be Sincere, as to frames and ends. Mat. 6.5, 6.


18. Be daily sensible of wants, Mat. 5.6.
weaknesses.

19. Wait patiently for returns of prayer. Psalm. 5.3.


20. Be thankful for any in-comes after Phil. 4.6, 7.
Prayer. Such dispositions as these you must have and act in the duty of
Prayer, and then you shall prevail for your selves and others. This is the
Third general Head.

4. The last I shall briefly hint at is, some Cordials which may support and
bear up our hearts till our Souls overtake our dear Lord, or he turn again to
us, in our lamentings after him.

1. Lamenting Souls after the Lord are most likely to be the remnant escaping
in approaching Calamities: Zeph. 2.3.
These have the Mourners mark on them, and ordinarily are left, Ezekiel. 9.4, 6.
and Ezekiel. 7.16. But they that escape of them shall escape, and shall be on the
Mountains like Doves of the Valleys, all of them mourning every one for their
iniquity. If Land-destroying Calamities come, you are likeliest to survive and
be a holy Seed for storing the Church in future times.

2. You may be the Instruments to prevail with the Lord for keeping in the
midst of us: Yet there is a possibility; Who knows if he will return and
repent, and leave a blessing behind him? Joel 2. v. 14. There Is yet a may-be in
it, Amos 5.15. Hate the evil, and love the good, and establish Judgment in the
Gate; it may be that the Lord God of Hosts will be gracious unto the remnant of
Joseph. God has condescended to his Peoples supplications, why not yours? The
poor wise man has delivered the City; Eccl. 9.15. Job 22.30.
the Innocent may deliver the Island. Lot sped for Zoar, Abraham for Lot, yea
very far for the Cities of the Plain. Make a trial; and what comfort will it be
to you, if your lamenting Prayers turn the Scales for God's stay with us!

3. However, you may stay him with your own Souls; Is that nothing? God is as
willing to be friends with us, as we can be to desire it, and much more, Isa.
27.5. Or, Let him take hold of my strength, that he may make peace with me; and
he shall make peace with me; And is this nothing? Oh what is God's presence
worth! How have David, Job, Heman, and all the Saints prized it? Do you not
want it? Follow on to know [and own and acknowledge] the Lord, and you shall
find his going forth is prepared as the morning, and he will come to you as the
Rain, Hos. 6.3. Your Fleece shall be wet when others are dry. If you cannot
obtain mercy for others, yet as Noah, Daniel and Job, Ezekiel. 14.14.
you may deliver your own Souls by your righteousness.

4. Yet the Lord has not forsaken us; he is yet in the midst of us by his
gracious Providence and Influences; he has been hitherto prevailed with,
though he threatened us to leave us, and we had cause to fear Execution; his
Candlesticks are fixed, and Candles are shining, though not all in their proper
Sockets, but under a Bushel: This is an encouraging mercy, our God has not
forsaken us. Yea now for a little space grace has been showed from the Lord
our God, to leave us a remnant to escape, and to give us a Nail in his holy
Place, that our God may lighten our Eyes, and give us a little reviving in our
bondage, Ezra 9.8, 9. It was not our deservings that has kept him with us; no,
no, Israel bath not been forsaken, nor Judah of his God, -- though their Land
was filled with sin against the holy One of Israel, Jer. 51.5. What Is the
reason then that God is not quite gone? See 1 Samuel 12.22. For the Lord will not
forsake his People for his great Names sake, because it has pleased the Lord
to make you his People. The Argument holds for us, and it is still in force;
blessed be God he has not cast us off as yet, and the Covenant with Ancestors
still holds good, as in 2 King. 13.23.

5. God seems to be in suspense whether he should leave us or no, to draw us on
in our lamentings after him; just as he expresses himself in Hos. 11.8. How
shall I give thee up Ephraim? How shall I deliver thee Israel? How shall I make
thee as Admah? How shall I set thee as Zebbim; strange Language spoken by the
infinitely wife and immutable God; As though he were puzzled and knew not what
to do. Surely this is spoken after the manner of men, and speaks God loath to
punish, for indeed it is his strange work; q. d. the severity of my threats
call on truth to make execution, sed quomodo hoc a me impetrabo?] But how shall
I prevail with my self to do it? The glory of my Name, free grace, and constant
love to my Covenanted people get hold on my wrathful hand when ready to strike
the fatal stroke, the righteousness of a Judge says, strike; The bowels of a
Father say, hold; And when God thus deliberates, it is to stay and see if his
People will get hold of him, by faith and prayer: Is not this his carriage
toward us in his providence? certainly the Lord comes and goes as if he were
loath to punish us, and is not this a very great encouragement to us to lament
after him? Since he looks back, as a Mother to her Child, with a wishly eye, as
if he had not the power to go, as if he should say, call me back and you shall
have me, my heart is toward you, though I am forced to turn my back on you,
you shall have me if you will lament Evangelically after me.

6. You have good company in your lamenting after the Lord, though there be too
too many vile Atheists and debauched wretches that say to God, depart from us,
cause the holy one to cease from the midst of us, yet there are mourners in
Zion that are very importunatly crying and lamenting after the Lord, with all
their might seeking to fetch back the Ark: Though they be few comparatively,
and though despised, and possibly hid in corners, and as little taken notice of
as those seven thousand in Elijah's days, ^ King. 19.
that had not bowed their knee to Baal: but God searches out such clandestine
worshippers, that pray, and complain to their Father in secret, and he will
reward and answer them openly with what concerns more then themselves. Oh! it is
good to be of the number of these hidden ones! How blessed a thing is it to
twist interests with this lovely Society? There is a communion of Saints in
prayer, though unknown to each other: And I can say it, for your encouragement,
Oh ye praying mourning Souls, that you are not alone, God has thousands in
these Nations that have been hard at it many years, and present circumstances
do quicken their cries; Our danger increases our pangs, and those advance our
cries; be not discouraged, you have many assistants; A threefold cord is not
easily broken, God has some Children to cry after him from all parts of the
Kingdom, and though many of the old stock of weeping Souls are worn out, yet
some wrestling young ones are planted in their room, some begotten in the bonds
of the Gospel, for the word of God is not bound, though Ambassadors be. Zion
has been built in this troublous time. And I think it may be truly said, that
as the Ark has more visible followers, so more sincere lamenters after it,
then when it was taken out of its public station, as Tertullian of old said,
so it must be acknowledged that the more God's field is cut, the more grass
Springs up.

7. God has a dear and tender respect to such as lament after him for the Arks
sake, and will do them good upon that very account, Psalm. 122.6. pray for the
peace of Jerusalem, they shall prosper that love thee. They shall not only
prosper and prevail for Jerusalem, but God will prosper them in other respects,
in their graces, in comforts, yea often in worldly concerns: A public Spirit is
a personal gainer; God never suffers such to be losers by him, that deny
themselves for him, Zeph. 3.18. I will gather them that are sorrowful, for the
solemn Assembly, who are of thee to whom the reproach of it was a burden. Psalm.
55.22.
Such as study Gods interest, have the Lord to study their interest? If we put
our shoulder to bear his burden, he will bear both us and ours. Consider now,
says God, from this day and upward from the four and twentieth day of the
ninth month, even from the day that the foundation of the Lords Temple was
laid, consider it, -- From this day will I bless you, Hagg. 2.18, 19. How much
does God value and how fully does he reward an esteem for his Worship! God
builds their houses that have but a good will to build his house; As in David:
Thus our Lord bids us prove him by our obedience, and see if he will not open
the windows of Heaven and pour down a blessing, Mal. 3.10, 11, 12. Who would
not then own and lay to heart Zions case?

8. Lamented for Ark and Ordinances will be the sweetest and most profitable
when returned and enjoyed. None will so gladly welcome the Ark, and improve it
as they that most deeply laid to heart its removal. Such will be like hungry
stomachs, lay to hard when they can get to this. Soul-refreshing food; a
thirsty Person will prize and improve a little Water: David never so gredily
longed for God's Presence and Ordinances, as when he was in a dry and thirsty
land where no water was, Psalm. 63.1. The full stomach loathes the honeycomb,
Psalm. 42.1.
but to the hungry Soul every bitter thing is Sweet: Oh what pantings? As the
Heart chased pants for Waterbrooks! You Will gain more days preaching then, then
formerly in many days.

9. Souls that lament after the Lord shall enjoy him immediately in the end: in
Heaven you shall need no Ordinances, Rev. 21.22. I saw no Temple therein, for
the Lord God Almighty and the Lamb are the temple of it, Rev. 22.4. 1 Cor.
13.12. 1 John 3.2.
for you shall see his face immediately and no more through a Glass darkly, yea
you shall see him as he is, which cannot but felicitate Souls perfectly
therefore its called the Beatifical vision. Oh what a day will that be? You
shall not then need to fear any disturbance from men nor Devils, but his
Servants shall Serve him, and his name shall be in their foreheads; There Is no
more skulkIng into corners, nor meeting in the night for fear of men's Laws, and
persecution. Yea the more you lamented after the Lord and his Ark the more
shall you increase your joy in the Lord: The more your sorrows abound, the more
will your comfort abound; The lower the Ebb, the higher the Tide: You that
loved Jerusalem shall be glad with her, yea, you shall rejoice for joy with
her, all ye that mourned for her, Isa. 66.10.

10. In the mean time God himself will supply the want of Ordinances; the great
God will be a little Sanctuary in the want of other means of Worship; Ezekiel.
11.16.1 Sam. 30.6. Hab. 3.16.
he himself will supply that defect. David could encourage himself in the Lord
his God; Habakkuk rejoice in the Lord, when destitute of outward comforts, yea
and in the absence of external Privileges. What want you from Ordinances, that
the Alsufficient God cannot supply you with? light, love, warmth, strength,
resolution of doubts, satisfaction of your hearts; God is all in all, and all
without all these helps. O Friends! (though you may not choose to be without
means of Grace, because they are God's Instituted ways of conveying himself to
us here, yet) you must be content to be without them, when Providence cuts you
short of them, and say in this case as holy David, (with which I shall conclude
this Subject,) 2 Samuel 15.25, 26. Carry back the Ark of God into the City, if I
shall find favor in the Eyes of the Lord, he will bring me again, and show me
both it and his habitation; but if he thus say, I have no delight in thee,
behold, here am I, let him do to me as seems good unto him.

The End.

