A SECOND, But more Perfect RELATION OF The great Victory obtained by Sir RALPH
HOPTON, near Bodmin, in the County of Cornwall, on thursday Ian. 19. Ann. Dom.
1642. Together with his no less eminent success at Saltash, the Sunday
following being the 22th.

Printed by H. Hall for W. Webb. M.DC.XLII.

A second, but more perfect Relation of the great Victory obtained by Sir RALPH
HOPTON.
UPon the 18 of January being Wednesday, His Majesty's forces in Cornwall drew
out of Bodmin with a resolution to fall upon the enemy in Lescand. That night
they lay abroad in Boconnocke park* the next morning as they were advancing
toward the Town, the enemy leaving that advantage, which the dangerous and
difficult avenues unto the place through deep and narrow lanes did give them,
came forth into the field. They were about 20 foot Colors, and between 4 and
500 horse. They faced us at Hilsborough, themselves being planted upon a little
hill encompased with a Bogge. There were but two passages (and those but wide
enough to receive ten or twelve men in breast) over it. His Majesty's Army
took no fear for all that, their joy to see their enemy, above either their
expectation or their hope fairly in the field, drowning all apprehensions of
that disadvantage, wherefore after prayers upon the place (which the Rebels, as
was afterward confessed by the prisoners, scoffingly termed mass) we advanced
boldly forwards. Ere we came near them, they gave us two or three volees in
vain, hurt none of us: but so soon as we were got within distance of them,
and had saluted them with one volee, they turned about and fled, Our soldiers
were eager to pursue the^. but by the industry of their Commanders, were kept
still in good order. This providence diverted a mischeife from us, which* as it
seems, the enemy had intended us. For on a sudden the whole body of their
horse turned back upon us. But finding us in our ranks, and unbroken, they
utterly lost their courage, and ran away, as if some tempest had driven them,
even over their own men* The soldiers br^ke now forth with all violence into
the chase (they could not any longer be possibly withheld) we followed it at
least five miles, even to the towns end. There we were a litttle stayed by a
volee, which a company of the enemies, that had not that day marched forth,
gave us from their barricadoes. It did noe hurt; only shot a horse of Captain
Digbies through the leg. The volee ended, they all ran presently away; and we
enterd the Town. We found there good store of Ammunition, and five excellent
brass gunnes, and one iron. This day there were slain in the pursuit 200 of
the Rebels and 700 we took prisoners; among them Sir Shilston Colmadee; and 8
colors; and all this with the loss but of one common soldier, what became of
the rest of their colors we know not, but for certain they brought back
only one into the Town. The next day, which was Friday, we rested there. On
Saturday we advanced yet farther Eastward. In the mean while a fresh regiment
of the Earl of Stamford under the command of Lieutenant Colonel Colmadee had
entered Launcestan; but upon our approach that way fled thence to Plymouth. This
evening the one half of our Army was quartered about Calstecke and Cutteale;
the other marched with Sir Ralph Hopton toward Saltash, where the enemy had
rallyed and made head against us.

On the morrow about 4 in the evening Sir Ralph assaulted the Town. Ruthen,
Crocher, Strode, Pyne, and diverse others of the enemies Chiefes were there. and
they had 10 pieces of ordinance with them. 3 hours they held out; but at last
we forced the place (lost but one man in this service) seized on their
artillery, and so dispersed the very men themselves, that they could have but
little time, less opportunity to escape. yet it being dark, we could not for
the present know either how many of them, or whom we had taken. the morning was
likely to yield some better account of them, but this Relator was dispatched
for Oxford before it was day. Ere he came away, one boat full of them putting
over for Plymmouth, suncke in the passage. perhaps there were of their Chiefes
in that. As he passed Devon, he heard it every where, it was almost every man's
discourse, how that Ruthen himself and Stroud and the rest had miscarried in
the business. Neither of these successes did the Kings Commanders attribute to
their own strength or policy. they gave the glory to him, whose work alone it
was, causing a Chaplain of the Army to draw a form of thankes-giving, to go
throughout Cornwall for those great deliverances.

Since this Relaters arrival at Oxford, His Majesty has received a more full
information of Sir Ralph Hoptons success at Saltash where he has taken
(besides those 10 pieces of ordinance already mentioned) 700 prisoners more,
and arms for 4000 men, and a ship with 16 pieces of ordinance in it,
formerly brought up to batter the Town. It pleasing God, contrary to their
expectation, to give it up a prey to that power, which it came thither to
suppress.

FINIS.
February 3. 1642.
SIR,
HAving newly entered Cyrencester, I thought good to impart some passages of our
siege and entertainment there, but time will not permit a full Relation;
wherefore I here give you only a brief, which is as follows: viz. slain
and wounded of the Kings Forces seven and thirty slain and wounded of the
Rebels four hundred ninety seven; Taken Colonel Fetiplace, Governor of the
Town; Lieutenant Colonel Carre, Sergeant Major Ashton, and one George a
Parliament man: six pieces of Canon, and all their Gunners; two thousand
Arms, one thousand Prisoners, and the Town Plundered, which their own base
behavior was the cause of; for after we entered the Town they shot out of their
windows at us, and killed one of our men: what favor such desperate Rebels
deserve, let all the world judge.

Your friend T. B.


