THE Best Entail.

OR, Dying Parents Living Hopes for their surviving Children, grounded upon the
Covenant of Gods Grace, with Believers and their Seed.

BEING A short Discourse upon 2 Samuel 23.5.

WHEREIN Is a Collection of several Covenant-Promises to support the Faith, and
some Pleas to direct and quicken the Prayers of Gods Covenanted People for
their surviving Posterity.

By O. H. Minister of the Gospel.

Psalm. 90.16. Let thy Work appear unto thy Servants, and thy Glory unto their
Children.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns in
Cheapside. 1693.

THE EPISTLE DEDICATORY.
To the Right Honorable Philip Lord Wharton.
My Lord,
THe concernedness your Lordship, has for the worthy Branches of your Noble
Family, is demonstrated to all whom you esteem Friends, by the constant
subscription with your own hand [Remember me and my Family in your Prayers,] by
which your Lordship at once testifies your natural Affection and true Piety:
Your earnest desire of the best good, and the means by which that must come
from God, even duon the wings of a believing Prayer. Your Lordships request
has the force of a command; the obligations laid upon many hundreds of both
Ministers and People, extort from us, in point of Gratitude, both many
thanksgivings to God, and renewed supplications for your Lordship, that the
blessing of Abraham, may successively continue in your Noble Family, to be
blessed, and be a blessing. Oh happy Family! where the precious Pearl of
Covenant grace Enamels the Gold-ring of worldly honor! It Is true, the Divine
Oracles say, Not many Mighty, not many Noble are called. A good Lady added,
Blessed be God, that it says not [not any.] Once at last God will have an
Emperor [a Constantine] saved. Augustine says wittily, a poor Lazarus is laid
in rich Abraham's bosom. Sacred Writ records a Noble Theophilus, and an Elect
Lady: And Ecclesiastical History furnishes us with a large Catalogue of
Illustrious Branches of Noble Families, planted in the House of the Lord, and,
like fixed Stars of the first Magnitude, have shined bright in their proper
Orb, and conveyed great Influence to their Inferiors. In which rank God has
placed your Honor; whose Morning Star of early Piety continues still shining
bright to a good old Age, and has cast many resplendent Beams of favor upon
Indigent Persons, to spread the favor of Divine Knowledge amongst ignorant
souls in the Country; for which the loins of the Poor, and souls of the
Instructed will bless you in this, and the other world. I doubt not, my Lord,
but your gracious spirit Eccho's to the dying speech of holy David, to whom a
succession of Piety in his seed was more Eligible than of Royalty and large
Revenues. What can be compared to this one comprehensive promise, [I will be a
God unto thee, and to thy seed after thee:] Yet this is the rich privilege of
Gods Covenanted Servants: Mines of Gold, Mountains of Pearl, can bear no
proportion to this one word [My God:] This is light in darkness, life in death,
an heaven in the midst of hell. The sense of this is the only Cordial to the
fainting Spirits of Gods afflicted Children. Yea, says one, if but one little
drop of Divine Love, should fall into a Damned Soul in Hell, it would sweeten
or swallow up those bitter Torments. And next to the privilege of Gods being
our God; His being our Childrens God claims the Preeminence: For Parents
anxious thoughts run out for their Childrens well-doing in this and the other
world. If God help us to own him, he will not forsake us or ours. It Is true
Grace comes not by succession, yet often in succession. The Line of Covenant-love
reaches to many Generations; and the more numerous pious Predecessors are,
the greater is the shower of Blessings. So a Learned man reads that paternal
benediction of Jacob to Joseph, Genesis 49.26.
The blessings of thy Fathers are strong with the blessings of my Progenitors:
As the more waters run into one Channel, the deeper it grows. Your Lordship
then may hope for multiplied, accumulative blessings on your Noble Progeny. If
that be found Divin^ty, which was a Maxim amongst the Jewish Rabbis, That the
Divine Glory rests on Noble Stemms; however beams of love reflect with greatest
luster when descending on honorable Personages. Therefore should we pray, most
ardently, for those of highest rank, as in the greatest capacity of doing most
good; and a godly man, or Minister, must not only, with David, serve his own
generation by the will of God, Acts 13.36.
but with the blessed Apostle Peter, 2 Pet. 1.15.
Endeavor that posterity may be able after their decease to have Divine Truths
always in remembrance. This, my Lord, has been the great care of your Honor;
and as natural motions are quickest toward the end, so the nearer your
Lordship approaches to your center, and Haven, the more sedulous and active
are you to lay a foundation of Religion in future Generations; thereby also
laying up in store for your self a good foundation for time to come, 2 Timothy
4.19.
so laying hold on Eternal Life, for the accomplishing of this great End. A
poor inconsiderable worm casts his Mite into my Lords Treasury and prostrates
himself at your Lordships Feet, in this Dedication, in testimony of my real
gratitude for your unparalled kindness and condescension to so ignoble a
person. Withal recommending this small Treatise to your Lordship, to encourage
your heart, and strengthen your hands in God, under the smarting breaches in
your Noble Family; venturing it into a critical world under your Lordships
auspicious Name: not doubting a pardon of this boldness, and a candid
acceptance following it, with my poor Prayers, that it may obtain its desired
success upon the rising Generation, and provoking Parents to improve this
blessed Covenant; hoping that when your Lordship has filled up your days with
Grace, and tranplanted your Soul into the Celestial Paradise; some of your
Seed shall rise up in your room as Plants of Renown, to bear your Image and
Name, and follow your gracious Example while Sun and Moon endure: Which is the
daily Prayer of

My Lord, Your humble and devoted Servant, Oliver Heywood.

A PREFACE, OR AN EPISTLE to the READER.
THere is nothing in the World (I am very confident) lies so near the heart of
a gracious Christian, next to the Glory of God and his own Souls Eternal
happiness, as the Spiritual good of his dear Children: nature binds him to love
his own: Christianity regulateth and Spiritualiseth this love: fondness is not
true love, but faithfulness: love to their bodies is but brutish without love
to their Souls: i'ts like a doting on the Case, and throwing away the Jewel,
the Soul is the man, the unseen part is the best part; where the Soul is
lodged, when parted from the Body, there must the Body lodge, in Heaven or Hell:
Oh that men understood and well digested this! surely they would not so
unweariedy toil and tread to get Estates for their Children, and take no care
of their precious Souls, and know not when they Dye whether he that comes after
them shall be a Wise man or a Fool: Eccl. 21.9
if he be a wise man, a little will serve him, with Gods blessing: if wicked he
puts a Sword into the hand of a Fool to do himself and others a greater
mischief: Oh how much better is it for their own peace and their Childrens
profit to plead the Covenant, to Instruct, Correct, Admonish, Counsel, Comfort
and encourage their Children in the ways of God, and use their utmost Endeavor
to make them Gods Children: an Ancient thus writes, Sabrian ad Eccles. cath.
lib. 3. p. 441.
[Disciplinam parents deus jubet thesaurisare filijs, non pecuniam, perennia
praecipit non peritura conferre] God commands Parents to hoard up Discipline,
not Money for their Children, things of a perpetual not perishing nature: what
a base and sordid thing is it to prefer a Swine to a Son! to provide for a
Beast and cast out a Child! and yet most Parents bestow more care of their
Cattle than of their Childrens Souls: they give their Children nature, but deny
them nurture: Yea they propagate corruption to them, but do not travel over
them till Christ be formed in them: they glory in being Fathers of their Flesh,
but cry not to the Father of Spirits for the best life in their Childrens dead
Souls: they promise at their Baptism, to bring them up in the nurture and
admonition of the Lord, but know not what that means, and have no heart to
learn, that they may teach: Oh what account will these perjured Parents give
another day? Remember God will call you to account, what Answer will you give,
when he shall Say? where is the Child's Soul, that I committed to thy trust?
what care have thou taken of it? where are thy Tears, Prayers, Groanings,
Earnings of Bowels for thine own Bowels? did thou not know that thy Child had
a Soul? that its Soul was polluted with Sin? that it must be born again not
only of Water but of the Spirit: or could not be Saved? that though I was to be
the Efficient cause, yet thou must be the Instrument to begin and carry on this
Work, and have thou struck one stroke in this work by faithful endeavors? or
have thou earnestly desired me to do that for thy Child that thou could not?
thou know thou have done neither, and therefore thy Child's Blood shall be
reqiured at thy hands: what Apology will thou then make for thy self? Do thou
think to come off by Saying, I sent him to School to learn, or to the Minister
to be Catechized? this is more than some will do, but is this all? is not
paternal care thy personal duty? was not thou charged with thy Child's Soul? may
not God justly blast other teachers pains as a punishment of thy negligence?
and does not thy bad Example at home unravel all that others teach them? Woe, Woe
be to such wicked wretched Parents!

In the name of God I charge you, as you will not have your Children accuse and
curse you in Hell for ever, concern your selves deeply about their Everlasting
State, think they can never do well, if they do not well for another World:
they will never be dutiful to you, till they be Obedient to God: train them up
for God and you consult at once Gods Glory, the good of Church and
Commonwealth, your own Comfort, and their Eternal felicity: true Grace qualifys
persons for every condition: for he that is really good will be relatively
good: a good King and Subject, Father and Child, Master and Servant: Heathens
knew this, that the way to form Persons into a due mould of civil Subjection is
a literate and virtuous Education: thus the King of Babylon conquering Judah,
ordered the Kings seed, Dan. 1.3, 4
and Princes to be trained up in the learning of of the Chaldeans: and our own
Historys tell us, that when the Romans conquered this Island, Julius Agricola
brought Noble men's Sons to Rome, and caused them to be educated in liberal
Sciences, whereby they gradually tamed the furious temper of the Britains, so
that the Inhabitants here became of gentle spirit, and peaceable Subjects: much
more will Christianity and true Piety, bring persons into a regular conformity:
it expells Barbarity and produces Civility, Hospitality, Frugality, and yet a
discreet liberality: a divine Benediction is entailed upon Sincere Religion:
Godliness is profitable unto all things, 1 Timothy 4.8.
having promise of the life that now is and of that which is to come: if your
Children be Godly they will be fit for any thing, and all things will conduce
to their good:

And You, Oh children, suffer a word of Exhortation from one that has had
Experience of childhood, Youth, riper age, and is arrived at old age, and has
been a teacher of others above forty years, and may say to you as Augustus did
to his mutinous Army, [Audite me juvenes, quem juvenem senes Audierunt] Hear me
Young men, whom sometimes Old men have heard and obeyed: God forbid you should
be headstrong sons of Belial Yoakless, and so run headlong into the pit of
destruction: Be not like the wild asses colt, break not through Parents tears.
Prayers, counsels and commands, to Hell: Alas! that any young persons should
desperately contradict the persuasions of Ministers, the motions of the Spirit,
the checks of their own consciences, the sad warnings of their undone
companions and the rods of God on their own backs, and haste through all these
to the pit, and never stop till they be swallowed up in that Infernal Lake that
burns with Fire and Brimstone: you will say what would you have us to do? I
answer, Act as Rational Creatures, inure your selves to Solemn consideration:
Consider that you are Creatures of an higher rank than Bruits, that you have
Immortal never dying Souls, that God made you to Glorify and enjoy him: that he
has given you a rule to act by, in order to another state in the other World,
that Sin has depraved your natures, has diprived you of Gods Image, brought
you under his curse: that Christ came to redeem Sinners, that saving Faith does
interest Souls in Christ: that Faith is the gift of God: that in your Baptism
you were engaged to forsake the World, Flesh and Devil: Consider your sins
since you were baptized, confess them to God: review and renew your Baptismal
vow, actualy renounce all other claimers, and give up your Selves to the Lord,
understandingly, Deliberately, Universally and Perpetually: improve Jesus
Christ, as the way, the truth, and the Life: Espouse his interest: join with
Gods People: Obey all his commands Attend on him in all his Ordinances: Be sure
you be sincere: Exercise every Grace: aim at Perfection: keep a constant watch
over your hearts and ways: maintaining a daily warfare against all Spiritual
Enemies: prepare for death: and consider where you must lodge when the King of
Terrors lays its cold hand of Arrest upon you: and make your Accounts straight
against that great reckoning day: and be sure you put on Christ, and improve
him as your Advocate, that he may Answer for you at that day.

These things I do but touch: for my great design is, the quickening and
encouraging of Parents on the behalf of their Posterity: some whereof are left
to themselves by the Lord to go astray, which occasioned Mr. Lawrence's
excellent Treatise of Parents Groans; nor is it his case only, but many others
also, some particular instances are fresh in memory, which have brought some
Godly Parents gray hairs with Sorrow to their Graves: some well known Servants
of God having never seen any hopeful symptoms of Grace upon some or all there
Children in their Life time, and had some sad temptations to question the truth
of of God in his Covenant: yet even in the very pangs of Death reached to and
claspt hard this Blessed Word, dying in the hopes of its Efficacy for
themselves and theirs, and the subject being recommended to me, was accordingly
treated on in a Funeral Discourse, which upon request, I was willing to
transcribe, for the encouragement of Poor afflicted Parents, that are bowed
down with heart-grief for their offending Children; I confess the subject is
novel and singular, and such as I have not seen any Treatise upon: and having
walked in an untrodden path, I hope I may obtain a pardon from God and Man of
some Erratick motion, whilst the tendency is Gods Glory and the good of Souls.

I hope none will reject this Treatise, because it seems a limited Subject, as
if they were not concerned in it, for as it is handled it is extensive to all,
Parents, Children; yea such as have no Children, are dealt with in this small
Treatise, for their Instruction and Consolation: such as it is I commend to
Believing, Praying Parents, following it with my poor Prayers, that all the
Children of the Covenant, may be Covenanted Souls, and that Parents may be
comforted in the Grace of God in their Posterity, and both may meet in Glory;
and if any reap and receive any advantage, I have my reward, and do humbly beg
the Incessant Prayers of all that can Pray

For The poor Servant of Christ and the Church O. H.

A General Scheme or view of the Chief Contents of this Treatise.
Chap. 1. The Context cleared, the Text explained, 10 Doctrines briefly hinted
Page 1. Chapter 2. The main Doctrine, Propounded, Cleared, Explained, by some things
premised 9. Chapter 3. What this Covenant is, and who are concerned in it. 16. Chapter
4. Six grounds of hope which Parents have from the Covenant for their Children.
24. Chapter 5. Six other grounds of Encouragement to Parents for their surviving
Children. 32. Chapter 6. An Answer to a great objection, in seven particular
Considerations. 39. Chapter 7. An use of Conviction to Irreligious Parents and
graceless Children. 48. Chapter 8. An use of Exhortation to Children both of
Vncovenanted and Covenanted Parents, and to such as have no Children. 59. Chapter
9. Another branch of Exhortation to all Parents that have Children, ten motives
to do their utmost to leave them within the Covenant: what means to be used.
69. Chapter 10. The last mean to be used for Childrens good is Earnest Prayer for
them. Twelve several Pleas and Arguments helping Parents in Prayers. Some Cases
of Conscience answered. 79.
These Books Written and Published by Mr. Oliver Heywood; are to be sold by
Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns in Cheapside.
THE Sure Mercies of David; being the fruits of some Meditations from Isa.
55.3. Christ displayed as the choicest gift and best Master: from Joh. 4.^0.
And Joh. 13.13. Written by Mr. Nath. Heywood, and published by Mr. Oliver
Heywood. Isreal's Lamentation after the Lord: Being some Meditations upon 1 Samuel
7.2. The Holy Life and Happy Death of Mr. John Angier. Closet Prayer: Or a
Christians Duty, from Mat. 6.6. Baptismal Bonds renewed: On Psalm. 50.5.
Meetness for Heaven upon Colos. 1.12. designed for a Funeral Legacy. Advice to
an only Child, or excellent Counsel to all Young Persons, containing the Sum
and Substance of Experimental and Practical Divinity. Written by an Eminent and
Judicious Divine for the Private use of an only Child now made public for the
Benefit of all. Published by Mr. Oliver Heywood.
Dying Parent's Living Hopes for their surviving Children, etc.
2 Samuel 23.5. Although my house be not so with God, yet he has made with me an
Everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things and sure: for this is all my
Salvation, and all my Desire, although he make it not to grow.


CHAP. I. The Context cleared, the Text explained, Doctrines raised.
THese words contain dying David's living comfort: the Covenant was the only
Cordial to his fainting Spirits; when the World looked black about him, here is
light arises out of obscurity: just as it was with Oecolampadius dying, and
clapping his hand on his Breast, cried [hic sat lucis] here is light enough: so
David and a Believing Soul, looking above sees all good in the Covenant;
looking within, sees the countervain of it, says, here, here alone is light:
Job 29.3.
by his light I walk through darkness. This shall be my [ vade mecum, or]
companion through this Pilgrimage of the World, and this only shall be my [
viand and viaticum] support and supply when I pass through the Valley of the
Shadow of Death. Farewell empty, filthy World, welcome the immediate presence of
my Covenanted God. I am going from a Prison to a Palace, from sorrow to
solace, from Sin to sweet Enjoyment of God: and the only foundation of my hopes
is this Gospel Covenant: A sad, and sorry dying Miser, ready to breath out his
sensual, senseless Soul, got a Jacobus piece of Gold, clapped it to his Breast,
saying, Some wiser than others, but I will dye with this Cordial at my Heart:
but at last plucked it away saying, it will not do, alas it will not do; Gold it
self is no Cordial, it cannot disarm death nor arm against it, it has lost its
virtue: nothing but Gods Covenant will stand in stead: the dying Child of God
is like a Standard bearer, who when the battle is lost, wraps himself in his
Colors and therein is safe, marching triumphantly through Armies of Enemies,
untoucht into his Fathers Palace. Oh happy Soul that injoys and improves this
Covenant!

The Context tells us, that these be the last words of David, not absolutely as
though he breathed his last, after he had uttered them (for there are several
expressions and transactions after) but comparatively, they were uttered
toward the latter end of David's Life. Now the dying words of Pious men are
gracious, serious, ponderous: they use not to spend their breath about trifles.

In the Context, we have 1. The Porch, or Introduction. 2. The Temple, and
excellency of the Gospel Covenant.

In the Porch or Introduction we have these two things. 1. The Penman,
instrument, or Amanuensis, who spoke these words, David. 2. The Author who
dictated them.

1. The Penman, or Instrument, David, is described these four ways.

1. By his natural descent, the Son of Jesse. 2. By his Royal Dignity, raised
up on high. 3. By his Divine Unction, anointed of God. 4. By his Employment,
Exercise, sweet-Psalmist of Israel: whose breath is sweet to this Day.
2. The Author that dictated to David. Viz.
1. The Holy Ghost, Spirit spoke by me. Viz. 2. God the Father, the God of
Israel. Viz. 3. Jesus Christ the Mediator of the Covenant, called here the Rock
of Israel, as he is called, 1 Cor. 10.4.


2. In the Temple or the Matter David speaks are also two things considerable.

1. The nature of David's Regiment. 2. The Excellency of the Covenant.
For the former which unfolds to us, the nature and properties of David's
Kingdom, as the type, and of Christ's as the Antitype, in four particulars.

1. The holiness of it, he that rules over men must be just, ruling in the
fear of God; a brave character.

2. The happiness of it, he shall be as the light of the morning, when the Sun
rises, a morning without clouds.

3. The fruitness of it, as the tender grass springing out of the Earth, by
clear shining after Rain.

4. Here Is an uncomfortable exception with reference to David's Family and
Kingdom, in these words [Although my house be not so with God.]

2. Here Is an Excellent description of the nature, properties, and suitableness
of the Gospel Covenant, in these four particulars.

Viz.
1. The dureableness of it, Everlasting. 2. The orderliness of it, Ordered. 3.
The sureness, certainty of it. 4. The suitableness to David, as to his. 1.
Present desires in this World. 2. Eternal Salvation hereafter.

You see the Text is a full store house, a rich treasury, a blessed Magazine,
whence we may fetch both meat and medicine, food and physic, work and reward,
all things that concern grace and glory.

1. The Text then presents to us David's case, and 2. Cure. 1. His Case is
presented negatively, [Although my house be not so with God.] 2. His Cure
positively, which is [the Covenant,] that is a Salve for all Sores, a Remedy for
all Maladies, a Supply for all Wants.

I am not ignorant that some carry the sense thus, Although my house be not so
with God, i. e. my house is not such an unstable, inconstant thing, to alter
and change as the Weather, from a glorious Sunshine morning, to a dark cloudy,
gloomy evening, so it may prove, a stormy, rainy day; no, no, my House and
Family is fixed, settled, splendid, and complete, if not in my outward affairs
at present, yet in the Messiah to come out of my Loins in the fullness of time:
his Kingdom will appear, and shine most gloriously, and break in pieces all
other Kingdoms, and it shall stand for ever; so you read, Dan. 2.44.

But (though that be a great truth) I am apt to incline to those Interpreters,
that take this as a concession, concerning the defects and imperfection of
Piety and Tranquillity in David's Family, q. d. I must needs confess, that
neither I nor my Children have lived so exactly, or ruled so uprightly in the
fear of God as we ought; we have had our faults and folly, which have clouded
our Consciences and Reputation, and therefore have not enjoyed such
uninterrupted prosperity as we might, had we walked more closely and exactly,
and therefore sad Clouds and Storms have darkened and disturbed our Heaven, yea
often benighted our state, domestical political, ecclesiastical, as well as
personal, my Children have not been like tender Grass, springing up to
maturity, but some of them cut off in the prime of their days; I have been
banished from my Throne, and family, not suffered to build God an House, nor
abide in his Sanctuary, my wounded Spirit has sighed out many heavy groans,
God has often withdrawn his Grace, hid his Face, and left my Soul on the brink
of hellish despair; yet for all this I can in my lowest ebbs cast my Eye upon
the Gospel Covenant, and fetch relief from that in my lowest state, inward or
outward.

Many Doctrines may be drawn out of this large, and full Text.

Doctrine 1. That it is a singular mercy to be be trusted with a Family. This is
implied, and owned by David, in 1 Chronicles. 17.16, 25. God sets the solitary in
Families, Psalm. 68.6.

Doct. 2. House-holders must make inspection into their Families. So does David
here, and Psalm. 101.2, 3. he had a large Family, State Affairs on his hands,
yet prays with his Family, 2 Samuel 6.20. puts it not off to Stewards or
Chaplains. See Prove. 27.23.

Doct. 3. A Religious Family is to be with God. Although my House be not so
with God, he earnestly desires all the members of his Family might be with God,
laments the contrary, for the Lord is with them that are with him, 2 Chronicles.
15.2.

Doct. 4. The best Families have their defects and imperfections. David's
Family (for all his care) may be far from the rule, not only as to individual
members, but as to the complex body of a Family; there were disorders even in
Christ's own Family.

Doct. 5. Family-faults bring family plagues, family-defects produce
family-afflictions. God will not spare sinning families, though dear to him,
nay they shall smart soonest and sorest, Amos 3.2. You only have I known of all
the families of the Earth, therefore I will punish you.

Doct. 6. Family-miscarriages do greatly trouble gracious house-holders. He
speaks of it, with sad resentment. Oh what bitterness is it to a godly Father,
Master, to find disorders in such as are under his charge!

Doct. 7. The Covenant of Grace is extensive and comprehensive. The godly have
much comfort and content in it, with reference not only to themselves, but
their houses and families.

Doct. 8. The Covenant of Grace is Everlasting. It is from all Eternity in the
Covenant of Redemption, betwixt Father and Son, Tit. 1.1, 2. and endures for
ever, Psalm. 111.9.

Doct. 9. There is a comely and admirable order in the Gospel Covenant. An
order of persons, in the Fathers Election, Sons Redemption, Holy Ghosts
Application, believers reception: An order of things supreme, subordinate
causes, means, instruments, promises, privileges, principles, and practices;
all keep their places, they do not interfere or thwart each other.

Doct. 10. The Gospel Covenant is sure and stable. Things are not left at
uncertainties, nor depend on the mutable Will of Man, as of old it was with
Adam: but they are the sure Mercies of David, Isa. 55.2. and 54.9, 10.

Doct. 11. There Is that in the Covenat that answers a Christian's desires. As
the Christians desire is mainly carried to it; so there is that in it which
answers and satisfies those desires: desires are vast and immense, but the
contents of the Covenant run parallel, and are every way adequate to just
desires.

Doct. 12. A Christians Salvation is wrapped up in the Gospel covenant. Upon this
may a Child of God venture his Soul. Eternal Life is contained and comprehended
in it.

I wave all these, and shall consider the Text in a two fold notion, or
relation.

1. In a domestical sense. 2. In a personal respect.
The former refers to David's House, the latter to his Heart and Soul: this
blessed Covenant was David's chief relief, in both these cases: from the former
observe,

That notwithstanding the sins and sufferings in a godly man's family which
occasion much grief to his Spirit, yet he is supported and satisfied with Gods
gracious Gospel covenant.

From the latter acceptance observe this.

Doct. That Covenant Relation is the foundation of a dying Christians safety,
satisfaction, and salvation. It is the former Doctrine I shall say something to
at present.

CHAP. II. The Doctrine cleared from the Text, some things premised.
THE principal point I propose from the Text concerns David's family, for 1. He
mentions his house in the beginning of the Text. 2. The latter end of the verse
refers to his house, [Although he make it ( i. e. my house) not to grow] i. e.
to increase in number, power, honor.

The former part of the verse is variously rendered, (...) nec tanta est domus
mea apud Deum. Nor is my house so great, or of so much worth with God. Alas
what is my house at best, my pedigree is mean and base. David disdains not to
reflect on his despicable original, though advanced to the culminating point of
civil and spiritual promotion, as a King and Prophet: he magnifieth God, and
villifieth, yea nullifieth himself, 2 Samuel 7.18. Who am I, O Lord God, and what
is my house that thou have brought me hitherto? others thus, plus est quam haec
domus mea ante Deum, Chaldee.
Jon. i. e. there is more in the Covenant than this my house before God. All
the Families in the World amount not to so much as one Messiah, he, he only is
the noble flourishing branch springing out of my Family, that is worth us all,
who conveys life and sap to us all, Isa. 11.1.
this is the Rod out of the Stem of Jesse, and a branch growing out of its
Roots, and they shall hang on him all the glory of his Fathers house: Isa.
22.24.
my whole family would fall to ruin but for him, on whose behalf it must be
upheld, that he may be born of it: yea who only upholds it.

Others thus, [quamvis not sit it a] i. e. Although, my Family, and Kingdom be
not so holy, as to perform the conditions of the Covenant so exactly as God
requires, we are guilty in many respects before God, and he has whipped us
sore, yet Gods Covenant is the ground of my hope for my Family, and I doubt not
but my Lord will make it good.

And what David says of his Family, any Child of God may say of his, except in
the peculiar case of the Messiah springing out of his loins. Thence we may
safely draw this

Doct. That notwithstanding the sins and sufferings in a godly man's Family,
which occasion much grief to his Spirit, yet he is supported and satisfied with
Gods gracious Gospel covenant. In handling this point I shall 1. Premise some
things fit to be known. 2. Give the proof of the point. 3. Answer a main
objection. 4. Make a short Application.


The things to be premised are four, 1. What may befall a Godly man's family. 2.
Why are these a grief to his Spirit. 3. What is the Covenant that supports him.
4. What is in the Covenant to bear him up.


A word of all these briefly.

1. What may fall out in a godly man's family that may occasion his grief?

Answ. I shall reduce these to two heads.

1. Corruptions breaking out. 2. Afflictions breaking in on his house, sin and
suffering, and indeed suffering is the proper fruit of sinning.
1. Corruption may break out in godly families: I shall not need to instance in
Adams, Noah's, Abraham's, Isaacs, yea even in Jacobs, Aarons, Samuels, etc. I
shall keep to David's, Alas, corruption brake out sadly. 1. In himself. 2. In
his Children. 1. David was guilty of, 1. Sins of Ommission, possibly not
instructing, restraining, or not punishing Ammon, Absalom, and not crossing
Adonijah, 2 Kin. 13.21.
1 Kin. 1.6. David was too indulgent for which he smarted. Yea, 2. He was
guilty of foul sins of commission: as Adultery, and Murder of his faithful
Servant Vriah, 2 Samuel 11.4, 27. rashness toward Mephibosheth, 2 Samuel 19.29.
sometimes lying, changing his behavior, etc. 2. His Children also were deeply
guilty, Ammons Incest, 2 Samuel 13.23, 28. 2 Samuel 15.1. 1 Kin. 1.7.
Absolom's Rebellion, and Adonijahs Ambition. Alas that there should be found
such gross abominations in godly David's Family! yet this was not his case
only, it is said of Samuel, that his sons walked not in his ways, but turned
aside after lucre, and took bribes and perverted judgment, 1 Samuel 8.3.

2. And what a flood gate of troubles did these sins open, which gushed in upon
him, deep called to deep, Psalm. 42.7.
all Gods Waves and Billows went over him, Remember David and all his
Afflictions, Psalm. 132.1.
says he, how numerous, how ponderous! some of his desirable Children dying
in the height of their career, by the eminent hand of justice one died in
infancy to punish his iniquity: 2 Samuel 12.14.
besides foreign Enemies, he had a doomy morning, noon, evening, what bloody
Wars with Saul, and his house, with Philistines, Ammonites! what sad Tragedies,
Insurrections, Commotions, Confusions, threatening a total Dissipation and
extirpation, so that David might call some Child Beriah, as Ephraim did because
it went evil with his house. 1 Chronicles. 7. 21, 22, 23. and so it has done with
many a good man's house.

2. Why are these breakings out of sin, and breakings in of sufferings in their
Families, such a grief to godly householders?

An. For the first, it must needs trouble them.

1. Because by sin God is greatly displeased, his name much dishonored,
Religion discredited, the hearts of the Godly sadened, the wicked scandalized,
hardened; Motes in Professors are beams, Mountains in the eyes of Profane;
what will they say? they are no better than we, what are they but a pack of
hypocrites, to what purpose is all their whining and praying? Our Children
carry as civilly as theirs, where is the Covenant they boast of? Hence David,
Psalm. 42.3. My tears have been my meat day and night, while they continually
say unto me, where is thy God?

2. They are greatly afflicted with the sins of Children, because the beloved
of their Souls are endangered, they are pieces of themselves, as their own
Souls, how can I endure to see my own flesh scorched, and tormented in
Hell-flames? Oh! that Child that came out of my Loins, my Bowels, to be
separated from God, a companion with Devils, a Firebrand in Hell, the mention
of it sinks my Spirits? Is all my labor lost? their Souls lost? oh who can
endure to think of it? no wonder if that be the first of Solomon's Proverbs,
Prove. 15.28.
chapter 1. A wise Son makes a glad Father; but a foolish Son is the heaviness of
his Mother. Yea, 17. 25
he frequently repeats it: other afflictions lie on the back, this goes to the
heart, see Romans 9.1, 2, 3.

3. Consciousness in Parents of their own guilt, makes Childrens Miscarriages,
more uneasy and afflictive. O I read my sin in my Child's folly, alas, omission
of due instruction, admonition, correction has brought my Child to this, I may
thank my self, I have taught the young ones by my bad Example, I have not
watched over them, prayed for them, been so jealous of them, to offer Sacrifice
for them continually, as I find Job did, chap. 1. 5, 3, 25. who can tell, but
if I had been faithful, I might have prevented all this? Oh, my Child's sin
brings my youthful vanities to my remembrance, thus I dealt with my Father, to
this pitch I arrived. God punishes my sin with my Child's: I am verily guilty,
this cuts deep, Jer. 4.18.

4. The affliction is heavier because it does in some sort weaken Parents
confidence in the Covenant, and endanger their faith in the Promise. Godly
Parents are ready to say when a Child is born and baptized as Samuel of Eliab,
1 Samuel 16.6.
surely the Lords anointed is before him, this is a lovely child, I hope this
may honor God in his day, but the child grows up, and degenerates, answers,
not expectations, but grows debaucht, and hopeless; old in sin, though young in
years, and now the Godly Parents hopes are dashed and daunted, he is put to a
stand, and knows not what to think or say, but concludes sadly, with the two
disciples in another case, we trusted that it had been he (this Child) Luke
24.21.
that should have been an honor to God, a comfort to me, and a good instrument
in the Church, but oh how am I disappointed! he proves the greatest affliction
I have oh what is become of the Covenant? have I not some reason to question
either Gods faithfulness or mine own interest? This was the temptation of holy
David, with whom the Covenant was made expressly and immediately, Psalm. 89.20.
yea God gives him all the assurances imaginable his word, his oath, ver. 34,
35. yet ver. 49. he says Lord, where are thy former loving kindnesses, which
thou sworest unto David in thy truth? A sad expostulation, as if God kept not
touch with David, why what is the matter? the reason was, because Providence
run counter to Promises: crosses seemed to make void Gods Covenant, ver. 38. to
46. but thou have cast off and abhorred, thou have been wroth with thine
anointed, etc. Alas, David, where is thy Faith? But so it is that sense prevails
in the best Saints above Faith at some seasons: but most of all in this case,
when the Children of the Covenant, cross the Ends of the Covenant? and no doubt
this becomes a great grief of heart to a godly Soul; when he is thus sadly non
plust, till the light of the Covenant rightly understood unriddle this mystery,
the poor Christian is in great perplexity: David had a promise by Samuel that
he should be King, yet says in his heart, 1 Samuel 27.1.
I shall now perish one day by the hand of Saul. Why so? why, his present
danger seemed to supersede the performance of that promise, Psalm. 116.11.
and though he said in his haste all men are liars, yet when he came to
himself, certainly he would fret and vex himself, that he should so wrong
himself, and Samuel yea and cast such an unworthy reflection upon God himself,
as though, he were unfaithful to his promise: thus will the Godly Soul do at
last, but at present he is upon a strange rack, tortured betwixt hope and fear.

CHAP. III. What this Covenant is, and what is in it to support the Christian.
IT would be superfluous to say much of the nature of a Covenant, yet take this
short description of it.

A Covenant is a voluntary mutual compact between two parties, containing
benefits to be enjoyed, and duties to be performed.

1. It Is a compact between two parties, for though a single person may make a
promise, yet a covenant is betwixt two or more, and of parties formerly at
distance; this is the case betwixt God and Man, so Genesis 26.28.

2. It Is a mutual reciprocal compact, both parties must be engaged, therefore
it is called the Bond of the Covenant, Ezekiel. 20.87. because though they were
free before yet now they are become bond.

3. It Is a voluntary compact, both parties were free before they were obliged
by covenant, covenanting is an Elective act, God is a free Agent: nothing but
pure love induced him to covenant with Man, Deuteronomy. 77, 8. and though man was not
absolutely free, being Gods Creature, and so bound to his Creator, yet his
actual entering into Covenant is a voluntary act, Psalm. 110.3. Thy People shall
be willing [or Volunteers] in the day of thy Power.

4. Betwixt Covenanters there is mutual obligation to conferring of benefits,
and performing of duties [called the habenda and the agenda] things to be
conferred by God, and received by man, and duties on man's part if he expect any
benefits from God, Isa. 1.19. If you be willing and obedient, you shall eat the
good of the Land.

Yet in the Covenant of Grace betwixt God and Man, there are two things
peculiar.

1. That there is an interposing Mediator, our blessed Jesus, the days-man that
lays his hand upon both: now says the Apostle, a mediator, is not of one, but
God is one, Job 9.55.
Gal. 3.20. i. e. his business is to reconcile parties not only distinct, but
different.

2. This Mediator is also surety or sponsor, to be a susceptor or undertaker
for both parties, i. e. to perform what is necessary, both what concerns
conferring of benefits on Gods part, not formally, and performing conditions on
man's part, as though Christ believes and repents for us, to save us a labor of
repenting or believing, but meritoriously, purchasing these Graces for us, and
efficiently working them in us, thus Jesus is made a surety of a better
Testament, Heb. 7.22 on Gods part, he brings in everlasting righteousness, and
makes God friends with us, and all his attributes amicable to us, employed for
us: on our part working gracious dispositions and actings, which are the
conditions of the Covenant, so the whole lies upon Christ: Col. 3.11.
and he is all in all: he is responsible for God and Man, being only able and
capable, as God and Man, to fulfill necessary terms on both parts: thus God
promises what he requires, and gives what he promises, Jer. 3.19. But I said,
how shall I put thee among the Children, and give thee a pleasant land, a
goodly heritage of the Host of Nations? And I said thou shall call me my
Father, and shall not turn away from me. [Thou shalt] there is Gods undertaking,
to give filial disposition and perseverance: Oh infinite contrivance of Divine
Wisdom and Free grace!

Mr. Baxter's Directory.
An Eminent Divine observes, that 1. The Gospel relating matters of fact, is an
history. 2. Declaring terms on which God will be served, is a law of Grace. 3.
Discovering promises of Life conditionally, it is Gods Covenant. 4. As accepted
by Man, it is a mutual Covenant betwixt God and Man: this Law and Covenant of
Grace, which was purchased by Christ's Death, is that legacy he left to the
World, dispensed by his Ambassadors, and effectually conveyed to the Legatees,
or Heirs of Promise, by his grand Executor the Holy Ghost. This then is the
great security of man's Salvation, That God works in us, Phil. 2.13. 1 Pet.
1.5.
both to will and to do, that we are kept by the mighty power of God through
Faith unto Salvation. This is the excellency of the Gospel dispensation of the
New Covenant, the Old-Covenant laid all the stress on the shoulders of mutable
man, and therefore it is judged, that the Covenant of God made with Adam in
innocence, was peculiar to him in that estate and went no farther, is not at
all continued in any force since the Fall, for if there had been a law given,
which could have given life, then righteousness had been by the Law, Gal. 3.21.
but it is by the Gospel Covenant that we are justified and saved.

Quest. What Is all this to the purpose? All this seems to be personal not
relating to posterity, but you told us of grounds of hope for Children from the
Covenant: how come Children concerned in this Covenant?

This leads me to the

4th Thing premised, viz. What is there in the Gospel Covenant, that is ground
of support to Parents on the behalf of their Children?

I answer, in general, Parents and Children are legally one party, and in civil
contracts are usually involved in the same bottom, so in the first Covenant
Adam being a public person, represented all his Posterity, for judgment was by
one to condemnation, Romans 5.16, 18.
yea upon all men: we smart for Adam's sin. And in the Old
Testament-dispensation of the Covenant, Genesis 17.7. I will establish my Covenant
between Me and Thee, and thy Seed after thee in their Generations. And
afterward in Moses days, when God renewed the Covenant, he says Deuteronomy. 29.14,
15. Neither with you only do I make this Covenant, and this Oath, with him that
stands here with us this before the Lord our God, and also with him that is
not here with us this day, i. e. With their Posterity, and so the People did
understand it, Deuteronomy. 5.3. The Lord made not (i. e. only) this Covenant with our
Fathers, but with us, even us who are all of us here alive this day. And in the
New Testament, the Apostle says, Act. 2.39. For the promise is unto you, and
to your Children: this is a [faedus ad successores transiens] a Covenant that
passes to successors. Bargains, Leases, Legacies may pass to Children, yea
Children may suffer for their Parents faults, Traitors Sons lose their Fathers
inheritance.

Now we must look upon Children under a double capacity. 1. Children of
Heathens, or Jews; Turks, or Infidels. 2. Children of Christian Parents:
concerning the former we have little to say. It Is the latter we treat of, and
of these also, 1. Some are only by an external profession in Covenant. 2.
Others are sincerely, savingly in Covenant with God: we can say little
concerning the former, we insist chiefly on the latter: and of both or all
these, 1. Some Children dye, in Infancy, 2. Others live to years of maturity: I
shall hint a word or two of the former, though it be the latter that I
principally design.

1. For Children dying in Infancy, if we had any Scripture discovery concerning
the Election of all Infants, or that Christ had expiated the guilt of such
Infants, or that effectual saving Grace does always attend the Ordinance of
Baptism, though they be brought under it (which yet many are not) the question
were quickly determined, but what God does with the Souls of such Infants, we
have not sufficient means to understand, and therefore leave them to Gods good
pleasure. But concerning the Seed of those that truly fear God, of one or both
the Parents, we have ground of hope for their Salvation: for

1. They are Holy, 1 Cor. 7.14. and though it be faederally or relatively holy
yet may be really, and so be saved.

2. Our Savior says, Mark 10.14.
of such is the Kingdom of God, or of Heaven, Mat. 19.14. not only such as have
the disposition of Children, but Infants themselves, may be Church Members
here, and glorified hereafter.

3. Children of Godly Parents are in Covenant with God, Now to Abraham and to
his Seed were the promises made, Gal. 3.16. natural as well as spiritual: it is
true there was a Covenant of peculiarity to give his Seed the land of Canaan,
and it is as true, the text speaks not of Seeds but one Seed, that is Christ,
but the Scripture affirms, that in his Seed, Christ, yea in thee, says God,
shall all the Families of the Earth be blessed, Genesis 12.3. for so does the
Apostle interpret, and apply it, Act. 3.25. Ye are the Children of the Prophets
and of the Covenant, which God has made with our Fathers.

4. David had good hopes that his Child was gone to Heaven, 2 Samuel 12.25. I
shall go to him, but he shall not return to me. Obs. 1. He does not only mean
into the state of the dead, where the child is, but into Heaven where I shall
find him, for his Carcass was but part of him, and the least part. 2. This hope
he had of him, though the Child was begot in Adultery. 3. Though the Child was
struck with death, as a punishment of David's sin. 4. Though the Child had not
yet circumcision the Seal of the Covenant, for he died on the seventh day, ver.
18. and we know that Circumcision was not to be till the eighth day. Genesis 17.12.
So that it seems the stress is not laid on the Seal, but on the Covenant: so
that we see grounds of hope for the Eternal Salvation of the Infants, of
believing Parents. But how and whence this comes to pass, that such Infants
become capable of Eternal Salvation, that is a great Question.

Luther thinks that Infants have actual Faith, from Mat. 18.6. Whosoever shall
offend one of these little ones which believe in me. So reason is in Infants
[tanquam in principio and Radice] in its principle, root, habit, virtually
though not yet actually produced.

2. Others say they are saved by some peculiar, unknown, unspeakable way
without Faith, but the text says, Mark 16.16. He that believes and is
baptized, shall be saved, but he that believes not shall be damned: how far
this extends with reference to Infants I know not.

3. Others say that Parents Faith is also Childrens, according to the Tenor of
the Covenant; [I will be thy God and the God of thy Seed] thus Children have
faith after a sort. So the text says, Romans 11.16. If the Root be holy, the
Branches are also holy. So in humane Laws the Father and the Heir are but one
Person: of this opinion is Mr. Perkin's, and produces the testimony of the
Ancients, as St. Augustine and Bernard, saying it is meet, and for the honor of
God, that to whom age denies their own Faith, Grace should grant to them, a
benefit by the Faith of another. Perk vol. 1. fol. 486. where he answers
Bellarmine's objection, That by this means Children shall be born Believers,
and so be conceived and born without original sin.

Answ. Believing Parents sustain two persons, one whereby they are men, and
thus they bring forth Children, having Man's Nature with all the corruptions of
nature: the other as they are holy men, and Believers, and thus they bring
forth Infants, that are not so much their Children, as the Children of God; and
Infants are Gods Children, not by virtue of their birth, but by means of
Parents Faith, which intitles them to all the blessings of the Covenant. Thus
he.

But this is not the subject of our present design, and consideration.

CHAP. IV. What grounds of hope Parents have from the Covenant for their Adult,
and surviving Children.
THE second head in the prosecuting of this Doctrine is the proof of the point,
That notwithstanding the sins and sufferings, breaking forth in a godly man's
Family, or breaking in upon it, which occasion much grief to his Spirit, yet he
is, and has reason to be supported and satisfied from Gods gracious
Gospel Covenant.

I am very sensible I have undertaken a difficult province, and walk in an
untrodden path; But this I may confidently affirm, that whatever befalls a
covenanted Soul, he may fetch all good out of this blessed treasury: for 1.
Either his Children shall be laid hold on by converting Grace; or 2. They shall
not: if they be, oh what cause will he have to magnify Covenant-love, on their
behalf? if not, still he will exceedingly adore Covenant-grace, on his own
behalf, that has made him to differ, and in the worst case will find something
in the Covenant for supporting his Spirit, and sanctifying his bitter cup of
Affliction, in the death of Children. As to this latter, I shall say nothing,
but refer you to a small Treatise of Mr. John Flavel's, called the Balm of the
Covenant applied to the bleeding wounds of afflicted Saints, from this text.

But my present business is to gather up such gracious promises, as a Nosegay,
or Posie, out of the Garden of Scripture, as may refresh the drooping hearts of
Gods poor Children, sorrowing for the miscarriages of their Children, that they
may turn them into Prayer, or use them as a Cordial to support them, till the
Lord shine upon the Souls of their beloved offspring.

In general observe that as the Covenant of Grace is a blessed constellation.
So every promise is an orient refulgent Star, to give both light and influence
to the weary Traveller, in this dark and dismal dispensation; wherein he is
appalled through sad fears that his Child shall be a castaway.

The Question is, what grounds of hope from Scripture have godly Parents, for
their Children that are grown, or growing up and likely to survive or outlive
them? The resolving of this is of exceeding great importance, and having
searched the Sacred Records, I do find twelve sorts of Promises that may
encourage Parents Hearts.

1. The first and chief is God himself, Genesis 17.7. For I will establish my
Covenant between me and thee, and thy seed after thee, in their Generations for
an Everlasting Covenant: to be a God unto thee, and to thy seed after thee.
This extends both to Abraham's natural Seed, and afterward to his Spiritual
Seed, all Gentile-believers, Romans 4.12, 18. Oh what a privilege is this!
whatever God is, has, or can be or do, is for believers, of all that is
communicable, divine power, wisdom, goodness, mercy, holiness, justice is the
portion of Believers, and their Seed, whatever they can ask or expect in a God,
shall be in due season, laid out, in them, and for them: this one word is the
substance and confluence of all good, spiritual, temporal, eternal, [Deus meus
and omnia] My God, is the most extensive and comprehensive word in the World:
what can a man desire more, and no less will give a gracious Soul content for
himself and his Seed: no less is in the Covenant, Jer. 31.33. Blessed is the
Nation whose God is the Lord. Psalm. 33.12. God (in some sense) may be the God
of Nations, Families, as well as Persons: and if some boast of Pedigree,
Wealth, Honor, numerous Posterity, Worldly Prosperity, yet let David reckon up
the Epitome, the summa totalis of man's felicity, he will thus conclude, happy
is that People whose God is the Lord, Psalm. 144.12, 15. Happy Parents that
bequeath such a Legacy to their Posterity, though they leave them in Poverty!

2. Next to that, and a mean to enjoy God is Jesus Christ the Mediator of the
Covenant, Isa. 42.6. I will give thee for a Covenant of the People, for a light
of the Gentiles: it is true God vouchsafed to the Jewish Nation this privilege,
Romans 9.5.
that of them as concerning the Flesh Christ came, but they cannot monopolize
this glorious gift, Ephesians. 2.13.
for now in Christ Jesus we who sometimes were afar off are made nigh by the
blood of Christ, and poor Gentiles laying hold on the Covenant, are become free
Denizons of all Jewish privileges that are essential to Salvation, Gal. 3.28.
for we are all one in Christ Jesus and promises are to us that are afar off,
even as many as the Lord our God shall call, Act. 2.39. even Christ himself, in
whom all the promises of God are yea, and in him, Amen. 2 Cor. 1.0.
Nor can any man have an interest in any one promise for himself or seed,
without an interest in Christ: there never was or will be any Covenant betwixt
God and Man since the fall, but through Christ: he then that has Christ, has
something to plead for his Children more than another has: Col. 3.11
he only is all and in all for our selves and ours; And they shall hang on him
all the glory of his Fathers House, the offspring and the issue, all vessels
of small quantity. Isa. 22.24. All believers are Gods family, and by Faith in
Prayer they may freely hang upon him offspring, i. e. Children,
Grandchildren, the smallest and least of the Vessels that are in their house
he will not refuse them, but lovingly entertain them; himself will take Infants
into his Arms, as himself being an Infant, was taken into old Simeons Arms, and
both old and young are blessed by him. Oh happy Parents that lay surviving seed
in so warm a bosom! they cannot miscarry that have Christ for their Guardian.

3. Another Legacy that Parents may leave their Children is the third person of
the blessed Trinity, the Holy Ghost, Isa. 44.3, 4. For I will pour Water upon
him that is thirsty. I will pour my Spirit upon thy Seed, and my blessing upon
thine offspring, and they shall spring up as among the grass, as willows by
the water courses: There Is no interest in God or Christ but by the operation of
the Spirit: the Holy Ghost proceeding from Father and Son, teaches believers
all things, convinces of Sin, renews the will, Joh. 14.16, 26.16.8, 13.
begets faith, uniteth the Soul to God, fills the empty vessel with divine
gifts, graces, influences, comforts; all the good things of Heaven are conveyed
into the Soul by our Lords substitute, the Spirit assisteth, quickneth,
inlargeth, supporteth and satisfies; yea says the Christian, I have had much
experience of the Spirits help in my own Soul, but what reason have I to hope
for the like to my Children? Look on the text again, I will pour my Spirit upon
thy Seed: it shall not come on them by drops, but be poured on them abundantly:
they shall be filled with the Holy Ghost, see the full promise in Joel 2.28.
accomplished, Act. 2.17, 18. I will pour out my Spirit upon all flesh, and your
Sons and Daughters shall Prophecy. It Is true there is something in that Promise
Arbitrary and extraordinary, suited to that dispensation, but something there
is also usual, permanent and essentially necessary to true Christianity: which
God makes good to believers and their seed in all ages. Oh happy Children! that
have the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, the love of God, and the communion and
communications of the Holy Ghost, 2 Cor. 13.14.

4. Children of Believers are rightful heirs of all Gospel-priviledges: I may
in a sound sense say of them as Paul of the Jewish Church, Romans 9.4. who are
Israelites, to whom pertains the Adoption, and the glory, and the Covenants,
and the giving of the Law, and the service of God, and the Promises: there are
two sorts of privileges. 1. External as the Ordinances; they being born within
the Pale of the Visible Church, have the Prayers of Gods People for them. Romans
4.11.
As the Children of Abraham had the Seal of Circumcision, at eight days old, so
Children of Believers are Baptized, being Disciples of Christ, Mat. 28.19.
and so have Gods Sheep-mark set upon them betimes, and are taken into his
peculiar protection, and growing up, and owning their Baptismal Covenant, they
enjoy, 2. Those Essential Privileges that accompany Salvation, as
Reconciliation, Adoption, Justification, and are in a fair way to Eternal
Salvation, for they lie in the Road of Free Grace, under the droppings of the
Sanctuary, where the Spirit is wont to breathe the breath of Spiritual Life: if
any be proper heirs of Gods special care, and Ordinances, surely it is the
Children of Gods People, Psalm. 69.35, 36. For God will save Zion, and build the
Cities of Judah: who shall have the benefit of this Salvation? He answers, the
Seed also of his Servants shall inherit it, and they that love his name shall
dwell therein; Parents have prayed for the Churches Deliverance, and their
Children shall reap the fruit of their Prayers, so Psalm. 102.28. The Children
of thy Servants shall continue, and their Seed shall be established before
thee: there is a double mercy here; 1. In restoring Ordinances, 2. In
vouchsafing this privilege to the Children of Believers. Oh what would a Child
of God give to know that his Posterity should see better days? You have it in
the Promise, and may have it in the performance, if you reach out the hand of
Faith to receive it, for your selves and yours.

5. Children of Believing Parents shall be converted to God by Ordinances.
Psalm. 110. 3. The People shall be willing in the day of thy Power (i. e. in
dispensing of powerful Ordinances) in the beauties of holiness, [for holiness
is full of glory] from the Womb of the Morning [i. e. from the beginning of
Christ's entrance upon his Kingdom] thou have the Dew of thy Youth, [i. e. those
young men of the Seed of the faithful that shall be born to the Messiah,
resembling Dew for quality and quantity, for number and strange manner of
Genaration. But a plainer text we have in Isa. 29.22, 23. Jacob shall not now
be ashamed, neither shall his Face now wax pale [through the loss of good
blood, or death of godly] But when he sees his Children the work of my hands,
in the midst of him, they shall sanctify my name -- Oh blessed sight! to
behold Gods Image and Workmanship in the Souls of our Children! this is far
better than to behold our Image upon them: Gods Picture is drawn by his own
hand, with the Pencil of his Word and Spirit: the discovery of this will raise
high Monuments to the glory of Free Grace: Lift up thine Eyes (says God, Isa.
60.45.) Thy Sons shall come from far, and thy daughters shall be nursed at thy
side; I know it means Gentlie-converts: And it is so much the more of concern to
us. Isa. 49.22.
Another text says they shall bring thy Sons in their arms, with great care
and tenderness as nurses carry young infants in their bosoms that they be not
hurt. Oh what a brave sight is it to see converts flocking to Christ, and into
his Church like doves to their windows or lockers! Isa. 60.8
the Seventy Translate it as Doves with their young ones unto me: You may hope
for your childrens saving conversion, having those encourageing promises.

6. Godly Persons natural Children may and shall be useful instruments of
public good to the Church of God, Isa 49.17. Thy Children shall make haste,
(or as others render it,) thy builders: And her Children were her builders, as
we read in Ezra and Nehemiah: That is a glorious day, when destroyers are gone,
and the Churches Children build Zions Temple and Walls: But so it shall be,
Isa. 58.12. And they that shall be of thee (i. e. thy Children Spiritual or
Natural, or both) shall build the old Wast places, thou shall raise the
Foundations of many generations. Is not this worth something to have blessed
Instruments of Reformation raised out of your loins, as Magistrates or
Ministers! how did it glad David's heart, that his Son Solomon must build God an
house, 2 Samuel 7.13. He shall build an house for my name. David ecchos', verse
18. Who am I, O Lord God, and what is my house that thou have brought me
hitherto? And what if a Zerobbabel or a Joshuah proceed out of thy loins, who
knows but some of thy posterity may be raised up as godly Ministers to convert
sinners to God? hope and pray, for all things are possible with God, and thou
have encouragement from the Covenant.

CHAP. V. More grounds of encouragement to Parents from the Promises.
7 ANother incourageing word to Parents for their Children is, that principles
of grace and profession of godliness shall continue to future generations, Isa?
59.21. As for me, this is my Covenant with them, says the Lord, my Spirit that
is upon thee and my words which I have put in thy mouth shall not depart out of
thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy s^ednor out of the mouth of thy Seeds
Seed, says the Lord, from henceforth and for ever. This is a large and
long-lasting charter: God Spirits within his children, and the owning of his
name in their lips, and this for ever! What can godly Parents desire more?
Whether this Spirit import a Spirit of Prophecy or a Spirit of Sanctification,
surely it is a rich kindness, that it shall run in this straight line, and
channel to many generations, that the name of God, as well as your name may be
kept up in your Family perpetually when you are dead and gone: Oh happy Parents
that have such Children! Happy Children that had such Parents! and blessed be
God that embraces both in the bosom of the Covenant! That Is a Soul-supporting
word in Hag. 2.5. According to the word that I covenanted with [your Fathers,
yea with] you, when you came out of Egypt, so my Spirit remains among you:
Fear ye not, be not daunted, there were as many and great obstructions in the
way of mercy then as now, yet grace overcame them, and I have not taken away my
Spirit from you notwithstanding your multiplied provocations this 2000. years,
but still it is among you and shall continue to many generations: May not faith
triumph in this promise?

8. That great observations shall be made of and remarks upon the Children of
godly Parents, Isa 61.8, 9. I will make an everlasting Covenant with them, and
their seed shall be among the gentiles (i. e. Gentile Churches) and their
offspring among the People, all that see them shall acknowledge them, that they
are the seed which the Lord has blessed. Men shall speak to each other, Do not
you see the faithful child of such a believing Father? Oh how many a precious
day have we had, with such an ones Father, Mother, or Grandfather! this is the
Pious Child of a Zealous father, you see it is not in vain to seek and serve
God, I remember the prayers and tears poured out for his Child, and I see the
blessed fruit thereof: God is a prayer-hearing God: of some Children we may
say, as Paul to Timothy, 2 Timothy 1.5. When I call to remembrance the unfeigned
faith that is in thee, which dwelt first in thy Grandmother Lois, and thy
Mother Eunice, and I am persuaded that in thee also: His Grandmothers name was
Lois, which signifies better, his Mothers name Eunice signifying victor, and
Timothy is the fear of God: If Parents choose the better part, God will give
them victory over the World, Sin, and Satan, yea they shall have power with
God, and obtain God-fearing Children, which others will observe and admire the
grace of God in.

9. Childrens Children to many generations are remembered with
Covenant-kindness: So in the second Commandment, Exodus 20.6. Showing mercy unto
thousands [i. e. of generations,] of them that love me and keeep my
Commandments: Deuteronomy. 7.9.
This is transcendent mercy, punishment extending but to three or four of them,
ver. 5. you will say, mercy and justice are Gods two Arms, is the one longer than
the other? Answer no, they are equally infinite, but he makes his Church to
feel more of his mercy, then of his justice, with the Lord there is mercy, why
so? Because with him is plenteous Redemption, Psalm. 130.7. It is a Covenant of
Grace, and Christ interposeth as Mediator of it: Oh! the overflowings of
Free Grace to many generations, Psalm. 103.17, 18. But the mercy of the Lord is
from everlasting to everlasting upon them that fear him, and his righteousness
unto Childrens Children. Mark it, it is called righteousness, to show, it is a
discharge of his obligation, by which he has in some sort bound himself to
Parents to do good to their Posterity, Mic. 7.20.
for it was mercy to Abraham to make a Covenant, but it is truth and
faithfulness to perform it to Jacob. and his rising seed many years after: for
it is founded in his Eternal purpose, and continues to Eternity: and this is the
reason of our hopes of the calling the Jews, because they are beloved for their
Fathers sake, or rather because of God's Covenant with their Ancestors, Romans
11.27, 28. Oh what encouragement is this to Parents that God will not utterly
cast off their seed: but will resume thoughts of love to them at last?

10. That God will reduce the wandering Children of his People by seasonable and
sanctified correction, Psalm. 89.29. -- 35. 2 Samuel 7.14, 15.
If his Children for sake my Law and walk not in my judgments (i. e. if they
forfeit the Privileges promised by nonperformance of the conditions) then
will I visit their transgression with a Rod, and their iniquity with Stripes,
nevertheless my loving kindness will I not utterly take from him nor suffer my
faithfulness to fail: God has adopted Affliction to be a branch of Covenant
affection, Psa;l. 119.75.
'Its a promise [I will visit] not so much a threatening, for in faithfulness he
afflicts his Children: he will not take so much pains with a slave as with a
Son: he will make his Children thank God for a whipping, Lord; says a godly
Parent, bring home my Child though it be by weeping cross: starve my prodigal
son, or feed him with husks, that he may reflect on his Fathers plenteous
Table: oh break his Leg or Arm rather than damn his Soul: cast him on a sick
bed, rather than cast him into Hell: let his Purgatory be here and his Heaven
hereafter: now our gracious God answers his Childrens Prayers: good Hezekiah's
Prayers for his extravagant Son Manasseh were answered by Gods taking him among
the Thorns, binding him with Fetters, carrying him to Babylon, till he had
humbled him to purpose, and made him know that Jehovah was God, 2 Chronicles. 33.11,
12, 13. doubtless the natural as well as the spiritual Father of the Prodigal
will welcome home the Child, though broken on the Wheel.

11. The Covenant ingageth for a blessing on Parents instruction and correction
of their erring Children: this is of great use, 1. For instruction, Prove. 22.6.
Train up a Child in the way he should go: [There's the Parents Duty, do thy
duty to set him right in the beginning of his way, so some read it,] and when
he is old he will not depart from it, i. e. not easily, ordinarily, q. d. if
thou that art the Father wilt do thy duty faithfully, I will undertake to do my
part: set thou their faces in the right road, and I will keep them in it;
ordinarily I will bless thy instructions admonitions, counsels, examples, see
Genesis 18.19. God says of Abraham, I know him that he will command his Children,
and his household after him, you will say what is he better for that? they will
choose whether they will obey or no: nay says God, but I will undertake for them,
[And they shall keep the way of the Lord, to do Justice and Judgment.] His
labor shall not be in vain; I live, says God, to make his words take
impression on his surviving Children when he is dead? For correction you have a
notable promise in Prove. 23.13, 14. Withold not correction from the Child,
for if thou beatest him with the rod, he shall not dye [I will take care of
him;] thou shall beat him with the Rod, and shall deliver his Soul from Hell: O
blessed whipping! surely such a scourge as fetches blood is easier than
hell torments: but my benediction shall be upon that correction: that is a cruel
Parent, that will rather see his Child a flaming Faggot in the scorching fire,
than try to whip folly out of him, that is cruel pity, better he should cry
here, then roar hereafter, yea and curse thee for ever, that would not speak
a word or give him a tap, to prevent these intolerable torments: Oh the good
that seasonable correction may do! if thou prevail not to make thy Child good,
yet thou will have comfort in the discharge of thy duty, there is good hopes of
both by the blessing of God, Prove. 29.17. Correct thy Son, and he shall give
thee rest, yea he shall give delight unto thy Soul: yet take this caution, that
these promises must not be understood absolutely, necessarily, and universally
producing this effect, but ordinarily so it is, and this is sufficient motive
to Parents to do their duty, and encouragement therein.

12. The last encouragement to Parents from the Covenant of God, for their
surviving Children, is, that God will take care of their outward concerns in
the World, Prove. 20.7. the just man walks in his integrity, his Children are
blessed after him, if their Father has not heaped up riches by cunning and
covetous devices, and so leaves them but little in the World, yet he has left
them in the hands of a good Father, who will take care of them, when their
earthly Parents are gone: for this blessed Covenant is not confined to the
persons of the Godly but entailed on their Posterity, Psalm 112.1, 2. Blessed is
the man that fears the Lord, that delights greatly in his commandments, his
seed shall be mighty upon earth, the generation of the upright shall be
blessed: answerable to this, I call to mind a passage, told me by a Reverend
Minister in London, who knew a poor and pious Preacher in Wiltshire, who had
many Children, and little to maintain them, one asked him, how he thought they
could shift when he was gone, he answered, I am not at all afraid of that, I am
more afraid of them when they shall ride up and down London streets in their
Coaches: which came to pass, for some of them came to be Aldermen of that
Famous City: our frequent experience confirms this truth, what care God takes
of his upright-hearted Servants Seed when they are laid in the dust: let us
take holy David's Experiment, Psalm. 37.25. I have been young, and now am old,
yet have I not seen the righteous forsaken, nor his seed begging bread. If
there have been some few exceptions, these yet do not destroy the truth of a
general proposition: howbeit temporal promises were more express and positive
to the Jews of old, than to christians in Gospel Times, which consists more in
spirituals: But this will remain a truth that Children of Godly Parents are
usually provided for comfortably even in things that concern this life, if it
tends to Gods glory, and their good, and if God see it good in his Infinite
Wisdom, which limitations must always be annexed to temporal promises: but if
they be poor, defamed, sick, in prisons, banished, yet all these work together
for their good. Romans 8.28.

CHAP. VI. An Answer to an Objection against the premises.
THE third general head in the Doctrinal part, is an answer to a main
objection, which is this.

Object. You have produced many promises as branches of the Gospel Covenant,
that the children of godly Parents, shall have converting Grace, that God the
Father, Son and Holy Ghost shall be theirs, are heirs of Gospel Privileges,
shall be sanctified, be useful instruments in the Church, shall own their
profession with an holy conversation, if they wander God will reduce them,
bless Parents instructions, corrections, take care of their outward concerns,
etc.

Now do we not see by daily observation the clean contrary to all these, how
many worthy Ministers have had worthless sons! how many worthless Children are
there of gracious Parents? nay do we not see some Children of Godly Parents,
miscarry more than others of their carnal civil neighbors more proud, scorners
of Godliness, companions of Drunkards, Swearers, Debaucht persons that have
proved a great dishonor to God, scandal to Religion, grief to Godly, and
Heartbreaking to their Parents, yea have so prejudiced the Spirits of wicked
men, that they say, this Religion is but a fancy, praying so much is needless,
and what is become of the Covenant you so much boast of? Nay, have we not seen
some Children of Godly Parents live and dye visibly graceless, under tokens of
Gods Wrath, yea hastening their death by intemperance and overmuch wickedness?
How is this consistent with all that you have spoken? How is God true to his
Covenant?

This is a sad truth, and cannot be denied and an awful consideration, and
possibly has staggered the Faith of some, and strengthened the hands of some
wicked against the power of Godliness, and is too palpable an observation to be
denied. But yet I hope to clear this tremendous providence from the holy
Scriptures by propounding these seven considerations.

1. Some of the Children of Gods People can set their seal to Gods
faithfulness, in the Covenant made to their Parents and their Seed: this clears
Gods truth and the goodness of Religion: I doubt not but some Children of the
Covenant can speak the language of Solomon, in 1 Kin. 8.23, 24. Lord God of
Israel there is no God like unto thee, who keep Covenant and Mercy with thy
Servants that walk before thee with all their heart, who have kept with thy
Servant David my Father, that thou promisedst him, thou spakest also with thy
mouth, and have fulfilled it with thine hand as it is this day: will not some
stand forth and say, I bless God for Godly Parents, my Soul has found the
benefit of their Prayers, and fruit of Gods Promise, I prefer this charter to
all earthly privileges: let others say their pleasure, I will for ever adore
Free Grace, that brought me forth under so good a Covenant, it is better to me
than to be born of a Royal Race, and being Heir to a Crown, he is my God, Exodus
15.2.
and I will prepare him an habitation, my Fathers God, and I will exalt him:
and cannot some Parents say, 2 Samuel 7.19.
God has spoken well of his servants house for a great while to come? behold I
see the buds of Grace in this or that Child, and a saving growing work in
another: blessed be Free Grace: I can hold forth this token for good against
all the cavils of profane Spirits, and against my own unbelieving fears.

2. God never forsakes the Children of Godly Parents, till they forsake him;
poor Children run away from God before he turn them off, 1 Chronicles. 28.9. If thou
seek him he will be found of thee, but if thou forsake him he will cast thee
off for ever. If Solomon (or any other Child or Children of a Godly Father,)
put on a Cloak of Religion, to please Parents or accomplish a carnal end, while
they live, and cast off Religion, and perversely turn their backs on God, and
embrace wicked ways, without true Repentance, they have discharged God of his
performing promise, because they have voluntarily descarded the condition on
their part; now at ripe age, when they are fit to make a choice, it is a
voluntary act, proceeding from their own wilfulness, John 5.40.
You will not come unto me; and then it becomes a judicial act in God to
forsake them, because they first forsook him: and neither they nor their
Parents can find fault with God for withdrawing from them that Grace they
abused, which he is not bound to give them.

3. Parents have no reason to challenge God for nonperformance of the terms of
the Covenant, but themselves for their neglect of duty to their Children, this
is ordinarily the reason of their Childrens miscarriage: even godly Parents are
too apt to miss it, by over fondness, and negligence in their education, not
admonishing, counselling, correcting them; David had been too indulgent to
Adonijah, in not crossing him, and doubtless his Conscience flew in his Face
upon his Ambition: this is a plain case, good Eli honored his sons above God,
1 Samuel 2.29. by permitting them to dishonor him, choosing rather to offend God
by connivance at their sin, than displease them by severe rebukes, effectual
restraints, and severe punishments, for as a Father, and as a Magistrate he
ought to have curbed them: therefore God says, I will judge his house for
ever, for the iniquity which he knows of, because his sons made themselves
vile, and he restrained them not. Oh what privy nips do the Consciences of
Parents give them, when their Children grow up and take not good ways! alas I
sinned against God, and now God leaves them to themselves; I have no cause to
censure God, but condemn my self: God is Righteous, their sin is a Glass to see
my own. Lord humble me, and convince them, oh pardon my iniquity, that I may
pray believingly for my Seed.

4. God may pass by the immediate offspring of his faithful Children and work
upon their more remote posterity: Free grace sometimes runs under ground for a
season and breaks out at a distance, an immediate Son is bad, but grace lays
hold on a Grandson, Jehoshaphat was a good man, 2 Chronicles. 20.32. But Jehoram his
Son proved bad, 2 Chronicles. 21.6. Yea, Ahaziah his Son walked in the ways of the
house of Ahab, 2 Chronicles. 22.3, 4. Vzziah did right in the sight of the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 26.4. And Jotham his Son, 2 Chronicles. 27.2, 6. But had a bad Son Ahaz, 2 Chronicles. 28.1, 2. Yet Electing love broke out again in good Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles.
29.2. But it lay dormant for a considerable time, and laid not hold of
Manasseh. 2 Chronicles. 33.2. Yea some think his forced Repentance was not sincere
and saving; however the grace of God withdrew from Amon his Son, 2 Chronicles.
33.20. But laid hold on good Josiah his Son, 2 Chronicles. 34.2. You see how grace
skips and leaps over the head of one, and lays its hand upon another, yea
sometimes it crosses hands and as Jacob guided his hands wittingly laying his
right hand on Ephraim and his left hand on Manasseh, Genesis 48.14, 20.
setting the younger before the Elder, contrary to Joseph's desire and design:
Thus God crosses our natural affections and expectations blessing such as we
least thought of and leaving others that our hearts were most set upon, to
convince us of the freeness of his grace: But thus his Covenant does stand sure.

5. Delays are no denials: God has his time to bring in the Prodigal Sons of
pious Parents; [nullum tempus occurrit Regi] the King of Heaven can take what
time he pleases to work on hearts. Saul shall long persecute the Church, yet
become a chosen vessel: it is worth observing that the Children of many godly
Parents sowed their wild Oats in youth; even godly Jacob was guilty of many
faults, stealing the blessing by a lie: Several of Jacobs Sons had foul spots,
Ruben and Judah were guilty of Incest, Simeon and Levi of rash Anger,
Treachery, Murder; yet all godly Patriarchs: Several combining out of envy to
sell Joseph: Whereby they broke their Father Jacob's honest heart; but let not
godly Parents make too hasty conclusions: He that believes makes not haste: It
may be God defers to hear because he loves your company, and would make you an
Errand to the throne of grace, your Prayers are yet too cold, he thinks fit to
quicken importunity: the Answer will come double laden, and pay for all your
pains and patience; give God the glory of his wisdom: he knows how to husband
your mercies better than you: it is worth observing that those Women in Sacred
Writ that waited longest for Children had the best as Sarah, Rebecca, Rachel,
Hannah, Manoahs Wife, and Elizabeth: Be not preposterous, you may see Gods
Salvation before you die.

6. If God never shows mercy to your seed, you must not so much murmur at his
Justice, as adore his Sovereignty; he is absolute disposer of his own grace;
such an act of Prerogative may be admired must, not be questioned: The Apostle
Paul having waded as far as Scripture led him into the unfathomable Abyss of
God's casting of the Covenanted seed of believing Abraham, and adopting the
forlorn, and forsaken Gentiles, stands on the bank of that Ocean and cries,
[(...)] Oh the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! To.
11.33.
how unsearchable are his judgments and his ways past finding out: The
immensity and ineffability of these counsels are such depths, as he says in
Job 32.13. He gives not account of any of his matters: They are often
unaccountable, but never unrighteous: Kings have [Arcana Imperij,] mysteries of
State, not fit to be communicated to vulgar capacities: And much more the
infinite God; Deuteronomy. 29.29.
secret things belong to God: It Is presumption to pry into Gods Ark, our weak
eyes cannot behold this glorious Sun: poor sinner, down on thy knees, and say
thus to God; Lord, I will rather adimire the riches of thy grace to my own
Soul, than quarrel with thee for not giving my Child grace: It is an abstruse,
and inscrutable depth, my humble Ignorance or nescience shall stop at thy
pleasure, my will shall be melted into thy will; if my seed must glory in thy
Justice, I will acquiesce therein and say, though clouds and darkness are round
about thee, yet righteousness and judgment are the habitations of thy throne,
Psalm. 97.2.

7. Yet for all this Religion must be owned, and vindicated, God is good to the
Soul that seeks him; Isa. 45.9.
to the Soul that waits for him: He never said to the seed of Jacob, seek ye me
in vain. Lam. 3.25.
If God never show mercy to any of my seed, yet I will never justify the
wicked, by saying It Is in vain to serve God: Mal. 3.14.
No, God forbid, Il will never say, that prayerless Families are as good as
praying Families, my own experience, and thousands more besides; the infallible
verity of the faithful God, Psalm. 19.11.
will contradict that Atheistical Maxim: in the keeping Gods commandments I
have found great reward; Yea I have found that the miscarriage of my Child
(which is the greatest cross that ever I met with) has been blessed for the
good of my Soul, as the good Woman said, bearing my Children, and my crosses
have cost me dear, but I could not be without either; it is not fit I should
choose my affliction, and what God lays on is welcome, and I will like Christ no
worse for his Cross: for I find these bitter Waters most medicinal, and the
sweetest fruit grows on this bitter Tree: the badness of my Child has helped to
make me better: this heartbreaking has proved an heart melting: it is true,
wicked men are hardened by seeing the Children of the Covenant thus miscarry,
(even as divisions, Mat. 10.34, 35. 2 Cor. 2.14.
and offenses amongst Gods people, are occasions of their ruin, yea the
Gospel-preaching is the savor of Death to some) but as God is just therein to
them, so my Soul has cause to bless the Physician of Souls, that so tempers
this poison, as to make it wholesome Physic to my poor Soul: my crosses are
better than their comforts. I will commend Religion, though I mourn over my
irreligious Child: Godliness is gain, though I gain not Grace for my Child by
it.

CHAP. VII. An Use of Conviction and Humiliation.
ALL the improvement I shall make of this point, shall be 1. Of Conviction. 2.
Exhortation.

1. Of Conviction, if this be true, that notwithstanding the sins and
sufferings in a godly man's family, which occasion much grief to his Spirit, yet
he is comforted and satisfied in Gods gracious Gospel Covenant.

Then it follows by the rule of contraries, that those Families that have no
right to this Gospel Covenant are in a woeful state, have no grounds of comfort,
satisfaction, no hopes of Salvation, so remaining, they are not under a
blessing, but under a curse, Prove. 3.33. The curse of the Lord is in the house
of the wicked: the Plague is in that house: set a cross on that door, and say
Lord have mercy upon it: wicked families, read your doom, and train of curses
in Deuteronomy. 28.15, 16, 17, 18, 19. you make great reckoning of your estates, alas
there is no Covenant blessing in any thing you have, they are in themselves
great blessings of God, but to you they are cursed, Mat. 2.2. If you will not
hear, and if ye will not lay it to heart, to give glory to my name, says the
Lord of Hosts, I will even send a curse upon you, and will curse your
blessings, yea I have cursed them already, because ye do not lay it to heart:
it is a dreadful flaming text against impenitent, inconsiderate sinners: not
only their persons, but all their domestic concerns are under a curse; your
meat, money, houses, wives, children, garments, employments, enjoyments, all
that you do, all that you have shall be accursed; this is an heavy case: a
grounded curse by man lies long, and lights sadly upon Successors; Noah
pronounced a curse on Cham's offspring, Genesis 9.25.
which never left them till it rooted out the Canaanites, by Shem's Posterity.

The subject is large and astonishing, I shall say something, 1. To Irreligious
Parents. 2. To Irreligious Children.


1. There are some Parents within the bounds of the visible Church, that, 1.
Understand not this Covenant, never set themselves to consider it: they bring
their Infants to be baptized in a custom, because others do so, and it would be
a shame not to have them Christened, Neighbors would cry out against them; but
they neither know the meaning of Baptism, nor Covenant, nor have they any mind
to know them. 2. Take no pains to get their own Souls interested in this
Covenant, Ephesians. 2.12.
but are strangers from the Covenants of Promise, and so have no hope for
themselves or seed: we find great fault with prodigal Parents that imbezel, and
alienate their Ancestors Inheritance, that should have descended to their
Children, but it is a thousand times worse for Parents, to cut off this blessed
entail of the Gospel Covenant. 3. Most are negligent in doing their duty to
Children, alas how few will take pains to instruct them in the principles of
Religion, the nature, use, ends of the Seals of the Covenant, in praying for
them, as if there were no such text in the Bible, or they had never made such a
promise, Ephesians. 6.4.
to bring them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord! Ah! wretched
Father, Mother, out of your own mouth are you condemned, that promise what you
never intend to perform: how notoriously do you falsify your promise, betray
your trust. 4. There are too too many Parents that are scandalous, profane,
atheistical, and teach their young ones to lie, swear, be drunk, unclean, by
the evil example they set before them. A Child brought up with Plato, coming
home, hearing his father in a furious passion, could say, I never saw or heard
the like in Plato. Alas, sirs you lessen your esteem with your Children by
sinful courses; you bring guilt upon your family: yea you do your endeavor to
root out your family: The seed of the wicked shall be cut off, Psalm. 37.28. The
whole Psalm, and daily experience testifies the same: Hab. 2.10.
Ah sinner, thou have consulted shame to thy house, and some generations hence
may reap the fruits of thy folly. The text says he will visit the iniquity of
the Fathers upon the Children to the third and fourth generation of them that
hate him. Exodus 20.5.
There are some hereditary sins, and some hereditary punishments bequeathed as
an heritage to their Children; Divines vindicate Gods Justice in proving that
God may righteously punish sins of Relations in their correlates, Filij sunt
res Parentum.
for Children (say some) are portions of Parents, as people are the riches and
good of Princes: yea they have in them [aliquid parentis] something of the
Parent, they are pieces of them. So David was punished in his Child's death: But
I shall not spend more time in this point; because so much is said by many
others.

How can you see your Children damned in Hell through your default? How can you
hear their cries, and see their torments in that Infernal Lake, gnashing their
Teeth, and roaring with Flames about their Ears, saying, oh cursed Parents,
that by your Soul-damning negligence, have brought your selves and me into this
lamentable state! that would not speak a word to me, nor plead the Covenant for
me, to prevent these Eternal Torments: that saw me go on in sin, and would not
stop my course betimes, by faithful admonition and sound correction; nay that
set me a bad Example, and were content that I should perish with you, cursed be
the day that ever I should know such wretched Parents, well had it been for me,
that I had never been born, or had been brought forth a Beast without a
rational Soul, that I might have died like a Beast, yea I had been
comparatively happy if you my Parents had put me to death, or as the Heathen
Thracians, lamenting my Birth, buried me betimes, and rejoiced at my death,
because of the miseries of humane life, but Oh I am brought forth, and fed up
for the murderer, the murderer of Souls; I had but gone (as a condemned person)
out of a dark prison to the place of Execution, but now, having lived thus long
in the World, I have fought against God, and sunk my Soul deeper in Hell: Oh woe
is me, that I lived under such cruel Tyrants, and as the dying person said, I
am going to Hell and my wicked Mother must follow after.

And Oh, the woeful resentment of fellow damned Parents upon the hideous
outcries of the fruit of their own bodies and bowels! here neighbors fare is
not good fare, but the rich man's torments are aggravated by his fine brethrens
coming into the same condemnation: Every Screek of the Child will tear the
heart of the self-condemning Father: how easily might I have prevented these
despairing groans by a faithful discharge of duty! What if I had followed my
wandering Child with sighs and tears to God and him while there was hope, but
now all too late, all too late, the guilt of my Child's blood is now required at
my hands, Had I whipped him so as to fetch blood at every lash, it had not been
so dreadful as the lashes of divine vengeance; had I disinherited him for his
faults, it had not been so confounding, as my own being banished with him from
the presence of the Lord and from the glory of his power, Oh! what is temporary
punishment to Eternal torments! Oh that God would strike the hearts of poor
carnal Parents with bowels of pity toward their poor perishing offspring.

2. Graceless irreligious Children, grown up, it is no excuse for you to be bad,
because your Parents are bad, are you so wildly sociable as to go to. Hell for
company? This is like the miserable Indians that leap into their Parents graves
to be buried with them: Or like that Italian visiting his Fathers Sepulcher,
washing all the parts of the Monument with lamentable tears, Progenies
viperarum nominat potius quam viperas ut toti ordini exprobret virulentam
malitiam totum corpus damnare voluit. Calv. in Harm. Evan. in Mat. 3.7. 1 Pet.
1.18. Jer. 6.16.
fell down dead: God may say who requires this at your hands: But still it is
worse to follow their pernicious examples, as too many Children do: You may
reverence your Ancestors, yet examine their dictates by the word of truth, and
not be as the young Novice entering into a Monastery was advised [tu et Asinus
unum estote] to be like an Ass, swallow down all that comes. No, no, you are
redeemed from your vain Conversation, received by tradition from your Fathers,
and therefore must enquire not simply for the old way, but which is the good
way: It Is too much what Cicero (the Heathen Orator) thinks a commendable piece
of Religion, to live and die in the Religion of our Ancestors: It rather
becomes Children to take warning by their Fathers falls and faults to avoid
them, and the bad Consequences thereof: Ezekiel. 18.14-18.
So God says, If the Father beget a Son, who sees all his Fathers sins,
considers, turns, he shall not die for his Fathers Iniquity: But if you
follow their sinful courses, you justify them, condemn Gods ways, and damn
your own Souls: Yea you bring upon your selves the guilt of your Fathers sins
besides your own; wicked Parents are set before you as Sea-marks to avoid, not
as Landmarks to guide you: The Heathen Orator said, Parents are [(...)] as
household Gods, their words should be as Oracles, but alas they are but men,
and may mistake and miscarry, but God in his word is an unerring guide: Follow
the Lord and you cannot miss or miscarry, but you may miscarry by following the
best men, you will certainly miscarry, if you follow bad men: The Woman of
Samaria erroneously pleads the place of her Ancestors worship: John 4.20.
And Jeremiah confutes the foolish Jews fond plea from their Fathers practices,
Jer. 44.17, 21.

But I shall rather hint a few words of conviction to the irreligious Children
of godly Parents: Who degenerate from their Ancestors, that it may be said as
in Isa. 63.16. Abraham is ignorant of us, and Israel acknowledges us not, i.
e. (as some take it) if our godly Ancestors Abraham and Jacob were now alive,
or raised up from the dead, they would not own us for their legitimate
offspring, we are so unlike them. I fear this is too true of the Children of
godly Predecessors got to rest, that tread not in their Fathers steps, but take
a contrary course: their Fathers prayed in their families, but Children have
left off that trade, Fathers frequent Religious Societies, Children frequent
Alehouses and naughty company, Fathers walked closely with God, Childern run
away from God and his Institutions: Woe, Woe be to such Children.

1. They are perjured faedifragous, and forsworn wretches, who in their Baptism
engaged to be the Lords Servants, Subjects, Soldiers, and to fight under
Christ's Banner against the World, Flesh and the Devil, and took Press-money,
but now have turned their backs on Christ, and fight the Devils battles against
Christ. Woe be to such perfidious wretches, what is the doom of such as outrun
their Colors but to be shot to Death? Covenant breakers are ranked amonst the
worst of Sinners; Heathens, Romans 1.31. And such as make hard times in the later
days, 2 Timothy 3.3. If it were but a man's Covenant it is a grand crime to disannul
it, much more this, Gal. 3.15. Prove. 2.17.
the Covenant of Marriage is in some sense the Covenant of God, this more
immediately and he will avenge the quarrel of his Covenant, Lev. 26.25. Oh
Sirs! how dare you look God in the face whose Covenant ye have broken? What
have you to do to take his Covenant in your mouths, Psalm. 50.16.
when Conscience flies in your face?

2. You have lost the benefit of your Infant-Priviledges: Your Infant
membership was but calculated for your Infant-State, now you are grown up
Adult-persons, you must stand upon your own bottoms, no longer on your Parents,
now you must live by your own faith; Romans 1.17,
you must enter personally into Covenant with God, repent, obey the Gospel your
selves, or else if thou be a breaker of this Gospel-Law, Romans 2.25.
thy Circumcision becomes Uncircumcision, i. e. thy Privileges are made void,
insignificant: So God reckons uncircumcised in Heart with uncircumcised in
flesh, Jer. 9.26. And says they are as the Children of the Aethiopians unto
him, Amo. 9.7.
and in the Gospel it is repeated again and again, 1 Cor. 7.19.
Circumcision is nothing and Uncircumcision is nothing, but the keeping the
commandments of God; Gal. 5.6.6.15.
but faith which works by love; but a new Creature: You boast of your pious
Parents, as the Jews once did, and bear up big with being Abraham's seed, alas
you may be a generation of vipers, Mat. 3.7, 8, 9.
as John Baptist tells them, and of your Father the Devil; as our Lord says,
Joh. 8.33, 44.
except you have the Faith and do the works of Abraham. A famous Family will
avail nothing without personal piety: Without holiness in your hearts and lives
you cannot be saved: think not that God is bound, and you loose, the Covenant
is mutual, reciprocal, you cannot expect the Privileges without performing the
Conditions.

3. It Is an awful observation (and often proves too true) that if the Children
of God's People turn Apostates they become the worst of men, and run deeper
into sin, and further from God then many, yea any others: The Sons of good old
Eli run into unparalleled wickedness, 1 Samuel 2. 13, 22. We have many sad
instances of Cain, Cham, Ishmael, Esau, Ammon, Absalom, yea, Solomon, Rehoboam,
Manasseh, and few recovered and with great difficulty; The Tribe of Dan (Jacobs
Son) turned Idolaters, and scarce ever returned to God, therefore are not
reckoned amongst the Sealed ones, Romans 7. 5, 8. Because they set up Micahs
graven Image: and it is observable, that Jonathan the Son of Gershom (Moses
Grandson) was Priest to the Tribe of Dan, and his Sons after him, until the day
of the captivity of the land, Judge. 18.30, 31. But the Heathens observe that
though this Jonathan was Moses Natural Grandson by generation, yet he is called
Grandchild of Manasseh whom he imitated in forgetting God, not of Moses as
appears by lifing up a letter in the Hebrew to make it no Moses but Manasseh:
(...)
He had so far degenerated that his Godly Grandfather must not be named with
him. Jer. 5.28.
Thus Israelites are said to overpass the deeds of the wicked, i. e. of
Heathens, Ezekiel. 16.47. Ezekiel. 5.6.
yea, they go beyond Sodom and her Daughters, and change Gods judgments more
than the Heathen: The reason is clear, because these sin against more Light,
Love, Helps, Means, Convictions, Godly Examples, Good Education, and therefore
are justly forsaken of God, and left to greater abominations: Oh tremble lest
this be your case.

4. The Children of Godly Parents may be cast into Eternal Torments. Abraham
the Father of the Faithful may have an houling Son in Hell Torment. Luke 16.24,
25. Mat. 8.12.
The Children of the Kingdom shall be cast out into utter darkness, there shall
be weeping and gnashing of teeth, they that would not weep penitently here must
weep despairingly hereafter: they that scorned rebukes from Parents, must have
dreadful rebukes from God and Conscience, their Education was with Saints,
their conclusion with Devils. There Is many gone to Hell with Baptismal Water on
their Face: Baptized Magus, Act. 8.13, 20, 23.
is like to perish with his money; he was in the gall of bitterness, and bonds
of iniquity, that dragged him to Hell: Yea the damnation of such Caitiffs will
be endorst with more vengeance than others: the Worm of Conscience will bite
harder, being fed with more materials to strengthen her: the Flame will be
hotter, having more fuel: the higher men are exalted toward Heaven, Mat.
11.23.
and reach it not, the lower do they fall to Hell, and in Hell; if they plead
their birthright, as he that pleaded he was a Gentleman, the Judge told him,
he should therefore have an higher Gallows; or as Lord Sturton that was hanged
for Murder in a silken Halter: so must these well-bred persons be dealt with,
Luke 12.47.
the more they know of their Masters Will, the more stripes are laid on them:
the more they glory in their privileges, the more misery in their loss, and
the higher their hopes, the greater their disappointment: these are both
hypocrites and apostates, whose sin and shame is more aggravated and augmented
than others. Mat. 24.51.
Oh what flaming Faggots, and scorching Oil, will Parents Prayers, Tears,
Councils, Admonitions, Exhortations be to dissolute young men! when they shall
see Parents glorified, themselves condemned: read Prove. 5.11, 12, 13.

CHAP. VIII. An Use of Exhortation or Instruction.
THere are four sorts of persons concerned in this Text and Doctrine, that may
be instructed in their respective duties from it.

Viz.
1. Children of Uncovenanted Parents. 2. Children of Covenanted Parents. 3.
Persons married without Children. 4 Persons that have a Posterity.
An hint, and but an hint to all these.

1. There are some Children attending on God in Ordinances whose immediate
Parents were not in Covenant, knew not God, you may lay it to heart and lament
it as your infelicity, but this is no bar to your entertainment with God: for
how can you tell but some of your remote Ancestors might be godly? and if not,
Grace is free, those that come unto him, he will in no wise cast off: Joh. 6.37.
you may and must venture: sinners of the Gentiles are grafted into the true
Olive, Romans 11.24. Jud. 11.1, 2, 27, 28.
even contrary to nature, that were Wild by nature, so may thou be. J^phthah
was a Bastard, thrust out by his Brethren, but received by God. Be not
discouraged, though thou be bad, Col. 3.11. Gal. 3.28.
and Parents bad, yet God is no respecter of Persons; Barbarian, Scythian,
all is one in Christ Jesus; Grace makes, but regards no difference. And if the
Grace of God has leapt over others heads to touch your hearts. 1. Adore the
Sovereign actings of Free Grace, give God glory, discriminating Grace shall
have the Crown set upon its head: I was doubly polluted in my Birth, from
first, and immediate Parents. Oh that God should dispense with his ancient law,
Deuteronomy. 23.2.
that a Bastard should not enter into the Congregation of the Lord, yet God
has entertained me amongst his Saints on Earth, and gives me hopes of Heaven,
oh wonder of Grace! 2. Be humble all your days, and cast down in your own eyes.
Young professors are apt to be proud, but it ill becomes you of all persons to
be proud, whom God has lifted from the Dunghill, to sit with Princes the Kings
Children, read and apply, 2 Samuel 7.18, 19, 20. 3. Make up your Parents defect
with your own diligence, what time was lost in your childhood and youth, now
redeem it, the more ignorant your Parents were, the more knowledge do you lay
in. The further they were from God, the nearer do you get to him. The more
disadvantages you have had, the more pains must you take for your Souls, seeing
it is of absolute necessity. 4. If God have laid hold on your Hearts, be more
laborious for the good of your families: you have had sad experience of the
want of careful education, let not your Children have the like, but instruct
them, pray for them, do what you can to bring them into Covenant with God, give
not them occasion to complain of your neglect also.

2. Children of Covenanted Parents: God forbid you should act contrary to your
Baptismal Covenant Relation, or contradict your obligations, that Thorns should
grow instead of Lillies; or stinking Weeds, where sweet smelling Flowers have
been: it is dreadful, that cursing should be heard where Prayers have been put
up, or idle wanton Songs where Hosanna's have been used to the King of Heaven.
1. Review and Renew your Baptismal-covenant: you were timely devoted to God in
minority, confirm it now at age; you took press-money to be the Lords
Soldiers, to fight against Satan, World, Flesh. Beg the Graces and privileges
exhibited and sealed in that ordinance, Regeneration, Adoption, Mortification,
Union to Christ, Tit. 3.5. Romans 6.1, 2. Gal. 3.26. Act. 22.16.
Remission of Sin: say, Lord did thou promise before I could ask them, and
now will thou not bestow them, when I am become an humble suitor for them? I
here produce thy Charter, the deed of gift under thine own hand: thou did in
thy infancy confer a right, give me now possession of it, let me know the Seed
was sown by the crop growing up, that I may at last reap the blessed Harvest.
2. Repent for your breach of Covenant, alas I have not walked up to my vow in
Baptism: I have failed by omission, trangressed by commission, my Conscience
condemns me, God may justly censure me for transgressing his Laws, Isa. 24.5.
changing his Ordinances, breaking the everlasting Covenants I have abused his
kindness, rejected his gracious offers, neglected his Worship, and God may
justly draw up a black bill of indictment against me, pass the Sentence upon
me, and execute it as against an Apostate, but Lord heal my back slidings, Hos.
14.4.
love me freely, turn away thine anger from me: and deal with me according to
the tenor of this New Covenant. 3. Plead your Fathers Covenant, Prayers,
Practice: The Lord our God be with us as he was with our Fathers, 1 Kin. 8.57.
let him not leave us nor forsake us. Psalm. 22.4, 5. our Fathers trusted in
thee, they trusted, and thou did deliver them, they cried unto thee, etc.
blessed be God, the God of my Fathers, that gave them a believing, praying
heart; and sigsig experiences of answers of Prayer: I will build on that
Foundation, and surely my Lord will not be worse to me than he was to them; How
strong a plea this has been accounted, see in David, 1 Chronicles. 12.17.
Jehoshaphat, 2 Chronicles. 20.6. thus may you plead, Lord, my Godly Father was in
many straits, and still he made thee his only refuge and thou did not leave
him, Oh cut not off this blessed entail from me his Child, be as good to me as
thou wast to him. 4. Walk in the steps of your godly Ancestors, plead and
practice as they did, say as Moses, Exodus 15.2. He is my God, 1 Kin. 21.3, 4.
Pro. 27.10.
and I will prepare him an habitation; my Fathers God, and I will exalt him:
God forbid that I should sell the Inheritance of my Fathers: My Fathers Friend
I will not forsake, by sinning or apostatising, he never gave me occasion to
withdraw from him, Jer. 2.5.
What iniquity have my Fathers found in God? Shall I disoblige an old Friend,
to gratify an inveterate Enemy? No God forbid, Act. 24.14.
I will own, love, and serve the God of my Fathers for ever: the God of my
Fathers help me to stick close to my dear Lord in duty.

3. This Doctrine concerns persons that are married, that yet have no Children
to Pray and Care for, or encourage themselves about for surviving Posterity,
and under this head I shall also rank unmarried persons: both these may learn
these four practical lessons.

1. Be sure you lay hold of this Covenant for your own Souls: Be concerned for
your selves; if you have none else to care for, yet you have a great charge
upon your hands: You are either Gods or Devils to your selves; (aut Deus aut
Demon) either God or Satan is with us, even when alone: Yea every man is the
worst Devil to himself (quisque sibi Satan) every man is tempted when he is
drawn away of his own lust and enticed: Jam. 1.14.
Your business is therefore to secure your best interest, whether you shall
have Children or no: and the only course is to lay hold on this
Gospel Covenant, Isa. 56.4, 5. For thus says the Lord unto the Eunuchs that
keep my Sabbaths, and choose the thing that please me, and take hold of my
Covenant: Even unto them will I give in my House, and within my Walls a place
and a name better than of Sons and of Daughters -- Mark it, you both secure
your own Souls and your name: How much is this better than Absoloms Pillar,
which became an Eternal shame? You consult honor to your selves by embracing
Covenant terms, practicing Covenant-duties, improving Covenant-promises; and
Spirituallizing Covenant-seals, believing in Christ the Mediator of the
Covenant, being sprinkled with the blood of the Covenant that you may enjoy
Covenant-priviledges; then shall your names be enrolled in the sacred Calendar,
Isa. 4.3.
and written among the living in Jerusalem: God and good men will esteem and
honor you, yea, your name shall be had in everlasting remembrance: Your memory
shall be blessed on Earth, Prove. 10.7.
and your Souls happy in Heaven: Oh how much is this better than Sons to bear
up your name? That Is but a Temporal this a Spiritual mercy, that Common to all,
this peculiar to Saints, that uncertain, this fixed, that Temporary this
Eternal: Be sure of this and you are happy.

2. Be humble and mortified: You want Children, they are an Earthly blessing,
Psalm. 127. Psalm. 128.3, 4.
3, 4, 5. For Children are the heritage of the Lord and the fruit of the Womb
is his reward, as arrows are in the hands of a mighty man, so are the children
of Youth, happy is the man that has his quiver full of them: These are not
contemptible (though temporal) mercies, you must not throw up the head, and say
tush, I care not; I have more ease and draw a light harrow, I may take my
pleasure, and make even with my Estate; for I have none to leave it to when I
dye: This is naughtily spoken, God would have you humbled under the want of
Children, though but a temporal mercy: Gods Servants have looked on it as an
Affliction: You may hereby take occasion to exercise Repentance, and enquire
what sin he is now punishing you for; thus you may make a virtue of necessity:
Your defect of Children may prove an increase of your graces: But take heed of
despising the blessing, or taking occasion of revelling away your Estates;
that is an extreme one way, as penuriousness is unreasonable in you on the other
hand, both are sins to be avoided, and mortified, study, Col. 3.5. Mortify
therefore your members which are upon the Earth, Fornication, Uncleanness,
Inordinate Affection, Evil Concupisence, and Covetousness which is Idolatry.
Away with all licentious practices; live Chastely, modestly, moderately, humbly,
diligently in both callings.

3. Adopt some to be a Child or Children to you, if you be persons of any
Estates: this is Mr. Paul Bains advice: they must, says he, not revel with
their Substance, nor must they live like idle persons and busy-bodies for want
of this employment, but they must save the matter of their Estate, and depute
some as Adopted Children, and be helpful in Educating others. Thus he: Adoption
has been used in all civilized nations, and it is In alienam familiam
transitus, A passing legally out of one Family into another: And amongst the
Romans it was [Aut per praetorium, aut per populum:] That which was done by the
Proetors was called Adoption; That which was done by the People was called
Arrogation. They had many formalities about it, needless here to be recounted.
But by this means you may have children whom you may account as your own: you
rich men, that God has denied the fruit of your bodies to, have you no near
kinsmen, or poor neighbors, to whom God has granted a lovely offspring?
surely it would be acceptable both to God, them, and your selves, to pick out
an ingenuous child, help him to learning; train him up for God; bequeath your
Estates to make an Experiment of him while you live; So may you have comfort of
him, and he may bear up your name: Do good with your Estate, and be serviceable
in Church and Commonwealth. I know some rich men grudg and envy any that are
likely to enter into their labors: but as their glory will not descend after
them, so usually those Estates do no good when they are gone; Psalm. 49.17.
Eccl. 2.19.
For who knows whether he shall be a wise man or a fool, that shall have rule
over his labor.

4. Take more time and pains for the good of your own Souls, and lay out your
selves for the good of others: if you be unmarried study that Text: 1 Cor.
7.33, 35. He that is unmarried cares for the things that belong to the Lord,
how he may please the Lord. Not that married persons have a Supersedeas, or
Quietus est, from Soul-concerns. But the un-married have a more leisure and
fairer opportunity for immediate acts of Devotion. Married persons have some
divertisements (in themselves lawful) which un-married are free from. The
Married may have numerous Children, and so have many distractions, which
Childless persons are not entangled in; and so may [Vacare Deo] be more at
leisure for God; or as the word is, attend on the Lord without distraction.
[(...),] sit close to the Lord without Disjunction; [Indivisa cum domino
conjunctione vivatur] like the faithful servants who depart not from their
Masters side: O happy souls who have an heart and leisure to keep so close to
God! You have more time than others, see your feet and hands and heart run
parallel: Your opportunities are double to others. Let your improvement be
doubled. You have no children to lay up for: Lay out the more for God. He
expects more from you than from others. You have no children to maintain;
Honor the Lord with your substance. Prove. 3.9.
Buy Bibles and Catechisms for poor Children. Maintain them at School. Relieve
the poor. Encourage a Gospel Ministry. Give the tenth part at least of your
yearly incomes to charitable Uses. Let your own hands be your Executors. Trust
not others when you are dead; For as it is no thanks to you to bequeath
Legacies when you are forced to leave all, so you know not how they will be
imbezelled or disbursed. Besides, you lose the opportunity of showing your
charitable Disposition. Living Springs send forth streams liberally. Dead Pits
afford nothing but what is drawn out with Buckets. Watch and catch at Objects
and occasions of doing good. Spare upon your selves, but be liberal in good
uses, Let your Superfluities give way to your Brothers Conveniences: Your
Conveniences to his Necessities: Yea, your Necessities must go to supply his
Extremities. Fear not wanting your selves: You put all into a good Bank. Dare
you not trust God upon his Bills of Return, Promises? If you lend to the Lord,
doubtless he will repay: Do you fear the Alsufficient God will turn Bankrupt?
Consult the Experiences of Gods servants, and see if the Jewish Proverb have
not proved true, [Decima ut dives fias] Pay Tithes that thou may be rich.
Remember what our Lord says, Luke 6.38. Give, and it shall be given you, good
measure, pressed down, shaken together, and running over, shall men give into
your bosoms.

CHAP. IX. An Exhortation to Parents, to have their Children within the blessed
Covenant.
I Have dispatched the three first Exhortations. 4. The last concerns all
Parents to do their endeavor to the uttermost to bring their Children, and
leave them under this Covenant. Alas! What signifies your leaving them great
Estates, Hundreds a Year, or Thousands of Gold and Silver, in comparison of
this? David was a King, and his many Sons Noble Princes, and Solomon one of the
most glorious Monarchs that ever the Sun saw: so that it became a Proverb,
Solomon in all his glory. Mat. 6.29. 2 Chro. 11.15.

Laurence Saunder writ to his Wife, Riches I have none to endow you with, but
that treasure of tasting, How sweet Christ is, which I feel, I bequeath to you.
Fox Mon.


And David left him in peaceable possession of the Kingdom, and the Lord
magnified him exceedingly: Yet all this did not cheer up dying David's heart so
much as this blessed Covenant. That Is but a carnal heart that can brag of what
treasures of worldly riches he leaves his children. The gracious soul would
rather bequeath a promise to them, than all the wealth of the Indies. Zenophon
tells us, that one being asked, Where Is your Treasure? He answered him [(...),]
Where Cyrus my friend is: Much more may a Christian say, Christ is my Friend,
and my All. Oh that I could leave him in the bosom of my dear Child! That is
the height of my Ambition, to have my Children gracious, and glorified. As an
honest Minister said, If I may but see the fear of God in my Children, [Satis
habeo, satisque mihi, uxori, filiis and filiabus perspexi.] I have enough, and
my self, Wife, Sons, Daughters, are all well provided for; I need no more. Oh!
that God would set Parents hearts toward the Covenant of God! I shall give
some Motives and Directions. 1. For Motives, I beseech you consider:

Ephesians. 23.
1. That your Children are Children of wrath, as well as others: You begot them
as Men, not as Holy Men, for Grace was adventitious. Adam begot a Son in his
own likeness, Genesis 5.3.
after his own Image, not Gods, which he had lost. For Grace comes by spiritual
regeneration, not by natural generation: You gave them a sinful and miserable
being! O study to give them an holy and happy being. They are born in sin;
Travel over them till Christ be formed in them. Gal. 4.19.
If you cannot make them good, yet lament that they are so bad: You have done
them a dis-kindness: Labor to do them this kindness, to plant Grace in them.

2. Your Children are more inclined to Vice than Virtue; they are born like the
wild Asses Colt, Job 11.12.
with a byas Hell-wards, and an antipathy in their nature to what is good: For
the carnal mind is enmity against good: Romans 8.7.
Aelian tells of a Whore, that boasted she could easily get Scholars away from
Socrates, but Socrates could get no Scholars from her. Wrong is always before
right; naturally, the left hand before the right. Children need not be taught
what is bad, they learn that fast enough: but you will find much ado to beat into
them what is good.

3 Yet they must learn Divine Truths, and their Duty, or never be happy. One
thing is needful; If they die as they are born, Luke 10.4.
with their backs on God, they are undone for ever; they are become like the
beasts that perish. But it is better be a beast, Eccl. 3.2.
than to be a rational man like a beast; The one goes upwards to be judged by
God, and condemned to eternal torments; but the Sensitive spirit of a beast
goes downwards to the Earth: And however some think the Beast shall not lose
its individuation, yet it is not capable of Moral Evil, and so of the
Punishment of Hell, as a rational, but a graceless soul is. Would you not have
them far worse than Beasts? Oh! take pains to work grace in them, else no
salvation, Mat. 18.3.

4. They are capable of Instruction. For this end was the Book of Proverbs
written, Prove. 14.
To give subtilty to the simple, to the young man knowledge and discretion.
Aristotle indeed says, That a young man is not a fit hearer of Moral
Philosophy, or of Ethics; but he speaks of what is, [De facto, non de eo quod
fieri debet,] what is usually, not what ought to be. Children can learn Trades,
Toys, why not Scriptures, Catichisms? It Is not enough to tell the capacity of
many Children: were they Idiots, or Natural Fools, destitute of Common Reason,
it were a lamentable judgment of God, and a sore affliction to Parents. But
they have members of Body, use of Reason. Oh! do what you can to add Grace. You
are taken with their outward Feature, wit, Parts; these qualify them not for
Heaven, till Gods Image be super-induced.

5. Parents have great advantage in beginning with their Children, whilst
young: Now they are young and tender, soonest reduced. Like young twigs quickly
bended, or a young Horse easily broken, or a young Hawk soonest brought to the
lure. Take them betimes, before they be hardened in sin, and you may most
likely prevail; but if they be let alone awhile, they will be past dealing with.
Custom in sin makes them like the Ethiopian in his skin, Jer. 13.23.
or the Leopard spots. Besides, teach them betimes, and they will more likely
retain it. It is an usual saying, [Liquidae sunt puerorum memoriae, Quo semel
est imbuta recens servabit odoremtesta diu-
] Childrens memories are soft, and soonest take impression, and clear or free
from disturbance, and so retain it longest. Season a New Vessel, and it will
keep that favor long: Let Cloth be died in Wool, and after in Cloth, the
color will be most lively and durable. The Application is easy.

6. Parents are betrusted with their Childrens Souls as well as Bodies: Ezekiel.
18.4.
All Souls are mine, says God, and he concredits them to the tuition of
Parents as a precious Talent, or depositum, saying as Pharoah's Daughter to
Moses Mother, Exodus 2.9.
take this child away, and nurse it for me, and I will give thee thy Wages: so
says God (when the Child is Born and Baptized) to Parents, I devolve the
charge of this child on thee, look to it, Ezekiel. 3.17.
if it miscarry through thy default, its blood will I require at thy hand: thou
must give an account of its Soul: go then to God and say as Manoah concerning
his Son Sampson, Judges 13.12.
how shall we order the Child? And how shall we do unto him? Fetch your
instructions from God, and assistance also for your Childrens good, consider of
a reckoning day.

7. By this you will manifest your own sincerity or sinisterity, your love to
God and your Children, or your hatred; Remember, no man is really good that is
not Relatively good: When thou art converted strengthen thy Brethren, says our
Lord, i. e. Luke 22.32.
evidence the sincerity of thy conversion, by endeavoring the good of others:
Grace is like Fire that turns what it touches into its own nature: if you do
not your endeavor to bring others, (especially your seed) into covenant, it is
a shrewd sign you are not your selves in Covenant with God: then woe be to you,
Oh cursed Parents of cursed Children! Are you so indifferent whether Christ's
Kingdom be reared and erected in your Family, that you will scarce put up a
prayer, or speak a word to promote it? Where is your love to Christ that loved
Souls so dearly? And where is your true love to your natural offspring? if a
Beast be fallen in a Pit, will you not help him out? Have thou more care of a
Swine than the Soul of thy Child?

8. Satan lies at the catch for your Children, that Fiend of Hell hunteth daily
for the precious Soul of thy dear Child: he got possession when thy Child came
into the World, and he makes it his business to keep possession, and will do
till Christ that is stronger than he cast him out: Luke 11.22.
and will thou see a Dog, a Bear, the Lion of Hell hurry away thy Child, Man,
and not cry out to Heaven for aid? O heard-hearted miscreant! does not nature
teach the Hen to fly at the glade that would take her Chickens; yea the Sheep
to turn upon the Dog that would catch her Lamb? And art thou so far degenerated
as to cast of all pity to thine own bowels? Oh Monster of Mankind! have thou
laid aside Humanity, as well as Christianity?

9. The Church and Commonwealth require this office of love from you to your
Children: and if you neglect their Education you take a course to corrupt both.
It Is worth observing, that the Heathen Romans sued in their Courts of
Judicature, such persons as were not careful in Educating their Children;
Cicero laid this to the charge of Verres, that he had debauched his Son, by
Intemperance, Riot, Wantonness; it seems it was actionable among Heathens, and
it were well if it were punished among pretended Christians; Woe be to that Town
where the Springs are poisoned: sad is the case of that Church and State where
Academies and Inns of Court are corrupted, yea, corrupters; Isa. 1.4. Hos. 5.7.
where strange Children are begot and brought up; no reformation can be
expected till public Schools be reformed. It Is said of Protagoras he lived 60
years, and spent 40 years in corrupting youth; if not only Old Trees in an
Orchard be rotten but young also, what fruit can be expected? Its fit they be
dug up, by this we may Divine what will become of a Church or Kingdom.

10. The consequence is sad of Parents neglect of their Childrens due
education: a Child left to himself brings his Mother to shame, Pro. 29.15.
throw the Reins on the Child's Neck, and whither will he not run? A foolish Son
is the heaviness of his Mother, Prove. 10.1. Pro. 19.15. Pro. 17.21.
the calamity of his Father: neither Father nor Mother have joy in a wicked
Child, and usually they may thank themselves for it; the Switzers had a law,
that if a Child was condemned to dye, the Parent should execute him, because
it is neglect in Parents that is usually the rack of their Children: it is true a
godly Man may have a bad Son, but this is most ordinary. Oh what shame will
cover the Face, and horror fill the Conscience of a bad Father, or a good
Father conscious of guilt, when he shall see his Child running hell-wards, or
roaring in those unquenchable Torments! I advise you therefore to a timely care
to prevent these dreadful consequences.

Quest. What course should Parents take to restrain sin in Children, principle
them with Grace, and bring them within the Covenant of God?

I answer this is a large and ordinary subject, that I cannot now insist on:
practical Divines lay four great duties before Parents, for the Education of
their Children, 1. Provision. 2. Correction. 3. Instruction. 4. Prayer,
Supplication.


1. Providing Food, Raiment, a Calling: This though a great duty, I pass, as
not pertinent to our case: only I find this remarkable passage, that the
Athenians ordered in their laws, that if Parents had not brought up their
Children in a lawful calling, they should not be bound to keep their Parents:
thus all were set to Trades.

2. For correction, I shall not enlarge on that, only observe it to be done
seasonably, Prove. 19.18, Chasten thy Son while there is hope, some put it off
till he become too stubborn, do it with self-reflection, humiliation,
moderation, prayer, instructing them in their fault, and the way to mend it. I
pass this also.

3. Instruction, this I chiefly aimed at, if I had leisure, an hint of 1. The
Matter. 2. The Manner of performing this duty.

1. For Matter, instruct your Children in the main fundamental principles of
our Christian Religion, as, that there is a God; concerning, his nature,
properties, persons of the Godhead: the creation of the World; of Man, the
Immortality of the Soul; the Nature of Sin; the fall of Adam; the sad fruits
thereof: the Remedy by Christ, his Humiliation Offices, Exaltation; the Duty of
Man; the nature of a Church; privileges, properties of Believers; the
Ordinances, the state of all men after death; Rewards and Punishments, etc.

You are likewise to instruct them in the Covenant of Grace; the nature, use,
ends of it; the difference betwixt this and the old Covenant of Works; the
Mediator of it; the terms, properties, and conditions thereof; the seals of it.
Baptism and the Lords Supper; the privilege and necessity of Souls being
within it: press them with Arguments to enter into it, give directions about it.

2. For the Manner of your instructing your Children, you must do it. 1. Isa.
28.9.
Timously as soon as they are capable, but drawn from the breasts, 2 Timothy 3.15.
[ab incunabulis] that they may suck in knowledge with there mothers milk as
Timothy. 2. Frequently, once is not enough but you must inculcate truths on
them, whet them, as you go often with the Knife upon the Whet-stone, Deuteronomy. 6.7.
so the word signifies. 3. Experimentally not by rote, hearsay, work things on
your hearts, Ephesians. 4.21.
learn and speak the truth as it is in Jesus: speak feelingly, from the Heart,
as one that believes thy self. 4. Wisely, Jud. 22.23. Col. 3.21.
observe the tempers of your Children, some must be drawn, others driven,
provoke not tenderhearted to fretting, discontent. 5. Seasonably, observe
[candida tempora] proper melting seasons, Eccl. 8.5. Psa. 14.10.
as a good humor, affliction, conviction, speak to them words upon the Wheel,
or in some nick of time, when they will be best taken. 6. Lovingly, winningly,
meekly, not in passion, but draw with cords of love: Hos. 11.3.
oil them with kindness, and they will go down glibly: even bitter Pills rolled
in Sugar will be well taken. 7. Plainly, familiarly, not in high flown
language, but use similitudes, speak as they are able to bear it, Isa. 28.10,
11.
come on gradually, [guttatim] by drops, here a little there a little, into
these narrow mouthed vessels. 8. Faithfully, search the wound, do not skin it
over: a fair hand makes a foul wound: Luke 19.22.
a weak dose rather stirs, than purges out bad humors, rebuke sharply. Tit.
1.14.
9. Scripturally, bring your authority along with you show them chapter and
verse, Act. 18.24, 28.
Gods authority joined with yours may prevail much, ^ Cor. 10.^, 5.
these are Spiritual Weapons. 10. Romans 10.1.
Prayingly, pray solemnly before an instruction, by Ejaculation, in speaking:
it is not your work but Gods to make it successful: Be sensible that all is lost
if God give it not the setting on, and strike with the great hammer.

CHAP. X. Directions to Parents, and encouragements in their pleading for their
Children.
4. THE last Exhortation to Parents on the behalf of their surviving Children
is prayer and supplication, this is a natural duty, and catholic relief to the
aching hearts of Godly Parents, not only to obtain Children, as Hanna, but for
Grace in Children, when they go astray: hence it was that holy Abraham, to whom
this Covenant was first made, breaths out his longing Soul in a short
Ejaculation for his wild Son, Oh that Ishmael might live before thee! Genesis
17.18. q. d. I thank God for Isaac, but I am not satisfied with Isaac only, I
must beg Spiritual and Eternal Life for my extravagant Son Ishmael, though he
be not the Son of the Promise: yet let him be a Son of Promise; if Isaac must
have the Earthly Canaan, let not Ishmael be excluded out of the heavenly. Thus
must you plead with the Lord for Children.

To assist you herein, I shall subjoyn some pleas, Arguments and Encouragements
not to move God, but to quicken your Faith, Hope, and Importunity. Thus then
say.

1. Lord, this Covenant thou have made with Believers and their Seed, did
spring only from the Fountain of thy Free Grace: this Promise commenced before
I had a Being, and therefore could not depend on any worthiness in me; Deuteronomy.
7.7, 8.
the Lord did not set his love on Israel because they were better than others,
but because he loved them, the love of benevolence produced the love of
complacency, it is an Everlasting love both in its original and duration: Jer.
31.3.
it has no cause but in Gods breast, and shall have no end: Lord, for thy
words sake, 2 Samuel 7.21. compared with 1 Chr. 17.19.
yea, for thy Servants sake, [ viz. Christ, who is Gods Essential word] and
according to thy own heart, have thou done all these great things: had thou
seen any stop or obstruction on my part, thou would have forborne making this
Covenant. But such a Covenant there is, and Grace made it, look into thine own
heart, Lord, and as Grace only made it, so let Grace perform it.

2. Lord, Thou art true and faithful in the performance of thy promises: Mercy
made this Covenant with Abraham, Mic. 7.20. Numb. 23.19. Psalm. 89.35.
Truth performs it to Jacob: thou art not as man that thou should lie; thou
have sworn by thy holiness that thou will not lie unto David: well Lord, in
hopes of the performance of thy Covenant, I married, begot Children, gave them
up to God in Baptism, wherein thou tookest them as thine own; and do thou now
repent of thy choice? Oh no, thou have told me in thy word, Isa. 54.9, 10.
that thy Covenant-promises are as sure as the Waters of Noah not overflowing
the World: Jer. 31.35, 36, 37.
yea the Mountains and Hills will sooner depart, than God go back from his
word: yea his Covenant is as sure as the Ordinances of Heaven, Sun Moon and
Stars: as sure as day and night; Lord, my Soul having got such good hold of
thee by Faith, I will not let go this hold, but stick fast till thou make good
thy promise to me and my seed: I am resolved to sue thy Bond, by Faith and
Prayer, till thou pay this debt.

3. Lord, thou have made this Covenant good to others: thou have performed the
mercy promised to our Fathers, and remembered thy holy Covenant: Luke 1.45, 55,
72.
there has been a performance of the things spoken by the Lord: never could
any stand forth, and challenge thee for the breach of promise, from the
beginning of the World to this day: and I humbly hope thou will not begin with
me: Genesis 13.16, 17, 18.
thou made a promise to Abraham of a numerous offspring and inhabiting
Canaan, and thou did perform all to a tittle, yea to a minute, the least Iota
did not fail, or fall to the ground: and thou art as great, as good, as
powerful, as merciful now as ever; Genesis 18.14. Job 42.2.
thou say, is any thing too hard for the Lord? My Soul Eccho's, No: I know,
that thou can do every thing: with God all things are possible, I believe,
Lord, help my unbelief; thou art able to reduce my Prodigal Child, to convert
my stubborn Child: Oh give a proof of thy power in this great work.

4. Lord, thou have made good the Promise to my own Soul: my Parents improved
and pleaded thy Covenant for me, a sinful wretch, and will thou not make the
same good to mine? I must say as once Solomon, Thou have kept with thy Servant
David my Father, 1 Kin. 8.23, 24.
that thou promisedst him, thou spakest also with thy Mouth, and have fulfilled
it with thy hand, as it is this day: Blessed be the God of my Fathers, that
has not cut off his kindness from me, that am the Seed of those faithful ones,
that are now at rest with thee: I my self, can rise up and bear witness to thy
faithfulness [Ecce signum] Behold a testimony of Divine love: Psalm. 86.16, 17.
thou have showed me a token for good, who am the Son of thy handmaid: and I
take this as a pledge of more kindness to mine: Psalm. 116.16.
thou have loosed my Bonds, will thou not also knock off the Fetters of sin
from my poor Child? I was as wicked as any; and cost my Father, and Mother many
a tear and groan, but thou heardest their Prayer, will thou not also hear me?

5. Lord; I do find all that I want for my self and seed within the compass of
the Covenant: for as thou have promised to be my God, and pardon sin, so thou
have undertaken to work the conditions thou requirest, as absolutely necessary
for obtaining the privileges of the Covenant: thou say they shall all know
me from the least to the greatest of them, Jer. 31.34.
i. e. as I understand it, young as well as old: Deuteronomy. 30.6.
thou say, the Lord thy God will circumcise thy heart, and the heart of thy
Seed, to love the Lord thy God. Again thou say, They that dwell under his
shadow shall return: Hos. 14.7.
amongst whom are Children: and that he will turn the hearts of the Fathers
with the Children, Mal. 4.6.
(so some read it:) this is enough Lord, may my Children be savingly converted,
I have all my desire, for this shall be their Salvation; and I have these
promises under thy hand, and surely they are not insignificant.

6. Yea, Lord, thou have converted some whose immediate Parents were not in
Covenant, and whether their remote Parents, were so, who can tell? I plainly
discern thou sometimes leapest out of the ordinary road, reaching over the
heads of some nearlier related, to lay hold on strangers hearts, and I do not
grudge them this mercy, but adore the freeness of Divine Grace: only, my Soul
fetches some encouragement thence, Romans 11.17, 23. Hos. 2.23.
will my Lord graft into the true Olive some wild branches, and not take in
natural? Will thou say, Ammi my people to them that were not thy people, and
will thou say Lo ammi to such as cling to thee, are resolved not to forgo thee?
Oh my Lord, the exuberancy of Free Grace to strangers is an encouragement to
me; and thus I say, will my Father give such lumps of bread to Dogs, and can he
not afford a crum to a Child? I see some, whose Parents never spoke a word to
God for them, eminent in Grace, and Monuments of free grace, and shall any of
my Children, which thou have taken into thy Family be shut out of thy doors? I
hope not.

7. Lord, if thou had a design to deny my suit thou would have shut my
mouth in prayer: for thy word says, Psalm. 10.17
Thou will prepare their heart, thou will cause thine ear to hear: An enlarged
heart in Prayer, is not only a mean, but a pledge of gracious audience: surely
thou will not send thy Spirit into my heart, and draw out my heart to thee in
vain: when a Father bids his Child ask, he designs to give: thou will not let
this blessed spirit breathe in vain in my soul. Will thou enlarge my heart, and
not grant my request? Psalm. 38.9.15.
Lord, all my desire is before thee, and my groaning is not hid from thee. In
thee, O Lord, do I hope, thou will hear me, O Lord, my God. Thou have raised my
heart in Expectation, will thou not give me the mercy I expect?

8. Lord, is not thy Glory concerned in this affair as well as my comfort? And
yet my comfort is something in thine eye; For thou say, Ps. 118.15.
The voice of rejoicing and salvation is in the Tabernacles of the righteous:
And alas! What joy can there be in a family, when a foolish Son is heaviness
both to Father and Mother, Prove. 10.1.
and a disturbance to the whole house? But oh! thy Name is dishonored by my
own flesh; wicked men hardened; some scandalized by the miscarrying of the
Children of the Covenant. But on the other hand, if Covenant-grace be spread
upon my child's heart, by Converting-grace, many will glorify God: Gal. 1.24.
His own Soul will be the actual lively Trumpet of Divine Glory, by confessing
sin, and turning to God; thy Omniscience, Grace and Omnipotency, will be made
glorious; And who can tell how many may be won to God by his Example, 1 Pet.
2.1^. 2 These. 1.1^.
and every Convert Glorifies God in the day of their visitation, and at the
great Day God will be glorified in his Saints. Lord, consult thy Glory!

9. Lord, thou have given me some encouragement concerning this Child I am
praying for: When my Child was young he was very hopeful; now he is grown up,
my hopes are dashed: He has now embraced the world, or is fallen into bad
company and courses: the less are my hopes now, because he is a woeful Apostate,
and sins against more light than others, and this daunts and damps my spirit:
however I will pray and wait still, for what is a daunting to me, Genesis 22.14.
is rather an advantage to thee. In the mount of the Lord it is seen. When the
knife is at Isaac's throat, Hos. 2.14.
the valley of Achor is a door of hope. When men say, our bones are dried, our
hope is lost, Ezeck. 37.11, 12.
we are cut off for our parts, then the graves are opened, and there is life
from the dead. The case is mine. I am saying as Jonah, I am cast out of his
sight: yet will I look again toward thy holy Temple. The other look may fetch
the mercy. There Is a may be in the case: Can a Child of so many Prayers and
Fears miscarry?

This brings to mind a passage in Melchior Adamus, De vitis Theol. Germ. page
724. It is this; The mother of Hunnius, being with child of him, had a Vision;
She thought she was in the Church, and took up a Reed, or a Straw, or such a
small thing; While she held it in her Fingers, it so increased, that she was
almost oppressed with its weight, even to death. She presently saw it turned
into a Pillar of the Temple; Then she was eased of her burden. This was
verified in her Son Hunnius, who though religiously educated, and hopeful in
Childhood, yet fell into bad Company, and then into horrible Temptations, and
sad Apprehensions, That he had committed the sin against the Holy Ghost, but by
Grace was recovered, and proves an excellent instrument in the Church of God.
This may be of use to poor afflicted desponding Parents.

10. Lord, If thou deny my suit, and glorify thy Justice, in the rejection and
damnation of My child; I must and will acquiesce in thy Sovereign righteous
Will. It Is hard to bring my heart to it, but I will say, Thy Will be done. Romans
11.33
Oh the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! How
unsearchable are thy judgments, and thy ways past finding out? I my self
deserve to be forsaken and cast into Hell. I have many a time told thee, I must
for ever justify God with flames about mine ears, if thy justice be glorified
in my destruction for all my abominations: And if thou deal thus with my
beloved Off spring, I will say, The Lord is righteous in all his ways, and
holy in all his works. Dan. 9.7.
Righteousness belongs unto thee, but unto me and mine confusion of faces. I
submit my all to thee, and thank thee for grace in my own soul, and hopes of
Glory; and if my wilful child may not bring a revenue of Glory to free Grace, I
will be content with thy raising up a revenue of Glory to thy Justice in his
just condemnation.

Obj. But what tenderhearted Parent can be contented to see his Child damned!

Answ. You must distinguish betwixt Nature and Grace. Nature loves its own, and
cannot bear to see part of it self in misery. Yea, grace cannot but desire,
cannot but earnestly breathe after the spiritual and eternal good of our
Children. And it is not only lawful, but duty to desire it. Yet if God deny it,
Grace brings man's Will to a due submission to the Divine disposal; for the
more a Christian is like to God, the more is his Will melted into God's Will;
and therefore will a Child of God rejoice in the execution of Gods justice upon
dearest carnal Relations at the great Day. As sanctified Levi in the cause of
God, Deuteronomy. 33.9
said to his Father and his Mother, I have not seen: neither did he acknowledge
his Brethren, nor knew his own Children. Nature will be in a sort swallowed by
grace in Gods good pleasure. That was a remarkable passage of a gracious
Gentlewoman that had a vicious Son, who fell into many debaucheries, and into
one heinous Act, which sunk her tender spirit: But recovering her self, she
said to him with some warmth, Ah! my sinful Son, thou have cost me many a Tear,
Groan, and bitter hour; but a day is coming, when I shall triumph in seeing the
just vengeance of God excecuted upon thee: this did so appall the young
Gentleman that he laid it to heart, repented, and became a new man, to the joy
of his Godly Mother: But,

2. You must distinguish about Damnation, and look on it as under a double
notion, 1. as a state of complete Sinning, Blaspheming and hating God to the
utmost. God calls you not to be content with this, which is so directly
contrary to the Grace of God in the Christian: nor yet may you be content to
have your Child separated from God, the chiefest good; which is the worst part
of hell. But, 2. Hell may be considered as a place or state of torment, and
misery, to the Rational Creature: and upon this account, you must not be
contented simply to have your Child tormented, which is abhorent to nature, but
your Souls must be so overr-uled with the Divine pleasure, as where his will is
manifested, you must rest satisfied in that by which God thinks fit to Glorify
himself.

11. Yet further, say, Lord, if thou refuse to hear me for this or that
particular Child, yet I will thank thee for Free Grace expressed to another
Child, or more of my Children that are-hopefull: God forbid that my sorrow for
our Child should drown all my Comfort in another, or my complaints should
silence my gratitude: I will praise thee for what I enjoy, and hope for more:
Nature teaches persons to beg a future, by acknowledging a former kindness. I
Bless the Lord, I have a Praying, Obeying Child, that was born as destitute of
Grace as this: and I humbly take this as a pledge of more; Thou have Grace
enough for all my Children, I will not despond, but be thankful; such a Child
I hope, has embraced the Covenant of God: Who am I, O Lord God! 2 Samuel 7.18,
19, 20.
and what is my house? That thou have brought me hitherto. And this was yet a
small thing in thy sight, O Lord God? but thou have spoken also of thy Servants
house for a great while to come: and is this the manner of man, O Lord God?
Thou did not owe me any thing, and yet thou have given me the best things:
It Is true I have a Cain, yet I have a Righteous Abel, I have a Shem as well as
a Cham, an Isaac as well as an Ishmael, a Jacob, as well as an Esau, a Solomon
as well as an Ammon, or Absalon: All my Children were born in Sin, and God
might have suffered all to have dyed in Sin: But blessed be Free Grace, that
has plucked this or that as a brand out of the Fire; God has heard prayers and
taken of my Seed, to be the Lords, he has not dealt so with all Families. I
own this as an higher preferment for my Children then if they were the greatest
princes on Earth, I will be thankful for them, yet jealous of them, and mix my
praises with prayers, the heart is very deceitful; I will give God Glory, yet
not glory in my Children: But my jealousy shall not obscure thy Glory of this
mercy. Ebenezer hitherto God has helped. I will rejoice with trembling:
something God has done that I may love and praise him, and be encouraged to
hope for more: Much is yet to do that I may still have an Errand to the Throne
of Grace, thus my Lord keeps me in a waiting depending posture I must have
something to evidence that God is my God, and an hearer of Prayer: I must not
have all, that I may know I am on Earth, and not in Heaven: It may be Religion
may live in my Family when I am dead and gone: And if all my Seed be not happy,
I hope some may: However God has done my own Soul good, and laid a foundation
of Grace in my heart, and will lay the top Stone in Glory: It was a notable
speech of that gracious Minister of Christ, One Mr. Avery, See the life of Mr.
Mather, p. 131.
passing to New England, in a Storm at Sea, expecting every wave to bring
death, he lift up his Eyes to Heaven, and Said, Lord I cannot challeng of
preservation of my life, but according to thy Covenant I challeng Heaven:
Immediately a wave wasted him to Heaven: he his Wife, and five Children, being
then drowned: and is this nothing that thou may with gratitude and
confidence claim a Promise for thy own Salvation: If it reach no farther.

12. Lastly, Lord notwithstanding all the discouragement I have I will Believe,
Hope, and Pray till thou take me off by my own death, or the death of my Child:
As I will follow on to know, and love, and serve the Lord, whatever thou do
with me, so I am resolved to Pray and Hope, and wait whatever thou say to me,
Lam. 3.26.
for I am sure, it is good for a man both to hope and quietly wait for the
Salvation of the Lord: God is worthy waiting on, even upon my Knees, I cannot
be in a better exercise: Say then, Oh my dear Lord, I am a Sinful worm, have
a wicked heart, am of polluted lips, a sinful life, I deserve not the least
crum of Bread or drop of Water, I have forfeited my right to all Covenants, as
well as common Mercys, for my self and Seed: I have begot a Child in my own
Image, not thine: it is a Child of wrath by nature, as well as others, but thou
in thy love have made a Covenant with believers and their Seed: thou have
brought me into the bond of the Covenant: the like mercy I beg for mine: my
Child must have thine Image as well as mine, or it is undone for ever: and it
is not in my power to convey it, but thou can: My daily errand to the throne
of Grace, is to beg the blessings of the Covenant of Grace to me and mine: I
will not go from thy door without an alms: thou shall have a troublesome guest
of me till thou grant my request: O remember thy word unto thy servant, Psalm.
119.49.
upon which thou have caused me to hope: Come, Lord, let Covenant-Grace enter
into the soul of my Child, which is part of my self: and I will take it as done
to my self; if I had not the mercy I beg under a promise, I durst not ask it,
but thou have made thy self a debtor, and I will put thy bond in suit by Faith
in Prayer: Thou can not deny thine own hand writing: Thou art Faithful, and
wilst perform it to some, and why not to me.

God loves such importunate beggars, and our dear Lord Jesus has propounded
two parables to provoke importunity: Luke. 11.5, 8, 9.18.1.8.
therefore it is not unmannerly sauciness, but holy earnestness, and approved
impudence, wherein God much delights: the End thereof is not to move God to
alter his purpose, but that our own Souls may have the condition of thy
Promise: thus the Canaanitish (or the Syrophenician) Woman cries out for her
Daughter, Have mercy on me O Lord, thou Son of David, my Daughter is grievously
vexed with a Devil. Mark. 7.24, 25.
Mat. 15.22, 28. She received a first, a second, a third repulse, but She hangs
on still, and will have no nay and at last obtained her suit with an high
Encomium and larg grant: O Woman great is thy Faith be it unto thee even as
thou will: go thou and do likewise.

Obj. Alas! Sir but I am faithless, had I Faith as that Woman had, I might
prevail, and you say Faith in Gods Covenant is necessary for the parent, but I
cannot Pray in Faith for my Child, and how then should I prevail?

Ans. There is a twofold faith, General, and Objective, by which you believe
God is able and willing, to make good his Covenant, does make it good to some,
and would to thee if thou had the condition: this is absolutely necessary in
all that come to God, and this thou have thou art sure that Christ is able to
save to the uttermost, Heb. 12.6. Jam. 1.6, 7.
all that come to God by him, Heb. 7.25. (...), to the uttermost, i. e. to the
utmost extent of the Covenant-grant, yea, say thou, I believe his ability,
but I question my right coming, therefore, 2. There is a particular persuasion,
that God will grant this request, Ergo, for this child, or in this case: it is
true sometimes the Lord does impress this upon the Spirit with power that this
Mercy shall be granted, this Child shall be Converted, but this is not
necessary for the obtaining of the Mercy: a godly Soul may want faith to
believe the issue of his Prayer, and yet be heard, as you see in David, Psalm.
31.22. I said in my have, I am cut off from before thine eyes. Mark it, he had
no particular faith for his preservation, yet he prayed still nevertheless.
Says he, Thou heardest the voice of my supplication, when I cried unto thee.
Observe it, the want of his Faith hindered not the fruit of his Prayer, nor will
it do of thine.

2. What ailes thee to follow so hard after God? Is it not a principle of
Faith? Have thou not laid hold on Gods Covenant for thine own Soul? What means
that frequent renewing of thy Covenant with the Lord, in taking God to be thy
God, chiefest Good, and utmost End? and thy dedicating thy all to the Lord?
This shows thou art in Covenant: for this is the Essence of saving Faith; and
thy being so much concerned for thy Seed, declares plainly thy being in
Covenant. Thou go daily to the Lord, in earnest pleadings for thy Children,
and wilt not be beat off, (like the foresaid woman) though one while he answers
not, another while he gives discouraging answers: And is not this sincere
faith? Our Lord accounted it so in the woman that weathered out so many
affronts in her importunate pleas: And are not thy motions still more vigorous?
Poor soul, thou art following the Lord with tears, sighs, and groans, for thy
wandering Child, saying still, Mar. 9.24.
Lord I believe, help thou my unbelief! I will still express my desires of
Grace for my child, or children; nothing else shall serve my turn: Civility
will not please me, nor profit them without Sanctity I am not satisfied with
Gifts without Grace; Common Grace, without Saving Grace. Carnal men are well
content to see their Children Witty, Ingenious, Industrious, and likely to
thrive in the World, good Husbands, notable Tradesmen, and likely to come to
preferment. But oh my Lord, thou know my breathings; I look further: My soul
longs for a principle of Grace, and a Portion in another World: This is all my
desire, and all my Salvation.

Yea, you will say, But I am afraid I offend God, by being too importunate; Who
can tell whether my Child be Elected, and if not, it is in vain to pray, I
cannot alter Gods Decree?

Deuteronomy. 29.29
I Answer: The secret things belong unto the Lord our God, but those things that
are revealed, belong unto us, and to our Children for ever, that we may do all
the words of this Law. You must not make Gods hidden Councels, but his holy
Scriptures the Rule of your Prayers. 1 Timothy 2.4.
God says, he will have all men saved: Thus his Will is manifested, and I told
you the Warrant you have to believe, and pray for the Children of the Covenant;
and you cannot be too importunate, so as you do not limit the Holy One of
Israel: and as longas there is life, there is hope; Therefore continue your
Prayers the term of your natural life, unless God take you off by some
remarkable Providence. I knew a very gracious zealous woman, many years ago,
who was weeping and wrestling with God, in an Out-house in the night, for the
precious Soul of her Prodigal Son, who was now fallen sick, and upon his, Death
bed; and while she was groaning out her soul with tears, and strong cries, she
thought she heard a voice, saying to her, [Be content, what I have done I have
done:] She rose off her knees, could not speak a word more, went away quieted;
and upon enquiry, found that her Son breathed out his last breath at that very
instant in a Town two miles thence.

I am not credulous of such Storys: but have great reason to believe the truth
of it, yet the instance is singular; However this is a truth, that God shuts up
the Spirit of Prayer, when he does not intend to hear a good Woman, so God had
never denied what she had asked of God in Prayer: One objected a child of hers
dying, she replied it is true, but I could never Pray for that Child; Gods
assistings or withdrawings often portend the event.

But it is safest for us to suspect some fault in our Persons or Prayers if God
do not hear us for our Children, therefore it becomes us to search our
Consciences and Conversations, to find out the Sin, confess it, beg a pardon in
the Blood of Christ, and Mortify it, and then Pray, say as Divine Herbert's
Church Lock and Key.

I know it is my Sin, which locks thine ears, and binds thy hands
Out-crying my requests, drowning my tears,
Or else the chilness of my faint demands:
But as cold hands are angry with the Fire, and mend it still.
So I do lay the want of my desire,
Not on my Sins or coldness but thy will:
Yet hear, Oh God! only for his bloods sake, which pleads for me.
For though sins plead too, yet like stones they make,
His bloods sweet current much more loud to be.

The End.

