A LETTER To a Gentleman of LEICHESTERSHIRE,

Showing, Out of the public writings which have passed betwixt His MAJESTY,
and His two Houses of PARLIAMENT:

That, All the Overtures, which have been made for Peace and Accommodation
have proceeded from His MAJESTY only.

And, That the unsuccessefulnesse of the late TREATY is not to be imputed to
His Majesty, but to them alone.

Printed in the Year M. DC. XLIII.

A Letter to a Gentleman of Leicestershire, showing that all the overtures
which have been made for Peace and Accommodation, proceeded from His Majeie
only; and that the unsuccessefulnesse of the late Treaty, is not to be imputed
to His Majesty, but to the two Houses of Parliament.
SIR,
ACcording unto your importuuate desires of being made acquainted with the
passages and success of the late Treaty betwixt His Majesty and His two
Houses of Parliament, I did from time to time advertise you, as far as I was
able to discover the proceedings of it, both what was done, and what was like
to be the issue. And because I found some strong impressions in you, that if
the Treaty came not to a fortunate end, and that some manifest were not
published in His Majesty's name, to satisfy the Subject in the carriage of it,
the blame thereof was likely to be cast upon His Majesty, as if he had no
thoughts nor intents of Peace: I sent you the Collection of all the particular
papers that passed between His Majesty and the Committee here at Oxford,
as soon as it came off the Press, wherein my care to give you satisfaction was
so great and urgent, that I would not stay the coming of the common Foot-post.
But contrary to my expectation you write back, that you are not satisfied with
the sight thereof; that you poor Country Gentlemen (as you please to say) are
not so nimble-witted as to discover the result of those debates, or the
conclusions issuing from those premises, except it be more plainly laid down
before you; all that the common sort of people will be little edified with this
bare collection, unless some application of the point be brought home unto
them. In which respects you have expressed a vehement desire to see somewhat
published, agreeable to the cap^cities of the good people in the Countries, who
may be otherwise (...) with some false opinions of the averseness of the Court
from all peaceable Counsels, and by the subtle practices of malicious men,
may be seduced to a belief, that His Maj^stie only is in fault, wh^ the same
Treaty came to no better end. And thi^, you say, the ordinary sort of people
may be brought to give c^dence to, as having a long time been persuaded by the
Emissaries of the adverse faction, that all the overtures which have been made
for a Pacification, proceeded originally from the Parliament; that they have
often pressed to obtain this Treaty, before His Majesty could be induced to
give ear unto it; and therefore that in probability His Majesty being found
so difficult from time to time, in giving way unto the Treaty, the
unsuccessfulnesse thereof will be charged on him. The undeceiving of the people
in these particulars you say would be good service to His Majesty, and I
think so too; and therefore could have wished, and do wish so still, you had
exact^ (...) account thereof from a better hand. But being you are (...) to
impose this task upon me, and that you will not otherwise be satisfied then by
my conformity to your commands; I shall herein apply my self unto your
desires, as having been trained up by you from my youth in the School of
Obedienc^, and taught betimes, that for a man to dedicate and devote himself
to his own humors and reservednesse, was but the sacrifice of ^ooles. In the
performance of which undertaking I shall say little of mine own, but only lay
together such material Passages, as I have noted in the several writings
which have passed betwixt His Majesty and His two Houses of Parliament,
keeping my self (as near as possibly I can) to the very language and
expressions of those writings; that my discou^se may gain more credit and
authority both with you and others.

2. And first whereas you s^y the Emissaries or Messengers of the adverse
faction do per^wade the (...), that all the overtures which have been made
for a Pacification, (...) originally from the (...); though nothing (...) more
true then that the Subjects of this Kingdom have been so persuaded, yet
nothing is more impudently false, then that which those malicious instruments
of the public ruin do persuade them to. For after the first open breach was
made betwixt His Majesty and His two Houses of Parliament, upon occasion of
His Majesty's coming to the House of Commons on the fourth of Jan. 1641. how
studious was His Majesty to make it up? how many plasters did He apply to
salve that sore? how many (...) did He send to take off the offense which was
raised about it? not only waving His proceedings in that way, out of a desire
of giving satisfaction to all men in all matters that might seem to have
relation nnto the privileges of Parliament, His (...), (...). 12. 1641.
and signifying that in His proceedings against the Lord Kimbolton and the five
(...), He had never the least intention of violating the least Privilege of
Parliament, and that in case any doubt of breach of Privileges did remain, He
would be willing to clear that, and assert those by any reasonable way that
his Parliament should advise Him to His Majesty's Message, Jan. 14. 1641.
: but offering wholly to desert any prosecution of the accused members of
either House, and to grant as free and general a Pardon, for the full
contentment of all His loving Subjects, as by the approbation of both Houses of
Parliament should be thought convenient, for the better composing and settling
of all Fears and Jealousies of what sort soever His Majesty's Answers, Feb 2
1641.
. Nay, He descended at the last to acknowledge (upon the in^ormation since
given Him) an apparent breach of Privilege, and to pro^esse withal, His
readiness to repair^ the same for the future, by any Act that should be
desired of His Majesty His Majesty's Answer Feb. 28. 1641.
; declaring plainly and ingeniously the reasons which induced Him to go in
person at that time to the House of Commons Ibid. and His Majesti^ Ans. ^o a
^ook, etc. May 19 1642.
. Insomuch, That if the breach of privilege had been greater then had ever
before been offered to both or ^ither of the Houses; His (...) acknowledgement
and retractation has bin greater also, (as his Majesty very well observes)
then ever King gave unto His Subjects Hi^ (...) D^claration, Mar. 9. 1641.
. Yet all this condescension of His Majesti, in the acknowledging of His
mistake, (though in a matter of form only) and offering to repair the same
in such a way as the House should prescribe unto Him, was so far from
satisfying, that His proceeding in that bu^nesse, has been and is still
charged upon him for so great a crime, as if he had thereby forfeited all duty,
credit, and allegiance, which was due to him from his people His Majesty's Ans.
to a Book, etc. May. 19. 1641.
.

3. More then this yet. His Majesty perceiving that this unfortunate breach
produced many other dangerous inconveniences, besides debates and disputations
concerning privileges; and that whilst so much time was taken up in those
debates and disputations, many distractions did arise, which could not but
occasion a general mischief to the whole government of this His Realm:
resolved, as one most chief^ly interessed, so by many reasons most obliged, to
do what in him lay for preventing of it His Majesty's Mess^ge. Jan. 20. 1641.
. And he might justly have expected (as most proper for the duty of Subjects)
that propositions for the remedy of those evils ought rather to come to him,
then from him: yet such was bis fatherly care of all his people, that he chose
rather to lay by particular respects of his own dignity, then that any time
shouldbe lost in a matter of so i Ibid.
great importance. In which respect His Majesty thought fit to propound unto
them, that they would fall with all speed into a serious consideration, of all
those particulars which they should hold necessary, as well for the upholding
and maintaining of His Majysties just and Legal authority, and for the settling
of his Revenue, as for the present and future establishing of their
Privileges, the free and quiet enjoying of their estates and fortunes, the
liberty of their persons, the security of the true Religion now professed in
the Church of England, and the settling of Ceremonies in such a manner as may
take away al just offense: wherein His Majesty professed His Majesty to equal
and exceed the greatest examples of the most indulgent Princes in their Acts
of grace and favor unto their people Ibid.
. Nor was this for a fit or a moment only; but constantly pursued and pressed
in several Messages, Answers, Declarations, as the most certain means of
settling the distractions of this wretched Kingdom, as viz. in His Majesty's
Answer to the two Houses concerning the Militia. Feb. 28. 1641. His Majesty's
Speech to the Committee, March. 9. 1641. His Majesty's Message to both Houses
sent from Huntingdon, Mar. 15. 1641. His Majesty's Answer to the Petition of
both Houses. March. 26. 1642. His Answer to the inhabitants of Yorkshire April
7. 1641 and in His Answer to the Declaration of both Houses May 4. 1642. not to
descend to more particulars. And to say truth, we need not look on more
particulars for this point and purpose; His Majesty pressing it so often
(though still in vain) that at the last it was declared by both Houses (though
at the first they did return most humble thanks unto His Majesty for that
gracious message;) l Hum^le Petition of the Comm^ns, ^a 28. 1641.
that as often as the Message of the 20 of Jan. had been pressed upon them, so
often had their privileges been clearly infringed in that away and method of
proceeding was proscribed unto them The third R^monstrance. pab. III.
. Which said, it was high time (...) for His sacred Majesty to desist from
pressing those fair overtures for accommodation, which he before had made unto
them, for fear lest out of a desire of giving satisfaction for one breach of
privileges, he might unknowingly infringe so many of them, and that in so
unpardonable a degree as could admit no satisfaction, how much soever he did
desire to give it. You see then that the Overtures for a Pacification came not
Originally from the Parliament; nay you see the contrary. Those Overtures
proceeded from His Majesty, and from him alone; and were no (...) made to the
two Hous^s of Paliament, then rejected by them.

4. The second thing suggested to the poor ignorant people is, That when His
Majesty was in Arms, His houses often pressed for a Treaty before they could
obtain it. When indeed (without mentioning how they Leavied forces first, and
so made His Majesty only defensive) either their strength was so great, or
their indisposition to peace so prevalent with them, that when His Majesty
first offered a Treaty, it produced him only such an answer as might expose
him to scorn and pity; witness His Majesty's gracious Message sent from
Nottingham (where first his standard was advanced) Aug. 25. 1642. in which His
Majesty desired, that some fit persons might be by them enabled to treat with
the like number authorized by them, in such a manner and with such freedom of
debate, as might best tend to the peace of the kingdom, together with his
promise to remove all possible scruples which might hinder the Treaty, so much
desired by His Majesty in taking down His Standard, and calling in such
Proclamations and Declarations (...) were excepted against by the said two
Houses, on the same day which they should nominate and appoint for the revoking
of their Declarations, in which His Majesty's faithful servants were (...)
Traitors for adhering to him ^ Reply to the (...) the ^, Sep. 2. 1642.
. And though His Majesty expressed in His said Message, As by the sequel is
since manifested, that nothing but his Christian and pious care to prevent the
effusion of blood had begot that motion, his provision of men, Arms, and money,
being such as might secure him from their violence, till it pleased God to open
the eyes of his people His (...), Aug. 25. 1642.
. Yet so averse were they from consenting to it, so inconsiderable did they
think His Majesty, and themselves so formidable that no Treaty was to be
obtained unless he would denude himself of all force raised to defend his
person from a visible strength marching against him in the field, admit those
persons to be Traitors to him, who had appeared in his defense His Majesty's
Message, Sept. 11. 1642.
, and put himself wholly into their power who by their former practices had
declared sufficiently their good affections to, and intentions toward him; His
Majesty's coming back unto His Parliament without his forces, and his presence
there in that his great Council, being avowed to be the only means of any
Treaty betwixt His Majesty and them, with hope of successeq. q Answer to His
(...), Sept. 26.
Never did Prince descend so low as to desire and press a Treaty with his
own Subjects; never did Subjects so reject the pious motions, and Christian
condescensions of a gracious Prince. At last about the end of Sept. when His
Majesty was at Shrewsburie, and the Earl of Essex the General of the Forces
levied against His Majesty at Worcester, a Counselor of His Majesty was
advertised by Letter from the said Earl there was a Message to be delivered
His Majesty from His Parliament: which His Majesty by him answered he was ready
to hear, So it were brought by any person that he had not declared a Traitor;
His Majesty having then declared few or none but the Earl of Essex, and such
as were in Arms under his Command against him. But after this answer (surely
sufficiently gracious) so little true affection had they to peace, that that
Message was stifled, and until His Majesty had given their supposed invincible
Army that great defeat at Edgehill, and taken (...) which they went to relieve,
and advanced with his Army toward London as far as Reading, he never
understood his two Houses intended to (...) to him. There he understood his
Castle of Wind or, where he meant to lodge, His own Palace, was (...) against
him: yet neither his own good and prosperous successes, nor the Injuries done
unto him, made him refuse the intended Message from his two Houses of
Parliament. But he gave his safe conduct sor their Committee, who met him at
(...), and presented him a Petition.

5. That a Committee from both Houses might attend His Majesty with some
Propositions for the removal of those bloody distempers, and distractions, and
settling the (...) of the Kingdom Petition (...) the two Hou^, Nov. (...).
. What Answer made his Majesty unto this proposal? Did he require them to lay
down their (...), raised for destruction of his Person, or to recall their
Declarations and Remonstrances so full of bitterness against his government;
or to repeal their many Ordinances so evidently (...) of the Subjects
Liberties; or to adjourn the Parliament to some such place, which he should
(...) for his abode and habitation? None of all these, nor any thing which
looked that way, was required of them: His (...) unto their desires without
limitations or conditions, as by his (...) Answer unto that Petition, does at
full appear. His (...) had promised at a time, when all his offers and desires
were (...) by them, that whenever they desired a Treaty of him, his Majesty
(...) remembering blood was to be spilt in this unnatural quarrel, would very
cheerfully embrace it His Majesty's Message, Sept. 11. 1642.
: and he resolved that no felicity, no change of fortune, should make him
differ from himself, or change his purposes. And though that Proposition for a
Treaty came to no effect, and probably was never really intended by them, as to
moderate men might appear by the Earl of Essex his marching from London with
many Ordnance toward his Majesty, the same day the Committee of the Houses
were attending him, whereby his Majesty was to have him before him with the
body of their (...), others at Acton on the one hand, and others at (...) on
the other hand; and as if this were not enough that they were before him, and
of each side, his own Palace Windsor Castle was kept in the back of him by
Captain Ven of London, and thus if his (...) had not advanced to Brainceford,
whereby he got (...): (...), a place to fight on, he had been pinned in at
(...)' in a (...) country, where he could have made no use of his Horse, and so
(...) probably come to have Treated concerning his own Liberty or retreat, and
not the peace of his (...); for which he has all this while as well as for his
own right fought: so then (...) all the progress of this business, fro the
first taking up Arms, until the settling of the armies in their (...) quarters;
the offers of a treaty have bin always on his (...) side, and the refusal on
the Parliaments: save that sent unto him at Colebrook. And when that treaty was
renewed, it was not done by them, nor on their (...), but merely on the motion
of his sacred Majesty, after he had long time, and in vain expected, they would
apply themselves unto him for an (...); nor broken off, when it was set on foot
again, either by the (...) of his Majesty's demands: or his unwillingnesse to
yield unto them in such points as could be reasonably desired for the good of
his Subjects, but only by the practice and perverseness of some guilty persons
of that side, who have no hope to escape the hand of public justice, but by
involving the whole Kingdom in a general ruin. Which point if it be proved
(as I doubt not of it) I hope the people will permit themselves to be
disabused, and not impute the blame of these distempers to (...) sacred
Majesty, who has so graciously vouchsafed to try all fair means which might
conduce unto the cure of a troubled state.

6. For proof of this, I would first have you cast your eye on that space of
time, which was between his Majesty's retreat from Brainceford, and the coming
of their first Committee to the Court at Oxford; being from the 13. of November
to the first of February, no less then eleven weeks, and somewhat upwards. In
(...) which time they could not spare themselves so much (...), (...) to send a
single message to his Majesty by (...) one of their own members, but
entertained themselves in studying new (...) and devises to raise moneys, or in
undoing those who did not willingly submit to their impositions: and when (...)
the City of London to be so generaly disposed to more moderate counsels, that
unless some Propositions were prepared to be presented to (...) Majesty, they
were in danger of loosing all that power and (...) which they had amongst them;
they were resolved to stand upon such Terms with their Lord and Sovereign,
that if they could obtain them, would confirm their power, or if (...), (...)
yet preserve the belief of the poor simple people, (...) they endeavored
peace. So that at last, upon these hopes and considerations, some Propositions
are presented to his Majesty by the Earl of Northumberland, the Earl of
Northumberland, and others appointed by both Houses to attend that service; in
number fewer, in substance very little different from those nineteen, which
they had sent unto his Majesty when he was at York. And what were they
presented for? to be considered of between the parties in such a manner, and
with such freedom of debate, as might best tend to the establishment of a
general peace throughout the Kingdom, according to his Majesty's desire and
purpose formerly expressed? Not so, they were too stout to descend so low, but
that his Majesty would graciously accept and grant those their desires and
^ons; which (...) and performed, (...) would then endeavor that His Majesty
and all His people might enjoy the (...) of peace, truth, and justice The
humble (...) and P^opositions, (...). 1. 1642.
. Here was no motion for a Treaty, nothing at all which looked that way, but
only a commending to him of their own desires, which could not be denied but
with the certain loss of truth, peace, and justice: and those too (...) in
with a Preamble, so full of (...) charges, bitter invectives and reproaches
against his Majesty, that if His (...) had not given up all the faculties of
his soul to an earnest endeavor of peace and reconciliation with his people
His Majesty's Answer to those Propositions.
, it might have utterly discouraged him from (...) further. And although (...)
Propositions presented to him, were very (...) from and (...) to his just power
and (...), and no (...) Sub^, or due unto them by the Laws (...), (...) so
^sirous was his (...) to (...) all the miseries which this Kingdom (...), by an
(...) peace, that he was (...) a (...) time and place should be agreed upon
(...) the (...) as his Majesty and both Houses (...) appoint, (...) for the
discussing of the Propositions recommended to him, as to debate upon some
others, which his Majesty thought fit, on his part, to propose to them Ibid.
p. 12.
. Which earnest and affectionate desire of his Sacred Majesty, as it begat the
following Treaty, which could (...) shame refused, when so (...) offered: so it
had bee^e as che^rfully entertained, and followed by them with as re^ll and
religious purposes as it was propo^ed, a speedy and a blessed peace had been
accomplished Ibid. p. 13.
before this time. And it is worth your observation, that howsoever the
Propositions sent unto his Majesty, were such as are before described, to have
no being or foundation in the Laws established; and more then so, to be
d^rogatory and destructive of a Regal power: yet of a goodness so singular
was his Sacred Majesty, as to put his own known Legal and undoubted rights
into the self same balance with them, to be debated, and discussed and
concluded on with their ^xorbitant demands.

7. This gracious offer of his Majesty's being made known unto the Houses
within three days after, could not be honored with an Answer till the last of
February. In all which time they had advanced no further then to yield to this,
that there should be a Treaty to begin on the fourth of March, but to continue
for no longer time then for 20 days: in which treaty so much of his Majesty's
Proposition as concerns the Magazines, Forts, and Ships, and the Proposition
of both Houses for the disbanding of the Armies, should be first treated of,
and concluded on, before they did proce^d to treat upon any of the other
Propositions The Votes agreed on Feb. ^8. 1642.
. Where you may note, first to how short a time they restrained his Majesty,
allowing but 20 days in all from the beginning of the Treaty, for the
discussing and debate of 20 general Propositions (that is to sa^, six of his
(...) Majesty's, and 14 of their own) many of which were subdivided into many
branches and particulars: and secondly, that though they had seized on all his
Majesty's revenues, under pretense to see it husbanded, and expended for the
public good, yet they had so converted it to their own private uses, that that
part of the Proposition must not come in question (though afterward on further
council and advice, they gave way unto it.) Well then, this being thus
resolved on, after some Messages to and fro, touching the qu^lity of the
Cessation, so much (but (...) in vain) desi^ed by his sacred Majesty, at last,
though long first, not till the 21. of March, came their Committee to the
Court: and then too with a Commission so limited, and circumscribed by private
and particular Instructions, that they had not power so much as to explicate
the terms, or agree in the wording of expressions His Maje^ (...) to both
Houses April 8. 1643.
, without dispatching a fresh Post to consult the Oracle. And here you might
take notice also, that though his Majesty desired that a Cessation might be
granted during the Treaty, and free Trade over all the Kingdom during the
Cessation His Maje^ Answer to the Propositions, F^b. 1. 1642.
, and that al matters touching the Cessation might b^ settled here by their
Committee His Majesty's Answer to the (...) t^uching the Cessation.
, yet none of these could be obtained; the two last being absolutely denied and
the first clogged with such conditions, as made it utterly unusefull to his
Majesty, and His loyal ^ubjects. But being this business of the Cessation,
was only moved by his Majesty in order to the Propositions, as a preparation
expedient to advance the Treaty, and was no part of the ^ubstance (...); I
shall pass it by, observing only by the way, that thoug^ His (...) de^lared,
that he desired the Cessation more for the ease and liberty of his Subjects,
then for his own dignity and (...) His Maje^ Answer to the Articl^s of
Cessation.
, and was content that the desired freedom of comm^rce, should be restrained
in matters which concerned himself, the Officers and Soldiers of His Army; yet
it would not be. For after no small time spent in disputes about it, betwixt
His Majestje and the Committee, and that his Majesty had so fully answered the
reasons of the Lords and Commons, which moved them not to agree unto the
Articles of Cessation offered by his Majesty (...) a book called, The Reasons
of the Lords and Commons, etc.
, that they were able to make no reply at al unto it: immediately, on the
receipt thereof, they sent down present order unto their Committee, not to
cons^me any more of the time allowed for the Treaty, in any further debates
upon the Cessation (...) the (...) of the (...), page 35.
.

8. Next for the Propositions which were treated on, I would have you know,
that when the Committee first came to Oxford, they had no power to enter into
any Treaty concerning the other Propositions, before the Articles of the
Cessation agreed on by the Lords and Commons were assented to His Majesty's
(...) to the (...).
. Which seems to be a pretty riddle, that first the Articles of the Cessation
must be yielded to, before their Propositions were to come in Treaty: yet when
^hey found themselves put to it by His ^ajesties Answer, the (...) the
Cessation must be laid aside, that so (...) time might be allowed for the
Propositions. But to go on, His Man being willing to treat however (even
without a Cessation) upon the Propositions made of each side, and in that Order
which (...) had agreed upon, with much ado, and after several (...), obtained
^o much of the two Hou^es, that their Com^ here might be enabled to that effect
His (...) to the (...) of Cessation.
. Which being obtained for the two first Propositions, and no further, although
his Maj^stie could not without a notable disadvantage disband His Army raised
with so much difficulty, on the mere gaining of his Revenue, Forts, Ships, and
Magazines, (which with his coming to the Parliament, was the substance of the
two first Proposition) considering how easy it was for them to repossesse
themselves of the same again, when they saw occasion: yet he resolved to
proceed. And knowing that the sight of those Instructions which had been given
to the Committee would much facilitate the business, and bring it to some
issue with far less expense of time, then could be otherwise expected; His
Majesty desired to have a Copy of them, or at the least a sight thereof, but
could be gratified in neither: answer being made, that they were enjoined not
to discover or show their Instructions, or to give any Copy of them; which they
forbore to do till they had given (...) the whole substance thereof in their
several papers) Collection of ^ll the papers, page 1, 2.
yet on the other side, when the Committee moved his (...) to give them leave
to repair unto him for further satisfaction upon any doubts which should arise
amongst them, in any of those Pa^rs which they either had, or should receive
from his Mai^stie, before such time as they transmitted them to both Houses of
(...): His (...) most graciously condiscended to it at the first (...) (...).
p. 3.
. Which shows in my opinion, a remarkable (...) the (...) of his Majesty's
purposes, and the (...) of the others in their dealing with him.

9. (...) the branches of the Propositions, as they (...) in (...); (...) we
meet with, does concern his Majesty's (...): Of (...), although they had so
totally deprived his (...) (even to the (...) away of money out of his
Exch^quer, and the (...) Ibid. p. 5.
(...) that (...) had not wherewith to subsist in the cond^on of a private
Gen^leman; yet they had confidence enough (...) tell him, that they had
received a very small proportion of it, which for the most part was employed in
the maintenance of His Majesty's children Ibid. p. 4.
. But the next thing worthy of your observation, is with what readiness and
facility his (...) was content to rest upon the promise of these his Majesti^s
two Houses of Parliament, to satisfy Him for those sums which remained due
Ibid. p. 4.
: as also for leaving the same unto His Mai^stie for the time to come, in the
same way wherein it was before the beginning of these troubles Ibid. p. 6.
; considering the power they claim of making and revoking Ordinances, as they
see occasion, and with what specious shadows of (...) they may impose so^e new
restraints and interruptions on the same, as often as they have a mind to
create new Jealousies. And you may please to know withal, that this refunding
of such sums as they had received out of his Maj^sties (...), came not
without a clogge upon it: it being to be done but upon condition (for ought the
Committee Ibid. p. 6.
had to say unto the contrary) that His Majesty would restore what had been
taken for his own use, upon any of the Bills assigned to other purposes by Act
of Parliament, or out of the provision made for the War in Ireland Ibid. p. 4.
. It Is true, somewhat He received for his own household out of the Customs, for
the maintenance of this and Robes, above 12. months since, and they know a
great part of this came out of his own Customs of Inheritance: And that to his
Fathets household (even by Act of Parliament) much thereof was assigned, so with
the knowledge of this Parliament continued to him. But herein (as in other
things) they showed a notable piece of cunning, to abuse the people, in making
them believe that the many sums of money levied on the Subject, for the
necessary service of this Kingdom, or the War in Ireland, had been converted by
his Majesty to his proper use. Whereas they knew exceeding well, His Majesty
had received very little, or indeed nothing in that way Ibid. p. 5.
; (the moneys levied on those Acts being paid, and to be paid, to Treasurers of
their own appointing): and could not but as well remember, that they had seized
upon 100000 l. at once of those public moneys, which had been^ paid by the
Adventurers for the War of Ireland, and by the Act of Parliament was not to be
employed in any other purpose whatsoever, then the reducing of those R^bels, to
be expended in a most unnatural War against his Majesty His Majesty's
Message, Aug. 13. and the Answer to it.
. And yet such was his Sacred Majesty's desire, to give all possible
contentment to his said two Houses, that He declared his willingness to
restore all moneys which had been taken by his Majesty, or by Authority from
him, on any Bills assigned unto other purposes Collection of all the Papers, p.
5.
; without requiring or expecting the like from them. So that the first point
(that of the Revenue) was soon agreed betwixt his Mai^stie and the Committee;
his Maj^stie being willing to connive at some things, and consent to any thing
(within the verge of their demands) which might conduce to bring it to speedy
issue.

10. Touching the M^gazines, Forts, and Ships, there are some things to be
observed, which do relate to ^ll in common; and some which are to be considered
with reference to each branch in several. Offer was made by the Committee,
that all the Arms and Ammunition which h^d b^ene taken our of his Majesty's
Magazines, and was remaining in the hands of both House^ of Parliament, should
be delivered into His Majesti^s Stores; that which was wanting of the same, to
be supply^d in kind in convenient time Ibid. p. 8.
To this His Majesty vouchsafed a gracious and free consent, desired not the
performance of it, until the Treaty was concluded and agreed upon Ibid. p. 10.
; declared the place of Store to which his Arms and Ammunition should be
(...), to be no other then the usual place, even the Tower of London Ibid. p.
10.
; and promised to restore all Arms and Ammunition which had been taken for
His Majesti^s use (his own at that time being taken from him) from any of the
Counties, Towns, or Cities, in this his Realm, expecting only (but not
conditioning with them, as they did with Him) that they should do the like for
all the Arms and Ammunition which had been taken for the use of their Armies,
under the command of the Earl of Essex Ibid. p. 9.
. Hitherto all things were agreed on, and with much facility. The difference
was, that they desired the public Magazines might be committed to such persons
of His Majesty's naming, as the two Houses should conside in Ibid. p. 8.
: which is no more nor less, then to keep them still in their own power, at
their own disposing; or at the best to shift it out of one hand into another.
For we know well enough, that their confiding men are such as are resolved on
all occ^sions, to serve their turns against His Maj^stie, or else to be
discharged without ^urther confidence. And this they did so pertinacio^sly
adhere unto, that though His Majesty declared that the said Magazines should
be committed to, and continued in the cus^ody of the sworn Officers (some of
the which had been by them commended to His ^acred Majesty) unto who^e pl^ce
it b^long'd Ibid. p. 9.
, and who had Patents of those places Ibid. p. 10.
. which His (...) in Law and Justice could not take away: and that if any of
those Officers had committed, or should commit any misd^meanour, to make them
unworthy of that trust, His Maj sty would by no means d^fend them from the
Iustic^ of Law Ibid. p. (...)
: yet that would not satisfy. They must have all committed to such hands as
they might conside in: and were so far from guiding their affections by Law
and Justice, and so much discontented with his ^ajesties Answer, that they
would neither offer any ^xceptions against the persons now in Office, nor
render any reasons of their dislike, although His Majesty seemed twice to
require it of them Ibid. p. 11, 12.
.

11. So also for the other branch touching the Forts, PortTownes, and
Garrisons, it was agreed on ea^ly on both sides, that all the Fortifications
which had been raised since the beginning of these troubles should be
slighted, and all the ^arrisons which had been newly placed in any of his
Maj^sties Towns, F^rts, and Castles, should be removed, and the said Castl^s,
Towns, and Forts, reduced into such condition, as the^ were in An. 1636. But
in this point the difference was wider then in that before: For here the Houses
did not only require of His ^acred Maj^stie to put the (...), Forts, and
Towns, into such hands as they might (...) in, and that the keeping of the
Cinque Ports, and all the members of the same, should be disposed of also in
the same manner: but that the (...) of the Cinque Ports, and all Gov^rnours and
Command^rs of Towns. Castles, and Forts should so k^p t^ sa^, as not to admit
into any of them any foreign Forc^s, or any other Forces raised without his
Majesty's authority, and consent of the two Hou^es of Parliament, but to use
their utmost endeavors to suppr^sse all Forces whatsoever, raised without such
authority and consent, and to seize all Arms and Ammunition which are provided
for such Forces Ibid. p. 13, 14.
. And they have yet a further demand, wherein they crave, that none of the new
Garrisons shall be renewed, nor their Fortifications repaired, without consent
of his Majesty, and both Houses of Parliament Ibid. p. 14.
.

12. Such being their demands, we must next see the reasonableness and Justice
of his Majesty's Answers, that all good people may perceive how little reason
the two Houses had to remain unsatisfied, had they intended nothing but the
good of the Subjects, and the preservation of the Laws, to which they seem in
all their actions and proceedings to be so zealously affected. Only I shall
desire you to take notice, first, with what a royal cleernesse his Majesty
proceeded in all this business, in that (considering the great and manifold
extremities he had been brought unto by this Rebellion) he was so readily
content to remove all Garrisons, to slight all Works and Fortifications raised
for his defense Ibid p. 15, 16.
, and totally to cast himself into the arms of his Subjects, many of which
have sh^wn themselves so easy to be wrought upon by treasonable and seditious
Counsels, This said, you may observe his Majesty's Answer to the point of
confidence, to be like that before in the other branch, viz. That He would put
his Towns, Forts, and Castles, both now and for the time to come, into the
hands of such persons, against whom no just exception can be made, and would
remove them also at what time soever any just cause or reason should be given
for it Ibid. p. 15.
. And for the Cinque Ports and the members of it; that they were already in the
custody of a noble person, who had so legal an interest therein, that his
Majesty in justice could not put him out from it; till some suffici^nt cause
be made to appear unto him; which whenever it appeared, His Majesty was
willing they should proceed against him according to the rules of Justice Ibid.
p. 15.
. Now as his Majesty builds this part of his Answer upon the common principles
of Justice, which would have no man punished but for some offense, nor
dispossessed of his estate but for some d^liquency; and the first part thereof,
the nominating of Commanders to His Towns and Forts on that legal right which
was inherent in His Majesty, and had been formerly enjoyed by all His Royal
Progenitors Ibid p. 17.
: so does He build His Answer to their other demands, on the Laws and Statutes
of the Kingdom. For He declar^th His consent, that the Governors and
Commanders of His Towns, Forts, and Castles, should not admit into any of them
any foreign Forces, or other Forces, which were either raised within the
Realm, or brought into it contrary to the Laws established, but should use
their utmost endeavor to suppress all such Forces, and seize all Arms and
Ammunition, which by the Laws and Statutes of the Kingdom they ought to seize
Ibid. p. 15.
. And to the last demand, that ^o new Garrison shall be renewed, nor their
Fortifications repaired, otherwise then by the Laws and Statutes of the
Kingdom they ought to be Ibid. p. 1^
.

13. Before I pass to any observations upon this Answer, or rather on the
Exceptions of the two Houses of Parliament against the same, I shall proc^ed on
to the other branch, that about the Ships; the Answer and exceptions being much
the same. It was propounded or resolved rather by the Houses, that the ships
should be delivered into the hands of such a noble person, as His Majesty
should nominate to be Lord high Admiral of England, and the two Houses of
Parliament confide in, who was to have his Office by letters Patents, quam diu
se been gesserit; and to have power to nominate and appoint all inferior
Officers, which Ships he shall employ for the defense of the Kingdom, against
all foreign forces whatsoever, and for the safe guard of Merchants, the
securing of Trade, the guarding of Ireland, and the intercepting of supplies to
be carried to the Rebels, and shall use his utmost endeavors to suppress all
forces which shall be raised by any person without your Majesty's authority,
and consent of the Lords and Commons in Parliament, and shall seize all Arms
and Ammunition provided for supply of any such forces Ibid. p. 22, 25.
. Where note, as in the branch before, how cunningly they change the term^s of
the Proposition. His Majesty expounded that His Revenue, Magazines, Towns,
Forts, and Ships, which have been taken on kept from him by force, might be
forthwith restored unto Him His Majejesties Answ. to the Prop^s. Febr. 1.
. They return answer, that the said (...), Towns, and Forts, shall be d^livered
up into the hands of such persons of q^lity and trust, to be nominat^d by His
Majesty Collection of ill the pap^s, p. 13.
, and the (...) Cinqueports into the hands of such a noble person, as his
Majesti should appoint to be Warden of them; and the said Ships into the charge
of such a nobl^ person as his Majesty shall no^inate, to be Lord high Admiral
Ibid. p. 22.
: all of (...) to be such, and (...) well-affected (...) the cause, as the two
Houses of Parliament may confide in them Ibid. p. 13. 22.
. It seems the Right and Property of the said Towns, Forts Castles, and Ships,
belongs legally to the two Houses of Parliament, and that who ever does
receive the charge, or keeping of them, must take them from their hands
immediately, as the proper owners; His Majesty having no more Right or
Interesse in any of them, then a power to nominate the party to be trusted with
them, and that neither as they ^logge and contrive the matter, whereof more
anon. And this his (...) observed when he made his answer to this part of the
demand foregoing: requiring, that his own Ships be forthwith d^livered to him,
as by the Law they ought to be: delivered to him, as his proper goods; by him
to be disposed of as his own, to such men of quality, as he conceived most
worthy of so great a trust.

14. In other matters of his Answer, you may observe how cheerfully his
Maj^stie does comply with his two Houses of Parliament, in all particulars
which they thought fitting and convenient to propose unto him, touching the
place, the power, and duty of a Lord high Admiral. Only his ^jesty desired,
that that which was his own by Law, and contrary to the Law had been taken from
him, should be fully restored unto him, without conditioning to impose any new
Limitations on His Majesty, or his Ministers, which were not formerly required
from them by Law; thinking it most unreasonable (as indeed it was) to be
pressed to diminish his own Rights himself, because others had violated and
usurp^d them Ibid. p. 24, 25.
. And when this Declaration of is Majesty was quarrelled by the Houses, as a
c^nsure vp^n their proc^edings Ibid. p. 25.
; his Majesty required, that since they did esteem those words of his [that
they had taken his Ships from him contrary to Law] to be a censure on their
actions, they would either produce that Law by which they took them, or free
themselves from so just and unconfutable a censure, by a ^peedy and unlimited
restoration Ibid. p. 26
. Neither of which being done, or intended by them, his Majesty had reason to
ad^ere unto the Answer made unto that particular, which was, that for the
present h^ would govern the Admiralty by Commission, as in all times had been
accustom^d; that when he pleased to nominate a Lord high Ad^irall, it should be
such a noble person against whom no just exception should be made; or if there
were, his Maiest^e would leave him to his due trial and ex^mination: an, that
he should employ the Ships to all intents and purposes; by them desired; and
use his utmost ^ndeavours to suppress all forces which shall be raised by any
person what^oever, against the Laws and Statutes of the Kingdom, and to ^eize
all Arms and Ammunition provided for the supply of any such forces Ibidem. p.
(...).
. The difference in which last particulars stands thus between them; The Houses
craved, that the Lord Admiral should use his utmost endeavor to suppress all
forces, which should be raised without His Mai^sties Authority, and the
cons^nt of the Lords and Commons in Parliament: his Maiest^e (...) that the
Laws and Stat^tes of the Kingdom, might (...) what is, and what is not to be
done Ibid^ p. ^8.
, refers the ex^ sing of (...) Admirals power, to the suppr^ssing of all forces
which (...) raised by any person whatso^ver, against the Laws and Statutes of
the Kingdom.

15. And now I would feign know what is to be d^ked in his ^jesties Answers, to
these two last branche^; either his Majesty's insisting on his Legal and
undoubted Rig^s, in nominating men of rank and qualiti^, to those publi^ke
trust^; or his desire of making the Laws and Statut of this Realm, the rule
and measure, by which inferior Officers must discharge their duties. I hope
they will not say the first, and the last they dare ^ot: and other points then
these, I see none in difference, or if there be, they are reducible to these,
and of (...) moment. I hope they will not say the first, ^or they are bound by
their Oaths of Allegiance, Obedience, and Supremacy, and have bound themselves
by their Protestation (a Covenant of their own devising) solemnly taken in the
presence of Almighty ^od, that to the utmost of their powers, and with the
haz^rd of their lives and fortunes, they will defend His Majesty's Person,
Honor, and Estate. And sure whatever zeal and duty they may pretend unto His
Person, they show but small rega^d unto His Honor, and not much more unto His
Estate, in seeking by force to divest hi^ Majesty of those legal Rights, which
are inherent in His Person, and have unquestionably been enjoyed by all his
Royal Predecessors in the times before. Either they break their Oaths, and
Prot^station, and so are perjured by it in the sight of God, in seeking to
extort from his Sacred Majesty those native Rights, and legal Privileges,
which are invested in his Person: or if they mean to keep the Protestation,
they must needs leave his Majesty in as good condition, as they found him in.
So that his Maj^stie does in^st on nothing in this particular of his Answer,
but his native Rights, which they have bound themselves by their Protestation
to preserve and keep. And it belong^d to them in all right and reason, either
to show that he had no such right by Law, as he did pretend to, or that
themselves had by some fundamental Law, a right superior unto that which was
then in question Ibid. p. 20.
; (neither of which they can, or pretend to do) or else to have been satisfied,
and contented with his Maj^sties Answer, against that, which they had no other
reason to produce, but their f^ars and iealousies Ibid. p. 20.
, which being without cause, are without care also. Now as they will not say
the first, so I dare presume they dare not say the last, and be offended with
his Mai^sties Answer, for no other reason, then that he does refer the duties
of his principal Officers, and such as are in authority under him, to be
squared and regulated according to the Laws and Statutes of the Kingdom. Should
they wave that, and plainly mani^est their intents, and purposes of bringing in
an Arbitrary Government, and make the Votes of the two Houses, the (...) and
measure by which the Lo: high Admiral of Engl^nd, the (...) of the
Cinque Ports, the Governors and Commanders of his M^sties Castles, Forts, and
Towns, must discharge their Offices, how easy were it for them to subvert all
Law, and bring this wretched people unto such a thraldom, as greater was not
suffered by the poor Ath^ians, under all their Tyrants? This I p^esume they
dare not say, though they may intend it, (as all their Proj^ct, and proceedings
seem to look that way) for fear the people should fall off, and desert them
utterly, and so deprive them of those hopes of (...), which they have nourished
in themselves.

16. There is another part of Sovereignty to be looked on yet, which is the
binding of the Subject by a solemn oath: and this for the establishment of
their power and party, they labor to impose on the Lord Admiral of England,
the Warden of the Cinque Ports, all Commanders of ships, all Governors of
TownsForts, and Castles Collection of all the papers, p 27.
. The ordinary Oaths which all those Officers were already by the Laws obliged
to take, were not held sufficient, to bind them fast enough unto the side; and
therefore they must have a new one of their own devising: and all the Officers
must be sworn, not only to preserve the true Reformed Protestant Religion, and
the peace of the Kingdom against foreign Forces; bu^ also against all other
Forces raised without the consent of the two Houses of Parliament, though by
his Majesty's authori^y Ibid. p. (...)
. His Majesty's authority it seems is of little value, when all the Officers
and Commanders of his Realm must be sworn against it: the Officers and
Commanders in as ill condition, when by their places they are bound either to
rebel against his Majesty, if he make use of his Authority, or to be perjured
if they do not. And so intent they were upon this design, that when his (...)
Declared, that if it were made to appear unto him, that any thing was necessary
to be added to the former Oaths, he would most readily consent unto it in a
full and peaceable convention of Parliament Ibid. p. 27.
; they took it for a great affront, as if His Majesty had ta^ed them of some
deficiencies, or reckoned them incapable of making a previsionall law Ibid. p.
(...)
, for the present turn. Nor were they better satisfied with his Majesty's
Reply, then they had been with his Answer, though he declared his willingness
to apply any proper r^medy unto the extraordinary causes of their fears and
jealousies, if he could see there were such causes; and further promised, that
when ^oth Houses should prepare and present such an Oath, as they should make
appear unto his Majesty, to be necessary to the ends proposed, his Majesty
would readily consent unto it Page 28, ^9
. His Maje^ must either captivate His unde^standing to their votes and
ordinances, and follow their appointments with a blind obedience, or ^eild to
all things at first sight which are offered to him: or else his Answers are
interpreted to be denials ( Ibid. p. 18, 25.
); and the poor people shall be told in the next new Pamphlets, or the n^xt
eloquent oration at the Common-c^uncell, how little hopes there is of peace in
the way of treaty; and therefore that his Majesty must be forced by Arms, and
not gained by Parley.

17. You may perceive by this discourse, that his Maj^stie demanded nothing in
his first Proposition, but what was legally his own, and denied nothing to his
two Houses of Parliament, but a divesting of himself of that Regal power, by
which he is enabled to protect his Subjects. So that the breach was theirs, not
his, in that they craved such things (and would not otherwise be satisfied) as
were neither fit for them to ask, if they desired to continue in the rank of
Subjects, nor possible for him to grant, if he resolved to live a Sovereign.
Let us next ^ee what, and how much was done, in the first Propositions of the
Lords and Commons for the disbanding of the Armies, and his Majesty's return
unto his Parliament. In which you may observe, that though there are two
several branches, neither of them depending on the other; yet the Committee
had no power to Treat upon the latter branch ( Ibid. p. 30.
), (that of his Majesty's coming to the Parliament) but were confined by their
Instructions to the former only. So that His Majesty in all manner of Justice,
might have delayed or denied to begin to treat upon one part, until they had
been enabled to treat on the other ( Ibid. p. 38.
). For what could His most Sacred Majesty have effected in the way to peace, by
the disbanding of Armies, in case his coming to the Parliament had still
continued unsecure; and that promiscuous rabble of unruly people, which then
awed the Houses, and formerly had compelled His Majesty, together with the
greatest, and most moderate part of the Lords, and Commons to withdraw
themselves to places of most and safety, had been as able to affront and
terrify them, as before they were. Assuredly by such improvident a disbanding
his Majesty had been more exposed to contempt and scorn, reduced himself to
the condition he was in at Windsor, Jan. 1641. and the distractions of the
Kingdom had been more uncurable, then they are at present. Yet his desire of
peace, and consequently his proceeding in the Treaty as in order to it, was so
prevalent with him Ibid. p. 38.
; that he resolved to overcome all difficulties whatsoever; which were laid
before him of set purpose, either to make him stumble in the way, or discourage
him from going forwards.

18. Being thus resolved. His Majesty returned this Answer to the first part of
their Proposition, that he was as ready, and as willing that all Armies should
be disbanded as any person whatsoever Ibid. p. 29.
; and that he would so do for his part, as soon as the present Treaty came to
such a Conclusion, as there might be a clear evidence to himself and His good
Subjects of a future peace, and no ground left for the continuance or growth of
these bloody dissentions, for the time to come Ibid. p. 31.
. And though this Answer could not but be satisfactory to indifferent men, yet
being required by the Committee to signify what His Majesty intended to be a
clear evidence to himself and his Subjects of a future peace Ibid. p. 32.
, he explained it thus, that he intended only such a Conclusion of that
pr^sent Treaty on His Majesty's first Proposition, and the Proposition of both
Houses, that the Law of the Land might have a full, free, and uninterrupted
course, for the defense and preservation of the Rights both of His Majesty, His
good Subjects, and the two Houses of Parliament Ibid. p. 34.
. Which Answer being so far from satisfying, that it was conceived by both
Houses to be in effect a denial Ibid. p. 39.
, and His most sacred Majesty perceiving with how much loss of time he treated
at so great a distance; he thought it best, and did accordingly vouchsafe to
send a gracious Message to them by one of his own servants, April 12. 1643.
The substance of which Mass^ge (for so much as concerns this point) was this
which follows, viz. that as soon as His Majesty was satis^d in his first
Proposition, concerning his own Revenue, Mag^nes, Ships, and Forts; in which
he desired nothing, but that the just, legal, and known rights of His Majesty
and of the persons trusted by him be restored unto them; as soon as the
Members of both Houses should be restored unto the same capacity of sitting and
Voting in Parliament, as they had upon the first of Jan. 1641. (exclusively of
such whose votes had been taken away by Bilt, or by new elections on new
writs) and that as soon as His Majesty and both Houses may be secured from
such tumultuous Assemblies, as to the high dishonor of the Parliament had awed
the Members of the same (which he conceived could not otherwise be done, but by
adjourning the Parliament, to some place 20 miles from London, such as the
Houses should agree on) His Majesty most cheereful^y and readily would consent
to the (...) of the Armies, and would return speedily to His two Houses of
Parliament, according to the time and place which they should agree on His
Majesty's Message April 12. 1643.
. To which His Majesty's most gracious Message the Houses were not pleased to
send any other Answer, then the calling back of their (...), the next day
after, and the dissolving of the Treaty, which ended April 15. being the day by
them determined.

19. I hope you see by this time who must bear the blame of all the miseries,
which are expected to ensue in this wretched Kingdom: And yet I have some
other evidences to evince it surther. Two only means were left (as wise men
conceived) to put an end unto our troubles; a longer continuance of the Treaty,
and His Majesty's return to His two Houses of Parliament: both which His
Majesty most earnestly desired, but could speed in neither. First, for the
Treaty, His Majesty proposed it at the first, without any limitation of the
time at all; desiring to avoid both that, and all other limitations whatsoever,
as being like to give great interruptions to the business Ibid p. 36. 37
. But on the contrary, the Houses first restrained the whole Treaty unto 20
days, as before was shown; and afterward so minced the matter, being
resolved to treat upon no more then the two first Propositions of either part,
and that of the Cessation, that they would hardly allow more time then what
would serve for the transcribing of the Papers. It seems the time appointed
for the Treaty, was a^ the first restrained as to the point of the Cessation,
unto two da^es only His (...) Ans^er to the R^asons. Ap^ 4.
, (a time too strictly limmited for so great a business) the whole to be
determined on the fourth of April Colection of the Papers, p. 30.
. After a further time was given to treat upon the two first Propositions viz.
the first Proposition of His Majesty, and the first of both Houses, til the
Friday following Ibid. p. 30.
, being the seventh of the same month. Upon the eight of April we find seven
days more, and that affirmed to be the full remainder of the time for the
whole Treaty Ibid. p. 35.
. And when His Majesty desired, that the Treaty might proceed without further
interruption or limitation of d^yes Ibid. p. 33.
; Answer was made Ap^il 10. that the two (...) of Parliament did not think fit
to enlarge the time of the Treaty beyond the 20 days formerly limited, to be
reckoned from the 25 of March then past, which could admit of no alteration or
enlargement without manifold prejudice and danger to the whole Kingdom Ibid.
p. 11.
; to the great sorrow of His Majesty, as he expressed himself to their
Committee, the day before they went away, being April 14 Ibid. p. 12.
. Nay in such have the Houses were to dis^olve the Treaty that without
conside^ing of his Answers to their demands and Proposition, or showing any
reason of their dislike, or giving His Majesty more time to bethink himself
of what was fitting to be done in such weighty businesses, they called back
their Committee by a special order; that part thereon which came from the
House of Commons being commanded to hasten their return in most strict and
unusual terms Ibid. p. 48.
.

20. Next for His Majesty's return unto His Parliament, you cannot choose but
know, that when His Majesty was forced to withdraw himself, and bent his
journey toward the North, with what a vehement importunity he was Petitioned
Petition of the Lords and Commons, (...) 26. 1642. June 17. etc.
to return: and that when their Petitions could not bring him back to so
unsafe a place, with what strange votes they Declared that withdrawing of His
Majesty from His two Houses of Parliament, for a breach of Privilege
Declaration March 9. 1641.
; a cause of great danger and distaction Petition at Theobalds (...). 1. 1641.
, and of great hazard to the Kingdom (...) resolved March 2. 1641.
; and that it would not only be an obstruction, but might be a destruction to
the (...) of Ireland The votes of (...), (...) ^6.
. You cannot choose but call to mind also the Artifices which they used to make
the people of those s^verall Counties, through which he was to pass as he went
toward York. to clamor after him with P^titions, for his re^urue toward His
Parliament: and how their party in and about that Country in which His Majesty
made choice to fix His (...), did labor and solicit him to that pupose also.
The copies of the said Pe^, with His Majesty's gracious Answers to them being
put (...) print, and obvious to the eyes of every Reader I am sure you have
seen, being so curious an observer o^ (...) public passages. Thus when His
Majesty desired a Treaty, by His gracious Message sent from (...), they
answered him with an advice of leaving his forces and coming again unto His
Parliament Answ. by His Majesty's last (...); and that of Sept. 16 1642.
; as the only expedient to ^ake His Majesty happy, and his Kingdom safe: and
when the Aldermen and other Citizens of London were sent to Oxford to His
Majesty in behalf of that City, the self same errand, (His Majesty's return
unto His Parliament) is made the substance of the business Petition of the
Major and Aldermen, Jan. 3. 1642.
A man would think a point so eagetly pretended, and made in the address of
both the Houses to His Majesty, Feb. 1. 1642. to be of equal consideration to
the peace of the Kingdom, with that of the disbanding of both Armies; should
not be so coldly followed when it came to the point and was most like to be
(...), that if they would but have found means to have secured His Majesty's
orderly and safe going thither, His Majesty was ready to make His journey
speedy; desiring nothing more then to be with His two Houses. His Majesty's
most gracious Message of the 12. of April, for His Return to His two Houses of
Parliam^nt and the disbanding of the Armies, you have seen before; together
with their entertainment of it, and their Answer to it.

All this while according to my method and promise, I have I hope, by laying
down the way of their addresses, the language even of their Propositions. and
His Majesty's Answers, satisfied, and if need were convinced you, or any
moderate or reasonable man; that the indisposition to the Peace, the occasion
why it has not been all this while procured, has been the subtilty of those
who are so prevalent in both Houses, as first to cast this Kingdom into a War
to raise their (...) Commonwealth, and make themselves the supreme Governors
therein. And now when they find the foundations of this well-tempered Monarchy
cannot by force be battered down, by cunning it must be undermined; for
without any invective or asperity, give me leave (to my former Quotations) to
say but two or three words of my own, and I have done.

The two Houses in the (...) Propositions Propositions surely demanded of the
King in so plain language His Sovereignty, nay the (...) and power of His
Office, as all the world saw they left Him but the name King. This was written
in so great Letters, that the meanest man that had a Family to govern, could
conclude. I would not be u^ed thus: Therefore this was too gross to (...) on.
But the Character must be made less, it must now upon the Treaty o^ Peace
(which they know all people wish and understand the beloved name of, though not
the fit way to procure it, especially such a one as may be firm and (...)) be
so ordered, that some of the principle heads therein (such as like corner
stones, being pulled out, pull down the present power in the Kinghood) should
be insisted on, but apparelled with the language of Peace; therefore toward
Peace in this Treaty these things are insisted on.

First the Ships, Towns, Forts, (...), etc. must be only in such persons
hands as His Majesty nominating they approve.

What is this but to keep all still in their own hands? for surely if you
were to name a man for any place, and I approve him, I could weary and
necessitate you to name such a one that depended on me, not you.

Then in these Ships, Towns, and Forts, no Forces to be admitted without His
Majesty's authority, and consent of the two Houses.

What is this but to gain the power of the (...) of this Kingdom out of the
King into the two Houses? for both which you cannot but know, (and His Majesty
often calls upon them for it) they have not the least pretense of Law. If this
be said that it is desired but for three years; that is sufficient argument: to
show it is a new thing they pretend to. 'Pray, who thinks that they who can
do all this without any right or president, after such a title to it, will not
find Jealousies enoug^ to continue their possession for ever? for I think some
intend to make this Parliament perpetual; yet surely the Subject generally can
never be so sotted to wish it so: they gave themselves not up to this race of
men for a perpetual government, nor those them for their lives, or with a
power to settle themselves for their lives: Nor did they think so themselves
when they asked a Parliament every three years, they should have pretended to
one always. But as the best reason to ans^er this, Why should the King (to
whom all making War and Peace belongs; and if others had not invaded this
right, we had been still in peace) divest himself of this power, since this
power in this Kingdom was never in any person single, or representative body
of all the Subjects, saving himself and Predecessors? What will this effect,
but the continuance of the misery we now groan under? for if the Houses can now
without the Kings authroty make this unnatural War betwixt Subject and
Subject, and put those heavy loads on all fellow Subjects that will not comply,
as that their persons may be imprisoned, nay slain; their goods plundered,
their estates sequestered, nay, given away; (if more could be) what might we
not expect, when they had a pretense of interest and power in disposing the
Arms of this Kingdom? And do they not use us as the King, say, they fight
for Him, when they ^hoot to slay Him; say, it is for the good of the Kingdom,
when authority is given to plunder all men's estates they will call malignant?
and when neither Country nor person that would be a neutrall, (which I know not
how they can answer in Law to the King) can be admitted by them by Law, to show
why he is not bound to contribute to their Assessements.

I promised you, I would not say much of my own: and you see that few Articles
are treated, therefore I will not exceed them: this only I Will tell you, that
if these two Articles were granted as desired, I know not why they might
not; nay, I fear they would presently force the King to the other 17. So
little they had left in him to defend himself: for how could I that by Law am
now bound to attend him in his Wars, stay with him when a new Law said he
could ^eavy no force but with such a consent? Consider therefore his Answer to
the 19 Propositions: his Answers to these particulars in this Treaty; and see,
whether he make not the rule of all his Actions, Law, and Right; they fears
and jelousies? by the one you may measure any thing, (indeed the Law is but the
rule of our public actions) by the other no man can measure any thing; for to
measures fears and jealousies, is as hard a task, as to take measure of the
Moon for a garment: which is ever waxing or declining, never in a certain
condition.

I conclude therefore with this advice, Remember the obedience to Princes: God
requires the strict Allegiance our Laws enjoyne; The Oaths we have taken, or
by nature are bound to observe to him. Fear then God, and honor the King, and
have not to do with those that love change; lest, as you may contribute to
continue our miseries for a time, you make your own everlasting.

FINIS.

