A SURVEY OF THE Estate of France, AND Of some of the adjoining ISLANDS: TAKEN
In the Description of the principal Cities, and chief Provinces; with, The
Temper, Humor and Affections of the People generally; And an exact account of
the Public Government in reference to the Court, the Church, and the Civil
State.

By PETER HEYLYN.

Published according to the Authors own Copy, and with his consent, for
preventing of all False, Imperfect, and Surreptitious Impressions of it.

LONDON, Printed by E. Cotes for Henry Seile, and are to be sold at the
Black-boy over against St. Dunstans Church in Fleetstreet, M. DC. LVI.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE Lord Marquess OF DORCHESTER.
IHere present unto your Lordship the Fruits, if not the Follies also, of my
younger days, not published now, if the audaciousnesse of some others had not
made that necessary which in my own thoughts was esteemed unseasonable. The
reasons why I have no sooner published these Relations, and those which have
enforced me to do it now, are laid down in the following Preface, sufficient
(as I hope) both to excuse and justify me with ingenuous men. But for my
boldness in giving them the countenance of your Lordships name, I shall not
study other reasons then a desire to render to your Lordship some
acknowledgement of those many fair expressions of esteem and favor, which your
Lordship from my first coming to Westminster, has vouchsafed unto me. Your
known abilities in most parts of learning, together with the great respects you
have for those which pretend unto it, inclined you to embrace such opinion of
me, as was more answerable to your own goodness then to my desert, and to
cherish in me those Proficiencies, which were more truly in your self. And for
my part, I always looked upon your Lordship as a true Son of the Church of
England, devoted zealously to her Forms of worship, the orthodoxies of her
Doctrine, and the Apostolicism of her Government; which makes me confident that
these pieces will not prove unwelcome to you, in which the superstitions and
innovations of the two opposite parties, are with an equal hand laid open to
your Lordships view. Nor shall you find in these Relations, such matters of
compliance only with your Lordship in point of Judgment, as promise
satisfaction unto your intellectual, and more noble parts; but many things
which may afford you entertainments of a different nature, when you are either
spent with study, or wearied with affairs of more near importance. For here you
have the principallest Cities and fairest Provinces of France presented in as
lively colors, as my unpolished hand could give them; the Temper, Humor and
Affections of the People, generally deciphered with a free and impartial Pen;
the public Government of the whole, in reference to the Court, the Church, and
the Civil State, described more punctually then ever heretofore in the English
Tongue; some observations intermingled of more ancient learning, but pertinent
and proper to the business which I had in hand. You have here such an account
also of some of the adjoining Islands (the only remainders of our Rights in the
Dukedom of Normandy) that your Lordship may find cause to wonder, how I could
say so much on so small a subject, if the great alterations which have happened
there in bringing in and working out the Genevian Discipline, had not
occasioned these enlargements. Such as it is, it is submitted with that
Reverence to your Lordships Judgment, which best becomes

My Lord, Your Lordships most humble And most devoted Servant, Pet. Heylyn.

The Authors Preface to the Reader.
I. IT may seem strange unto the Reader, that after so large a volume of
Cosmography, in which the world was made the subject of my Travels, I should
descend unto the publishing of these Relations, which point at the estate only
of some neighboring places: or that in these declining times of my life and
fortunes, I should take pleasure in communicating such Compositions, as were
the products of my youth, and therefore probably not able to endure the censure
of severer age. And to say truth, there are some things in this publication,
whereof I think my self obliged to give an account to him that shall read these
papers, as well for his satisfaction as mine own discharge; as namely touching
the occasion of these several Journeys, my different manner of proceeding in
these Relations, the reasons why not published sooner, and the impulsions which
have moved me to produce them now.

II. For the two first, the Reader may be pleased to know, that as I undertook
the first Journey, in the company of a private friend, only to satisfy my self
in taking a brief view of the pleasures and delights of France; so having
pleased my self in the sight thereof, and in the observation of such things as
were most considerable, I resolved to give my self the pleasure of making such
a character and description of them, as were then most agreeable to my present
humor, at what time both my wits and fancies (if ever I was master of any)
were in their predominancy. I was then free from all engagements, depending
merely on my self, not having fastened my relations upon any one man, in order
to my future preferment in Church or State, and therefore thought of nothing
else then a self-complacency, and the contentment of indulging to mine own
affections. This made me to take that liberty in deciphering the tempers,
humors, and behaviors of the French Nation generally, which to a grave
judgment may seem too luxuriant, and to have more in it of the Satyrist, then
is consistent with an equal and impartial character. But in the midst of so
much folly (if the Reader shall vouchsafe it no better name) there is such a
mixture of more serious matters, as makes the temperature of the whole be more
delightful; according to that saying of Horace in his Book de Art Poetica:

Omne tulit punctum, qui miscuit utile dulci.
That is to say,

He hits on every point aright,
Who mingleth profit with delight.
III. The other Journey being undertaken almost four years after, in attendance
on the Earl of Danby, is fashioned after a more serious and solemn manner. I
had then began to apply my self to the Lord Bishop of London, and was resolved
to present the work to him, when it was once finished, and therefore was to
frame my style agreeably unto the gravity and composedness of so great a
Prelate. My design was to let him see in the whole body and contexture of that
discourse, that I was not altogether incapable of managing such public
business, as he might afterward think fit to entrust me with; and it
succeeded so well with me, that within a short time after he recommended me
unto his Majesty for a Chaplain in ordinary, and by degrees employed me in
affairs of such weight and moment, as rendered my service not unusefull to the
Church and State; however mistaken by some men, who think all matters ill
conducted, which either pass not through their own hands, or are not managed
by their sinister and precipitate counsels. This makes the style and language
of the second Journey to be so different from the first. The indiscretion would
have been impardonable, if I had come before such a person in so light a garb,
as might have given him a just occasion to suppose, that I had too much of the
Antic, and might be rather serviceable to his recreations, then to be honored
with employments of more weight and consequence.

IV. If it be asked, why these Relations were not published as soon as they
passed my hands, and might be thought more seasonable, then they are at this
present; the Answer in a manner may prevent the question. The last discourse,
being written, and intended purposely as a Present to that great Prelate whom
before I spoke of, could not with any fitness, be communicated to the public
view without his consent. For having tendered it unto him, it was no more mine,
and not being mine, I had no reason to dispose otherwise of it, as long as the
property thereof was vested in him by mine own free act. But he being laid to
sleep in the bed of peace, I conceive my self to have gotten such a second
right therein, as the Granter has many times in Law, when there is no Heir
left of the Grantee to enjoy the gift, and consequently to lay any claim unto
it. And being resolved, upon the reasons hereafter following, to publish the
first of these two Journals, I thought it not amiss to let this also wait upon
it, second in place, as it had been second in performance and course of time.

V. So for the first Journey, being digested and committed unto writing for
mine own contentment, without the thought of pleasing any body else; the
keeping of it by me did as much conduce to the end proposed, as if it had been
published to the view of others. And I had still satisfied my self in enjoying
that end, if the importunity of friends (who were willing to put themselves to
that charge and trouble) had not drawn some copies of it from me. By means
whereof it came unto more hands then I ever meant it, and at the last into such
hands, by which it would have been presented to the public view without my
consent; and that too with such faults and errors, as Transcripts of necessity
must be subject to when not compared with the Original, or perused by the
Author. And had it happened so, as it was like enough to happen, and has happened
since, the faults and errors of the Copy, as well as of the Press, would have
passed for mine* and I must have been thought accomptable for those
transgressions which the ignorance and unadvisednesse of other men would have
drawn upon me. And yet there was some other reason, which made the publishing
of that Journal when first finished by me, not so fit nor safe, nor so
conducible to some ends, which I had in view. I had before applied my self unto
his Majesty, when Prince of Wales, by Dedicating to him the first Essays of my
Cosmographie; and thereby opened for my self a passage into the Court,
whenever I should have a mind to look that way. And at the time when I had
finished these Relations, the French party there were as considerable for their
number, as it was afterward for their power: and the discourse fashioned with
so much liberty, and touching (as it might be thought) with so much Gayete de
coeur upon the humors of that people, might have procured me no good welcome;
and proved but an unhandsome harbinger, to take up any good lodging for me in
that place, when either my studies should enable, or my ambition prompt me to
aspire unto it. Which causes being now removed, I conceive the time to be more
seasonable now, then it was at the first, and that these papers may more
confidently walk the open streets, without giving any just offense to my self
or others.

VI. For though perhaps it may be said, that I have made too bold with the
French, and that my character of that people, has too much of the Satyrist in
it, as before was intimated; yet I conceive that no sober minded man either of
that Nation or of this, will find himself aggrieved at my freedom in it. The
French and other foreign Nations make as bold with us, not sparing to lay open
our wants and weaknesses, even without occasion, and offering them by such
multiplying Glasses to the sight of others, as render them far greater then
indeed they are. Men of facetious fancies and ^coffing wits (as the French
generally are) must not expect to be always on the offering hand, but be
content to take such money as they use to give; there would be else no living
near them, or conversing with them. Hanc veniam petimusque damusque vicissim,
in the Poets language. Besides the reader must distinguish betwixt the
inclinations of nature, and corruptions in manners. Natural inclinations may be
described under a free and liberal character, without any wrong unto the
Nations which are so described: nor is it more to the dishonor of the French,
to say that they are airy, light, Mercurial, as soon lost as found; then to the
Spaniard, to be accounted slow, and Saturn^ne, lofty and proud, even in the
lowest ebb of a beggarly fortune. The temperature of the soil and air,
together with the influences of the heavenly bodies, occasion that variety of
temper and affections in all different Nations, which can be no reproach unto
them, when no corruption of manners, no vice in matter of morality is charged
upon them. Hinc illa ab antiquo vitia, et patriae sort durantia, quae totas in
historiis gentes aut commendant aut notant, says a modern but judicious
Author. The present French had not been else so like the Galls in the Roman
stories, had not those influences, and other natural causes before remembered,
produced the same natural inclinations, and impulsions in them, as they had
effected in the other; their own Du Bartas says as much touching this
particular, as he is thus translated by Josuah Sylvester.

O see how full of wonders strange is nature,
Since in each climate, not alone in stature,
Strength, color, hair; but that men differ do
Both in their humors, and their manners too.
The Northern man is fa^r, the Southern foul;
That Is white, this black, that smiles and this does scowl.
The one blithe and frolic, the other dull and froward,
The one full of courage, the other a fearful coward.
VI Much less would I be thought injurious to the female sex, though I have
used the like freedom in my character of them. I doubt not but there are
amongst them, many gallant women, of most exemplary virtue, and unquestioned
chastity; and I believe the greatest part are such indeed, though their
behavior at first sight might, to a man untravelled, persuade the contrary.
But general characters are to be fitted to the temper and condition of a people
generally, unto the Generasingulorum, as Logicians phrase it, though possibly
(as there are few general Rules without some exceptions) many particular
persons both of rank and merit, may challenge an exemption from them:

Queis meliore luto finxit praecordia Titan. To whom the heavens have made a
breast
Of choicer metal then the rest.
And it is possible enough I might have been more sparing of that liberty which
I then gave unto my self, were there occasion to make a second character of
them at this present time; or had I not thought fit to have offered this
discourse without alteration, as it first issued from my pen. Our English women
at that time were of a more retired behavior then they have been since, which
made the confident carriage of the French Damsels, seem more strange unto me,
whereas of late the garb of our women is so altered, and they have so much in
them of the mode of France, as easily might take off those misapprehensions,
with which I was really possessed at my first coming thither. So much does
custom alter the true face of things, that it makes many things approvable,
which at the first appeared unsightly.

VIII. In the next place it may be said that this short Journall deserves not
to be called A SURVEY OF THE STATE OF FRANCE, considering that it only treats
of some particular Provinces, and of such Towns and Cities only in those
Provinces, as came within the compass of a personal view. But then it may be
said withal, that these four Provinces which I passed through, and describe,
may be considered as the Epitome of the whole, the abstract or compendium of
the Body of France: the Isle of France being looked on as the mother of Paris,
Picardie as the chiefest Granary, and La Beause as the nurse thereof; as
Normandy is esteemed for the Bulwark of all France it self by reason of that
large Seacoast, and well fortified Havens, wherewith it does confront the
English. And if the rule be true in Logic (as I think it is) that a
Denomination may be taken from the nobler parts; then certainly a Survey of
these four Provinces, the noblest and most considerable parts of all that
Kingdom, may be entitled without any absurdity the Survey of France. For
besides that which has been spoken, it was in these four Provinces that Henry
the 4. did lay the scene of his long war against the Leaguers, as if in keeping
them assured or subjected to him the safety of the whole Kingdom did consist
especially. For though the war was carried into most other Provinces as the
necessity of affairs required, yet it was managed in those Provinces by
particular parties. Neither the King himself, nor the Duke of Mayenne (the
heads of the contending Armies) did act any thing in them except some light
velitations in Champagne, and one excursion into Burgundy; the whole decision
of the quarrels, depending principally, if not wholly, in the getting of these.
The Duke of Parma had not else made so long a march from the Court of Bruxels,
to raise the Kings Army from the siege of Roven; nor had the King mustered up
all his wit and power to recover Amiens, when dexterously surprised by a
Spanish stratagem. And if it be true, which the French generally affirm of
Paris, that it is the Eye, nay the very Soul of all France it self; I may with
confidence affirm, that I have given more sight to that Eye, more life and
spirit to that Soul, then has been hitherto communicated in the English.
Tongue. The Realm of France surveyed in the four principal Provinces, and the
chief Cities of the whole, gives a good color to the title, and yet the title
has more color to insist upon, then the description of these Cities, and
those principal Provinces, can contribute toward it. For though I have
described those four Provinces only in the way of Chorography, yet I have took
a general and a full Survey of the State of France, in reference to the Court,
the Church, and the Civil State, which are the three main limbs of all Bodies
Politic, and took it in so full a manner, as I think none, and am assured that
very few have done before me.

IX. If it be said that my stay was not long enough to render me exact and
punctual in my observations: I hope it will be said withal, that the less my
stay was, my diligence must be the greater, and that I husbanded my time to the
best advantage. For knowing that we could not stay there longer, then our money
lasted, and that we carried not the wealth of the Indies with us, I was
resolved to give my self as little rest, as the necessities of nature could
dispense withal; and so to work my self into the good opinions of some
principal persons of that nation, who were best able to inform me, as might in
short space furnish me with such instructions, as others with a greater expense
both of time and money could not so readily attain. By this accommodating of my
self unto the humors of some men, and a resolution not to be wanting to that
curiosity which I carried with me, there was nothing which I desired to know
(and there was nothing which I desired not to know) but what was readily
imparted to me both with love and cheerfulness. Cur nescire pudens prave quam
discere mallem? I always looked upon it as a greater shame to be ignorant of
any thing, then to be taught by any body; and therefore made such use of men of
both Religions, as were most likely to acquaint me with the counsels of their
several parties. Nor was I purse-bound when I had occasion to see any of those
Rarities, Relics, and matters of more true antiquity, which either their
Religious Houses, Churches, Colleges, yea, or the Court it Self could present
unto me. Money is never better spent then wen it is laid out in the buying of
knowledge.

X. In the last place it may be said that many things have happened both in the
Court and State of France, many great revolutions and alterations in the face
thereof, since I digested the Relation of this Journey for my own contentment;
which makes this publication the more unseasonable, and my consent unto it
subject to the greater censure: which notwithstanding I conceive that the
discourse will be as useful to the ingenuous Reader, as if it had gone sheet
by sheet from the Pen to the Press, and had been offered to him in that point
of time when it took life from me. The learned labors of Pausanias in his
Chorography of Greece, are as delightful now to the studious Reader, as
formerly to the best wits of Rome or Athens. Nor need we doubt, but that the
description of the Netherlands by Lewis Guicciardine, and of the Isles of
Britain by our famous Camden, will yield as great profit and contentment to
future Ages, as to the men that knew the Authors. The Realm of France is still
the same, the temperature of the air and soil the same, the humors and
affections of the people still the same; the Fractions of the Church as great,
the Government as Regal or despotical now, as when the Author was amongst them.
The Cities stand in the same places which before they stood in, and the Rivers
keep the same channels which before they had, no alteration in the natural
parts of that great body, and not much in the politic neither. The change
which since has happened by the Death of the King, being rather in the person of
the Prince, then the form of Government. Affairs of State then managed by a
Queen Mother, and a Cardinal favorite, as they are at this present. The King
in his Majority then, but not much versed or studied in his own concernments,
as he is at this present; the Realm divided then into parties and factions
(though not into the same factions) as it is at this present; and finally, the
English then in as high esteem, by reason of the alliance then newly made
between the Princes, as they can possibly be now, by reason of the late
concluded peace betwixt the Nations. Nor has there happened any thing not
reconcilable to the present times, but the almost miraculous birth of the King
and his Brother after 20 years barrenness, and the marriage of the Monsieur
with Montpensiers Daughter, contrary to the general expectation of all that
people, and for the first (I think I may be bold to say) of the world besides.

XII. These reasons as they may excuse this publication, in reference to the
work it self, so there is one which serves to justify it in respect of the
Author; that is to say, the manifesting of this truth to all which shall peruse
these papers, that he is still of the same Judgment, and opinion in matters of
Religion, Gods worship, and the government of holy Church, of which he was 30
years ago, when the Relation of the first Journey was fashioned by him; that
he has stood his ground in all those revolutions both of Church and State,
which have happened since; that he now holds no other Tenets, then those to which
he has been principled by education, and confirmed by study; and finally that
such opinions as he holds, be they right or wrong, he brought to the Court with
him, and took not from thence. So that whatsoever other imputation may be
charged upon him, he cannot be accused for a time-server, but always constant
to himself, in all times the same; Qualis ab incepto processeri^, in the Poets
language, the same man then as now without alteration Compare my late book upon
the Creed, with these present Journals, and it will easily be seen, that in all
points wherein I have occasion to declare my Judgment, I am nothing altered;
that neither the temptations of preferment, nor that great turn both in the
public and my own affairs which has happened since; have made me other then I
was at the very first.

XIII. It Is true in reading over these papers as they were sent to the Press,
I found some things which I could willingly have rectified as they passed my
hands; but that I chose rather to let them go with some Petit errors, then
alter any thing in the Copy, which might give any the least occasion to this
misconceit, that the work went not to the Press, as it came from my pen, but
was corrected by the line and level of my present Judgment. And for such
petit errors, as then escaped my hands, being they are but petit errors, they
may the more easily be pardoned by ingenuous men. But howsoever being errors,
though but petit errors, I hold it necessary to correct them, and shall correct
them in this order as they come before me.

Normandy bounded on the South with L'Isle de P. 4. l. 27.
France] Not with the Isle of France distinctly and properly so called,
occasioned by the circlings of the Scine and the Marne, in which Paris
stands; but by that part of France, which is called commonly France Special,
or the Proper France, as being the first fixed seat of the French Nation, after
their first entrance into G^ul; which notwithstanding may in some sense, be
called the Isle of France also, because environed on all sides with some river
or other, that is to say, with the Velle on the East, the Eure on the West, the
Oise on the North, and a vein Riveret of the Seine on the South parts of it.

The name Neustria] Not named so in the time of P. 5. l. 10.
the Romans, when it was reckoned for a part of Gallia Celtica, as the words
not well distinguished do seem to intimate; but when it was a part of the
French Empire, and then corruptly so called for Westria, signifying the West
parts thereof: the name of Westria or Westenrick, being given by some to this
part of the Realm of West France, as that of Austria or Ostenric to a part of
East France.

By the permission of Charles the Bald] Not so, but by the sufferance of
Charles the Simple, a weaker Ibid. l. 17.
Prince, and far less able to support the Majesty of a King of France. For
though the Normans ransacked the Sea coasts of this Country during the reign
of Charles the Bald, which lasted from the year 841 to the year 879. yet
Charles the Bald was not so simple nor so ill advised, as to give them livery
and seisin of so large a Province. That was a business fit for none but
Charles the SIMPLE, who began his reign in the year 900. and unto him the words
foregoing would direct the Reader, where it is thus told us of these Normans,
anno 900. they first seated themselves in France, etc. which relates plainly to
the reign of Charles the Simple, in the beginning whereof they first settled
here, though Rollo their chief Captain was not honored with the title of Duke
of Normandy until 12 years after.

For the most part of a light and sandy mould] mistaken P. 7. l. 26.
in the print for a light and handy, that is to say, of a more easy tillage,
then the rest of those Kingdoms. Which words though positively true of the
Country of Norfolk, are to be understood of Normandy, comparatively and
respectively to the rest of France; for otherwise it would ill agree with the
following words, where it is said to be of a fat and liking soil, as indeed it
is, though not so fat and deep as the Isle of France, La Beause, or many others
of the Southern Provinces.

The French custom giving to all the sons an equality P. 8. l. 17.
in the Estate] which must be understood of the Estates of meaner and inferior
persons, and not of those of eminent, and more noble Families, which have been
altered in this point; The Lands and Honors passing undivided to the eldest
sons, the better to support the dignity of their place and titles; as many
Gentlemen of Kent have changed their old tenure by Gavellinde into Knights
service, for the same reason, and obtained several Acts of Parliament to make
good that change.

For when Meroveus the Grandchilde of Pharamond] P. 34 l. 2.
so he is said to be by Rusener, as eldest son of Clodian the son of Pharamond;
but Paradine, the best Herald of all the French, speaks more doubtfully of him,
not knowing whether he were the son or next kinsman of Clodian, and others
(whose authority I have elsewhere followed) make him to be the Master of the
Horse to Clodian, whose children he is said to have dispossessed of the Crown,
and transferred the same unto himself.

The reason of the name I could not learn amongst P. 125 l. 25.
the people] That is to say, not such a reason of the name, as I then approved
of, my conceit strongly carrying me to the Bellocassi, whom I would fain have
settled in the Country of La Beause, and from them derived that name unto it.
But stronger reasons since have persuaded the contrary, so that leaving the
Bellocassi near Baieux in the Dukedom of Normandy, we must derive the name of
La Beause, and Belsia, by which it is severally called by the French and
Latins, from the exceeding beautifulness of that flourishing Province, that
which the Latins call Bellus in the Masculine, and Bella in the Feminine
Gender, being by the the French called Bell and Beau, as it after follows.

Picardie is divided into the higher, which contains P. 164. l. 1.
the Countries of Calice and Bologne, etc.] That Picardie is divided into the
higher and the lower, is a Truth well known, though I know not by what
negligence of mine they are here misplaced, that being the lower Picardie which
lies next the sea containing the Countries of Calais, and Bologne, with the
Towns of Abbeville, and Monstreuille; and that the higher Picardie, which
liethmore into the Land in which stands the fair City of Amiens, and many
other Towns and Territories else where described.

Both these were born unto the King by Madam Gabriele P. 207. l. 38.
for her excellent beauty surnamed La Belle] Madam Gabriele is brought in here
before her time, and b^ing left out, the sense will run as currently, but more
truly thus. Both these were born unto the King by the Dutch^sse of Beaufort, a
Lady whom the King, etc. And for the children which she brought him, though
they are named right, yet (as I have been since informed) they are marshalled
wrong, Caesar Duke of Vendosm being the eldest; not the younger son. And as for
Madam Gabriele, she was indeed the King best beloved Concubine, one whom he
kept not only for his private chamber, but carried publicly along with him in
the course of his wars. Insomuch that when the Duke of Biron had besieged
Amiens (being then lately surprised by the Spaniards as before was intimated)
and was promised succors by the King with all speed that might be; the King at
last came forwards with Madam Gabriele, and a train of Ladies to attend her:
which being noted by the Duke, he cried aloud with a great deal of scorn and
indignation, Behold the goodly succors which the King has brought us. A Lady
in great favor, but in greater power, to whom the character was intended,
which by mistake, is here given to the Duchess of Beaufort, though possibly
that Duchess also might deserve part of it.

When the Liturgy was translated into Latin by P. 243. l. 1.
Doctor Mocket] Not by him first translated, as the words may intimate, it
having been translated into Latin in Queen Elizabeth's time. But that Edition
being worn out, and the Book grown scarce, the Doctor gave it a Review, and
caused it to be reprinted together with Bishop Jewels Apology, the Articles of
the Church of England, the Doctrinal points delivered in the Book of Homilies,
with some other pieces, which being so reviewed and published, gave that
contentment to many sober minded men of the Romish party which is after
mentioned.

In the Relation of the second Journey, I find no mistakes, requiring any
Animadversions, as written in a riper judgment, and with greater care, because
intended to a person of such known abilities. Nor was I less diligent in
gathering the materials for it, then careful that it might be free from
mistakes and errors; not only informing my self punctually in all things which
concerned these Islands, by persons of most knowledge and experience, in the
affairs and state of either, but with mine own hand copying out some of their
Records, many whole Letters from the Council and Court of England, the whole
body of the Genevian Discipline obtruded on both Islands by Snape and
Cartwright, the Canons recommended by King James to the Isle of Jarsey, besides
many papers of less bulk and consequence, out of all which I have so enlarged
that discourse, that if it be not (...), it comes very near it. Certain I am
that here is more delivered of the affairs of these Islands and on their
account, then all the Authors which have ever written of them being laid
together, can amount unto. For in pursuance of this part, I have took a full
survey of those Islands which I went to visit, together with such alterations
in Religion as have happened there, both when they were under the Popes of Rome,
and the Bishops of Constance, as since they have discharged themselves from the
power of both. The Reformation there being modelled according to the Genevian
Platform, occasioned me to search into the beginning, growth, and progress of
the Presbyterian government with the settling of it in these Islands; together
with the whole body of that Discipline as it was there settled, and some short
observations on the text thereof, the better to lay open the novelty,
absurdity, and ill consequents of it. That done I have declared by what means
and motives the Isle of Jarsey was made conformable in point of discipline and
devotion to the Church of England, and given the Reader a full view of that
body of Canons which was composed and confirmed for regulating the affairs
thereof in sacred matters; and after a short application tending to the
advancement of my main design, do conclude the whole.

Lastly, I am to tell the Reader, that though I was chiefly drawn to publish
these Relations at this present time, for preventing all impressions of them,
by any of those false copies which are got abroad; yet I am given to
understand, that the first is coming out (if not out already) under the Title
of France painted out to the life: but painted by so short a Pensil, as makes
it want much of that life which it ought to have. By whom and with what color
that piece is painted thus without my consent, I may learn hereafter. In the
mean time, whether that Piece be printed with, or without my name unto it, I
must protest against the wrong, and disclaim the work, as printed by a false
and imperfect copy, deficient in some whole Sections, the distribution of the
books and parts, not kept according to my mind and method, destitute also of
those Explications and Corrections, which I have given unto it on my last
perusal in this general Preface; and finally containing but one half of the
work which is here presen(...) Faults and infirmities I have too many of mine
own, Nam vitiis nemo sine nascitur, as we know who said; and therefore would
not charge my self with those imperfections, those frequent errors and mistakes
which the audaciousnesse of other men may obtrude upon me: which having
signified to the Reader, for the detecting of this imposture, and mine own
discharge, I recommend the following work to his favorable censure, and both
of us to the mercies of the Supreme Judge.

Lacies Court in Abingdon, April 17. 1656.
Books lately printed and reprinted for Henry Seile.
DOctor Heylyn's Cosmography, in fol.

Twenty Sermons of Dr. Sanderson's, ad Aulam, etc. never till now published.

Dr Heylyn's Comment on the Apostles Creed, in fol.

Bishop Andrews holy Devotions, the 4 Edition, in 12.

Martial in 12. for the use of West minster School.

John Willis his Art of Stenography or Short writing, by spelling Characters,
in 8. the 14 Edition: together with the School master to the said Art.

SYLLABUS CAPITUM: OR, The Contents of the Chapters.
NORMANDY; OR, THE FIRST BOOK.
The Entrance. THe beginning of our Journey. The nature of the Sea. A farewell
to England. CHAP. I. NORMANDY in general; the Name and bounds of it. The
condition of the Ancient Normans, and of the present. Ortelius character of
them examined. In what they resemble the Inhabitants of Norfolk. The
commodities of it, and the Government. page 4. CHAP. II. Dieppe, the Town,
strength and importance of it. The policy of Henry IV. not seconded by his Son.
The custom of the English Kings in placing Governors in their Forts. The
breaden God there, and strength of the Religion. Our passage from Dieppe to
Roven. The Norman Innes, Women, and Manners. The importunity of servants in
hosteries. The saucy familiarity of the attendants. Ad pileum vocare, what it
was amongst the Romans. Jus pileorum in the Universities of England, etc. p. 9.
CHAP. III. ROVEN a neat City; how seated and built; the strength of is. St.
Katharines mount. The Church of Nostre dame, etc. The indecorum of the Papists
in the several and unsuitable pictures of the Virgin. The little Chapel of
the Capuchins in Boulogne. The House of Parliament. The precedence of the
President and the Governor. The Legend of St. Romain, and the privilege thence
arising. The language and religion of the Rhothomagenses, or people of Roven.
p. 19. CHAP. IV. Our journey between Roven and Pontoyse. The holy man of St.
Clare and the Pilgrims thither. My sore eyes. Mante, Pontoyse, Normandy justly
taken from King John. The end of this Book. p. 26.
FRANCE specially so called; OR, THE SECOND BOOK.
CHAP. I. France in what sense so called. The bouuds of it. All old Gallia not
possessed by the French. Countries follow the name of the most predominant
Nation. The condition of the present French not different from that of the old
Gauls. That the heavens have a constant power upon the same Climate, though
the Inhabitants are changed. The quality of the French in private, at the
Church, and at the table. Their language, complements, discourse, etc. p. 33.
CHAP. II. The French Women, their persons, prating and conditions. The
immodesty of the French Ladies. Kissing not in use among them; and the sinister
opinion conceived of the free use of it in England. The innocence and
harmelesnesse of it amongst us. The impostures of French Pandars in London,
with the scandal thence arising. The peccancy of an old English Doctor. More
of the French Women. Their Marriages, and lives after wedlock, etc. An Elogie
to the English Ladies. p. 41. CHAP. III. France described. The valley of
Montmorancie, and the Dukes of it. Mont-martre. Burials in former times not
permitted within the walls. The pros cuting of this discourse by manner of a
journall, intermitted for a time. The Iown and Church of St. Denis. The Legend
of him, and his head. Of Dagobert and the Leper. The relics to be seen there.
Martyrs how esteemed in St. Augustine' s time. The Sepulchers of the French
Kings, and the treasury there. The Kings house of Madrit. The Qeen Mothers
house at Ruall, and fine devices in it. St. Germains en lay, another of the
Kings houses. The curious painting in it. Gorramburie Window: the Garden
belonging to it, and the excellency of the Waterworks. Boys St. Vincent de
Vicennes, and the Castle called Bisester. p. 50. CHAP. IV. Paris, the names and
antiquity of it. The situation and greatness. The chief strength and
Fortifications about it. The streets and buildings. King James his laudable
care in beautyfying London. King Henry the fourths intent to fortify the Town.
Why not actuated. The Artifices and wealth of the Parisians. The bravery of the
Citizens described under the person of a Barber. p. 64. CHAP. V. Paris divided
into four parts. Of the Fauxburgs in general. Of the Pesthouse. The Fauxburg
and Abbey of St. Germain. The Queen Mothers house there. Her purpose never to
reside in it. The Provost of Merchants, and his authority. The Arms of the
Town. The Townhouse. The Grand Chastellet. The Arcenall. The place Royal,
etc. The Vicounty of Paris. And the Provosts seven daughters. p. 73. CHAP. VI.
The University of Paris, and Founders of it. Of the Colleges in general.
Marriage when permitted to the Rectors of them. The small maintenance allowed
the Scholars in the Universities of France. The great College at Tholoza. Of
the College of the Sorbonne in particular; that and the House of Parliament,
the chief Bulwarks of the French liberty. Of the Polity and Government of the
University. The Rector and his precedence; the disordered life of the Scholars
there being. An Apology for Oxford and Cambridge. The privileges of the
Scholars, their degrees, etc. p. 80. CHAP. VII. The City of Paris seated in the
place of old Lutetia. The Bridges which join it to the Town and University.
King Henry's Statua. Alexander' s injurious policy. The Church and revenues of
Nostre Dame. The Holy water there. The original making and virtue of it. The
Lamp before the Altar. The heathenishnesse of both customs. Paris best seen
from the top of this Church: the great Bell there never rung but in time of
Thunder: the baptizing of Bells, the grand Hospital and decency of it. The place
Daulphin. The holy Chapel and Relics there. What the Ancients thought of
Relics. The Exchange. The little Chastelet. A transition to the Parliament. p.
90. CHAP. VIII. The Parliament of France when begun; of whom it consists, The
digniiy and esteem of it abroad, made sedentarie at Paris, appropriated to the
long robe. The Palais by whom built, and converted to seats of Justice. The
seven Chambers of Parliament. The great Chamber. The number and dignity of the
Presidents. The Duke of Biron afraid of them. The Kings seat in it. The sitting
of the Grand Signeur in the Divano. The authority of this Court in causes of
all kinds; and ever the affairs of the King. This Court the main pillar of the
Liberty of France. La Tournelle, and the Judges of it. The five Chambers of
Enquestes severally instituted, and by whom. In what cause it is decisive. The
form of admitting Advocates into the Courts of Parliament. The Chancellor of
France and his Authority. The two Courts of Requests, and Masters of them. The
vain envy of the English Clergy against the Lawyers. p. 104. CHAP. IX. The
Kings Palace of the Louure, by whom built. The unsutablenesse of it. The fine
Gallery of the Queen Mother. The long Gallery of Henry IV. His magnanimous
intent to have built it into a quadrangle. Henry IV. a great builder. His
infinite project upon the Mediterranean and the Ocean. La Salle des Antiques.
The French not studious of Antiquities. Burbon house. The Tuilleries, etc. p.
113.
La BEAUSE; OR, THE THIRD BOOK.
CHAP. I. Our Journey toward Orleans, the Town, Castle, and Battle of Mont
l'hierrie. Many things imputed to the English which they never did. Lewis the
11. brought not the French Kings out of wardship. The town of Chartroy, and the
mourning Church there. The Country of La Beause and people of it. Estampes.
The dancing there. The new art of begging in the Innes of this Country.
Angerville. Tury. The sawciness of the French Fiddlers. Three kinds of Music
amongst the Ancient. The French Music. p. 121. CHAP. II. The Country and site
of Orleans like that of Worcester. The Wine of Orleans. Praesidial Towns in
France, what they are. The sale of Offices in France. The fine walk and pastime
of the Palle Malle. The Church of St. Croix founded by Superstition and a
miracle. Defaced by the Hugonots. Some things hated only for their name. The
Bishop of Orleans, and his privilege. The Chapel and Pilgrims of St.
Jacques. The form of Mass in St Croix C^n^ing an Heathenish custom. The great
siege of Orleans, raised by Joan the Virgin. The valor of that woman: that she
was no witch. An Elogie on her. p. 131. CHAP. III. The study of the Civil Law
revived in Europe. The dead time of learning. The Schools of Law in Orleans.
The oeconomie of them. The Chancellor of Oxford anciently appointed by the
Diocesan. Their method here, and prodigality in bestowing degrees. Orleans a
great conflux of strangers. The language there. The Corporation of Germans
there. Their house and privileges. Dutch and Latin. The difference between an
Academie and an University. p. 145. CHAP. IV. Orleans not an University till
the coming of the Jesuits. Their College there by whom built. The Jesuits
no singers. Their laudable and exact method of teaching. Their policies in it.
Received not without great difficulty into Paris. Their houses in that
university. Their strictness unto the rules of their order. Much maliced by
the other Priests and Friars. Why not sent into England with the Queen; and of
what order they were that came with her. Our return to Paris. p. 152.
PICARDIE; OR, THE FOURTH BOOK.
CHAP. I. Our return toward England. More of the Hugonots hate unto Crosses.
The town of Luzarch, and St. Loupae. The Country of Picardie and people. Tho
Picts of Britain not of this Country. Mr. Lee Dignicoes Governor of Picardie.
The office of Constable what it is in France. By whom the place supplied in
England. The marble table in France, and causes there handled. Clermount, and
the Castle there. The war raised up by the Princes against D' Ancre. What his
designs might tend to, etc. p. 162. CHAP. II. The fair City of Amiens; and
greatness of it. The English feasted within it; and the error of that action;
the Town how built-seated and fortified. The Citadell of it, thought to be
impregnable. Not permitted to be viewed. The overmuch opennesse of the English
in discovering their strength. The watch and form of Government in the Town.
Amiens a Visdamate: to whom it pertains. What that honor is in France. And
how many there enjoy it, etc. p. 169. CHAP. III. The Church of Nostre Dame in
Amiens. The principal Churches in most Cities called by her name. More honor
performed to her then to her Savior. The surpassing beauty of this Church on
the outside. The front of it. King Henry the sevenths Chapel at Westminster.
The curiousness of this Church within. By what means it became to be so. The
sumptuous masking closets in it. The excellency of perspective works.
Indulgences by whom first founded. The estate of the Bishopric. p. 175. CHAP.
IV. Our Journey down the Some, and Company. The Town and Castle of Piquigni,
for what famous. Comines censure of the English in matter of Prophecies. A
farewell to the Church of Amiens. The Town and Castle of Pont D' Army.
Abbeville how seated; and the Garrison there. No Governor in it but the Major
or Provost. The Authors imprudent curiosity; and the courtesy of the Provost to
him. The French Posthorses how base and tired. My preferment to the
Trunk-horse. The horse of Philip de Comines. The Town and strength of
Monstreuille. The importance of these three Towns to the French border, etc. p.
183. CHAP. V. The County of Boulonnois, and Town of Boulogne by whom
Enfranchized. The present of Salt butter. Boulogne divided into two Towns.
Procession in the lower Town to divert the Plague. The form of it. Procession
and the Letany by whom brought into the Church. The high Town Garrisoned. The
old man of Boulogne; and the desperate visit which the Author bestowed upon
him. The neglect of the English in leaving open the Havens. The fraternity De
la Charity, and inconveniency of it. The costly Journey of Henry VIII. to
Boulogne. Sir Walt. Raleghs censure of that Prince condemned. The discourtesie
of Charles V. toward our Edward VI. The defense of the house of Burgundy how
chargeable to the Kings of England. Boulogne yielded back to the French; and on
what conditions. The courtesy and cunning of my Host of Bovillow. p. 192.
FRANCE GENERAL; OR, THE FIFTH BOOK.
Describing the Government of the Kingdom generally, in reference to the Court,
the Church and the Civil State. CHAP. I. A transition to the Government of
France in general The person, age and marriage of King Lewis XIII.
Conjecturall reasons of his being issuelesse. Iaqueline Countess of Holland
kept from issue by the house of Burgundy. The Kings Sisters all married; and
his alliances by them. His natural Brethren, and their preferments. His
lawful Brother. The title of Monsieur in France. Monsieur as yet unmarried;
not like to marry Montpensiers daughter. That Lady a fit wife for the Earl of
Soissons. The difference between him and the Prince of Conde for the Crown, in
case the line of Navarre fail. How the Lords stand affected in the cause.
Whether a child may be born in the 11 month. King Henry IV. a great lover of
fair Ladies. Monsieur Barradas the Kings favorite, his birth and offices. The
omniregency of the Queen Mother; and the Cardinal of Richileiu. The Queen
Mother a wise and prudent woman. p. 204. CHAP. II. Two Religions struggling in
France, like the two twins in the womb of Rebecca. The comparison between them
two, and those in the general. A more particular survey of the Papists Church
in France, in Policy, Privilege and Revenue. The complaint of the Clergy to
the King. The acknowledgment of the French Church to the Pope merely titular.
The pragmatick sanction, Maxima tua fatuitas, and Conventui Tridentino,
severally written to the Pope and Trent Council. The tedious quarrel about
Investitures. Four things propounded by the Parliament to the Jesuits. The
French B shops not to meddle with Friars, their lives and land. The ignorance of
the French Priests. The Chanoins Latin in Orleans. The French not hard to be
converted, if plausibly humoured. p. 216. CHAP. III. The correspondency between
the French King and the Pope. This Pope an Omen of the Marriages of France with
England. An English Catholics conceit of it. His Holiness Nuncio in Paris. A
learned Argument to prove the Popes universality. A continuation of the
allegory between Jacob and Esau. The Protestants compelled to leave their Forts
and Towns. Their present estate and strength. The last War against them justly
undertaken; not fairly managed Their insolences and disobedience to the Kings
command. Their purpose to have themselves a free estate. The war not a war of
Religion. King James in justice could not assist them more then he did First
for saken by their own party. Their happiness before the war. The Court of the
edict. A view of them in their Churches. The commendation which the French
Papists give to the Church of England. Their Discipline and Ministers, etc. p.
229 CHAP. IV. The connection between the Church and Common wealth in general. A
transition to the particular of France. The Government there merely regal. A
mixed form of Government most commendable. The Kings Patents for Offices.
Monopolies above the censure of Parliament. The strange office intended to Mr.
Luynes. The Kings gifts and expenses. The Chamber of Accounts. France divided
into three sorts of people. The Conventus Ordinum nothing but a title. The
inequality of the Nobles and Commons in France. The Kings power how much
respected by the Princes. The powerablenesse of that rank. The formal
execution done on them. The multitude and confusion of Nobility. King James
defended. A censure of the French Heralds. The command of the French Nobles
over their Tenants. Their privileges, gibbets and other Regalia. They conspire
with the King to undo the Commons. p. 246. CHAP. V. The base and low estate of
the French Paisant. The misery of them under their Lord. The bed of Procrustes.
The suppressing of the Subject prejudicial to a State. The wisdom of Henry
VII. The Forces all in the Cavallerie. The cruel impositions laid upon the
people by the King. No demain in France. Why the trial by twelve men can be
used only in England. The Gabell of Salt. The Popes license for wenching. The
Gabell of whom refused, and why. The Gascoines impatient of Taxes. The taille,
and taillion. The Pancarke or Aides. The vain resistance of those of Paris. The
Court of Aides. The manner of gathering the Kings moneys. The Kings revenue.
The corruption of the French publicans. King Lewis why called the just. The
moneys current in France. The gold of Spain more Catholic then the King The
happiness of the English Subjects. A congratulation unto England. The
conclusion of the first Journey. p. 258.
GUERNZEY and JARSEY; OR, THE SIXTH BOOK.
The Entrance. (1) The occasion of, etc. (2) Introduction to this work. (3) The
Dedication, (4) and Method of the whole. The beginning, continuance of our
voyage; with the most remarkable passages which happened in it. The mercenary
falsnesse of the Dutch exemplified in the dealing of a man of war. p. 179.
CHAP. I. (1) Of the convenient situation, and (2) condition of these Islands in
the general. (3) Alderney, and (4) Serke. (5) The notable stratagem whereby
this latter was recovered from the French. (6) Of Guernzey, (7) and the smaller
Isles near unto it. (8) Our Lady of Lebu. (9) The road, and (10) the Castle of
Cornet. (11) The Trade, and (12) Privileges of this people. (13) Of Jarsey,
and (14) the strengths about it. (15) The Island why so poor and populous. (16)
Gavelkind, and the nature of it. (17) The Governors and other the Kings
Officers. The (18) Polity, and (19) administration of justice in both Islands.
(20) The Assembly of the Three Estates. (21) Courts Presidiall in France what
they are. (22) The election of the Justices, (23) and the Oath taken at their
admission. (24) Of their Advocates or Pleaders, and the number of them. (25)
The number of Atturneys once limited in England. (26) A Catalogue of the
Governors and Bailiffs of the Isle of Jarsey. p. 292. CHAP. II. (1) The City
and Di^cesse of Constance. (2) The condition of these Islands under that
Government. (3) Churches appropriated what they were. (4) The Black Book of
Constance. (5) That called Dooms day. (6) The suppression of Priors Aliens. (7)
Priours Dative, how they differed from the Conventuals. (8) The condition of
the^e Churches after the suppression. (9) A Diagram of the Revenue then
allotted to each several Parish, together with the Ministers and Justices now
being. (10) What is meant by Champarte deserts and French querrui. (11) The
alteration of Religion in these Islands. (12) Persecution here in the days of
Queen Mary. The Authors indignation at it, expressed in a Poetical rapture.
(13) The Islands annexed for ever to the Diocese of W^nton, and for what
reasons. p. 313. CHAP. III. (1) The condition of Geneva under their Bishop. (2)
The alteration there both in Polity, and (3) in Religion. (4) The state of
that Church before the coming of Calvin thither. (5) The conception, (6) birth,
and (7) growth of the New Discipline. (8) The quality of Lay Elders. (9) The
different proceedings of Calvin, (10) and Beza in the propagation of that
cause. (11) Both of them enemies to the Church of England. (12) The first
enrtance of this Platform into the Islands (13) A permission of it by the
Queen and the Council in St. Peter's and St. Hillaries. (14) The letters of the
Council to that purpose. (15) The tumults raised in England by the brethren.
(16) Snape and Cartwright establish the new Discipline in the rest of the
Islands. p. 327. CHAP. IV. The Discipline Ecclesiastical, according as it has
been in practice of the Church after the Reformation of the same by the
Ministers, Elders and Deacons of the Isles of Guernzey Jarsey, Serke, and
Alderney; confirmed by the authority and in the presence of the Governors of
the same Isles in a Synod holden in Guernzey the 28 of June 1576. And
afterward revived by the said Ministers and Elders, and confirmed by the said
Governors in a Synod holden also in Guernzey the 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, and 17.
days of October, 1597. p. 338. CHAP. V. (1) Annotations on the Discipline. (2)
N^place in it for the Kings Supremacy. (3) Their love to Parity, as well in the
State as in the Church. (4) The covering of the head a sign of liberty. (5) The
right hand of fellowship. (6) Agenda, what it is in the notion of the Church:
The intrusion of the Eldership into Domestical affairs. (7) Millets case. (8)
The brothren superstitious in giving names to children. (9) Ambling Communions.
(10) The holy Discipline made a third note of the Church. (11) Marriage at
certain times prohibited by the Discipline. (12) Dead bodies anciently not
interred in Cities. (13) The Baptism of Bells. (14) The brethren under pretense
of scandal, usurp upon the civil Courts. (15) The Discipline incroacheth on our
Church by stealth. (16) A caution to the Prelates. p. 364. CHAP. VI. (1) King
James how affected to this Platform. (2) He confirms the Discipline in both
Islands. (3) And for what reasons. (4) Sir John Peyton sent Governor into
Jarsey. (5) His Articles against the Ministers there. (6) And the proceedings
thereupon. (7) The distracted estate of the Church and Ministry in that
Island, (8) They refer themselves unto the King. (9) The Inhabitants of Jarsey
petition for the English Discipline. (10) A reference of both parties to the
Council. (11) The restitution of the Dean. (12) The Interim of Germany what it
was. (13) The Interim of Jarsey. (14) The exceptions of the Ministry against
the Book of Common prayer. (15) The establishment of the new Canons. 378. CHAP.
VII. The Canons and Constitutions Ecclesiastical for the Church Discipline of
Jarsey; together with the Kings Letters Patents for the authorizing of the
same. p. 390. CHAP. VIII. (1) For what cause it pleased his Majesty to begin
with Jarsey. (2) A representation of such motives whereon the like may be
effected in the Isle of Guernzey. (3) The indignity done by a Minister hereof
to the Church of England. (4) The calling of the Ministers in some reformed
Churches how defensible. (5) The circumstances both of time and persons how
ready for an alteration. (6) The grievances of the Ministry against the
Magistrates. (7) Propesals of such means as may be fittest in the managing of
this design. (8) The submission of the Author and the work unto his Lordship.
The conclusion of the whole. Our return to England. p. 412.
ERRATA.
Besides the errors of the Copy, the Reader is of course to look for some from
the Press, which the have made for preventing the false impressions, bath more
increased then any negligence of the Workman, which the Reader is desired to
amend in this manner following.

PAge 4. l. 27. r. Le Main. p. 5. l. 23. r. locorum. p. 7 l. 15. r. qui. p. 10.
l. 22. r. the predecessor to the same Henry. p. 11. l. 17. del. in. p. 13. l.
18. r. pace. ibid. l. 35. (...)yred p. 19. l 26. r. Evenlode. p. 31 l. 8. r.
fourth. p. 39. l. 25. and p. 108. l. 9 r. interview. p. 49. l. 3. r. then. ibid
l. 4. r. as at. ibid. l. 9. r. her own thoughts. p. 52. l. 1. r. Cumrye. p. 60
l. 28. r. En lar. ibid. l. 35 r. Troyes. p. 69 l. 26. del. now. p. 95. l. 17. r
born. p. 96. l. 19 r. abolished. p. 99. l. 20. r. Treasurirer p. 100. l. 1. r.
visible. p. 121. l. 12. r. Chastres. p. 123 l 1 r. as much hugged. ibid. l. 26.
r. I shall hereafter show you. p. 125. l. 27. r. Beu. p. 127. l. 14. r.
Angerville. p. 132. l. 12. r. Angiers. p. 138 l. 9. r. his. p. 139. l. 15. r.
ancient times. ibid. l. 20. r quam disfumigamibus. p. 140. l. 22. r. Belb^s p.
147. l. 2. r. meri^ p. 150. l. 27. r. many. p. 153. l. 6. r. mouths ibid. l.
31. r. form. p. 158 l. 9 r. trumped. p. 162. l. 12. r. Les D guieres. p. 163.
l. 20 r. Bevie. ibid. l. ^3. r. Troyes. p. 167. l. 27. r. Ancre. p. 170. l. 18.
r. adeo. ibid. l. 19. r. fidei. p. 175. l. 9. r. mossing p. 185 l. 27. del. do.
ibid. 36. r ner p. 190. l. 3. del my ibid. l. 33. r. Books. p. 199. l. 20. r.
horror. p. 206. l. 8. r Fran^. p. 208. l. 1. r. 60000. p. 211. l. 14. del.
each (...). p. 213 l 8. to these words abeady mentioned, add, and Madam
Gabriele the most breed of all. p. 220 l. ult. r. Aix. p. 222. l. 38. r. no
other. p. 223. l 7. and l. 32. r. investi(...). ibid. l. 18. r. Henry IV. ibid.
l. 34. r. Henry I p 225. l. 10. r. sanctio. ibid. l. 23. r. (...)e. p. 230. l
19. r. fair, p. 231 l. 1. r. to come. ibid. l. 6 r. greatest action. p. 235. l.
(...). del into. p. 242. l 4 r. Le Chastres. p. 244 l. 33. r. Systematicall. p
248. l. 27. r. (...). p. 261. l. 24 del. for. p. 271. l. 13. r. birudo p 272.
l. ult r. Vitr^y. p. 274. l. r. (...)tal. p. 288 l. 28. r. Peitor. p. 298. l.
5. and 302. l. 16. r. Army. p. 304 l. 33 r. Summa(...) p. 306 l. 20. r.
manner. p. 312. l. 8 del. a Cross engraled O. p. 314. l. 5 r. Viconte. p. 320.
l 8. r. painset. ibid. l. 2. r. honor. p. 323. l. 34. r. once. p 325. l. 7. r.
fact. p. 330. l. 36. r. Birtilier. p. 337. l. 11. r titulary. ibid. l 17 r.
Painset. p. 354. l ult. (...) them they. p. 368 l 35. r. propounded. p. 374 l
10 r. tactum. p. 381. l. 14. r. va(...). p. 384. l. 3 and l. 3^. and p. 386 l.
15. Misse^v^. p 385. l. 17 r. Olivier. ibid. l. 34. r. St. Martins. p 387. l
32. r. interea p. 393 l. 9. r. cure. p 401. l. ult. r. rols. p. 417 l. 11. del.
has p 415 l. 3. r. ceremonial. ibid. l. 25. r. besaid unto him. ibid. l. 38.
r. Bishop. p. 417. l 8. r clamors. p. 422. l. 13. r. change. p. 423. l 3. r.
sic. ibid. l. 24. r. pool.

THE RELATION Of the FIRST JOURNEY: CONTAINING A SURVEY of the STATE OF FRANCE.

TAKING IN The Description of the principal Provinces, and chief Cities of it;
The Temper, Humors and Affections of the people generally; And an exact account
of the Public Government, in reference to the Court, the Church and the Civil
State.

By PET. HEYLYN.

London, Printed 1656.

A SURVEY OF THE STATE of FRANCE.
NORMANDY; OR, THE FIRST BOOK.
The Entrance.
The beginning of our Journey. The nature of the Sea. A farewell to England.

ON Tuesday the 28 of June, just at the time when England had received the
chief beauty of France, and the French had seen the choice beauties of England;
we went to Sea in a Bark of Dover. The Port we aimed at, Dieppe in Normandy.
The hour three in the afternoon. The wind fair and high, able, had it
continued in that point, to have given us a wastage as speedy as our longings.
Two hours before night it came about to the Westward, and the tide also not
befriending us, our passage became tedious and troublesome. The next day being
dedicated to the glory of God in the memory of St. Peter, we took the benefit
of the ebb to assist us against the wind; this brought us out of the sight of
England, and the flood ensuing compelled us to our Anchor.

I had now leisure to see Gods wonders in the deep; wonders indeed to us which
had never before seen them: but too much familiarity had made them no other
then the Sailers playfellowes. The waves striving by an imbred ambition which
should be highest, which foremost. Precedencie and supereminencie was equally
desired, and each enjoyed it in succession. The wind more covetous in
appearance, to play with the water, then disturb it, did only rock the billow,
and seemed indeed to dandle the Ocean; you would at an other time have thought
that the seas had only danced to the winds whistle; or that the Wind straining
it self to a Treble, and the Seas by a Diapason, supplying the Base, had tuned
a Caranto to our ship. For so orderly they ^ose and fell according to the time
and note of the Billow, that her violent agitation might be imagined to be
nothing but a nimble Galliard filled with Capers. This nimblenesse of the waves
and correspondency of our Bark unto them, was not to all our company alike
pleasing: what in me moved only a reverend and awful pleasure, was to others
an occasion of sickness, their heads gidie, their joints enfeebled, their
stomachs loathing sustenance, and with great pangs avoiding what they had
taken; in their mouths nothing might have been so frequent as that of Horace,

Illi robur and aes triplex
Girea pectus erat, qui fragilem ituei
Comnasit pelago ratem. Hard was his heart, as brass, which first did venture
In a weak ship, on the rough Seas to enter.


Whether it be, that the noisome smells, which arise from the saltness and
tartness of that region of waters, poysoneth the brain; or that the ungoverned
and unequal motion of the ship, stirs and unsetleth the stomach, or both;
we may conjecture with the Philosophers, rather then determine. This I am sure
of, that the Cabbins and Decks were but as so many Hospitals or Pesthouses
filled with diseased persons, whilst I and the Mariners only made good the
Hatches. Here did I see the Scaly nation of that Kingdom solace themselves in
the brimme of the waters, rejoicing in the sight and warmth of the day; and yet
spouting from their mouths such quantity of waters, as if they purposed to
quench that fire which gave it. They danced about our Vessel, as if it had
been a moving May pole; and that with such delightful decorum, that you never
saw a measure better trodden with less art. And now I know not what wave bigger
then the rest tossed up our ship so high, that I once more saw the coast of
England. An object which took such hold on my senses, that I forgot that
harmless company which sported below me, to bestow on my dearest mother, this
(and for ought I could assure my self, my last) farewell.

England adieu, thy most unworthy son
Leaves thee, and grieves to see what he has done.
What he has done, in leaving thee the best
Of mothers, and more glorious then the rest
Thy sister-nations. Had thou been unkind;
Yet might he trust thee safer then the wind.
Had thou been weak; yet far more strength in thee,
Then in two inebes of a sinking tree.
Had thou been cruel; yet thy angry face
Has more love in it, then the Seas embrace.
Suppose thee p^or; his zeal and love the less,
Thus to forsake his Mother in distress.
But thou art none of these, no want in thee;
Only a needless curiosity
Has made him leap thy ditch. O! let him have
Thy blessing in his Voyage: and he will crave
The Gods to thunder wrath on his neglect,
When he performs not thee all due respect;
That Nemesis her scourge on him would pluck,
When he forgets those breasts which gave him suck.
That Nature would dissolve and turn him earth,
If thou be not remembered in his mirth.
May he be cast from mankind, if he shame
To make profession of his mothers name.
Rest then assured in this, though sometimes he
Conceal, perhaps, his faith, he will not thee.
CHAP. I.
NORMANDY in general; the Name and bounds of it. The condition of the Ancient
Normans, and of the present. Ortelius character of them examined. In what they
resemble the Inhabitants of Norfolk. The commodities of it, and the Government.

THe next ebb brought us in sight of the Seacoast of Normandy, a shore so
evenly compassed and levelled, that it seems the work of Art, not Nature; the
Rock all the way of an equal height, rising from the bottom to the top in a
perpendicular, and withal so smooth and polished, that if you dare believe it
the work of Nature, you must also think, that Nature wrought it by the line,
and showed an art in it above the imitation of an Artist. This wall is the
Northern bound of this Province; the South parts of it being confined with Le
Mainde la Beausse, and L' Isle de France; on the East it is divided from
Picardie by the River of Some; and on the North it is bounded with the Ocean,
and the little River Crenon, which severeth it from a corner of Britain. It
extends in length from the beginning of the 19 degree of longitude, to the
middle of the 23. Viz. from the Cape of St. Savior West, to the Port-town of
St. Valerie East. For breadth, it lies partly in the 49, partly in the 50
degree of Latitude; so that reckoning 60 miles to a degree, we shall find it
to contain 270 English miles in length, and 60 English miles in breadth, where
it is narrowest.

Amongst the Ancients it was accounted a part of Gallia Cellica; the name
Neustria. This new title it got by receiving into it a new Nation. A people
which had so terribly spoiled the Maritine Coasts of England, France, and
Belgium, that, A furore Normannorum, was inserted into the Letanie. Originally
they were of Norway, their name imports it. Anno 800, or thereabouts, they
began first to be accounted one of the Plagues of Europe: 900 they seated
themselves in France by the permission of Charles the Balde, and the valor of
Rollo their Captain. Before this, they had made themselves masters of Ireland,
though they long held it not, and anno 1067 they added to the glory of their
name by the conquest of England. You would think them a people not only born to
the wars, but to victory. But, Ut frugum semina mutato solo degenerant, sic
illa genuina feritas eorum, amoenitate mollila est; Florus spoke it of the
Gauls removed into Asia: it is applyable to the Norwegians transplanted into
Gallia: yet fell they not suddenly, and at once into that want of courage which
now possesses them. During the time they continued English, they attempted the
Kingdom of Naples and Antioch, with a fortune answerable to their valor. Being
once oppressed by the French, and in slaved under that Monarchy; they grew
presently crest-faln; and at once lost both their spirits, and their liberty.

The present Norman then, is but the corruption of the Ancient; the heir of his
name, and perhaps his possessions, but neither of his strength, nor his
manhood. Bondage, and a fruitful soil, has so emasculated them, that it is a
lost labor to look for Normans even in Normandy. There remains nothing
almost in them of their progenitors, but the remainders of two qualities, and
those also degenerated, if not bastards; a penurious pride, and an ungoverned
doggednesse. Neither of them become their fortune, or their habit; yet to
these they are constant. Finally, view him in his rags and dejected
countenance, and you would swear it impossible that these snakes should be the
descendents of those brave Heroes, which so often triumphed over both
Religions, foiling the Saracens, and vanquishing the Christians.

But, perchance, their courage is evaporated into wit, and then the change is
made for the better. Ortelius would seem to persuade us to this conceit of
them; and well might he do it, if his words were Oracles: Le gens (says he,
speaking of this Nation) sont des plus accorts and subtils, d' esprit de la
Gaul. A character, for which the French will little thank him; who (if he
speak truth) must in matter of discretion give precedence to their Vassals. But
as Imbalt a French leader said of the Florentines in the fifth book of
Guicciardine, Non sapeva dove consistesse lingegne tanto celebrate de
Fiorentini; so may I of the Normans. For my part I could never yet find, where
that great wit of theirs lay. Certain it is, that as the French in general,
are termed the Kings Asses, so may these men peculiarly be called the Asses of
the French, or the veriest Asses of the rest. For what with the
unproportionable rents they pay to their Lords on the one side, and the
immeasurable taxes laid upon them by the King on the other, they are kept in
such a perpetuated course of drudgery, that there is no place for wit or
wisdom left amongst them. Liberty is the Mother and the Nurse of those two
qualities; and therefore the Romans (not unhappily) expressed both the
conditions of a Freeman, and a discreet and modest personage, by this own word
Ingenuus. Why the French King should lay a greater burden on the backs of this
Nation, then their fellows, I cannot determine. Perhaps it is, because they
have been twice conquered by them, once from King John, and again from Henry
VI. and therefore undergo a double servitude. It may be, to abate their
natural pride and stubbornness. Likely also it is, that being a revolting
people, and apt to an apostasy from their allegiance, they may by this means
be kept impoverished, and by consequence disabled from such practices. This a
French Gentleman of good understanding told me, that it was generally conceited
in France, that the Normans would suddenly and unanimously betray their
Country to the English, were the King a Catholic.

-- But there is yet a further cause of their beggerlinesse and poverty, which
is their litigiousnesse and frequent going to law (as we call it.) Ortelius,
however he failed in the first part of their character, in the conclusion of it
has done them justice. Mais en general (says he) ils sont scavans au
possible en process and plaideries. They are pretty well versed in the quirks of
the Law, and have wit more then enough to wrangle. In this they agree exactly
well with the Inhabitants of our Country of Norfolk: ex infima plebe non pauci
reperiuntur (says Mr. Camden) quin si nihil litium sit, lites tamen ex ipsis
juris apicibus serere calleant. They are pretty fellows to find out quirks in
Law, and to it they will whatsoever it cost them. Mr. Camden spoke not this at
random or by the guess. For besides what my self observed in them at my being
once amongst them, in a College progress, I have heard that there have been
no less then 340 Nisi prius tried there at one Assizes. The reason of this
likeness between the two Nations, I conjecture to be the resemblance of the
site, and soil; both lie upon the Sea with a long and a spacious Coast; both
enjoy a Country Champain, little swelled with hills, and for the most part of a
light and sandy mould. To proceed to no more particulars, if there be any
difference between the two Provinces, it is only this, that the Country of
Normandy, and the people of Norfolk, are somewhat the richer.

For, indeed, the Country of Normandy is enriched with a fat and liking soil;
such an one, Quae demum votis avari agricolae respondet, which may satisfy the
expectation of the Husbandman, were it never so exorbitant. In my life I never
saw Cornfieldsd more large and lovely, extended in an equal level almost as
far as eye can reach. The Wheat (for I saw little Barley) of a fair length in
the stalk, and so heavy in the ear, that it is even bended double. You would
think the grain had a desire to kiss the earth its mother, or that it purposed
by making it self away into the ground, to save the Plough-man his next years
labor. Thick it grows, and so perfectly void of weeds, that no garden can be
imagined to be kept cleaner by Art, then these fields are by Nature. Pasture
ground it has little, and less Meddow, yet sufficient to nourish those few
Cattle they have in it. In all the way between Dieppe and Pontoyse, I saw but
two flocks of Sheep, and them not above 40 in a flock. Kine they have in some
measure, but not fat nor large, without these there were no living for them.
The Nobles eat the flesh, whilst the Farmer seeds on Butter and Cheese, and
that but sparingly. But the miserable estates of the Norman paisant, we will
defer till another opportunity. Swine also they have in pretty number, and some
Pullen in their back sides; but of neither an excess. The principal River of
it is Seine, of which more hereafter; and besides this I saw two rivulets Robee
and Renelle.

In matter of Civil Government, this Country is directed by the court of
Parliament established at Roven. For matters Military, it has an Officer like
the Lieutenant of our shires in England, the Governor they call him. The
present Governor is Mr. Le duc de Longueville, to whom the charge of this
Province was committed by the present King Lewis XIII. anno 1619. The Laws by
which they are governed are the Civil or Imperial, augmented by some Customs
of the French, and others more particular which are the Norman. One of the
principal'st is in matters of inheritance; the French custom giving to all the
Sons an equality in the estate, which we in England call Gavelkind; the Norman
dividing the estate into three parts, and thereof allotting two unto the eldest
brother, and a third to be divided among the others. A law which the French
count not just: the younger brothers of England would think the contrary. To
conclude this general discourse of the Normans; I dare say it is as happy a
Country as most in Europe, were it subject to the same Kings, and governed by
the same Laws, which it gave unto England.

CHAP. II.
Dieppe, the Town, strength and importance of it. The policy of Henry IV. not
seconded by his Son. The custom of the English Kings in placing Governors in
their Forts. The breaden God there, and strength of the Religion. Our passage
from Dieppe to Roven. The Norman Innes, Women, and Manners. The importunity of
servants in hosteries. The saucy familiarity of the attendants. Ad pileum
vocare, what it was amongst the Romans. Jus pileorum in the Universities of
England, etc.

JUne the 30. at 6 of the clock in the morning, we landed at Dieppe, one of the
Haven-towns of Normandy; seated on an arm of the Sea, between two hills, which
embrace it in the nature of a Bay. This secureth the Haven from the violence of
the weather, and is a great strength to the Town against the attempts of any
forces which should assault it by Sea. The Town lying within these mountains,
almost a quarter of a mile up the channel. The Town it self is not uncomely,
the streets large and well paved, the houses of an indifferent height, and built
upright without any jettings out of one part over the other. The
Fortifications, they say, (for we were not permitted to see them) are very good
and modern; without stone, within earth: on the top of the hill, a Castle
finely seated, both to defend the Town, and on occasions to command it. The
Garrison consists of 60 men, in pay no more, but when need requires, the
Captain has authority to arm the Inhabitants. The present Governor is the
Duke of Longueville, who also is the Governor of the province, entrusted with
both those charges by Lewis XIII. anno 1619. An action in which he swarved
somewhat from the example of his father; who never committed the military
command of a Country (which is the office of the Governor) and the custody of
a Town of war or a Fortress, unto one man. The Duke of Biron might hope as
great a courtesy from that King, as the most deserving of his Subjects. He had
stuck close to him in all his adversities, received many an honorable scar in
his service; and indeed, was both Fabius and Scipio, the Sword and Buckler of
the French empire. In a word, he might have said to this Henry, what Silius in
Tacitus did to Tiberius, Suum militem in obsequio mansisse, cum alii ad
seditiones prolaberentur; neque duraturum Tiberii imperium, si iis quoque
legionibus cupido novandi fuisset: yet when he became petitioner to the King
for the Citadell of Burg, seated on the confines of his government of
Bourgogne, the King denied it. The reason was, because Governors of Provinces
which command in chief, ought not to have the command of Places and Fortresses
within their Government. There was also another reason and more enforcing,
which was, that the Petitioner was suspected to hold intelligence with the Duke
of Savoy, whose Town it was. The same Henry, though he loved the Duke of
Espernon, even to the envy of the Court; yet even to him also he used the same
caution. Therefore when he had made him Governor of Xainroigne and Angoulmois,
he put also into his hands the Towns of Metz and Boulogne; places so remote
from the seat of his Government, and so distant one from another, that they did
rather distract his power, then increase it.

The Kings of England have been well, and for a long time versed in this maxim
of estate. Let Kent be one of our examples, and Hampshire the other. In Kent at
this time the Lieutenant (or as the French would call him, the Governor) is the
Earl of Mountgomerie; yet is Dover Castle in the hands of the Duke of
Buckhingham; and that of Quinborough in the custody of Sir Edward Hobby: of
which the one commands the Sea, and the other the Thames, and the Medway. In
Hampshire, the Lieutenant is the Earl of South-Hampton: but the government of
the Town and Garrison of Portesmouth, is entrusted to the Earl of Pembroke:
neither is there any of the le^st Sconces or Blockhouses, on the shore-side of
that Country, which is commanded by the Lieutenant.

But King Lewis now reigning in France, minded not his Fathers action; when at
the same time also he made his confident Mr. Luines Governor of Picardie, and
of the Town and Citadell of Amiens. The time ensuing gave him a sight of this
State-breach. For when the Dukes of Espernon, Vendosme, Longueville, Mayenne
and Nemours, the Count of Soisons and others, sided with the Queen Mother
against the King; the Duke of Longueville strengthened this Dieppe; and had not
Peace suddenly followed, would have made it good, maugre the Kings forces. A
Town it is of great importance, King Henry IV. using it as his Asylum or City
of refuge, when the league was hottest against him. For, had he been further
distressed, from hence might he have made an escape into England; and in at
this door was the entance made for those English forces which gave him the
first step to his throne. The Town has been pillaged and taken by our Richard
the first, in his war against Philip Augustus; and in the declining of our
affairs in France, it was nine months together besieged by the Duke of York,
but with that success, which commonly attends a falling Empire. The number
of the Inhabitants is about 30000, whereof 9000 and upwards are of the
Reformation, and are allowed them for the exercise of their religion, the
Church of Arques, a Village some two miles distant; the remainders are Papists.
In this Town I met with the first Idolatry, which ever I yet saw, more then in
my Books. Quos antea audiebam, hodie vidi Deos, as a barbarous German in
Vellejus said to Tiberius. The Gods of Rome, which before I only heard of, I
now saw, and might have worshipped. It was the Hoaste, as they call it, or the
Sacrament reserved, carried by a couple of Priests under a Canopie, ushered by
two or three torches, and attended by a company of boys and old people which
had no other employment. Before it went a Bell continually tinkling, at the
sound whereof all such as are in their houses, being warned that then their God
goes by them, make some show of reverence; those which meet it in the street,
with bended knees and elevated hands doing it honor. The Protestants, of this
Bell make an use more religious, and use it as a warning or watch-peal to avoid
that st^eet through which they hear it coming. This invention of the Bell has
somewhat in it of Tureisme, it being the custom there at their Canonical
hours, when they hear the criers bawling in the steeples, to fall prostrate on
the ground wheresoever they are and kiss it thrice, so doing their devotions
to Mahomet. The carrying of it about the streets has, no question, in it a
touch of the Jew, this ceremony being borrowed from that of carrying about the
Arc on the shoulders of the Levites. The other main part of it which is the
Adoration, is derived from the Heathens, there never being a people but they,
which afforded divine honors to things in animate. But the people indeed, I
cannot blame for this Idolatrous devotion, their consciences being persuaded,
that what they see pass by them, is the very body of their Savior. For my
part, could the like belief possess my understanding, I could meet it with
greater reverence, then their Church can enjoin me. The Priests and Doctors of
the people are to be condemned only, who impose and enforce this sin upon their
hearers. And doubtless there is a reward which attends them for it. Of
standing it is so young, that I never met with it before the year 1215. Then
did Pope Innocent ordain in a Council holden at Rome, that there should be a
Pix made to cover the Bread, and a Bell bought to be rung before it. The
Adoration of it was enjoined by Pope Honorius, anno 1226. both afterward
increased by the new solemn feast of Corpus Christi day, by Pope Urban the IV.
anno 1264. and confirmed for ever with multitudes of pardons, in the Council
of Vienna, by Clement the V. anno 1310. Such a punie is this great God of the
Romans. Lactantius in his first Book of Institutions against the Gentiles,
taxes the wise men of those times of infinite ridiculousnesse, who worshipped
Jupiter as a God, Cum eundem tamen Saturno and Rhea genitum confiterentur,
Since themselves so perfectly knew his original. As much I marvel at the
impudency of the Romish Clergy, who will needs impose a new God upon their
people, being so well acquainted with his cradle.

It is now time to go on in our journey to Roven. The Car^ stays, and it is
fit we were in it. Ho^ses we could get none for money, and for love we did not
expect them. We are now mounted in our Chariot, for so we must call it. An
English man would have thought it a plain Cart, and if it needs will have the
honor of being a Chariot, let it; sure I am it was never ordained for triumph.
At one end was fastened three carcasses of horses, or three bodies which had
once been horses, and now were worn to dead images; had the Statua of a m^n
been placed on any one of them, it might have been hanged up at an I^ne door,
to represent St. George on horseback, so livelesse they were, and as little
moving; yet at last they began to crawle, for go they could not. This converted
me from my former Heresy, and made me apprehend life in them: but it was so
little, that it seemed only enough to carry them to the next pack of hounder.
Thus accommodated we bid farewell to Dieppe, and proceeded with a space so
slow, that me thought our journey unto Roven would prove a most perfect emblem
of the motion of the ninth sphere, which is 49000 years in finishing. But this
was not our greatest misery. The rain fell in us through our tilt, which for
the many holes in it, one would have thought to have been a net. The dirt brake
plentifully in upon us, through the rails of our Chariot: and the unequal and
ill proportioned pase of it, startled almost every bone of us. I protest, I
marvel how a French man durst adventure in it. Thus endured we all the
diseases of a journey, and the danger of three several deaths, drowning,
choking with the mire, and breaking on the wheel; besides a fear of being
famished before we came to our Inn, which was six French miles from us. The
mad Duke in the Play, which undertook to drive two snailes from Millaine to
Musco, without staff, whip or goade; and in a braverie dared all the world to
match him for an experiment: would here have had matter to have tried his
patience.

On the left hand we saw Arques, once famous for a siege laid about it by our
Richard the first; but raised speedily by the French: It is now (as before I
told you) the Parish Church of the Dieppe Protestants. Their Preachers Mr.
Corteau, and Mr. Mondenis, who have each of them an yearly stipend of 40 l. or
thereabouts; a poor pay, if the faithful discharge of that duty were not a
reward unto it self, above the value of gold and silver. To instance in none of
those beggarly Villages we past through, we came at last unto Tostes, the place
destinated to be our lodging; a Town somewhat like the worser sort of
Market Towns in England. There our Chareter brought u^ to the ruins of an
house, an Ale house I should scarce have thought it, and yet in spite of my
teeth it must be an Inn, yea and that an honorable one, as Don Quixotes host
told him. Despair of finding there either Bedding or Victuals, made me just
like the fellow at the gallows, who when he might have been reprieved on
condition he would marry a wench which there sued for him, having viewed her
well, cried to the hangman to drive on his Cart. The truth is, IN eschappay la
tonnnere et rencheus en l' eschair, according to the French proverb; I fell out
of the drying pan into the fire. One of the house (a ragged fellow I am sure he
was, and so most likely to live there) brought us to a room somewhat of kindred
to a Charnel-house, as dark and as dampish. I confess it was paved with brick
at the bottom, and had toward the Orchards a pretty hole, which in former times
had been a window, but now the glass was all vanished. By the little light
which came in at that hole, I first perceived that I was not in England. There
stood in this Chamber three beds, if at the least it be lawful so to call
them; the foundation of them was of straw, so infinitely thronged together,
that the wool-packs which our Judges sit on in the Parliament, were melted
butter to them: upon this lay a medley of flocks and feathers sowed up together
in a large bag; (for I am confident it was not a tick) but so ill ordered, that
the knobs stuck out on each side, like a crab-tree cudgel. He had need to have
flesh enough that lies on one of them, otherwise the second night would wear
out his bones. The sheets which they brought us, were so course, that in my
conscience no Mariner would vouchsafe to use them for a sail; and the coverlet
so bare, that if a man would undertake to reckon the threads, he need not miss
one of the number. The napperie of the Table was suitable to the bedding, so
foul and dirty, that I durst not conceive it had been washed above once; and
yet the poor clothes looked as briskly as if it had been promised for the whole
year ensuing, to escape many a scouring. The napkins were fit companions for the
clothes, Unum si noveris, omnes nosti. By my description of this Inn, you may
guess at the rest of France; not altogether so wretched, yet is the alteration
almost insensible.

Let us now walk into the Kitching, and observe their provision. And here we
found a most terrible execution committed on the person of a pullet; my
Hostess (cruel woman) had cut the throat of it, and without plucking off the
feathers, tore it into pieces with her hands, and after took away skin and
feathers together, just as we strip Rabbets in England: this done, it was
clapped into a pan, and fried into a supper. In other places where we could get
meat for the Spitte, it uses to be presently broached, and laid
perpendicularly over the fire; three turns at the most dispatcheth it, and
brings it to the Table, rather scorched then roasted. I say where we could
get it, for in these rascally Innes, you cannot have what you would, but what
you may; and that also not of the cheapest. At Pontoyse we met with a Rabbet,
and we thought we had found a great purchase; larded it was, as all meat is in
the Country, otherwise it is so lean, it would never endure roasting. In the
eating it proved so tough, that I could not be persuaded, that it was any more
then three removes from that Rabbet which was in the Ark. The price half a
Crown English. My companions thought it over deer, to me it seemed very
reasonable; for certainly the grass which fed it, was worth more then thrice
the money. But to return to Tostes.

And it it time; you might, perchance, else have loft the sight of mine
Hostess, and her daughters. You would have sworn at the first blush, they had
been of a blood; and it had been great pity had it been otherwise. The
salutation of Horace, Omatre pulchra filia pulchrior, was never so unseasonable
as here. Not to honor them with a further character, let it suffice that their
persons kept so excellent a decorum with the house and furniture, that one
could not possible make use of Tullies Quam dispari dominaris domina. But this
is not their luck only. The women not of Normandy alone, but generally of all
France, are forced to be contented with a little beauty; and she which with us
is reckoned with the vulgar, would amongst them be taken for a Princess. But
of the French women, more when we have taken a view of the Dames of Paris; now
only somewhat of their habit and condition. Their habit in which they differ
from the rest of France, is the attire of the head, which hangs down their
backs in the fashion of a Vail. In Roven and the greater Cities, it is made of
linen, pure and decent; here, and in the Villages, it cannot possible be any
thing else then an old dish-clout turned out of service, or the corner of a
tablecloth reserved from washing. Their best condition is not always visible.
They show it only in the mornings, or when you are ready to depart, and that is
their begging; you shall have about you such a throng of those illfaces, and
every one whining out this dity, Pour les servants, that one might with greater
ease distribute a dole at a rich man's Funeral, then give them a penny. Had you
a purpose to give them unasked, their importunity will prevent your speediest
bounty. After all this impudent begging, their ambition reaches no higher then
a Sol; he that gives more out-biddeth their expectation, and shall be counted
a spendthrift.

But the principal ornaments of these Innes, are the menservants, the
raggedest regiment that ever I yet looked upon. Such a thing as a Chamberlain
was never heard of amongst them, and good clothes are as little known as he. By
the habit of his attendants, a man would think himself in a Gaol; their clothes
either full of patches, or open to the skin. Bid one of them wipe your boots,
he presently has recourse to the curtains, with those he will perhaps rub over
one side, and leave the other to be made clean by the guest. It is enough for
him, that he has written the copy. They wait always with their hats on their
heads, and so also do servants before their masters: attending bare-headed, is
as much out of fashion there, as in Turkey: of all French fashions, in my
opinion, the most unfitting and unseeming. Time and much use reconciled me to
many other things, which at the first were offensive; to this unreverent
custom, I returned an enemy. Neither can I see how it can choose but stomach
the most patient, to see the worthyest sign of liberty usurped and profaned by
the basest of slaves. For seeing that the French paisantrie, are such infinite
slaves unto their Lords and Princes, it cannot be, but that those which are
their servants, must be one degree at the least, below the lowest condition.

Certainly among the ancients, this promiseuous covering of the head, was never
heard of. It was with them the chief sign of freedom, as is well known to
those which are conversant with Antiquity. The Lacones a people of
Peloponnesus, after they had obtained to be made free denizens of Lacedemon, in
sign of their new-gotten liberty, would never go into the battle nisi
pileati, but with their hats on. Amongst the Africans, as it is written in
Alexander ab Alexandro, the placing of a hat on the top of a spear, was used as
a token to incite the people to their liberty, which had been oppressed by
Tyrants; Per pileum in hasta propositum, ad libertatem proclamari. But amongst
the Romans, we have more variety. The taking off of the hat of Tarquinius
Priscus by an Eagle, and the putting of it on again, occasioned the Augur to
prophesic unto him the Kingdom, which fell out accordingly. In their sword
plays, when one of the Gladiators had with credit slain his adversary; they
would sometimes honor him with a Palm, sometimes with the Hat. Of these the
last was the worthyer, the Palm only honoring the Victor, this also
enfranchizing the receivers; therefore conferred commonly on him which had
killed most men in the Theaters. Hence the complaints of Tertullian, lib. de
Spectaculis, cap. 21. Qui insigniori cuiquam homicidae leonem poscit, idem
gladiatori atroci rudem petat (rudis was an other token of enfranchisement) and
pileum praemium conferat. In their common Forum, or Guildhall, when they
purposed to manumit any of their servants; their custom also was, after the
Lictor or Sergeant had registered the name of the party manumitted, to shave his
head and give him a cap, whence according to Rosinus, ad pileum vocare, is to
set one at liberty.

Erasmus in his Chiliades, makes the Hat to be the sign of some eminent worth
in him that wears it; Pileus (says he) i^signe spectatae virtutis. On this
he conjectureth that the putting on of caps on the heads of such as are created
Doctors or Masters, had its original. In the Universities of England this
custom is still in force; the putting on of the cap being never performed, but
in the solemn Comitia, and in the presence of all such as are either auditors
or spectators of that days exercise. When I was Regent, the whole house of
Congregation joined together in a Petition to the Earl of Pembroke, to restore
unto us the jus pileorum, the license of putting on our Caps, at our public
meetings; which privilege, time and the tyranny of the Vicechancellors, had
taken from us. Among other motives, we used the solemn form of creating a
Master in the Acts, by putting on his cap: and that that sign of liberty might
distinguish us which were the Regents, from those boys which we were to
govern: which request he graciously granted. But this French sauciness has
drawn me out of my way. An impudent familiarity, which I confess did much
offend me: and to which I still profess my self an open enemy. Though Jack
speak French, I cannot endure Jack should be a Gentleman.

CHAP. III.
ROVEN a neat City; how seated and built; the strength of it. St. Katharines
mount. The Church of Nostre dame, etc. The indecorum of the Papists in the
several and unsuitable pictures of the Virgin. The little Chapel of the
Capuchins in Boulogne. The House of Parliament. The precedencie of the
President and the Governor. The Legend of St. Romain, and the privilege thence
arising. The language and religion of the Rhothomagenses, or people of Roven.

JUly the first we set on for Roven. In 10 hours our Cart dragged us thither,
the whole journey being in all six leagues French: admirable speed! About three
of the clock in the afternoon we had a sight of the Town, daintily seated in a
valley on the River Seine. I know not any Town better situate, Oxford excepted,
which indeed it much resembles; I mean not in bigness, but situation: It
stands on all sides evironed with mountains, the North excepted, and has a
large and pleasant walk of meadows by the river side, to the South-east-ward;
as Oxford has toward Eveley. It is seated on the principal river of France,
distant from the Metropolis of that Country 50 miles English, or thereabouts;
as Oxford on the Thames, and from London. Watered also it is with two small
rivulets, Robee and Renelle, as the other with Charwell and Eventode. The
difference is, that Oxford is seated somewhat higher on the swelling of an
hill, and a little more removed from those mountains which environ it: and that
the rivers which run through some part of Roven, do only wash the precincts of
the other. The buildings are in some places wood, in some stone, in other both;
the houses without juttings or overlets, four stories high, and in the front
not very beautiful. The most promising house which mine eye met with, was that
of Mr. Boniface, who being of obscure parents, and having raised himself a
fortune in the wars, against the League, here built a receptacle for his age.
It is fashioned after the manner of new buildings in London, composed all of
dainty white stone, square and polished. On the partition between the first
story and the second, it has these words engraven, Vi and Virtute. Martis
opus. Tentanda via. Amore and armis: a motto suitable to his rising.

The other buildings of note are the bridge (for I as yet omit the House of
Parliament and the Churches) and the Town wall by it. The bridge, whilst it was
all standing, was thought to have been the fairest and strongest piece of that
kind in all France. It consists of twelve arches, large and high: there now
remain but seven of them, the rest being broken down by the English in the
falling of their affairs in France, the better to make good the Town against
the French. The river is here about the breadth of the Th^^nes at Fulham.
Between the River and the Town wall, is the Exchange or meeting place of the
Merchants, paved with broad and even peble. In breadth up to the wall-ward 30
yards, in length 100; a fine walk in fair weather. All along the bank side
lay the ships, which by reason of the broken bridge come up thither, and on
occasions higher: a good turn for Paris. The wall for the length of 100 yards,
is as straight as one may lay a line, of a just height, and composed of square
and excellent stones, so cunningly laid, that I never saw the sides of a Noble
man's house built more handsomely. But it is not only the beauty of the wall
which Roven delights in, there must somewhat also be expected of strength: to
which purpose it might serve indifferently well, were there some addition of
earth within it. It is well helped on the outside by the breadth and depth of
the ditches; but more by St. Katherines fort seated on a hill at the East side
of it. A Fort, which were it strengthened according to the modern art of
fortifying, would much assure the Town, and make it at once, both a slave and a
commander. The Marshall D' Ancre, when he was Lieutenant here for the Queen
mother, began to fortify this mountain, Quilleboeuse, and other places of
importance; but upon his death they were all rased: what were his projects in
it, they know best which were acquainted with his ambition. Certainly the jars
which he had sown amongst the Princes one with the other, and between them and
the King: show that they were not intended for nothing.

There are in Roven 32 Parish Churches, besides those which belong to Abbeys
and Religious houses, of which the most beautiful is that of St. Audoin or
Owen, once Archbishop of this City. The seat and Church of the Archbishop is
that of Nostre dame, a building far more gorgeous in the outside, then within.
It presents it self to you with a very gracious and majesticall front, decked
with most curious imagery, and adorned with three stately Towers. The first La
tour de beurre (because it was built with that money which was raised by
Cardinal Dr. Amboyse, for granting a dispensation to eat butter in the Lent):
and a third built over the porch or great door, wherein is the great Bell so
much talked of. Within it is but plain and ordinary, such as common Cathedral
Churches usually are, so big, so fashioned. Behind the high Altar, at a pillar
on the left had, is the remainder of the Duke of Bedfords Tomb: which for ought
I could discern, was nothing but an Epitaph some three yards high in the
pillar. I saw nothing in it, which might move the envy of any Courtier to have
it defaced, unless it were the title of Regent du Royaume de France, which is
the least he merited.

Somewhat Eastward, beyond this is our Ladies Chapel, a pretty neat piece, and
daintily set out. There stands on the top of the screen, the image of the
Virgin her self, between two Angels. They have attired her in a red mantle,
laced with two gold laces, a handsome ruff about her neck, a vail of fine
lawne hanging down her back, and (to show that she was the Queen of heaven) a
crown upon her head: in her left arm she holds her son in his side-coat, a
black hat and a golden hatband. A jolly plump Lady she seems to be, of a
flaxen hair, a ruddy lip, and a cheerful complexion. Twere well the Painters
would agree about limming of her, otherwise we are likely to have almost as
many Ladies, as Churches. At Nostre dame in Paris, she is taught us to be
brown, and seems somewhat inclining to melancholy. I speak not of her
different habit, for I envy not her changes of apparel Only I could not but
observe how those of St. Sepulchers Church, en la Fue St. Dennis, have placed
her on the top of their Skreen, in a Coape, as if she had taken upon her the
zeal of Abraham, and were going to make a bloody sacrifice of her Son. They of
Nostre dame in Amiens, have erected her Statua all in gold, with her Son also
of the same mettle in her arms; casting beams of gold round about her, as the
Sun is painted in its full glory: strange Idolatries! On the contrary, in the
Parish Church of Tury, in La Beausse, she is to be seen in a plain petticoat of
red, and her other garments correspondent. In my mind this holds most
proportion to her estate, and will best serve to free their irreligion from
absurdity. If they will worship her as a nurse, with her child in her arm, or
at her breast, let them array her in such apparel, as might beseem a Carpenters
wife; such as she may be supposed to have worn before the world had taken
notice, that she was the mother of her Savior. If they needs must have her in
her estate of glory, as at Amiens; or of honor (being now publicly
acknowledged to be the blessedest among women) as at Paris, let them disburden
her of her child. To clap them thus together, is a folly, equally worthy of
scorn and laughter. Certainly had she but so much liberty, as to make choice
of her own clothes, I doubt not but she would observe a greater decorum. And
therefore I commend the Capuchins of Boulogne, who in a little side-chappell
consecrated unto her, have placed only a handsome fair looking-glass upon her
Altar, the best ornament of a female closet: why they placed it there, I cannot
say, only I conceive it was, that she might there see how to dress her self.

This Church is said to have been built (I should rather think repaired) by
Raoul or Rollo, the first Duke of Normandy; since it has been much beautifyed
by the English when they were Lords of this Province. It is the seat of an
Archbishop, a Dean and fifty Canons. The Archbishop was instituted by the
authority of Constantine the Great, during the sitting of the Council of
Arles. Anidian who was there present, being consecrated the first Archbishop.
The Bishops of Sees, Aurenches, Constance, Bayeux, Lysieux and Eureux, were
appointed for his Diocesans. The now Archbishop is said to be an able Scholar,
and a sound Statesman; his name I enquired not. The revenues of his Chair are
said to be 10000 crowns: more they would amount to, were the Country any way
fruitful of Vines; out of which the other Prelates of France draw no small
part of their intrada.

The Parliament of this Country, was established here by Lewis XII. who also
built that fair Palace wherein Justice is administered, anno 1501. At that time
he divided Normandy into seven Lathes, Rapes, or Bailiwicks, viz. Roven, Caux,
Constentin, Caen, Eureux, Gisors, and Alencon. This Court has Supreme power to
enquire into, and give sentence of all causes within the limits of Normandy. It
receives appeals from the inferior Courts of the Duchy unto it, but
admits none from it. Here is also Cour des Esl^ux, a Court of the general
Commissioners, also for Taxes; and La Chamber des Aides, instituted by Charles
VII. for the receiving of his Subsidies, Gabels, Imposts, etc. The house of
Parliament is in form quadrangular, a very greatefull and delectable building;
that of Paris is but a Chaos or a Babell to it. In the great hall (into which
you ascend by some 30 steps or upwards) are the seats and desks of the
Procurators; every ones name written in Capital letters over his head. These
Procurators are like our Atturnies, to prepare causes and make them ready for
the Advocates. In this Hall do suitors use either to attend on, or to walk up
and down and confer with their pleaders. Within this hall is the great Chamber,
the tribunal and seat of justice, both in causes Criminal and Civil. At
domus interior regali splendida luxu
Instruitur: -- As Virgill of Queen Didoes dining room.


A Camber so gallantly and richly built, that I must needs confess it far
surpasses all the rooms that ever I saw in my life. The Palace of the Louure
has nothing in it comparable. The seeling all inlaid with gold, and yet did
the workmanship exceed the matter. This Court consists of two Presidents,
twenty Counselors or Assistants, and as many Advocates as the Court will admit
of. The prime President is termed Ner de Riz, by birth a Norman: upon the
Bench, and in all places of his Court, he takes the prcedencie of the Duke of
Longueville: when there is a convention of the three Estates summoned, the Duke
has the priority.

We said even now, that from the sentence of this Court there lay no appeal;
but this must be recanted, and it is no shame to do it: St. Austin has written
his Retractations; so also has Bellarmine. Once in the year there is an appeal
admitted, but that for one man only, and on this occasion: There was a
poisonous Dragon not far from Roven, which had done much harm to the Country
and City. Many ways had been tried to destroy him, but none prospered; at last
Romain, afterward made a Saint, then Archbishop of the Town, accompanied with
a thief and a murderer, whose lives had been forfeited to a sentence,
undertaketh the enterprise; upon sight of the Dragon the thief stole away, the
murderer goes on, and sees that holy man vanquish the Serpent, armed only
with a Stole (it is a neck habit, sanctified by his Holiness of Rome, and made
much after the manner of a tippet) with this Stole tied about the neck of the
Dragon, does the murderer lead him prisoner to Roven. To make short work, the
name of God is praised, the Bishop magnifyed, the murderer pardoned, and the
Dragon burned. This accident (if the story be not Apocrypha) is said to have
happened on holy Thursday. Audoin or Owen, successor unto St. Romain, in memory
of this mavelous act, obtained of King Dagobert the first (he began his reign
anno 632) that from that time forwards the Chapitre of the Cathedral Church,
should every Ascension day have the faculty of delivering any malefactor, whom
the laws had condemned. This that King then granted, and all the following
Kings even to this time have successively confirmed it. I omit the ceremonies
and solemnities wherewith this prisoner is taken from his irons, and restored
to liberty. It is not above nine years agone, since a Baron of Gascoyne took
occasion to kill his wife, which done, he fled hither into Normandy; and having
first acquainted the Canons of Nostre dame with his desire, put himself to the
sentence of the Court, and was adjudged to the wheel. Ascension-day immediately
coming on, the Canons challenged him, and the Judge, according to the custom,
caused him to be delivered. But the Normans pleaded that the benefit of that
privilege belonged only to the natives of that Province; and they pleaded with
such sury, that the Baron was again committed to prison, till the Queen Mother
had wooed the people, pro ea saltem vice, to admit of his reprievall.

I deferred to speak of the language of Normandy, till I came hither, because
here it is best spoken. It differs from the Parisian, and more elegant
French, almost as much as the English spoken in the North, does from that of
London or Oxford. Some of the old Norman words it still retains, but not
many. It is much altered from what it was in the time of the Conqueror, few of
the words in which our laws were written being known by them. One of our
company gave a Litleton's tenure, written in that language, to a French Doctor
of the Laws; who protested that in three lines, he could not understand three
words of it. The religion in this Town is indifferently poized, as it also is
in most places of this Province. The Protestants are thought to be as great a
party as the other, but far weaker, the Duke of Longueville, having disarmed
them in the beginning of the last troubles.

CHAP. IV.
Our journey between Roven and Pontoyse. The holy man of St. Clare and the
Pilgrims thither. My sore eyes. Mante, Pontoyse, Normandy justly taken from
King John. The end of this Book.

JUly the second we take our farewell of Roven, better accommodated then we
came thither; yet not so well at I desired. We are now preferred ab Asinis ad
equos, from the Cart to the Wagon. The French call it a Coach, but that
matters not; so they would needs have the Cart to be a Chariot. These Wagons
are the ordinary instruments of travel in those Countries; much of a kin to
Gravesend's barge. You shall hardly find them without a knave or a Giglot. A
man may be sure to be merry in them, were he as certain to be wholesome. This,
in which we traveled, contained ten persons, as all of them commonly do; and
amongst these ten, one might have found English, Scots, French, Normans, Dutch,
and Italians, a jolly medley; had our religions been as different as our
Nations, I should have thought my self in Amsterdam or Poland; if a man had
desired to have seen a Brief or an Epitome of the World, he would no where have
received such satisfaction, as by looking on us. I have already reckoned up the
several Nations, I will now lay open the several conditions. There were then
to be found amongst these ten passengers, men and women, Lords and serving men,
Scholars and Clowns, Ladies and Chambermaids, Priests and Laie-men, Gentlemen
and Artificers, people of all sexes and almost all ages. If all the learning in
the world were lost, it might be found again in Plutarch, so said Budaeus. If
all the Nations in the world had been lost, they might have been found again in
our Wagon, so I. Seriously I think our Coach to have been no unfit
representation of the Ark. A whole world of men and languages might have grown
out of it.

But all this while our Wagon joggeth on, but so leisurely, that it gave me
leave to take a more patient view of the Country, then we could in the Cart.
And here, indeed, I saw sufficient to affect the Country, yea to dote on it,
had I not come out of England. The fields such as already I have described,
every where beset with Apple Trees, and fruits of the like nature. You could
scarce see any thing which was barren in the whole Journey. These Apples are
both meat and drink to the poor Paisant. For the Country is ill provided with
Vines (the only want I could observe in it) and Beer is a good beverage at a
Gentleman's table, Sider then, or Perry are the poor man's Claret; and happy man
is he, which once or twice a week can aspire so high above water. To proceed,
through many a miserable Village (Burghs they call them) and one Town somewhat
bigger then the rest, called Equille; we came that night to St. Claire 10
French miles from Roven, a poor Town god wot, and had nothing in it remarkable,
but an accident. There dwelt a monk there, grown into great opinion for his
sanctity, and one who had an especial hand upon sore eyes; yet his ability
herein was not general, none being capable of cure from him but pure Virgins.
I persuade my self France could not yield him many patients: and yet from all
parts he was much sought unto. Hope of cure and a charitable opinion, which
they had of themselves, had brought to him diverse distressed Damsels; which, I
am confident, had no interest in his miracle. In the same Inn (Alehouse I
should say) where we were to be harbored, there had put in a whole convoy of
these Ladies errant, Pilgrims they called themselves, and had come on foot two
days journey to clear their eyesight. They had white vailes hanging down
their backs, which in part covered their faces; yet I perceived by a glimpse,
that some of them were past cure. Though my charity durst allow them maids, it
was afraid to suppose them Virgins: yet so far I dare assure them they should
recover their sight, that when they came home, they should see their folly. At
that time, what with too much watching on shipboard, what with the tartness of
the water, and the violence of the wind, working upon me for almost 40 hours
together whilst I lay on the Hatches: mine eyes had gotten a rheum and a
redness: my Hostess (good woman) persuaded me to this holy Eye-wright, but I
durst not venture Not that I had not as good a title to my Virginity as the
best there: but because I had learned what a grievous sentence was denounced on
Ahaziah king of Israel, for seeking help of Beelzebub the god of Eckron. When I
hap to be ill, let my amendment come on Gods name. Mallem semper profanus esse,
quam sic religiosus, as Minutius Foelix of the Roman Sacrifices. Let my body
rather be still troubled with a sore eye, then have such a recovery to be a
perpetual eyesore to my conscience. Rather then go in Pilgrimage to such a
Saint, let the Papists count me for an Heretic. Besides, how durst I imagine
in him an ability of curing my bodily eyes, who had for above 70 years been
troubled with a blindness in the eyes of his soul? -- Thou fool (said our
Savior almost in the like case) first cast out the beam out of thine own eye,
and then shall thou see clearly to cast out the mote out of thy brothers eye.

The next morning (July 3) I left my pilgrims to try their fortunes, and went
on in our journey to Paris, which that day we were to visit. My eyes not
permitting me to read, and my ears altogether strangers to the French chat,
drove my thoughts back to Roven; and there nothing so much possessed me, as the
small honor done to Bedford in his monument. I had leisure enough to provide
him a longer Epitaph, and a shorter apology against the envy of that
Courtier, which persuaded Charles the VIII to deface the ruins of his
Sepulcher: Thus.

Sa did the Fox, the coward'st of the heard,
Kick the dead Lion, and profane his beard.
So did the Greeks, about their vanquished host,
Drag Hectors relics, and torment his ghost.
So did the Parthian slaves deride the head
Of the great Crassus now betrayed and dead:
To whose victorious sword, not l^ng before,
They would have sacrificed their lives, or more.
So do the French assault dead Bedfords spright,
And trample on his ashes in despite.
But foolish Curio cease, and do not blame
So small an honor done unto his name.
Why grievest thou him a Sepulcher to have,
Who when he lived could make all France a grave?
His sword triumphed through all those Towns which lie
In the Isle, Maine, Anjoy, Guyen, Normandy.
Thy fathers felt it. Oh! thou worst of men,
(If man thou art) do not endeavor then,
This Conqueror from his last hold to thrust,
Whom all brave minds should honor in his dust.
But be not troubled Bedford; thou shall stand
Above the reach of malice, though the hand
Of a French baseness may deface thy name,
And tear it from thy marble, yet shall fame
Speak loudly of thee and thy acts. Thy praise
A Pyramid unto it self shall raise,
Thy brave achievements in the times to come,
Shall be a monument above a Tomb.
Thy name shall be thy Epitaph: and he
Which once reads Bedford, shall imagine thee
Beyond the power of Verses, and shall say
None could express thy worthes a fuller way.
Rest thou then quiet in the shades of night,
Nor vex thy self with Curio's weaker spite.
Whilst France remains, and Histories are writ,
Bedford shall live, and France shall Chronicl' it.
Having offered this unworthy, yet grateful sacrifice, to the Manes of that
brave Heroes: I had the more leisure to behold Mante, and the Vines about it,
being the first that ever I saw. They are planted like our Hop-gardens, and
grow up by the help of poles, but not so high. They are kept with little c^st,
and yield profit to an husbandman sufficient to make him rich, had he neither
King nor Landlord. The Wine which is pressed out of them, is harsh and / not
pleasing: as much differing in sweetness from the Wines of Paris or Orleans,
as their language does in elegancy. The rest of the Norman wines, which are not
very frequent, as growing only on the frontiers toward France, are of the same
quality. As for the Town of Ma^^e, it seems to have been of good strength
before the use of great Ordinances; having a wall, a competent ditch, and at
every gate a drawbridge. They are still sufficient to guard their Pullen from
the Fox, and in the night times to secure their houses from any forain
burglary. Once indeed they were able to make resistance to a King of France,
but the English were then within it. At last on honorable terms it yielded,
and was entered by Charles VII. the second of August, anno 1449. The Town is for
building and bigness, somewhat above the better sort of Market Towns here in
England.

The last Town of Normandy toward Paris is Pontoyse, a Town well fortifyed, as
being a borderer, and one of the strongest bulwarks against France. It has in
it two fair Abbeys of Maubuissen and St. Martin, and six Churches Parochial,
whereof that of Nostre dame in the Suburbs is the most beautiful. The name it
derives from a bridge, built over the river of Oyse, on which it is situate,
and by which on that side it is well defended; the bridge being strengthened
with a strong gate, and two draw-bridges. It is commodiously situate on the
rising of an hill, and is famous for the siege laid before it b^ Charles VII
anno 1442. but more fortunate unto him in the taking of it. For having raised
his Army upon the Duke of Yorks coming to give him battle with 6000 only; the
French Army consisting of double the number; he retired or fled rather unto St.
Denis; but there hearing how scandalous his retreat was to the Parisians even
ready to mutiny; and that the Duke of Orleans and others of the Princes,
stirred with the ignominiousnesse of his flight, began to practice against him;
he speedily returned to Pontoyse, and makes himself master of it by assault.
Certainly to that fright he owed the getting of this Town, and all Normandy,
the French by that door making their entry unto this Province; out of which at
last they thrust the English, anno 1450. So desperate a thing is a frighted
coward.

This Country had once before been in p^ssession of the English, and that by a
firmer title then the sword. William the Conqueror had convei^d it over the
S^^s into England, and it continued an Appendix of that Crown, from the year
1067 unto that of 1204. At that time, John called Sans terre, third son unto
King Henry II. having usurped the estates of England and the English
possessions in France, upon A^thur heir of Bretagne, and son unto Geofry his
elder brother; was warred on by Philip Augustus King of France, who sided with
the said Arthur. In the end Arthur was taken, and not long after was found dead
in the ditches of the Castle of Roven. Whether this violent death happened unto
him by the practice of his Uncle, as the French say, or that the young Prince
came to that unfortunate end in an attempt to escape, as the English report, is
not yet determined. For my part, considering the other carriages and
virulencies of that King, I dare be of that opinion, that the death of Arthur
was not without his contrivement. Certainly he that rebelled against his
Father, and practiced the eternal imprisonment and ruin of his Brother, would
not much stick (this being so speedy a way to settle his affairs) at the
murder of a Nephew. Upon the first bruit of this murder, Constance mother to
the young Prince, complains unto the King and Parliament of France; not the
Court which now is in force, consisting of men only of the long robe, but the
Court of the P^i^rie or 12 Peers, whereof King John himself was one, as Duke
of Normandy. I see not how in justice Philip could do less then summon him, an
homager being slain, and a homager being accused. To this summons John refused
to yield himself, a Counsel rather magnanimous then wise, and such as had more
in it of a English King then a French Subject. Edward III a Prince of finer
metal then this John, obeyed the like warrant, and performed a personal
homage to Philip of Valoys, and it is not reckoned amongst his disparagements.
He committed yet a further error or solecisme in State, not so much as sending
any of his people to supply his place, or plead his cause. Upon this
nonappearance, the Peers proceed to sentence, Ilfut par Arrestdela dite cour
(says Du Chesne) condamne pour atteint and convaincu da crime de parricide,
and de felony; Parric de for killing his own Nephew; and Felony for committing
an act so execrable on the person of a French Vassal, and in France. John du
Serres adds a third cause, which was contempt, in disobeying the Kings
commandment. Upon this ^^rdict the Court awarded, Que toutes les terres qu' il
aveit parde la demoureroient aqu^ses and confisquces a la Couronne, etc. A
proceeding so fair and orderly, that I should sooner accuse King John of
indiscretion, then the French of injustice. When my life or estate is in
danger, let me have no more finister a trial. The Erglish thus outed of
Normandy by the weakness of John, recovered it again by the puissance of
Henry; but being held only by the swo^rd, it was after 30 years recovered
again, as I have told you. And now being passed over the Oyse, I have at once
freed the English and my self of Normandy; here ending this Book, but not that
days journey.

The End of the First Book.
A SURVEY OF THE STATE of FRANCE.
FRANCE specially so called. OR, THE SECOND BOOK.
CHAP. I.
France in what sense so called. The bounds of it. All old Gallia not possessed
by the French. Countries follow the name of the most predominant Nation. The
condition of the present French not different from that of the old Gauls. That
the heavens have a constant power upon the same Climate, though the Inhabitants
are changed. The quality of the French in private, at the Church, and at the
table. Their language, complements, discourse, etc.

July the third, which was the day we set out of St. Claire, having passed
through Pontoyse, and crossed the river, we were entered into France: France as
it is understood in its limited sense, and as a part only of the whole, for
when Meroveus, the Grandchild of Pharamond, first King of the Franci or
Frenchmen, had taken an opportunity to pass the Rhine, having also during the
wars between the Romans and the Goths, taken Paris; he resolved there to set
up his rest, and to make that the head City of his Empire. The Country round
about it, which was of no large extent, he commanded to be called Francia, or
Terra Francorum, after the name of his Frankes whom he governed. In this
bounded and restrained sense, we now take it, being confined with Normandy on
the North, Champagne on the East, and on the West and South with the Province
of La Beausse. It is incircled in a manner with the Oyse on the Northwards, the
Eure on the West, the Velle on the East, and a vein riveret of the Seine
toward the South; but the principal environings are made by the Seine, and
the Marne a river of Campaign, which constitute that part hereof which commonly
and (...), is called by the name of the Isle of France, and within the main
Island makes diverse little petty Isles, the waters winding up and down, as
desirous to recreate the earth with the pleasures of its lovely and delicious
embraces.

This Isle, this portion of Gaul, properly and limitedly sty led France, was
the seat of the Francs at their first coming hither, and has still continued
so. The rest of Gallia, is in effect rather subdued by the French, then
inhabited; their valor in time having taken in those Countries which they
never planted: so that if we look apprehensively into Gaul, we shall find the
other Nations of it, to have just cause to take up that complaint of the King
of Portugal against Ferdinand of Castile, for assuming to himself the title of
Catholic King of Spain; Ejus tam non exigua part penes reges alios, as
Mariana relates it. Certain it it, that the least part of all Gallia is in the
hands of the French, the Normans, Britons, Biscaines or Gascons, the Goths (of
Languedoc and Provence) Burgundians, and the ancient Gauls of Poictou,
retaining in it such fair and ample Provinces. But it is the custom (shall I
say) or fate of lesser and weaker Nations, to lose their names unto the
stronger: as wives do to their husbands, and the smaller rivers to the greater.
Thus we see the little Province of Poland to have mastered and given name to
the Pruteni, Mazovii, and other Nations of Sarmatia Europaea; as that of Mosco
has unto all the Provinces of Asiatica. Thus has Sweden conquered and
denominated almost all the great Peninsula of Scandia; whereof it is but a
little parcel: and thus did the English Saxons being the most prevailing of
the rest, impose the name of English on all the people of the Heptarchie. Et
dedit imposito nomina prisca jugo.


And good reason the vanquished should submit themselves as well unto the
appellation, as the laws of the victor. The French then are possessors of some
parts of old Gallia, and masters of the rest; possessors not of their Cities
only, but their conditions. A double victory, it seems, they enjoyed over
that people, and took from them at once, both their qualities and their
Countries. Certainly whosoever will please to peruse the Commentaries of Julius
Caesar, de bello Gallico; he will equally guess him an Historian and a
Prophet; yea he will rather make himself believe, that he has prophesied the
character of the present French, then delivered one of the ancient Gaul. And
indeed, it is a matter worthy both of wonder and observation, that the old
Gauls, being in a manner all worn out, should yet have most of their
conditions surviving in those men, which now inhabit that region, being of so
many several Countries and originals. If we dive into natural causes, we have
a speedy recourse unto the powerful influence of the heavens; for as those
celestial bodies considered in the general, do work upon all sublunary bodies
in the general, by light, influence and motion; so have they a particular
operation on particulars. An operation there is wrought by them in a man, as
borne at such and such a minute; and again as borne under such and such a
Climate. The one derived from the setting of the Houses, and the Lord of the
Horoscope at the time of his Nativity; the other from that constellation which
governs as it were, the Province of his birth, and is the genius or deus
tutelaris loci. Hinc illa ab antiquo vitia (says an Author modern rather in
time then judgment) and patriae sort durantia, que tol as in historiis gentes
aut commendant aut not ant. Two or three Authors by way of parallel, will make
it clear in the example, though it appear not obscure in the search of causes.
Primus Gallorum impetus imajor quam virorum, secundus minor quam foeminarum,
says Florus of the Gauls. What else is that which Mr. Dallington says of the
French, when he reports that they begin an action like thunder, and end it in
a smoke? Their attempts on Naples and Millain (to omit their present enterprise
on Genoa) are manifest proofs of it; neither will I now speak of the battle of
Poicteirs, when they were so forward in the onset, and furious in the flight.
Vt sunt Gallorum subita ing enia, says Caesar: and I think this people to be
as hare-brained as ever were the other. Juvenal calls Gallia, foecunda
causidicorum: and among the modern French it is related, that there are tried
more law-causes in one year, then have been in England fince the Conquest. Of
the ancient Germans, the next neighbors and confederates of the Gauls,
Tacitus has given us this note, Diem noctemque continuare potando nulli
probrum; and presently after, De jungendis affinitatibus, de bello denique and
pace, in convivis consultant. Since the time of Tacitus has Germany shifted
almost all her old inhabitants, and received new Colonies of Lombards, Sueves,
Goths, Sclavonians, Hunns, Saxons, Vandals, and diverse other Nations not known
to that writer. Yet still is that exorbitancy of drinking in fashion; and to
this day do the present Germans consult of most of their affairs in their cups.
If the English have borrowed any thing of this humor, it is not to be thought
the vice of the Country, but the times. To go yet higher and further, the
Philosopher Anacharsis (and he lived 600 and odd years before Christ) noted it
in the Greeks, that at the beginning of their feasts, they used little goblets,
and greater toward the end, when they were now almost drunken, (...), as
Laertius reports it. George Sandys in the excellent discourse of his own
travailes, relates the same custom to continue still amongst them;
notwithstanding the length of time, and all the changes of state and people
which have since happened. Their Empire indeed they have lost, their valor,
learning, and all other graces which set them out in the sight of the World;
and no marvel these were not national conditions, but personal endowments. I
conclude then this digression with the words of Barklay, Haeret itaque in omni
gente vis quaedam inconcussa, quae hominibus pro condition terrarum, in quibus
nasoi contigerit, sua fata diviserit.

The present French then, is nothing but an old Gaul molded into a new name,
as rash he is, and as head strong, and as hare brained. A nation whom you shall
win with a seather, and lose with a straw. Upon the first sight of him you
shall have him as familiar as your sleep, or the necessity of breathing. In one
hours conference, you may indeer him to you, in the second unbutton him; the
third pumps him dry of all his secrets, and he gives them you as faithfully,
as if you were his ghostly father, and bound to conceal them sub sigillo
confessionis: when you have learned this, you may lay him aside, for he is no
longer serviceable. If you have an humor of holding him in a further
acquaintance, (a favor of which he confesses, and I believe him, he is
unworthy:) himself will make the first separation. He has said over his lesson
to you, and must now find out some body else to whom to repeat it. Fare him
well, he is a garment whom I would be loath to wear above two days together,
for in that time he will be threadbare. Familiare est homini omnia sibi
remittere, says Velleius of all; it holds most properly in this people. He
is very kind-hearted to himself, and thinks himself as free from wants, as he
is full: so much he has in him of the nature of a Chinoy's, that he thinks
all men blind but himself. In this pride of self-conceitednesse he hates the
Spaniard, loves not the English, and contemns the German; himself is the
only Courtier, and complete Gentleman; but it is his own glass which he sees
in, out of this conceit of his own excellency, and partly out of a shallowness
of brain; he is very liable to exceptions. The least distaste that can be,
draws his sword, and a minutes pause sheathes it to your hand. If afterward
you beat him into better manners, he shall take it kindly and cry serviteur. In
this one thing they are wonderfully like the Devil. Meekness or submission
makes them insolent, a little resistance puts them to their heels, or makes
him your Spaniel. In a word (for I have held him too long) he is a walking
vanity in a new fashion.

I will now give you a taste of his table, which you shall find in a measure
furnished; (I speak not of the Paisant:) but not in so full a manner as with
us. Their Beef they cut out in so little chops, that that which goes there for
a laudable dish, would be thought here to be an University commons, new served
from the hatch. A loine of Mutton serves amongst them for three roastings,
beside the hazard of making pottage with the rump. Foul also they have in good
plenty, especially such as the King sound in Scotland. To say truth, that which
they have is sufficient for nature and a friend, were i^ not for the Mistress
of the Kitchin-wench. I have heard much fame of French Cooks, but their skill
lies not in the handling of Beef or Mutton. They have (as generally have all
this Nation) good fancies, and are special fellows for the making of
puffe-pastes, and the ordering of banquets. Their trade is not to feed the
belly, but the palate. It is now time you were set down, where the first thing
you must do, is to say your own Grace; private Graces are as ordinary there, as
private Masses: and from thence I think they learned them. That done, fall to
where you like best. They observe no methods in their eating, and if you look
for a Carver, you may rise fasting. When you are risen, if you can digest the
sluttishnesse of the cookery, (which is most abominable at first sight) I dare
trust you in a Garrison. Follow him to Church, and there he will show himself
most irreverent and irreligious; I speak not this of all, but of the general.
At a Mass in the Cordeliers Church in Paris, I saw two French Papists, even
when the most sacred mystery of their faith was celebrating, break out into
such a blasphemous and Atheistical laughter, that even an Ethnic would have
hated it. It was well they were known to be Catholics; otherwise some French
hot-head or other, would have sent them laughing to Pluto.

The French language is, indeed, very sweet and delectable. It is cleared of
harshnesse, by the cutting off, and leaving out the consonants, which makes it
fall off the tongue very volubly; yet in my opinion, it is rather elegant then
copious, and therefore is much troubled for want of words to find out
periphrases. It expresses very much of it self in the action. The head, body,
and shoulders concur all in the pronouncing of it; and he that hops to
speak it with a good grace, must have somewhat in him of the Mimick It is
enriched with a full number of significant Proverbs, which is a great help to
the French humor of scoffing; and very full of courtship, which makes all the
people complementall. The poorest Cobbler in the Village has his Court-cringes;
and his eau beniste de Cour, his court holy water, as perfectly as the Prince
of Conde.

In the Passados of their court-ship, they express themselves with much
variety of gesture, and indeed, it does not misbecome them. Were it as graticus
in the Gentlemen of other Nations as in them, it were worth your patience; but
the affectation of it is scurvy and ridiculous. Quocunque salutationis
artificio corpus inflectant, putes nihil ista institutione magis convenire.
Vicinae autem gentes ridiculo errore deceptae, ejusdem venustatis imitationem
ludicram faciunt and ingratam: as one happily observed at his being amongst
them. I have heard of a young Gallant, son to a great Lord of one of the three
British Kingdoms, that spent some years in France to learn fashions. At his
return he desired to see the King, and his father procured him an entervenie.
When he came within the Presence Chamber, he began to compose his head, and
carry it as if he had been ridden with a Martingall: next he fell to draw back
his legs and thrust out his shoulders, and that with such a graceless
apishnesse, that the King asked him if he meant to shoulder him out of his
chair, and so left him to act out his complement to the hangings. In their
courtship they bestow even the highest titles, upon those of the lowest
condition. This is the vice also of their common talk. The beggar begets
Monsieurs and Madams to his sons and daughters, as familiarly as the King. Were
there no other reason to persuade me, that the Welsh or Britains were the
descendants of the Gauls, this only were sufficient, that they would all be
Gentlemen.

His discourse runs commonly upon two wheels, treason and ribaldrie. I never
heard people talk less reverently of their Prince, nor more sawcily of his
actions. Scarce a day passes away without some seditious Pamphlet printed and
published, in the disgrace of the King, or of some of his Courtiers. These are
every man's money, and he that buyeth them is not coy of the Contents, be they
never so scandalous; of all humors the most base and odious. Take him from this
(which you can hardly do, till he has told all) and then he falls upon his
ribaldry. Without these crutches, his discourse would never be able to keep
pace with his company. Thus shall you have them relate the stories of their own
uncleanness, with a face as confident, as if they had no accidents to please
their hearers more commendable. Thus will they reckon up the several
profanations of pleasure, by which they have dismanned themselves; sometimes
not sparing to descend to particulars. A valiant Captain never gloried more in
the number of the Cities he had taken, then they do of the several women they
have prostituted. Egregiam vero laudem and spolia ampla --


Foolish and most perishing wretches, by whom each several incontinencie is
twice committed; first, in the act; and secondly, in the boast. By themselves
they measure others, and think them naturals, or Simplicians, which are not so
conditioned. I protest, I was fain sometimes to put on a little impudence, that
I might avoid the suspicion of a gelding or a sheep-biter. It was St. Austins
case, as himself testifyeth in the second book of his Confessions, Fingebam me
(says that good Father) fecisse quod non feceram, ne caeteris viderer
abjectior. But he afterward was sorry for it, and so am I; and yet, indeed,
there was no other way to keep in a good opinion, that unmanly and ungoverned
people.

CHAP. II.
The French Women, their persons, prating and conditions. The immodesty of the
French Ladies. Kissing not in use among them; and the sinister opinion
conceived of the free use of it in England. The innocence and harmelesnesse of
it amongst us. The impostures of French Pandars in London, with the scandal
thence arising. The peccancie of an old English Doctor. More of the French
Women. Their Marriages, and lives after wedlock, etc. An Elogie to the English
Ladies.

I Am come to the French Women, and it were great pity they should not
immediately follow the discourse of the men, so like they are one to the other,
that one would think them to be the same, and that all the difference lay in
the apparel. For person, they are generally of an indifferent stature, their
bodies straight, and their wastes commonly small: but whether it be so by
nature, or by much restraining of these parts, I cannot say. It is said, that
an absolute woman should have (amongst other qualities requisite) the parts of
a French woman from the neck to the girdle; but I believe it holds not good,
their shoulders and backs being so broad, that they hold no proportion with
their midles; yet this may be the vice of their apparel. Their hands are, in
mine opinion, the comliest and best ordered part about them, long, white and
slender. Were their faces answerable, even an English eye would apprehend them
lovely: but herein do I find a pretty contradictorie. The hand, as it is the
best ornament of the whole structure, so does it most disgrace it. Whether it
be that ill diet be the cause of it, or that hot blood wrought upon by a hot
and scalding air, must of necessity by such means vent it self, I am not sure
of. This I am sure of, that scarce the tithe of all the maids we saw, had her
hands and arm wrists free from scabs, which had overrun them like a leprosy.
Their hair is generally black, and indeed, somewhat blacker then a gracious
loveliness would admit. The Poets commend Leda for her black hair, and not
unworthily.

Leda fuit nigris conspicienda comis.
As Ovid has it.
Yet was that blackness but a darker brown; and not so f^^^full as this of the
French women. Again, the blackness of the hair is then accounted for an
ornament, when the face about which it hangs, is of so perfect a complexion
and symmetrie, that it gives it a luster. Then does the hair set forth the
face, as a shadow does a picture; and the face becomes the hair, as a
field-argent does a sable-bearing, which kind of Armory the Heralds call the
most fairest. But in this the French women are most unluckie. Don Quixote did
not so deservedly assume to himself the name of The Knight of the ill-favored
face, as may they, that of the damsels of it. It was therefore a happy speech
of a young French gallant that came in our company out of England, and had it
been spoken amongst the Ancients, it might have been registered for an
Apophthegme; that the English of all the people in the world were only nati ad
voluptates. You have (says he) the fairest women, the goodliest horses, and
the best breed of dogs, under heaven. For my part, as far as I could in so
short a time observe, I dare in this first believe him. England not only being
(as it is said) a paradise for women, by reason of their privileges; but also
a paradise of women, by reason of their unmatchable perfections.

Their dispositions hold good intelligence with their faces. You cannot say to
them as Sueton does of Galba, Ingenium Galbae male habitat. They suit so well
one with another, that in my life I never met with a better decorum; but you
must first hear them speak. Loquere ut te videam, was the method in old times,
and it holds now. You cannot gather a better character of a French woman,
then from her prating, which is so tedious and infinite, that you shall sooner
want ears, then she tongue. The fastidious pratler which Horace mentions in
his ninth Satyr, was but a puisne to her. The writers of these times, call the
Sitilians, Gerrae Siculae, and not undeservedly; yet were they but the Scholars
of the French, and learned this faculty of them, before the Vespers. It is
manners to give precedence to the Mistress, and she will have it, if words may
carry it. For two things I would have had Aristotle acquainted with these
Starlings. First, it would have saved him a labor in taking such pains about
finding out the perpetual motion. Secondly, it would have freed him from an
Heresy with which his Doctrine is now infected, and that is, Quiquid movetur,
ab alio movetur; their tongues, I am certain move themselves, and make their
own occasions of discoursing. When they are going, they are like a watch, you
need not wind them up above once in twelve hours, for so long the thread of
their tongues will be in spinning. A dame of Paris came in Coach with us from
Roven; fourteen hours we were together, of which time (^'le take my oath upon
it) her tongue fretted away eleaven hours and 57 minutes. Such everlasting
talkers are they all, that they will sooner want breath then words, and are
never silent, but in the grave; which may also be doubted. As they are endless
in their talk, so also are they regardlesse of the company they speak in. Be
you stranger or of their acquaintance, it much matters not; though indeed, no
man is to them a stranger. Within an hour of the first fight, you shall have
them familiar more then enough, and as merry with you, as if they had known
your bearing-clothes. It may be they are chaste, and I persuade my self many of
them are; but you will hardly gather it out of their behavior. Te tamen and
cultus damnat, as Ausonius of an honest woman that carried her self less
modestly. They are abundantly full of laughter and toying, and are never
without variety of lascivious Songs: which they spare not to sing in what
company soever. You would think modesty were quite banished the Kingdom; or
rather, that it had never been there. Neither is this the weakness of some
few. It is an epidemicall disease, Maids and Wives are alike sick of it, though
not both so desperately; the galliardy of the maids, being of the two a little
more tolerable; that of the women coming hard upon the confines of
shamelessness. As for the Ladies of the Court, (I cannot say this, but upon
hearsay) they are as much above them in their lightness, as they are in their
place; and so much the worse in that they have made their lightness impudent.
For whereas the daughter of Pythagoras, being demanded what most shamed her to
discourse of, made answer (...), those parts which made her woman: these French
dames will speak of them, even in the hearing of men, as freely, and almost as
broadly, as a Midwife, or a Barber-surgeon. Nay, I have heard a Gentleman of
good credence relate, that being at a tilting, he saw a Courtier going to
remove a boy, which very roguishly looked under a Ladies clothes: but when her
Ladyship perceived his intention, she hindered him with this complement, Laisse,
Monseuir, laisse, les yeuxne sont pas larrens; the boys eyes would steal
nothing away; a very merciful and gentle Lady. If that of Justine be still
true, Vera mulierum ornamenta pudicitiam esse, non vestes; that modesty were
the best apparel of a woman; I am afraid many of the female sex in France
would be thinly clad, and the rest go naked.

Being a people thus prone to a sudden familiarity, and so prodigal of their
tongue and company, you would scarce imagine them to be coy of their lips. Yet
this is their humor. It seemed to me strange at first and uncivil, that a
woman should turn away from the proffer of a salutation. Afterward I liked the
custom very well, and I have good cause for it, for it saved me from many an
unsavory piece of mannerlinesse. This notwithstanding could not but amaze me,
that they who in their actions were so light and wanton, should yet think
themselves modest, and confine all lasciviousness unto a kiss. A woman that
is kissed, they account more then half whored, be her other deportment never so
becoming; which makes them very sparing of receiving such kindnesses. But this
is but a dissembled unwillingnesse, and has somewhat in it of the Italian. For
as they had rather murder a man in private, then openly speak ill of him: so it
may be thought that these Damsels would hardly refuse a man's bed, though
education has taught them to fly from his lip. Night and the curtains may
conceal the one: the other can obtain no pardon in the eye of such, as may
happen to observe it.

Upon this ground your French Traveller, that perhaps may see their Hostess
kissed at Dover, and a Gentleman salute a Lady in the streets of London;
relates at his coming home, strange Chimera's of the English modesty. To
further this sinister opinion, he will not spare to tell his Camerades (for
this I have noted to you, to be a part of his humor) what Merchants wives he
enjoyed in London; and in what familiarity such a Lady entertained him at
Westminster. Horrible untruths! and yet my poor gallant thinks he lies not.
I remember I met in Paris with an English Doctor and the Master of a College
there, who complained much of the lasciviousness of the English women: and how
infamously every French Tailor that came from us, reported of them: withal, he
protested, that it did not grieve him much, because he thought it a just
judgment of God upon our Nation, that all the married men should be cuckolds.
A strange piece of Divinity to me who never before had heard such preaching:
but this was the reason of the Doctrine: In the old English Masse-book called
Secundum usum Sarum, the woman at the time of marriage, promises her future
husband to be bonny and buxom at bed and at board, till death us depart, etc.
This being too light for the gravity of the action then in hand, and in mine
opinion somewhat less reverend then a Church duty would require; the reformers
of that book thought good to alter: and have put in the place of it, to love,
cherish and obey. That this was a sufficient assurance of a conjugal faith, he
would not grant; because the promise of being Buxom in bed was excluded.
Besides he accounted the supposed dishonesty of the English wives, as a
vengeance plucked down upon the heads of the people, for chopping and changing
the words of the holy Sacrament: (for such they esteem the form of Matrimony)
though his argument needed no answer, yet this accutation might expect one: and
an English Gentleman (though not of the English Faith) thus laid open the
abuse; and seemed to speak it out of knowledge. When the Monsieurs come over
full pursed to London, the French Pandars, which lie in wait for such booties,
grow into their acquaintance: and promise them the embraces of such a Dame of
the City, or such a Lady of the Court; women perchance famed for admirable
beauties. But as Ixion amongst the Poets expected Juno, and enjoyed a cloud: so
these beguiled wretches in stead of those eminent persons mentioned to them,
take into their bosoms some of the common prostitutes of the Town. Thus are
they cousen'd in their desires, thus do they lie in their reports: whilst poor
souls, they think themselves guilty of neither imposture.

For the other accusation, which would seem to fasten a note of immodesty upon
our English women's lips: I should be like enough to confess the crime, were the
English kisses like unto those of the French. As therefore Dr. Dale Master of
the Requests, said unto Mendoza the Spanish Ambassador, upon his dislike of the
promiscuous sitting of men and women in our Churches; Turpe quidem id esse apud
Hispanos qui etiam in locis sacris cogitarent de explenda libidine, a qua
procul aberant Anglorum mentes: So do I answer to the bill of the complainant.
An Oxford Doctor upon this text, Betrayest thou the Son of man with a kiss?
made mention of four manner of kisses, viz. Osculum charitatis, osculum
gratioris familiaritatis, osculum calliditatis, and osculum carnalitatis. Of
these I will bestow the last on the French, and the third on the Spaniards;
retaining the two first unto our selves: whereas the one is enjoined by the
precept, and the other warranted by the examples of holy Scripture. For my
part, I see nothing in the innocent and harmless salutations of the English,
which the Doctor calls Osculum gratioris familiaritatis, that may move a
French man's suspicion; much I confess to stir his envy. Perhaps a want of the
like happiness to himself, makes him dislike it in us: as the Fox that had
lost his tail, persuaded all others to cut off theirs; but I have already
touched the reason, why that Nation is unworthy of such a favor: their kisses
being hot and sulphury, and indeed nothing but the prologue to their lusts.
Whereas on the contrary, and I dare be confident in it; the chaste and innocent
kiss of the English Gentlewomen, is more in heaven, then many of the best of
their devotions. It were not amiss to explain in this place a verse of Ovids,
common in the mouths of many, but the understanding of few. Thus then says
the Poet:

Oscula qui sumpsit, si non and caetera sumpsit,
Haec quoque quae sumpsit perdere dignus erit. He that does only kiss, and
does no more,
Deserves to lose the kisses given before.


Which must be understood according to the fashion of Rome and Italy (and since
of France and Spain); where they were given as pawns of a dishonest contract:
and not according to the customs of England, where they are only proffered in
way of a gracious and innocent familiarity; and so accepted.

I return again to the French women; and though I may not kiss them (which he
that sees them will swear I have good cause to thank God for) yet they are at
liberty to be courted: an office which they admit freely, and return as
liberally. An office to which they are so used; that they can hardly
distinguish complement from wooing, till the Priest expects them at the
Church door. That day they set themselves forth with all the variety of riches
their credit can extend to. A Scholar of the University never disfurnished so
many of his friends, to provide for a journey, as they do neighbors, to adorn
their wedding. At my being in Pontoyse, I saw M^is. Bride returning from the
Church. The day before she had been somewhat of the condition of a
Kitchen-wench, but now so tricked up with scarfs, rings, and cross garters,
that you never saw a Whitsun-Lady better rigged. I should much have applauded
the fellows fortune, if he could have married the clothes: but God be merciful
to him) he is chained to the wench. Much joy may they have together most
peerless couple! Hymen, O Hymenaee Hymen, Hymen O Hymenaee.


The match was well knit up between them. I would have a French man marry none
but a French woman.

Being now made mistress of an house, she can give her self a dispensation to
drink wine: before she had a fling at the bottle by stealth, and could make a
shift to play off her whole one in a corner: as St. Austine in the ninth book
of his Confessions reports of his mother Monica. Now she has her draughts
like the second edition of a book, augmented and revised: and which is more,
published cum privilegio. Her house she does keep as she does her self. It
would puzzle a strong judgment, to resolve which of the two are the more
nasty: yet after ten of the clock, you may come nigh her; for by that time she
has not only eaten, but it may be her hall has had a brushing: if you be not
careful of your time, you shall commonly find her speechless; her mouth being
stopped with some of the relics of last nights supper. To five meals a day
she is very constant; and for varieties sake, will make some of them at
street-door. She is an exceeding good soul (as Sancho Panco said of his wife)
and one that will not pine her self, though her heirs smart for it. To her
husband she is very servile, seldom sits with him at the table, readily
executes all his commands, and is indeed rather a married servant then a wife:
or an household drudge under the title of a Mistress: yet on the other side she
has freedom enough, and certainly much more then a moderate wisdom would
permit her. It is one of her jura conjugalia to admit of Courtship, even in the
fight of her husband; to walk arm in arm about the streets or into the fields
with her Privado, to proffer occasions of familiarity and acquaintance at the
first sight of one, whose person she relisheth: and all this sans soupsen,
without any the least imputation: a liberty somewhat of the largest, and we may
justly fear that having thus wholly in her own power the keys of the Cabinet,
that she shows her jewels to more then her husband. Such are the French
women; and such lives do they lead both maids and married.

Thou happy England: thy four seas contain
The pride of beauties: such as may disdain
Rivals on earth. Such at once may move
By a strange power, the envy, and the love
Of all the sex besides. Admit a dame
Of France or Spain, pass in the breath of fame,
And her thoughts, for fair: yet let her view
The commonst beauty of the English crew;
And in despair she will execrate the day
Which bare her black; and sigh her self away.
So pined the Phrygian dames and hanged the head,
When into Troy, Paris did Helen lead.
But boast not Paris, England now enjoyes
Helens enough to sack a world of Troyes.
So does the vulgar tapers of the ^kie,
Lose all their luster when the Moon is nigh.
Yet English Ladies, glorious lights, as far
Exceed the Moon; as does the Moon a star.
So do the common people of the groves
Grow hushed, when Philomel recounts her loves.
But when our Ladies sing, even she forbears
To use her tongue; and turns her tongue to ears.
Nay more; Their beauties should proud Venus see,
She Would blush her self out of her Deity:
Drop into Vuleans forge, her reign now done;
And yield to them her Empire, and her son.
Yet this were needless. I can hardly find
Any of this land stars, but straight my mind
Speaks her a Venus; and me thinks I spic
A little Cupid sporting in her eye.
Who thence his shafts more powerfully delivers,
Then ere did the other Cupid from his quivers.
Such in a word they are; you would them guess
An harmony of all the goddesses;
Or swear that partial Nature at their birth,
Had robbed the heavens to glorify the earth.
Such though they are, yet mean these graces bin
Compared unto the virtues lodged within:
For needs the Jewels must be rich and precious,
When as the Cabinet is so delicious.
CHAP. III.
France described. The valley of Montmorancie, and the Dukes of it.
Mont-martre. Burials in former times not permitted within the walls. The
prosecuting of this disccurse by manner of a journal, intermitted for a time.
The Town and Church of St. Denis. The Legend of him, and his head. Of Dagobert
and the Leper. The relics to be seen there. Martyrs how esteemed in St.
Augustine's time. The Sepulchers of the French Kings, and the treasury there.
The Kings house of Madrit. The Queen Mothers house at Ruall, and fine devices
in it. St. Germains en lay, another of the Kings houses. The curious painting
in it. Gorramburie Window: the Garden belonging to it, and the excellency of
the Waterworks. Boys St. Vincent, de Vincennes, and the Castle called Bisester.

I Have now done with the French, both men and women: a people much extolled by
many of our English Travelers, for all those graces which may enoble and adorn
both sexes. For my part, having observed them as well as I could, and traced
them in all their several humors: I set up my rest with this proposition, that
there is nothing in them to be envied but their Country. To that indeed I am
earnestly, and I think not unworthily affected: here being nothing wanting
which may be required, to raise and reward ones liking. If nature was ever
prodigal of her blessings, or scattered them with an over-plentiful hand; it
was in this Island: into which we were entered, as soon as we passed over the
bridge of Pontoyse. The first part of it, which lasted for three leagues; was
upon the plain of a mountain: but such a mountain, as will hardly yield to the
best valley in Europe, out of France. On both sides of us the Vines grew up in
a just length, and promised to the husbandman a thriving vintage. The Wines
they yield are far better then those of Normandy, or Gascoyne; and indeed the
best in the whole Continent, those of Orleans excepted: yet what we saw here,
was but as a bit to prepare our stomachs; lest we should surfeit in the valley.

Here we beheld nature in her richest vestiments. The fields so interchangeably
planted with Wheat and Vines, that had L. Florus once beheld it, he would never
have given unto Campania the title of Cereris and Bacchi certamen. These fields
were dispersedly here and there, beset with Cherry trees; which considered with
the rest, gave unto the eye an excellent object. For the Vines yet green; the
Wheat ready for the sith; and the cherries now fully ripened, and showing
forth their beauties through the vails of the leaves: made such a various and
delightsome mixture of colors, that no art could have expressed it self more
delectably. If you have ever seen an exquisite Mosaical work, you may the best
judge of the beauty of this valley. Add to this, that the River Seine being now
past Paris; either to embrace that flourishing soil, or out of a wanton desire
to play with it self, has divided it self into sundry lesser channels; besides
its several windings and turnings: so that one may very justly, and not
irreligiously, conceive it to be an Idea, or representation of the Garden of
Eden: the river so happily separating it self, to water the ground. This valley
is of a very large circuit; and as the Welsh men say of Anglesey. Mon mam
Gym^ye; id est, Anglesey is the mother of Wales: so may we call this the mother
of Paris. For so abundantly does it furnish that great and populous City, that
when the Dukes of Berry and Burgundy besieged it with 100000 men; there being
at that time 3 or 400000 Citizens and Soldiers within the walls: neither the
people within, nor the enemies without, found any want of provision.

It is called the Valley of Montmorency, from the Town or Castle of Montmorency
seated in it: but this town names not the Valley only. It gives name also to
the ancient family of Dukes of Montmorency, the antientest house of
Christendom. He styles himself Le primier Christian and plus viel Baron de
France: and it is said that his ancestors received the Faith of Christ by the
preaching of St. Denis, the first Bishop of Paris. Their principal houses are
that of Chantilly, and Ecquoan, both seated in the Isle: this last being given
unto the present Dukes Father, by King Henry 4. to whom it was confiscated by
the condemnation of one of his Treasurers. This house also (and so I leave it)
has been observed to have yielded to France, more Constables, Marshals,
Admirals, and the like officers of power and command, then any three other in
the whole Kingdom. Insomuch that I may say of it, what Irenicus does of the
Count Palatines, the name of the Country only changed: Non alta Galliae est
familia, cui plus debeat nobilitas. The now Duke, named Henry, is at this
present Admiral of France.

The mosteminent place in all this Isle is Mont-martre, eminent I mean by
reason of its height; though it has also enough of antiquity to make it
remarkable. It is seated within a mile of Paris, high upon a mountain: on which
many of the faithful, during the time that Gaul was heathenish, were made
Martyrs. Hence the name. Though Paris was the place of apprehension and
sentence, yet was this Mountain commonly the scaffold of execution: it being
the custom of the ancients, neither to put to death, nor to bury within the
walls of their Cities. Thus the Jews when they crucisied our Savior, led him
out of the City of Jerusalem unto Mount Calvarie: unto which St. Paul is
thought to allude, Heb. 13. saying, Let us. therefore go forth to him, etc.
Thus also does St. Luke (to omit other instances) report of St. Stephen, Act.
7. And they cast him out of the city, and stoned him. So in the state of Rome,
the Vestall Virgin having committed sornication, was stifled in the Campus
sceleratus; and other malefactors thrown down the Tarpeian rock: both situate
without the Town. So also had the Thessalians a place of execution, from the
praecipice of an hill, which theycalled the (...), or Corvi: whence arose the
proverb (...), be hanged. As they permitted not executions of malefactors
within their walls: so neither would they suffer the best of their Citizens to
be buried within them. This was it which made Abraham to buy him a field
wherein to bury his dead: and thus we read in the 7. of Luke, that the widow of
Naims son was carried out to be buried. This custom also we find amongst the
Athenians, Corinthians, and other of the Grecians, Qui in agris suis (as says
Alexander ab Alexandro) aut in fundo suburbano, seu in avito and patrio solo
corpora humari consuevere. Amongst the Romans, it was the fashion to burn the
bodies of the dead, within their City. This continued till the bringing in of
the Laws of Athens, commonly called the Laws of the 12. Tables: one of which
Laws runs in these words, In urbe ne sepelito, neve urito. After this
prohibition, their dead corpse were first burned in Campus Martius; and their
urnes covered in sundry places in the fields. The frequent urnes or sepulchral
stones, dug up amongst us here in England, are sufficient testimonies of
this assertion. Besides we may find in Appian, that the chief reason why the
rich men in Rome would not yield to that Law, called Lex Agraria, or the Law of
dividing the Roman possessions equally among the people, was, because they
thought it an irreligious thing that the Monuments of their forefathers should
be sold unto others. The first that is registered to have been buried in the
City, was Trajan the Emperor. Afterward it was granted as an honourary to
such as had deserved well of the republic: and when the Christian Religion
prevailed, and Churchyards, those dormitories of Saints were consecrated; the
liberty of burying within the walls, was to all equally granted.

On this ground it not being lawful to put to death or bury, within the Town of
Paris; this Mountain was destinate to those purposes. Then was it only a
Mountain; now it is enlarged unto a Town: it has a poor wall, an Abbey of
Benedictine Monks, and a Chapel called La Chapelle des Martyrs; both founded
by Lewis the 6. called the Gross. Amongst others, which received here the
Crown of Martyrdom, none more famous then St. Denis (said to be Dionysius
Areopagita) the first Bishop of Paris; Rusticus his Archpriest; and
Eleutherius, his Deacon. The time when, under the reign of Domition; the person
by whose command, Fesceninus Governor of Paris; the crime, for not bowing
before the Altar of Mercury, and offering sacrifice unto him. Of St. Denis
being the patron or tutelary Saint of France, the Legend reports strange
wonders. As namely, when the Executioner had smitten off his head, that he
caught it between his arms; and ran with it down the hill as fast as his legs
could carry him; half a mile from the place of his execution, he sat down and
rested: and so he did nine times in all, even till he came to the place where
his Church is now built. There he fell down and died, being three English miles
from Mont-martre: and there he was buried together with Rustious, and
Eleutherius, who not being able to go as fast as he did, were brought after him
by the people. O impudentiam admirabilem and vere Romanam! and yet so far was
the succeeding age possessed with a belief of this miracle, that in the nine
several places where he is said to have rested there are erected so many
hansome Crosses of stone; all of a making.

To the memory of this Saint, did Dagobert the first build a Temple: and the
times ensuing improved it to a Town. Afterward in honor of St. Denis, and
because it lay near Paris; some of the following Kings bestowed a wall upon it.
A wall it is of a large circuit, and very much unproportionable to the Town,
which stands in it, for all the world like a Spaniards little face in his
great ruff, or like a small chop of Mutton in a large dish of pottage at the
three penny Ordinary. Thus was the Town built (as you see) by natural means:
but it was not so with the Temple. Unless that be worth a miracle, both in the
building, and in the consecrating of it: I will not give a straw for it. Thus,
then says the story. Diagobert afterward King of France, during the life of
Clotoyre the second his Father, had cruelly slain Sadrasegille his governor.
To avoid the fury of his Father, much incensed with that unprincely action; he
was compelled to wander up and down France hungry and thirsty. And so he went,
and he went, (for this tale should be told in the same style, that wenches tell
theirs by the fire side) till he came to the Sepulcher of St. Denis, where he
laid down and slept: and then there appeared unto him a fine old man, with a
staff in his hand, and he told him that his father was dead, and that he
should be King, and he prayed him of all loves, that when he came to be King,
he would build a Church there, in the honor of St. Denis. He had an hard
heart, that could deny so sweet an old man so little a courtesy, for so much
good news, and I trow the King was more kind then so. And so when the Church
was built, the Bishop was sent for in all haste to bless it. But it chanced
that the night before the day wherein the Bishop was to bless it, there came
to the Town an ugly Leper, and the foulest that ever was seen: and this Leper
would needs lie in the Church. And when he was there, about twelve a clock at
night, our Savior came into the Church in garments as white as the driven
snow, and there came with him the Apostles, and the Angels and the Martyrs, and
the sweetest Music that ever was heard in the world. And then Christ blessed
the Church, and said unto the Leper, that he should tell the Bishop that the
Church was already blessed, and for a token of it, he gave the Leper his
health, who presently became as fine a sweet youth as one should see in a
summers day. Auditum admissi risum teneatis? you may laugh if you please, but
I Will assure you this is the story: neither is it a jot the less authentic
because of the style. Such ridiculous stuff, did the Friars and Munks of those
times invent to please and blind the people. So prone were our Ancestors to
believe as Oracles, what ever was delivered unto them by these Impostors.
Majoribus nostris tam facilis in mendaciis fides fuit, ut temere crediderint
etlam monstrosa miracula: and quicquid famae licet fingere, illis erat libenter
laudire. Minulius Faelix spoke it of his foresathers being Heathens: we may
justly affirm it of ours also, being Christians.

But (to omit the additions of the Legend) true it is, that Dagobert the first,
was the founder of the Church: which was after rebuilt and beautified by the
25. Abbot of it, called Sugger, in the reign of King Lewis the sixth. A
reverend and comely fabric, certainly it is; dark, as the Churches of those
times commonly were: and none of the poorest. It maintains 262 Monks and an
Abbot, whose ^ngle revenue is thought to be worth 10000 Crowns and upwards. The
present Abbot is Henry of Lorrein, son to the Duke of Guise, a young Gentleman
of some 14 years of age, or thereabouts: but of him more hereafter. The Abbot
of it, among many other privileges, has a full power upon the lives, goods,
and honors of his vassals: and has a voice in the Parliament of Paris, as
full and binding as any of the Counselors there sitting. As for the Church it
self, it is in height 80 foot, 100 in breadth; and in length 300. The high
Altar, under which the bodies of St. Denis and his two fellow-Martyrs, are said
to be buried; is a very rich and excellent work: the Crucifix which stands
over it, being all of pure gold, enchased with diverse Pearls and precious
Stones of great value. Before it hangs a silver Lamp continually burning: and
if you look about it, you shall see the richest and the fairest glass for
painting, in all France; that of Amiens only excepted. One thing further I will
note in this Church, before I come to to the Tombs and relics; which is, how
Henry 4. in this Church said his first Mass, after his last reconcilement to
the Church of Rome. And good reason I have to say his last. For having been
first brought up in the Romish Faith, he was by his Mother made a Protestant.
At the massacre of Paris, fear of death or imprisonment, turned him Papist:
liberty again made him an Hugonot. In this vein he continued till the year
1595. and then once more re-embosom'd himself into the Roman Synagogue; which
was the time we now speak of. Quo teneam nodo mutantem Protea vultum? The only
Proteus in matters of faith in our times. Doctor Perne was a Diamond to him.

It is now time I should show you the Relics; but you must first stay till
the Clerk has put on his Surplice. I have heard of a blind Priest that could
never mumble over his Mass handsomely without his spectacles. This fellow and
his surplice is just like him. I persuaded my self that the Surplice without
the Clerk, could marshall the Relics, as well as the Clerk without the
Surplice. As soon as he was sadled for his journey, he puts himself into his
way; and followed it with a pace so nimble, that there was no keeping of him
company: his tongue ran so fast, that the quickest eye there, was fain to give
him over in plain ground: the fellow that shows the Tombs at Westminster,
being no more to be compared to him, for the volubility of his chops, then a
Capuchin to a Jesuit: yet as we learned afterward of him (when he was out of
his road) they were thus disposed. On the right hand of the Altar, (not the
high Altar above mentioned) there are said to be kept one of the Nails which
fastened our Savior to the Cross. 2. A piece of the Cross it self. 3. Some of
the Virgin Mary's Milk. 4. The arm of St. Simeon set in a case of gold. And 5.
The relics of St. Lewis reserved in a little chapel, all of gold also; and
built in the fashion of the Nostre dame in Paris. On the left, there was showed
us the head of St. Denis and a part of his body. But I mistake my self, it was
not the head, but the portraiture of it in gold; the head being said to be
within it; by his representation he seems to have had a very reverend and
awful countenance: though I persuade my self that the rich Crown and Miter
which he there wears (and certainly they are of a high value) never
belongedto him in his life. On each side of the head are two Angels supporting
it, all of gold also: both which together with the head and ornaments
supported, are reported to be the work of one Eloy, le plus artificiel orfeure
de son temps, the cunningest Goldsmith of his time; who afterward was made
Bishop of Noyon, and Sainted.

Concerning Relics I shall have occasion to speak further, when I come to the
holy Chapel in Paris; somewhat now of the honor due unto the memory of
Martyrs. I am none of those that think the memories of those Heroes of the
primitive times, not to be honored in the dust; neither would I assault their
shrines with an irreverent finger: on the other side, they shall never have my
prayers directed to them, nor my devotions; nor can I think it lawful to give
the remnants of them any bodily observance. Though I do and will honor, I dare
not worship them. St. Austin has cut out a mid way between the Papist and the
Zelot, in the 8 Book of his most excellent work De Civitate dei, and his path
it is best, to follow, Honoramus sane memorias little tanquam sanctorum hominum
Dei, qui usque ad mortem corporum pro veritate certarunt: and a little after,
he shows the end of these memorials, viz. Vt ea celebritate Deo vere gratias
de eorum victori is agamus, and nos ad imitationem talium coronarum eorum
memoriae renovatione adhortemur. One relic there is of which this use cannot
possibly be made; and what do you think that should be, but the Lanthorn which
Judas used when he went to apprehend his Master? a pretty one it is (I confess)
richly beset with studdes of Crystal, through which all the light comes; the
main of it being of a substance not transparent. Had it been showed me within
the first century of years after the passion, I might, perhaps, have been
fooled into a belief; for I am confident it can be no older. Being as it is, I
will acknowledge it to be a Lanthorn, though it belonged not to Judas.

From the relics of Martyrs, proceed we to those of Kings; and amongst those
there is nothing which will long detain an English man. He that has seen the
tombs at Westminster will think these to be but trifles, if he consider the
workmanship, or the riches and the magnificence. The chief of those many mean
ones which are there, are those of Henry II. and Katharine de Medices his wife,
in a little Chapel of their own building; both in their full proportion, and
in their royal habiliments, exceeding stately. There is also a neat tomb of
the same Henry, built all of brass, and supported by four brass pillars: his
Statua of the same mettle placed on the top of it, and composed as if at his
prayers. The rest are more in tale then weight. But the chief beauties of this
Church, are in the treasury, which it was not my happiness to see. As I am
informed, the most remarkable things in it are these, The Swords of Joan the
Virgin, Charles the great, Rowland his cosen, and that of Henry IV. when he
was Crowned. His Boots, Crown and Scepter, as those also of his son Lewis now
reigning. A cross three foot high, made of pure gold. A Crown, Scepter and
golden ball, given by Pope Adrian to Carolus magnus. A golden Crown of larger
sise, bedecked with Adamants and other precious stones; given by Charles
Martell after his victories over the Saracens. A very fair Chalice all of gold,
in which St. Denis is reported to have consecrated the Sacramental wine. The
others of lesser note, I purposely omit, for having not seen them, I am loath
to go any further upon trust. And so I leave St. Denis, a Church so richly
furnished, that had I seen all the rarities and glories of it, that only days
content had deserved our journey; sed haec infelici nimia.

Not to continue this discourse any longer by way of journall, or gesta dierum.
Few days after we had wearied our selves with the sight of Paris, we went to
see some of their Majesty's houses in the Country. And here we passed by
Madrit, so called of the King of Spains house at Madrit, after the form of
which it is built. The founder of it was Francis the first, who being taken
Prisoner at the battle of Pavie, ann. dom. 1525. and thence carried into
Spain, had no less then a twelve months time to draw the platform. A fine
Country house it seemed to be; but our journey lay beyond it. One league
beyond it lay Ruall, a small Town belonging to the Abbey of St. Denis. In a
corner of this Town the Queen Mother has a fine summer house, abundantly
adorned with retired walks, and a most curious variety of waterworks: for
besides the forms of diverse glasses, pillars, and Geometrical figures, all
framed by the water; there were birds of sundry sorts so artificially made,
that they both deceived the eye by their motion, and the ear by their melody.
Somewhat higher in the midst of a most delicious Garden, are two Fountains of
admirable workmanship: In the first, the portraitures of Cerberus, the Boar of
Calydon, the Nemean Lion; and in the navell of it Hercules killing Hydra. In
the other only a Crocodile full of wild and unruly tricks, and sending from his
throat music not much different from Organs. Had your eyes been shut, you
would have thought your self in some Cathedral Church: this melody of the
Crocodile, and that other of the birds, so exactly counterfeiting the harmony
of a well ordered Quire. And now we are come into the Grove, a place so full of
retired walks, so sweetly and delect^bly contrived, that they would even entice
a man to melancholy, because in them even melancholy would prove delightful.
The trees so interchangeably folded one within the other, that they were at
once a shelter against wind and sun: yet not so sullenly close, but that they
afforded the eye an excellent Lordship over the Vines and verdure of the earth
imprisoned within them: it seemed a Grove, an Orchard, and a Vineyard, so
variously interwoven and mixed together, as if it had been the purpose of the
Artist to make a man fall in love with confusion. In the middle of this
Wilderness was feated the house, environed round about with a Moat of running
water. The house pretty, and therefore little; built rather for a banquet, then
a feast. It was built and enriched with this variety of pleasures, by Mr. de
Ponte, Tailor to King Henry IV. and was no question the best garment that ever
he cut out in his life. Dying, he gave it to Mr. Landerboyne, once his servant,
and now his son by adoption; of whom the Queen Mother taking a liking to it,
bought it; giving him in exchange, an office in the Treasury worth 400000
crowns to be sold.

Two leagues from Ruall, is the Kings house of St. Germain ^n Olay, a house
seated on the top of a hill just like Windsore, The Town of St. Germain lies
all about it, the river Seine (of the same breadth as the Thames is at the
place mentioned) runs below it; and the house by reason of the site, having
a large command upon the Country round about it. The Town is poor and has
nothing in it remarkable but the name, which it took from St. Germain Bishop of
Auxerre, who together with St. Lupus Bishop of Tropes, sailed into Britain to
root out Pelagianism. The Castle or seat Royal is divided into two parts, the
old and the new; the old, which is next unto the Town, is built of Bricks, and
for form it is triangular: founded it was at the first by Charles V. since
strengthened and beautified by the English when it was in their possession:
Francis I. added to it the upper story and the battlements, and in memoriam
facti, has left a Capital F upon every of the Chimnies. The new house,
distant from the old about a furlong, and to which you descend by a handsome
green Court, was built by Henry IV. It consists of three several parts, all
joined together, the two outermost quadrangular, that in the middle almost
round and in the fashion of a Jewish Synagogue. Here we saw the Volatory full
of sundry forain birds, and in one of the lower rooms great store of outlandish
conies; but these were accessories. The principal was the majesty of the
house, which is, indeed, worth the observation. The Palace of the Loure so much
famed, is not to be named in the same day with it. The rooms are well ordered,
and high roofed, gorgeously set out with the curiosities of the Painter. In
some of the Chambers they showed us some Poetical fictions expressed by the
pencill in the windows and on the wainscot, and seemed to glory much in them.
I confess they might have plentifully possessed my fancy, had I not seen the
window of Gorrambury gallery, belonging to the Right Honorable Francis Viscount
St. Albans; a window in which all the Fables of Ovids Metamorphosis, are so
naturally and lively dissembled, that if ever art went beyond it self, it was
in that admirable expression.

Let us now take a view of the waterworks, and here we shall see in the first
water-house, which is a stately large walk vaulted over head, the effigies of a
Dragon, just against the entrance; an unquiet beast that vomiteth on all that
come nigh it. At the end toward the right hand is the Statua of a Nymph sitting
before a pair of Organs. Upon the loosing of one of the pipes, the Nymphs
fingers began to manage the keys, and brought the instrument to yield such a
music, that if it were not that of an Organ, it was as like it as could be,
and not be the same. Unto the division of her fingers, her head kept a
porportionable time; jolting from one shoulder to the other, as I have have
seen an old fiddler at a Wake. In the same proportion were the counterfeits of
all sorts of mils, which before very eagerly discharged their functions; but upon
the beginning of this harmony, they suddenly stood still, as if they had had
ears to have heard it. At the other end toward the left hand, we saw a shop of
Smiths, another of Joiners, and a backside full of Sawyers and Masons, all
idle. Upon the first command of the water, they all fell to their Occupations,
and plied them lustily; the birds every where singing, and so saving the
Artificers the labor of a whistling. Besides, upon the drawing of a wooden
courtain, there appeared unto us, two Tritons riding on their Dolphins, and
each of them with a shell in his hand, which interchangeably and in turns
served them in stead of trumpets. A very happy decorum, and truly Poetical.

Caeruleum Tritona vocat, conchaque sonanti
Inspirare jubet, --
As Ovid of him.
Afterward follows Neptune himself, fitting in his Chariot, drawn with four
Tortoyses, and grasping his tricuspis or three forked Scepter in his hand: the
water under them representing, all this while, a sea somewhat troubled. 36
steps from the front of the house we descended into this water-house; and by 60
more we descended into a second of the same fashion, but not of an equal
length with the other. At the right hand of this, is the whole story of
Perseus, Andromeda and the Whale lively acted; the Whale being killed, and the
Lady unloosed from the rock very perfectly. But withal, it was so cunningly
managed, and that with such a mutual change of fortune, on the parties of both
the combatants, that one who had not known the fable, would have been sore
afraid that the Knight would have lost the victory, and the Lady her life. At
the other end there was shown unto us, Orpheus in sylvis positus, sylvaeqne
sequentes.


There appeared unto us the resemblance of Orpheus, playing on a treble Vial,
the trees moving with the force of the music, and the wild beasts dancing in
two rings about him. An invention which could not but cost K. Henry a great sum
of money; one only string of the fidle being by mischance broken, having cost
King Lewis his son 1500 Livres. Upon the opening of a double-leaved door, there
were exhibited to us diverse representations and conceits, which certainly might
have been more graceful, if they had not so much in them of the puppet play.
By some steps more we descended into the Garden, and by as many more into a
Green, which opened into the water side; in which the goodliest flower and most
pleasing to my eyes, was the statua of an horse in brass, of that bigness,
that I and one of my companions could stand in the neck of him. But dismounting
from this horse, we mounted our own, and so took our leaves of St. Germain.

On the other side of Paris, and up the river, we saw an other of the Kings
houses, called St. Vincent or Vincennes. It was beautified with a large part by
Philip Augustus, anno 1185. who also walled the Park, and replenished it with
Deer. In this house have dyed many famous personages, as Philip the fair, Lewis
Hutin, and Charles the fair; but none so much to be lamented as that of our
Henry V. cut down in the flower of his age, and midst of his victories: a man
most truly valiant, and the Alexander of his times. Not far from thence is an
old Castle, once strong, but time has made it now unserviceable. The people
call it Chasteau Bisestre, corruptly for Vincestre; which makes me believe it
was built by the English when they were masters of this Isle.

CHAP. IV.
Paris, the names and antiquity of it. The situation and greatness. The chief
strength and Fortifications about it. The streets and buildings. King James his
laudable care in beautifying London. King Henry the fourths intent to fortify
the Town. Why not actuated. The Artifices and wealth of the Parisians. The
bravery of the Citizens described under the person of a Barber.

NOw we are come unto Paris, whither, indeed, I should have brought you the
same day we came from Pontoyse.

It has had in diversages, two several names; the one taken from the people,
the other from the situation; the name taken from the people is that of Paris.
J. Caesar in his Commentaries making mention of the Nation of the Parisii, and
at that time calling this City Urbem Parisiorum. Ammianus Marcellinus calls
it by the same appellative; for as yet the name of Paris was not appropriated
unto it. As for these Parisii, it is well known that they were a people of
Gallia Celtica; but why the people were so called, has been questioned, and
that deservedly. Some derive them from a son of Paris the son of Priam: but the
humor of deriving all national originations from Troy, has long since been
hissed out of the School of Antiquity. The Berosus of John Annius brings
them from one Paris King of the Celtae; and his authority is alike
authentical. The bastards which this Annius imposed upon the Ancient writers,
are now taught to know their own father. Others deduce it from (...), a Greek
word importing boldness of speech; which is approved by William of Breton, in
the first book of his Phillipiades.

Finibus egressi patriis, per Gallicarura
Sedem quaerebant, ponendis maenibus aptam,
Et se Parisios dixerunt, nomine Graeco,
Quod sonat expositum nostris, audacia, verbis. Leaving their native soil, they
sought through Gaul
A place to build a City, and a wall,
And called themselves Parisians; which in Greek
Does note a prompt audacity to speak.


It is spoken of those Gauls, who coming out of the more Southern parts, here
planted themselves. Neither is it improbable, that a Gallick nation should
assume to it self a Greek name, that language having taken good footing in
these parts, long before Caesar's time, as himself testifyeth in his
Commentaries. How well this name agrees with the French nature, I have already
manifested in the character of this people, both men and women. But I will not
stand to this etymology. The names of great Cities are as obscure as those of
their founders; and the conjecturall derivations of them are oftentimes rather
plausible then probable; and sometimes neither. As for the antiquity of it, it
is said to be built in the time of Amasia King of Judah; but this also is
uncertain: the beginnings of ancient Cities, being as dark and hidden, as the
reasons of their names. Certain it is, that it is no puisne in the world; it
being a strong and opulent Town in the days of Julius Caesar.

The other name of this City, which is indeed the ancient, and was taken from
the situation of it, is Lutetia, from lutum dirt; as being seated in an
exceeding clammy and dirty soil. To this also consents the abovenamed William
of Breton, in his said first Book of the Phillippiades, saying,

-- Quoniam tunc temporis illam
Reddebat palus and terrae pinguedo lutosam,
Aptum Parisii posuere Lutetia nomen. And since the Fens, and clammy soil did
make
Their City dirty: for that reasons sake,
The Town, the name Lutetia did take.


As for the Etymology of Munster, who deriveth the name from Luens one of the
Kings of the Celtae: it may (for ought I know) deservedly keep company with
that of Berosus, already recited. This name of Lutetia continued till the
coming of the Franks into these parts: who to endeer the nation of the Parisii,
and oblige them the more faithfully to do them service, commanded it for ever
after to be called Paris. But the situation of this Town gave it not only the
name; it gave it also (as the custom of Godfathers in England) a christning
gift, which is the riches of it; and by consequence, the pre-eminence. In how
delicate and flourishing a soil it is situate, I have already told you in my
description of the valley of Montmorencie where it stands. If you will believe
Comines in the first book of his Histories, he will tell you, that Cest la cite
que jamais ie veisse environnee de meilleux pais et plantureux; of all the
Cities which ever he saw, it is environed with the best and fruitful'st
Country. The river of Seine is also, no question, a great help to the
enriching of it; for though it be not Navigable unto the Town, yet it gives
free passage unto boats of an indifferent big burden, into which the ships are
unladen, and so their commodities carried up the water. A profitable enter
course between the Sea and the City for the Merchants. Of these boats there are
an infinite company that plie up and down the water, and more indeed, as the
said Comines is of opinion, than any man can believe that has not seen them.

It is in circuit, as Boterus is of opinion, 12 miles. Others judge it at 10.
For my part, I dare not guess it to be above 8, and yet I was told by a French
man, that it was in compass no less then 14 leagues within the walls; an
untruth bigger then the Town. For figure it is circular, that being, according
to Geometricians, of all figures the most capacious. And questionless if it be
true, that Urbs non in moenibus, sed in civibus posita est; Paris may challenge
as great a circuit as the most of Europe: it being little inferior to the
biggest, for the multitudes of her inhabitants. Join the compass and the
populousness together, and you shall hear the wisest of the French men say,
that Que ce qu' est l' ame a la raison, el la prunelle a l' oeil; cela mesme
est Paris a la France. Add to this the verdict of Charles V. who being demanded
which he thought to be the biggest City of France: answered, Roven: and being
then asked, what he thought of Paris: made answer, Unpais; that it was a whole
Country. The Emperor did well to flatter Francis the first, who asked him
these questions, and in whose power he then was; otherwise he might have given
men good cause to suspect his judgment. The truth is, that Paris is a fair and
goodly Town; yet withal, it is nothing like the miracle that some men make it.
Were the figure of London altered, and all the houses of it cast into a Ring; I
dare able it a larger and more goodly Town then Paris, and that in the
comparison, it may give it at the least half a mile odds.

For matter of strength and resistance, certain it is that this City is
exceeding well seated, were it as well fortifyed. It lies in a plain flat
level, and has no hills nigh unto it, from which it can any way be annoyed;
and for the casting and making of rowling-trenches, I think the soil is hardly
serviceable. If Art were no more wanting to the strength of it then Nature, in
mine opinion, it might be made almost impregnable. Henry IV. seeing the present
weakness of it, had once a purpose (as it is said) to have strengthened it
according to the modern art of Fortifications. But it went no further then the
purpose. He was a great builder, and had many projects of Masonry in his head,
which were little for his profit; and this would have proved less then any.
For besides the infinite sums of money which would have been employed in so
immense a work; what had this been in effect, but to put a sword into the hand
of a mad man? The mutinies and sedition of this people have made it little
inferior to Liege or Gaunt, the two most revolting Towns of Europe. And again,
the Baricadoes against the person of King Henry III. and the large resistance
it made to himself, being weak; were sufficient to instruct him what might be
expected from it by his successors, when it should be strengthened and enabled
to rebellion.

The present strength of the Town then is not great, the walls being very weak
and ruinous; and those other few helps which it has, being little availeable
for defense. The beautifullest part of the whole resistance is the ditch, deep,
precipitate and broad; and to say no more of it, an excellent ward, were there
any thing else correspondent to it. As for the Fort next unto St. Antonies
gate, called the Bastille; it is in my conceit too little to protect the Town,
and too low to command it. When Swords only and Pick-axes were in use, and
afterward in the infancy of guns, it did some service in the nature of a
Fortress: now it serves principally as a prison for those of the greater
sort, who will permit themselves to be taken. It is said to be built by the
English, when they were Lords of Paris, and the vulgar are all of this opinion.
Others, of the more learned sort, make it to be the work of one of the Provosts
of the City. Du Chesne calls him Hugues Aubriot, in the time of Charles V.
when as yet the English had nothing to do here. The word Bastille in general,
signifies a Fortress; the article la, prefixed before it, makes it a name,
and appropriateth it unto this building. There are also two little turrets,
just against the gallery of the Louure, on both sides of the Seine, intended
for the defense of the River; though now they are little able to answer that
intention: they also are fathered on the English, but how true I know not. An
other place I marked, designed perhaps for a Rampart, but employed at this time
only by windmils. It is a goodly mount of earth, high and capacious, situate
close unto the gate called St. Martins; the most defensible part, if well
manned, of all Paris. Thus is the strength of this Town (as you see) but small;
and if Henry IV. lay so long before it with his Army, it was not because he
could not take it, but because he would not. He was loath (as Biron advised
him) to receive the bird naked, which he expected with all its feathers; and
this answer he gave the Lord Willougbie. who undertook to force an entry into
it.

For the streets, they are many of them of a lawful and competent breadth,
well pitched under the foot with fair and large peble. This paving of it was
the work of Philip Augustus, anno 1223. or there abouts; before which time it
could not but be miserably dirty, if not unpassable. As it now is, the least
rain makes it very slippery and troublesome; and as little a continuance of
warm weather, stinking and poisonous. But whether this noisomenesse proceed
from the nature of the ground, or the fluttishnesse of the people in their
houses, or the neglect of the Magistrates in not providing a sufficiency of
Scavengers, or all, I am not to determine. This I am confident of, that the
nastiest lane in London, is Frankincense and Juniper, to the sweetest street in
this City. The ancient byword was (and there is good reason for it) Il
destaint comme la fange de Paris: had I the power of making proverbs, I would
only change il destaint into il puit, and make the byword ten times more
Orthodox. I have spoken somewhat already of the Fortifications of this Town,
but they are but trifles: the only venom of the street, is a strength unto it
more powerful then the ditch^s or the bulwark of St. Martins. Morrison in his
Itinerarie relates how the Citizens of Prague in Bohemia, were repairing the
walls of their Town for fear of the Turks; but with all he adds, that if the
stink of the streets kept him not thence, there was no assurance to be looked
for of the walls. I know now not how true it is of that City, I am sure it may
be justly verified of this. It was therefore not unjudiciously said of an
English Gentleman, that he thought Paris was the strongest Town in
Christendom; for he took (strong) in that sense as we do in England, when we
say such a man has a strong-breath. These things considered, it could not but
be an infinite happiness granted by nature to our Henry V. that he never
stopped his nose at any stink, as our Chronicles report of him. Otherwise, in
my conscience, he had never been able to keep his Court there. But that which
most amazed me, is, that in such a perpetuated constancy of stinks, there
should yet be found so large and admirable a variety. A variety so special and
distinct, that any Chymicall nose (I dare l^y my life on it) two or three
perambulations, would hunt out blindfold, each several street by the smell, as
perfectly as another by his eye. A Town of a strange composition, one can
hardly live in it in the Summer without poisning, in the Winter without miring.

For the buildings, they are I confess very handsomely and uniformely set out
to the street-ward; not unseemly in themselves, and very suitable one with
another. High and perpendicular, with windows reaching from the top almost to
the bottom. The houses of the new mould in London, are just after their
fashion: wherein the care and design of our late Sovereign King James is
highly to be magnifyed. Time and his good beginnings well seconded, will make
that City nothing inferior for the beauty and excellency of her structures, to
the gallantest of Europe; insomuch that he might truly have said of his London,
what Augusius did of his Rome, (...), Urbem quem lateritiam inveni marmoream
relinquo, as Dion has it. But as London now is, the houses of it in the
inside, are both better contrived, and richlyer furnished by far, then those of
Paris; the inward beauty and ornaments most commonly following the estate of
the builders, or the owners. Their houses are distinguished by signs as with
us, and under every sign there is printed in Capital letters, what sign it
is; neither is it more then need. The old shift of This is a Cock, and this is
a Bull, was never more requisite in the infancy of painting, then in this City.
For so ^ideously and so without resemblance to the thing signified, are most of
these pencil-works: that I may without danger say of them as Pseudolus in
Plaulus does of the letter which was written from Phoenicium to his young
master Callidorus, An obs^^ro hercle, habent quoque gallinae manus? nam has
quidem gallina scripsit. If a hen would not scrape better portraitures on a
dunghill then they have hanged up before their doors, I would send to my
Hostess of Tostes to be executed. And indeed generally, the Arti(...) of Paris
are as slovenly in their trades, as in their houses, yet you may find nimble
d^^cers, pretty fiddlers for a toy, and a Tailor that can trick you up after the
best and newest fashion. Their Cutlers make such abominable and fearful
knives, as would grieve a man's heart to see them: and their Glovers, are worse
then they; you would imagine by their Gloves, that the hand for which they are
made, were cut of by the wrist: yet on the other side they are very perfect at
tooth-picks, beard brushes, and (which I hold the most commendable art of them)
at the cutting of a seal. Their Mercers are but one degree removed from a
Peddler; such as in England we call Chapmen, that is a Peddler with a shop. And
for Goldsmiths there is little use of them, glasses being there most in
request, both because neat, and because cheap. I persuade my self that the two
several ranks of shops in Cheapside, can show more plate, and more variety of
Mercery wares, good and rich, then three parts of Paris. Merchants they have
here, but not many, and they not very wealthy. The river ebbs not, and flows
not nigher then 75 miles or thereabouts, and the boats which thence serve the
City, being no bigger then our Western Barges. The principal means by which
the people do subsist, are the Court of the King, most times held amongst them;
and the great resort of Advocates and Clients to the chambers of Parliament.
Without these two crutches the Town would get a vile halting, and perhaps be
scarce able to stand. What the estate of some of their wealthyest Citizens may
amount to, I cannot say, yet I dare conjecture it, not to be superfluous. The
Author of the book entitled Les estat du monde, reckons it for a great
marvel that some of our London Merchants should be worth 100000 crowns, we
account that estate among us not to be so wonderful, and may thence safely
conclude, that they who make a prodigy of so little, are not worth so much
themselves.

If you believe their apparel, we may, perhaps, be persuaded otherwise; that
questionless speaks no less then millions, though like it is, that when
they are in their best clothes, they are in the middle of their estates. But
concerning the ridiculous bravery of the poor Parisian, take along with you
this story: Upon our first coming into Paris, there came to visit a German
Lord, whom we met a ship-bord, a couple of French Gallants, his acquaintance;
the one of them (for I did not much observe the other) had a suit of Turkey
grogram doubled with Taffeta, cut with long slashes, or carbonado's, after the
French fashion, and belaied with bugle lace. Through the openings of his
doublet appeared his shirt of the purest Holland, and wrought with curious
needlework; the points at his waste and knees, all edged with a silver edging;
his garters, roses and hat-band, suitable to his points; a beaver hat, and a
pair of silk stockins; his cloak also of Turkey grogram, cut upon black
Taffeta. This Lord (for who would have dared to guess him other?) applied
himself to me, and perceiving my ignorance in the French, accosted me in
Latin, which he spoke indifferently well. After some discourse, he took notice
of mine eyes, which were then sore and sea-sick, and promised me, if I would
call on him at his lodging the next morning, to give me a water, which suddenly
would restore them to their strength and vigor. I humbly thanked his Lordship
for such an ineffable and immerited favor, in the best complement and greatest
obeisance I could devise. It was not for naught, thought I, that our English
extol so muth the humanity of this people; nay I began to accuse the report of
envy, as not having published the one half of their graces and affabilities.
Quantillum enim virtutum illarum acceperim! And thus taking my leave of his
Honor, I greedily expected the next morning. The morning come, and the hour of
visting his Lordship almost at hand, I sent a servant to fetch a Barber to come
trim me and make me neat, as not knowing what occasion I might have, of seeing
his Lady or his daughters. Upon the return of the messenger, presengly
follows his Altitude, and bidding me sit down in his chair, he disburdened
one of his pockets (Quis hoc credat, nisi sit proteste vetustas?) of a case of
instruments, and the other of a bundle of linen. Thus accommodated, he falls
to work about me, to the earning of a quardesou. In my life I had never more
ado to hold in my laughter. And certainly, had not an anger or vexation at my
own folly, in casting away so much humble rhetoric the night before upon him,
somewhat troubled me; I should either have laughed him out of his fine suit, or
have broke my heart in the restraint. Quid domini facient, audent cum talia
fures?


If a Barber may be thus taken in suspicion for a Lord, no doubt but a Mercer
may be accused for a Marquess.

CHAP. V.
Paris divided into four parts. Of the Fauxbourgs in general. Of the
Pesthouse. The Fauxbourg and Abbey of St. Germain. The Queen Mothers house
there. Her purpose never to reside in it. The Provost of Merchants, and his
authority. The Arms of the Town. The Townhouse. The Grand Chastelet. The
Arcenall. The place Royal, etc. The Vicounty of Paris. And the Provosts seven
daughters.

THey which write of Lusitania divide it into three parts, viz. Ulteriorem,
lying beyond Dueras, North; Citeriorem, lying from Tagus, South; and
Interamnem, situate betwixt both the rivers. Paris is seated just as that
Province, and may in a manner admit of the same division; for the River of
Seine, has there so dispersed it self, that it has divided this French
Metropolis into three parts also, viz. Citeriorem, lying on this side the
river, which they call La Ville, the Town; Ulteriorem, lying beyond the further
branch of it, which they call L'Universitie; and Interammem, situate between
both the streams in a little Island; which they call La Cite. To these add the
Suburbs, or (as they call them) the Fauxbourgs, and you have in all four parts
of Paris.

These Fauxbourgs are not incorporated unto the Town, or joined together with
it, as the Suburbs of London are unto that City. They stand severed from it a
pretty distance, and appear to be what indeed they are, a distinct body from
it; For the most part the houses in them are old and ruinous: yet the Fauxbourg
of St. Iacques is in a pretty good fashion and the least unsightly of them all,
except St. Germains. The Fauxbourg also of St. Marcell has somewhat to commend
it, which is that the great Pesthouse built by Henry IV. is within the
Precincts of it: a house built quadrangular wise, very large and capacious; and
seems to such as stand afar off it (for it is not safe venturing nigh it or
within) to be more like the Palace of a King, then the Kings Palace it self.
But the principallest of all the Suburbs is that of St. Germains, a place
lately repaired, full of diverse stately houses, and in bigness little inferior
unto Oxford. It took name from the Abbey of S^. Germain, seated within it,
built by Childebert the son of Clouis, anno 1542. in the honor of St. Vincent.
Afterward it got the name of St. German a Bishop of Paris, whose body was
there buried, and at whose instigation it had formerly been founded. The number
of the Monks was enlarged to the number of 120 by Charles the balde, (he began
his reign anno 841) and so they continue till this day. The present Abbot is
Henry of Burbon Bishop of Metz, base son unto Henry IV. He is by his place Lord
of all this goodly Suburb; has power of levying Taxes upon his tenants: and to
him accrue all the profits of the great Fair holden here every February.

The principal house in it is that of the Queen Mother, not yet fully built.
The Gallery of it, which possesses all the right side of the square, is
perfectly finished, and said to be a most royal and majesticall piece. The
further part also, opposite to the gate, is finished so far forth as concerns
the outside and strength of it; the ornamentall parts and trappings of it being
yet not added. When it is absolutely consummate, if it hold proportion with the
other sides, both within and without, it will be a Palace for the elegancy and
politenesse of the Fabric, not fellowed in Europe. A Palace answerable to the
greatness of her mind that built it; yet it is by diverse conjectured that her
purpose is never to reside there: for which cause the building goes but slowly
forward. For when upon the death of her great Privado, the Marquess D'Ancre,
she was removed to Blois: those of the opposite taction in the Court got so
strongly into the good opinion of the King, that not without great struglings,
by those of her party, and the hazard of two civil wars, she obtained her
former neernesse to his Majesty. She may see by this what to trust to, should
her absence leave the Kings mind any way prepared for new impressions. Likely
therefore it is, that she will rather choose to leave her fine house unhabited
further then on occasions for a Banquet, then give the least opportunity to
stagger her greatness. This house is called Luxembourg Palace, as being built
in place of an old house belonging to the Duke of that Province. The second
house of note in this Suburb is that of the Prince of Conde, to whom it was
given by the Queen Mother, in the first year of her Regency.

The Town of Paris, is that part of it, which lies on this side of the
hithermost branch of the Seine toward Picardie. What was spoken before in the
general has its reference to this particular; whether it concern the
sweetness of the streets, the manner of the building, the furniture of the
artificer, or the like. It contains in it 13 Parish Churches, viz. St. German
de l'Auxerre, 2 St. Eustace, 3 Les Saints Innocents, 4 St. Savueur, 4 St.
Nicolas des champs. 6 L^ Sepulore. 7 St. Iacques de la bouchierie, 8 St. Josse,
9 St. Mercy, 10 St. Jean, 11 St. Gervase, and St. Protasse, 12 St. Paul, and 13
St. Jean le tonde It also has in it 7 Gates, sc. 1 St. Anthony upon the side
of the river near unto the Arcenall. 2 Port du Temple. 3 St. Martim. 4 St.
Denis. 5 Mont martre. 6 St. Honor, and 7 Port Neufue, so called because it
was built since the others, which joyneth hard upon the Tnilleries, the Garden
of the Louure.

The principal Governor of Paris, as also of the whole Isle of France, is the
Duke of Monbazon, who has held this office ever since the year 1619. when it
was surrendered by Luines; but he little medleth with the City. The particular
Governors of it are the two Provosts, the one called Le Provost du Paris, the
other Le Provost des Merchands. The Provost of Paris determines of all causes
between Citizen and Citizen, whether they be criminal or civil. The office is
for term of life; the place of judgment, the Grand Chastelet. The present
Provost is called Mr. Seguier, and is by birth of the Nobility; as all which
are honored with this office must be. He has as his assistants three
Lieutenants; the Lieutenant criminal, which judges in matters of life and
death; the Lieutenant civil, which decideth causes of debt or trespass
between party and party; and the Lieutenant particular, who supplyeth their
several places in their absence. There are also necessarily required to this
Court the Procureur, and the Advocate, or the Kings Sollicitour, and Attorney,
12 Counselors, and of underofficers more then enough. This Office is said to
have been erected in the time of Lewis the son of Charles the great. In matters
criminal there is appeal admitted from hence to the Tournelle. In matters
civil, if the sum exceed the value of 250 Livres, to the great Chamber, or Le
grande Chamber in the Court of Parliament. The Provost of the Merchants, and
his authority was first instituted by Philip Augustus, who began his reign anno
1190. His office is to conserve the liberties and indulgences, granted to the
Merchants and Artificers of the City: to have an eye over the sales of Wine,
Corn, Wood, Cole, etc. and to impose taxes on them; to keep the keys of the
Gates, to give watch word in time of war; to grant Past-ports to such as are
willing to leave the Town, and the like. There are also four other Officers
joined unto him, Escbevins they call them, who also carry a great sway in the
City. There are moreover Assistants to them in their proceedings, the Kings
Sollicitour (or Procureur) and 24 Counselors. To compare this Corporation
with that of London, the Provost is as the Mayor, the Eschevins as the
Sheriffs, the 24 Counselors as the Aldermen, and the Procureur as the
Recorder. I omit the underofficers, whereof there is no scarcity. The place of
their meetings is called L' hostel de ville, or the Guilde-hall The present
Provost, Mr. de Grieux, his habit, as also that of the Eschevins, and
Counselors, half red, half sky colored, the City livery with a hood of the
same.

This Provost is as much above the other in power, as men which are loved,
commonly are above those which are feared. This Provost the people willingly,
yea sometimes factiously obey, as the conservator of their liberties; the other
they only dread as the Judge of their lives, and the tyrants over their
Estates. To show the power of this Provost, both for and with the people
against their Princes, you may please to take notice of two instances. For the
people against Philip de Valois, anno 1349. when the said King desiring an
Impost of one Livre in five Crowns, upon all wares sold in Paris, for the
better managing of his Wars against the English, could obtain it but for one
year only; and that not without special letters reversall, that it should no
way incommodate their privileges. With the people, anno 1357, when King John
was Prisoner in England, and Charles the Daulphin, afterward the fifth of that
name, labored his ransom amongst the Parisians. For then Stephen Marcell the
Provost, attended by the Vulgar Citizens, not only brake open the Daulphins
Chamber, but flew John de Conf^ans and Robert of Clermount, two Marschals of
France, before his face Nay, to add yet further insolences to this, he took
his partycoloured hood off his head, putting it on the Daulphins, and all that
day wore the Daulphins hat, being a brown black; Pour signal de sa dictature,
as the token of his Dictatorship. And which is more then all this, he sent the
Daulphin cloth to make him a Gown and an Ho^d of the City livery; and
compelled him to avow the massacre of his servants above named, as done by his
commandment: Horrible insolences! Quam miserum est cum haec impune facere
potuisse? as Tully of Marcus Antonius.

The Arms of this Town, as also of the Corporation of the Provost and
Eschevins, are Gule^, a Ship Argent; a Chief, powdered with flower de Lyces, Or.
The seat or place of their assembly, is called (as we said) L' h^stell de
ville, or the Guild Hall. It was built or rather finished by Francis the first,
anno 1533. and since beautifyed and repaired by Francis Miron, once Provost des
Merchands, and afterward Privy Counselor to the King. It stands on one
side of the Greve, which is the public place of execution, and is built
quadrangular wise, all of free and polished stone, evenly and orderly laid
together. You ascend by 30 or 40 steps, fair and large, before you come into
the Quadrate; and thence by several stairs into the several rooms and
Chambers of it, which are very neatly contrived and richly furnished. The grand
Chastelet is said to have been built by Julian the Apostata, at such time as he
was Governor of Gaul. It was afterward new built by Philip Augustus: and since
repaired by Lewis XII. in which time of reparation, the Provost of Paris kept
his Courts in the Palace of the Louure. To sight it is not very gracious, what
it may be within I know not. Certain I am, that it looks far more like a
prison (for which use it also serves) then a Town hall or seat of judgment.

In this part of Paris called La ville, or the Town, is the Kings A^cenal or
Magazin of War; it carries not any great face of majesty on the outside,
neither indeed is it necessary; such places are most beautiful without, when
they are most terrible within. It was begun by Henry II. finished by Charles
the ninth, and augmented by Mr. De Rhosny, great Master of the Artillery. It is
said to contain 100 fieldpieces and their carriages; as also Armor sufficient
for 10000 horse, and 50000 foot. In this part also of Paris is that excellent
pile of building called the Place Royal, built partly at the charges, and
partly at the encouragement of Henry IV. It is built in form of a quadrangle,
every side of the square being in length 72 fathomes; the materials Brick of
diverse colors, which makes it very pleasing, though less durable. It is
cloystered round, just after the fashion of the Royal Exchange in London, the
walks being paved under foot. The houses of it are very fair and large, every
one having its Garden and other out-lets. In all they are 36, nine of a side,
and seem to be sufficient capable of a great retinue; the Ambassador for the
estate of Venice, lying in one of them. It is situate in that place, whereas
formerly the solemn Tiltings were performed, a place famous and fatal for the
death of Henry II. who was here slain with the splinters of a Lance, as he was
running with the Earl of Montgomery, a Scotish-man; a sad and heavy accident.

To conclude this discourse of the Ville or Town of Paris, I must a little
wander out of it; because the power and command of the Provost says it must be
so: for his authoriis not confined within the Town. He has seven daughters on
which he may exercise it; Les sept filles de la Provoste de Paris, as the
French call them. These seven daughters are seven Bailiwicks, comprehended
within the Vicountie of Paris, viz. 1 Potssy. 2 St. German en lay. 3 Tornon 4
Torcie en Brie. 5 Corbeil. 6 Montlierie. And 7 Ginness en France. Over these
his jurisdiction is extended, though not as Provost of Paris. Here he
commands and gives judgment as Lieutenant civil to the Duke of Monbazon,
or the supreme Governor of Paris, and the Isle of France, f^r the time being.
Yet this Lieutenant being an Office perpetually annexed to the Provostship, is
the occasion that the Biliwicks above named are called Les sept filles de la
Prevoste.

CHAP. VI.
The University of Paris, and Founders of it. Of the Colleges in general.
Marriage when permitted to the Recters of them. The small maintenance allowed
to Scholars in the Universities of France. The great College at Tholoza. Of
the College of the Sorbonne in particular; That and the House of Parliament,
the chief Bulwarks of the French liberty. Of the Polity and Government of the
University. The Rector and his precedence; The disordered life of the Scholars
there being. An Apology for Oxford and Cambridge. The privileges of the
Scholars, their degrees, etc.

THat part of Paris which lies beyond the furthermost branch of the Seine, is
called the University. It is little inferior to the Town for bigness, and
less superior to it in sweetness or opulency. Whatsoever has been said of the
whole in general, was intended to this part also, as well as the others: all
the learning in it, being not able to free it from those inconveniences,
wherewith it is distressed. It contains in it only six parish Churches: the
paucity whereof is supplied by the multitude of religious houses, which are
within it. These six Churches are called by the names of St. Nicholas du
Chardonuere, 2. St. Estienne, at this time in repairing. 3. St. Severin. 4. St.
Bennoist. 5. St. Andre. And 6. St. Cosome. It has also eight Gates, viz. 1.
Port de Neste, by the water side over against the Louure. 2. Port de Buci. 3.
St. Germain. 4. St. Michell. 5. St. Jacques. 6. St. Marcell. 7. St. Victor, and
8. Port de la Tornelle. It was not accounted as a distinct member of Paris, or
as the third part of it, until the year 1304. at what time the Scholars having
lived formerly dispersed about the City, began to settle themselves together in
this place: and so to become a peculiar Corporation.

The University was founded by Charles the great, anno 791. at the persuasion
of Alcuine an Oxford man, and the Scholar of venerable Bede: who brought with
him three of his con disciples to be the first readers there: their names were
Rabbanus Maurus, John Erigena, surnamed Scolus; and Claudus, who was also
called Clement. To these four does the University of Paris owe its original
and first rudiments: neither was this the first time, that England had been the
Schoolmistress unto France; we lent them not only their first Doctors in
Divinity and Philosophy; but from us also did they receive the mysteries of
their Religion, when they were Heathens. Disciplina in Britannia reperta,
(says Julius Caesar Com. 6.) atque inde in Galliam translata esse existimatur.
An authority not to be questioned by any, but by a Caesar. Learning thus new
born at Paris, continued not long in any full vigor. For almost 300 years it
was fallen into a deadly trance: and not here only, but also through the
greatest part of Europe: anno 1160. or thereabouts Peter Lombard, Bishop of
Paris, the first author of Scholastical Divinity; and by his followers called
the Master of the Sentences; revived it here in this Town by the favor and
encouragement of Lewis 7. In his own house were the Lectures first read: and
after as the numbers of Students did increase, in sundry other parts of the
Town; Colleges they had none till the year 1304. The Scholars till then
sojourning in the houses of the Citizens, accordingly as they could bargain for
their entertainment.

But anno 1304. Joane, Queen of Navarre, wife to Philip the fair, built that
College, which then and ever since has been called the College of Navarre:
and is at this day the fairest and largest of all the rest. Nonibi constituunt
exempla ubi coeperunt, sed in tenuem accepta tramitem, latissime evagandi viam
sibi faciunt: as Velleius. This good example ended not in it self: but incited
diverse others of the French Kings, and people, to the erecting of convenient
places of study. So that in process of time, Paris became enriched with 52
Colleges. So many it still has, though the odd forty are little serviceable
unto learning, for in twelve only of them is there any public reading, either
in Divinity or Philosophy. Those twelve are the Colleges of Harcourte. 2.
Caillvi, or the Petit Sorbonne. 3. Lisseux, or Lexovium. 4 Boncourte. 5.
Montague. 6. Le March. 7. Navarre. 8. De la Cardinal de Moyne. 9. Le Plessis.
10. De Beavais. 11. La Sorbonne. 12. De Clermont, or the College of the
Jesuits: there are also public readings in the houses of the four orders of
Friars Mendicants, viz. the Carmelites, the Augustins, the Franciscans, or
Cordeliers, and the Dominicans. The other Colleges are destinated to other
uses. That of Arras is converted to an house of English fugitives; and there is
another of them hard by the Gate of St. Jacques, employed for the reception of
the Irish. In others of them there is lodging allotted out to Students, who for
their instructions have resort to some of the 12 Colleges above mentioned.

In each of these Colleges there is a Rector: most of whose places yield to
them but small profit. The greatest commodity which accreweth to them is raised
from chamber Rents: their preferments being much of a nature with that of a
Principal of an Hall in Oxford; or that of a Treasurer in an Inn of Chancery
in London. At the first erection of their Colleges, they were all prohibited
marriage, though I see little reason for it. There can hardly come any
inconvenience or damage by it, unto the scholars under their charge, by the
assuming of leases into their own hands: for I think few of them have any to be
so imbezled. Anno 1520. or thereabouts it was permitted unto such of them as
were Doctors in Physic, that they might marry: the Cardinal of Toute Ville,
Legate in France, giving unto them that indulgence. Afterward in the year 1534.
the Doctors of the Laws petitioned the University for the like privilege:
which in fine was granted to them, and confirmed by the Court of Parliament.
The Doctors of Divinity are the only Academicals now barred from it: and that
not as Rectors, but as Priests. These Colleges for their buildings are very
inelegant, and generally little beholding to the curiosity of the artificer. So
confused and so proportioned in respect of our Colleges in England, as Exeter
in Oxford was some 12. years since, in comparison of the rest: or as the two
Temples in London now are, in reference to Lincolns-Inne. The revenues of them
are suitable to the Fabrics, as mean and curtailed. I could not learn of any
College, that has greater allowances then that of Sorbonne: and how small a
trifle that is, we shall tell you presently. But this is not the poverty of the
University of Paris only: all France is troubled with the same want, the same
want of encouragement in learning: neither are the Academies of Germany in any
happier state, which occasioned Erasmus that great light of his times, having
been in England and seen Cambridge, to write thus to one of his Dutch
acquaintance, Vnum Collegium Cantabrigiense (confidenter dicam) superat vel
december nostra. It holds good in the neatness and graces of the buildings, in
which sense he spoke it: but it had been more undeniable had he intended it of
the revenues. Yet I was given to understand, that at Tholoze there was amongst
20 Colleges, one of an especial quality: and so indeed it is, if rightly
considered. There are said to be in it 20 Students places, (or fellowships as
we call them). The Students at their entrance are to lay down in deposito 6000.
Florens, or Livres; paid unto him after six years, by his successor: Vendere
jure potest, emerat ille prius. A pretty market.

The College of Sorbonne, which is indeed the glory of this University, was
built by one Robert de Sorbonne of the chamber of Lewis the 9. of whom he was
very well beloved. It confisteth merely of Doctors of Divinity: neither can any
of another profession, nor any of the same profession not so graduated, be
admitted into it. At this time their number is about 70; their allowance, a
pint of wine, (their pint is but a thought less then our quart) and a certain
quantity of bread daily. Meat they have none allowed them, unless they pay for
it: but the pay is not much: for five Sols (which amounts to six pence
English) a day, they may challenge a competency of flesh or fish, to be served
to them at their chambers. These Doctors have the sole power and authority of
conferring degrees in Divinity: the Rector and other officers of the
University, having nothing to do in it. To them alone belongs the examination
of the students in the faculty, the approbation, and the bestowing of the
honor: and to their Lectures do all such assiduously repair, as are that way
minded. All of them in their turns discharge this office of reading, and that
by sixes in a day: three of them making good the Pulpit in the forenoon; and as
many in the afternoon. These Doctors are accounted, together with the
Parliament of Paris, the principal pillars of the French Liberty: whereof
indeed they are exceeding jealous, as well in matters Ecclesiastical as Civil.
When Gerson Chancellor of Paris (he died Anno 1429.) had published a book in
approbation of the Council of Constance; where it was enacted that the
authority of the Council was greater then that of the Pope: the Sorborne
Doctors declared that also to be their Doctrine. Afterward, when Lewis the 1,
1. to gratify Pope Pius the 2. purposed to abolish the force of the pragmatick
sanction; the Sorbonnists in behalf of the Church Gallican, and the University
of Paris; Magnis obsistebant animis, (says Sleidan in his Commentaries) and a
Papa provocabant ad Concilium. The Council unto which they appealed was that
of Basil; where that sanction was made: so that by this appeal, they verified
their former Thesis; that the Council was above the Pope. And not long since,
anno viz. 1613. casually meeting with a book written by Becanus, entitled,
Controversia Anglicana de potestate regis and papae: they called an assembly,
and condemned it. For though the main of it, was against the power and
supremacy of the Kings of England: yet did it reflect also on the authority of
the Pope over other Christian Kings by the bie, which occasioned the Sentence.
So jealous are they of the least circumstances, in which the immunity of their
nation may be endangered.

As for the Government of the University, it has for its chief directour, a
Rector: with a Chancellor, four Procurators or Proctors, and as many others,
whom they call Les Intrantes, to assist him; besides the Regents. Of these the
Regents are such Masters of the Arts, who are by the consent of the rest,
selected to read the public Lectures of Logic and Philosophy. Their name they
derive a regendo, eo quod in artibus rexerint. These are divided into four
Nations, viz. 1 The Norman. 2 The Picarde. 3. The German. And 4 The French.
Under the two first are comprehended the students of those several Provinces:
under the third, the Students of all foreign nations, which repair hither for
the attainment of knowledge. It was heretofore called natio Anglica: but the
English being thought unworthy of the honor, because of their separation from
the Church of Rome; the name and credit of it was given to the Germans. That of
the French is again subdivided into two parts: that which is immediately within
the Diocese of Paris; and that which contains the rest of Gallia. These four
Nations (for notwithstanding the subdivision above mentioned, the French is
reckoned but as one) choose yearly four Proctors or Procurators; so called,
quia negotia nationis suae procurant. They choose four other officers, whom
they call les Intrantes: in whose power there remains the Delegated authority
of their several Nations. And here it is to be observed, that in the French
Nation, the Procurator, and Intrant, is one year of the Diocese of Paris; and
the following year of the rest of France: the reason why that Nation is
subdivided. These four Intrantes thus named, have amongst them the election of
the Rector: who is their supreme Magistrate.

The present Rector is named Mr. Tarrienus, of the College of Harcourte: a
Master of the Arts, for a Doctor is not capable of the Office. The honor
lasts only three months; which time expired, the Intrantes proceed to a new
election: though oftentimes it happens that the same man has the lease renewed.
Within the confines of the University, he takes place next after the Princes
of the blood: and at the public exercises of learning before the Cardinals,
otherwise he gives them the precedence. But to Bishops or Archbishops he will
not grant it upon any occasion. It was not two months before my being there,
that there happened a shrewd controversy about it. For their King had then
summoned an assembly of 25. Bishops of the Provinces adjoining, to consult
about some Church affairs; and they had chosen the College of Sorbonne to be
their Senate House: when the first day of their sitting came, a Doctor of the
house being appointed to preach before them: began his oration with
Reverendissime Rector, and vos amplissimi praesules. Here the Archbishop of
Roven, a man of an high spirit, interrupted him and commanded him to invert his
style. He obeyed, and presently the Rector rises up with Impono tibi
silentium: which is an injunction within the compass of his power. Upon this
the Preacher being tongue-tied, the controversy grew hot between the Bishops
and the Rector, both parties very eagerly pleading their own priority. All the
morning being almost spent in this altercation, a Cardinal wiser then the rest,
desired that the question might for that time be laid aside: and that the
Rector would be pleased to permit the Doctor to deliver his Sermon, beginning
it without any praeludium at all. To which request the Rector yielded, and so
the contention at that time was ended.

But salus academiae non vertitur in istis. It were more for the honor and
profit of the University, if the Rector would leave off to be so mindful of
his place, and look a little to his office. For certainly never the eye and
utmost diligence of a Magistrate was wanting more, and yet more necessary, then
in this place. Penelopes suitors never behaved themselves so insolently in the
house of Ulysses, as the Academicks here do in the houses and streets of Paris.
Nos numeri sumus, and fruges consumere nati,
Sponsi Penelopes, nebolones Alcinoique --
not so becoming the mouth of any as of those. When you hear of their
behavior, you would think you were in Turkey: and that these men were the
Janissaries. For an Angel given amongst them to drink, they will arrest whom you
shall appoint them: double the money, and they shall break open his house, and
ravish him into the Jail. I have not heard that they can be hired to a murder:
though nothing be more common amongst them then killing, except it be stealing.
Witness those many carcasses which are found dead in the morning, whom a desire
to secure themselves and make resistance to their pillages; has only made
earth again. Nay, which is most horrible, they have regulated their villainous
practices into a Commonwealth: and have their captains and other officers, who
command them in their night-walks; and dispose of their purchases. To be a
Gypsy and a Scholar of Paris, are almost Synonyma. One of their Captains had
in one week (for no lon^er would the gallows let him enjoy his honor) stolen
no fewer then 80 cloaks. Number fuit Autolyci tam piceata manus? For these thefts,
being apprehended, he was adjudged to the wheel: but because the Judges were
informed that during the time of his reign, he had kept the hands of himself
and his company unpolluted with blood; he had the favor to be hanged. In a
word, this ungoverned rabble, (whom to call scholars were to profane that title)
omit no outrages or turbulent misdemeanors, which possibly can be, or were ever
known to be committed in place; which consists merely of privilege, and
nothing of statute.

I would heartily wish that those who are so ill conceited of their own two
Universities of Oxford and Cambridge, and accuse them of dissoluteness in their
behavior; would either spend some time in the Schools beyond seas: or enquire
what news abroad, of those which have seen them. Then would they doubtless see
their own errors, and correct them. Then would they admire the regularity and
civility of those places, which before they condemned of debauchednesse. Then
would they esteem those places as the seminary of modesty and virtue, which
they now account as the nurseries only of an impudent rudeness. Such an opinion
I am sure some of the Aristarchi of these days, have lodged in their breasts,
concerning the misgovernment of our Athens. Perhaps a kinsman of theirs has
played the unthrist, equally of his time and money: hence their malice to it,
and their invectives against it. Thus of old,

-- -- Pallas exurere classem
Argivam, atque ipsos potuit submergere ponto
Unius ob culpam and furias Aiacis Oilei.
An injustice more unpardonable, then the greatest sin of the Universities. But
I wrong a good cause with an unnecessary patronage. Yet such is the peccant
humor of some, that they know not how to expiate the follies of one but with
the calumny and dispraise of all. An unmanly weakness, and yet many possessed
with it. I know it unpossible, that in a place of youth and liberty some should
not give occasion of offense. The Ark wherein there were eight persons only,
was not without one Cham, and of the twelve which Christ had chosen, one was a
Devil. It were then above a miracle, if amongst so full a cohort of young
soldiers, none should forsake the Ensign of his General: he notwithstanding
that should give the imputation of cowardice to the whole army; cannot but be
accounted malicious or peevish. But let all such as have evil will at Sion,
live unregarded, and die unremembred, for want of some Scholar to write their
Epitaph. Certainly a man not wedded to envy, and a spiteful vexation of
spirit, upon a due examination of the civility of our Lycaea, and a comparison
of them with those abroad, cannot but say, and that justly, Non habent
Academiae Anglicanae pares, nisi seipsas.

The principal cause of the rudeness and disorders in Paris have been chiefly
occasioned by the great privileges wherewith the Kings of France intended the
furtherance and security of learning. Having thus let them get the bridle in
their own hands, no marvel if they grow sick with an uncontrolled
licenciousnesse. Of these privileges some are, that no Scholars goods can be
seized upon, for the payment of his debts: that none of them should be liable
to any taxes or impositions (a royal immunity to such as are acquainted with
France:) that they might carry and recarry their utensils without the least
molestation: that they should have the Provost of Paris to be the keeper and
defender of their liberties, who is therefore styled, Le conservateur des
privileges royaux de l' Universite de Paris, etc.

One greater privilege they have yet then all these; which is their soon
taking of degrees. Two years sees them Novices in the Arts, and Masters of
them. So that enjoying by their degrees an absolute freedom, before the
follies and violences of youth are broke in them: they become so unruly and
insolent, as I have told you. These degrees are conferred on them by the
Chancellor, who seldom examineth further of them then his sees. Those paid,
he presents them to the Rector, and gives them their Letters Patents sealed
with the University Seal: which is the main part of the creation. He also
sets the Seal to the Authentical Letters (for so they term them) of such
whom the Sorbonnists have passed for Doctors. The present Chancellor is named
Petrus de Pierre vive, Doctor of Divinity, and Canon of the Church of Nostre
Dame: (as also are all they which enjoy that office). He is chosen by the
Bishop of Paris, and takes place of any under that dignity. But of this
ill-managed University, enough, if not too much.

CHAP. VII.
The City of Paris seated in the place of old Lutetia. The Bridges which join
it to the Town and University. King Henry's Statua. Alexander's injurious
policy. The Church and revenues of Nostre dame. The Holy Water there. The
original making and virtue of it. The Lamp before the Altar. The
heathenishnesse of both customs. Paris best seen from the top of this Church:
the great Bell there never rung but in time of Thunder: the baptizing of Bells,
the grand Hospital and decency of it. The place Daulphin. The holy Chapel and
Relics there. What the Ancients thought of Relics. The Exchange. The little
Chastelet. A transition to the Parliament.

THE Isle of Paris, commonly called L'Isle du Palais, seated between the
University and the Town: is that part of the whole, which is called La Cite,
the City, the epitome and abstract of all France. It is the sweetest and best
ordered part of all Paris; and certainly if Paris may be thought to be the eye
of the Realm; this Island may be equally judged to be the apple of that eye. It
is by much the lesser part, and by as much the richer, by as much the decenter:
and affords more variety of objects, then both the other. It contains an
equal number of Parish Churches, with the Town, and double the number of the
University. For it has in it 13 Churches parochial, viz. la Magdalene. 2 St.
Geniveue des ardents. 3 St. Christopher. 4 St. Pierre aux Boeufs. 5 St. Marine.
6 St. Lander. 7 St. Symphorian. 8 St. Denis de la charity. 9 St. Bartellemie.
10 St. Pier^^ des Assis. 11 St. Croix. 12 St. Marciall. 13 St. German de vieux.
Seated it is in the middle of the Seine, and in that place where stood the old
Lutetia: Labienus cum quatuor legionibus (says Jul. Caesar 70 Comment.)
Lutetiam proficiscitur: id est opidum Parisiorum positum in medio fluminis
Sequanae. It is joined to the main land, and the other parts of this French
Metropolis, by six Bridges, two of wood, and four of stone: the stone Bridges,
are 1 Le petit pont, a Bridge which certainly deserves that name. 2 Le pont de
Nostre dame, which is all covered with two goodly ranks of houses: and those
adorned with portly and antic imagery. 3 Le pont St. Michell, so called,
because it leads toward the Gate of St. Michell; has also on each side a
beautiful row of houses: all of the same fashion, so exactly, that but by
their several doors, you would scarce think them to be several houses. they
are all new, as being built in the reign of this present King, whose arms is
engraven over every door of them.

The fourth and largest Bridge, is that which stands at the end of the Isle
next the Louure; and covers the waters now united again into one stream. It
was begun to be built by Katharine of Medices, the Queen Mother, anno 1578. her
Son King Henry the 3. laying the first stone of it. The finishing of it was
reserved unto Henry 4. who as soon as he had settled his affairs in this Town,
presently set the workmen about it. In the end of it where it joyneth to the
Town, there is a water-house which by artificial engines forces up waters
from a fresh spring, rising from under the river: done at the charge of this
King also. In the midst of it is the Statua of the said Henry 4. all in brass,
mounted on his barbed Steed, of the same mettle. They are both of them very
unproportionable unto those which they represent: and would show them big
enough, were they placed on the top of Nostre dame Church. What minded King
Lewis to make his father of so gigantive a stature, I cannot tell. Alexander at
his return from his Indian expedition, scattered Armours, Swords, and
Horsebits, far bigger then were serviceable: to make future ages admire his
greatness. Yet some have hence collected, that the acts he performed are not
so great as they are reported: because he strived to make them seem greater
then they were. It may also chance to happen, that men in the times to come,
comparing the achievements of this King, with his brazen portraiture: may
think that the historians have as much belied his valor as the statuary has
his person.

A ponte ad pontifices. From the Bridge proceed we to the Church, the principal
Church of Paris: being that Nostre dame. A Church very uncertain of its first
founder, though some report him to be St. Savinian: of whom I can meet with no
more then his name. But who ever laid the first foundation, it much matters
not: all the glory of the work being now cast on Philip Augustus; who pitying
the ruins of it, began to build it anno 1196. It is a very fair and awful
building, adorned with a very beautiful front, and two towers of especial
height. It is in length 174 paces, and 60 in breadth: and is said to be as many
paces high: and that the two towers are 70 yards higher then the rest of the
Church. At your first entrance on the right hand, is the effigies of St.
Christopher, with our Savior on his shoulders. A man, the Legend makes him as
well as the Mason, of a gyantlike stature; though of the two, the Mason's
workmanship is the more admirable: his being all cut out of one main stone;
that of the Legendary being patched up of many fabulous and ridiculous shreds:
it has in it four ranks of pillars 30 in rank; and 45 little Chapels, or
Masseclosets, built between the outermost range of pillars, and the walls. This
is the seat of the Archbishop of Paris, for such now he is. It was a Bishopric
only till the year 1622. When Pope Gregory the 15. at the request of King
Lewis, raised it to a Metropolitanship. But by this addition of honor, I think
the present Incumbent has got nothing, either in precedence or profit. He had
before a necessary voice in the Court of Parliament, and took place immediately
next after the Presidents, he does no more now. Before he had the priority of
all the Bishops, and now he is but the last of all the Archbishops: a
preferment rather intellectual then real: and perhaps his successors may
account it a punishment; for besides that the dignity is too unweildy for the
revenue, which is but 6000 Livres or 600 l. English yearly: like enough it is,
that some may come into that Sea of Caesar's mind, who being in a small
village of the Alps, thus delivered his ambition to his followers, Mallem esse
hic primus, quam Romae secundus. The present possessor of this Chair, is
Francis de Gondi, by birth a Florentine: one, whom I have heard much famed for
a Statesman, but little for a Scholar. But had he nothing in him, this alone
were sufficient to make him famous to posterity, that he was the first
Archbishop, and the last Bishop of the City of Paris. There is moreover in this
Church a Dean, 7 Dignities, and 50 Canons. The Deans place is valued at 4000
Livres, the Dignities at 3000, and the Canons at 2000; no great intrados: and
yet unproportionable to the Archbishopric.

At Dieppe (as I have said) I observed the first Idolatry of the Papists: here
I noted their first superstitions; which were the needless use of Holy water,
and the burning of Lamps before the Altar. The first is said to have been the
invention of Pope Alexander the 7. Bishop of Rome in their account after Peter.
I dare not give so much credit unto Platina, as to believe it of this
antiquity; much less unto Bellarmine, who deriveth it from the Apostles
themselves. In this paradox, he has enemies enough at home, his own Doctors
being all for Alexander, yet they also are not in the right. The principal
foundation of their opinion, is an Epistle decretory of this Alexander: which
in it self carries its own confuta^ion. The citations of Scripture, on which
this Superstition is thought to be grounded, are all taken out of the vulgar
Latin translation attributed to St. Hierome, whereas neither was there in the
time of Alexander any public Translation of the Bible into Latin: neither was
St. Jerome born within 300 years after him. Holy Water then is not of such a
standing in the Church, as the Papists would persuade us: and as yet I have not
met with any, that can justly inform me at what time the Church received it;
many corruptions they have among them whereof neither they nor we can tell the
beginnings.

It consists of two ingredients, salt and water: each of them severally
consecrated, or rather exorcised; for so the words go: Exorcizo te creatura
salis. And afterward, Exorcizo te creatura aquae etc. This done, the salt is
sprinkled into the water in form of a cross, the Priest in the mean time
saying, Commixtiosalis and aquae pariter fiat, in nomine patris, etc. Being
made, it is put into a cistern standing at the entrance of their Church: the
people at their coming in, sometimes dipping their fingers into it, and making
with it the sign of the cross on their foreheads: and sometimes being
sprinkled with it by one of the Priests, who in course bestow that blessing
upon them. Pope Alexander who is said to be the father of it, gave it the gift
of purifying and sanctifying all which it washed: Ut cuncti illa aspersi
purificentur, and sanctificentur, says his Decretall. The Roman Rituall
published and confirmed by Paulus 5. makes it very sovereign, ad abigendos
daemones, and spiritus immundos. Bellarmine maintains it a principal remedy,
ad remissionem peccatorum venialium, and says; that this was the perpetual
doctrine of the Church. Augustine Steuchus in his Commentaries on Numbers,
leaves out venialia, and pronounces it to be necessary, ut ad ejus aspersum
delicta nostra deleantur, so omnipotent is this Holy Water, that the blood of
our Savior Christ may be in a manner judged unnecessary; but it is not only
used in the Churches, the Rituale Romanum, of which I spoke but now, allows
any of the faithful to carry it away with them in their vessels, ad
aspergendos aegros, domos, agros, vineas and alia: and ad habendam eam in
cabiculis suis. To which purposes you cannot but think this water to be
exceeding serviceable.

The second superstition which this Church showed me was the continual burning
of a Lamp before the Altar, a ceremony brought into the Churches (as it is
likely) by Pope Innocent 3. anno 1215. at what time he ordained that there
should a pix be bought to cover the bread, and that it should be therein
reserved over the Altar. This honor one of late times has communicated also
unto the virgin Mary: whose image in this Church, has a lanthorn ex diametro
before it: and in that a candle perpetually burning. The name of the Donour, I
could not learn, only I met on the skreen close by the Ladies image this
inscription, Une ave Maria, et un pater noster, pour l'in qui cela done; which
was intended on him that bestowed the Lanthorn. No question but Pope Innocent,
when he ordered this Vestall fi^e to be kept amongst the Christians, thought he
had done God good service in reviving his old Commandment given to Moses in
Exodus 27. 20, 21 if so, the world cannot clear him of Judaism; therefore the
best way were to say he learned it of the Gentiles: For we read that the
Athenians had Lychnum inextincti luminis, before the Statu^ of their Pallas:
that the Persians also had Ignem pervigilem in their Temples: and so also had
the Medians and Assyrians. To omit the everlasting fire of Vesta and come near
home, we meet with it also here in Britain; In Britannia quoque (says a good
Philosopher) Minervae numen colitur, in cujus temploperpetui ignes, etc.
Afterward the flattery of the Court applying divine honors unto their Kings,
this custom of having fire continually burning before them, began to grow in
fashion among the Romans. Herodian amongst other the ensigns of imperial
majesty, is sure not to omit this, and therefore tells us, that
notwithstanding Commodus was fallen out with his sister Lucilla, he permits
her her ancient seat in the Theater, (...), and that fire should still be
carried before her. The present Romans succeed the former, as in their
possessions, so in their follies. For calling the Sacrament their Lord God, and
the Virgin their Lady, they thought they should rob them of half their honor,
should they not have their Lamps and fires also burning before them.

As are their lamps, so is their holy water, merely Heathenish Siquidem in
omnibus sacris (as we read in the fourth Book Genialium dierum) sac^rdos cum
diis immolat, and rem divinam facit, corporis ablutione purgatur. The author
gives a reason for it, and I would have no Papist, no not Bellarmine himself
to give a better; Aquae enim aspersione labem to^i and castimoniam praestari
putant. Neither did the Priest only use it himself, but he sprinkled also the
people with it;

Spargere rore levi, and ramo foelicis olivae,
Lustravitque viros: --
As Virgil in the Aeneid's.
In which place two things are to be noted: First, Ramus olivae, now called
Aspersorium, or the sprinkling rod, wherewith the water is sprinkled on the
bystanders. And secondly, the term lustrare, merely the name of Aqua
lustralis, by which they call it. That the laics also of the Gentiles, were
cleansed of sin by this water, is evident by that of Homer, where he makes
Orestes having killed his mother, and thereupon grown mad, at once restored to
his wits and quiet thoughts, by washing in the water. Perhaps Pilate might
allude to this custom, when having condemned our Savior, he washed his hands
in the midst of the Congregation. Hereunto also Ovid:

O faciles nimium, qui tristia crimina caedis
Fluminea tolli posse putatis aqua. Too facile souls, which think such heinous
matters
Can be aboliz'd by the river waters.


Indeed, in the word fluminea, the Poet was somewhat out, the waters only of
the Sea serving for the expiation of any crime; the reason was, Cum propter vim
igneam magnopere purgationibus consentanea putaretur; and for this cause
questionless, do the Popish Priests use salt in the consecration of their
holy water; that it might as nigh as was possible, resemble the waters of the
Sea in saltness. So willing are they in all circumstances to act the Heathens.

But I have kept you too long within the Church, it is now time to go up to the
top, and survey the outworks of it. It has, as we have already said, at the
front two Towers of admirable beauty; they are both of an equal height, and are
each of them 377 steps in the ascent. From hence we could clearly see the whole
circuit of Paris, and each several street of it; such as we have already
described, of an orbicular form and neatly compacted. From hence could we see
the whole valley round about it, such as I have also delineated already, though
not in such lively colors as it meriteth.

In one of these Towers there is a ring of Bells, in the other two only, but
these for worth are equal to all the rest; the bigger of the two is said to be
greater then the Bell of Roven so much talked of; as being 8 yards and a span
in compass, and two yards and a half in depth; the bowl also of the clapper
being one yard and a quarter round: of a great weight it needs must be, and
therefore Multorum manibus grande levatur onus,
there are no less then four main ropes, besides their several tale-ropes, to
ring it. By reason of this trouble it is never rung, but in time of thunders,
and those no mean ones neither, lesser bells will serve to disperse the lesser
tempests; this is used only in the horrider claps, and such as threaten a
dissolution of nature. But how well, as well this as the smaller bells discharge
that office, experience would tell us were we void of reason; yet so much do
the people affiance themselves to this conceit of the power of them, that they
suppose it inherent to them continually, after the Bishop has baptized them;
which is done in this manner. The bell being so hanged that it may be washed
within and without, in comes the Bishop in his Episcopal robes, attended by
one of his Deacons, and sitting by the Bell in his chair says with a loud
voice the 50, 53, 56, 66, 69, 85, and 12 Psalms, or some of them: then does he
exorcize severally the salt and the water, and having conjured these
ingredients into an Holy Water, he washes with it the Bell, both on the inside
and the outside, wiping it dry with a linen cloth, he reads the 145, 146,
147, 148, 149, and 150 Psalms; he draws a cross on it with his right thumb
dipped in hallowed oil, (Chrisme they call it) and then prays over it. His
prayer finished, he wipeth out that cross, and having said over the 48 Psalm,
he draws on it with the same oil, seven other crosses, saying, Sanctificetur
and consecretur Domine campana ista, in nomine, etc. After another prayer, the
Bishop takes the Censour, and putting into it Myrthe and Frankincense, sets
it on fire, and puts it under the Bell that it may receive all the fume of
it. This done, the 76 Psalm read and some other prayers repeated, the Bell has
received his whole and entire Biptisme, and these virtues following, viz. Ut
per illius tactum procul pellantur omnes insidiae inimici, fragor grandium,
procella turbinum, impetus tempestatum, etc. For so one of the prayers
reckons them prescribed in the Roman Pontifical, authorized by Clement VIII.
A strange piece of Religion that a Bell should be Baptized; and so much the
stranger, in that these inanimate bodies can be received into the Church, by no
other ministry then that of the Bishop; the true Sacrament being permitted to
every hedge Priest.

Not far from the West gate of this Church of Nostre dame, is the Hostel
dieu, or Le grand Hospital de Paris; first founded by St. Lewis, anno 1258. it
has been since beautifyed and enlarged, anno 1535. by Mr. Anthony Pratt
Chancellor of France, who augmented the number of Hospitalers; and gave fair
revenues for the maintaining of Surgeons, Apothecaries, and Religious men
among them. Since that time, the Provosts and Eschevins of Paris have been
especial Benefactors unto it. At the first entrance into it, you come into
their Chapel, small, but handsome and well furnished; after, you pass into a
long gallery, having four ranks of beds, two close to the two walls, and two in
the middle. The beds are all suitable one to the other; their Valence, Curtains
and Rugs being all yellow. At the right hand of it, was a gallery more then
double the length of this first, so also furnished. At the further end of this
a door opened into another Chamber, dedicated only to sick women: and within
them another room, wherein women with child are lightened of their burden, and
their children kept till seven years of age, at the charge of the Hospital. At
the middle of the first gallery toward the left hand, were four other ranks of
beds, little differing from the rest, but that their furniture was blew; and in
them there was no place for any but such as were somewhat wounded, and belonged
properly to the Surgeon. There are numbered in the whole Hospital no fewer
then 700 beds (besides those of the attendants, Priests, Apothecaries, etc) and
in every bed two persons. One would imagine that in such a variety of wounds
and diseases, a walk into it, and a view of it, might savor more of
curiosity, then discretion, but indeed it is nothing less; for besides that no
person of an infectious disease is admitted into it: which makes much for the
safety of such as view it; all things are there kept so cleanly, neatly and
orderly, that it is sweeter walking there then in the best street of Paris,
none excepted.

Next unto these succeeds La Sancte Chappelle, situate in the middle of the
Palais; a Chapel famous for its form, but more for its Relics. It was
founded by Lewis IX. vulgarly called St. Lewis, 1248. and is divided into two
parts, the upper and the lower, the lower serving for the keeping of the
Relics; and the upper for celebrating the Mass. It is a comely spruce
Edifice without, but far more curious within; the glass of it for the
excellency of painting, and the Organs for the richness and elaborate
workmanship of the case, not giving way to any in Europe. I could not learn the
number of Chanoins, which are maintained in it, though I heard they were places
of 300 Crowns revenue. As for their Treasurer, Le Threasururier, so they call
their Governor; He has granted him by especall privilege license to wear all
the Episcopal habits, except the Crosier-staffe; and to bear himself as a
Bishop within the liberties of his Chapel. In the top of the upper Chapel
(it is built almost in form of a Synagogue) there hangs the true proportion
(as they say) of the Crown of thorns: but of this more when we have gone over
the Relics. I was there diverse times to have seen them, but (it seems) they
were not vible to an Huganots eyes; though me thinks, they might have
considered, that my money was Catholic. They are kept, as I said, in the
lower Chapel, and are thus marshalled in a Table, hanging in the upper; know
then that you may believe that they can show you the crown of thorns, the
blood which ran from our Saviors breast, his swaddling cloutes, a great part of
the Cross (they also of Nostre dame have some of it) the chain by which the
Jews bound him, no small piece of the stone of the Sepulcher, Sauctam toelam
tabulae insertam, which I know not how to English. Some of the Virgins milk,
(for I would not have those of St. Denis think, that the Virgin gave no other
milk, but to them) the head of the Lance which pierced our Savior, the purple
Robe, the Sponge, a piece of his Shroud, the napkin wherewith he was girted
when he washed his Disciples feet, the rod of Moses, the heads of St. Blase,
St. Clement, and St. Simeon, and part of the head of John Baptist. Immediately
under this recital of these Relics (and venerable ones I durst say they
were, could I be persuaded there were no imposture in them) there are set down
a Prayer and an Anthem, both in the same Table; as follows.

Oration.
Quaesumus Omnipotens Deus, ut qui sacra sanctissimae redemptionis nostrae
insignia, temporaliter veneramur: per haec indesinenter muniti, aeternitatis
gloriam consequamur, per dominum nostrum, etc.

De sacrosanctis reliquiis
Antiphona.
Christo plebs dedita, Tot Christi donis praedita
Jocunder is hodie, Tota sis devota,
Erumpens in jubilum, Depone mentis nubilum;
Tempus est laetitiae, Cura sit summota,
Ecce crux et Lancea, ferrum, corona spinea,
Arma regis gloriae, Tibi offerantur,
Omnes terrae populi, laudent actorem seculi,
Per quem tantis gratiae signis gloriantur. Amen.
Pretty Divinity, if one had time to examine it. These Relics as the Table
informs us, were given unto St. Lewis, ^n^. 1247. by Baldwin the II. the last
King of the Lat^nes in Constantinople; to which place the Christians of
Palest^ne had brought them, during the times that those parts were harryed by
the Turks and Sara^^ns. Certainly, were they the same, which they are given out
to be, I see no harm in it, if we should honor them. The very reverence due
unto antiquity and a silver head, could not but extract some acknowledgment of
respect, even from an Heathen. It was therefore commendably done by Pope Leo,
having received a parcel of the Cross from the Bishop of Jerusalem, that he
entertained it with respect, Particulam dominicae crucis (says he in his 72.
Epistle) cum Eulogiis dilectionis tuae venera^tur accepi. To adore and worship
that or any other Relick whatsoever, with Prayers and Anthems, as the Papists
you see do; never came within the minds of the Ancients, and therefore St.
Ambrose calls it, Gentilis error, and vanitas impiorum. This also was St.
Hieroms Religion, as himself testifies in his Epistle to Riparius, Nos (says
he) non dico Martyrum reliquias, sed ne Solemn quidem and Lunam, non Angelos,
etc. colimus and odoramus. Thus were those two fathers minded toward such
Relics, as were known to be no others then what they seemed: Before too many
centuries of years had consumed the true ones; and the impostures of the
Priests had brought in false, had they lived in our times, and seen the
supposed remnants of the Saints, not honored only, but adored and worshipped
by their blind and infatuated people; what would they have said? or rather,
what would they not have said? Questionless the least they could do, were to
take up the complaint of Vigilantins (the Papists reckon him for an Heretic)
saying, Quid necesse est tanto honor non solum honorare, sed etiam adorare,
illud nescio quid, quod in vasculo transferendo colis?

Presently without the Chapel is the Burse, La Gallerie des Merchands; a rank
of shops, in show, but not in substance, like to those in the Exchange in
London It reaches from the Chapel unto the great hall of Parliament; and is
the common through-fare between them. On the bottom of the stairs and round
about the several houses, consecrated to the execution of Justice, are sundry
shops of the same nature, meanly furnished if compared with ours; yet I
persuade my self the richest of this kind in Paris. I should now go and take a
view of the Parliament house; but I will step a little out of the way to see
the Place Daulphin, and the little Chastelet; this last serves now only as the
Jail or Common-prison belonging to the Court of the Provost of Merchants, and
it deserves no other employment. It is seated at the end of the Bridge called
Petit Pont, and was built by Hugh Aubriot once Provost of this Town, to
repress the fury and insolences of the Scholars, whose rudeness and
misdemeanors can no ways be better bridled. Omnes eos, qui nomen ipsum
Academiae, vel serio, vel joco nominossent, haeereticos pronunciavit, says
Platina of Pope Paul the II. I dare say it of this wilderness, that whosoever
will account it as an Academy, is an Heretic to Learning and Civility. The
Place Daulphin, is a beautiful heap of building, situate nigh unto the new
Bridge. It was built at the encouragement of Henry IV. and entitled according
to the title of his Son. The houses are all of brick, high built, uniforme, and
indeed such as deserve and would exact a longer description, were not the
Parliament now ready to sit, and my self sommoned to make my appearance.

CHAP. VIII.
The Parliament of France when begun; of whom it consisted. The dignity and
esteem of it abroad, made sedentarie at Paris, appropriated to the long robe.
The Palais by whom built, and converted to seats of Justice. The seven Chambers
of Parliament. The great Chamber. The number and dignity of the Presidents. The
Duke of Biron afraid of them. The Kings seat in it. The sitting of the Grand
Signeur in the Divano. The authority of this Court in causes of all kinds; and
over the affairs of the King. This Court the main pillar of the Liberty of
France. La Tournelle, and the Judges of it. The five Chambers of Enquestes
severally instituted, and by whom. In what cause it is decisive. The form of
admitting Advocates into the Courts of Parliament. The Chancellor of France
and his Authority. The two Courts of Requests, and Masters of them. The vain
envy of the English Clergy against the Lawyers.

THe Court of Parliament was at the first instituted by Charles Martell
Grandfather to Charlemaine, at such time as he was Maire of the Palace, unto
the less and rechlesse Kings of France. In the beginnings of the French
Empire, their Kings did justice to their people in person: afterward banishing
themselves from all the affairs of State, that burden was cast upon the
shoulders of their Majors; an office much of a nature with the P^aefecti
praetorio in the Roman Empire. When this office was bestowed upon the said
Charles Martell, he partly weary of the trouble, partly intent about a
business of an higher nature, which was, the estating the Crown in his own
posterity; but principally to endeer himself to the common people, ordained
this Court of Parliament, anno 720. It consisted in the beginning of 12 Peers,
the Prelates and noble men of the best fashion, together with some of the
principallest of the Kings household. Other Courts have been called the
Parliaments with an addition of place, as of Paris, at Roven, etc. this only
(...), the Parliament. It handled as well causes of estate, as those of private
persons. For hither did the Ambassadors of neighbor Princes repair, to have
their audience and dispatch; and hither were the Articles agreed on, in the
national Synods of France sent to be confirmed and verified; here did the
subjects tender in their homages, and Oaths of fidelity to the King; and here
were the appeals heard of all such as had complained against the Comites, at
that time the Governors and Judges in their several Counties. Being furnished
thus with the prime and choycest Nobles of the Land, it grew into great
estimation abroad in the world; insomuch that the Kings of Sicilie, Cyprus,
Scotland, Bohemia, Portugal, and Navarre, have thought it no disparagement
unto them to sit in it; and which is more, when Frederick II. had spent so much
time in quarrels with Pope Innocent IV. he submitted himself and the rightnesse
of his cause to be examined by this Noble Court of Parliament. At the first
institution of this Court, it had no settled place of residence, being sometimes
kept at Tholoza, sometimes at Aix la Chappelle, sometimes in other places,
according as the Kings pleasure, and ease of the people did require. During its
time of peregrination, it was called Ambulatoire, following for the most part
the Kings Court, as the lower sphaeres do the motion of the primum mobile; but
Philip le bell (he began his reign anno 1286) being to take a journey into
Flanders, and to stay there a long space of time, for the settling of his
affairs in that Country, took order that this Court of Parliament should stay
behind at Paris; where ever since it has continued.

Now began it to be called Sedentaire or settled, and also peua peu, by little
and little to lose much of its luster. For the chief Princes and Nobles of the
Kings retinue, not able to live out of the air of the Court, withdrew
themselves from the troubles of it; by which means at last it came to be
appropriated to them of the Long robe, as they term them, both Bishops and
Lawyers. In the year 1463. the Prelates also were removed by the command of
Lewis XI. an utter enemy to the great ones of his Kingdom, only the Bishop of
Paris, and Abbot of St. Denis, being permitted their place in it: since which
time the Professors of the civil law have had all the sway in it, Et cedunt
arma togae, as Tully.

The place in which this Sedentarie Court of Parliament is now kept, is called
the Palace, being built by Philip le bell, and intended to be his mansion or
dwelling house. He began it in the first year of his reign, anno 1286. and
afterward assigned a part of it to his Judges of the Parliament: it being not
totally and absolutely quitted unto them till the days of King Lewis XII. In
this the French Subjects are beholding to the English; by whose good example
they got the ease of a Sedentarie Court: our Law courts also removing with the
King, till the year 1224. when by a Statute in the Magna Charta it was
appointed to be fixed; and a part of the Kings Palace in Westminster allotted
for that purpose.

Within the verge of this Palais are contained the seven Chambers of the
Parliament; that called La grande Chamber; five Chambers of Inquisition, Des
Enquestes; and one other called La Tournelle. There are moreover the Chambers,
des aides, des accomptes, de l' edict, des monnoyes, and one called La Chamber
Royal; of all which we shall have occasion to speak in their proper places:
these not concerning the common government of the people, but only of the Kings
revenues. Of these seven Chambers of Parliament, La grande Chamber is most
famous; and at the building of this house by Philip le bell, was intended for
the Kings bed. It is no such beautiful piece as the French make it, that of
Roven being far beyond it; although indeed it much excel the fairest room of
Justice in all Westminster; so that it stands in a middle rank between them,
and almost in the same proportions as Virgil betwixt Homer and Ovid. Quantum
Virgilius magno concessit Homero;
Tantum ego Virgilio Naso poeta meo.


It consists of seven Presidents, 22 Counselors, the Kings Attorney; and as
many Advocates and Proctours as the Court will please to give admission to. The
Advocates have no settled studies within the Palais, but at the Bar; but the
Procureurs or Attorneys have their several pews in the great Hall, which is
without this Grande Chamber, in such manner as I have before described at
Roven: a large building it is, fair and high roofed: not long since ruined by a
casualty of fire, and not yet fully finished. The names of the Presidents are
Mr. Verdun, the first President, or by way of excellency, Le President, the
second man of the Long robe in France. 2. Mr. Sequer, lately dead, and likely
to have his son succeed him, as well in his Office, as in his Lands. 3. Mr.
Leiger. 4. Mr. Dosambe. 5. Mr. Sevin. 6. Mr. Baillure. And 7. Mr. Meisme. None
of these, neither Presidents nor Counselors, can go out of Paris, when the
Laws are open, without leave of the Court: it was ordained so by Lewis XII.
anno 1499. and that with good judgment; Sentences being given with greater
awe, and businesses managed with greater majesty when the Bench is full: and it
seems indeed that they carry with them great terror; for the Duke of Biron, a
man of as uncontrouled spirit, as any in France, being called to answer for
himself in this Court, protested, that those scarlet roabs did more amaze him,
then all the red cassocks of Spain.

At the left hand of this Grande Chamber, or Golden Chamber as they call it; is
a Throne or seat Royal, reserved for the King, when he shall please to come
and see the administration of Justice amongst his people; at common times it is
naked and plain, but when the King is expected, it is clothed with blew-purple
Velvet, femied with flowers de lys; on each side of it are two forms or
benches, where the Peers of both habits, both Ecclesiastical and Secular, use
to sit and accompany the King. But this is little to the ease or benefit of the
Subject, and as little availeable to try the integrity of the Judges; his
presence being always foreknown, and so accordingly they prepared. Far better
then is it, in the Grande Signeur, where the Divano, or Council of the Turkish
affairs holden by the Bassas, is hard by his bedchamber which looks into it:
the window which gives him this entervenue is perpetually hidden with a
curtain on the side of the partition, which is toward the Divano; so that the
Bassas and other Judges cannot at any time assure themselves that the Emperor
is not listening to their sentences: an action in which nothing is Turkish or
Mohammedan.

The authority of this Court extends it self unto all causes within the
jurisdiction of it, not being merely ecclesiastical. It is a law unto it self,
following no rule written in their sentences, but judging according to equity
and conscience. In matters criminal of greater consequence, the process is
here immediately examined, without any preparation of it by the inferior
Courts; as at the arraignment of the Duke of Biron: and diverse times also in
matters personal. But their power is most eminent in disposing the affairs of
State, and of the Kingdom. For such prerogatives have the French Kings given
hereunto, that they can neither denounce War, nor conclude Peace, without the
consent (a formal one at the least) of this Chamber. An alienation of the
Lands of the Crown, is not any whit valid, unless confirmed by this Court:
neither are his Edicts in force, till they are here verified: nor his Letters
Patents for the creating of a Peer, till they are here allowed of. Most of
these, I confess, are little more then matters of form, the Kings power and
pleasure being become boundless; yet sufficient to show the body of authority
which they once had, and the shadow of it, which they still keep; yet of late
they have got into their disposing one privilege belonging formerly to the
Conventus ordinum, or the Assembly of three Estates, which is the conferring of
the regency or protection of their King during his minority. That the Assembly
of the three Estates formerly had this privilege is evident by their stories.
Thus we find them to have made Queen Blanch Regent of the Realm, during the
nonage of her son St. Lewis, 1227. That they declared Philip de Valois
successor to the Crown, in case that the widow of Charles le bell, was not
delivered of a son, 1357. As also Philip of Burgogne, during the Lunacy of
Charles VI. 1394. with diverse other. On the other side we have a late example
of the power of the Parliament of Paris in this very case. For the same day
that Henry IV. was slain by Ravilliao, the Parliament met, and after a short
consultation, declared Mary de Medices, Mother to the King, Regent in France,
for the government of the State, during the minority of her son, with all power
and authority. Such are the words of the Instrument, Dated the 14 of May 1610.

It cannot be said but that this Court deserves not only this, but also any
other indulgence, whereof any one member of the Commonwealth is capable. So
watchful are they over the health of the State, and so tenderly do they take
the least danger threatened to the liberty of that Kingdom, that they may not
unjustly be called, patres patriae. In the year 1614. they seized upon a
discourse written by Suarez a Jesuit, Entitled, Adversus Anglicanae sectae
errores: wherein the Popes temporal power over Kings and Princes is averred:
which they sentenced to be burnt in the Palaceyard by the public hangman. The
year before they inflicted the same punishment upon a vain and blasphemous
discourse penned by Gasper Scioppius, a fellow of a most desperate brain, and a
very incendiary. Neither has Bellarmine himself, that great Atlas of the Roman
Church, escaped much better: for writing a book concerning the temporal power
of his Holiness, it had the ill luck to come into Paris, where the Parliament
finding it to thwart the liberty and royalty of the King and Country, gave it
over to the Hangman, and he to the fire. Thus it is evident that the titles
which the French writers give it, as the true Temple of French Justice, the
bu^tresse of equity, and the guardian of the rights of France, and the like, are
abundantly deserved of it.

The next Chamber in esteem is the Tournelle, which handles all matters
criminal. It is so called from tourner, which signifies to change or alter;
because the Judges of the other several chambers give sentence in this,
according to their several turns; the reason of which institution is said to
be, lest a continual custom of condemning, should make the Judges less
merciful, and more prodigal of blood: an order full of health and providence.
It was instituted by the above named Philip de bell, at the same time when he
made the Parliament sedentarie at Paris; and besides its peculiar and original
employments, it receives appeals from, and redresseth the errors of the
Provost of Paris. The other five Chambers are called Des Enquestes, or Camerae
inquisitionum; the first and antientest of them was erected also by Philip le
bell, and afterward divided into two by Charles VII. Afterward the multitude
of Processes being greater then could be dispatched in these Courts, there was
added a third. Francis the first established the fourth for the better raising
of a sum of money which then he wanted; every one of the new Counselors paying
right deerly for his place. The fifth and last was founded in the year 1568. In
each of these several Chambers there are two Presidents, and 20 Counselors,
besides Advocates and Proctours ad placitum. In the Tournelle, which is an
aggregation of all the other Courts, there are supposed to be no sewer then 200
officers of all sorts; which is no great number considering the many causes
there handled. In the Tournelle, the Judges fit on life and death; in the
Chamber of Enquests, they examine only civil affairs of estate, title, debts,
or the like. The pleaders in these Courts are called Advocates, and must be at
the least Licentiates in the study of the Law. At the Parliaments of Theloza
and Bourdeaux, they admit of none but Doctors. Now the form of admitting them
is this: In an open and frequent Court, one of the aged'st of the Long roab
presents the party, which defireth admission, to the Kings Attorney general,
saying with a loud voice, Paise a cour recevoir N. N. licencie (or Docteur) en
droict civil, a la office d' Advocate; This said, the Kings Attorney bids
him hold up his hand, and says to him in Latin, Tu jurabis observare omnes
regias consuetudines; he answers Juro, and departs. At the Chamber door of
the Court, whereof he is now sworn an Advocate, he pays two crowns; which is
forth with put into the common treasury appointed for the relief of the
distressed widows of ruined Advocates and Proctoms; Hanc veniam perimusque
damusque, it may be their own cases, and therefore it is paid willingly. The
highest preferment of which these Advocates are capable is that of Chancellor,
an office of great power and profit: the present Chancellor is named Mr. d'
Allegre, by birth of Chartres. He has no settled Court wherein to exercise his
authority, but has in all the Courts of France the Supreme place whenever he
will vouchsafe to visit them. He is also President of the Council of Estate
by his place; and on him depends the making of good and sacred laws, the
administration of Justice, the reformation of superstuous, and abrogation of
unprofitable Edicts, etc. He has the keeping of the Kings great seal, and by
virtue of that, either passes or puts back such Letters patents and Writs
as are exhibited to him. He has under him, immediately for the better dispatch
of his affairs, four Masters of the Requests and their Courts. Their office
and manner of proceeding, is the same which they also use in England; in the
persons there is thus much difference, for that in France, two of them must be
perpetually of the Clergy. One of their Courts is very ancient, and has in it
two Presidents, which are two of the Masters; and 14 Counselors. The other is
of a later erection, as being founded anno 1580. and in that, the two other of
the Masters and eight Counselors give sentence.

Thus have I taken a view of the several Chambers of the Parliament of Paris,
and of their particular jurisdictions, as far as my information could conduct
me. One thing I noted further, and in my mind the fairest ornament of the
Palace, which is the neatness and decency of the Lawyers in their apparel;
for besides the fashion of their habit, which is I allure you, exceeding
pleasing and comely, themselves by their own care and love to handsomeness,
add great luster to their garments, and more to their persons. Richly dressed
they are, and well may be so, as being the ablest and most powerful men under
the Princes and la Noblesse, in all the Country; an happiness, as I
conjecture rather of the calling then the men. It has been the fate and
destiny of the Law to strengthen and enable its professors beyond any other
Art or Science: the pleaders in all Commonwealths, both for sway amongst the
people, and vogue amongst the military men, having always had the
pre-eminence. Of this rank were Pericles, Phocion, Alcibiades, and Demosthenes
amongst the Athenians, Antonius, Cato, Caesar and Tully at Rome; men equally
famous for Oratory and the Sword: yet this I can confidently say, that the
several states above mentioned, were more indebted to Tully and Demosthenes,
being both mere gown-men, then to the best of their Captains; the one freeing
Athens from the armies of Macedon, t^h other delivering Rome from the
conspiracy of Catiline. O fortunatam natam te Consule Romam!


It is not then the fate of France only, nor of England, to see so much power
in the hands of the Lawyers: and the case being general, me thinks the envy
should be the less: and less it is indeed with them then with us. The English
Clergy, though otherwise the most accomplished in the world, in this folly
deserves no Apology; being so strongly ill affected to the pleaders of their
Nation, that I fear it may be said of some of them, Quod invidiam non ad
causam, sed personam and ad voluntatem dirigunt; a weakness not more unworthy
of them, then prejudicial to them. For by fostering between both gowns such an
unnecessary emulation, they do but exasperate that power which they cannot
control, and betray themselves to much envy and discontentednesse; a disease
whose cure is more in my wishes then my hopes.

CHAP. IX.
The Kings Palace of the Louure, by whom built. The unsutablenesse of it. The
fine Gallery of the Queen Mother. The long Gallery of Henry IV. His magnanimous
intent to have built it into a quadrangle. Henry IV. a great builder. His
infinite project upon the Mediterranean and the Ocean. La Salle des Antiques.
The French not studious of Antiquities. Burbon house. The Tuilleries, etc.

WE have discharged the King of one Palace, and must follow him to the other,
where we shall find his residence. It is seated at the West side of the Town
or Ville of Paris, hard by Portenufue, and also by the new bridge. A house of
great fame, and which the Kings of France have long kept their Court in. It was
first built by Philip Augustus, anno 1214. and by him intended for a Castle: it
first serving to imprison the more potent of the Nobles; and to lay up the
Kings treasury. For that cause it was well moated, strengthened with walls and
drawbridges, very serviceable in those times. It had the name of Louure, quasi
L'oeuure, or the work, the building, by way of excellency. An etymology which
draws nigher to the ear, then the understanding, or the eye; and yet the
French writers would make it a miracle. Du Chesne calls it, Superbe
bastiment, qui n'a son esgal en toute la Christiente; and you shall hear it
called in an other place, Bestiment qui pass, aujourd hui en excellence et en
grandeur, tous les autres. Brave elogies, if all were gold that glistered. It
has now given up its charge of money and great prisoners to the Bastile, and
at this time serves only to imprison the Court. In my life, I never saw any
thing more abused by a good report, or that more belyeth the rumors that go of
it. The ordinary talk of vulgar travelers, and the big words of the French,
had made me expect at the least some prodigy of architecture; some such
Majesticall house as the Sun Don Phoebus is said to have dwelt in, in Ovid.

Regia Solis erat sublimibus alta columnis,
Claramicante auro, flamasque imitante pyropo,
Cujus ebur nitidum, etc.
Indeed I thought no fiction in Poetry had been able to have paralleld it: and
made no doubt but it would have put me into such a passion as to have cried out
with the young Gallant in the Comedy, when he had seen his sweetheart, Hei
mihi qualis erat? talis erat qualem nunquam vidi; But I was much deceived in
that hope, and could find nothing in it to admire, much less to envy. The
Fable of the Mountain which was with child, and brought forth a mouse; is
questionless a fable: this house and the large fame it has in the world, is
the moral of it. Never was there an house more unsuitable to it self in the
particular examination of parts, nor more unsuitable to the character and esteem
of it in the general Survey of the whole.

You enter into it over two draw bridges, and through three gates, ruinous
enough, and abundantly unsightly. In the Quadrangle you meet with three
several fashions of building, of three several ages, and they so unhappily
joined one to the other, that one would half believe they had been clapped
together by an earthquake. The South and West parts of it are new, and indeed
Princelike; being the work of Francis the first, and his son Henry. Had it been
all cast into the same mould, I persuade my self that it would be very gracious
and lovely. The other two are of an ancient work, and so contemprible, that
they disgrace the rest; and of these I suppose the one fide to be at the least
100 years older then his partner: such is it without. As for the inside, it is
far more graceful, and would be pleasing at the entrance, were the
Guardchamber reformed. Some Hugonot architect, which were not in love with the
errors of Antiquity, might make a pretty room of it; a catholic Carpenter
would never get credit by it: for whereas the provident thrift of our
forefathers intended it (for the house would else be too narrow for the Kings
retinue) both for a room of safety and of pleasure, both for bill-men and
dancers; and for that cause made up some six ranks of seats on each side; that
sparingnesse in the more curious eyes of this time, is little Kinglike:
Country wenches might with indifferent stomach abuse a good Galliard in it, or
it might perhaps serve with a stage at one end to entertain the Parisians at a
play, or with a partition in the middle, it might be divided into two pretty
plausible Cockpits; but to be employed in the nature it now is, either to
solace the King and Lords in a dance, or to give any forain Ambassador his
welcome in a Mask, is little suitable with the Majesty of a King of France. The
Chambers of it are well built, but ill furnished; the hangings of them being
somewhat below a meannesse; and yet of these there is no small scarcity. For,
as it is said of the Gymnosophists of India, that Una Domus and mansioni
sufficit and sepulturae: so may we of this Prince, the same Chamber serves for
to lodge him, to feed him, and also to confer and discourse with his Nobility.
But like enough it is that this want may proceed from the several Courts of
the King, the Monsieur, the Queen Mother and the Qeen Regoant, being all kept
within it.

Proceed we now to the two Galleries, whereof the first is that of the Queen
Mother, as being beautified and adorned exceedingly by Katbarine de Medices,
mother to Henry III. and Charles IX. It contains the pictures of all the
Kings of France, and the most loved of their Queens, since the time of St.
Lewis. They stand each King opposite to his Queen, she being that of his wives
which either brought him most estate, or his fuccessors. The tables are all of
a just length, very fair, and according to my little acquaintance with the
Painter, of a most excellent workmanship, and which adds much grace to it,
they are in a manner a perfect History of the State and Court of France in
their several times. For under each of the Kings pictures, they have drawn the
portraitures of most of those Lords whom valor and courage in the field enobled
beyond their births. Under each of the Queens the lively shapes of the most
principal Ladies, whose beauty and virtue had honored the Court. A dainty
invention, and happily expressed. At the further end of it stands the last
King and the present Queen Mother; who fill up the whole room. The succeeding
Princes, if they mean to live in their pictures, must either build new places
for them, or else make use of the long Gallery built by Henry IV. and which
opens into that of the Queen Mother. A Gallery it is of an incredible length,
as being above 500 yards long, and of a breadth and height not
unporportionable; a room built rather for ostentation then use, and such as
has more in it of the majesty of its founder then the grace. It was said to
have been erected purposely to join the Louure unto the House and Garden of the
Tuilleries, an unlikely matter that such a stupendous building should be
designed only for a cleanly conveyance into a Summer house: others are of an
opinion that he had a resolution to have made the house quadrangular, every
side being correspondent to this which should have been the common Gallery to
the rest. Which design had it taken effect, this Palace would at once have been
the wonder of the world, and the envy of it. For my part, I dare be of this
last mind, as well because the second side is in part begun, as also
considering how infinitely this King was inclined to building. The Place
Daulphin, and the Place Royal, two of the finest piles in Paris, were erected
partly by his purse, but principally by his encouragement. The new Bridge in
Paris was merely his work; so was also the new Palace, and most admirable
waterworks of St. Germans en lay. This long Gallery and the new Pest house
owes it self wholly to him; and the house of Fountainebleau, which is the
fairest in France, is beholding to him for most of its beauty; add to this his
Fortifications bestowed on the Bastile; his walling of Arles; and his purpose
to have strengthened Paris according to the modern art of Towns: and you will
find the attribute of Parietaria or wall flower, which Constantine scoffingly
gave unto Trajan for his great humor of building, to be due unto this King;
but seriously and with reverence.

Besides the general love he had to building, he had also an ambition to go
beyond example, which also induces me further to believe his intent of making
that large and admirable quadrangle above spoken of, to have been serious and
real. For to omit others, certain it is, that he had a project of great spirit
and difficulty, which was to join the Mediterranean sea and the Ocean together;
and to make the Navigation from the one to the other through France, and not to
pass by the straight of Gibraltare. It came into Council, anno 1604, and was
resolved to be done by this means: The river Garond is Navigable from the Ocean
almost to Tholoza; and the Mediterranean opens it self into the Land by a
little River, whose name I know not, as high as Narbonne. Betwixt these two
places was there a Navigable channel to have been dug, and it proceeded so
far toward, being actuated, that a workman had undertaken it, and the price
was agreed upon. But there arising some discontents between the Kings of France
and Spain, about the building of the Fort Fluentes in the Country of the
Grisons; the King not knowing what use he might have of Treasure in that
quarrel, commanded the work not to go forward. However he is to be commended
in the attempt, which was indeed Kinglike, and worthy his spirit: praise him in
his heroic purpose and design. Quem si non tenuit, magnis tamen excidit ausis.


But the principal beauty, if I may judge of this so much admired Palace of the
Louure, is a low plain room, paved under foot with bricks, and without any
hangings or tapestrie on the sides; yet being the best set out and furnished to
my content of any in France. It is called, La Salle des Antiques, and has in
it five of the antientest and venerablest pieces of all the Kingdom. For this
Nation generally is regardlesse of Antiquity, both in the monuments and study
of it, so that you shall hardly find any ancient inscription, or any famous
ruin snatched from the hand of time, in the best of their Cities or Churches.
In the Church only of Amiens could I meet with an ancient character, which also
was but a Gothish Dutch letter, and expressed nothing but the name and virtue
of a Bishop of the Church on whose tomb it was. So little also did I perceive
them to be inclined to be Antiquaries, that both neglects considered, Si verbis
audacia detur, I dare confidently aver, not only that the Earl of Arundels
Gardens have more antiquities of this kind, then all France can boast of; but
that one Cotton for the Treasury, and one Seldom (now Mr. Camden is dead) for
the study of the like antiquities; are worth all the French. As for these five
pieces in La Salle des Antiques, they are I confess worthy observation, and
respect also, if they be such as our Trudgemen inform us. At the farther end
of it is the Statua of Diana, the same, as is said, which was worshipped in the
renowned Temple of Ephesus; and of which Demetrius the Silversmith and his
fellow artists, cried out (...), Great is Diana of the Ephesians. Of a large
and manly proportion she seems to be. Quantum and quale latus, quam invenile
femur!
As Ovid of his Mistress.
She is all naked save her feet, which are buskined; and that she has a skarfe
or linen roll, which coming over her left shoulder, and meeting about her
middle, hung down with both ends of it a little lower. In the first place on
the right hand as we descended toward the door, was the Statua of one of the
Gods of Ethiopia, as black as any of his people, and one that had nothing about
him to express his particular being. Next to him the Effigies of Mercury,
naked all except his feet, and with a pipe in his mouth, as when he enchanted
Argus: Namque reperta fistula nuper erat, says the Metamorphosis. Next unto
him the portraiture of Venus quight, and most immodestly unapparelled; in her
hand her little son Cupid, as well arraied as his mother, sitting on a Dolphin.
Last of all Apollo also in the same naked truth, but that he had shoes on, he
was portraied as lately returned from a combat, perhaps that against the
Serpent Python.

Quem Deus arcitenens and nunquam talibus armis
Ante ni si damis capreisque fugacibus usus,
Mill gravem telis, (exhausta paene pharetra)
Perdidit effuso per vulnera nigra vene^o. As Ovid.
The Archer god, who ere that present tide
Nere used those arms, but against the Roes and Deer,
With thousand shafts, the earth made to be died
With Serpents blood, his quiver emptied clear.


That I was in the right conjecture, I had these reasons to persuade me, the
quiver on the Gods right shoulder almost emptied, his warlike belt hanging
about his neck, his garments loosely tumbling upon his left arms, and the
slain Monster being a water Serpent, as Python is fained to be by the Poets:
all of these were on the same side of the wall, the other being altogether
destitute of ornaments: and are confidently said to be the Statuas of those
Gods, in the same forms as they were worshipped in, and taken from their
several Temples. They were bestowed on the King by his Holiness of Rome, and
I cannot blame him for it, it was worthy but little thanks, to give unto him
the Idols of the Heathens, who for his Holiness satisfaction had given himself
to the Idols of the Romans. I believe that upon the same terms, the King of
England might have all the Relics and ruins of Antiquity which can be found
in Rome.

Without this room, this Salle des Antiques and somewhat on the other side of
the Louure, is the house of Burbon, an old decayed fabric, in which nothing
was observable, but the Omen, for being built by Lewis of Burbon, the third
Duke of that branch, he caused this motto ESPERANCE to be engraven in Capital
Letters over the door, signifying his hope, that from his loins should proceed
a King which should join both the Houses and the Families, and it is
accordingly happened. For the Tuilleries I having nothing to say of them, but
that they were built by Katharine de Medices in the year 1564. and that they
took name from the many Lime-kils and Tilepits there being, before the
foundation of the House and the Garden, the word Tuilleries importing as much
in the French language, I was not so happy as to see, and will not be indebted
to any for the relation.

The End of the Second Book.
A SURVEY OF THE STATE of FRANCE.
La BEAUSE, OR, THE THIRD BOOK.
CHAP. I.
Our Journey toward Orleans, the Town, Castle, and Battle of Mont l'hierrie.
Many things imputed to the English which they never did. Lewis the 11. brought
not the French Kings out of wardship. The town of Chartroy, and the mourning
Church there. The Country of La Beause and people of it. Estampes. The dancing
there. The new art of begging in the Innes of this Country. Angerville. Tury.
The sawciness of the French Fiddlers. Three kinds of Music amongst the
Ancients. The French Music.

HAving abundantly stifled our spirits in the stink of Paris, on Tuesday being
the 12 of July, we took our leave of it, and prepared our selves to entertain
the sweet Air and Wine of Orleans. The day fair and not so much as disposed to
a cloud, save that they began to gather together about noon, in the nature of a
curtain to defend us from the injury of the Sun. The wind rather sufficient to
fan the air, then to disturb it, by qualifying the heat of the Celestial fire,
brought the air to an excellent mediocrity of temper: you would have thought it
a day merely framed for the great Princess Nature to take her pleasure in, and
that the birds which cheerfully gave us their voices from the neighboring
bushes, had been the loud music of her Court. In a word, it was a day solely
consecrated to a pleasant journey, and he that did not put it to that use,
misspent it: having therefore put our selves into our wagon, we took a short
farewell of Paris, exceeding joyful that we yet lived to see the beauty of the
fields again, and enjoy the happiness of a free heaven. The Country such as
that part of the Isle of France toward Normandy; only that the corn grounds
were larger, and more even. On the left hand of us we had a side-glance of the
royal house of Boys St. Vincennes, and the Castle of Bisestre; and about some
two miles beyond them we had a sight also of a new house lately built by Mr.
Sillery Chancellor of the Kingdom, a pretty house it promised to be, having
two base Courts on the hither side of it, and beyond it a park; an ornament
whereof many great mansions in France are altogether ignorant.

Four leagues from Paris, is the the Town of Montliberrie, now old and ruinous:
and has nothing in it to commend it, but the carcass of a Castle: without it,
it has to brag of a large and spacious plain; on which was fought that
memorable battle between Lewis the 11. and Charles le hardy, Duke of
Burgogne, a battle memorable only for the running away of each Army: the field
being in a manner emptied of all the forces, and yet neither of the Princes
victorious. Hic spe celer, ille salute, some ran out of fear to die, and some
out of hope to live: that it was hard to say, which of the Soldiers made most
use of their heels in the combat. This notwithstanding, the King esteemed
himself the conqueror, not that he overcame, but because not vanquished. He was
a Prince of no heart to make a warrior, and therefore resistance was to him
almost hugged as victory. It was Antonies case in his war against the
Parthians: a Captain whose Lance King Lewis was not worthy to bear after him.
Crassus before him had been taken by that people: but Antonius made a retreat,
though with loss, Hanc itaque fugam suam, quia vivus exierat, victoriam
vocabat; as Paterculus, one that loved him not, says of him. Yet was King
Lewis is so puffed up with this conceit of victory, that he ever after slighted
his enemies: and at last ruined them, and their cause with them. The war which
they undertook against him, they had entitled the war of the Weal public:
because the occasion of their taking arms was for the liberty of their
Country and people: both whom the King had beyond measure oppressed. True it
is, they had also their particular purposes; but this was the main, and failing
in the expected event of it, all that they did, was to confirm the bondage of
the Realm, by their own overthrow. These Princes once disbanded, and severally
broken; none durst ever afterward enter into the action; for which reason King
Lewis used to say that he had brought the Kings of France, Horse pupillage, out
of their ward-ship: a speech of more brag then truth. The people I confess, he
brought into such terms of slavery; that they no longer merited the name of
subjects, but yet for all his great boast, the Nobles of France are to this day
the Kings Guardians. I have already shown you much of their potency. By that
you may see that the French Kings have not yet sued their livery, as our
Lawyers call it. Had he also in some measure broken the powerableness of the
Princes, he had then been perfectly his words-master; and till that be done, I
shall still think his successors to be in their pupillage. That King is but
half himself which has the absolute command only of half his people.

The battle foughten by this Town, the common people impute to the English;
and so do they also many others which they had no hand in. For hearing their
Grandames talk of their wars with our nation, and of their many fields which we
gained of them; they no sooner hear of a pitched field; but presently, (as the
nature of men in a fright is) they attribute it to the English; good simple
souls, Qui nos non solum laudibus nostris ornare velint, sed onerare alienis,
as Tully in his Philippicks. An humor just like unto that of little children,
who being once frighted with the tales of Robin Goodfellow, do never after hear
any noise in the night, but they straight imagine, that it is he which makes
it; or like the women of the villages near Oxford, who having heard the
tragical story of a duck or an hen killed, and carried to the University: no
sooner miss one of their chickens, but instantly they cry out upon the
Scholars. On the same false ground also, hearing that the English, whilst they
had possessions in this Country, were great builders; they bestow on them
without any more ado, the foundation and perfecting of most of the Churches
and Castles in the Country. Thus are our Ancestors said to have built the
Churches of Roven, Amiens, Bayon, etc. as also the Castles of Bois, St.
Vincennes, the Bastile; the two little forts on the river side by the Louure:
that of St. Germans; and amongst many others, this of Mont l'Hierrie, where we
now are; and all alike: as for this Castle, it was built during the reign of K.
Robert, anno 1015. by one of his servants, named Thibald: long before the
English had any possessions in this Continent. It was razed by Lewis the
Gross, as being a harbourer of rebels in former times; and by that means, as a
strong bridle in the mouth of Paris: nothing now standing of it, save an high
Tower, which is seen a great distance round about, and serves for a land mark.

Two leagues from Mont l'Hierrie is the Town of Castres; seated in the farthest
angle of France, where it confineth to La Beause. A Town of an ordinary size,
somewhat bigger then for a Market, and less then would beseem a City, a wall
it has, and a ditch; but neither serviceable further then to resist the enemy
at one gate, whilst the people run away by the other: nothing else remarkable
in it, but the habit of the Church, which was mourning: for such is the fashion
of France, that when any of the Nobles are buried, the Church which en^ombeth
them is painted black within and without, for the breadth of a yard, or
thereabouts; and their Coats of Arms drawn on it. To go to the charges of
hanging it round with cloth is not for their profits: besides, this counterfeit
sorrow fears no thief; and dares out-brave a tempest: he for whom the Church
of Castres was thus apparelled, had been Lord of the Town: by name, as I
remember, Mr. St. Benoist; his Arms were Argent, three Cressants, Or, a Mullet
of the same; but whether this Mullet were part of the Coat, or a mark only of
difference, I could not learn. The like Funeral Churches, I saw also at Tostes
in Normandy; and in a village of Picardie, whose name I mind not, Nec operae
pretium. And now we are passed the confines of France; a poor river, which for
the narrowness of it, you would think to be a ditch; parting it from the
Province of La Beause.

La Beause has on the North, Normandy; on the East the Isle of France; on the
South, Nivernois and Berry; and on the West the Countries of Toureine and
Lemaine. It lies in the 22 and 23 degree of Longitude; and 48 and 49 of
Latitude: taking wholly up the breadth of the two former, and but parts only of
each of the later; if you measure it with the best advantage for length, you
will find it to extend from la ferte Bernard in the North-west corner of it,
to Gyan, in the South east; which according to the proportion of degrees,
amounts to 60 miles English, and somewhat better: for breadth, it is much
after the same reckoning. The ancient inhabitants of this Province, and the
reason of the name I could not learn amongst the people: neither can I find
any certainty of it in my books with whom I have consulted. If I may be bold to
go by conjecture, I should think this Country to have been the seat of the
Bellocasst, a people of Gaul Celtick mentioned by Caesar in his Commentaries.
Certain it is, that in or near this tract they were seated; and in likelihood
in this Province: the names ancient and modern, being not much different in
sense, though in sound; for the Francks called that (which in Latin is
Pulcher, or Bellus) by the name of Bell, in the Mas^uculine Gender, (Ben they
pronounce it) and Beau if it were Feminine; so that the name of Bello cassi, is
but varied into that of Beause; besides, that Province which the Roman writers
style Bellovaci, the French now call Beauvais; where Bello isalso turned into
Beau. Add to this that the Latin writers do term this Country Belsia; where
the ancient Bello is still preserved; and my conjecture may be pardoned, if not
approved. As for those which have removed this people into Normandy; and found
them in the City of Baieux: I appeal to any understanding man, whether their
peremptory sentence, or my submisse opinion, be the more allowable. -- Haec si
tibi vera videntur,
Deed manus; ^ausi falsa est, accingere contra.


The same night, we came to Estampes, a Town situate in a very plentiful and
fruitful soil; and watered with a river of the same name, stored with the best
crevices. It seems to have been a town of principal importance; there being
five walls and gates in a length, one before another: so that it appears to be
rather a continuation of many towns together, then simply one. The streets are
of a large breadth; the building for substance are stone; and for fashion as
the rest of France. It contains in it five Churches, whereof the principal,
which is a College of Chanoins, is that of Nostre dame; built by King Robert:
who is said also to have founded the Castle; which now can scarsely be visited
in its ruins. Without the town, they have a fine green meadow, daintily seated
within the circlings of the water; into which they use to follow their
recreations. At my being there, the sport was dancing; an exercise much used by
the French, who do naturally affect it. And it seems this natural
inclination, is so strong and deep rooted; that neither age nor the absence of
a smiling fortune can prevail against it. For on this dancing green, there
assembled not only youth and Gentry, but age also and beggary. Old wives which
could not put foot to ground without a Crutch, in the streets; had here taught
their feet to hoble; you would have thought by the cleanly conveyance of their
bodies that they had been troubled with the Sciatica: and yet so eager in the
sport, as if their dancing days should never be done. Some there were so
ragged, that a swift Galliard would almost have shaked them into nakedness: and
they also most violent to have their carcasses directed in a measure. To have
attempted the staying of them at home, or the persuading of them to work, when
they had heard the Fiddle, had been a task too unwieldy for Hercules. In this
mixture of age and condition, did we observe them at their pastime; the rags
being so interwoven with the silk, and wrinkled brows so interchangeably
mingled with fresh beauties: that you would have thought it, to have been a
mummery of fortune. As for those of both sexes, which were altogether past
action; they had caused themselves to be carried thither in their chairs, and
trod the measure with their eyes! The Inn which we lay in was just like those
of Normandy; or at the least so like as was fit for sisters; for such you must
think them. -- Facies non omnibus una,
Nec diversa tamen, qualem deeet esse sororum.


All the difference between them lay in the morning: and amongst the
maidservants. For here we were not troubled with such an importunate begging
as in that other Country. These here had learned a more neat and compendious
way of getting money; and petitioned not our ears, but our noses. By the
rhetoric of a posie, they prevailed upon the purse; and by giving each of us a
bundle of dead flowers tacked together, seemed rather to buy our bounties, then
to beg them. A sweeter and more generous kind of Petitioning then the other of
Normandy; and such as may seem to employ in it some happy contradiction. For
what else is it, that a maid should proffer her self to be deflowred without
prejudice to her modesty: and raise to her future husband an honest stock, by
the usury of a kindness? Refreshed with these favors, we took our leave of
Estampes, and the dancing miscellany: jogging on through many a beautiful
field of corn, till we came unto Augerville which is six leagues distant. A
Town of which I could not observe, nor hear of any thing memorable; but that is
was taken by Montacute Earl of Salisbury; as he went this way to the siege of
Orleans; and indeed, the taking of it was no great miracle, the walls being so
thin, that an arrow would almost as soon make a breach in them as a Canon. The
same fortune befell also unto Toury, a place not much beyond it in strength or
bigness: only that it had more confidence (as Savage an English Gentleman once
said) in the walls of bones, which were within it, then in the walls of stones
which were without it. -- This Town stands in the middle way betwixt Fstampes
and Orleans: and therefore a fit stage to act a dinner on; and to it we went.
By that time we had cleared our selves of our pottage, there entered upon us
three uncouth fellows, with hats on their heads like covered dishes. As soon
as ever I saw them, I cast one eye on my cloak, and the other on my sword: as
not knowing what use I might have of my steel, to maintain my cloth. There was
great talk at that time of Mr. Soubises being in arms: and I much feared that
these might be some straglers of his Army: and this I suspected by their
countenances, which were very theevish and full of insolences. But when I had
made a survey of their apparel, I quickly altered that opinion; and accounted
them as the excrement of the next prison: deceived alike in both my jealousies;
for these pretty parcels of man's flesh, were neither better nor worse, but even
arrant fiddlers: and such which in England we should not hold worthy of the
whipping-post. Our leave not asked, and no reverence on their parts performed,
they abused our ears with an harsh lesson: and as if that had not been
punishment enough unto us, they must needs add to it one of their songs. By
that little French which I had gathered, and the simpring of a fille de joy of
Paris who came along with us; I perceived it was bawdy; and to say the truth,
more then could be patiently endured by any but a French man. But quid facerem,
what should I do but endure the misery? for I had not language enough to call
them Rogues handsomely; and the villains were inferior to a beating: and
indeed not worthy of mine or any honest man's anger. Praeda canum lepus est,
vastos non implet hiatus;
Nec gaudet tenui sanguine tanta sitis.
They were a knot of rascals so infinitely below the severity of a statute,
that they would have discredited the stocks; and to have hanged them, had been
to hazard the reputation of the gallows. In a year you would hardly find out
some vengeance for them, which they would not injure in the suffering: unless
it be not to hearken to their ribaldry, which is one of their greatest
torments. To proceed, after their song ended, one of the company (the Master of
them it should seem) draws a dish out of his pocket, and lays it before us:
into which we were to cast our benevolence: custom has allowed them a Sol for
each man at the table: they expect no more, and they will take no less. No
large sum, and yet I Will assure you richly worth the Music: which was merely
French, that is, lascivious in the composure; and French also, that is
unskilfully handled in the playing.

Among the Ancients I have met with three kinds of Music, viz. first that
which the Greeks call (...), which consists altogether of long notes, or
spondaeus. This was the gravest and saddest of the rest; called by Aristotle in
the last chapter of his Politics, (...), or moral; because it settled the
affections. Boethius whom we account the Classical author in this faculty,
calls it Lydian, because in much use with those of that Nation, at this day
we may call it Italian, as being generally a peculiar music to that people.
This is the music which Elisha called for, to invite unto him the spirit of
Prophecy, 1 King. 3. 15. and this is it which is yet sung in our Churches. A
practice which we derive from the ancients, however some of late have opposed
it: and which is much commended by S. Austin; this being the use of it; Ut per
oblectamenta aurium, infirmior animus in pietatis affectum assurgat. The second
kind the artists call (...), which consists of a mixture of long and and
short notes, or of the Dactylus. The philosopher terms it (...) or active,
because it raised up the affections. Boethius terms it the Dorian, because it
had been in much esteem amongst the Doors a Greek nation: we may now call it
English; and is that music which cheereth the spirits, and is so sovereign an
antidote to a mind afflicted; and which as the Poet has it, does saxa movere
sono. The third sort is that which the Greeks call (...), consisting altogether
of short notes, or Tribrachys. Aristotle calls it (...), or ravishing;
because it unhinged the affections, and stirred them to lasciviousness.
Boethius terms it Phrygian, as being the strain of the wanton and luxuriant
people. In these times we may call it French, as most delighted in, by the
stirring spirits, and lightness of this nation. A note of music forbidden unto
youth by Aristotle and Plato; and not countenanced by any of them but on the
common theaters, to satisfy the rude manners and desires of the vulgar; (...),
and to give them also content in their recreations: yet is this music
altogether in use in this Country, no lesson amongst their protest Musicians
that I could hear, which had any gravity or solid art showed in the
composition. They are pretty fellows I confess for the setting of a Mask, or
a Caranto; but beyong this, nothing: which makes the mufick in their Churches
so base and unpleasing. So that the glory of perfect music, at this time lies
between the English, and Italian: that of France being as trivial as their
behavior, of which, indeed, it is concomitant: Mutata musica, mutantur mores,
says Tully: and therefore he gives us this lesson, Curandum itaque est ut
musica quam gravissima and sedatissima retineatur: a good Item for the French.

CHAP. II.
The Country and site of Orleans like that of Worcester. The Wine of Orleans.
Praesidial Towns in France, what they are. The sale of Offices in France. The
fine walk and pastime of the Palle Malle. The Church of St. Croix founded by
Superstition and a miracle. Defaced by the Hugonots. Some things hated only for
their name. The Bishop of Orleans, and his privilege. The Chapel and Pilgrims
of St. Jacques. The form of Mass in St. Croix. Censing an Heathenish custom.
The great siege of Orleans, raised by Joane the Virgin. The valor of that
woman: that she was no witch. An Elogie on her.

WE are now come into the Country of Orleans, which though within the limits
of La Beause, will not yet be an entire County of it self. It is a dainty and
pleasing Region, very even and large in the fields of it, insomuch that we
could not see an hill, or swelling of the ground within eyesight. It
consists in an indifferent measure of Corn, but most plentifully of Vines;
and has of all other fruits a very liberal portion; neither is it meanly
beholding to the Loyre, for the benefits it receives by that river: on which
the City of Orleans it self is sweetly seated. Of all places in England,
Worcestershire, in mine opinion, comes most nigh it; as well in respect of the
Country, as the situation of the Town. For certainly that Country may be
called the Epitome of England; as this of France. To the richest of the
cornfieldsd of Orleanoys we may compare the Vale of Evesham: neither will it
yield for the choile and variety of fruits, the Vine only excepted. The hedges
in that Country are prodigal and lavish of those trees which would become the
fairest Orchards of the rest; and in a manner recompenseth the want of Wine, by
its pl^nty of Perry and Sider. In a word, what a good writer has said of one,
we may say of both; Coelum and solum adeo propitium habent, ut salubritate and
ubertate vicinis non concedant. But the resemblance betwixt the Towns, is more
happy. Both seated on the second river of note in their several Countries; and
which are not much unlike in their several courses. Severne washing the walls of
Gloucester, and passing nigh unto Bristol, seated on a little riveret and its
homager, divides the Ancients Britains from the rest of the English. The
Loyre, gliding by the City of Tours, and passing nigh to Augeire, seated also
up the land, on a little river, and one of its tributories, separateth the
modern Bretagnes from the rest of the French. Posita est in loco modico acclivi
ad flumen, quod turrigero ponte conjungitur, and muro satis firmo munita, says
Mr. Camden of Worcester: Orleans is seated on the like declivity of an hill;
has its bridge well fortified with turrets, and its walls of an equal ability
of resistance. Sed docu^est ab incolis, qui sunt numerosi and humani: ab
aedificiorum nitore, a templorum numero, and maxim a sede episcopali; says he
of ours in general; we shall see it fitly applied to this in each particular.

The people of this town are not of the fewest: no Town in France, the capacity
of it considered, being more populous; for standing in so delicate an air, and
on so commodious a river, it inviteth the Gentry or Nobles of the Country
about it, to inhabit there: and they accept it. Concerning their behavior and
humanity, certainly they much exceed the Parisians. I was about to say all the
French men; and indeed, I need not grudge them that Elogie which Caesar gives
unto those of Kent: and verify, that they are omnium incolarum long
bumanissimi; my self here observing more courtefie and affability in one day,
then I could meet withal in Paris, during all my abode. The buildings of it
are very suitable to themselves, and the rest of France; the streets large and
well kept: not yielding the least offense to the most curious nosethrill.
Parish Churches it has in it 26 of different and unequal being: as it uses
to be in other places. Besides these, it contains the Episcopal Church of St.
Croix, and diverse other houses of religious persons; amongst which Sr. Jacques:
of both which I shall speak in their due order. Thus much for the resemblance
of the Towns: the difference betwixt them is this. That Orleans is the bigger,
and Worcester the richer; Orleans consists much of the Nobles, and of
sojourners; Worcester of Citizens only, and home dwellers. And for the manner
of life in them; so it is, that Worcester has the handsomer women in it;
Orleans the finer (and in mine opinion the loveliest of all France:) Worcester
thriveth much on Clothing; Orleans on their Vine-presses.

And questionless the Vine of Orleans is the greatest riches not of the Town
only, but of the Country also about it. For this cause Andre du Chesne calls
it the prime cellar of Paris. Fst une pais (says he) si heureuse and si
secunde sur tout en vine, qui on la dire l' un de premiers celiers de Paris.
These Vines wherein he makes it to be so happy, deserve no less a commendation
then he has given them: as yielding the best wines in all the Kingdom. Such
as it much grieved me to mingle with water; they being so delicious to the
palate, and the epicurism of the taste. I have heard of a Dutch Gentleman, who
being in Italy, was brought acquainted with a kind of Wine, which they there
call Lachrymae Christi. No sooner had he tasted it, but he fell into a deep
melancholy: and after some seven sighs, besides the addition of two groans, he
brake out into this pathetical ejaculation: Dii boni, quare non Christus
lachrymatus esset in nostris regionibus! This Dutch man and I, were for a time
of one mind: insomuch that I could almost have picked a quarrel with nature,
for giving us none of this liquor in England: at last we grew friends again,
when I had perceived how offensive it was to the brain, (if not well qualified)
for which cause it is said, that King Lewis has banished it his Cellar: no
doubt to the great grief of his drinking Courtiers, who may therefore say with
Martial, Quid tantum fecere boni tibi pessima vina?
Aut quid fecerunt optima vina mali?
This Town called Genabum by Caesar, was reedified by Aurelian the Emperor,
anno 276. and called by his name Aurelianum; which it still retains amongst
the Latins. It has been famous heretofore for four Councels here celebrated;
and for being the siege royal of the Kings of Orleans, though as now I could
not hear any thing of the ruins of the Palace. The fame of it at this time
consists in the University, and its seat of justice: this Town being one of
them which they call Seiges presidiaux. Now these Seiges Presidiaux, Seats or
Courts of Justice were established in diverse Cities of the Realm, for the ease
of the people; anno 1551, or thereabouts. In them all civil causes not
exceeding 250 livres in money, or 10 livres in rents; are heard and determined
soveraignly and without appeal. If the sum exceed those proportions, the appeal
holds good, and shall be examined in that Court of Parliament under whose
jurisdiction they are. This Court here consists of a Bailly whose name is Mr.
Digion, of 12 Counselors, two Lieutenants, one civil and the other criminal;
and a public notary. When Mr. Le Comte de St. Paul, who is Governor or
Lieutenant General of the Province, comes into their Court, he gives
precedence to the Bailly: in other places he receives it. This institution of
these Presidentiall Courts, was at first a very profitable ordinance, and much
eased the people: but now it is grown burdensome: the reason is, that the
offices are made salable, and purchased by them with a great deal of money,
which afterward they wrest again out of the purses of the pesants: the sale of
offices drawing necessarily after it, the sale of justice; a mischief which is
spread so far, that there is not the poorest under-officer in all the Realm,
who may not safely say with the Captain in the 22. of the Acts and the 28.
verse. (...), with a great sum of money obtained I this freedom. Twenty years
purchase is said to be no extraordinary rate: and I have read, that only by the
sale of offices, one of the Kings had raised in 20 years 139 millions: which
amounts to the proportion of seven millions yearly, or thereabouts: of all
ways to thrift and treasure the most unkingly. In the year 1614 the King
motioned the abolising of the sales of this market, but it was upon a condition
more prejudicial to the people then the mischief: for he desired in lieu of it,
to have a greater imposition laid upon Salt and on the Aides: which those who
were Commissioners for the Commonalty would not admit of; because then a common
misery had been bought out of the State to make their particular misery the
greater, and so the corruption remains unaltered.

This Town, as it is sweetly seated in respect of the air: so is it finely
convenienced with walks: of which the chief are that next unto Paris Gate,
having the wall on one hand, and a rank of palm trees on the other; the second
that near unto the Bridge, having the water pleasingly running on both sides:
and a third, which is indeed the principal, on the east side of the City. It is
called the Palle Malle, from an exercise of that name, much used in this
Kingdom: a very Gentleman-like sport, not over violent; and such as affords
good opportunity of discourse, as they walk from one mark to the other. Into
this walk, which is of a wonderful length and beauty, you shall have a clear
evening empty all the Town: the aged people borrowing legs to carry them; and
the younger, arms to guide them. If any young Dame or Monsieur, walk thither
single, they will quickly find some or other to link with them: though perhaps
such with whom they have no familiarity. Thus do they measure and re-measure
the length of the Palle Malle, not minding the shutting in of the day, till
darkness has taken away the sense of blushing. At all hours of the night, be
it warm and dry, you shall be sure to find them there, thus coupled: and if at
the years end, there be found more children then fathers in the Town; this walk
and the night are suspected shrewdly to be accessaries. A greater inconvenience
in my opinion then an English kiss.

There is yet a fourth walk in this Town called L' Estapp, a walk principally
frequented by Merchants: who here meet to conserre of their occasions. It lies
before the house of Mr. Le Comte de St. Paul the Governor, and reaches up to
the Cloister of St. Croix: of the building of which Church, I could never yet
hear or read of any thing, but that which is merely fabulous, for the Citizens
report, that long since, time out of mind, there appeared a vision to an holy
Monk, which lived thereabouts, and bad him dig deep in such a place, where he
should find a piece of the holy Cross, charging him to preserve that blessed
relic in great honor, and to cause a Church to be built in that place where
it had been buried: upon this warning the Church was founded, but at whose
charges they could not enform me: so that all which I could learn concerning
the foundation of this Church, is that it was erected only by Superstition and
a lie. The Superstition is apparent in their worshipping of such rotten sticks,
as they imagine to be remnants of the Cross; their calling of it holy, and
dedicating of this Church unto it. Nay they have consecrated unto it two holy
days, one in May, and the other in September: and are bound to salute it as
often as they see it in the streets or the highways, with these words, Ave
salus totius saeculi arbor salutifera. Horrible blasphemy, and never heard but
under Antichrist! Cruces subeundas esse non adorandas, being the lesson of the
Ancients. As for the miracle, I account it as others of the same stamp: equally
false and ridiculous. This Church in the year 1562. was defaced and ruined by
the Hugonots, who had entered the Town under the conduct of the Prince of Conde.
An action little savouring of humanity, and less of Religion: the very
Heathens themselves never demolishing any of the Churches, of those Towns which
they had taken. But in this action, the Hugonots consulted only with rashness,
and a zealous fury, thinking no title so glorious as to be called the Scourge
of Papists, and the overthrowers of Popish Churches. Quid facerent hosts capla
crudelius urbe?


The most barbarous enemy in the world could not more have exercised their
malice on the vanquished; and this I persuade my self had been the fate of most
of our Churches, if that faction had got the upper hand of us. But this Church
notwithstanding, is likely now to su(...) their madness. King Henry the 4.
began the repairing of it, and his Son Lewis has since continued: so that the
quire is now quite finished, and the workmen are in hand with the rest. What
should move the Hugonots to this execution, I cannot say: unless it were a
hate which they bare unto the name; and perhaps that not unlikely. We read how
the Romans having expelled their Kings, banished also Collatinus their Consul:
a man in whom they could find no fault but this, that his surname was Tarquin;
tantum ob nomen and genus regium, says Florus: afterward, quam invisum regis
nomen, is very frequent in the stories of those times. Amongst those which had
been of the conspiracy against Julius Caesar, there was one named Cinna, a name
so odious amongst the people, that meeting by chance with one of Caesar's chief
friends, and hearing that his name was Cinna, they presently murdered him in
the place, for which cause one Casca, which was also the name of one of the
Conspirators, published a writing of his name and pedigree: showing therein,
that he neither was the traitor, nor any kin to him. The reason of his action
Dion gives us (...), Quod Cinua nominis causa occideretur. With a like hate it
may be were the French Protestants possessed against the name of the Cross:
for they not only ruined this temple but beat down also all those little
crossets, betwixt Mont Martre, and St. Denis, though now King Lewis has caused
them to be re-edified. And what troubles the French party here in England have
raised, because of that harmless ceremony of the cross; Notius est quam ut
stilo egeat, and therefore I omit it. This Church is the seat of a Bishop, who
acknowledges the Archbishop of Sens, for his Metropolitan. The present Bishop
is named Franciscus d' Aubespine, said to be a worthy Scholar, and a sound
Politician; though he were never graduated further then the arts. Of his
revenue I could learn nothing, but of his privilege this: namely, that at the
first entrance of every new Bishop into this Church, he has the liberty of
setting free any of the prisoners of the Jail: though their crime be never so
mortal. For, the original of this indulgence: we are beholding to St. Aignan,
once Bishop here, and who defended the City against Auila the Harm. At his
first entrance into the town, (says the story) after he was invested Bishop,
he besought Agrippinus the Governor, that for his sake he would let loose all
his prisoners, ut omnes quos pro variis criminibus poenalis carcer detinebat
inclusos, in sui introitus gratiam redderet absolutos; when the Governor had
heard his request, he denied it: and presently a stone falls upon his head,
no man knew from whence: wounded and terrified with this, the Governor grants
his desire, recovereth her health: and ever since the custom has continued.
For the truth of this story, I intend to be no Champion: for I hold it
ridiculous and savouring too much of the Legend: but this I am certain of, that
every new Bishop makes a very solemn and majestic entry into the City; and at
his entry, releaseth a prisoner.

Let us follow the Bishop into his Church, and there we shall find him
entertained with an high Mass; the ceremonies whereof are very pretty and
absurd. To go over them all, would require a volume, I will therefore mention
those only wherein they differ from other Masses: and they are two: the one
fantastical, the other heathenish. For as soon as the priest at the altar has
read a certain lesson, but what, his voice was not audible enough to tell me:
out marches the Dean, or in his absence, the senior Canon, out of the Church.
Before him two or three torches, and a long cross silvered over, after him all
those of the Church, and lastly the lay people, both men and women: so that
there is none left to keep possession, but the Priest and the Altar; and such
strangers as come thither for curiosity, they go out at one door, and having
first circuited the quire, and afterward the body of the Church; they return
to their places: and the Priest proceeds. I have seen many a dumb show in a
play just like it. This only is the difference, that here we had no interpreter
nor Chorus afforded us to show us the mystery of this silent gesticulation.
The other addition which I observed here at the Mass (though I have since been
told that it is ordinary at high Masses, in the Cathedral Churches) was the
censing of the people: which was performed in this manner. Whilst the Priest
was busy at the Altar, there entered into the quire at a side door, two boys
in their Surplices, bearing wax-tapers in their hands: and immediately after
them the foresaid fellow with the Cross, in the rere there came two of the
Priests in their copes, and other stately vestiments: between both a young lad
with the incense-pot, made full of holes to let out the sum; which he swingeth
on all sides of him, with a chain, to which it was fastened: having thus marched
through the Church and censed the people, he ascends unto the Altar, and
there censeth the cross, the relics, the bread, the wine, the chalice, the
images: and I know not what not. A custom very much used amongst the Heathen.
Omnibus viris factae sunt statuse and ad eas thus and cerei, says Tully: and,
Jane tibi primam thura merumque fero, says Ovid in his de Fastis. So have we
in Martial, Te primum piathura rogent: and the like in diverse other writers of
ancient. At what time it crept into the Churches of the Christians, I cannot
tell. Sure I am it was not used in the primitive times, nor in the third age
after our Savior: save only in their burials, Sciant Sabaei (says Tertullian,
who at that time lived) pluris and cariores merces suas, Christianis
sepeliendis profligari, quam fumigantibus. Arnobius also in the 7 book adversus
gentes, disclaimeth the use of it: and yet the Council of Trent in the 22.
Session, defines it to be as boldly, ex Apostolica institutione and
traditione, as if the Apostles themselves had told them so. I know they had
rather seem to derive it from the 30 chap. and 7. verse. of Exodus: and so
Bishop Durand is of opinion in his Rationale divinorum: but this will not help
them. Aaron there is commanded only to burn incense on the Altar: and not to
cense men and images, crosses and relics, etc. as the Papists do. So that will
they, nill they, they must be counted followers of the Heathen: though I envy
them not the honor of being Jews.

From the history and view of the Church, proceed we to that of the Town: where
nothing occurreth more memorable then the great siege laid before it by the
English. A siege of great importance to both parties. France having been
totally won unto King Henry, if this Town had yielded, and once so nigh it was
to submit it self, that the people proffered to yield themselves to Philip Duke
of Burgundy, then a great consederate of our Nation: who had not been present
in the Camp. But this the English General would not consent to; and it was the
resolution of Antigonus i^ long time before us. Negavit Antigonus (says
Justine) se in ejus belli praedam socios admittere, in cujus periculum solus
descenderat. On this determinate sentence of the General (he was Montacute Earl
of Salisbury) the Town purposed to hold out a little longer, and was at the
last relieved by Joane D' Arc, a maid of Vaucoleur in Lorrein: whom they called
La Pusille: how that excellent soldier the General was slain, and the siege
raised, I need not relate. It is extant in all our Chronicles. This only now,
that ever since that time the people of Orleans keep a solemn procession on
every eighth day of May: on which day anno 1427. their City was delivered from
its enemies.

But the achievements of this brave Virago stayed not here, she thinks it not
enough to repulse her enemies unless she also vanquish them: armed therefore,
Cap a pe, she went to seek occasion of battle: and was always foremost, and in
the head of her troops. Ducit Amazonidum lunatis agmina bellis
Penthiselea furens: mediisque in millibus ardet.
For her first service she takes Jargeau, discomfiteth the English, which were
within it, and makes the Earl of Suffolk prisoner. Soon after followed the
battle of Patay: in which the English were driven out of the field, and the
great Talbot taken. This done, she accompanies Charles the 7. whose Angel
Guardian she was, through all Campague unto Rhemes: where she saw him solemnly
crowned: all the Towns of those Countries yielding upon the approach of her,
and the Kings Army. Finally, after many acts performed above the nature of her
sex, which I will not stand here to particulate, she was taken prisoner at the
siege of Campoigne: delivered over unto the Duke of Bedford, by him sent unto
Roven, and there burnt for a Witch on the 6. of July, anno 1431. There was also
another crime objected against her, as namely that she had abused the nature of
her sex, marching up and down in the habit of a man, Et nihil muliebre praeter
corpus gerens. Of all accusations the most impotent, for in what other habit
could she dress her self, undertaking, the actions of a General? and besides,
to have worn her woman's weeds in time of battle, had been to have betrayed her
safety; and to have made her self the mark of every arrow. It was therefore
requisite that she should array her self in complete harness; and in that
habit of complete armor, have those of Orleans erected her Statua all in
brass, upon the middle of their bridge.

As for that other imputation of being a Witch, saving the credit of those
which condemned her, and theirs also who in their writings have so reported
her: I dare be of the contrary opinion, for dividing her actions into two
parts, those which preceded her coming unto Orleans, and those which followed
it: I find much in it of cunning, somewhat perhaps of valor: but nothing that
is devilish. Her relieving of Orleans, and courage shown at the battails of
Patay and Gergeau, with her conducting of the King unto Rhemes: are not such
prodigies, that they need to be ascribed unto witchcraft. She was not the first
woman whom the world knew famed in arms, there being no Nation almost of the
earth, who have not had a Champion of this sex, to defend their Liberties: to
omit the whole Nation of Amazons. To the Jews in the time of their
afflictions, the Lord raised up salvation by means of two women, Deborah and
Judith: and God is not the God of the Jews only, but also of the Gentiles;
amongst the Syrians Zenobia Queen of Pabnira is very famous; the Romans whom
she often foiled, never mentioning her without honor. The like commendable
testimony they give of Velleda, a Queen amongst the Germans: a woman that much
hindered their affairs in that Country. Thus had the Goths their Amalasunta:
the Assyrians their Semiramis, the Scythians their Tomyris, the Romans their
Fulvia: all brave Captains, and such as posterity has admired without envy.
To come home unto our selves, the writers of the Romans mention the revolt of
Britain, and the slaughter of 70000 Raman Confederates under the conduct of
Voaditia: and she in the beginning of her encouragements to the action, tells
the people this, Solitum quidem Britannis foeminarum ductu bellare. Of all
these heroical Ladies, I read no accusation of witchcraft: invasive courage and
a sense of injury, being the arms they fought withal; neither can I see why
the Romans should exceed us in modesty; or that we need envy unto the French
this one female warrior, when it is a fortune which has befaln most Nations.
As for her achievements, they are not so much beyond a common being: but that
they may be imputed to natural means: for had she been a Witch, it is likely
she would have prevented the disgrace which her valor suffered, in the ditches
of Paris, though she could not avoid those of Compeigne, who took her prisoner:
the Devil at such an exigent only being accustomed to forsake those which he
has entangled. So that she enjoyed not such a perpetuity of felicity, as to
entitle her to the Devils assistance, she being sometimes conqueror, sometimes
overthrown, and at last imprisoned. Communia fortunae ludibria, the ordinary
sports of fortune. Her actions before her march to Orleans, have somewhat in
them of cunning, and perhaps of imposture, as the vision which she reported to
have incited her to these attempts, her finding out of the King disguised in
the habit of a country man; and her appointing to her self an old Sword
hanging in St. Katharines Church in Tours. The French were at this time merely
crest fallen: not to be raised but by miracle. This therefore is invented, and so
that which of all the rest must prove her a sorceresse, will only prove her an
impostor. Gerrard, Seigneur du Hailan, one of the best writers of France, is of
opinion that all that plot of her coming to the King, was contrived by three
Lords of the Court; to hearten the people; as if God now miraculously intended
the restoration of the Kingdom. Add to this, that she never commanded in any
battle, without the assistance of the best Captains of the French Nation: and
amongst whom was the Bastard of Orleans, who is thought to have put this device
into her head. The Lord of Bellay in his discourse of art military,
proceeds further, and makes her a man: only thus habited, pour fair revenir
le courage aux Francois: which, had it been so, would have been discovered at
the time of her burning. Others of the later French writers (for those of the
former age savor too much of the Legend) make her to be a lusty Less of
Lorrein, trained up by the Bastard of Orleans, and the Seigneur of
Baudricourte; only for this service. And that she might carry with her the
reputation of a Prophetess, and an Ambassadresse from heaven; admit this, and
farewell witchcraft. And for the sentence of her condemnation, and the
confirmation of it by the Divines and University of Paris; it is with me of no
moment: being composed only to humor the Victor. If this could sway me, I had
more reason to incline to the other party; for when Charles had settled his
estate, the same men, who had condemned her of sorcery, absolved her: and there
was also added in defense of her innocence, a Decree from the Court of Rome.
Joane then with me shall inherit the title of La pucille d' Orleans: with me
she shall be ranked amongst the famous Captains of her times; and be placed in
the same throne, equal with the valiantest of all her sex, in time before
her. Let those whom partiality has wrested aside from the path of truth,
proclaim her for a sorceresse, for my part I will not flatter my best fortunes
of my Country to the prejudice of a truth: neither will I ever be enduced to
think of this female warrier, otherwise then of a noble Captain.

-- Audetque viris concurrere virgo.
Penthesilea did it. Why not she
Without the stain of spells and sorcerie?
Why should those acts in her be counted sin,
Which in the other have commended bin?
Nor is it fit that France should be denied
This female soldier, sin^e all Realms beside,
Have had the honor of one: and relate
How much that sex has re-enforc'd the state
Of their decaying strengths. Let Scythia spare
To speak of Tomyris, the Assyrians care
Shall be no more to hear the deeds recited
Of Ninus wife. Nor are the Dutch delighted
To hear their Valleda extolled: the name
Of this French warrier has eclipsed their fame:
And silenced their achievements. Let the praise,
That Is due to virtue, wait upon her. Raise
An obelisque unto her, you of Gaul,
And let her acts live in the mouths of all
Speak boldly of her, and of her alone,
That never Lady was as good as Jone.
She died a virgin: 'twas because the earth
Held not a man, whose virtues, or whose birth
Might merit such a blessing. But above,
The gods provided her a fitting love:
And gave her to St. Denis, she with him
Protects the Lillies and their Diadem.
You then about whose armies she does watch,
Give her the honor due unto her match.
And when in field your standards you advance,
Cry loud, St. Denis and St. Jone for France.
CHAP. III.
The study of the Civil Law revived in Europe. The dead time of learning. The
Schools of Law in Orleans. The oeconomie of them. The Chancellor of Oxford
anciently appointed by the Diocesan. Their method here, and prodigality in
bestowing degrees. Orleans a great conflux of strangers. The language there.
The Corporation of Germans there. Their house and privileges. Dutch and
Latin. The difference between an Academie and an University.

I Have now done with the Town and City of Orleans, and am come unto the
University or Schools of Law which are in it; this being one of the first
places in which the study of the Civil Laws was revived in Europe. For
immediately after the death of Justinian, who out of no less then 2000 volumes
of law-writers had collected that body of the Imperial Laws, which we now
call the Digests, or the Pandects: the study of them grew neglected in these
Western parts, nor did any for a long time profess or read them; the reason
was, because Italy, France, Spain, England and Germany, having received new
Lords over them; as the Franks, Lombards, Saxons, Saracens, and others were
fain to submit themselves to their Laws. It happened afterward that Lotharius
Saxo the Emperor, wh(...)began his reign, anno 1126. (being 560 years after the
death of Justinian) having taken the City of Melphy in Naples, found there an
old copy of the Pandects. This he gave to the Pisans his confederates, as a
most reverend relick of Learning and Antiquity; whence it is called Littera
Pisana. Moreover he founded the University of Bologne or Bononia, ordering the
Civil Law to be professed there: one Wirner being the first Professor; upon
whose advice the said Emperor ordained that Bononia should be Legum and juris
Schola una and sola: and here was the first time and place of that study in the
Western Empire. But it was not the fate only of the Civil Laws, to be thus
neglected. All other parts of learning, both Arts and languages, were in the
same desperate estates; the Poets exclamation of O saeclum insipiens and
infacetum, never being so applyable as in those times. For it is with the
knowledge of good letters, as it was with the effects of nature; they have
times of grows alike, of perfection and of death. Like the sea, it has its
ebbs as well as its floods; and like the earth, it has its Winter, wherein the
seeds of it are deaded and bound up, as well as a Spring wherein it
reflourisheth. Thus the learning of the Greeks lay forgotten, and lost in
Europe for 700 years, even until Emanuel Chrysolaras taught it at Venice,
being driven out of his Country by the Turks. Thus the Philosophy of Aristotle
lay hidden in the moath of dust and libraries, Et nominabatur potius quod
legebatur, as Ludovicus Vives observes in his notes upon St. Austine, until
the time of Alexander Aphrodiseus. And thus also lay the elegancies of the
Roman tongue obscured, till that Erasmus, More and Reuchlyn, in the several
Kingdoms of Germany, England, and France, endeavored the restoration of it.

But to return to the Civil Law. After the foundation of the University of
Bologne, it pleased Philip le bell King of France to found another here at
Orleans, for the same purpose, anno 1312. which was the first School of that
profession on this side the mountains. This is evident by the Bull of Clement
V. dated at Lions in the year 1367. where he gives it this title, Fructiferum
universitatis Aurelianensts intra caetera citramontana studia, prius solennius,
antiquius, tam civilis, quam Canonicae facultatis studium. At the first there
were instituted eight Professors, now they are reduced to four only; the reason
of this decrease, being the increase of Universities. The place in which they
read their Lectures, is called Les grand escoles, and part of the City, La
Universite; neither of which attributes it can any way remit. College they
have none, either to lodge the students, or entertain the Professors, the
former sojourning in diverse places of the Town, these last in their several
houses. As for their place of reading which they call Les grans escoles, it is
only an old barn converted into a School, by the addition of five ranks of
forms, and a pew in the middle, you never saw a thing so mock its own name:
Lucus not being more properly called so a non lucendo, then this ruinous house
is a great School, because it is little. The present professors are Mr. Furner,
the Rector at my being there; Mr. Tuillerie, and Mr. Grand. The fourth of them
named Mr. Augrand, was newly dead, and his place like a dead pay among
Soldiers not supplied; in which estate was the function of Mr. Brodee, whose
office it was to read the Book of Institutions, unto such as come newly to the
Town. They read each of them an hour, in their turns, every morning in the
week, unless Holidays and Thursdayes, their hearers taking their Lectures in
their tables. Their principal office is that of the Rector, which every three
months descends down unto the next, so that once in a year, every one of the
professors has his turn of being Rector. The next in dignity unto him is the
Chancellor, whose office is during life, and in whose name all degrees are
given, and the Letters Authentical, as they term them, granted. The present
Chancellor is named Mr. Bouchier Dr. of Divinity and of both the Laws, and
Prebend also of St. Croix; his place is in the gift of the Bishop of Orleans;
and so are the Chancellors places in all France at the bestowing of the
Diocesan. Anciently it was thus also with us at Oxford; the Bishop of Lincoln
nominating to us our Chancellors, till the year 1370. William of Remington
being the first Chancellor elected by the University.

In the bestowing of their degrees here, they are very liberal, and deny no
man that is able to pay his fees. Legem ponere is with them more powerful then
legem dicere, and he that has but his gold ready, shall have a sooner
dispatch, then the best Scholar upon ticket. Ipse licet v^^ias Musis comitatus
Homere,
Si nihil attuleris, ibis Homere for as.
It is the money which disputes best with them, (...), money makes the man; said
the Greek, and English proverb. The exercise which is to be performed, before
the degree taken, is very little, and as trivially performed. When you have
chosen the Law which you mean to defend, they conduct you into an old ruinous
chamber. They call it their Library; for my part, I should have thought it to
have been the warehouse of some second hand Bookseller. Those few books which
were there, were as old as Printing; and could hardly make amongst them one
cover, to resist the violence of a rat. They stood not up endlong, but lay one
upon the other, and were joined together with cobwebs in stead of strings. He
that would ever guess them to have been looked into since the long reign of
ignorance, might justly have condemned his own charity; for my part, I was
prone to believe that the three last centuries of years had never seen the
inside of them; or that the poor paper had been troubled with the disease
called N^lime tangere. In this unluckie room do they hold their disputations,
unless they be solemn and full of expectation, and after two or three
arguments urged, commend the sufficiency of the Respondent, and pronounce him
worthy of his degree. That done, they cause his Authentical Letters to be
sealed; and in them they tell the Reader with what diligence and pains they
fitted the Candidati; that it is necessary to the Commonwealth of learning,
that industry should be honored; and that on that ground they have thought it
fitting p^st angustias sulamen, post vigilias requietem, post dolorem gaudia,
(for so as I remember goes the form) to recompense the labors of N. N. with
the degree of Doctor or Licentiate; with a great deal of the like formal
foolery, Et ad hunc modum fiunt Doctores.

From the study of the Law, proceed we unto that of the Language, which is said
to be better spoken here, then in any part of France, and certainly the people
hereof speak it more distinctly then the rest; I cannot say more elegantly. Yet
partly for this reason, partly because of the study of the Law, and partly
because of the sweetness of the air; the Town is never without abundance of
strangers of all Nations which are in correspondency with the French. But in
the greatest measure it is replenished with those of Germany who have here a
corporation, and indeed do make amongst themselves a better University, then
the University. This Corporation consists of a Procutator, a Questor, an
Assessor, two Bibliothecarii, and 12 Counselors. They have all of them their
d^stinct jurisdiction, and are solemnly elected by the rest of the company
every third month. The Consulship of R^me was never so welcome to Cicero, as
the office of Procurator is to a Dutch Gentleman; he for the time of his
command ordering the affairs of all his Nation; and to say truth, being much
respected by those of the Town. It is his office to admit of the young comers,
to receive the moneys due at their admission, and to receive an account of the
dispending of it of the Questor at the expiting o^ his charge. The office of
Assessor is like that of a Clerk of the Councels, and the Secretary mixed. For
he registreth the Acts of their Councels, writes Letters in the name of the
House to each of the French Kings, at their new coming to the Crown; and if any
prime or extraordinary Ambassador comes to the Town, he entertaineth him with
a speech. The Bibliothecarii look to the Library, in which they are bound to
remain three hours in a day in their several turns. A pretty room it is, very
plentifully furnished with choice books, and that at small charge; for it is
here the custom, that every one of the Nation at his departure, must leave
with them one book, of what kind or price it best pleases him. Besides, each
of the officers at the resigning up of his charge, gives unto the new Questor
a piece of gold about the value of a Pistolet, to be expended according as the
necessity of the state requires; which most an end is bestowed upon the
increase of their Library.

Next unto this citedes Lettres (as one of the French writers calls Paris) is
their Council house; an handsome square Chamber, and well furnished. In this
they hold their Consultations, and in this preserve their Records and
Privileges, the keeping of the one, and summoning the other, being merely in
the hands of the Procurator. About the Table they have five chairs for the five
principal Officers; those of the Council sitting round the Chamber on stools;
the arms of the Empire being placed directly over every of the seats. If it
happen that any of them die there, they all accompany him to his grave, in a
manner mixed so orderly of grief and state, that you would think the obsequies
of some great Potentate were solemnized. And to say truth of them, they are a
hearty and a loving Nation, not to one another only, but to strangers, and
especially to us of England. Only I would wish that in their speech and
complement, they would not use the Latin tongue, or else speak it more
congruously. You shall hardly find a man amongst them, which cannot make a
shift to express himself in that language; nor one amongst a hundred that can
do it Latinly. Galleriam, Compagniam, Gardinum, and the like, are as usual in
their common discourse, as to drink at three of the clock; and as familiar as
their sleep. Had they bent their studies that way, I persuade my self they
would have been excellent good at the Common Laws; their tongues so naturally
falling upon those words which are necessary to a Declaration. But amongst the
rest, I took notice of one Mr. Gebour, a man of that various mixture of words,
that you would have thought his tongue to have been a very Amsterdam of
languages. Cras main (...) nous irons ad magnam Galleriam, was one of his most
remarkable speeches, when we were at Paris; but here at Orleans we had them of
him thick and threefold. If ever he should chance to die in a strange place
where his Country could not be known, but by his tongue, it could not possible
be, but that more Nations would strive for him, then ever did for Homer. I had
before read of the confusion of Babel; in him I came acquainted with it, yet
this use might be made of him and his hotch-pot of languages, that a good
Chymicall Physician would make an excellent medicine of it against the stone.
In a word, to go no more upon the particular, I never knew a people that spoke
more words, and less Latin.

Of thesee ingredients is the University of Orleans, compounded, if at the
least it be lawful to call it an University, as I think it be not. The name of
Academie would beseem it better, and God grant (as Sanco Panco said of his
wife) it be able to discharge that calling. I know that those names are
indifferently used, but not properly. For an Academie (the name is derived from
a place near Athens, called Academia, where Plato first taught Philosophy) in
its strict and proper sense, is such a study, where some one or two Arts are
professed; as Law at Orleans and Bononia, and Physic at Montpelier and Padua;
an University is so called, Quod Universae ibi traduntur disciplinae, as the
name imports; where learning is professed in the generality, and in the whole
(...) of it; the first the Germans call Schola illustris; the latter Generale
studium; very opposite titles, and in which there is little of a German.

CHAP. IV.
Orleans not an University till the coming of the Jesuits. Their College
there by whom built. The Jesuits no singers. Their laudable and exact method
of teaching. Their policies in it. Received not without great difficulty into
Paris. Their houses in that University. Their strictness unto the rules of
their order. Much maliced by the other Priests and Friars. Why not sent into
England with the Queen; and of what order they were that came with her. Our
return to Paris.

THe difference between an University and an Academie standing thus, Those
which lived in our Fathers days could hardly have called Orleans an
University; a School of Law being the name most fit for it. At this time since
the coming of the Jesuits, that appellation may not misbecome it, they having
brought with them those parts of learning, which before were wanting in it: but
this has not been of any long standing, their College being not yet fully
finished. By an inscription over the gate, it seems to be the work of Mr.
Gagliery, one of the Advocates in the Parliament of Paris, a man of large
practice, and by consequence, of great possessions; and who having no child
but this College, is said to intend the fastening of his estate upon it. In
this house do those of this order apply themselves to the study of good
Letters, in the pursuit whereof, as the rest of this fracernity are, they are
good proficients, and much exceed all other sorts of Friars, as having better
teachers and more leisure to learn. That time which the other spent at high
Masses, and at their Canonical hours, these men bestowed upon their books:
they being exempted from these duties by their order. Upon this ground they
trouble not their heads with the crotchets of Music, nor spend their months
upon the chanting out of their services. They have other matters to employ
their brains upon, such as are the ruin of Kingdoms, and desolation of
Countries. It was the saying of Themistocles, being requested to play a lesson
on the Lute, That he could not fidle, but he could tell how to make a little
Town a great City. The like we may say of the Jesuits; They are no great
singers, but are well skilled in making little Cities great, and great ones
little. And certain it is, that they are so far from any ability or desire this
way, that upon any of their solemn Festivals, when their Statutes require
music, they are feign to hire the singing men of the next Cathedral. As here
upon the feast of their Patron St. Ignatius, being the 21 of July, they were
compelled to make use of the voices of the Church of St. Croix.

To this advantage of leisure is added the exact method of their teaching,
which is indeed so excellent, that the Protestants themselves in some places
send their sons to their Schools; upon desire to have them prove exquisite in
those arts they teach. To them resort the children of the rich as well as of
the poor, and that in such abundance, that wheresoever they settle, other
houses become in a manner desolate, or frequented only by those of the more
heavy and phlegmatic constitutions. Into their Schools when they have
received them, they place them in that forum or Classis into which they are best
fitted to enter. Of these Classes, the lowest is for Grammar: the second for
Composition, or the making of Theames, as we call it: the third for Poetry: the
fourth for Oratory: the fifth for Greek Grammar and compositions: the sixth for
the Poesy and Rhetoric of that language: the seventh for Logic: and the
eight and last for Philosophy. In each of these Schools there is a several
Reader or Institutor, who only minds that art, and the perfection of it,
which for that year he teaches. That year ended, he removes both himself and
Scholars with him, into the Classis or Schools next beyond him, till he has
brought them through the whole studies of humanity. In this last form, which
is that of Philosophy, he continues two years, which once expired, his
Scholars are made perfect in the University of learning, and themselves
manumitted from their labors, and permitted their private studies. Nor do they
only teach their Scholars an exactness in those several parts of Learning
which they handle, but they also endeavor to breed in them an obstinacy of
mind, and a sturdy eagerness of spirit to make them thereby hot prosecutors of
their own opinions, and impatient of any contrary consideration. This is it
which makes all those of their education, to affect victory in all the
controversies of wit or knowledge, with such a violence, that even in their
very Grammatical disputations, you shall find little boys maintain arguments
with such a fiery impatience, that you would think it above the nature of
their years. And all this they perform freely and for nothing; the poor
Paisants son being by them equally instructed, with that of the Noblest.

By this means they get unto their Society, great honor, and great strength;
honor in furnishing their Schools with so many persons of excellent quality
or Nobility, of whom afterward they make their best advantages for their
strength also. As for those of the poorer sort, they have also their ends upon
them; for by this free and liberal education of their children, the common
people do infinitely affect them: besides that, out of that rank of their
Scholars they assume such into their fraternity, whom they find to be of a
rare wit and excellent spirit, or any other way fitted for their profession.
Thus do they make their own purposes out of all conditions, and refuse no fish
which either they can draw into their nets, or which will offer it self unto
them. Si locuples quis est, avarisunt, si pauper, ambitiosi, quos non oriens,
non occidens satiaverit, soli omnium opes atque inopiam pari affectu
concupiscunt: Galgacus a British Captain, spoke it of the Soldiers of the
Romans Empire: we may as justly verify it of these Soldiers of the Romish
Church, they being the men whom neither the West nor East Indies can satisfy;
and who with a like fervencie desire the education of the needy and the
wealthy. Moreover, by this method of teaching they do not only strengthen
themselves in the affections of men a broad, but also fortify themselves
within their own walls at home; for by this means, there is not one of their
society, who has not only perfectly concocted in his head the whole (...) of
knowledge, but has gained unto himself the true art of speaking, and a
readiness of expressing what he knows; without the least demurre or
haesitancie: the greatest happiness of a Scholar. To conclude then and say no
more of them, and their rare abilities (for virtus and in host probatur) it is
thought by men of wisdom and judgment, that the planting of a College of
Jesuits in any place, is the only sure way to reestablish that Religion which
they profess, and in time to eat out the contrary.

This notwithstanding, they were at the first institution of them mightily
opposed, and no where more violently then in the University of Paris. An
University that stands much upon its liberty and privileges; to which this
order was imagined to be an hindrance: it being lawful for them to take any
degree in their own houses, without reference to any public exercise or
examination. In the year 1554. at what time they first began to set foot in
France, the College of the Sorbonists made a long decree against them, in the
end whereof are these words, and they are worth the reading, Uidetur haec
societas in negotio fidei periculosa, pacis Ecclesiae perturbativa, monasticae
religionis eversiva and magis ad destructionem, quam ad adificationem; a
censure too full of vinegar and bitterness. Afterward in the year 1564. they
preferred a Petition to the University, that the College which the Bishop of
Clermont had built for them, might be incorporated into the University, and
enjoy the immunities of it. Upon the Universities denial of their desire,
there arose a suit between them and the University in the high Court of
Parliament; Peter Versoris pleading for the Jesuits, and Stephen Pasquier for
the other party. In the end they were admitted, though upon terms of wondrous
strictness. Anno 1594. John Castle a novice of this order, having wounded
King Henry IV. in the mouth, occasioned the banishment of this Society out of
all France, into which they were not again received till the year 1604. and
then also upon limitations more strict then ever. Into Paris they were not
readmitted until anno 1606. neither had the liberty of reading Lectures and
instructing the youth confirmed unto them till anno 1611. which also was
compassed not without great trouble and vexation. Per varios casus and tot
discrimina rerum,
As Aeneas and his companions came into Latium.


In this University they have at this instant three houses, one of the Novices,
a second of Institutors, which they call the College; and a third of professed
Jesuits, which they style their Monastery, or the professed house of St.
Lewis. In their house of Novices they train up all those whom they have culled
out of their Schools to be of their order, and therein initiate them in the
arts of Jesuitism, and their mysteries of iniquity. They there teach them not
Grammatical constructions or composition, but instruct them in the paths of
virtue, courage and obedience, according to such examples as their Authors
afford them. This they say of themselves and their friends for them. But he
that made the funeral Oration for Henry IV. anno 1610. reports it otherwise,
Latini sermonis obtentu (says he) impurissime Gallicae juventutis mores
ingenuos foedant. Bonarum litterarum praetextu, pessimas edocent arts. Dum
ingenia excolunt, animas perdunt, etc. In their College they have the same
method of teaching which the others of their company use in Orleans. A College
first given unto them by Mr. William Pratt Bishop of Clermount, whose house it
was; but much beautifyed by themselves after his decease. For with the money
which he gave unto them by his will, which amounted (as it was thought) to
60000 crowns; they added to it the Court called De Langres, in St. James
street, anno 1582. Their Monastery or house of profession is that unto which
they retire themselves after they have discharged their duties in the College,
by reading and studying publicly in their several Classes. When they are
here, their studies both for time and quality is ad placitum; though generally
their only study in it is Policy, and the advantage of their cause. And indeed
out of this Trojan horse it is, that those firebrands and incendiaries are let
out to disturb and set in combustion the affairs of Christendom, out of this
forge come all those stratagems and tricks of Machiavillianism, which tend to
the ruin of the Protestants, and the desolation of their Countries. I speak
not this of their house of Profession here in Paris, either only or
principally; wheresoever they settle, they have a house of this nature, out of
which they issue to overthrow the Gospel. Being sent once by their Superiors,
a necessity is laid upon them of obedience, be the employment never so
dangerous. And certainly this Nation does most strictly obey the rules of their
order, of any whatsoever, not excepting the Capouchins nor the Carthusians This
I am witness to, that whereas the Divinity Lecture is to end at the tilling of
a Bell; one of the Society in the College of Clermont, reading about the fall
of the Angels, ended his Lecture with these words, Denique in quibuseunque; for
then was the warning given, and he durst not so far trespass upon his rule, as
to speak out his sentence.

But it is not the fate of these Jesuits to have great persons only, and
Universities only to oppose their fortunes: they have also the most accomplished
malice, that either the secular Priests or Friars amongst whom they live, can
fasten upon them. Some envy them for the greatness of their possessions, some
because of the excellency of their learning; some hate them for their power,
some for the shrewdness of their brains; all together making good that saying
of Paterculus, that Semper eminentis fortune comes est invidia. True indeed it
is, that the Jesuits have in a manner deserved all this clamor and stomach by
their own insolences; for they have not only drawn into their own hands all
the principal affairs of Court and state; but upon occasions cast all the
scorn and contempt they can, upon those of the other Orders. The Janissaries of
the Turk never more neglectfully speak of the Asapi, then those do of the
rest of the Clergy. A great crime in those men, who desire to be accounted such
excellent Masters of their own affections. Neither is the affection born to
them abroad, greater then that at home; amongst those I mean of the opposite
party; who being so often troubled and crumped by them, have little cause to
afford them a liking, and much less a welcome. Upon this reason they were not
sent into England with the Queen, although at first they were destinate to that
service. It was well known how odious that name was amongst us, and what little
countenance the Court or Country would have afforded them. They therefore who
had the Governance of that business, sent hither in their places the
Oratorians, or the Fratres congregationis Oratorii; a race of men never as yet
offensive to the English, further then the general defense of the Romish
cause, and so less subject to envy and exception. They were first instituted
by Philip Nerius, not long after the Jesuits, and advanced and dignified by
Pope Sixtus V. principally to this end, that by their incessant Sermons to the
people, of the lives of Saints, and other Ecclesiastical Antiquities, they
might get a new reputation; and so divert a little the torrent of the peoples
affections from the Jesuits. Baronius, that great and excellent Historian, and
Bozius that deadly enemy to the Soveraignity of Princes, were of the first
foundation of this Order.

I have now done with Orleans and the Jesuits, and must prepare for my return
to Paris. Which journey I begun the 23 of July, and ended the day following. We
went back the same way that we came, though we were not so fortunate as to
enjoy the same company we came in, for in stead of the good and acceptable
society of one of the French Nobles, some Gentlemen of Germany, and two Friars
of the Order of St. Austin; we had the perpetual vexation of four tradesmen of
Paris, two filles de joye, and an old woman; the Artizans so slovenly attired
and greasy in their apparel, that a most modest apprehension could have
conceived no better of them, then that they had been newly raked out of the
scullery. One of them by an Inkehorne that hung at his girdle, would have made
us believe that he had been a Notarie; but by the thread of his discourse, we
found out that he was a Sumner: so full of ribaldrie was it, and so rankly did
it favor of the French bawdie-courts. The rest of them talked according to
their skill, concerning the price of commodities; and who was the most likely
man of all the City, to be made one of the next years Eschevins. Of the two
wenches, one so extremely impudent, that even any immodest ear would have
abhorred her language, and of such a shameless deportment, that her very
behavior would have frighted lust out of the most incontinent man living.
Since I first knew mankind and the world, I never observed so much impudence
in the general, as I did then in her particular, and I hope shall never be so
miserable, as to suffer two days more the torment and hell of her
conversation. In a word, she was a wench born to shame all the Friars with whom
she had traficked, for she would not be casta, and could not be cauta, and so I
leave her, a creature extremely bold, because extremely faulty. And yet having
no good property to redeem both these, and other unlovely qualities; but (as
Sir Philip Sydney said of the Strumpet Baccha in the Arcadia) a little
counterfeit beauty disgraced with wandering eyes, and unwayed speeches. The
other of the younger females (for as yet I am doubtful whether I may call any
of them women) was of the same profession also, but not half so rampant as her
companion. Haec habitu casto cum non sit, casta videtur,
as Ausonius gives it one of the two wanton sisters. By her carriage a
charitable stranger would have thought her honest; and to that favorable
opinion had my self been inclinable, if a French Monsieur had not given me her
character at Orleans: besides there was an odd twinkling of her eye, which
spoiled the composedness of her countenance; otherwise she might have passed
for current. So that I may safely say of her, in respect of her fellow Harlot,
what Tacitus does of Pompey, in reference to Caesar, viz. Secretior Pompeius,
Caesare non melior. They were both equally guilty of the sin; though this last
had the more cunning to dissemble it, and avoid the infamy and censure due
unto it. And so I come to the old woman, which was the last of our goodly
companions. A woman so old, that I am not at this day fully resolved whether
she were ever young or no. 'T was well I had read the Scriptures, otherwise I
might have been very prone to have thought her one of the first pieces of the
creation, and that by some mischance or other, she had escaped the flood; her
face was for all the world like unto that of Sibylla Erythraea in an old print,
or that of Solomon's two harlots in the painted cloth; you could not at the
least but have imagined her one of the Relics of the first age after the
building of Babel; for her very complexion was a confusion more dreadful then
that of languages. As yet I am uncertain whether the Poem of our arch-poet
Spencer, entitled, The Ruins of time, was not purposely intended on her; sure
I am it is very applyable in the title. But I might have saved all this labor:
Ovid in his description of Fames, has most exactly given us her portraicture;
and out of him, and the eight book of his Metamorphosis, you may take this view
of her.

Nullus erat crinis, cava lumina, pallor in ore,
Labra incana situ, scabri ru^igine dentes,
Dura cutis, per quam spectari viscera possent;
Ventris erat pro ventre locus: pendere putares
Pectus, et a spinae tantummodo crate teneri. Unhair'd, pale-faced, her eyes
sunk in her head,
Lips hoary-white, and teeth most rustie-red,
Through her course skin, her guts you might epsy,
In what estate and posture they did lie.
Belly she had none, only there was seen
The place whereas her belly should have been.
And with her hips her body did agree,
As if 'twas fastened by Geometry.


But of this our companion, as also of the rest of the Coachfull, Sunday-night,
and our arrival at Paris, has at the last delivered us. A blessing for which
I can never be sufficiently thankful; and thus -- Dedit Deus his quoque finem.


The End of the Third Book.
A SURVEY OF THE STATE of FRANCE.
PICARDIE: OR, THE FOURTH BOOK.
CHAP. I.
Our return toward England. More of the Hugonots hate unto Crosses. The town
of Luzarch, and St. Loupae. The Country of Picardie and people. The Picts of
Britain not of this Country. Mr. Lee Dignicoes Governor of Picardie. The office
of Constable what it is in France. By whom the place supplied in England. The
marble table in France, and causes there handled. Clermount, and the Castle
there. The war raised up by the Princes against D'Ancre. What his designs
might tend to, etc.

JUly the 27. having dispatched that business which brought us into France,
and surveyed as much of the Country, as that opportunity would permit, we
began our journey toward England in a Coach of Amiens. Better accompaned we
were then when we came from Orleans, for here we had Gentlemen of the choicest
fashion, very ingenious, and in my opinion of finer condition then any I had
met withal in all my acquaintance with that Nation. We had no vexation with us
in the shape of a French woman, which appeared unto me somewhat miraculous, to
torment our ears with her discourse, or punish our eyes with her complexion.
Thus associated we began to jog toward St. Loup, where that night we were to
be lodged. The Country such as already I have described it in the Isle of
France, save that beyond St. Denis it began to be somewhat more hilly. By the
way I observed those little crossets erected in the memory of St. Denis, as
being vainly supposed to be his resting places, when he ran from Mont-martre
with his head in his hand, which the zealous madness of the Hugonots had
thrown down, and were now reedified by King Lewis. It could not but call to
mind the hate of that Nation unto that harmless monument of Christ's
sufferings, the Cross; which is grown it seems so exorbitant, that the
Papists make use of it to discover an Hugonot. I remember as I passed by water
from Amiens to Abbeville, we met in the boat with a levy of French
Gentlewomen; to one of them, with that French as I had, I applied my self, and
she perceiving me to be English, questioned my Religion. I answered (as I
safely might) that I was a Catholic: and she for her better satisfaction
proffered me the little cross which was on the top of her beads to kiss, (and
rather should I desire to kiss it then many of their lips) whereupon the rest
of the company gave of me this verdit, that I was Un urai Christien, and ne
point un Hugonot. But to proceed in our journall. The same day we parted from
Paris, we passed through the Town of Luzarch, and came to that of St. Loup. The
first famous only in its owner, which is the Count of Soissons. The second in
an Abbey there situate built in memory of St. Lupus Bishop of Trios in
Champagne. These Towns passed, we were entered into Picardie.

Picardie is divided into the higher, which contains the Countries of Calice
and Boulogne, with the Town Monst^^vill: and the lower, in which are the goodly
Cities of Amiens, Abbeville, and many other places of principal note. The
higher which is the lesser, and more Northern part is bounded North and West
with the English Ocean; and on the East with Flanders and Artoys. The lower,
which is the larger, the richer and the more Southern, has on the East the
little Country of Veromandys; on the West Normandy; and on the South the
Country of Champagne. In length it comprehends all the 51 degree of
Latitude, and three parts of the 50; extending from Calice in the North, to
Clermont in the South. In breadth it is of a great inequality. For the higher
Picardie is like Linea amongst the Logitians, which they desine to be longitudo
sine latitudine, it being indeed nothing in a manner, but a mere border. The
lower is of a larger breadth, and contains in it the whole 24 degree of
longitude, and a fourth part of the 23; so that by the proportion of degrees,
this Province is 105 miles long, and 25 broad.

Concerning the name of Pieardie, it is a difficulty beyond my reading and my
conjecture. All I can do is to overthrow the less probable opinions of other
writers, and make my self subject to that scoff which Lactantius bestows on
Aristotle, Recte hic sustulit aliorum disciplinas, sed non recte fundavit suam.
Some then derive it from Piquon, one forsooth of Alexander the greats Captains,
whom they fain to have built Amiens and Piquigni; an absurdity not to be
honored with a consutation: some from the Town of Piquigni it self, of which
mind is Mercator; but that Town never was of such note as to name a Province:
others derive it from Picardus a fanaticall Heretic of these parts, about the
year 1300 and after; but the appellation is far older then the man: others
fetch it from the Picts of Britain, whom they would have to fly hither after
the discomfiture of their Empire and Nation by the Scots; a transmigration of
which all Histories are silent: this being the verdict of the best Antiquary
ever was nursed up in. Britain, Picti itaque funestissimo praelio debellati,
aut penit us fuerunt extincti, aut paulatim in Scotorum nomen and nationem
concesserint. Lastly, some others derive the name from Pique, which signifies
a Lance or a Pike, the inventors of which warlike weapon, the fathers of this
device would fain make them. In like manner some of Germany have labored to
prove that the Saxons had that name given them from the short swords which they
used to wear, called in their language Scaxon; but neither truly. For my part
I have consulted Ptolemie for all the Nations; and the Itinerarium of Antonius
for all the Towns in this tract, but can find none on which I may fasten any
probable Etymology. All therefore that I can say, is, that which Robert Bishop
of Auranches in Normandy has said before me, and that only in the general,
Quos itaque aetas nostra Picardos appellat verae Belgae dicendi sunt: qui post
modum in Picardorum nomen transmigrarunt.

This Country is very plentiful of Corn and other grain, with which it
abundantly furnishes Paris; and has in it more store of pasture and meadow
grounds, then I else saw in any part of France. In Vines only it is defective,
and that (as it is thought) more by the want of industry in the people, then
any inhability in the soil. For indeed they are a people that will not labor
more then they needs must, standing much upon their state and distance, and in
the carriage of their bodies favoring a little of the Spaniard; whence
Picard^er, to play the Picard, is usually said of those who are lofty in their
looks, or gluttonous at their tables: this last being also one of the symptoms
of a Picard. The Governor of this Province is the Duke of Les Diguieres, into
which office he succeeded Mr. Luynes, as also he did into that of the
Constable. Two preferments which he purchased at a deer rate, having sold or
abandoned that religion to-compasse them, which he had prosessed more then 60
years together; an apostasy most unworthy of the man, who having for so many
years supported the cause of religion, has now forsaken it; and thereby made
himself gilty of the cowardice of M. Antonius, Qui cum in desertores saevire
debuerat, desertor sui exertilus factus est. But I fear an heavier censure
waits upon him; the crown of immortality not being promised to all those
which run, but to those only which hold out till the end. For the present
indeed he has augmented his honors by this office, which is the principal of
all France. He has place and command before and over all the Peers and Princes
of the blood; and at the Coronation of the French Kings, ministers the oath:
when he enters a City in state, or upon the ^redition of it, he goes before
with the Sword naked; and when the King sits in an assembly of the three
estates, he is placed at the Kings right hand. He has command over all his
Majesty's forces; and he that kills him is guilty of high treason. He sits
also as chief Judge at the Table of marble upon all suits, actions, persons,
and complaints whatsoever concerning the wars.

This Table de Marbre was wont to be continually in the great hall of the
Palais at Paris; from whence upon the burnning of that hall, it was removed to
the Louure. At this table does the Admiral of France hold his Sessions, to
judge of trafick, prizes, letters of marts, piracy, and business of the like
nature. At this table judges also Le grand Maistre des eaues et forests; we
may call him the Justice in Eire of all his Majesty's Forests and waters. The
actions here handled, are Thefts, and abuses committed in the Kings Forests,
Rivers, Parks, Fishponds, and the like. In the absence of the grand Maistre,
the power of sentence rests in the Les grand Maistres Enquesteurs, et
generaux reformateurs, who have under their command no fewer then 300
subordinate officers. Here also sit the Marshals of France, which are ten in
number, sometimes in their own power, and sometimes as Assistants to the
Constable, under whose direction they are. With us in England the Marshalship
is more entire, as that which besides its own jurisdiction, has now
incorporated into it self most of the authority, anciently belonging to the
Constables, which office ended in the death of Edward Lord Duke of Buckingham,
the last hereditary and proprietary Constable of England. This office of
Constable, to note unto you by the way so much, was first instituted by Lewis
the gross, who began his reign, anno 1110. and conferred on Mr. Les Diguieres
on the 24 of July, 1622. in the Cathedral Church of Grenoble, where he first
heard Mass, and where he was installed Knight of both Orders. And so I leave
the Constable to take a view of his Province, a man at this time beloved of
neither parties; hated by the Protestants as an Apostata, and suspected by the
Papists not to be entire.

To proceed, July the 28. we came unto Clermont, the first Town of any note
that we met with in Picardie: a pretty neat Town, and finely seated on the
rising of an hill. For the defense of it, it has on the upper side of it, an
indifferent large Castle, and such which were the situation of it somewhat
helped by the strength of Art, might be brought to do good service. Toward the
Town, it is of an easy access, to the fieldwards more difficult, as being
built on the perpendicular fall of a rock. In the year 1615, it was made good
by Mr. Harancourt with a Regiment of eight Companies, who kept it in the name
of the Prince of Conde, and the rest of that confederacy; but it held not long,
for at the Marshall D' Ancres coming before it with his Army, and Artillery, it
was presently yielded. This war, which was the second civil war which had
happened in the reign of King Lewis, was undertaken by the Princes, chiefly to
thwart the designs of the Queen mother, and crush the powerfulness of her
grand favorite, the Marshall. The pretense (as in such cases it commonly is)
was the good of the Commonwealth: the occasion, the cross marriages then
consummated by the Marshall, between the Kings of France and Spain; for by
those marriages they seemed to fear the augmentation of the Spaniards
greatness; the alienation of the affections of their ancient allies; and by
consequence the ruin of the French Empire. But it was not the fate of D'
Anire, as yet to persh. Two years more of command and insolences, his
destinies allowed him, and then he tumbled. This opportunity of his death
ending the third civil war, each of which his faulty greatness had occasioned.

What the ambition of his designs did tend to, I dare not absolutely
determine; though like enough it is, that they aimed further then at a private,
or a personal potencie; for having under the favor and countenance of the
Queen mother made himself master of the Kings ear, and of his Council; he made
a shift to get into his own hands an authority almost as unlimited, as that of
the old Mayre of the Palace. For he had suppressed the liberty of the general
estates, and of the sovereign Courts; removed all the officers and Counselors
of the last King; ravished one of the Presidents of the great Chamber, by name
Mr. le Jay, out of the Parliament into the prison, and planted Garrisons of his
own in most of the good Towns of Normandy, of which Province he was Governor.
Add to this, that he had caused the Prince of Conde, being acknowledged the
first Prince of the blood, to be imprisoned in the Bastile, and had searched
into the continuance of the lives of the King and his brother, by the help of
Sorcery and Witchcraft. Besides, he was suspected to have had secret
intelligence with some forain Princes, ill willers to the State; and had
disgraced some and neglected others of the Kings old confederates. Certainly
these actions seem to import some project beyond a private and obedient
greatness, though I can hardly believe that he durst be ambitious of the
Crown; for being a fellow of a low birth, his heart could not but be too narrow
for such an hope, and having no party amongst the Nobility, and being less
gracious with the people, he was altogether destitute of means to compass it.
I therefore am of an opinion, that the Spanish gold had corrupted him to some
project concerning the enlargement of that Empire, upon the French dominion;
which the cross marriages, whereof he was the contriver, and which seemed so
full of danger to all the best Patriots of France, may seem to demonstrate. And
again, at that time when he had put the Realm into his third combustion, the
King of Spain had an Army on foot against the Duke of Savoy, and another in the
Countries of Cleve and Juliers; which had not the timely fall of this Monster,
and the peace ensuing prevented it, might both perhaps have met together in the
midst of France. But this only conjecturall.

CHAP. II.
The fair City of Amiens; and greatness of it. The English feasted within it;
and the error of that action; the Town how built, seated and fortified. The
Citadell of it, thought to be impregnable. Not permitted to be viewed. The
overmuch opennesse of the English in discovering their strength. The watch and
form of Government in the Town. Amiens a Visdamate: to whom it pertains. What
that honor is in France. And how many there enjoy it, etc.

THat night we went from Clermont to a Town called Bret^aul, where we were
harbored: being from Clermont 6 French leagues; and from Paris 20. Our
entertainment there such as in other places: as sluttish, as inconvenient. The
next day being the 29, about ten of the clock, we had a sight of the goodly
City of Amiens. A City of some four English miles circuit within the walls,
which is all the greatness of it: for without the walls it has houses few or
none. A City very capacious, and for that cause has been many times honored
with the persons and trains of many great Princes: besides that once it
entertained almost an whole Army of the English. For King Lewis the 11. having
made an advantageous peace with our Edward 4. and perceiving how ungrateful it
was amongst the military men, he intended also to give them some manner of
satisfaction: He sent therefore unto them 300 carts laden with the best Wines:
and seeing how acceptable a present that had proved; he intended also to feast
them in Amiens, within half a league of which their Camp was lodged. This
entertainment lasted four days, each street having in it two long tables: and
each table being furnished with very plentiful provision. Neither were they
denied entrance into any of the Taverns, and Victualling houses, or therein
stinted either in meats, or drinks; whatsoever was called for, being defrayed
by King Lewis. An action wherein, if mine opinion might carry it, there was
little of the politician. For there were permitted to enter into the Town so
many at once of the English men, that had they been but so minded, they might
easily have made themselves Masters both of the place, and of the Kings person.
Nine thousand are reckoned by Cumines to have been within it together, and most
of them armed: so that they might very easily have surprised the Gates, and let
in the rest of the Army. Those of the French Kings Counsel much feared it, and
therefore informed both Princes of the danger, the one of his Town, the other
of his Honor. But this jealousy was but a French distrust, and might well
have been spared: the English being of that Generals mind, who scorned to
steal a victory, and of that generous disposition, that they would not betray
their credits. Nunquam illis adei ulla opportuna visa est victoriae occasio,
quam damno pensarent fides: as the Historian of Tiberius. If this City then
escaped a sack or a surprisal, it cannot be imputed to the wisdom of the
French, but to the modesty and fair dealing of the English. But this was not
the only soloecism in point of state, committed by that great politic of his
time, King Lewis: there never being man so famed for his brain, that more
grossly overreached himself, then that Prince, though perhaps more frequently.

The buildings of this Town are of diverse materials, some built of stone,
others of wood, and some again of both. The streets very sweet and clean, and
the air not giving place to any for a lively pureness. Of their buildings the
principal are their Churches, whereof there are twelve only in number: Churches
I mean parochial, and besides those belonging to Religious houses. Next unto
them the work of most especial note, is a great and large Hospital; in method
and the disposing of the beds much like unto the Hostel Dieu in Paris, but in
number much inferior; Et me tamen rapuerant, and yet the decency of them did
much delight me. The sweetness and neatness of the Town, proceeded partly as
I said from the air, and partly from the convenience of the River of Some, on
which it is seated. For the river running in one entire bank at the further end
of the Town, is there divided into six channels, which almost at an equal
distance run through the several parts of it. Those channels thus divided,
receive into them all the ordure and filth, with which the Town otherwise might
be pestered: and affords the people a plentiful measure of water wherewith
to purge the lanes, and bie corners of it, as often as them lists. But this
is not all the benefit of these Channels: they bestow upon the City matter also
of commodity, which is the infinite number of Grist-mils, that are built upon
them. At the other end of the Town the Channels are again united into one
stream: both those places, as well of the division, as of the union of the
Channels being exceeding well fortified with chains and piles, and also with
bulwarks and outworks.

Neither is the Town well fortified and strengthened at those passages only: the
other parts of it having enough of strength to enable them to a long
resistance. The ditch round about it, save where it meets with the Citadell,
is exceeding deep, and steepie: the walls of a good height, broad, and composed
of earth and stone equally: the one making up the outside of them, and the
other the inside. The Gates are very large and strong, as well in the finewie
composition of themselves, as in the addition of the Drawbridge. Suburbs this
City has none, because a Town of war: nor any liberal circuit of territory,
because a frontier. Yet the people are indifferently wealthy, and have amongst
them good trading; besides the benefit of the Garrison, and the Cathedral. The
Garrison consists of 250 men, (500 in all they should be) who are continually
in pay to guard the Citadel, their pay eight Sols daily. The Governor of them
is the Duke of Chaune, who is also the Lieutenant or Deputy Governor of the
whole Province under the Constable: their Captain Mr. Le Noyre, said to be a
man of good experience, and worthy his place. This Citadel was built by Henry
4. as soon as he had recovered the Town from the Spaniards, anno 1597. It is
seated on the lower part of the City, though somewhat on the advantage of an
hill, and seems in mine opinion, better situate to command the Town, then to
defend it; or rather to recover the Town being taken, then to save it from
taking. They who have seen it, and know the arts of fortification, report it to
be impregnable. -- Quod nec Jo^is ira, nec ign^s,
Nec poterit ferrum, nec edax abolere vetustas.


Nor am I able to contradict it. For besides that it is a skill beyond my
profession, we were not permitted to come within it, or to take a survey of it,
but at a distance. As soon as we approached high unto it, one of the Garrison
proffes'd us the Musket: a sufficient warning not to be too venturous. So that
all which I could observe was this: that they had within themselves good plenty
of earth to make their Gabions, and repair their breaches. With the same
jealousy also, are the rest of the Forts and Towns of importance guarded in
this and other Countries: no people that ever I heard being so open in showing
their places of strength and safety unto strangers, as the English. For a dozen
of Ale a foreiner may pace over the curtain of Portsmouth, and measure every
stone and bulwark of it. For a shilling more he shall see their provision of
powder and other munition. And when that is done, if he will he shall walk the
round too. A French crown sathometh the walls of Dover Castle: and for a pint
of wine one may see the nakedness of the blockhouses at Gravesend. A
negligence which may one day cost us dearly: though we now think it not. For
what else do we in it, but commit that prodigal folly, for which Pltarch
condemned Pericles: that is, to break open all the pal^s and enclosures of our
land, to the end that every man might come in freely, and take away our fruit
at his pleasure. Jealousy, though a vice in a man toward his wife, is yet one
of the safest virtues in a Governor toward his fortress: and therefore I
could wish that an English man, would in this particular borrow a little of the
Italian.

Besides these soldiers which are continually in garrison for the defense of
the Citadell, there are also 300 which keep watch every night for the defense
of the City. The watchmen receive no pay of the King, but discharge that duty
amongst themselves, and in turns, every house finding one for that service,
twelve nights in the year. The weapons which they use, are pikes only, and
muskets: there being not one piece of Ordinance all about the Town, or on the
walls of it. The Governor of this Town, as it has reference to the King, is a
Bailly, who has belonging to him all the authority which belongs to a siege
Pres^dial. Under him he has a Lieutenant general, and particular; seven
Counselors, a public Notary, and other inferior Officers and Magistrates. As
it is a Corporation, the chief Governor of it is a Mayor, and next to him the
E^sohevins, or Sheriffs, as protectors of the inhabitants and their liberties:
besides those of the Common Council.

Another circumstance there is, which (...) this Town of Amiens, which is, that
it is a Visdamate: or that it gives honor to one of the Nobility, who is
called the Visdame of Amiens. This title at this time belongs to the Duke of
Chaune, Governor of the Ci^adell, together with the Lordship of Piquigni: both
which he obtained by marrying the daughter and heir of the last Visdame of
Amiens, and Lord of Piquigni, anno 1619. A marriage which much advanced his
fortunes, and which was compassed for him by the Constable Luynes his brother,
who also obtained for him of the King, the title of Duke: his highest attribute
before being that of Mr. de Cadinet, by which name he was known here in
England, at such time when he was sent extraordinary Ambassador to King James.
This honor of Visdame, is for ought I could ever see, used only in France.
True it is that in some old English Charters we meet with this title of
Vice-dominus. As in the Charter of King Edred to the Abbey of Crowland in
Lincolnshire, dated in the year 948. there is there subscribed Ego Ingulph
Vice-dominus: but with us, and at those times, this title was only used to
denote a subordination to some superior Lord, and not as an honorary attribute,
in which sense it is now used in France. Besides that, with us it was
frequently, though falsely used for Vice comes. Between which two offices of a
Vicount and a Visdame, there are found no small resemblances. For as they which
did gerere vicem Comitis, were called Vicecomites or Vicounts: so were they
also called Vidames or Vicedomini, qui domini episcopi vicem gerebant in
temporalibus. And as Vicounts from officers of the Earls became honorary: so
did the Vidames disclaim their relation to the Bishop, and became Signieural or
honorary also.

The Vidames then according to their first institution were the substitutes of
the greater Bishops, in matter of secular administration: for which cause,
though they have altered their tenure, they take all of them their denomination
from the chieftown of some Bishopric. Neither is there any of them, who
holds not of some Bishopric or other. Concerning the number of them that are
thus dignified I cannot determine. Mr. Glover, otherwise alled Somerset Herald,
in his Discourse of Nobility, published by Mr. Milles of Canterbury, puts it
down for absolute, that here are four only, viz. of Amiens, of Chartres, of
Chalons, and of Gerberey in Beauvais; but in this he has deceived both himself
and his readers, there being, besides those diverse others, as of Rheimes, Man's,
and the like. But the particular and exact number of them, together with the
place denominating, I leave to the French Heralds: unto whose profession it
principally belongs.

CHAP. III.
The Church of Nostre Dame in Amiens. The principal Churches in most Cities
called by her name. More honor performed to her then to her Savior. The
surpassing beauty of this Church on the cutside. The front of it. King Henry
the sevenths Chapel at Westminster. The curiousness of this Church within. By
what means it became to be so. The sumptuous masking closets in it. The
excellency of perspective works. Indulgences by whom first founded. The estate
of the Bishopric.

THere is yet one thing which adds more luster to the City of Amiens, then
either the Vidamate or the Citadel, which is the Church of Nostre Dame. A name
by which most of the principal Churches are known in France. There have we the
Nostre Dame in Roven, a second in Paris, a third in this City, a fou(...) in
Boulogne, all Cathedral: so also a Nostre Dame in Abbeville and another in
Estampes: the principal Church in those Towns also: had I seen more of their
Towns, I had met with more of her Temples: for of so many I have heard of, that
if there be more then two Churches in a Town, one shall be sure to be dedicated
unto her, and that one of the fairest: of any temples consecrated to the name
and memory of our Savior, ne gry quidem: there was not so much as a word
stirring, neither could I marvail at it, considering the honors done to her,
and those to her son; betwixt which there is so great a disproportion, that you
would have imagined that Mary, and not Jesus had been our Savior. For one
Pater noster the people are enjoined ten Ave Mary's, and to recompense one
pilgrimage to Christ's Sepulcher at Jerusalem, you shall hear 200 undertaken to
our Lady of Loretto: and whereas in their Calendar they have dedicated only
four festivals to our Savior, which are those of his birth, circumcision,
resurrection, and ascension, (all which the English Church also observes) for
the Virgins sake they have more then doubled the number. Thus do they solemnize
the feasts of her purification, and annuntiation, at the times which we also
do: of her visitation of Elizabeth, in July; of her dedication and assumption
in August: of her nativity in September: of her presentation, in November: and
of her conception in the womb of her mother, in December. To her have they
appropriated set forms of Prayers prescribed in the two books called, one
Officium, and the other Rosarium beatae Mariae virginis, whereas her son must
be contented with those oraisons which are in the common Masse-book. Her
shrines and images are more glorious and magnificent, then those of her son.
And in her Chapel are more vows paid, then before the Crucifix. But I cannot
blame the vulgar, when the great masters of their souls are thus also besotted.
The Officium before mentioned, published by the command of Pius 2. says thus
of her. Gaude Maria virgo; tu sola omnes haereses interemisti in universe
mundo. Catharinus in the Council of Trent, calls her fidelissimam dei sociam:
and he was modest if comp(...) with others. In one of their Councels, Christ's
na(...) quite forgotten, and the name of our Lady put in the place of it. For
thus it begins: Autoritate Dei patris, and beatae virginis, and omnium
sanctorum: but most horrible is that of one of their writers (I am loath to say
it was Bernard) Becta virgo monstra te esse matrem, jube filium: which Harding
in his confutation of the apology, endeavoring to make good; would needs have
it to be only an excess of mind, or a spiritual sport and dalliance. But from
all such sports and dalliances, no less then from the plague, pestilence and
famine, Good Lord deliver us.

Leaving our Lady, let us go to see her Church, which questionless is one of
the most glorious piles of building under the heavens. What Velleius says of
Augustus, that he was homo qui omnibus omnium gentium viris inducturus erat
caliginem: or what Suetonius spoke of Titus, when he called him Delitias humani
generis; both those attributes and more too, may I most fitly fasten on this
most magnificent Structure. The whole body of it is of most curious and polisht
stone, every where born up by buttresses of that excellent composure, that they
seem to add more of beauty to it then of strength. The Quire of it, as in great
Churches commonly it is, is of a fairer fabric then the body, thick set with
dainty pillars, and most of them reaching to the top of it, in the fashion of
an arch. I am not well able to judge, whether this Quire, or the Chapel of
King Henry VII. at Westminster, be the more exquisite piece of Architecture;
though I am not ignorant that Leland calls that of our King Miraculum orbis.
I persuade my self, that a most discerning eye could find out but little
difference between them, and that difference more subtle then sound: for if
such perfection may receive the word of more, it might be said, that there were
more majesty in this of Amiens, and more of loveliness in that of Westminster;
yet so that the ones majesty did exceed in loveliness, and the others
loveliness exceed in majesty. Tam been convenient, and in una sede morantur
Majestas and amor.


But now we are come unto the divinity of the workmanship; the front, which
presents it self unto us with two Towers, and three gates, that in the midst
being the principal. The front of Wells or Peterborough, which we so much
fame in England, deserve not to be named in the same myriad of years, with this
of Amiens; for here have you almost all the sacred stories engraven so lively,
that you would no longer think the story of Pygmalions image to be a fable; and
indeed at the first sight, you would confidently believe that the histories
there presented were not carved, but acted. To say no more of it (for all my
abilities will but disgrace it in the description) that of Zeuxis may most
fitly he inscribed upon it, Invisurum facilius aliquem, quam imitaturum; so
infinitely it is above the ambition of imitation.

The outside of the Church being admirable, you would have thought that art and
treasure had left nothing of themselves to bestow within it: yet herein would
such thoughts deceive you; for although the beauty of the Nostre dames in Paris
and Roven lay most without, yet here it serves but as a mask to hide and
conceal those most admirable graces which are within. As soon as entered you
will suppose that the materials of it are all of gold; such a luster does it
cast upon the eyes of all those that look upon it. The glory of Solomon's
Temple, next unto the description of it in the Scriptures, is best read in this
Church, of which it seems to have been the pattern. Jupiters house in heaven
described by the Poets, was never half so gorgeous as this on the earth; that
therefore which Ovid Poetically spoke concerning that imaginary Palace of the
false God, we may positively verify of this real mansion of the true God.

Hic locus est, quem, si verbis audacia detur,
Haud time am magni dixisse palatia regis.
To instance in particulars; the partition between the Quire and the body, is
so overlaid with gold, that the acutest sight could apprehend no other
substance of it; and yet the art of the workman so fully expressed its power on
it, that the cost was much inferior to the workmanship; so curiously was it
adorned with excellent Imagery, and what else the hand of man could fashion
into portraiture: on the top of it was the Statua of our Lady in the just
height and proportion of a woman, all either of gold or gilded; her child in
her arms, of the same making. She was there expressed as standing in a round
circle, unto every point of which she darted out rays and beams of gold; just
as the Sun does seem to do, when the Painter has drawn him in his full luster.
The glass of the Church generally, and particularly that about the Quire, and
the Virgins Chapel, is the fullest of life and beauty, of any that I ever yet
set eye upon. As much as that of St. Denis exceeds ours at Canterbury, so
much does this St. Denis. But the largest measure of perfection in it is that
of the Pillars, which though full of majesty in their height and compass, have
yet an ornament added to them, more majesticall then the majesty, for upon each
of them (there are four ranks of them in all) are fastened four Tables, which
take up their whole circle, every Table being in length two yards or
thereabout. In every of these, are the pictures of sundry men and women of the
better quality, so exactly limmed, that neither a curious eye could desire, nor
a cunning hand discharge it better. These Tables are the Monuments and Tombs of
the Burgers of the City, or of the noblest of the Country nigh unto it; who in
them have caused their pictures to be drawn with as great art and state as cost
could procure them, and in a subscription of golden letters, have eternized
their names and that act to all succeeding posterity. So that we may justly say
of the sumptuousness of this Church, what the Historian does of the Temple of
Delphos, Multa igitur ibi, and opulenta regum populorumque visuntur munera;
quaeque magnificentia sui, reddentium vota gratam voluntatem manifestant.
Neitheir have these Sepulchrall ornaments been of any great standing; the
antientest of them which I could observe having been erected since the year
1570. Add to these the curious works which the ingraver has cut in the main
walls, and then you perhaps will fall into the same ecstasy that I did, and pick
a quarrel with nature and the heavens, that they had not made you all into an
eye.

In this Church, as in others also of this party, besides the high Altar in the
midst of the Quire, there are diverse others in the private Clossets, which
are destinate to the mumbling of their low Masses. Of these there are in number
24. all of them seated between the two outermost ranks of pillars and the
walls; pretty neat places, and it is pity they should be abused to such
Idolatries. Of three of them I took especial notice, they being indeed the
chiefest of the rest, either for furniture or use.

The first of them was that of the Virgin, which was divided from the rest of
the Church by a sphere made of wood, which reached unto the tops of the
partitition. On the outside the Planets, Stars and Constellations were most
artificially set down in their proper orbs, with the times of absolving their
several courses. On the inside, those spaces were filled up with a pack of
Verses in commendation of our Lady. The Altar there, was for matter and making,
the most glorious that ever I yet looked upon; that on the other side in the
Quire, and over which is the image of our Savior, being more despicable then
were fit for the credit of a Village. Over this Altar was the Virgins Status,
all gilt, and of a full and wo^anly proportion; two Angels of the same
materials attending on her. Finally, this Chapel considering the richness
and glory of it, may be styled the Epitome of the Church; that attribute of
Immensae opulentiae Templum, being no more deservedly applyable to Solomon's
Temple, of which Tacitus spoke it, then to this.

The second of them, stood as I remember (...) the further end of the Church
behind the Quire, not directed for ought I could perceive to any particular
Saint, yet not to be passed over without a due remembrance. It was separated
from the rest of the Church by two ranks of br^sse pillars, one rank above the
other. The pillars all curiously casted, and such as would not shame the
workman. In this Massing Closet over the Altar there was hanged a tablet, which
by the many lines and shadows drawn in it, seemed to represent some piece of
building. Moving my hand toward mine eye in the nature and kind of a
Perspective glass, I perceived it to be the representation of that Church in
which I stood to see it; and it was done with that cunning, that it would
almost have persuaded a man out of himself, and made him believe, that he had
been in the Church yard. So perfectly did it show the majesty of the Front, the
beauty of the Isles, the number of the Pillars, and the glory of the Quire. A
kind of work, in mine opinion of all others the most excellent, and such as
would infinitely delight an optic. Had not such pieces been vulgar to me, it
had more affected me; but in the Gallery of Mr. Crane of Cambridge, once
belonging to that humorous Physician Mr. Butlar; and in that of Sir Noel Caron,
late Leiger for the States, at Lambeth, I had seen diverse of them, whereof some
perfector.

The third of these Massing closets was that of St. Peter, not so gorgeous as
the rest unto the eyes of them that saw it, but more useful to the souls of
those, who had a mind to take the benefit of it. For therein hung an
indulgence granted by Pope Gregory the fifteenth unto that Church; Dated the 27
of July, anno 1622. and of his Popedom the second. The contents of it were an
absolute exemption from the pains and place of Purgatory to those, who upon
the Feast of Al-soules (Festum commemorationis defunctorum, the brief calls
it) and the Octaves of it; would come to pay their devotions and moneys, in
that Temple. Had the extent of it been general, it would quickly have emptied
the Popes Treasury; and in time have put an end to Purgatory. His Holiness
therefore did wisely restrain it in his Bull, to the natives of that Diocese.
The Author and first founder of this granting of Indulgences (if it be lawful
to note so much by the way) was Pope Urban the second, who began his Popedom
anno 1088. who conferred them upon all such as would go unto the wars for
the recovering of Jerusalem; next they began to be conferred on those, who
would side with the Pope, in his unlawful wars against the Emperors. And
fastly, about the time of Clement the fifth (he began his reign anno 1306) they
began to be merchantable; for to him that gainful invention of the Church
Treasury, consisting of the merits of our Savior and the Saints is imputed.
But I return again to the Church of Amiens.

This glorious Church is the seat of a Bishop, who acknowledges for his
Metropolitan, the Archbishop of Rhemes, Primate of all France; the first Bishop
of it was one Firminus, a native of Pampelune in the Kingdom of Navarre, who
suffered Martyrdom under the Emperor Diocletian. To him succeeded another
Firminus, to whom the first foundation of the Church is attributed. The present
Diocesan is named Franciscus Faber, his intrade about 6000 crowns a year.
Chanoins there are in the Church to the number of forty, of whose revenue I
could not learn any thing; neither could I be so happy as to see the head of
St. John Baptist, whis is said to be here entire; though it cannot be denied
that a piece of it is in the holy Chapel at Paris, besides those fractions of
it which are in other places.

CHAP. IV.
Our Journey down the Some, and Company. The Town and Castle of Piquigni, for
what famous. Comines censure of the English in matter of Prophecies. A farewell
to the Church of Amiens. The Town and Castle of Pont D' Army. Abbeville how
seated; and the Garrison there. No Governor in it but the Mayor or Provost.
The Authors imprudent curiosity; and the courtesy of the Provost to him. The
French Posthorses how base and tired. My preferment to the Trunke-horse. The
horse of Philip de Comines. The Town and strength of Monstreville. The
importance of these three Towns to the French border, etc.

JUly the 30. we took boat to go down to Abbeville, by the river of Some; a
river of no great breadth, but deep and full; the boat which carried us was
much of the making of those Lighters which live upon the Thames, but that is
was made more wi^ldie and fit for speed. There were in it of us in all, to the
number of 30 persons or thereabouts: people of all conditions, and such with
whom a man of any humor might have found a companion. Under the tilt we espied
a bevie of Lasses, mixed with some young Gentlemen. To them we applied our
selves, and they taking a delight to hear our broken French, made much of our
company; for in that little time of our abode there we had learned only so much
of the French, as a little child after a years practice has of his mothers
tongue; Linguis dimidiata adhuc verba tentantibus; and loquela ipso offensantis
linguae fragmine dulciori. The Gentlewomen next those of Orleans, were the
handsomest that I had seen in France, very pleasant and affable; one of them
being she which put my Religion to the touchstone of kissing the cross of her
beads. Thus associated, we passed merrily down the stream, though slowly; the
delight which our language gave the company, and the content which their
liberal humanity afforded to us, beguiling the tediousness of the way.

The first thing we met with observable, was the Town and Castle of Piquigni.
The Town poor and beggarly, and so unlikely to have named the Province; as
Mercator would have it; besides the disproportion and dissimilitude of the
names. The Castle situate on the top of the hill, is now a place of more
pleasure then strength, as having command over an open and goodly Country,
which lies below it. It belongs as we have said, to the Vid(...)te of
Amiens; and so does the Town also. This Town is famous among the French for a
Tradition and a truth, the Tradition is of a famous defeat given unto the
English near unto it; but in whose reign, and under whose conduct, they could
not tell us. Being thus routed, they fled to this Town, into which their
enemies followed with them, intending to put them all to the sword: but at last
their fury being allaied, they proposed that mercy to them, which those of
G(...)ad did unto those of Ephraim in the Scriptures: life and liberty being
promised to all them which could pronounce this word Piquigni. It seems it
was not in those days a word possible for an English mouth; for the English
saying all of them Pequenie in stead of Piquigni, were all of them put to the
sword: thus far the Tradition. The Truth of story, by which this Town is famous
in the writers of both Nations, is an enterview here given betwixt our Edward
IV. and their Lewis XI. upon the concluding of their nine years truce. A
circumstance of no great moment of it self, had not Philip de Comines made it
such by one of his own observations. Upon this meeting the Chancellor of
England, being Bishop of Ely, made an oration to both Kings, beginning with a
prophecy; which said, that in this place of Piquigni, an honorable peace
should be concluded between the two Kingdoms: on this ground, which himself
also is the only man that relates, he has built two observations; the one (I
have not the original by me) That the English men are never unfurnished with
Prophesies; the other, That they ground every thing they speak upon Prophesies.
How far those times were guilty of that humor, I cannot say; though sure I am,
that we are not the only men that were so affected. Paulus Jovius in some place
of his Histories (I remember not the particular) has vindicated that quarrel
for us, and fastened the same imputation on the French. So true is that of the
Tragedian, Quod quisque fecit patitur, authorem scelus repetit. And now being
past Piquigni, I have lost the sight of the Church of Amiens.

The fairest Fabric, and most rich to see
That ere was guilty of mortality.
No present Structure like it, nor can fame
In all its bed-rols boast an equal name.
Let then the barbarous Egyptians cease
So to extol their huge Pyramides;
Let them grow silent of their Pharus, and
Conceal the other triumph of their Land.
And let the Carians henceforth leave to raise
Their Mausolaea with such endless praise.
This Church alone does the(...) much excel,
As they the lowest Cottages, where do dwell
The least of men: as they those urnes which keep
The s(...)st ashes which are laid to sleep.
Nor be thou vexed thou glorious Queen of night,
Nor let a cloud of darkness mesk thy light.
That renewnd Temple which the Greeks did call
The worlds seventh wonder, and the fairest of all:
That pile so famous, that the world did see
Two only great and high, thy same and thee:
Is neither burnt and perished, Ephesus
Survives the follies of Erostratus.
Only thy name in Europe to advance,
It was transported to the Realm of France.
And here it stands, not robbed of any grace
Which there it had; nor altered, save in place.
Cast thy beams on it, and twill soon be proved
Thy Temple was not ruined but removed.
Nor are thy rites so changed; but thou wilt aver
This Christian is thy old Idolater.
But oh good God! how long shall thy decree
Permit this Temple to Idolatry?
How long shall they profane this Church, and make
Those sacred walls and pavements to partake
Of their loud sins: and here that Doctrine teach,
Against which the very stones do seem to preach?
Reduce them Lord unto thee; make them see
How ill this building and their rites agree:
Or make them know, though they be still the same,
This house was purposed only to thy name.
The next place of note that the water conveied us to, was the Town and Castle
of Pont^d' Arm: a place now scarce visible in the ruins, and belonging to one
Mr. Quercy. It took name, as they say, from a bridge here built for the
transportation of an Army; but this I cannot justify. Three leagues down the
river is the Town of Abbeville; a Town conveniently seated on the Some, which
runs through it. It is of greater circuit within the walls, then the City of
Amiens, and has four Parish Churches more then it; but is not so beautiful,
nor so populous. For the houses here are of an older stamp, and there is
within the Town no scarcity of wast ground. I went round about the walls, and
observed the thinness of the houses, and the largeness of the fields, which are
of that capacity and extent, that for ought I could apprehend, the Town need
never fear to be compelled by famine, if those fields were husbanded to the
best advantages. The walls are of earth within and stone without, of an unequal
breadth, and in some places ruinous. A Castle it once had, of which there is
now scarce any thing remaining. In stead of which, and in places more
convenient, they built out three Bastions, very large and capacious; and such
well manned need not yield upon a summons. There are also a couple of mounts
raised nigh unto the wall, at that place where the Country is most plain, upon
which good Ordinance would have good command; but at this time there were none
upon it. Without the walls it is diversely strengthened, having in some places a
deep ditch without water, in some a shallower ditch but well filled by the
benefit of the river, in others only a moorish and fennie level, more
dangerous to the enemy, and secure to the Town, then either of the rest, and
therefore never guarded by the Soldiers of the Garrison. But the chief
strength of it, is five Companies of Swiss, 100 in a company, proper tall
fellows in appearance, and such as one would imagine fit for the service. It
was my chance to see them begin their watch; to which employment they advanced
with so good order, and such a show of stomach, as if they had not gone to
guard a Town, but possess one. Their watch was at Port de Boys, and Port
St. Valery; the first lying near un- Hesain a frontier Town of Artoys; the
other five leagues only from the Sea and Haven of St. Valery. From those places
most danger was feared, and therefore there kept most of their Soldiers, and
all their Ordinance. Their Captain is named Mr. Aille a Grison by birth, and
reported for a good Soldier. Besides him they have no Military Commander; the
Mayor of the Town, contrary to the nature of Towns of war, being there in
highest authority. A privilege granted unto the Majors hereof, not long since,
as a reward due to one of their integrities, who understanding that the
Governor of the Town held intelligence with the Archduke; apprehended him and
sent him to the Court, where he received his punishment. This Abbeville (and so
I leave it, and in it my bevie of French lasses) is so called quasi Abbatis
Villa, as formerly belonging to the Abbot of it.

And yet before I leave this Town, I must needs take notice of an Adventure,
which might have proved prejudicial to me, if my good fortune had not overcome
all contrary accidents. My companions had no sooner landed out of the boat
which brought us from Amiens, but presently they betook themselves to the
Post House without the Town, that they might be ready for Bologne the next
morning. But I who did not think that I was to make such a gollopping journey
through France, as the foolish traveller affirmed he had made through Venice,
resolved to satisfy my self in all those particulars which I found capable of
note and observation. Which having done, and thinking I had still day enough
for my curiosities, I betook my self to the Corpse du guard, where being soon
known to be a Gentleman of England, I easily obtained leave to walk round about
the works of the Town, and to observe the situation, strength, and defenses of
it. But so it happened that before I came to the gate which led toward the
Post House, I found in newly locked up by the Captain of the watch son that
night, and thought I might have found passage at the next gate, had I hastened
toward it; yet I was so taken up with the orderly march of the Guards, being
all proper follows and well appointed, that before I came to that gate, it was
locked up also: which being the two only gates on that side of the River,
deprived me of all ordinary mean to come that night to my Companions, who were
resolved to be on horse back the next morning by the break of day. I had now
liberty enough to traverse and consult the streets, within which I seemed to be
imprisoned, but could meet none that could inform me how to free my self out
of that restraint; at last I met with and old Burger of a comely presence, who
I thought promised better satisfaction then the rest had given me; who being
acquainted with my desire of uniting my self with my companions, and the
difficulty which my curiosity had brought upon me, directed me to the house of
the Provost, who, as he told me, had the keeping of a Water gate under one of
the Arches of the wall by which the River passed through the Town, by which I
might find a way out of it, if I could woo him to make use of his privilege
in that point, which he thought hard, if not impossible to be effected. Well,
to the Provosts house I went, whom I sound at home, acquainted him that I came
with Letters from the Court of England, that I was returning thither with my
dispatches, that my companions being less curious then my self, had presently
betook themselves to their lodgings without the Town, that it would be a great
reproach to me, if I should not be in England as soon as they, and therefore
humbly did beseech him (in a^ good French as I could) that he would be my means
no set me on the other side of the River without the Town, which I understood
to be in his power. To this request he yielded with a great de^l of
cheerfulness, assuring me that he thought himself exceeding happy in having
opportunity of doing any acceptable service to an English Gentleman: which
said, he presently dispatched a servant for his Bayliffe delleaw, or Water
Bailiffe (being a sworn officer of the Town) to attend upon him, and in the
mean time entertained himself with such discourses as I was able to make him of
the Queens reception. News being brought that the Water Bailiffe was coming
forwards, he conducted me into a low Parlor very handsomely furnished, where I
found a Banquet or Collation provided for me, consisting of cold bake-meats,
choice Marmelets, and most excellent Wines, and (which I looked upon as the
greater favor) his Wife and Daughters ready for my entertainment. We had
scarce ended this refreshment, when the Bailiff brought word that he had made a
boat ready to carry me to the Watergate; whereupon having had the honor to
kiss the hands of the women, I made account to take my leave of the Provost
also, who on the other side was resolved to accompany me to the water side, and
not to leave me till he saw me passed through the gate (whether out of civility
to me, or compliance with the trust reposed in him, I determine not) which was
done accordingly; one of his servants waiting on me till he had brought me to
the Inn where I was to lodge.

July the last, we took Post-horse for Bologne; if at the least we may call
those Posthorses, which we rid on. As lean they were, as Envy is in the Poet;
Macies in corpore toto, being most true of them. Neither were they only lean
enough to have their ribs numbered, but the very spur-gals had made such
casements through their skins, that it had been no great difficulty to have
surveyed their entrails. A strange kind of Cattle in my mine opinion, and such
as had neither flesh on their bones, nor skin on their flesh, nor hair on their
skin; sure I am they were not so ^lusty as the horses of the Sun in Ovid;
neither could we say of them Flammiferis implent hinnitibus auras. All the
^eighing we could hear from the proudest of them, was only an old dry cough,
which I Will assure you did much comfort me, for by that noise I first learned
there was life in them. Upon such Anatomies of horses, or to speak more
properly, upon such several heaps of bones, when I and my Companion mounted;
and when we expected, however they seemed outwardly, to see somewhat of the
Post in them, my beast began to move after an Aldermans pace, or like Envy in
Ovid, Surgit humi pigre, passuque incedit inerti.
Out of this gravity no persuasion could work them; the dull Jades being grown
unsensible of the spur, and to hearten them with wands would in short time have
disforested the Country. Now was the Cart of Dieppe thought a speedy
conveyance; and those that had the happiness of a Wagon were esteemed too
blessed, yea though it came with the hazard of the old woman and the wenches.
If good nature, or a sight of their journeyes end, did chance to put any of
them into a pace like unto a gallop, we were sure to have them tire in the
middle way, and so the remainder of the Stage was to be measured by our own
feet. Being weary of this trade, I made bold to dismount the Postilion, and
ascended the trunk-horse, where I sat in such a magnificent posture, that the
best Carrier in Paris might envy my felicity. Behind me I had a good large
Trunk and a Port mantle; before me a bundle of cloaks, a cloak-bag, and a
parcel of boots; sure I was if my stirrups could poise me equally on both
sides, that I could not likely fall backwards nor forwards. Thus preferred, I
encouraged my companions, who cast many an envious eye upon my prosperity. And
certainly there was not any of them, who might not more justly have said of me,
Tuas un meilleur temps que le Pape, then poor Lazarello's master did when he
allowed him an Onion only for four days. This circumstance I confess might
have well been omitted, had I not great example for it. Philip de Comines in
the mi^dest of his grave and serious relation of the Battle of Mont? Hierrie,
has a note much about this nature, which gave me encouragement, which is, That
himself had an old horse half tir^d (and this was just my case) who by chance
thrust h^s head into a pale of wine and drank it off, which made him lustier
and fresher that day, then ever before: but in that, his horse had better luck
then I had.

On the right hand of us, and almost in the middle way betwixt Abbeville and
Bologne, we left the Town of Monstrueil, which we had not leisure to see. It
seems daintily seated for command and resistance, as being built upon the top
and declivity of a hill. It is well strengthened with Bastions and Ramparts on
the outside, and has within it a Garrison of five Companies of Soldiers;
their Governor (as I learned of one of the Paisants) being called Lannoy And
indeed it concerns the King of France to look well to the Town of Monstrueil,
as being a border Town, within two miles of Artoys; and especially considering
that the taking of it, would cut off all intercourse between the Countries of
Bologne and Calais, with the rest of France. Of the like importance also are
the Towns of Abbeville and Amiens; and that the French Kings are not ignorant
of. Insomuch that those two only, together with that of St. Quintain, being put
into the hands of Philip D. of Burgundy, to draw him from the party of the
English; were redeemed again by Lewis XI. for 450000 crowns, an infinite sum
of money, according to the standard of those times; and yet it seems the King
of France had no bad bargain of it. For upon an hope only of regaining these
Towns, Charles Eal of Charaloys son to D. Philip undertook that war against
King Lewis, by which at the last, he lost his life, and hazarded his estate.

CHAP. V.
The County of Boulonnois, and Town of Boulogne by whom Enfranchized. The
present of Salt-butter. Boulogne divided inte two Towns. Procession in the
lower Town to divert the Plague. The form of it. Procession and the Letany by
whom brought into the Church. The high Town Garrisoned. The old man of
Boulogne; and the desperate visit which the Author bestowed upon him. The
neglect of the English in leaving open the Havens. The fraternity De la
Charity, and inconvenience of it. The costly Journey of Henry VIII. to
Boulogne. Sir Walt. Raleghs censure of that Prince condemned. The discourtesie
of Charles V. toward our Edward VI. The defense of the house of Burgundy how
chargeable to the Kings of England. Boulogne yielded back to the French; and on
what conditions. The courtesy and cunning of my Host of Bovillow.

WE are now come to the County of Boulonnois, which though a part of Picardie,
disdaineth yet to be so accounted, but will be reckoned as a County of it self.
It comprehends in it the Town of Boulogne, Estaples, and N^uf-Chastell,
besides diverse Villages; and consists much of Hills and Valleys, much after
the nature of England; the soil being indifferent fruitful of Corn, and
yielding more Grass then any other part of France (which we saw) for the
quantity. Neither is it only a County of it self, but it is in a manner also a
free County, it being holden immediately of the Virgin Mary, who is, no
question, a very gracious Landladie. For when King Lewis XI. after the decease
of Charles of Burgundy, had taken in Boulogne, anno 1477. as new Lord of the
Town (thus John de Serres relates it) he did homage without Sword or Spurs,
bare-headed and on his knee, before the Virgin Mary, offering unto her Image an
heart of massy gold, weighing 2000 crowns. He added also this, that he and his
successors Kings after him, should hold the County of Boulogne of the said
Virgin, and do homage unto her image in the great Church of the higher Town
dedicated to her name, paying at every change of a Vassal an heart of pure
gold of the same weight. Since that time, the Boulonnois being the Tenants of
our Lady, have enjoyed a perpetual exemption from many of those Tributes and
Taxes, under which the rest of France is miserably afflicted. Amongst others
they have been always freed from the Gabell of Salt; by reason whereof, and by
the goodness of their Pastures, they have there the best butter in all the
Kingdom. I said partly by reason of their salt, because having it at a low
rate, they do liberally season all their Butter with it; whereas they which buy
their Salt at the Kings price, cannot afford it any of that deer commodity:
upon this ground it is the custom of these of Boulonnois to send unto their
friends of France and Paris, a barrel of Butter seasoned according to their
fashion; a present no less ordinary and acceptable, then Turkies, Capons, and
the like, are from our Country Gentlemen to those of London.

As for the Town of Boulogne, it is divided into two parts, La haute Ville, and
La basse Ville, or the high Town, and the low Town, distant one from the other
above an hundred paces, and upwards. The high Town is seated upon the top of an
hill; the low Town upon the declivity of it, and toward the Haven. Or else we
may divide it into other parts, viz. the Town, and the City; the Town that
toward the water, and the City that which lies above it. It was made a City
in the reign of Henry II. anno 1553. at which time the City of Terovenne was
totally ruined by the Imperials, and the Bishops seat was removed hither; the
Church of Nostre Dame being made the Cathedral. There came along hither, upon
the remove of the Bishop, 20 Canons, which number is here still retained, their
revenue being about 1000 Livres yearly. As for the present Bishop, his name is
Pierre d' Arm, his intrado 2000 Livres, his Metropolitan he of Rhemes. The
Town, or as they call it, the low Town, is bigger then the City, and better
built, the streets larger, and the people richer, most of the Merchants living
in it, because it lies upon the Haven.

But that which made this low Town most pleasing to me, was a solemn procession
that passed through the streets of it, intending to pacify Gods anger, and
divert the plague, which at that time was in the City. In the first front there
was carried the Cross, and after that the holy or sanctified Banner; next unto
it followed all the Priests of the Town bare-headed, and in their Surplices,
singing as they went the Services destinate to that occasion. After them
followed the men, and next to them the women of the Town, by two and two, it
being so ordered by the Roman Rituall, U^ laici a clericis, foeminae a viris
prosequantur se paratae. On the other side of the street went the Brethren De
la Charity, every one of them holding in his hand a little triangular Banner,
or a Pennon; after them the boys and wenches. In this method did they measure
solemnly every lane and angle of the Town; the Priests singing, and ill the
people answering them in the same note. At the Church they began it with
prayers, and having visited all the Town, they returned again thither to end it
with the same devotion. An action very grave and solemn, and such as I could
well allow of, were it not only for one prayer which is always said at the
time of this performance, and the addition of the Banners. The Prayer is this:
Exaudi nos Deus salutaris noster, and intercedente beata and gloriosa Viigine,
and beato Sebastiano Martyr tuo (this Sebastian is their Aesculapius or
tutelary Saint against the Sickness) and omnibus Sanctis; populum tuum ab
iracundiae tuae terroribus libera, and misericordiae tuae fac largitate
securum, Amen. This only excepted, there is nothing in all the liturgy of it,
which can be offensive to any conscience, not idly scrupulous. -- These
Processions were first instituted by Pope Stephanus II. who began his Popedom
anno 752. the intent of them, as Platina reports it, Ad placandam Dei iram.
The first place that ever they went to in procession, was the Church of our
Lady in the Shambles; or Ad sanctam Dei genitricem ad praesepe, as the
Historiian calls them. As for the Letany, which is a principal part of it,
it was first compiled by Mamercus Bishop of Vienna in Daulphine, in the time of
Pope Leo the first, which was 308 years before the time of Stephanus. The
motive of it, was the often danger to which France was subject, by reason of
the frequency of Earthquakes. Since those beginnings, which were fair and
commendable, the Romish Church has added much to them of magnificence, and
somewhat of impiety, and prosanenesse. As for the Brethren De la Charity, I
could not learn any thing of their original, but much of their Office; for
they are bound to visit all such as are infected with the Plague, to minister
unto them all things necessary, and if they die, to shrowde them and carry them
to their graves. These duties they perform very willingly, as being possessed
with this fancy, that they are privileged from contagion, by virtue of their
Order. And to say the truth, they are most of them old, and so less subject to
it; and indeed such saplesse, thin, unbodied fellows, that one would think
almost no disease could catch them. Yet has their prerogative not always held
to them; of 33 of them in Calice, three only surviving the disease, about four
years since. But were the danger to which themselves are liable, all the
inconveniency of it, I should not much disallow it. There is a greater mischief
waits upon it, and that is, the infecting of others; they immediately after
their return from the Pest house, mixing themselves with any of their
neighbors. A most speedy means to spread the Pestilence, where it is once
begun; though neither they nor the people will be persuaded to it.

The City or the high Town, stands, as we have said, on the top of the hill,
environed with deep ditches, a strong wall, and closed with a treble gate and
two draw-bridges. A little small Town it is, not much above a flights shot
thwart, where it is widest; and has in it but one Church besides that of
Nostre Dame, which is Cathedral. The streets not many, and those narrow,
unless it be in the Marketplace, where the Corpus du Guarde is kept. What the
outworks are, or whether it have any or no, I cannot say. Even in this time of
League and Peace, their jealousy will not permit an English man to walk their
walls, either within or without the Town. A Castle they said that it has; but
such a one as serves more for a dwelling then a Fort. The Garrison of this
Town consists of five Companies, 60 in a Company, which amount in all to 300:
their Governor being Mr. D' Aumont, son to the Marshall D' Aumont; who so
faithfully adhered to Henry IV. in the beginning of his troubles. The cause why
this Town being so small, is so strongly Garrisoned; is the safe keeping of the
Haven which is under it, and the command of the passage from the Haven up into
the Country. The first of the services it can hardly perform, without much
injury to the low Town, which stands between them: but for the ready
discharge of the last, it is daintily seated, for though to spare the low Town,
they should permit an enemy to land; yet as soon as he is in his march up into
the higher Country, their Ordinance will tear him into pieces.

But for the immediate security of the Haven, their Ancestors did use to
fortify the old Tower, standing on the top of the hill, called La tour
d'ordre. It is said to have been built by Julius Caesar, at the time of his
second expedition into Britain; this Haven being then named Portus
Gessoriacus. This Tower which we now see, seems to be but the remainder of a
greater work; and by the height and situation of it, one would guess it to
have been the Keep or Watchtower unto the rest. It is built of rude and
vulgar stone, but strongly cemented together, the figure of it is six square,
every square of it being nine paces in length. A compass too little for a
Fortress, and therefore it is long since it was put to that use; it now
serving only as a Seamarke by day, and a Pharos by night; Ubi aecensae noctu
faces navigantium cursum dirigunt. The English man calls it, The old man of
Boulogne, and not improperly, for it has all the signs of age upon it. The
Sea by undermining it, has taken from it all the earth about two squares of
the bottom of it; the stones begin to drop out from the top, and upon the least
rising of the wind, you would think it were troubled with the Palsy. In a
word, two hard Winters, seconded with a violent tempest, makes it rubbish;
what therefore is wanting of present strength to the Haven in this ruin of a
Tower, the wisdom of this age has made good in the Garrison. And here me
thinks I might justly accuse the impolitick thrift of our former Kings of
England in not laying out some money upon the strength and safety of our Haven
Towns: not one of them, Portesm uth only excepted, being Garrisoned. True it
is, that Henry VIII. did erect Block-houses in many of them; but what bables
they are, and how unable to resist a Fleet royally appointed, is known to every
one. I know, indeed, we were sufficiently garrisoned by our Navy, could it
either keep a watch on all particular places, or had it not sometimes occasion
to be absent I hope our Kings are not of Darius mind in the story, Qui
gloriosius ratus est hostem repellere quam non admittere; neither will I take
upon me, to give counsel; only I could wish that we were not inferior to our
neighbors, in the greatness of our care; since we are equal to the best of
them in the goodness of our Country.

But though the old man was too old to perform this service, or to contribute
any thing toward the defense of the Town and Haven, yet I conceived my self
obliged to give him a visit; partly out of the reverent esteem which I had of
Antiquity, but principally that I might from thence take a full view of my
dearest England, from which for want of wind and Company, I was then
restrained. With these desires I made a boy of the Inn acquainted, who told me
that there was no way but by the Pest-houses from the Town to the Tower, and
that if we were noted to walk that way, we should both be presently shut up as
infected persons, or committed to the custody of the Brethren of Charity, the
worst condition of the two. But finding the impatiencie of my desires not so
easily satisfied, and the temptation of a Quart d' escue, not to be resisted;
he told me that if I would venture to climb up the Rocks, as he and other boys
of the Town used to do sometimes, he would undertake to bring me thither. This
offer I readily accepted, and as soon as the tide was low enough for us, we
began our walk upon the Beach till we came to the bottom of the Rocks where
the old man dwelt, and presently we began to mount, as if we meant to take the
Fortress by Scalado. I found the way more troublesome and dangerous then I had
conceived, and my self before I came half way toward the top, which seemed
still to be farther of then it was at the first, so vexed and bruised, that I
began to be amazed at my own fool-hardinesse, and was many times in a mind to
descend again; and questionless I had done accordingly, if a resolution of not
giving over any enterprise which I was engaged in, and a fear least the boy
would laugh at me when we came to the Town, had not pushed me on. Having
breathed our selves a while, we advanced again. The old cripple who is fabled
to have stolen Paul's weathercock, used not more pains and cunning in climbing
to the top of that lofty steeple, then we in mounting to the top of these
mighty Rocks; which when we had attained at last, me thought I was much of the
same humor with old Tom of Odcombe on the top of the Alps, of whom the Poet
has informed us:

That to the top at last being got,
With very much ado god wot;
He eagerly desired,
That mighty Jove would take the pains
To dash out their unworthy brains,
Who offered to be tired.
No sooner had my eyes got above the height of the Cliffes, but the first sight
I met with was a row of Pest-houses not far distant, and some old women drying
the insected clothes on a bank adjoining; the sight whereof had almost made me
recoil backward with more have then speed. But having overcome the danger of
that apprehension, I first saluted the old man, taking full notice of his great
stature, old age, and many infirmities. That done, I turned my face toward
England, which afforded me a most pleasing object; the course thereof lying
within my view at so great a length, that one might easily discern from Dover
Castle Eastward, to the West of Sussex: an object of so rich contentment and so
full of ravishing contemplations, that I was almost of his mind who said Bonum
est nobis esse hic; and certainly I had dwelt there longer, if the boy had not
put me in mind that the flood was coming back amain (as indeed it was) and that
if we made not speed to recover the Town before it was got near the foot of the
Rocks, we must of necessity be fain to abide there the greatest part of the
night till the ebb ensuing. On this advertisement; there was no need to bid me
hasten: but then a new humor seized upon me, when I beheld those dreadful
precipices, which I was to descend, together with the infinite distance of the
Beach from the top of the Rocks; the danger of being shut up by the sea, if we
made not have, and of tumbling into it if we did. But as curiosity had carried
me up, so necessity brought me down again, with greater safety, I confess,
then I had deserved. This adventure being like some of those actions of
Alexander the great, whereof Curtius tells us that they were, magis ad
temeritatis quam ad gloriae famam.

This Town of Boulogne, and the Country about it, was taken by Henry VIII. of
England, anno 1545. himself being in person at the siege; a very costly and
chargeable victory. The whole list of his Forces did amount to 44000 Foot, and
3000 Horse; Field pieces he drew after him above 100 besides those of smaller
making: and for the conveyance of their Ordinance, Baggage and other provision,
there were transported into the Continent, above 25000 horses. True it is, that
his designs had a further aim, had not Charles the Emperor, with whm he was
to join, left the field and made peace without him. So that, judging only by
the success of the expedition, we cannot but say, that the winning of
Boulonnois was a deer purchase. And indeed in this one particular Sir Walter
Raleigh in the Preface to his most excellent History says not amiss of him;
namely, That in his vain and fruitless expeditions abroad, he consumed more
treasure, then all the rest of our Victorious Kings before him did in their
several Conquests. The other part of his censure concerning that Prince, I
know not well what to think of, as merely composed of gall and bitterness.
Only I cannot but much marvel, that a man of his wisdom, being raised from
almost nothing by the daughter, could be so severely invective against the
Father; certainly a most charitable Judge cannot but condemn him of want of
true affection and duty to his Queen: seeing that it is as his late Majesty
has excellently noted in his (...), A thing monstrous to see a man love the
child, and bate the Parents; and therefore he earnestly enjoyneth his son
Henry, To repress the insolence of such as under pretense to tax a vice in
the person seek craftily to stain the race.

Presently after this taking of Boulogne, the French again endeavored their
gaining of it, even during the life of the Conqueror; but he was strong enough
to keep his gettings. After his death, the English being engaged in a war
against the Scots, and Ket having raised a rebellion in Norfolk, they began to
hope a Conquest of it, and that more violently then ever. Upon news of their
preparations, an Ambassador was dispatched to Charles the fifth, to desire
succor of him, and to lay before him the infancy and several necessities of
the young King, who was then about the age of ten years. This desire when the
Emperor had refused to hearken to, they besought him, that he would at the
least be pleased to take into his hands and keeping, the Town of Boulogne; and
that for no longer time, then until King Edward could make an end of the
troubles of his Subjects at home. An easy request. Yet did he not only deny to
satisfy the King in this, except he would restore the Catholic religion; but
he also expressly commanded that neither his men or munition, should go to the
assistance of the English. An ingratitude, for which I cannot find a fitting
epithet; confidering what fast friends the Kings of England had always been
to the united houses of Burgundy and Austria; what moneys they have helped
them with, and what sundry Wars they have made for them, both in Belgium to
maintain their Authority, and in France to augment their potencie.

From the marriage of Maximilian of the family of Austria, with the Lady Mary
of Burgundy, which happened in the year 1478. unto the death of Henry the
eighth, which fell in the year 1548. are just 70 years. In which time only it
is thought by men of knowledge and experience, that it cost the Kings of
England, at the least six millions of pounds, in the mere quarrels and defense
of the Princes of those houses. An expense, which might seem to have earned a
greater requital, then that now demanded. Upon this denial of the unmindfull
Emperor, a Treaty followed betwixt England and France. The effect of it was,
that Boulogne, and all the Country of it should be restored to the French,
they paying unto the English, at two days of payment 800000 Crowns. Other
Articles there were, but this the principal. And so the fortune of young
Edward in his beginning, was like that of Julius Caesar toward his end, Dum
clementiam, quam praestiterat, expectat, inca^tus ab ingratis occupatus est.

I am now at the point of leaving Boulogne, but must first reckon with mine
Host, to whom we were grown into arrears since our first coming thither. Our
stock was grown so low, when we came from Paris, that had not a French
Gentleman whom we met at Amiens disbursed for us, it would not have brought us
to this Town, so that our Host was fain to furnish us with some moneys to make
even with him. After which staying there from Sunday noon to Wednesday morning,
and being then fain to make use of his credit also to provide of a Boat for
England (which alone stood us in three pound) our engagements grew greater then
he had any just reason to adventure on us. But being an ingenuous man, and
seeing that we fared well, spent freely, and for the most part entertained him
and his family at our table, he was the less diffident of payment, as he told
me afterward. Having stayed three days for Company, and none appearing, we
were fain to hire a boat express for my companion and my self to pass over
in. In order whereunto, I told him of our present condition, assured him that
we had friends in Dover who would supply us with all things necessary (as
indeed we had) that having summed up what we owed him, and what he had
contracted for our passage over, he should have a note under our hands for the
payment of it, and that one of us should remain prisoner in the Boat till the
other raised money to redeem him. To which he answered, that we had carried our
selves like Gentlemen, which gave him no distrust of a real payment; that he
would take if we pleased a Bill of our hands for the money to be paid in Dover;
and desired that we would give him leave to send over a servant in our Boat
with a basket of poultery, who should receive the money of us and give back our
Bond. This being agreed upon, the next morning we took boat for England, the
Mariners knowing nothing else, but that the servant went over only to sell his
Poultery (that being an opportunity frequently indulged by them unto those of
the Town) though we knew well enough he went on another errand; and as we could
not but commend my Host for his courtesy and his care taken of our credit, so
we had reason to esteem our selves in a kind of custody in that he would not
let us stir without a Keeper. Nor did my Host lose any thing by his kindness
to us. For we not only paid him honestly all his full demands, but bestowed a
reward upon his servant and sent a present of Gloves and Knives (commodities
much prized in France) to his Wife and Daughters; that he might see we knew as
well how to require as receive a courtesy. Which said, I must step back into
France again that having taken a brief view already of the Principal
Provinces; I may render some account of the Government also in reference to the
Courts, the Church and the Civil State.

The End of the Fourth Book.
A SURVEY OF THE STATE of FRANCE.
FRANCE GENERAL: OR, THE FIFTH BOOK.
Describing the Government of the Kingdom generally, in reference to the Court,
the Church and the Civil Sat.

CHAP. I.
A transition to the Government of France in general. The person, age and
marriage of King Lewis XIII. Conjecturall reasons of his being issuelesse.
^aqueline Countess of Holland kept from issue by the house of Burgundy. The
Kings Sisters all married; and his alliances by them. His natural Brethren,
and their preferments. His lawful brother. The title of Monseiur in France.
Monseiur as yet unmarried; not like to marry Montpensiers daughter. That Lady a
fit wife for the Earl of Soissons. The difference between him and the Prince of
Conde for the Crown, in case the line of Navarre fail. How the Lords stand
affected in the cause. Whether a child may be born in the 11 month. King Henry
IV. a great lover of fair Ladies. Monseiur Barradas the Kings favorite, his
birth and offices. The omniregency of the Queen Mother; and the Cardinal of
Richileiu. The Queen mother a wise and prudent woman.

HAving thus taken a survey of these four Provinces, which we may call the
Abstract and Epitome of the Realm of France; and having seen in them the
temper, humors and conditions of the people of it: We will next take a general
view of the Governors and Government thereof, with reference to the Court, the
Church and the Civil State.

First for the Court, we must in reason in the first place begin with the
person of the King, without whose influence and presence, the Court is but a
dead ^arkasse, void of life and Majesty. For person he is of the middle
stature, and rather well proportioned then large, his face knows little yet
of a beard, but that which is black and swarty, his complexion also much of the
same hew, carrying in it a certain boisterousnesse, and that in a farther
measure then what a graceful majesty can admit of, so that one can hardly say
of him, without a spite of Courtship, which Paterculus did of Tiberius, Quod
visus praetulerit principem, that his countenance proclaimed him a King. But
questionless his greatest defect is want of utterance, which is very
unpleasing, by reason of a desperate and uncurable stammering; which defect is
likely more and more to grow upon him. At this time he is aged 24 years and as
much as since the 27 day of last September, which was his birth day; an age
which he bears not very plaufible; want of beard, and the swarthinesse of his
complexion, making him seem older. At the age of 11 years he was affianced to
the Lady Anna Infanta of Spain, by whom as yec he has no children. It is
thought by many, and covertly spoken by diverse in France, that the principal
cause of the Queens barrenness proceeds from Spain; that people being loath
to fall under the French obedience, which may very well happen, she being the
eldest Sister of the King. For this cause in the seventh Article of the
marriage, there is a clause, that neither the said Infanta nor the children
born by her (to the King) shall be capable to inherit any of the Estates of the
King of Spain. And in the eight Article she is bound to make an Act of
Renunciation, under her own handwriting, as soon as she comes to be 12 years
old, which was accordingly performed. But this being not sufficient to secure
their fears, it is thought, that she was some way or other disabled from
conception before ever she came into the Kings embraces. A great crime, I
confess, if true; yet I cannot say with Tully in his defense of Ligarius,
Novum Crimen Caje Caear, and ante hoc tempus inauditum. Iaqueline Countess of
Holland, was Cosen to Philip Duke of Burgundy, her fruitfulness would have
debarred him from those Estates of Holland, Z^aland and West Friezland;
therefore though she had three husbands, there was order taken she should never
have child: with her first two husbands the Duke would never suffer her to
live; and when she had stolen a wedding with Frane of Borselle one of her
servants, the Dukes Physicians gave him such a potion, that she might have as
well married an Eu^uch; upon this injury, the poor Lady dyed, and the Duke
succeeded in those Countries: which by his Grandchilde Mary, were conveyed over
into the house of Austria, together with the rest of his estates. I dare not
say that that Family has inherited his practices with his Lands; and yet I
have heard, that the Infanta Isabella had the like or worse measure afforded
her before she was bedded by the Arch Duke Albertus. A Diabolical trick which
the prostitutes of the Heathen used in the beginning of the Gospel, and
before; of whom Octavius complains, Quod originem futuri hominis extinguant,
and paricidium faciunt, antequam pariunt, -- Better luck then the King has his
Sister beyond the Mountains, I mean his eldest Sister Madam Elizabeth, married
to the King of Spain now living, as being (or having been) the mother of two
children. His second Sister Madam Christian, is married unto Amadeo Victor
principe major, or heir apparent to the Duke of Savoy; to whom as yet she has
born no issue. The youngest Madam Henrietta Maria is newly married to his most
Excellent Majesty of England, to whom may she prove of a most happy and
fruitful womb, Et pulcr^ faciat te prole parentem. Of these Alliances, the
first were very profitable to both Princes, could there be made a marriage
between the Kingdoms, as well as the Kings. But it is well known that the
affections of each people are divided with more unconquerable mountains, then
their Dominions. The French extremely hating the proud humor and ambition of
the Spaniard, and the Spaniard as much loathing the vain and unconstant
lightness of the French; we may therefore account each of them, in these
inter-marriages, to have rather intended the perpetuity of their particular
houses, then the strength of their Empires; and that they more desired a noble
stock wherein to graft posterity, then power. The Alliance with Savoy is more
advantageous, though less powerful, then that of Spain: for if the King of
France can keep this Prince on his party, he need not fear the greatness of
the other, or of any of his faction. The continual siding of this house with
that of Austria, having given great and many impediments to the fortune of the
French. It stands so fitly to countenance the affairs of either King in
Italy or Germany, to which it shall incline, that it is just of the same nature
with the state of Florence between Millaine and Venice, of which Guicciardine
says, that Mantennero le cose d' Italia bilanciate. On this reason Henry IV.
earnestly desired to match one of his children into this Country, and left
this desire as a Legacy with his Council. But the Alliance of most use to the
State of France, is that of England, as being the nighest and most able of all
his neighbors; an alliance which will make his estate invincible, and
encompassed about as it were with a wall of brass.

As for the Kings bastard Brethren, they are four in number, and born of three
several beds. The elder is Alexander, made Knight of the Order of St. John or
of Malta, in the life time of his Father. He is now Grand Prior of France, and
it is much labored and hoped by the French, that he shall be the next Master
of the Order; a place of great credit and command. The second and most loved of
his father, whose lively image and character he is said to be, is Mr. Caesar
made Duke of Vendosme by his father, and at this time Governor of Britain, a
man of a brave spirit, and one who swayeth much in the affairs of state; his
father took a great care for his advancement before his death, and therefore
married him to the daughter and heir of the Duke of Mercuer, a man of great
possessions in Britain. It is thought that the inheritance of this Lady, both
by her Fathers side, and also by the Mothers, who was of the family of
Martiques, being a stock of the old Ducall tree, is no less then 200000
crowns yearly: both these were borne unto the King by Madam Gabriele, for her
excellent beauty surnamed La belle. Duchess of Beauforte; a Lady whom the
King entirely affected even to her last gasp, and one who never abused her
power with him. So that one may truly say of her, what Velleius flatteringly
spoke of Liviae the wife of Augustus, Ejus potentiam nemo sensit, nisi aut
levatione periculi, aut accessione dignitatis. The third of the Kings natural
brethren, is Mr. Henry now Bishop of Metz in Lorreine, and Abbot of St. Germans
in Paris; as Abbot he is Lord of the goodly Fauxbourg of St. Germans, and has
the profit of the great Fair there holden, which make a large revenue. His
Bishopric yields him the profits of 20000 Crowns and upwards, which is the
remainder of 6000, the rest being pa^ned unto the Duke of Lorreine by the last
Bishop hereof, who was of that Family. The mother of this Mr. Henry, is the
Marchioness of Verneville, who before the death of the King, fell out of his
favor into the Prison, and was not restored to her liberty, till the beginning
of this Queen mothers Regency. The fourth and youngest is Mr. Antonie, born
unto the King by the Countess of Marret, who is Abbot of the Churches of
Marseilles and Cane, and has as yet not fully out 6000 l. a year, when his
mother dies he will be richer.

The Kings lawful Brother is named John Baptist Gaston, born the 25 of April,
anno 1608; a Prince of a brave and manlike aspect; likely to inherit as large a
part of his Fathers spirit, as the King does of his Crown. He is entitled Duke
of Anjou, as being the third Son of France; but his next elder Brother the Duke
of Orleans being dead in his childhood, he is vulgarly and properly called
Monseiur. This title is different from that of Daulphin, in that that title
only is appropriated to the Heir Apparent, being the Kings eldest Son living,
this limited to the Heir Apparent being the Kings eldest Brother surviving; if
there be neither Son nor Brother, then the next Heir Apparent is styled only Le
primier Prince du sang, the first Prince of the blood. This title of Monseiur
answers unto that of Despote in the Greek Empire, and in imitation of that is
thought to have been instituted. Others of the French Princes are called
Monseiurs also, but with some addition of place or honor. The Kings eldest
Brother only is called Monseiur sans q^^ne, as the French use to say; that is,
simply Monseiur. This young Prince is as yet unmarryed, but destinate to the
bed of the young Duchess of Montpensier, whose Father dyed in the time of
Henry IV. Had the Duke of Orleans lived, he had espoused her long ere this; but
it is generally believed, that this Prince is not so affected; he sees his
elder Brother as yet childlesse, himself the next heir to the Crown, and it is
likely he will look on a while, and expect the issue of his fortune, -- Some
that speak of the affairs of the Court, holds her a fitter match for the
young Count of Soissons, a Prince of the blood, and a Gentleman of a fine
temper; the Lady her self is said not to be averse from the match; neither will
the King not be inclinable unto him, as hoping therein to give him some
satisfaction, for not performing a Court promise, made unto him, as some say,
about marrying the young Madam now Queen of England. As for the Count it cannot
but be advantageous to him diverse ways, partly to join together the two
families of Montpensier and Soissons, both issuing from the house of Burbon;
partly to enrich himself by adding to his inheritance so fair an Estate; and
partly by gaining all the friends and allies of that Ladies kindred to his, the
better to enable his opposition against the Prince of Conde; the difference
between them stands thus, Lewis the first Prince of Conde, had by two wives,
amongst other children two Sons, by his first wife Henry Prince of Conde; by
the second Charles Count of Soissons. Henry Prince of Conde had to his first
wife Mary of Cleve daughter to the Duke of Nevers, by whom he had no children.
To his second wife he took the Lady Katherine of Tremoville, sister to the Duke
of Thovars, anno 1586. Two years after his marriage, he dyed of an old grief
took from a poisoned cup, which was given him, anno 1552. and partly with a
blow given him with a Lance at the battle of Contras, anno 1587. In the 11
month after his decease, his young Princess was brought to bed with a young
Son, which is the now Prince of Conde. Charles Count of Soissons in the reign
of Henry IV. began to question the Princes Legitimation; whereupon the King
dealt with the Parliament of Paris to declare the place of the first Prince of
the Blood, to belong to the Prince of Conde. And for the clearer and more
evident proof of the title, 24 Physicians of good faith and skill, made an open
protestation upon oath in the Court, that it was not only possible, but common
for women to be delivered in the 11 month. On this it was awarded to the
Prince. -- This Decree of Parliament notwithstanding, if ever the King and his
Brother should die issuelesse, it is said, that the young Count of Soissons
(his father died anno 1614) will not so give over his title. He is Steward of
the Kings house, as his Father also was before, a place of good credit, and in
which he has demeaned himself very plausibly. In case it should come to a
trial, quod (...), which God prohibit, he is like to make a great party, both
within the Realm, and without it. Without it, by means of the house of Savoy,
having matched his eldest Sister unto Don Thomaz^ the second son of that
Dukedom now living, a brave man of arms, and indeed the fairest fruit that
ever grew on that tree; next heir of his father after the death of Don i Amadeo
yet childlesse. Within the Realm, the Lords have already declared themselves,
which happened on this occasion. In the year 1620, the month of March, the King
being to wash, the Prince of Conde laid hold of the towell, challenging that
honor as first Prince of the blood; and on the other side, the Count of
Soissons seized on it, as appertaining to his office of See ward, and Prince of
the blood also. The King to decide the controversy for the present, commanded
it to be given Monseiur his Brother; yet did not this satisfy, for on the
morning, the friends of both Princes came to offer their service in the cause.
To the Count came in general all the opposites of the Prince of Conde, and of
the Duke of Luynes, and Gu^^^; in particular the Duke of Maien, the Duke of
Vendosme, the Dukes of Longueville, Espernon, Nemours, the Grand Prior, the
Dukes of Thovars, Retz, and Rohan, the Viscount of Aubeterre, etc. who all
withdrew themselves from the Court, made themselves masters of the best places
in their governments, and were united presently to an open saction, of which
the Queen Mother declared herself head. As for the Commons, without whom the
Nobility may quarrel, but never fight; they are more zealous in behalf of the
Count, as being brought up always a Papist and born of a Catholic kindred,
whereas the Prince, though at this instant a Catholic, yet non fuit sic ab
initio; he was born, they say, and brought up an Hugonot, and perhaps the
alteration is but dissembled.

Concerning the Prince of Conde, he has a sentence of Parliament on his side,
and a verdict of Physicians, both weak helps to a Soverainty, unless well
backed by the sword. And for the verdict of the Physicians, thus the case is
stated by the Doctors of that faculty; Laurentius a professor of Montpellier
in Languedoc, in his excellent Treatise of Anatomy, makes three terms of a
woman's delivery: primus, intermedius and ultimus. The first is the seventh
month after conception, in each of which the child is vital, and may live if
it be borne. To this also consents the Doctor of their chair Hippocrates,
saying, (...) that a child born in the seventh month, if it be well looked to,
may live. We read also how in Spain, the women are oftentimes lightened in the
end of the seventh month, and commonly in the end of the eight. And further,
that Sempronius and Corbulo, both Roman Consuls, were born in the seventh
month, Pliny in his Natural History reports it as a truth; though perchance
the women which told him, either misreckoned their time, or else dissembled it
to conceal their honesties. The middle time (terminus intermedius) is in the
ninth and tenth months, at which time children do seldom miscarry. In the
former two months, they had gathered life; in these latter, they only
consummate strength, so said the Physicians generally. Non enim in duobus
sequentibus mensibus (they speak it of the intermedii) additur aliquod ad
perfectionum partium, sed perfectionem roboris. The last time (terminus
ultimus) in the common account of this profession, is the eleaventh month,
which some of them hold neither unlikely, nor rare. Massurius records
Papirius a Roman Praetor, to have recovered his inheritance in open Court,
though his Mother confessed him to be borne in the thirteeenth month. And
Avicen a Moore of Corduba relates (as he is cited in Laurentius) that he had
seen a a child born after the fourteenth. But these are but the impostures of
women: and yet, indeed, the modern Doctors are more charitable, and refer it to
supernatural causes, Et extraordinariam artis considerationem. On the other
side, Hippocrates gives it out definitively, (...), that in ten months at the
^urthest (understand ten months complete) the child is borne. And Ulpian, the
great Civilian of his times, in the title of the Digests de Testamentis, is of
opinion, that a child born after the tenth month (complete) is not to be
admitted to the inheritance of his pretended father. As for the Common Law of
England, as I remember (I have read it in a book written of Wills and
Testaments) it takes a middle course between the charity of nature, and the
severity of the Law; leaving it merely to the conscience and circumstance of
the Judge.

But all this must be conceived (as it was afterward alleged by the party of
the Earl of Soissons, taking it in the most favorable construction) of the
time after the conception of the mother, and by no means after the death of the
Father: and so no way to advantage the Prince of Conde. His Father had been
extremely sick no small time before his death, for the particular, and supposed
since his poison taken anno 1552. to be little prone to women in the general.
They therefore who would have him set besides the Cushion, have cunningly, but
malicionsly, caused it to be whisppered abroad, that he was one of the
by-blowes of King Henry IV. and to make the matter more suspiciously probable,
they have cast out these conjectures for it; but being but conjectures only,
and prosecuted for the carrying on of so great a project, they were not thought
to be convincing, or of any considerable weight or moment amongst sober and
impartial men. They therefore argued it,

First, From the Kings care of his education, assigning him for his Tutor
Nicholas de Febure, whom he also designed for his Son King Lewis.

Secondly, From his care to work the Prince, then young, Mollis et ap^us agi,
to become a Catholic.

Thirdly, The infirmity of Henry of Conde, and the privacy of this King with
his Lady, being then King of Nav^^e, in the prime of his strength, and in
discontent with the Lady Marguerite of Valoys his first wife; add to this that
Kings love to fair Ladies in the general, and then conclude this probability
to be no miracle. For besides the Duchess of Beauforte, the Marchioness of
Verneville, and the Countess of Morrel already mentioned; he is believed to
have been the Father of Mr. Luynes the great favorite of King Lewis. And
certain it is, that the very year before his death, when he was even in the
winter of his days, he took such an amorous liking to the Prince of Condes
wife, a very beautiful Lady, and daughter to the Constable, Duke of
Montmorencie; that the Prince to save his honor was compelled to fly,
together with his Princess, into the Archdukes Country; whence he returned
not, till long after the death of King Henry. If Mary de Medices in her
husbands life time, had found her self agrieved it, I cannot blame her, she
only made good that of Quin^ilian, Et uxor mariti exemplo incitata, aut imitari
se putat aut vindicore. And yet perhaps a consciousnesse of some injuries, not
only moved her to back the Count of Soissons and his faction against the
Prince and his; but also to resolve upon him for the husband of her daughter --
From the Princes of the blood, descend we to the Princes of the Court; and
there in the first place we meet with Mr. Barradas, the Kings present
favorite; a young Gentleman of a fresh and lively hew, little bearded and one
whom as yet the people cannot accuse for any oppression or misgovernment.
Honors, the King has conserred none upon him, but only pensions and offices;
he is the Governor of the Kings children of honor, (Pages we call them in
England) a place of more trouble then wealth or credit. He is also the Master
of the horse, or Le grand Escuire, the esteem of which place recompenseth the
emptiness of the other; for by virtue of this office, he carries the Kings
sword sheathed before him at his entrances into Paris. The cloth of estate
carried over the King by the Provost and Eschevins, is his ^ee. No man can be
the Kings spurmaker, his Smith, or have any place in the Kings Stables, but
from him, and the like. This place (to note so much by the way) was taken out
of the Constables office, (Comes stabuli is the true name) to whom it properly
belonged, in the time of Charles VII. Besides this, he has a Pension of 500000
Crowns yearly; and had an office given him, which he sold for 100000 Crowns in
ready money. A good fortune for one, who the other day was but the Kings Page.

And to say truth, he is as yet but a little better, being only removed from
his servant to be his play-fellow. With the affairs of State he intermedleth
not, if he should, he might expect the Queen mother should say to him, what
Apollo in Ovid did to Cupid: -- Tibi quid cum fortibus armis
Mipuer? ista decent humeros gestamina nostros.
For indeed first during her Sons minority, and after since her reintegration
with him, she has made her self so absolute a mistress of his mind, that he
has entrusted to her the entire conduct of all his most weighty affairs. For
her assistant in the managing of her greatest business, she has peeced her
self to the strongest side of the State, the Church; having principally (since
the death of the Marshal D'Ancre, I mean) assumed to her counsels the Cardinal
of Richileiu, a man of no great birth, were Nobility the greatest parentage;
but otherwise to be ranked amongst the noblest. Of a sound reach he is, and a
close brain; one exceedingly well mixed of a lay understanding, and a Church
habit; one that is completely skilled in the art of men, and a perfect master
of his own mind and affections; him the Queen uses as her Counselor, to keep
out frailty; and the Kings name as her countenance to keep off envy. She is of
a Florentine wit, and has in her all the virtues of Katharine de Medices, her
Ancestor in her Regency, and some also of her vices; only her designs tend not
to the ruin of the Kingdom and her children. Joan de Seirres tells us in
his Inventaire of France how the Queen Katharine suffered her son Henry III. a
devout and a supple Prince, to spend his most dangerous times, even
uncontrouled upon his beads; whilst in the mean time, she usurped the
Government of the Realm. Like it is that Queen Mary has learned so much of her
Kinswoman, as to permit this son of hers to spend his time also amongst his
play-fellowes and the birds, that she may the more securely manage the State at
her discretion. And to say nothing of her untrue or misbecoming her virtue, she
has notably well discharged her ambition; the Realm of France, being never
more quietly and evenly governed, then first during her Regencie, and now
during the time of her favor with the King. For during his minority she
carried her self so fairly between the factions of the Court, that she was of
all sides honored; the time of this Marquess D' Ancre only excepted; and for
the differences in Religion, her most earnest desire was not ^o oppress the
Protestants, insomuch that the war raised against them, during the command of
Mr. Luynes, was presently after his death, and her restoring into grace ended.
An heroical Lady, and worthy the report of posterity; the frailties and
weakness of her, as a woman, not being accounted hers, but her sexes.

CHAP. II.
Two Religions struggling in France, like the two twins in the womb of Rebecca.
The comparison between them two, and those in the general. A more particular
survey of the Papists Church in France, in Policy, Privilege and Revenue. The
complaint of the Clergy to the King. The acknowledgment of the French Church to
the Pope merely titular. The pragmatick sanction, Maxima tua fatuitas, and
Conventui Tridentino, severally written to the Pope and Trent Council. The
tedious quarrel about Investitures. Four things propounded by the Parliament
to the Jesuits. The French Bishops not to meddle with Friars, their lives and
land. The ignorance of the French Priests. The Chanoins Latin in Orleans. The
French not hard to be converted, if plausibly bumoured, etc.

FRom the Court of the King of France, I cannot better provide for my self then
to have recourse to the King of heaven; and though the Poet meant not Exeat
aula qui vult esse pius, in that sense, yet will it be no treason for me to
apply it so. And even in this, the Church, which should be like the Coat of its
Redeemer, without seam; do I find rents and factions: and of the two, these in
the Church more dangerous then those in the Louure. I know the story of
Rebecca, and of the children struggling in her, is generally applied to the
births and contentions of the Law and the Gospel; in particular we may make use
of it in expressing the State of the Church and Religions of France: for
certain it is, that here were diverse pangs in the womb of the French Church
before it was delivered. And first she was delivered of Esau, the Popish faith
being first after the struggling countenanced by authority; And he came out red
all over like an hairy garment, says the text, which very appositely
expresses the bloody and rough condition of the French Papists at the birth of
the Reformation, before experience and long acquaintance had bred a liking
between them. And after came his Brother out, which laid hold on Esaus heel,
and his name was called Jacob; wherein is described the quality of the
Protestant party, which though confirmed by public Edict after the other, yet
has it diverse times endeavored, and will perhaps one day effect, the tripping
up of the others heels. And Esau (says Moses) was a cunning hunter, a man of
the field; and Jacob a plain man, dwelling in tents: in which words the
comparison is made exact. A cunning hunter, in the Scripture signifies, a man
of art and power mingled; as when N^mr^d in Genesis 10. is termed a mighty
hunter. Such is the Papist, a side of greater strength and subtility, a side of
war and of the field; on the other side the Protestants are a plain race of
men, simple in their actions, without craft and fraudulent behaviors, and
dwelling in tents, that is, having no certain abiding place, no Province which
they can call theirs; but living dispersed and scattered over the Country;
which in the phrase of the Scripture is dwelling in tents. As for the other
words differencing the two brethren, and the elder shall serve the younger,
they are rather to be accounted a Prophecy then a Character; we must therefore
leave the analogy it holds with this Rebecca of France and her two children,
to the event and to prayer.

For a more particular insight into the strength and subtilty of this Esau, we
must consider it in the three main particular strengths of it; its Polity,
Privileges and Revenue. For the first, so it is that the Popish Church in
France is governed like those of the first and purest times, by Archbishops and
Bishops. Archbishops it comprehends 12, and of Bishops 104; of these the
Metropolitan is he of Rheimes, who uses to anoint the Kings, which office and
pre-eminence has been annexed unto this seat ever since the times of St.
Remigius Bishop hereof, who converted Clovis King of the Franks unto the
Gospel. The present Primate is son unto the Duke of Guise, by name Henry de
Lorrain, of the age of 14 years or thereabouts, a burden too unweildie for his
shoulders. -- Et quae non viribus istis
Munera convenient, n^c tam puerilibus annis.


For the better government therefore of a charge so weighty, they have
appointed him a Coadjutor to discharge that great function till he come to age
to take orders. His name is Gifford an English fugitive, said to be a man
worthy of a great fortune, and able to bear it. The revenues of this
Archbishopric are somewhat of the meanest, not amounting yearly to above 10000
Crowns, whereof Dr. Gifford receives only 2000, the remainder going to the
Caidet of Lorreine. This trick the French learn of the Protestants in Germany,
where the Princes after the Reformation began by Luther, took in the power and
Lordships of the Bishops, which together with their functions, they divided
into two parts. The lands they bestowed upon some of their younger sons or
kinsmen, with the title of Administrator; the office and pains of it they
conferred with some annual pension, on one of their Chaplains, whom they
styled the Superintendent of the Bishopric. This Archbishop together with the
rest of the Bishops have under them their several Chancellours, Commissaries,
Archdeacons, and other officers attending in their Courts; in which their power
is not so general as with us in England. Matters of testament never trouble
them, as belonging to the Court of Parliament; who also have wrested to their
own hands almost all the business of importance; sure I am, all the causes of
profit originally belonging to the Church, the affairs merely Episcopal and
spiritual are left unto them, as granting License for Marriages, punishing
whoredom by way of penance and the like; to go beyond this were ultra
crepidam, and they should be sure to have a prohibition from the Parliaments.
Of their privileges the chiefest of the Clergy / men is, the little or no
dependence upon the Pope, and the little profits they pay unto their King; of
the Pope anon; to the King they pay only their Dismes, or Tithes according to
the old rate; a small sum if compared unto the payments of their neighbors; it
being thought that the King of Spain receives yearly one half of the living of
the Churches; but this I mean of their livings only, for otherwise they pay the
usual gabels and customs, that are paid by the rest of the Kings liege
people. In the general assembly of the three Estates the Clergy has authority
to elect a set number of Commissioners, to undertake for them and the Church;
which Commissioners do make up the first of the three Estates, and do first
exhibit their grievances and Petitions to the King. In a word, the French
Church is the freest of any in Christendom, that have not yet quitted their
subjection to the Pope, as always protesting against the Inquisitions, not
submitting themselves to the Council of Trent, and paying very little to his
Holiness, of the plentiful revenue, wherewith God and good men have blessed
it.

The number of those which the Church Land maintains in France is tantum non
infinite, therefore the Intrado and Revenue of it must needs be uncountable.
There are numbered in it, as we said before, 12 Archbishops, 104 Bishoprics; to
these add 540 Archpriories, 1450 Abbeys, 12320 Priories, 567 Nunneries, 700
Convents of Friars, 259 Commendames of the order of Malta, and 130000 Parish
Priests. Yet this is not all, this reckoning was made in the year 1598. Since
which time the Jesuits have diverse Colleges founded for them, and they are
known to be none of the poorest. To maintain this large wilderness of men, the
Statistes of France, who have proportioned the Country; do allow unto the
Clergy almost a fourth part of the whole. For supposing France to contain 200
millions of Arpens (a measure somewhat bigger then our Acre) they have allotted
to the Church for its temporal revenue, 47 of them. In particular of the
Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots and Parish Priests, they of Aux, Alby, Cluniac and
St. Estiennes in Paris, are said to be the wealthyest; the Archbishopric of
Aux in Gascoine is valued at 400000 Livres or 40000 l. English yearly. The
Bishop of Alby in Lanquedoc, is prized at 10000 Florens, which is a fourth part
of it; a great part of this revenue rising out of Saffron. The Abbot of Cluniac
in the Duchy of Burgundy, is said to be worth 50000 Crowns yearly; the
present Abbot being Henry of Lorreine, Archbishop of Rheimes, and Abbot of St.
Dennis. The Parish Priest of St. Estiennes, is judged to receive yearly no
sewer then 8000 Crowns, a good Intrado. As for the vulgar Clergy they have
little Tit^e and less Glebe, most part of the revenue being appropriated unto
Abbeys and other Religious houses; the greatest part of their means is the
Baisse-maine, which is the Church-offerings of the people at Christnings,
Marriages, Burials, Dirges, Indulgences, and the like; which is thought to
amount to almost as much as the temporal estate of the Church, an income able
to maintain them in good abundance, were it not for the greatness of their
number; for reckoning that there are (as we have said) in France 130000 Perish
Priests, and that there are only 27400 Parishes; it must of necessity be, that
every Parishone with another must have more then four Priests; too many to be
rich.

But this were one of the least injuries offered to the French thrift, and
would little hinder them from rising, if it were not that the goodliest of
their preferments were before their faces given unto boys and children. An
affront which not only despoileth them of the honors due unto their calling,
but disheartneth them in their studies and by consequence draws them unto
debauched and s^anderous courses. -- Quis enim virtutem exquireret ips(...),
Premi^ si t^llas? --


The Clergy therefore (...) 1617. being assembled at the house of Austin Friars
in Paris (as every two years they use to do) being to take their leaves of the
King, elected the Bishop of Air to be their spokesman; and to certify his
Majesty of their grievances. In performing which business, the principal
thing of which he spoke was to this purpose; That whereas his Majesty was bound
to give them fathers, he gave them children; that the name of Abbot signifies
a Father; and the function of a Bishop is full of fatherly authority: that
France notwithstanding was now filled with Bishops and Abbots, which are yet in
their Nurses arms, or else under their Regents in Colleges; nay more, that
the abuse goes before their being; Children being commonly designed to
Bishoprics and Abba^ies, before they were born. He made also another
complaint, that the Sovereign Courts by their decrees, had attempted upon the
authority which was committed to the Clergy, even in that which merely
concerned Ecclesiastical discipline and government of the Church. To these
complaints he gave them, indeed, a very gracious hearing, but it was no further
then an hearing, being never followed by redress. The Court of Parliament knew
too well the strength of their own authority, and the King was loath to take
from himself those excellent advantages of binding to himself his Nobility, by
the speedy preferring of their children; and so the clergy* departed with a
great deal of envy, and a little satisfaction. Like enough it were, that the
Pope would in part redress this injury, especially in the point of
jurisdiction, if he were able. But his wings are shrewdly clipped in this
Country* neither can be fly at all, but as far as they please to suffer him.
For his temporal power they never could be induced to acknowledge it, as we
see in their stories, anno 1610. the Divines of Paris in a Declaration of
thei^s tendered to the Queen Mother, affirmed the supremacy of the Pope, to be
an Erroneous Doctrine, and the ground of that hellish position of deposing and
killing of Kings. Anno 1517. when the Council of Lateran had determined the
Pope to be the head of the Church in causes also temporal: the University of
Paris testifies against it in an Apology of theirs, Dated the 12 of March the
same year; Les decimus (says the Apology) in quodame(...), non tamen in
Spiritu Domini congregato, contra fide(...) Catholicam, etc. Sacrum Bisiliense
cotholicam da(...)vit. In which council of Basil, the Supremacy of the Pope
was condemned. Neither did the Kings of France forget to maintain their own
authority. And therefore when as Pope Boniface VIII. had in a peremptory
Letter, written to Philip le Bell King of France, styled himself Dominus totius
mundi tam in temporalibus quam in spiritualibus: the King returned him an
answer with an Epithet suitable to his arrogance, Sciat maxima tua fatuitas nos
in temporalibus alicui non subesse, etc. The like answer, though in modester
terms, was sent to another of the Popes, by St. Lewis, a man of a most mild
and sweet disposition, yet unwilling to forgo his royalties.

His spiritual power is always as little in substance, though more in show;
for whereas the Council of Trent has been an especial authorizer of the
Popes spiritual supremacy; the French Church would never receive it. By this
means the Bishops keep in their hands, their own full authority; whereof an
obedience to the decrees of that Council would deprive them. It was truly
said by St. Gregory, and they well knew it, Lib. 7. Epist. 70. Si unus
universalis est, restat ut vos Episcopi non sitis. Further the University of
Paris in their Declaration, anno 1610 above mentioned, plainly affirm, that it
is directly opposite to the Doctrine of the Church which the University of
Paris always maintained, that the Pope has the power of a Monarch in the
spiritual government of the Church. To look upon higher times, when the
Council of Constance had submitted the authority of the Pope unto that of a
Council; John Gerson, Theologus Parisiensis magni nominis, as one calls him,
defended that decree: and intituleth them, ^erniciosos admodum esse adulatores
qui tyrannidem istam in Ecclesiam invexere, quasi nullis legum teneatur
vinculis, quasi neque parere debeat concilio Pontifex, nec ab eo judicari
queat. The Kings themselves also befriend their Clergy in this cause; and
therefore not only protested against the Council of Trent, wherein this
spiritual tyranny was generally consented to by the Catholic faction. But
Henry II* also would not acknowledge them to be a Council, calling them by
another name then Conventus Tridentinus. An indignity which the Fathers took
very offensively.

But the principal thing in which it behooves them not to acknowledge his
spiritual Supremacy, is the collation of Benefices and Bishoprics, and the
Annats and first fruits thence arising. The first and greatest controversy
between the Pope and Princes of Christendom, was about the bestowing the
livings of the Church, and giving the investure unto Bishops; the Popes had
long thirsted after that authority, as being a great means to advance their
followers, and establish their own greatness: for which cause in diverse petty
Councels, the receiving of any Ecclesiastical preferment of a Lay man was
enacted to be Simony. But this did little edify with such patrons as had good
livings. As soon as ever Hildebrande, in the Catalogue of the Popes called
Gregory VII. came to the Throne of Rome, he set himself entirely to effect this
business as well in Germany, now he was Pope, as he had done in France whilst
he was Legate; he commands therefore Henry III. Emperor, Ne deinceps
Episc^patus and beneficia (they are Platinas own words) per cupiditatem
Simona^cam committat; aliter seusurum in-ipsum censuris Ecclesiasticis. To this
injustice, when the Emperor would not yield, he called a solemn Council at
the Lateran; wherein the Emperor was pronounced to be Simoniacall, and
afterward Excommunicated; neither would this Tyrant ever leave persecuting of
him, till he had laid him in his grave. After this there followed great
struggling for this matter, between the Popes and the Emperors; but in the end
the Popes got the victory. In England here, he that first beckoned about it was
William Ru^us; the controversy being, whether he or Pope Urban should invest
Anselme Archbishop of Canterbury. Anselme would receive his investure from none
but the Pope, whereupon the King banished him the Realm, into which he was not
admitted till the Reign of Henry II. He to endeer himself with his Clergy,
relinquished his right to the Pope, but afterward repenting himself of it, he
revoked his grant; neither did the English Kings wholly lose it, till the reign
of that unfortunate prince King John. Edward the first again recovered it, and
his successors kept it.

The Popes having with much violence and opposition wrested into their hands,
this privilege of nominating Priests and investing Bishops, they spared not to
lay on what taxes they pleased; as on the Benefices, first fruits, pensions,
subsidies, fifteenths, tenths; and on the Bishoprics for palles, miters,
crosiers, rings, and I know not what bables. By these means the Churches were
so impoverished, that upon complaint made to the Council of Basil, all these
cheating tricks, these aucupia and expilandi rations, were abolished. This
decree was called Pragmatica functio, and was confirmed in France by Charles
VII. anno 1438. An act of singular improvement to the Church and Kingdom of
France; which yearly before, as the Court of Parliament manifested to Lewis XI.
had drained the State of a million of Crowns; since which time the Kings of
France have sometimes omitted the rigor of this sanction, and sometimes also
exacted it, according as their affairs with the Pope stood; for which cause it
was called Froenum pontificum. At last King Francis I. having conquered
Millaine, fell into this composition with his Holiness; namely, that upon the
falling of any Abbacy or Bishopric, the King should have 6 months time allowed
him to present a fit man unto him, whom the Pope should legally invest. If the
King neglected his time limited, the Pope might take the benefit of the
relapse, and institute whom he pleased. So is it also with the inferior
Benefices, between the Pope and the Patrons; insomuch that any or every
Lay-patron, and Bishop together in England, has for ought I see (at the least
in this particular) as great a spiritual Supremacy, as the Pope in France.

Nay to proceed further, and show how merely titular both his supremacies are,
as well the spiritual as the temporal, you may plainly see in the case of the
Jesuits, which was thus: In the year 1609 the Jesuits had obtained of King
Henry IV. license to read again in their Colleges of Paris; but when their
Letters patents came to be verified in the Court of Parliament, the Rector and
University opposed them, on the 17 of December, 1611. both parties came to have
an hearing, and the University got the day, unless the Jesuits would
subscribe unto these four points. viz.

1. That a Council was above the Pope.

2. That the Pope had no temporal power over Kings, and could not by
Excommunication deprive them of their Realm and Estates.

3. That Clergy men having heard of any attempt or conspiracy against the King
or his Realm, or any matter of treason in confession, he was bound to reveal it.

And 4. That Clergy men were subject to the secular Prince or politic
Magistrate. It appeared by our former discourse, what little or no power they
had left the Pope over the Estates and preferments of the French.

By these Propositions (to which the Jesuits in the end subscribed, I know not
with what mental reservation) it is more then evident, that they have left him
no command neither over their consciences, nor their persons; so that all
things considered, we may justly say of the Papal power in France, what the
Papists said falsely of Erasmus, namely that it is Nomen sine rebus.

In one thing only his authority here is entire, which is his immediate
protection of all the orders of Friars, and also a superintendency or supreme
eye over the Monks, who acknowledge very small obedience, if any at all, to the
French Bishops: for though at the beginning every part and member of the
Diocese, was directly under the care and command of the Bishop; yet it so
happened that at the building of Monasteries in the Western Church, the Abbots
being men of good parts and a sincere life, grew much into the envy of their
Diocesan. For this cause, as also to be more at their own command, they made
suit to the Pope that they might be free from that subjection, Utque in tutelam
divi Petri admitterentur; a proposition very plausible to his Holiness
ambition, which by this means might the sooner be raised to its height; and
therefore without difficulty granted. This gap opened, first the several
orders of Friars; and after even the Deans and Chapters, purchased to
themselves the like exemptions. In this the Popes power was wonderfully
strengthened, as having such able, and so main props to uphold his authority; it
being a true Maxim in State, Quod qui privilegia obtinent; ad eadem
conservanda tenentur authoritatem concedentis tueri. This continued till the
Council of Trent unquestioned. Where the Bishops much complained of their want
of authority, and imputed all the Schisms and Vices in the Church, unto this,
that their hands were tied; hereupon the Popes Legates thought it fit to restore
their jurisdiction, their Deans and Chapters. At that of the Monks and
Monasteries, there was more sticking, till at the last Sebastian Pig^inus, one
of the Popes officers, found out for them this satisfaction; that they should
have an eye and inspection into the lives of the Monks, not by any authority of
their own, Sed tanquam a sede Apostolica delegat^. But as for the Orders of
Friars, the Pope would not by any means give way to it. They are his
Janissaries, and the strongest bulwark of his Empire, and are therefore called
in a good Author, Egr gia Romunae curiae instrumenta. So that with them the
Diocesan has nothing to do, each several religious house being as a Court of
Peculiars, subjects only to the great Metropolitan of Rome.

This mere dependence on his Holiness, makes this generation a great deal
more regardlesse of their behavior, then otherwise it would be: though since
the growth of the Reformation, shame and fear has much reformed them, they
have still howsoever, a spice of their former wantonness, and on occasions
will permit themselves a little good fellowship; and to say truth of them, I
think them to be the best companions in France for a journey, but not for
acquaintance. They live very me^^ily, and keep a competent table, more I
suppose then can stand with their vow; and yet far short of that affluency
whereof many of our books accuse them. It was my chance to be in a house of the
Franciscans in Paris, where one of the Friars upon the entreaty of our friends,
had us into the hall, it being then the time of their refectory; a favor not
vulgar; there saw we the Brothers sitting all of a side, and every one a pretty
distance from the other, their several commons being a dish of pottage, a chop
of Mutton, a dish of cherries, and a large glass of water: this provision
together with a liberal allowance of ^ase, and a little of study keeps them
exceeding plump and in a good liking, and makes them, having little to take
thought for, as I said before, passing good company. As I travailed toward
Orleans we had in our Coach with us three of these mortified sinners, two of
the Order of St. Austin, and one Franciscan; the merryest cricke^^ that ever
chirped, nothing in them but mad tales and complements; and for music, they
would sing like hawks. When we came to a vein of good wine they would cheer up
themselves and their neighbors with this comfortable Doctrine, Vivamus ut
(...) and bibamus ut vivamus. And for courtship and toying with the wenches,
you would easily believe ^^at it had been a trade with which they had not been
a little acquainted; of all men, when I am married, God keep my wife from them,
till then, my neighbors.

On the other side, the common Priests of France, are so dull and blockish,
that you shall hardly meet with a more contemptible people. The meanest of our
Curates in England, for spirit and discourse, are very Popes to them; for
learning they may safely say with S(...)atas, Hoc tantum scimus quod ne(...)us;
but you must not look they should say it in Latin. Tongues they have none but
that of their Mother and the Mass book: of which last they can make no use
except the book be open, and then also the book is ^ain to read it self. For in
the last (...) Miss^le, established by Pius V. and recognized by Clement VIII.
ann^ 1600. every syllable is diversely marked, whether it be sounded long or
short; just (...) the versifying examples are in the end of the Grammar. When I
had lost my self in the streets of Paris, and wanted French to (...)d, I used
to apply my self to some of these reverend habit. But O (...)lum ins(...)ns and
in(...)tum! you might as easily have (...) out of the (...), as a word of
Latin out of their mouths. Nor is this the disease of the vulgar Mass mumbler
only, it has also infected the right Worshipful of the Clergy. In Orleans I
had business with a Chanoin of the Church of St. Croix, a fellow that wore his
Surplice (it was made of Lawn and lace) with as good a credit, as ever I saw
any, and for the comeliness and capacity of his Cap, he might have been a
Metropolitan: perceiving me to speak to him in a strange tongue, for it was
Latin, he very readily asked me this question, Number potestis loqui Gallia?
which when I had denied, at last he broke out into another interrogatory, viz.
Quam diu fuistis in Gallice? To conclude, having read over my Letter, with two
or three deadly pangs, and six times rubbing of his temples, he dismissed me
with this cordial, and truly it was very comfortable to my humor, Ego
negotias vestras curabo. A strange beast, and one of the greatest prodigies of
ignorance, that I ever met with in man's apparel.

Such being the Romish Priests, it is no marvel that the French Papist be no
more settled and resolute in their Religion. If the eye be blind, the body
cannot choose but be darkened. And certainly there is nothing that has prepared
many of this Realm more to embrace the Reformation, then the blockishnesse of
their own Clergy. An excellent advantage to the Protestant Ministers, could
they but well humor it, and likely to be a fair enlargement to their party, if
well husbanded. Besides this, the French Catholics are not over earnest in the
cause, and so lie open to the assaults of any politic enemy. To deal with them
by main force of argument, and in the servent spirit of zeal, as the
Protestants too often do, is not the way; men incapable of opposition, as this
people generally are, and furious if once thwarted; must be tamed as Alexander
did his horse Bucephalus; those which came to back him with the tyranny of the
spur and cudgel, he quickly threw down and mischiefed. Alexander came
otherwise prepared, for turning the horse toward the sun that he might not see
the impatience of his own shadow, he spoke kindly to him, and gently clapped
him on the back, till he had left his ^linging and wildness, he lightly leapt
into the saddle, the horse never making resistance: Plutarch in his life
relates the story, and this is the moral of it.

CHAP. III.
The correspondency between the French King and the Pope. This Pope an Omen of
the Marriages of France with England. An English Catholics conceit of it. His
Holiness Nuncio in Paris. A learned Argument to prove the Popes universality.
A continuation of the allegory between Jacob and Esau. The Protestants
compelled to leave their Forts and Towns. Their present estate and strength.
The last War against them justly undertaken; not fairly managed. Their
in^ole^cies and disobedience to the Kings command. Their purpose to have
themselves a free estate. The war not a war of Religion. King James in justice
could not assist them more then he did. First forsaken by their own party.
Their happiness before the war. The Court of the edict. A view of them in
their Churches. The commendation which the French Papists give to the Church of
England. Their Discipline and Ministeries, etc.

WE have seen the strength and subtility, as also somewhat of his poverties at
home: Let us now see the alliance which this French Esau has abroad in the
world; in what credit and opinion he stands in the eye of B^^ri the Romish
^ittite, the daughter of whose abominations he has married. And here I find
him to hold good correspondency, as being the eldest son of the Church, and an
equal poise to balance the affairs of Italy against the Potency of Spain On
this ground the present Pope has always shown himself very favorable to the
French side, well knowing into what perils an unnecessary and impolitick
dependence on the Spanish party only; would one day bring the State
Ecclesiastic. As in the general, so also in many particulars has he
expressed much affection unto him. As

1. By taking into his hands the Valtolin, till his Son of France might
settle himself in some course to recover it. 2. His not stirring in the behalf
of the Spaniard, during the last wars in Italy. And 3. His speedy and willing
grant of the dispensation for Madams marriage, notwithstanding the Spaniard so
earnestly labored the denial, or at least the delay of it.
To speak by conjectures, I am of opinion, that his Genius prompted him to see
the speedy consummation of this marriage, of which his Papacy was so large an
Omen, so far a prognostic. Est Deus in nobis, agita^te calescimus illo.


The Lar or angel guardian of his thoughts hastened him in it; in whose time
there was so plausible a Presage, that it must be accomplished. For thus it
stands: Malachi now a Saint, then one of the first Apostles of the Irish, one
much reverenced in his memory unto this day by that Nation; left behind him by
way of Prophecy a certain number of Mottoes in Latin, telling those that
there should follow that certain number of Popes only, whose conditions
successively should be lively expressed in those Mottos, according to that
order which he had placed them. M(...)ngham an Irish Priest, and Master of the
College of Irish (...)es in Paris, collected together the lives of all the
Irish Saints; which book himself showed me. In that Volume, and the life of
this Saint, are the several Mottos and several Popes set down Column wise one
against the other: I compared the lives of them with the Mottos, as far as my
memory would carry me, and found many of them very answerable.

As I remember there are 36 Mottos yet come, and when just so many Popes are
joined to them, they are of opinion (for so (...) (...)ld) th(...) either the
world should end, or the Popedom be (...)ned. Amongst the others, the Motto of
the present Pope was most remarkable, and suitable to the action likely to
happen in his time: being this, Lilium and Rosa, which they interpret, and in
my mind not unhappily, to be intended to the conjunction of the French Lilly
and English Ros(...) To take from me any suspicion of Imposture, he showed an
old book, printed almost 200 years ago, written by one Wion a Flemming, and
comparing the number of the Mottos with the Catalogue of the Popes; I found the
name of Urban (the now Pope) to answer it. On this ground an English Catholic,
whose acquaintance I gained in France; made a copy of Verses in French, and
presented them to the English Ambassadors, the Earls of Carlisle and Holland.
Because he is my friend, and the conceit is not to be despised, I begged them
of him, and these are they.

Lilia juncta Rosis. Emblem de bon prefage de l' Alliance de la France, avec
(...) Angle terre.
Ce grand dieu qui d'un ocil voit tout ce que les ans.
So^bs leurs voiles sacrez vont a nous yeux cachans.
Decouure quelque fois, anis^ qui bon lui semble,
Et les maux a venir, et les biens tout ensemble,
Anisi fit-il jades a celui, qui primier.
Dans l' Ireland porta de la froy le laurier;
Malachie ^on (...) qu' au tymon de leglise
On verra s(...)r un jour, cil qui pour sa devise.
Aura les lys chenus ioints aux plus belles fleures,
Qui dorent le prin-temps, de leurs doubles colors.
CHARLES est le ^^curon de la Rose pourpree;
Henritte est le Lys, que la plus belle pree
De la France nourrtit: pour estre quelque jour
Et la Reina des fleurs, et des roses l' amor.
Adorable banquet, been heureuse co^ronne,
Que la bonte du ciel e parrage nous done;
He^reuse ma party, heureuse mill fois,
Celle qui te fera re^^orier en les roys.
With these Verses I take my leave of his Holiness, wishing none of his
successors would presage worse luck unto England. I go now to see his Nuncio,
to whose house the same English Catholic brought me, but he was not at home;
his name is Bernardino d'Espada: a man, as he informed me, able to discharge
the trust reposed in him by his Master, and one that very well affected the
English Nation. He has the fairest house, and keeps the largest retinue of
any ordinary Ambassador in the Realm; and makes good his Masters Supremacies,
by his own precedence. To honor him against he was to take his charge, his
Holiness created him Bishop of Damiata ^n Egypt; a place which I am certain
never any of them saw but in a map, and for the profits he receives thence,
they will never be able to pay for his Crozier. But this is one of his
Holiness usual policies, to satisfy his followers with empty titles. So he
made Bishop, whom he sent to govern for him in England, Bishop of Chal^^don in
Asia; and Smith also who is come over about the same business, with the Queen,
Bishop of Archidala a City of T^^ce. An old English Doctor used it as an
especial argument to prove the universality of power in the Pope, because he
could ordain Bishops over al Cities in Christendom; if he could as easily give
them also the revenue, this reason (I confess) would much sway me, till then I
am sorry that men should still be boys, and play with bubbles. By the same
authority he might do well to make all his Courtiers Kings, and then he were
sure to have a most royal and beggarly Court of it.

To proceed a little further in the Allegory, so it is that when Jacob saw Esau
to have incurred his fathers and mothers anger, for his heathenish marriage, he
set himself to bereave his elder brother of his blessing. Prayers, and the
sweet smell of his Venison, the sweet smelling of his sacrifices, obtained of
his Lord and Father a blessing for him: for indeed the Lord has given unto
this his French Jacob, as it is in the text, the dew of heaven, and the
fatness of the earth, and plenty of corn and wine, Genesis 27. 28. It follows
in the 41. verse. of the Chapter. And Esau hated Jaeob, because of the blessing
wherewith his father had blessed him; and Esau said in his heart, The days of
mourning for my father are at band, then will I slay my brother Jacob. The
event of which his bloody resolution was, that Jacob was ^ain to relinquish all
that he had, and fly unto his Uncle. This last part of the story, expresses
very much of the present estate of the French Church. The Papists hated the
Protestants to see them thrive and increase so much amongst them. This hatred
moved them to a war, by which they hoped to root them out altogether; and this
war compelled the Protestants to abandon their good Towns, their strong holds,
and all their possessions, and to fly to their friends wheresoever they could
find them. And indeed, the present estate of the Protestants is not much
better then that of Jacob in Mesopot^^ia, nor much different. The blessing
which they expect lies more in the seed then the harvest. For their strength
it consists principally in their prayers to God: and secondly, in their
obedience to their Kings. Within these two fortresses, if they can keep
themselves, they need fear none ill; because they shall deserve none. The only
outward strengths they have left them, are the two Towns of Montaban and
Rochell, the one deemed invincible, the other threatened a speedy destruction.
The Duke of Espernon (at my being there) lay round about it, and it was said,
that the Town was in very bad terms: all the neighboring Towns, to whose
opposition they much trusted, having yielded at the first fight of the Canon.
Rochell, it is thought, cannot be forced by assault, nor compelled by a famine.
Some Protestants are glad of, and hope to see the French Church restored to its
former powerfulness, by the resistance of that Town merely. I rather think,
that the perverse and stubborn condition of it, will at last, drive the young
King into a fury, and incite him to revenge their contradiction, on their
innocent friends, now disarmed and disabled. Then will they see at last the
issue of their own peremptory resolutions, and begin to believe, that the
Heathen Historian was of the two the better Christian, when he gave us this
note, Non turpe est ab eo vinci, quem vincere esset nefas, neque(...)lli
^inhoneste etiam submitti, quem fortuna super omnes ex^ulisset. This weakness
and misery which has now befallen the Protestants, was an^ effect, I confess,
of the illwill which the other party bare them; but that they bare them ill
will, was a fruit of their own graffing. In this circumstance, they were
nothing like Jacob, who in the hatred which his brother Esau had to him, was
simply passive; they being active also in the birth of it. And indeed that
lamentable and bloody war, which sell upon them, they not only endeavored not
to avoid, but invited, during the reign of Henry IV. who would not see it, and
the troublesome minority of Lewis XIII. who could not molest them, they had
made themselves masters of 99. Towns, well fortifyed and enabled for a (...): a
strength too great for any one faction to keep together, under a King which
desires to be himself, and rule his people. In the opinion of this their
potency, they call Assemblies, Parliaments as it were, when and as often as
they pleased. There they consulted of the common affairs of Religion, made new
Laws of government, removed and rechanged their general officers; the Kings
leave all this while never so much as formally demanded. Had they only been
guilty of too much power, that crime alone had been sufficient to have raised a
war against them, it not standing with the safety and honor of a King, not to
be the absolute commander of his own Subjects. But in this their licentious
calling of Assemblies, they abused their power into a neglect, and not
dissolving them at his Majesty's commandment, they increased their neglect into
into a disobedience. The Assembly which principally occasioned the war and
their ruin, was that of Rochell, called by the Protestants presently upon the
Kings journey into Bearn. This general meeting the King prohibited by his
especial Edicts, declaring all them to be guilty of treason; which
notwithstanding they would not ^earken to, but very undutifully went on in
their purposes. It was said by a Gentleman of their party, and one that had
been employed in many of their affairs, That the fiery zeal of some who had the
guiding of their consciences, had thrust them into those desperate courses; and
I believe him; Tantum relligio potuit su^dere malorum.


Being assembled, they sent the King a Remonstrance of their grievances, to
which the Duke Lesdiguiers, in a Letter to them written, gave them a very fair
and plausible answer, wherein also he entreats them to obey the Kings Edict,
and break up the Assembly. Upon the receipt of this Letter, those of the
Assembly published a Declaration, wherein they verified their meeting to be
lawful, and their purpose not to dismiss themselves, till their desires were
granted. This affront done to the King, made him gather together his Forces;
yet at the Duke of Lesdiguiers request, he allowed them 24 days of respite;
before his Armies should march toward them, he offered them also very fair and
reasonable conditions, such also as their Deputies had solicited, but far
better then those which they were glad to accept, when all their Towns were
taken from them. Profecto ineluct abilis fatorum vis, cujus fortunam mutare
constituit, ejus corrumpit consilia. It held very rightly in this people, who
turned a deaf ear to all good advice, and were resolved it seems, Not to
hear the voice of the Charmer, charmed he never so sweetly. In their Assembly
therefore they make Laws and Orders to regulate their disobedience, as, That
no peace should be made without the consent of the general Convocation, about
paying of Soldiers wages, for the detaining of the Revenues of the King and
Clergy, and the like. They also there divided France into seven circles or
parts, assigning over every circle several Generals and Lieutenants, and
prescribed Orders how those Generals should proceed in the wars.

Thus we see the Kings Army leavied upon no slight ground, his Regal authority
was neglected, his especial Edicts violated, his gracious profers slighted,
and his Revenues forbidden him, and his (...)m divided before his face, and
allotted unto officers not of his own election. Had the prosecution of his
action been as fair, as the cause was, just and legal, the Protestants had
only deserved the infamy; but hinc illae lachrymae. The King so behaved himself
in it, that he suffered the sword to walk at random; as if his main design had
been, not to correct his people, but to ruin them. I will instance only in
that tyrannical slaughter, which he permitted at the taking of Nigrep^^isse, a
Town of Quereu; wherein indeed, the Soldiers showed the very rigor of
severity, which either a barbarous victor could inflict, or a vanquished people
suffer, Nec (...) genus ^misit i^a and victoria, as Tacitus of the angered
Romans. For they spared neither man, nor woman, nor child, all equally subject
to the cruelty of the sword and the Conqueror. The streets paved with dead
carcasses, the channels running with the blood of Christians; no noise in the
streets, but of such as were welcoming death, or suing for life. Their
Churches, which the Goths spared at the sack of Rome, were at this place made
the Theaters of lust and blood; neither privilege of Sanctuary, nor fear of
God, in whose holy house they were, qualifying their outrage; this in the
common places.

At dom^^ interior gemi^u, miser^que (...)
Mis^etur; pe(...)tusque cavae plangoribus ^des
(...) ulu(...). --
A^ Virgil in the ruin of Trey.
But the calamities which bese^^ the men, were merciful and sparing, if
computed to those which the women suffered; when the Soldiers had made them
the objects of their lust, they made them also the subjects of their (...), in
that only pitiful to that poor and distressed sex that they did not ^et them
survive their honors. Such of them who out of ^ear and ^aintness had made but
little resistance, had the favor to be stabbed; but those whose virtue and
courage maintaned their bodies valiantly from the rapes of those villains, had
the secrets of nature (procul hinc este castae and misericordes au^es) filled
with gunpowder, and so blown into ashes. Whither, O you divine powers! is
humanity fled when it is not to be found in Christians? or where shall we look
for the effects of a pitiful nature, when men are become so unnatural? It is
said that the King was ignorant of this barbarousnesse, and offended at it.
Offended I persuade my self he could not but be, unless he had totally put off
himself, and degenerated into a Tiger. But for his ignorance I dare not
conceive it to be any other then that of Ner^, an ignorance rather in his eye
then understanding: Subduxit oculos Nero (says Tacitus) jussitque se^lera, non
spectavil -- Though the Protestants deserved affliction for their disobedience;
yet this was an execution above the nature of a punishment, a misery beyond the
condition of the crime. True it is, and I shall never acquit them of it, that
in the time of their prosperity, they had done the King many affronts, and
committed many acts of disobedience and insolency, which justly occasioned the
war against them; for besides those already recited, they themselves first
broke those Edicts, the due execution whereof seemed to have been their only
petition. The King by his Edict of pacification, had licenced the free exercise
of both Religions, and thereupon permitted the Priests and Jesuits to preach in
the Towns of Caution, being then in the hands of the Protestants. On the other
side, the Protestants assembled at ^oudun, strictly commanded all their
Governors, Majors and Sheriffs, nor to suffer any Jesuits, nor any of any other
Order to preach in their Towns, although licenced by the Bishop of the Diocese.
When upon dislike of their proceedings in that Assembly the King had declared
their meeting to be unlawful, and contrary to his peace; and this Declaration
was verified against them by the Parliament: they notwithstanding would not
separate themselves, but stood still upon terms of capitulation, and the
justifiableness of their action again. Whereas it happened, that the Lord of
Privas, a Town full of those of the Religion, dyed in the year 1620* and left
his daughter and heir in the bed and marriage of the Viscount of Cheylane, a
Catholic: this new Lord according to law and right, in his own Town changed
the former Garrison, putting his own servants and dependants in their places.
Upon this the Protestants of the Town and Country round about it, draw
themselves in troops, surprise many of the Towns about it, and at last
compelled the young Gentleman to fly from his inheritance; an action, which
jumping even with the time of the Assembly at Rochell, made the King more
doubtful of their sincerity. I could add to these diverse others of their
undutifull practices, being the effects of too much felicity, and of a fortune
which they could not govern. Atqui animus meminisse horret, luctuque refugit.


These their insolences and unruly acts of disobedience, made the King and his
Counsel suspect, that their designs tended further then Religion, and that
their purpose might be to make themselves a free State, after the example of
Geneva, and the Low-countreymen. The late power which they had taken of calling
their own Synods and Convocations, was a strong argument of their purpose; so
also was the intelligence which they held with those of their own faith. At the
Synod of Gappe, called by the permission of Henry the fourth, on the first of
October, anno 1603. they not only gave audience to Ambassadors, and received
Letters from forain Princes; but also importuned his Majesty to have a general
liberty of going into any other Countries, and assisting at their Councels: a
matter of especial importance: and therefore the King upon a foresight of the
dangers, wisely prohibited them to go to any Assemblies without a particular
License, upon pain to be declared Traitors. Since that time growing into
greater strength, whenever they had occasion of business with King Lewis,
they would never treat with him, but by their Ambassadors, and upon especial
Articles.

An ambition above the quality of those that profess themselves Subjects, and
the only way, as Du Seirres notes, To make an Estate in the State. But the
answers made unto the King by those of Clerac and Montauban, are pregnant
proofs of their intent and meaning in this kind; the first being summoned by
the King and his Army the 21 of July, Anno 1621. returned thus, That the King
should suffer them to enjoy their Lilerties, and leave their Fortifications as
they were, for the safety of their lives, and so they would declare themselves
to be his Subjects. They of Montauban, made a fuller expression of the general
design and disobedience, which was, That they were resolved to live and die in
the union of the Churches, had they said for the service of the King, it had
been spoken bravely, but now rebelliously.

This Union and Confederacy of theirs, King Lewis used to call the
Commonwealth of Rochell; for the overthrow of which, he always protested,
that he had only taken arms, and if we compare circumstances, we shall find
it to be no other.

In the second of April, before he had as yet advanced into the field, he
published a Declaration in favor of all those of the Religion, which would
contain themselves within duty and obedience. And whereas some of Tours, at the
beginning of the wars, had tumultuously molested the Protestants, at the
burial of one of their dead; five of them, by the Kings commandment, were
openly executed. When the war was hottest abroad, those of the Religion in
Paris lived as securely as ever, and had their accustomed meetings at
Charenton; so had also those of other places. Moreover, when ^idings came to
Paris of the Duke of Mayens death, slain before Montauban, the rascal French,
according to their hot headed dispositions, breathed out nothing but ruin to
the Hugonots. The Duke of Monbazon governor of the City commanded their houses
and the streets to be safely guarded. After, when this rabble had burn down
their Temple at Charenton, the Court of Parliament on the day following
ordained, that it should be built up again in a more beautiful manner, and
that at the Kings charge. Add to this, that since the ending of the wars, and
the reduction of almost all their Towns, we have not seen the least alteration
of Religion. Besides that, they have been permitted to hold a National Synod
at Charenton for establishing the truth of their Doctrine, against the errors
of Arminius professor of Leid^n in Holland.

All things thus considered in their true being, I connot see for what cause
our late Sovereign should suffer so much censure as he then did, for not giving
them assistance. I cannot but say, that my self have too often condemned his
remissness in that cause, which upon better consideration I cannot tell how
he should have dealt in. Had he been a medler in it further then he was, he had
not so much preserved Religion, as supported Rebellion; besides the consequence
of the example. He had Subjects of his own more then enough, which were subject
to discontent, and prone to an apostasy from their alleagiance. To have
assisted the disobedient French under the color of the liberty of conscience,
had been only to have taught that King a way into England upon the same
pretense; and to have trod the path of his own hazard. He had not long before
denied succor to his own children, when he might have given them on a better
ground, and for a fairer purpose; and could not now in honor countenance the
like action in another. For that other, denial of his helping hand, I much
doubt how far posterity will acquit him, though certainly he was a good Prince,
and had been an happy instrument of the peace of Christendom, had not the
latter part of his reign happened in a time so full of troubles. So that betwixt
the quietness of his nature, and the turbulency of his latter days, he sell
into that miserable exigent mentioned in the Historian, Miserrimum est eum
alicui, aut natura sua excedenda est, aut minuenda dignitas. Add to this, that
the French had been first abandoned at home by their own friends, of seven
Generals which they had appointed for the seven circles into which they divided
all France; four of them never giving them encouragement. The three which
accepted of those unordinate Governments, were the Duke of Rohan, his brother
M. Soubise, and the Marquess of Lafforce; the four others being the Duke of
Tremoville, the Earl of Chastillon, the Duke of Lesdisguier, and the Duke of
Bovillon, who should have commanded in chief. So that the French Protestants
cannot say that he was first wanting for them, but they to themselves.

If we demand what should move the French Protestants to this Rebellious
contradiction of his Majesty's commandments. We must answer, that it was too
much happiness: Gausa hujus belli eadem quae omnium, nimia foelicitas, as
Florus of the Civil wars between Caesar and Pompey. Before the year 1620 when
they fell first into the Kings disfavour, they were possessed of almost 100
good Towns, well fortified for their safety; besides beautiful houses and
ample possessions in the Villages, they slept every man under his own Vine and
his own Fig Tree; neither fearing, nor needing to fear the least disturbance:
with those of the Catholic party, they were grown so intimate and entire, by
reason of their inter-marriages, that a very few years would have them
incorporated, if not into one faith, yet into one family. For their better
satisfaction in matters of Justice, it pleased King Henry the fourth, to erect
a Chamber in the Court of the Parliament of Paris, purposely for them. It
consists of one President and 16 Counselors; their office to take knowledge
of all the Causes and Suits of them of the reformed Religion, as well within
the jurisdiction of the Parliament of Paris, as also in Normandy and Britain,
till there should be a Chamber erected in either of them. There were appointed
also two Chambers in the Parliaments of Bordeaux and Grenoble, and one at the
Chastres for the Parliament of Tholoza. These Chambers were called Les Chamber
de l' Edict, because they were established by especial Edict, at the Towns of
Nantes in Britain, April the 8. anno 1598. In a word, they lived so secure and
happy, that one would have thought their felicities had been immortal. O
faciles dare summa deos, eademque tueri
Difficiles --
And yet they are not brought so low, but that they may live happily, if they
can be content to live obediently; that which is taken from them, being matter
of strength only, and not privilege.

Let us now look upon them in their Churches, which we shall find as empty of
magnificence as ceremony. To talk amongst them of Common Prayers, were to
fright them with the second coming of the Mass; and to mention Prayers at the
burial of the dead, were to persuade them of a Purgatory. Painted glass in a
Church window, is accounted for the flag and ensign of Antichrist: and for
Organs, no question but they are deemed to be the Devils bagpipes. Show them a
Surplice, and they cry out, a rag of the Whore of Babylon; yet a sheet on a
woman, when she is in childbed, is a greater abomination then the other. A
strange people, that could never think the Masse-book sufficiently reformed,
till they had taken away Prayers; nor that their Churches could ever be
handsome, until they were ragged. This foolish opposition of their first
Reformers, has drawn the Protestants of these parts into a world of dislike
and envy, and been no small disadvantage to the fide. Whereas the Church of
England, though it dissent as much from the Papists in point of Doctrine, is
yet not uncharitably thought on by the Modern Catholics, by reason it retained
such an excellency of Discipline. When the Li^urgie of our Church was
translated into Latin by Dr. Morket, once Warden of All Souls College in
Oxford, it was with great approofe and applause received here in France, by
those whom they call the Catholics royal; as marvelling to see such order and
regular devotion in them, whom they were taught to condemn for Heretical. An
allowance, which with some little help, might have been raised higher, from the
practice of our Church, to some points of our judgment, and it is very worthy
of our observation, that which the Marquess of Rhosny spoke of Canterbury,
when he came as extraordinary Ambassador from King Henry IV. to welcome King
James into England. For upon the view of our solemn Service and ceremonies, he
openly said unto his followers, That if the reformed Churches in France, had
kept the same orders amongst them which we have, he was assured that there
would have been many thousands more of Protestants there, then now are. But the
Marquess of Rhosny was not the last that said so, I have heard diverse French
Papists, who were at the Queens coming over, and ventured so far upon an
excommunication, as to be present at our Church solemn Services, extol them
and us for their sakes, even almost unto hyperboles. So graciously is our
temper entertained amongst them.

As are their Churches, such is their Discipline, naked of all Antiquity, and
almost as modern as the men which embrace it. The power and calling of Bishops,
they abrogated with the Mass, upon no other cause then that Geneva had done
it. As if that excellent man Mr. Calvin had been the Pythagoras of our age, and
his (...), his ipse dixit, had stood for Oracles. The Hierarchy of Bishops
thus cast out, they have brought in their places the Lay Elders, a kind of
Monster never heard of in the Scriptures, or first times of the Gospel. These
men leap from the stall to the bench, and there partly sleeping, and partly
stroaking of their beards; enact laws of Government for the Church, so that we
may justly take up the complaint of the Satyrist, saying, Surgunt nobis
e(...)sterquilinio Magistratus, nec dum lotis manibus publica tractant negotia;
yet to these very men, composed equally of ignorance and a trade, are the most
weighty matters of the Church committed. In them is the power of ordaining
Priests, of conferring places of charge, and even of the severest censure of
the Church, Excommunication. When any business which concerns the good of
the Congregation is befallen, they must be called to council, and you shall
find them there as soon as ever they can put off their Aprons; having blurted
out there a little Classical nonsense, and passed their consents rather by
nodding of their heads, then any other sensible articulation, they hasten to
their shops, as Quinctius the Dictator in Florus did to his plough, Vt ad opus
relictum festinasse videatur. Such a platform, though it be, that needs no
further confutation then to know it, yet had it been tolerable if the
contrivers of it had not endeavored to impose it on all the Reformation. By
which means what great troubles have been raised by the great zelots here in
England, there is none so young, but has heard some Tragical relations. God
be magnified, and our late King praised, by whom this weed has been snatched
up out of the garden of this our Israel.

As for their Ministry, it is indeed very learned in their studies, and
exceeding painful in their calling. By the first they confute the ignorance of
the Roman Clergy; by the second their laziness. And questionless it behooves
them so to be, for living in a Country full of opposition, they are enforced
to a necessity of book-learning, to maintain the cause, and being continually
as it were beset with spies, they do the oftener frequent the Pulpits, to hold
up their. credits. The maintenance which is allotted to them, scarce amounts
to a competency, though by that name they please to call it. With receiving of
tithes they never meddle, and therefore in their Schismatic tracts of
Divinity, they do hardly allow of the paying of them. Some of them hold that
they were Jewish, and abrogated with the Law. Others think them to be merely
jure humano, and yet that they may lawfully be accepted, where they are
tendered. It is well known yet that there are some amongst them, which will
commend grapes, though they cannot reach them. This competence may come unto 40
or 50 l. yearly, or a little more. Beza that great and famous Preacher of
Geneva, had but 80 l. a year; and about that rate was Peter de Moulins pension,
when he Preached at Charenton. These stipends are partly paid by the King; and
partly raised by way of Collection. So the Ministers of these Churches, are
much of the nature with the English Lecturers.

As for the Tithes, they belong to the several Parish Priests in whose
Precincts they are due; and they, I Will warrant you, according to the little
learning which they have, will maintain them to be jure divino. The Sermons of
the French are very plain and homespun, little in them of the Fathers, and
less of humane learning; it being concluded in the Synod of Gappe, that only
the Scriptures should be used in their Pulpits. They consist much of
Exhortation and Use, and of nothing in a manner which concerns knowledge; a
ready way to raise up and edify the Will and Affections, but withal to starve
the understanding. For the education of them being children, they have private
Schools; when they are better grown, they may have free recourse unto any of
the French Academies; besides the new University of Saumur, which is wholly
theirs, and is the chief place of their study.

CHAP. IV.
The connection between the Church and Commonwealth in general. A transition
to the particular of France. The Government there merely regal. A mixed form
of Government most commendable. The Kings Patents for Offices. Monopolies above
the censure of Parliament. The strange office intended to Mr. Luynes. The Kings
gifts and expenses. The Chamber of Accounts. France divided into three sorts of
people. The Conventus Ordinum nothing but a title. The inequality of the Nobles
and Commons in France. The Kings power how much respected by the Princes. The
powerablenesse of that rank. The formal execution done on them. The multitude
and confusion of Nobility. King James defended. A censure of the French
Heralds. The command of the French Nobles over their Tenants. Their
privileges, gibbets and other Regalia. They conspire with the King to undo
the Commons.

HAving thus spoken of the Churches; I must now treat a little of the
Commonwealth. Religion is as the soul of a State, Policy as the body; we can
hardly discourse of the one, without a relation to the other; if we do, we
commit a wilful murder, in thus destroying a republic. The Commonwealth
without the Church, is but a carcass, a thing inanimate. The Church without
the Commonwealth is as it were anima separata, the joining of them together
makes of both one flourishing and permanent body; and therefore as they are in
nature, so in my relation, Connutio jung^m stabili. Moreover, such a secret
sympathy there is between them, such a necessary dependence of one upon the
other, that we may say of them, what Tully does of two twins in his book De
fato, Eodem tempore, ^orum morbus gravescit, and eodem levaiur. They grow sick
and well at the same time, and commonly run out their races at the same
instant. There is besides the general respect of each to other, a more
particular band betwixt them here in France, which is a likeness and
resemblance. In the Church of France we have found an head and a body; this
body again divided into two parts, the Catholic and the Protestant: the head
is in his own opinion, and the minds of many others, of a power unlimited; yet
the Catholic party has strongly curbed it. And of the two parts of the body,
we see the Papists flourishing and in triumph, whilst that of the Protestant
is in misery and affliction. Thus is it also in the body Politic. The King in
his own conceit boundless and omnipotent, is yet affronted by his Nobles;
which Nobles enjoy all the freedom of riches and happiness; the poor Paisants
in the mean time living in drudgery and bondage.

For the government of the King is merely, indeed, regal, or to give it the
true name despoticall; though the Country be his wife, and all the people are
his children, yet does he neither govern as an husband or a father; he
accounts of them all as of his servants, and therefore commands them as a
Master. In his Edicts which he over frequenly sends about, he never
mentions the good will of his Subjects, nor the approbation of his Council,
but concludes all of them in this form, Car tell est nostre plaisir, Sic volo
sic jubeo. A form of government very prone to degenerate into a tyranny, if
the Princes had not oftentimes strength and will to make resistance. But this
is not the vice of the entire and Sovereign Monarchy alone; which the Greek
call (...); the other two good forms of regiment, being subject also to the
same frailty. Thus in the reading of Histories have we observed an
Aristocracie, to have been frequently corrupted into an Oligarchie; and a (...)
(or Commonwealth properly so called) into a Democratie. For as in the body
natural, the purest complexions are less lasting, but easily broken and
subject to alteration; so is it in the body Civil, the pure and unmixt forms
of Government, though perfect and absolute in their kinds, are yet of little
continuance, and very subject to change into its opposite. They therefore which
have written of Republics do most applaud and commend the mixed manner of rule,
which is equally compounded of the Kingdom and the Politeia; because in these
the Kings have all the power belonging to their title, without prejudice to the
populacie. In these there is referred to the King, absolute Majesty; to the
Nobles, convenient authority; to the People, an incorrupted liberty: all in a
just and equal proportion. Every one of these is like the Empire of Rome, as
it was moderated by Nerva, Qui res ol^m dissociabiles miscuerat, principatum
and libertatem; wherein the Sovereignty of one endamaged not the freedom of
all. A rare mixture of Government, and such at this time is the Kingdom of
England, a Kingdom of a perfect and happy composition; wherein the King has
his full Prerogative, the Nobles all due respects, and the People, amongst
other blessings perfect in this, that they are masters of their own purposes,
and have a strong hand in the making of their own Laws.

On the otherside, in the Regal government of France, the Subject frames his
life merely as the Kings variable Edicts shall please to enjoin him; is
ravished of his money as the Kings taske-masters think fit; and suffers many
other oppressions, which in their proper place shall be specified. This
Aristole in the third book of his Politics calls, (...), or the command of a
Master, and defines it to be (...), Such an Empire by which a Prince may
command, and do whatsoever shall seem good in his own eyes. One of the
Prerogatives Royal of the French Kings. For though the Court of Parliament
does seem to challenge a perusal of his Edicts, before they pass for Laws;
yet is that but a mere formality. It is the cartel^^est nostre plaifir, which
makes them current; which it seems these Princes learned of the Roman
Emperors. Justinian in the book of Institutions, makes five grounds of the
Civil Laws, viz. Lex, (he means the law of the 12 Tables) Plebiscita,
Senatusconsulta, Predentum Responsa, and Principum placita; to this last he
adds this general strength, Quod principi plaeuerit, legis ^abet valorem;
the very foundation of the French Kings powerfulness. True it is, that the
Courts of Parliament do use to demur sometimes upon his Patents and Decrees,
and to petition him for a reversall of them; but their answer commonly is, Stat
pro ratione voluntas. He knows his own power, and grants his Letters
patents for new Offices and Monopolies abundantly. If a monied man can make a
friend in Court, he may have an office found for him, of six pence upon every
Sword made in France; a Livre, upon the selling of every head of Cattle; a
brace of Sols, for every pair of boots, and the like. It is the only study of
some men to find out such devices of enriching themselves, and undoing the
people. The Patent for Innes granted to St. Giles Mo^^pesson, was just one of
the French offices.

As for Monopolies, they are here so common, that the Subject takes no notice
of it; not a scurvey petty book being Printed, but it has its privilege
affixed, Ad imprimendum solum. These being granted by the King, are carried to
the Parliament, by them formally perused, and finally verified; after which,
they are in force and virtue against all opposition. It is said in France that
Mr. Luynes had obtained a Patent of the King, for a quart d' escu to be paid
unto him / upon the Christning of every child thoughout all the Kingdom. A
very unjust and unconscionable extortion. Had he lived to have presented it to
the Court, I much doubt of their denial, though the only cause of bringing
before them such Patents, is only intended that they should discuss the
justice and convenience of them.

As the Parliament has a formality of power left in them, of verifying the
Kings Edicts, his grants of Offices and Monopolics. So has the Chamber of
Accounts, a superficial survey also of his gifts and expenses. For his
expenses, they are thought to be as great now as ever, by reason of the
several retinues of himself, his Mother, his Queen, and the Monseiur; neither
are his gifts lessened. The late Wars which he managed against the Protestants
cost him deer, he being fain to bind unto him most of his Princes by money and
pensions. As the expenses of the King are brought unto this Court to be
examined, so are also the Gifts and Pensions by him granted to be ratified. The
titulary power given unto this Chamber, is to cut off all those of the Kings
grants which have no good ground and foundation; the officers being solemnly
(at the least formally) sworn, not to suffer any thing to pass them, to the
detriment of the Kingdom, whatsoever Letters of command they have to the
contrary. But this Oath they oftentimes dispense with. To this Court also
belongs the Enfranchisement or Naturalization of Aliens, anciently certain
Lords, officers of the Crown, and of the prime counsel were appointed to look
unto the accounts. Now it is made an ordinary and sovereign Court, consisting
of two Presidents and diverse Auditors, and other under Officers. The Chamber
wherein it is kept, called La Chamber des comptes, is the beautifullest piece
of the whole Palais; the great Chamber it self, not being worthy to be named in
the same day with it. It was built by Charles VIII. anno 1485. afterward
adorned and beautified by Lewis XII. whose Statua is there standing in his
royal robes, and the Scepter in his hand. He is accomp^aned by the four
Cardinal virtues expressed by way of Hieroglyphics, very properly and
cunningly; each of them having its particular Motto, to declare its being. The
Kings portraiture also as if he were the fifth virtue, had its word under
written, and contained in a couple of Verses, which let all that love the Muses
skip them in the reading, and are these:

Quatuor has comites foveo, Coelestia dona,
Innccuae pacis prospera scep^^a geren^.
From the King descend we to the Subjects, ab equis (quod aiunt) ad asinos, and
the phrase is not much improper; the French commonalty being called the Kings
asses. These are divided into three ranks or Classes, the Clergy, the Nobles,
the Paisants; out of which certain delegates or Committees, chosen upon
occasion, and sent to the King, did anciently concur to the making of the
Supreme Court for Justice in France. It was called the Assembly of the three
Estates, or the Conventus ordinum; and was just like the Parliament of England.
But these meetings are now forgotten, or out of use; neither, indeed, as this
time goes, can they any way advantage the State; for whereas there are three
principal, if not sole causes of these conventions, which are, the desposing
of the Regency during the nonage or sickness of a King; the granting Aides and
Subsidies; and the redressing of Grievances: there is now another course taken
in them. The Parliament of Paris, which speaks, as it is prompted by power
and greatness, appoints the Regent; the Kings themselves with their officers
determine of the Taxes; and as concerning their Grievances, the Kings care is
open to private Petitions.

Thus is that little of a Commonwealth which went to the making up of this
Monarchy, escheated, or rather devoured by the King, that name alone
containing in it both Clergy, Princes and People. So that some of the French
Counselors, may say with Tully in his Oration for Marcellus unto Caesar,
Doleoque cum respub. immortalis esse debeat, eam unius mortalis anima
consistere. Yet I cannot withal but affirm, that the Princes and Nobles of
France, do, for as much as concerns themselves, upon all advantages fly off
from the Kings obedience; but all this while the poor Paisant is ruined; let
the poor Tenant starve, or eat the bread of carfulness, it matters not, so
they may have their pleasure, and be counted firm zelots of the common
liberty. And certainly this is the issue of it, the former lives the life of a
slave to maintain his Lord in pride and laziness; the Lord lives the life of
a King to oppress his Tenant by fines and exactions. An equality little
answering to the old plat-formes of Republics. Aristotle, Genius ille naturae,
as a learned man calls him, in his fourth book of Politics has an excellent
discourse concerning this disproportion. In that Chapter, his project is, to
have a correspondency so far between Subjects under the King or people of the
same City, that neither the one might be over rich, nor the other too miserably
poor. They, says he, which are too happy, strong, or rich, or greatly
favored, and the like, can not nor will not obey, with which evil they are
infected from their infancy. The other through want of these things are too
abjectly minded and base; so that the one cannot but command, nor the other but
serve. And this he calls (...), a City inhabited only by Slaves and Tyrants.
That questionless is the most perfect and complete form of Government, Ubi
veneratur protentem humilis, non timet; antecedit, non contemnit humiliorem
potens, as Velleius. But this is an unhappiness of which France is not
capable; their Lords being Kings, and their Commons Villains.

And not to say less of them then indeed they are, the Princes of this
Country, are but little inferior in matter of Royalty, to any King abroad;
and by consequence little respective, in matter of obedience, to their own King
at home. Upon the least discontent, they withdraw themselves from the Court, or
put themselves into arms; and of all other comforts are ever sure of this,
that they shall never want partisans. Neither do they use to stand off from him
fearfully, and at distance, but justify their revolt by public Declaration,
and think the King much indebted to them, if upon fair terms and an honorable
reconcilement, they will please to put themselves again into his obedience.
Henry IV. was a Prince of as undaunted and uncontrollable a spirit, as ever any
of his predecessors, and one that loved to be obeyed; yet was he also very
frequently baffled by these Roytelets, and at the last dyed in an affront. The
Prince of Conde perceiving the Kings affection to his new Lady, began to grow
jealous of him, for which reason he retired unto Bruxells: the King offended at
his retreat, sent after him, and commanded him home. The Prince returned
answer, that he was the Kings most humble Subject and servant; but into France
he would not come unless he might have a Town for his assurance; withal he
protested in public writing a nullity of any thing that should be done to his
prejudice in his absence. A stomachfull resolution, and misbecoming a Subject;
yet in this opposition he persisted, his humor of disobedience out-living the
King whom he had thus affronted. But these tricks are ordinary here, otherwise
a man might have construed this action, by the term of Rebellion. The chief
means whereby these Princes become so head strong, are an immunity given them
by their Kings, and a liberty which they have taken to themselves. By their
Kings they have been absolutely exempted from all Tributes, Tolles, Taxes,
Customs, Impositions and Subsidies. By them also they have been estated in
whole entire Provinces, with a power of haute and main Justice (as the Lawyers
term it) passed over to them; the Kings having scarce an homage or
acknowledgment of them. To this they have added much for their strength and
security, by the insconcing and fortifying of their houses, which both often
moves, and afterward inableth them to contemn his Majesty. An example we have
of this in the Castle of Rochfort belonging to the Duke of Tremoville, which in
the long Civil wars endured a siege of 5000 shot, and yet was not taken. A
very impolitick course (in my conceit) of the French, to bestow honors and
immunities upon those, Qui (as the Historian notes) ea suo arbitrio aut
reposituri, aut retenturi videantur; quique modum habent in sua voluntate. For
upon a knowledge of this strength in themselves, the Princes have been always
prone to Civil wars, as having sufficient means for safety and resistance* On
this ground also they slight the Kings authority, and disobey his Justice. In
so much that the greater sort of Nobles in this Kingdom, can seldom be
arraigned or executed in person; and therefore the Laws condemn them in their
images, and hang them in their pictures. A pretty device to mock Justice. If by
chance, or some handsome slight, any of them are apprehended, they are put
under a sure guard, and not done to death without great fear of tumult and
unquietness.

Neither is it unus and alter, only some two or three, that thus stand upon
their distance with the King, but even all the Nobility of the Realm, a rout so
disordered, unconfined, and numberless, that even Fabius himself would be out
of breath in making the reckoning. I speak not here of those that are styled La
Noblesse, but of Titulados, men only of titular Nobility, of the degree of
Baron and above. Of these there is in this Country a number almost
innumerable. Quot Coelum Stellas; take quantity for quantity, and I dare be of
the opinion, that heaven has not more Stars, then France Nobles. You shall
meet with them so thick in the Kings Court especially, that you would think it
almost impossible the Country should bear any other fruit. This, I think, I
may safely affirm, and without Hyperbole, that they have there as many
Princes, as we in England have Dukes; as many Dukes, as we Earls; as many
Earls, as we Barons; and as many Barons as we have Knights; a jolly company,
and such as know their own strength too. I cannot therefore but much marvel,
that these Kings should be so prodigal in conferring honors; considering
this, that every Noble man he creates, is so great a weakening to his power.

On the other side, I cannot but as much wonder at some of our Nation, who have
murmured against our late Sovereign, and accused him of an unpardonable
unthriftiness, in bestowing the dignities of his Realm, with so full and
liberal a hand. Certainly, could there any danger have arisen by it unto the
State, I could have been as impatient of it as another. But with us, titles and
ennoblings in this kind, are only either the Kings favor, or the parties
merit, and makes whomsoever he be that receives them, rather reverenced then
powerful. Raro eorum honoribus invidetur, quorum vis non timetur, was a good
Aphorism in the days of Paterculus; and may for ought I know be as good
still. Why should I envy any man that honor, which takes not from my safety;
or repine at my Sovereign for raising any of his Servants into an higher degree
of eminency, when that favor cannot make them exorbitant? Besides it
concerns the improvement of the Exchequer, at the occasions of Subsidies, and
the glory of the Kingdom, when the Prince is not attended by men merely of the
vulgar. Add to this, the few Noble men of any title which he found at his happy
coming in amongst us, and the additions of power which his coming brought unto
us; and we shall find it proportionable, that he should enlarge our Nobility,
with our Empire: neither yet have we, indeed, a number to be talked of,
comparing us with our neighbor Nations. We may see all of the three first
ranks in the books of Milles, Brook, and Vincent; and we are promised also a
Catalogue of the Creations and successions of all our Barons. Then we should
see that as yet we have not surfeited. Were this care taken by the Heralde in
France, perhaps the Nobility there would not seem so numberless; sure I am not
so confused. But this is the main vice of that profession, of ^ix Heralds which
they have amongst them, viz. Montjoy, Normandy, Guyenne, Val^ys, Bretagne, and
Burgogne, not one of them is reported to be a Genealogist; neither were their
Predecessors better affected to this study. Paradine the only man that ever was
amongst them, has drawn down the Genealogies of 24 of the chief families, all
ancient and of the blood, in which he has excellently well discharged himself.
But what a small pittance is that compared to the present multitude?

The Nobles being so populous, it cannot be but the Noblesse, as they call
them; that is, the Gentry, must needs be thick set and only not innumerable. Of
these Nobles there are some which hold their estates immediately of the Crown,
and they have the like immunities with the Princes. Some hold their Feifes (or
feuda) of some other of the Lords, and he has only Basse Justice permitted to
him, as to mulct and amerce his Tenants, to imprison them, or give them any
other correction under death. All of them have power to raise and inhance up
their Rents, to Tax his Subjects on occasion, and to prohibit them such
pleasures, as they think fit to be reserved for themselves. By Brettaul in
Picardy, I saw a post fastened in the ground, like a race post with us, and
therein an inscription; I presently made to it, as hoping to have heard of some
memorable battle there foughten; but when I came at it, I found it to be
nothing but a Declaration of the Prince of Condes pleasure, that no man should
hunt in those quarters; afterward I observed them to be very frequent. But not
to wander through all particulars, I will in some few of them only give
instance of their power here. The first is Proict de bailli age, power to keep
Assize, or to have under him a Bailli, and a Superior seat of Justice, for the
decision of such causes as fall under the compass of ordinary jurisdiction. In
this Court there is notice taken of Treasons, Robberies, Murders, Protections,
Pardons, Faires, Markets, and other matters of privilege. Next they have a
Court of ordinary jurisdiction, and therein a Judge whom they call Le guarde de
Justice, for the decision of smaller business, as Debts, Trespasses, breach of
the Kings peace, and the like In this the purse is only emptied, the other
extends to the taking of life also; for which cause every one which has
Haute Justice annexed to his Feise, has also his peculiar Gibbet; nay which is
wonderfully methodicall, by the criticisme of the Gibbet, you may judge at the
quality of him that owneth it. For the Gibbet of one of the Nobles has but two
pillars, that of the Chastellan three, the Barons four, the Earls six, the
Dukes eight; and yet this difference is rather precise then general. The last
of their jura regalia, which I will here speak of, is the command they have
upon their people, to follow them unto the wars; a command not so advantageous
to the Lord, as dangerous, to the Kingdom.

Thus live the French Princes, thus the Nobles. Those sheep which God, and the
Laws has brought under them, they do not sheer but fleece; and which is worse
then this, having themselves taken away the Wool, they give up the naked
carcass to the King. Tondi oves meas volo, non deglubi, was accounted one of
the golden sayings of Tiberius; but it is not current here in France. Here the
Lords and the King, though otherwise at odds amongst themselves, will be sure
to agree in this, the undoing and oppressing of the poor Paisant; Ephraim
against Manasseh, and Manasseh against Ephraim, but both against Judah, says
the Scripture.

The reason why they thus desire the poverty of the Commons, is, as they
pretend, the safety of the State, and their own particulars. Were the people
once warmed with the feeling of ease and their own riches, they would presently
be harkening after the wars; and if no employment were proffered abroad, they
would make some at home. Histories and experience has taught us enough of
their humor in this kind; it being impossible for this hotheaded, and
hare-brained people, not to be doing. Si extraneus deest, domi hostem quaerunt,
as Justin has observed of the Ancient Spaniards; a pretty quality, and for
which they have often smarted.

CHAP. V.
The base and low estate of the French Paisant. The misery of them under their
Lord. The bed of Procrustes. The suppressing of the Subject prejudicial to a
State. The wisdom of Henry VII. The French forces all in the Cavallerie. The
cruel impositions laid upon the people by the King. No Demaine in France. Why
the trial by twelve men can be used only in England. The Gabell of Salt. The
Popes license for wenching. The Gabell of whom refused, and why. The Gascoines
impatient of Taxes. The taille, and taillion. The Pancarke or Aides. The vain
resistance of those of Paris. The Court of Aides. The manner of gathering the
Kings moneys. The Kings revenue. The corruption of the French publicans. King
Lewis why called the just. The moneys current in France. The gold of Spain more
Catholic then the King. The happiness of the English Subjects. A
congratulation unto England. The conclusion of the first Journey.

BY that which has been spoken already of the Nobles, we may partly guess at
the poor estate of the Paisant, or Countrymen; of whom we will not now speak,
as subjects to their Lords, and how far they are under their commandment; but
how miserable and wretched they are in their Apparel and their Houses. For
their Apparel it is well they can allow themselves Canvasse, or an outside of
that nature. As for Cloth, it is above their purse equally, and their ambition;
if they can aspire unto Fustian, they are as happy as their wishes, and he that
is so arrayed, will not spare to aim at the best place in the Parish, even
unto that of the Churchwarden. When they go to plough or to the Church, they
have shoes and stockins; at other times they make bold with nature, and wear
their skins. H^ts they will not want, though their bellies pinch for it; and
that you may be sure they have them, they will always keep them on their
heads: the most impudent custom of a beggarly fortune, that ever I met with,
and which already has had my blessing. As for the women, they know in what
degree nature has created them, and therefore dare not be so fine as their
Husbands; some of them never had above one pair of stockins in all their lives,
which they wear every day, for indeed they are very durable. The goodness of
their faces tell us, that they have no need of a band, therefore they use none.
And as concerning Petticoats, so it is, that all of them have such a garment,
but most of them so short, that you would imagine them to be cut off at the
placket. When the Parents have sufficiently worn these vestures, and that
commonly is till the rottenness of them will save the labor of undressing,
they are a new-cut-out and fitted to the children. Search into their houses,
and you shall find them very wretched, destitute as well of furniture as
provision. No Butter salted up against Winter, no powdring tub, no Pullein in
the Rick-barten, no flesh in the pot or at the spit, and which is worst, no
money to buy them. The description of the poor aged couple Phileman and Bauci^
in the eight book of the Metamorphosis, is a perfect character of the French
Paisant, in his housekeeping; though I cannot affirm, that if Jupiter and
Mercury did come amongst them, they should have so hearty an entertainment; for
thus Ovid marshalleth the dishes:

Ponitur hic bicolor sincerae bacca Minerva,
Intybaque, and radix, and lactis massa coacti,
Ovaque non acri leviter versata favilla,
Prunaque, and in patulis redolentia mala canistris.
Hic nux, hic mixta est rugosis caricapalmis,
Et de purpureis collectae vitibus uvae;
Omnia fictilibus nitide. -- They on the table set Minerva's fruit,
The double-colour'd Olive, Endive-root;
Radish and Cheese: and to the board there came
A dish of Eggs, rear-roasted by the flame.
Next they had Nuts, course Dates and Lenten-figs,
And Apples from a basket made of twigs,
And Plums, and Graps cut newly from the tree:
All served in earthen dishes, Housewifely.


But you must not look for this cheer often. At Wakes or Feasts days, you may
perchance be so happy as to see this plenty; but at other times, Olus omne
patella, the best provision they can show you is a piece of Bacon wherewith
they fatten their pottage; and now and then the inwards of Beast^ killed for
the Gentlemen. But of all miseries, this me thinks is the greatest, that
sowing so many acres of excellent wheat in an year, and gathering in such a
plentiful Vintage as they do, they should not yet be so fortunate, as to eat
white bread, or drink wine; for such infinite rents do they pay to their Lords,
and such innumerable taxes to the King, that the profits arising out of those
commodities, are only sufficient to pay their duties, and keep them from the
extremities of cold and famine. The bread then which they eat, is of the
coursest flower, and so black, that it cannot admit the name of brown. And as
for their drink, they have recourse to the next Fountain. A people of any, the
most unfortunate, not permitted to enjoy the fruit of their labors; and such
as above all others are subject to that Sarcasme in the Gospel, This man
planted a Vineyard, and does not drink of the fruit thereof. Nec prosunt
domino, quae prosunt omnibus, arts.


Yet were their case not altogether so deplorable, if there were but hopes left
to them of a better, if they could but compass certainty, that a painful
drudging and a thrifty saving, would one day bring them out of this hell of
bondage. In this, questionless, they are entirely miserable, in that they are
sensible of the wretchedness of their present fortunes, and dare not labor
nor expect an alteration. If industry and a sparing hand has raised any of
this afflicted people so high, that he is but 40 s or 5 l. richer then his
neighbor, his Lord immediately enhaunceth his Rents, and enformeth the Kings
taskmasters of his riches, by which means he is within two or three years
brought again to equal poverty with the rest. A strange course, and much
different from that of England, where the Gentry take a delight in having their
Tenants thrive under them, and hold it no crime in any that hold of them to be
wealthy. On the other side, those of France can abide no body to gain or grow
rich upon their farms; and therefore thus upon occasions rack their poor
Tenants. In which they are like the Tyrant Procrustes, who laying hands upon
all he met, cast them upon his bed; if they were shorter then it, he racked
their joints till he had made them even to it, if they were longer, he cut as
much of their bodies from them, as did hang over; so keeping all that fell into
his power in an equality. All the French Lords are like that Tyrant.

How much this course does depresse the military power of this Kingdom is
apparent by the true principles of war, and the examples of other Countries.
For it has been held by the general opinion of the best judgments in matters
of war, that the main Buttresse and Pillar of an Army is the foot, or (as the
Martialists term it) the Infantery. Now to make a good Infantery, it requires
that men be brought up not in a slavish and needy fashion of life, but in some
free and liberal manner. Therefore it is well observed by the Vicoun^ St.
Albans in his History of Henry VII. that if a State run most to Nobles and
Gentry, and that the Husbandmen be but as their mere drudges, or else simply
Cottagers, that that State may have a good Cavallery, but never good stable
bands of foot. Like to Coppice woods, in which if you let them grow too thick
in the stadles, they run to bushes or briars, and have little clean under-wood.
Neither is this in France only, but in Italy also, and some other parts abroad;
in so much, that they are enforced to employ mercenary Soldiers for their
battalions of foot: whereby it comes to pass, that in those Countries they
have much people, and few men. On this consideration King Henry VII. one of the
wisest of our Princes took a course so cunning and wholesome, for the increase
of the military power of his Realm; that though it be much less in territory,
yet it should have infinitely more Soldiers of its native forces, then its
neighbor Nations. For in the fourth year of his Reign, there passed an Act of
Parliament pretensively against the depopulation of Villages, and decay of
tillage, but purposedly to enable his subjects for the wars. The Act was, That
all houses of husbandry which had been used with twenty acres of ground and
upwards, should be maintained and kept up for, together with a competent
proportion of Land, to be used and occupied with them, etc. By this means, the
houses being kept up, did of necessity enforce a dweller, and that dweller,
because of the proportion of Land, not to be a beggar, but a man of some
substance, able to keep Hinds and Servants, and to set the plough a going. An
order which did wonderfully concern the might and manhood of the Kingdom;
these Farms being sufficient to maintain an able body out of penury; and by
consequence to prepare them for service, and encourage them to higher honors,
for Haud facile emergent, quorum virtutibus obstat
Res angusta domi. --
As the Poet has it.

But this Ordinance is not thought of such use in France, where all the hopes
of their Armies consist in the Cavallery or the horse; which perhaps is the
cause why our Ancestors have won so many battles upon them. As for the French
foot, they are quite out of all reputation, and are accounted to be the basest
and unworthyest company in the world.

Besides, should the French people be enfranchised, as it were, from the
tyranny of their Lords, and estated in freeholds and other tenures, after the
manner of England, it would much trouble the Council of France, to find out a
new way of raising his revenues, which are now merely sucked out of the blood
and sweat of the Subject. Anciently the Kings of France had rich and plentiful
demeans, such as was sufficient to maintain their greatness and Majesty,
without being burdensome unto the Country. Pride in matters of sumptuousness,
and the tedious Civil wars, which have lasted in this Country, almost ever
since the death of Henry II. have been the occasion that most of the Crown
lands have been sold and morgaged; in so much that the people are now become
the Demaine, and the Subject only is the Revenue of the Crown. By the sweat of
their brows is the Court sed, and the Soldier paid; and by their labors are
the Princes maintained in idleness. What impositions soever it pleases the
King to put upon them, it is almost a point of treason not only to deny, but to
question. Apud illos vere regnatur, nefasque quantum regi liceat, dubitare; as
one of them. The Kings hand lies hard upon them, and has almost thrust them
into an Egyptian bondage, the poor Paisant being constrained to make up daily
his full tale of bricks, and yet have no straw allowed them. Upon a sight of
the miseries and poverties of this people, Sir John Fortescue, Chancellor of
England, in his book entitled, De Laudibus legum Angliae, concludes them to
be unfit men for Jurors or Judges, should the custom of the Country admit of
such trials. For having proved there unto the Prince, (he was son to Henry VI.)
that the manner of trial according to the Common Law, by 12 Jurates, was more
commendable then the practice of the Civil or Imperial Laws, by the
deposition only of two witnesses, or the forced confession of the persons,
arrained, the Prince seemed to marvel, Cur ed lex Angliae quae tam fiugi and
optabilis est, non sit toti mundo communis. To this he makes answer, by
showing the ^ree condition of the English Subjects, who alone are used at these
indictments; men of a fair and large estate, such as dwell nigh the place of
the deed committed, men that are of ingenuous education, such as scorn to be
suborned or corrupted, and afraid of infamy. Then he shows how in other
places all things are contrary, the Husbandman an absolute beggar, easy to be
bribed by reason of his poverty; the Gentlemen living far asunder, and so
taking no notice of the fact; the Paisant also neither fearing infamy, nor the
loss of goods, if he be found faulty, because he has them not. In the end he
concludes thus, Ne mireris igitur princeps, si lex per quam in Anglia veritas
inquiritur, alias non pervagetur nationes, ipsae namque ut Anglia nequerunt
facere sufficientes consimilesque Juratas. The last part of the latin,
savoureth somewhat of the Lawyer, the word Juratas being put there to signify
a Jury.

To go over all those impositions, which this miserable people are afflicted
withal, were almost as wretched as the payment of them; I wiil therefore speak
only of the principal. And here I meet in the first place, with the Gabell or
Imposition on Salt. This Gabelle de sell, this Impost on Salt was first begun by
Philip the Long, who took for it a double (which is half a Sol) upon the pound.
After whom Philip of Valoys, anno 1328. doubled that. Charles the VII. raised
it unto three doubles; and Lewis the XI. unto six. Since that time it has been
altered from so much upon the pound to a certain rate on the Mine, which
contains some 30 bushels English; the rates rising and falling at the Kings
pleasure. This one commodity were very advantageous to the Exchequer, were it
all in the Kings hands; but at this time a great part of it is morgaged. It is
thought to be worth unto the King three millions of Crowns yearly; that only of
Paris and the Provosts seven Daughters, being farmed at 1700000 Crowns the
year. The late Kings since anno 15^1. being entangled in wars, have been
constrained to let it out others; in so much that about anno 1599. the King
lost above 800000 Crowns yearly: and no longer agone then anno 1621. the King
taking up 600000 pounds, of the Provost of Merchands and the Eschevines, gave
unto them a rent charge of 40000 l. yearly, to be issuing out of his Customs
of Salt, till their money were repaid them. This Gabell is, indeed, a Monopoly,
and that one of the unjustest and unreasonablest in the World. For no man in
the Kingdom (those Countries hereafter mentioned excepted) can eat any Salt,
but he must buy of the King and at his price, which is most unconscionable;
that being sold at Paris and elsewhere for five Livres, which in the exempted
places is sold for one. Therefore that the Kings profits might not be
diminished, there is diligent watch and ward, that no forain Salt be brought
into the Land, upon pain of forfeiture and imprisoment. A search which is made
so strictly, that we had much ado at Dieppe to be pardoned the searching of our
trunks and port-mantles, and that not, but upon solemn protestation, that we
had none of that commodity. This Salt is of a brown color, being only such as
we in England call Bay salt; and imposed on the Subjects by the Kings Officers
with great rigor, for though they have some of their last provision in the
house, or perchance would be content (through poverty) to eat meat without it,
yet will these cruel villains enforce them to take such a quantity of them;
or howsoever they will have of them so much money.

But this Tyranny is not general, the Normans and Picards enduring most of it,
and the other Paisant the rest. Much like unto which was the License which the
Popes and Bishops of old granted in matter of keeping Concubines. For when such
as had the charge of gathering the Popes Rents happened upon a Priest which had
no Concubine, and for that cause made denial of the Tributes; the Collectours
would return them this answer, that notwithstanding this, they should pay the
money, because they might have the keeping of a wench if they would.

This Gabell, as it sits hard on some, so are there some also which are
never troubled with it. Of this sort are the Princes in the general released,
and many of the Nobless in particular; in so much that it was proved unto King
Lewis, anno 1614. that for every Gentleman which took of his Majesty's Salt,
there were 2000 of the Commons. There are also some entire Provinces which
refuse to eat of this Salt, as Bretagne, Gascoine, Poictou, Quer^u, Xaintogne,
and the County of Boul^nnois. Of these the County of Boulonnois pretends a
peculiar exemption, as belonging immediately to the patrimony of our Lady
(Nostre Dame); of which we shall learn more when we are in Bovillon. The
Bretagnes came united to the Crown by a fair marriage, and had strength enough
to make their own capitulations, when they first entered into the French
subjection. Besides, here are yet diverse of the Ducall family living in that
Country, who would much trouble the peace of the Kingdom, should the people
be oppressed with this bondage, and they take the protection of them. Poictou
and Quercu have compounded for it with the former Kings, and pay a certain rent
yearly, which is called the Equivalent. Xaint^gne is under the command of
Rochell, of whom it receives sufficient at a better rate. And as for the
Gascoynes, the King dares not impose it upon them for fear of Rebellion. They
are a stuborne and churlish people, very impatient of a rigorous yoke, and such
which inherit a full measure of the Biscanes liberty and spirits, from whom
they are descended. Le droict de fouage, the privilege of levying a certain
piece of money upon every chimney in an house that smoketh, was in times not
long since one of the jura regalia of the French Lords, and the people paid it
without grumbling; yet when Edward the black Prince returned from his unhappy
journey into Spain, for the paying of his Soldiers to whom he was indebted,
laid this Fouage upon this people, being then English, they all presently
revolted to the French, and brought great prejudice to our affairs in those
quarters.

Next to the Gabell of Salt, we may place the Taille or Taillon, which are much
of a nature with the Subsidies in England, as being levied both on Goods and
Lands. In this again they differ, the Subsidies of England being granted by the
people, and the sum of it certain; but this of France being at the pleasure of
the King, and in what manner he shall please to impose them. Anciently the
Tailles were only levied by way of extraordinary Subsidy, and that but upon
four occasions, which were, the Knighting of the King Son, the marriage of his
Daughters, a Voyage of the Kings beyond sea, and his Ransom in case he were
taken Prisoner; Les Tailles ne sont point devis de voir ordinaire (says
Ragneau) ains ant este accordees durant la necessite des affairs seulement.
Afterward they were continually levied in times of war; and at length Chales
the VII. made them ordinary. Were it extended equally on all, it would amount
to a very fair Revenue. For supposing this, that the Kingdom of France
contains 200 millions of Acres (as it does) and that from every acre there
were raised to the King two Sols yearly, which is little in respect of what the
Taxes impose upon them: That income alone, besides that which is levied on
Goods personal, would amount to two millions of pounds in a year. But this
payment also lies on the Paisant; the greater Towns, the officers of the Kings
house, the Officers of War, the President, Counselors and Officers of the
Courts of Parliament, the Nobility, the Clergy, and the Scholars of the
University being freed from it.

That which they call the Taillon, was intended for the ease of the Country,
though now it prove one of the greatest burdens unto it. In former times the
Kings Soldiers lay all upon the charge of the Villages, the poor people being
^ain to find them diet, lodging, and all necessaries, for themselves, their
horses, and the harlots which they brought with them. If they were not well
pleased with their entertainment, they used commonly to beat their Host, abuse
his family, and rob him of that small provision, which he had laid up for his
children; and all this Cum privilegio. Thus did they move from one Village to
another, and at the last again returned to them from whence they came; Ita ut
non sit ibi villula una expers calamitatis istius; quae non semel aut bis in
anno, hac nefanda pressura depiletur, as Sir John ^ortescue observed in his
time. To redress this mischief, King Henry II. anno 1549. raised this
imposition called the Taillon.

The Pancarte comprehends in it diverse particular Imposts, but especially the
Sol upon the Livre; that is, the twentieth penny of all things bought or sold,
Corn, Sallets, and the like only excepted. Upon wine, besides the Sol upon the
Livre, he has his several Customs of the entrance of it into any of his
Cities, passages by Land, Sea or Rivers. To these Charles the IX. anno 1461.
added a Tax of five Sols upon every Muye (which is the third part of a Tun) and
yet when all this is done, the poor Vintner pays unto the King the eight
penny he takes for that Wine which he sells. In this Pancar^e is also
contained the Haut passage, which are the Tolles paid unto the King for passage
of Men and Cattle over his bridges, and his City gates, as also for all such
commodities as they bring with them: a good round sum considering the
largeness of the Kingdom; the through-fare of Lions, being farmed yearly of
the King for 100000 Crowns. Hereunto belong also the Aides, which are a Tax of
the Sol also in the Livre, upon all sorts of Fruits, Provision, Wares, and
Merchandise, granted first unto Charles Duke of Normandy, when John his father
was Prisoner in England, and since made perpetual. For such is the lamentable
fate of this Country, that their kindnesses are made duty; and those moneys
which they once grant out of love, are always after exacted of them, and paid
out of necessity. The Bedroll of all these impositions and Taxes, is called the
Pancarte, because it was hanged in a frame, like as the Officers fees are in
our Diocesan Courts; the word Pan signifying a frame or a pane of Wainscot.
These Impositions time and custom has now made tolerable, though at first
they seemed very burdensome, and moved many Cities to murmuring, some to
rebellion; amongst others, the City of Paris, proud of her ancient liberties
and immunities, refused to admit of it. This indignity so incensed Charles the
VI. their King, then young and in hot blood, that he seized into his hands all
their privileges, took from them their Provost des Merchands, and the
Es^b^vins, as also the Keys of their gates, and the Chains of their streets,
and making through the whole Town such a face of mourning, that one might
justly have said, Haec facies Trojae, cum caperetur, erat.
This happened in the year 1383. and was for five years together continued, which
time being expired, and other Cities warned by that example, the Imposition was
established, and the privileges restored. For the better regulating of the
Profits arising from these Imposts, the French King erected a Court called, Le
Cour des Aides; it consisted at the first of the Generals of the Aides, and of
any four of the Lords of the Council, whom they would call to their
assistance. Afterward Charles the V. anno 1380 or thereabouts settled it in
Paris, and caused it to be numbered as one of the Sovereign Courts. Lewis the
XI. dissolved it, and committed the managing of his Aids to his household
servants, as loath to have any public officers take notice how he fleeced his
people. Anno 1464. it was restored again. And finally, Henry II. anno 1551.
added to it a second Chamber composed of two Presidents and eight Counselors;
one of which Presidents, named Mr. Chevalier, is said to be the best monied man
of all France. There are also others of these Courts in the Country, as one at
Roven, one at Montferrant in Avergne, one at Bordeaux, and another at
Montpelier, established by Charles VII. anno 1437*

For the levying and gathering up of these Taxes, you must know that the whole
Country of France is divided into 21 Generalities, or Counties as it were, and
those again into diverse Eslectiones, which are much like our Hundreds. In every
of the Generalities, there are 10 or 12 Treasurers, 9 Receivers for the
generalty, and as many Comptollers; and in the particular Eslectiones, eight
Receivers and as many Comptrollers, besides all underofficers, which are
thought to amount in all to 30000 men*

When then the King levyeth his Taxes, he sends his Letters Patents to the
principal Officers of every Generalty, whom they call Les Genereaux des Aides,
and they dispatch their Warrant to the Esleus or Commissioners. These taxing
every one of the Parishes and Villages within their several divisions at a
certain rate, send their receivers to collect it, who give account for it to
their Comptrollers. By them it ascends to the Esleus, from him to the
Receiver general of that Generalty, next to the Comptroller, then to the
Treasurer, afterward to the General des Aides; and so Per varios casus and
tot discrimina rerum
Tendimus ad Latium. --
By all these hands it is at last conveyed into the Kings purse; in which
several passages, Necesse est ut aliquid haereat, it cannot be but that it
must have many a shrewd snatch. In so much that I was told by a Gentleman of
good credence in France, that there could not be gathered by the several
exactions above specified, and other devises of prowling, which I have omitted,
less then 85 millions a year, whereof the King receives 15 only. A report not
altogether to be slighted, considering the President of the Court of Accomptes
made it evident to the Assembly at Bloys, in the time of King Henry IV. that by
the time that every one of the Officers had his share of it, there came not to
the Kings Coffers one teston (which is 1 s. 2 d.) of a Crown; so that by
reckoning 5 testons to a Crown or Escu (as it is but 2 d. over) these Officers
must collect five times the money which they pay the King, which amounts to
75 millions, and is not much short of that proportion which before I spoke of.
The Kings Revenues then, notwithstanding this infinite oppression of his
people, amounts to 15 millions (some would have it 18.) which is a good
improvement in respect of what they were in times asore. Lewis the XI. as good
a husband of his Crown, as ever any was in France, gathering but one and a half
only. But as you reckon the flood, so also if you may reckon the ebb ofhis
Treasures, you will find much wanting of a full sea in his Coffers; it being
generally known, that the fees of officers, pensions, garrisons, and the men of
arms, draw from him yearly no fewer then 6 of his 15 millions.

True it is, that his Treasure has many good helps by way of Escheat, and that
most frequently, when he comes to take an account of his Treasurers and other
Officers. A Nation so abominably full of base and unmanly villains in their
several charges, that the Publicans of Old-Rome, were milk and white-broath
to them. For so miserably do they abuse the poor Paisant, that if he has in
all the world but eight Sols, it shall go hard, but he will extort from him
five of them. Non missura cutem nisi plena cruoris hirundo.
He is just of the nature of the Horse-leech, when he has once gotten hold of
you, he will never let you go till he be filled. And which is most strange, he
thinks it a greater clemency that he has lest the poor man some of his money,
then the injury was in wresting from him the rest. Nay they will brag of it,
when they have taken but five of the eight Sols, that they have given him
three, and expect thanks for it. A kindness of a very theevish nature, it
being the condition of Robbers, as Tully has observed, Ut commemorent iis se
dedisse vitam, quibus non ademerint. Were the people but so happy, as to have a
certain rate set upon their miseries, it could not but be a greater ^ase to
them, and would well defend them from the tyrany of these Thieves. But (which
is not the least part of their wretchedness) their Taxings and Assessements
are left arbitrary, and are exacted accordingly as these Publicans will give
out of the Kings necessities; so that the Countryman has no other remedy, then
to give Cerberus a crust, as the saying is, to kiss his rod and hug his
punishment. By this means the Questors thrive abundantly, it being commonly
said of them, Heri bouvier aviourdhui chevalier, to day a Swine-heard, to
morrow a Gentleman; and certainly they grow into great riches. Mr. Beaumarchais
one of the Treasurers (Mr. De Vilroy, who slew the Marquess D' Ancre, married
his only Daughter) having raked unto himself, by the villainous abuse of his
place, no less then 22 millions of Livres, as it was commonly reported. But he
is not like to carry it to his grave, the King having seized upon a good part
of it, and himself being condemned to the gallows by the grand Chamber of
Parliament, though as yet he cannot be apprehended and advanced to the Ladder.
And this has been the end of many of them, since the reign of this present
King, whom (it may be) for this cause, they call Lewis the just. This fashion
of affixing Epithites to the names of their Kings was in great use heretofore
with this Nation. Carolus the son of Pepin, was by them surnamed Le Magne:
Lewis his son Debonaire, and so of the rest. Since the time of Charles VI. who
was by them surnamed the Beloved, it was discontinued; and now revived again in
the persons of King Henry IV. and his son King Lewis. But this by the way. It
may be also he is called the Just by way of negation, because he has yet
committed no notable act of injustice, (for I wink at his cruel and unjust
slaughter at Nigrepelisse) it may be also to keep him continually in mind of
his duty, that he may make himself worthy of that attribute; Vere imperator sui
nominis, --
As one said of Severus.


Let us add one more misery to the State and commonalty of France, and that is,
the base and corrupt money in it. For besides the Sol, which is made of Tin,
they have the Double made of Brass, whereof six make a Sol, and the Denier,
whereof two make a Double; a coin so vile and small of value, that 120 of them
go to an English shilling. These are the common coins of the Country; silver
and gold not being to be seen but upon holidays. As for their silver, it is
most of it of their own coining, but all exceeding clipped and shaven; their gold
being most of it Spanish. In my little being in the Country, though I casually
saw much gold, I could only see two pieces of French stamp, the rest coming
all from Spain, as Pistolets, Demi pistolets and Double-pistolets. Neither is
France alone furnished thus with Castilian coin, it is the happiness also of
other Countries, as Italy, Barbary, Brabant, and elsewhere; and indeed it is
kindly done of him, that being the sole Monopolist of the mines, he will yet
let other nations have a share in the mettle. Were the King as Catholic as his
money, I think I should be in some fear of him, till then we may lawfully take
that ambitious title from the King, and bestow it upon his pictures. The
Sovereignty of the Spanish gold is more universally embraced, and more (...)
acknowledged in most parts of Christendom, then that of him which stamped it.
To this he which entituleth himself Catholic is but a prisoner, and never saw
half those Provinces, in which this more powerful Monarch has been heartily
welcomed. Yet if he will needs be King, let him grow somewhat more jealous of
his Queen, and confess that his gold does royally deserve his embraces, whom
before the extent of his dominion, the Ancient Poets styled Regina pecunia.
True it is, that by the figure and shape of this Emperesse, you would little
think her to be lovely, and less worthy of your imbracement. The stones which
little boys break into Quoits, are a great deal better proportioned; if a
Geometrician were to take the angles of it, I think it would quite put him
besides his Euclide; neither can I tell to what thing in the world fitter to
resemble it, then a French Cheese; for it is neither long, nor square, nor
round, nor thin, nor thick, nor any one of these, but yet all, and yet none of
them. No question, but it was the Kings desires, by this unsightly dressing of
his Lady, to make men out of love with her, that so he might keep her to
himself. But in this his hopes have conus^^^d him; for as in other Cuckoldries,
so in this; some men will be bold to keep his wife from him, be it only in
spite.

These circumstances thus laid together and considered, we may the clearer and
the better see our own felicities, which to express generally and in a word,
is to say only this, That the English Subject is in no circumstance a
Frenchman. Here have we our money made of the best and purest, that only
excepted, which a charitable consideration has coined into ^arthings. Here
have we our Kings royally, and to the envy of the world, magnificently
provided for, without the sweat and blood of the people, no Pillages, no
Impositions upon our private wares, no Gabels upon our commodities; Nullum in
tam in^enti regno vectigal, non in urbibus pontiumve discriminibus,
Publicanorum stationes; as one truly has observed of us. The moneys which the
King wants to supply his necessities, are here freely given him. He does not
here compel our bounties, but accept them. The Laws by which we are governed,
we in part are makers of, each Paisant of the Country has a free-voice in the
enacting of them; if not in his person, yet in his proxy. We are not here
subject to the lusts and tyranny of our Lords, and may therefore say safely,
what the Jews spoke ^actiously, That we have no King but Caesar. The greatest
Prince here is subject with us to the same Law, and when we stand before the
tribunal of the Judge, we acknowledge no difference. Here do we inhabit our
own houses, plough our own Lands, enjoy the fruits of our labor, comfort our
selves with the wives of our youth, and see our selves grow up in those
children, which shall inherit after us the same felicities. But I forget my
self. To endeavor the numbering of Gods blessings, may perhaps deserve as great
a punishment as David's numbering the people. I conclude with the Poet,

O fortunati minium, bona si sua norint*
Agricolae nostri. --
And so I take my leave of France, and prepare for England, toward which
(having stayed 3 days for wind and company) we set forwards on Wednesday the 3
of August, the day exceeding fair, the Sea as quiet, and the wind so still
that the Mariners were fain to takedown their Sails, and betake themselves unto
their Oars. Yet at the last with much endeavor on their side, and no less
patience on ours, we were brought into the midst of the channel, when
suddenly --

But soft, what white is that which I epsy,
Which with its ^^stre does eclipse mine eye;
That which does N^ptunes fury so disdain,
And beats the Billow back into the main?
Is it some dreadful Scylla fastened there,
To shake the Sailor into prayer and fear?
Or is 't some Island floating on the wave,
Of which in writers we the story have?
It Is England, ha! it is so! clap, clap your hands,
That the full noise may strike the neighboring Lands
Into a Pal^ie. Does not that loved name
Move you to ecstasy? O were the same
As dear to you as me, that very word
Would make you dance and caper over board.
Dull shipmen! how they move not, how their houses
Grow to the planks; yet stay, here is sport enough.
For see, the sea Nymphs foo^ it, and the fish
Leap their high measures equal to my wish.
Triton does sound his shell, and to delight me
Old Nereus hobleth with his Amphitrite.
Excellent triumphs! But (cursed fates!) the main
Quickly divides and takes them in again;
And leaves me dying, till I come to land,
And kiss my dearest Mother in her sand.
Hail happy England! hail thou sweetest Isle,
Within whose bounds, no Pagan rites defile
The purer faith: Christ is by Saints not mated,
And he alone is worshipped that created.
In thee the laboring man enjoyes his wealth,
Not subject to his Lords rape, or the stealth
Of hungry Publicans. In thee thy King
Fears not the power of any underling;
But is himself, and by his awful word,
Commands not more the beggar then the Lord.
In thee those heavenly beauties live, would make
Most of the Gods turn mortals for their sake.
Such as outgo report, and make ^ame see
They stand above her hig'st Hyperbale.
And yet to strangers will not gr^te^ the bliss
Of salutation, and an harmless kiss.
Hail then sweet England! may I (...) my last,
In thy lo^'d arms, and when my days are past,
And to the silence of the gr(...) I must;
All I desire is, thou would keep my ^ust.
The End of the Fifth Book and the first Journey.
THE SECOND JOURNEY: CONTAINING A SURVEY of the ESTATE of the two ISLANDS
Guernzey and Jarsey, With the ISLES appending.

According to their Polity, and Forms of Government, both Ecclesiastical and
Civil.

THE SIXTH BOOK.

LONDON, Printed by E. Cotes for Henry Seile over against St. Dunstans Church
in Fleetstreet, 1656.

A SURVEY of the ESTATE OF Guernzey and Jarsey, etc.
The Entrance.
(1) The occasion of, etc. (2) Introduction to this Work. (3) The Dedication,
(4) and Method of the whole. The beginning, continuance of our Voyage; with the
most remarkable passages which happened in it. The mercenary falsnesse of the
Dutch exemplified in the dealing of a man of war.

WHen first I undertook to attend upon my Lord of Danby to the Islands of
Guernzey and Jarsey; besides the purpose which I had of doing service to his
Lordship, I resolved also to do somewhat for my self: and, if possible, unto
the places. For my self, in bettering* what I could my understanding, if
peradventure the persons or the place might add unto me the knowledge of any
one thing, to which I was a stranger. At the least I was in hope to satisfy my
curiosity, as being not a little emulous of this kind of living, Multorum mores
hominum qui vidit and urbes; which had seen so much of men and of their
manners. It was also not the last part of mine intention, to do something in
the honor of the Island, by committing to memory their Antiquities, by
reporting to posterity their Arts of Government, by representing, as in a
Tablet, the choycest of their beauties; and in a word, by reducing these and
the Achievements of the people, as far as the light of Authors could direct me,
into the body of an History. But when I had a little made my self acquainted
with the place and people, I found nothing in them which might put me to that
trouble. The Churches naked of all Monuments, and not so much as the blazon of
an Arms permitted in a window, for fear, as I conjecture, of Idolatry. No
actions of importance to be heard of in their Legends, in their remembrancers;
whereby to ennoble them in time to come, unless perhaps some slight allarmes
from France, may occasion speech of them in our common Chronicles. The
Country, indeed, exceeding pleasant and delightsome, but yet so small in the
extent and circuit, that to speak much of them, wereto put the shoe of
Hercules upon the foot of an Infant. For being in themselves, an abridgement
only of the greater works of nature, how could the character and description of
them be improved into a Volume? Having thus failed in the most of my designs,
I applied my self to make inquiry after their form of Government, in which, I
must needs confess, I met with much which did exceedingly affect me. Their
Laws, little beholding in the composition of them, to Justinian; and of no
great affinity with the laws of England, which we call Municipall or common.
The grand Customarie of Normandy, is of most credit with them; and that indeed
the only rule by which they are directed, save that in some few passages it
has been altered by our Prince, for the convenience of this people.

Sed quid hoc ad Iphycli boves? But what had I, a Priest of the Church of
England, to do with the Laws and Customs of the Normans? Had I gone forward in
my purpose, I deny not, but I had mingled that knowledge which I have gotten of
their Laws, amongst other my Collections; but failing in the main of my intent,
I must only make such use of them, as shall be necessary for this present
argument. An Argument not so much as in my thoughts, when first I resolved upon
the Journey; as little dreaming that any alterations had lately happened in the
Churches of those Islands, or that those alterations could afford one such
variety. An Argument more suitable to my profession, as having had the honor to
be reputed with the Clergy; and such as in it self may justly be entitled to
your Lordships patronage. God and the King have raised you above your brethren
to be a Master in our Israel, a principal pillar in the glorious structure of
the Church. An advancement which does call upon you for the establishment and
supportation of the meanest Oratory dependant on the Church of England, your
most indulgent, and in you most happy mother. No marvail therefore, if those
little Chapels, even those two Tribes and a half, which are on the other side
of the flood, most humbly cast themselves at your Lordships feet, and by me lay
open their estate unto you.

Which that I may the better do, in discharge of the trust reposed in me, and
for your Lordships, more ample satisfaction I shall proceed in this order
following.

First, I shall lay before your Lordship, the full success and course of our
Navigation, till we were settled in those Islands; that so the rest of this
discourse being more material, may receive no interruption in the process of
it.

Next, I shall briefly, as in a map, present your Lordship with the situation,
quality and story of the Islands; with somewhat also of their Customs, of
their Government; but this (as the great Cardinal acknowledges the Popes
power in temporal affairs) in ordine tantum ad spiritualia: the better to
acquaint you with the occurrents of their Churches.

That done, I shall draw down the success of their affairs from the beginning
of the Reformation in matters of Religion, to the accomplishment of that
innovation which they had made in point of discipline; and therein, the full
platform or discipline it self, according as by Snape and Cartwright it was
established in their Synods.

In the third place, I shall show your Lordship, by what degrees and means the
Ministers and Church of Jersey, were persuaded to conform unto the discipline
of England; together with a copy of those Canons and constitutions
Ecclesiastical, whereby the Church and Ministry of that Island is now
governed.

Last of all, I shall commence a suit unto your Lordship in the name of those
of Guernzey for their little sister which has no breasts; that by your
Lordships place and power the one Island may conform unto the other, and both
to England. In which I shall exhibit unto your Lordship a just survey of such
motives, which may have most sway with you in the furthering of a work so
commendable; and shall adventure also upon such particulars, as may conduce to
the advancing of the business. Not that therein I shall presume positively to
advise your Lordship, or to direct you in the readiest way for the
accomplishment of this design; but that by this propounding of mine own
conceits, I may excite your Lordship to have recourse unto the excellent
treasures of your own mind, and thence to fashion such particulars for this
purpose, as may be most agreeable to your Lordships wisdom.

In order whereunto your Lordship may be pleased to call to mind that on
provocation given unto the French at the Isle of The, the King received
advertisement of some reciprocal affront intended by the French on the Isl^s
of Jarsey and Guernzey, with others thereupon appendant, the only remainders of
the Dukedom of Normandy in the power of the English; and that for the
preventing of such inconveniences as might follow on it, it was thought good to
send the Earl of Danby (then Governor of the Isle of Guernzey) with a
considerable supply of Men, and Arms, and Ammunition to make good those
Islands, by fortifying and assuring them against all invasions. This order
signified to his Lordship about the beginning of December, anno 1628. he
cheerfully embraced the service, and prepared accordingly. But being deserted
by his own Chaplains in regard of the extremity of the season, and the visible
danger of the enterprise, he proposed the business of that attendance unto me
(not otherwise relating to him then as to an honorable friend) in whom he
found as great a readiness and resolution, as he found coldness in the other.
According to his Lordships summons, I attended him in his Majesty's house of
St. James, a little before the Feast of Christmas; but neither the Ships,
money, nor other necessaries being at that time brought together, I was
dismissed again at the end of the Holidays, until a further intimation of his
Lordships pleasure. Toward the latter end of February I received a positive
command to attend his Lordship on Friday the 20 of that month, at the house of
Mr. Arthur Brumfeild, in the Parish of Tichfeild near the Sea, situate between
Portsmouth and South^ampton; whither accordingly I went, and where I found a
very cheerful entertainment. It was a full week after that, before we heard of
his Lordships coming, and yet his Lordship was fain to tarry two or three days
before he had any advertisement that his Ships, Men and Ammunition (which he
thought to have found there in readiness) were Anchored in the road of
Portsmouth. News whereof being brought unto us on the Monday morning, we spent
the remainder of that day in preparations for our Journey, and taking leave of
those good friends by whom we were so kindly entertained and welcomed.

On Tuesday March the 3. about ten in the morning, we went aboard his Majesty's
Ship called the Assurance, being a Ship of 800 tun, furnished with 42 pieces of
Ordinance, and very well manned with valiant and expert Sailors; welcomed
aboard (after the fashion of the Sea) with all the thunder and lightning which
the whole Navy could afford from their several Ships. Our whole Navy consisted
of five Vessels, that is to say, the Assurance spoken of before, two of his
Majesty's Pinnaces called the Whelps, a Catch of his Majesty's called the
Minikin, and a Merchants ship called the Charles, which carried the Arms and
Ammunition for the use of the Islands. Aboard the Ships were stowed about 400
foot with their several Officers, two Companies whereof under the command of
Collonell Pipernell (if I remember his name aright) and Lieutenant Collonell
Francis Connisby were intended for the Isle of Guernzey; the other two under
the command of Lieutenant Collonell Francis Rainford, and Captain William
Killegre for the Isle of Jars^y. The Admiral of our Navy (but in subordination
to his Lordship when he was at Sea) was Sir Henry Palmer one of the Admirals or
the Narrow-seas. All of them men of note in their several ways, and most of
them of as much gallantry and ingenuity, as either their own birth or education
in the School of war could invest them with. The Sea was very calm and quiet,
and the little breath of wind we had, made us move so slowly, that the
afternoon was almost spent before we had passed through the Needles, a
dangerous passage at all times, except to such only who being well skilled in
these sharp points, and those dreadful fragments of the Rocks, which so
entitled them, could stear a steady course between them: Scylla and Charybdis
in old times, nothing more terrible to the unskilled Mariners of those days,
then those Rocks to ours. Being got beyond them at the last, though we had got
more Sea room, we had little more wind, which made us move as slowly as
before we did, so that we spent the greatest part of the night with no swifter
motion, then what was given us by the tide. About 3 of the clock in the morning
we had wind enough, but we had it directly in our teeth, which would have
quickly brought us to the place we had parted from, if a great Miste arising
together with the Sun, had not induced our Mariners to keep themselves aloof
in the open Sea for fear of falling on those Rocks wherewith the Southside of
the Wight is made unaccessable. About 2 of the clock in the afternoon, the
winds turning somewhat Eastward, we made on again, but with so little speed,
and to so little purpose, that all that night we were fain to lie at Hull (as
the Mariners phrase it) without any sensible moving either backward or forward,
but so uneasily withal, that it must be a very great tempest indeed, which
gives a passenger a more sickly and unpleasing motion. For my part I had found
my self good Sea-proof in my Voyage to France, and was not much troubled with
those disturbances to which the greatest part of our Land-men were so sensibly
subject. On Thursday morning about daybreak being within sight of Portland, and
the wind serving very fitly, we made again for the Islands. At 11 of the clock
we discovered the main Land of Normandy, called by the Mariners Le Haggs. About
2 in the afternoon, we fell even with Aldernie or Aurnie; and about 3 discerned
the Isle of Jarzey to which we were bound, at which we aimed, and to which we
might have come much sooner then we did had we not found a special
entertainment by the way to retard our haste. For we were hardly got within
sight of Jarsey but we descried a sail of French consisting of ten barks laden
with very good Gascoy^ne Wines, and good choice of Linen (as they told us
afterward) bound from St. Malloes to New Haven for the trade of Paris, and
convoyed by a Holland-man of war, for their safer passage. These being looked
on as good prize, our two Whelps and the Catch gave chase unto them, a great
shot being first made from our Admirals Ship to call them in. The second shot
brought in the Holland man of war, who very sordidly and basely betrayed his
charge before he came within reach of danger; the rest for the greatest part of
the afternoon, spun before the wind, sometimes so near to their pursuers, that
we thought them ours, but presently tacking about, when our Whelps were ready
to seize on them, and the Catch to lay fast hold upon them, they gained more
way then our light Vessels could recover in a long time after. Never did Duck
by frequent diving so escape the Spaniell, or Hare by often turning so avoid
the Hounds, as these poor Barks did quit themselves by their dexterity in
sailing from the present danger. For my part I may justly say that I never
spent an afternoon with greater pleasure, the greater in regard that I knew his
Lordships resolution to deal favorably with those poor men if they chanced to
fall into his power. Certain I am, that the description made by Ovid of the
Hare and Hound, was here fully veryfied, but far more excellently in the
application then the first original; of which thus the Poet:

Ut canis in vacuo leporem cum Gallicus arvo
Vidit, and hic praedam pedibus petit, ille salutem;
Alter inhaesuro similis jam jamque tenere
Sperat, and obiento stringit vestigia collo;
Alter in ambiguo est, an sit compressus, and ipsis
Morsibus eripitur, tangentiaque ora relinquit. Which I find thus Englished by
G. Sandi^.
As when the Hare the speedy Gray-hound spies;
His feet for prey, she hers for safety plies.
Now bears he up, now, now he hopes to fetch her;
And with his snowt extended strains to catch her.
Not knowing whether caught or no, she slips
Out of his wide-stretcht-jawes and touching lips.


But at the last a little before the close of the evening, three of them being
borded and brought under Lee of our Admiral, the rest were put to a necessity
of yielding, or venturing themselves between our two great ships and the shore
of Jarsey, to which we were now come as near as we could with safety. Resolved
upon the last course and favored with a strong leading gale, they passed by us
with such speed and so good success, (the duskinesse of the evening
contributing not a little to a fair escape) that though we gave them 30 shot,
yet we were not able to affirm that they received any hurt or damage by that
encounter; with as much joy unto my self (I dare boldly say) as to any of those
poor men who were so much interessed in it. This Chase being over, and our
whole Fleet come together, we Anchored that night in the Port of St. Oen, one
of the principal Ports of that Island; the Inhabitants whereof (but those
especially which dwelled in the inland parts) standing all night upon their
guard, conceiving by the thunder of so many great shot, that the whole powers
of France and the Devil to boot were now falling upon them; not fully
satisfied in their fears, till by the next rising of the Sun they descried our
colors.

On Friday March the 6. about nine in the morning (having first landed our foot
in the long boats) we went aboard his Majesty's Catch called the Minikin, and
doubling the points of Le Corbiere and of Normoint, we went on shore in the Bay
of St. Heliers, near unto Mount St. Albin in the Parish of St. Peter. The
greatest part of which day we spent in accommodations and refreshments, and
receiving the visits of the Gentry which came in very frequently to attend his
Lordship. You need not think, but that sleep and a good bed were welcome to us,
after so long and ill a passage; so that it was very near high noon before his
Lordship was capable to receive our services, or we to give him our attendance;
after dinner his Lordship went to view the Fort Elizabeth (the chief strength
of the Island) and to take order for the fortifying and repair thereof. Which
having done he first secured the Man of War and the three French Barks, under
the command of that Castle; and then gave leave to Sir Henry Palmer and the
rest of the sea Captains to take their pleasures in Forraging and soowring all
the Coasts of France, which day near the Islands, commanding them to attend him
on the Saturday following. Next he gave liberty to all the French which he had
taken the day before, whom he caused to be landed in their own Country, to
their great rejoicing, as appeared by the great shout they made when they were
put into some long boats at their own disposing. The three Barks still
re(...)ing untouched in the state they were, save that some wines were taken
out of them for his Lordships spending. On Sunday March 8. it was ordered, that
the people of the Town of St. Hel^ers should have their divine offices in that
Church performed so early, that it might be left wholly for the use of the
English by nine of the clock, about which time his Lordship attended by the
Officers and Soldiers in a solemn Military pomp (accompanied with the
Governors of the Town and chief men of the Island) went toward the Church,
where I officiated Divine Service according to the prescript form of the Church
of England, and after preached on those words of David, Psalm. 31. 51. viz.
Offer unto God thanksgiving, etc. with reference to the good success of our
Voyage past, and hopes of the like mercies for the time to come. The next day,
we made a Journey to Mount Orgueil, where we were entertained by the Lady
Carteret (a Daughter of Sir Francis Douse of Hampshire) And after Dinner his
Lordship went to take a view of the Regiment of Mr. Josuah de Carteret,
Seignieur de la Trinity, mustering upon the Green upon Ha^re de Bowl in the
Parish of St. Trinity. On Tuesday, March the 10. his Lordship took a view of
the Regiment of Mr. Aron Misservie Col. and on Wednesday, March the 11. went
unto St. Oen, where we were feasted by Sir Philip de Carteret, whose Regiment
we likewise viewed in the afternoon. The Soldiers of each Regiment very well
arrayed, and not unpractised in their Arms; but such, as never saw more danger
then a Training came to. On Thursday his Lordship went into the Cohu or
Town Hall, attended by Sir John Palmer the Deputy Governor, Sir Philip de
Carteret, the Justices, Clergy, and Jurors of the Island, with other the
subordinate Officers thereunto belonging; where being set, as in a Parliament
or Sessions, and having given order for redress of some grievances by them
presented to him in the name of that people, he declared to them in a grave and
eloquent speech the great care which his Majesty had of their preservation in
sending Men, Money, Arms, and Ammunition to defend them against the common
Enemies of their peace and consciences; assuring them that if the noise of
those preparations did not keep the French from looking toward them, his
Majesty would not fail to send them such a strength of Shipping, as should make
that Island more impregnable then a wall of Brass; in which regard he thought
it was not necessary for him to advise them to continue fathfull to his
Majesty's service, or to behave themselves with respect and love toward those
Gentlemen, Officers, and common Soldiers, who were resolved to expose
themselves (for defense of them, their Wives and Children) to the utmost
dangers. And finally, advising the common Soldiers to carry themselves with
such sobriety and moderation toward the natives of the Country, (for as for
their valor toward the enemies he would make no question) as to give no
offense or scandal by their conversation. This said, the Assembly was
dissolved, to the great satisfaction of all parties present; the night ensuing
and the day following being spent for the most part in the entertainments of
rest and pleasures.

The only business of that day was the disposing of the three Barks which we
took in our Journey, the goods whereof having before been inventoried and
apprized by some Commissioners of the Town, and now exposed to open sale, were
for the most part, bought together with the Barks themselves by that very
Holland man of war, whom they had hired to be their Convoy: Which gave me
such a Character of the mercenary and sordid nature of that people, that of all
men living, I should never desire to have any thing to do with them, unless
they might be made use of (as the Gibeonites were) in hewing wood, and drawing
water for the use of the Tabernacle; I mean in doing servile offices to some
mightier State which would be sure to keep them under.

On Saturday, March the 14. having spent the greatest part of the morning in
expectation of the rest of our Fleet, which found better employment in the Seas
then they could in the Haven, we went aboard the Merchants ship, which before I
spoke of, not made much lighter by the unlading of the one half of the
Ammunition which was left at Jarsey, in regard that the 200 foot which should
have been distributed in the rest of the ships, were all stowed in her. Before
night, being met by the rest of our Fleet, we came to Anchor near St. Pier port
or St. Peter's Port within the Bay of Castle Cornet, where we presently landed.
The Castle divided from the Town and Haven, by the inter-currency of the Sea;
in which respect we were ^ain to make use of the Castle-hall in stead of a
Chapel. The way to the Town Church being too troublesome and uncertain to
give us the constant use of that, and the Castle yielding no place else of a
fit capacity for the receiving of so many as gave their diligent attendance at
Religious exercises.

On Monday, March the 16. our Fleet went out to Sea again, taking the Charles
with them for their greater strength, which to that end was speedily unladen of
such ammunition as was designed for the use of that Island.

The whole time of our stay here was spent in visiting the Forts, and Ports,
and other places of importance, taking a view of the several Musters of the
natural Islanders, distributing the new come Soldiers in their several
quarters, receiving the services of the Gentry, Clergy and principal Citizens;
and finally in a like meeting of the States of the Island, as had before been
held in Jarsey.

Nothing considerable else in the time of our stay, but that our Fleet came
back on Wednesday, March 25. which happened very fitly to complete the triumph of
the Friday following, being the day of his Majesty's most happy inauguration;
celebrated in the Castle, by the Divine Service for that day, and after by a
noble Feast, made by him for the chief men of the Island; and solemnized
without the Castle by 150 great shot, made from the Castle, the Fleet, the Town
of St. Peter's Port, and the several Islands, all following one another in so
good an order, that never Bells were rung more closely, nor with less confusion.

Thus having given your Lordship a brief view of the course of our Voyage; I
shall next present you with the sight of such observations, as I have made upon
those Islands at my times of leisure; and that being done, hoise sail for
England.

CHAP. I.
(1) Of the convenient situation, and (2) condition of these Islands in the
general. (3) Alderney, (4) and Serk^. (5) The notable stratagem whereby this
latter was recovered from the French. (6) Of Guernzey, (7) and the smaller
Isles near unto it. (8) Our Lady of Lehu. (9) The road, and (10) the Castle of
Cornet. (11) The Trade, and (12) Privileges of this people. (13) Of Jarsey,
and (14) the strengths about it. (15) The Island why so poor and populous. (16)
Gavelkind, and the nature of it. (17) The Governors and other the Kings
Officers. The (18) Polity, and (19) administration of Justice in both Islands.
(20) The Assembly of the Three Estates. (21) Courts Presidiall in France what
they are. (22) The election of the Justices, (23) and the Oath taken at their
admission. (24) Of their Advocates or Pleaders, and the number of them. (25)
The number of Atturneys once limited in England. (26) A Catalogue of the
Governors and Bailiffs of the Isle of Jarsey.

TO begin then with the places themselves, the Scene and Stage of our
discourse, they are the only remainders of our rights in Normandy; unto which
Dukedom they did once belong. Anno 1108. at such time as Henry I. of England
had taken prisoner his Brother Robert, these Islands as a part of Normandy,
were annexed unto the English Crown, and have ever since with great testimony of
^aith and loyalty, continued in that subjection. The sentence or arrest of
confiscation given by the Parliament of France against King John, nor the
surprisall of Normandy by the French forces, could be no persuasion unto them
to change their Masters. Nay when the French had twice seized on them, during
the Reign of that unhappy Prince, and the state of England was embroyled at
home, the people valiantly made good their own, and faithfully returned unto
their first obedience. In aftertimes as any war grew hot between the English
and the French, these Islands were principally aimed at by the enemy, and
sometimes also were attempted by them, but with ill success. And certainly, it
could not be but an eye sore to the French, to have these Isles within their
sight, and not within their power; to see them at the least in possession of
their ancient enemy the English; a Nation strong in shipping, and likely by the
opportunity of these places to annoy their trade. For if we look upon them in
their situation, we shall find them seated purposely for the command and Empire
of the Ocean. The Islands lying in the chief trade of all shipping from the
Eastern parts unto the West, and in the middle way between St. Malos and the
river Seine, the only trafick of the Normans and Parisians. At this St. Malos,
as at a common Empory do the Merchants of Spain and Paris barter their
Commodities; the Parisians making both their passage and return by these Isles;
which if well aided by a small power from the Kings Navy, would quickly bring
that intercourse to nothing. An opportunity neglected by our former Kings in
their attempts upon that Nation, at not being then so powerful on the Seas as
now they are, but likely for the future to be husbanded to the best advantage,
if the French hereafter stir against us. Sure I am, that my Lord of Danby
conceived this course of all others to be the fittest, for the impoverishing if
not undoing of the French; and accordingly made proposition by his Letters to
the Council, that a squadron of eight Ships (viz five of the Whelps, the
Assurance, the Adventure and the Catch) might be employed about these Islands
for that purpose. An advice which had this Summer took effect, had not the
Peace between both Realms, been so suddenly concluded.

Of these, four only are inhabited, and those reduced only unto two
Governments; Jarsey an entire Province as it were within it self; but that of
Gueruzey having the other two of Alderney and Serke dependant on it. Hence it
is, that in our Histories, and in our Acts of Parliament, we have mention only
of Jarsey and of Guernzey, this last comprehending under it the two other. The
people of them all live as it were in libera custodia, in a kind of free
subjection; not any way acquainted with Taxes, or with any levies either of men
or money. In so much, that when the Parliaments of England contribute toward
the occasion of their Princes, there is always a proviso in the Act, That this
grant of Subsidies or any thing therein contained, extend not to charge the
inhabitants of Guernzey and Jarsey, or any of them, of, for or concerning any
Manors, Lands, and Tenements, or other possessions, Goods, Chattels, or other
moveable substance, which they the said Inhabitants, or any other to their
uses, have within Jarsey and Guernzey, or in any of them, etc. These
privileges and immunities (together with diverse others) seconded of late days
with the more powerful band of Religion, have been a principal occasion of
that constancy, wherewith they have persisted faithfully in their allegiance,
and disclaimed even the very name and thought of France. For howsoever the
language which they speak is French, and that in their original, they either
were of Normandy or Britagne; yet can they with no patience endure to be
accounted French, but call themselves by the names of English-Normans. So much
does liberty, or at the worst a gentle yoke, prevail upon the mind and fancy of
the people.

To proceed unto particulars, we will take them as they lie in order, beginning
first with that of Alderney, an Island called by Antonine, Arica, but by the
French and in our old Records known by the name of Aurigny and Aurney. It is
situate in the 49 degree between 48 and 52 minutes of that degree, just over
against the Cape or promontory of the Lexobii, called at this time by the
Mariners the Hague. Distant from this Cape or Promontory three leagues only,
but thirty at the least from the nearest part of England. The air healthy,
though sometimes thickened with the vapors arising from the Sea. The soil
indifferently rich both for husbandry and gra^ing. A Town it has of well-near
an hundred families, and not far off, an haven made in the manner of a
semicircle, which they call Crabbie. The principal strength of it, are the
high rocks, with which it is on every side environed, but especially upon the
South; and on the East side an old Block house, which time has made almost
unserviceable. The chief house herein belongs unto the Chamberlains, as also
the dominion or Fee-farme of all the Island, it being granted by Queen
Elizabeth unto George the son of Sir Leonard Chamberlain, then Governor of
Guernzey, by whose valor it was recovered from the French, who in Queen Mary's
days had seized upon it. Near unto the Fort or Block-house before mentioned, a
great quantity of this little Island is overlaid with sand, driven thither by
the ^ury of the Northwest-winde. If we believe their Legends, it proceeded from
the just judgment of God upon the owner of those grounds, who once (but when I
know not) had made booty and put unto the Sword some certain Spaniards, there
shipwracked.

Four leagues from hence, and to the Southwest and by west, lies another of
the smaller Islands, called Serke; six miles in circuit at the least, which yet
is two miles lesser in the whole compass then that of Alderney. An Isle not
known at all by any name amongst the Ancients, and no marvail, for till the
(...)h of Queen Elizabeth or thereabou^s, it was not peopled. But then, it
pleased her Majesty to grant it for ever in Fee farm to Helier de Carteret,
vulgarly called Seigneur de St. Oen, a principal Gentleman of the Isle of
Jarsey, and Grandfather to Sir Philip de Carteret now living. By him it was
divided into several estates, and leased out unto diverse Tenants, collected
from the neighbor Islands, so that at this day it may contain some forty
households; whereas before it contained only a poor hermitage, together with a
little Chapel appertaining to it; the rest of the ground serving as a Common
unto those of Guernzey for the breeding of their Cattle. For strength it is
beholding most to nature, who has walled it in a manner round with mighty
rocks, there being but one way or ascent unto it, and that with small forces
easy to be defended against the strongest power in Christendom. A passage
lately fortified by the Farmers here, with a new plat-forme on the top of it,
and thereupon some four pieces of Ordinance continually mounted. In this
Island, as also in the other, there is a Bailiff and a Minister, but both of
them subordinate in matter of appeal unto the Courts and Colloquies of Guernzey.

During the reign of the late Queen Mary, who for her husband Philips sake, had
engaged her self in a war against the French; this Island then not peopled, was
suddenly surprised by those of that Nation, but by a Gentleman of the
Netherlands, a subject of King Philips thus regained, as the story much to this
purpose is related by Sir Wall. Raleigh. The Flemish Gentleman with a small Bark
came to Anchor in the road, and pretending the death of his Merchant, besought
the French that they might bury him in the Chapel of that Island, offering a
present to them of such commodity as they had aboard. To this request the
French were easily entreated, but yet upon condition that they should not come
on shore with any weapon, no not so much as with a knife. This leave obtained,
the Fleming rowed unto the shore with a Coffin in their Skiffe for that use
purposely provided, and manned with Swords and Arcubuishes. Upon their landing,
and a search so strict and narrow, that it was impossible to hide a penknife;
they were permitted to draw their Coffin up the Rocks, some of the French
rowing back unto the Ship to fetch the present, where they were soon made fast
enough and laid in hold. The Flemings in the mean time which were on land, had
carried their Coffin into the Chapel, and having taken thence their weapons,
gave an alarm upon the French, who taken thus upon the sudden, and seeing no
hopes of succor from their fellows, yielded themselves, and abandoned the
possession of that place. A stratagem to be compared, if not preferred, unto
any of the Ancients; did not that fatal folly reprehended once by Tacitus,
still reign amongst us, Quod vetera extollimus recentium incuriosi; that we
extol the former days, and are careless of the present.

Two leagues from Serke directly Westward, lies the chief Island of this
Government, by Antonine called Sarnia; by Us and the French known now by the
name of Garnzey, or of Guernzey. Situate in the 49 degree of Latitude, between
the 39 and 46 minutes of that degree, eight leagues or thereabouts from the
coast of Normandy, and well-neer in an equal distance from Alderney and
Jarsey. The form of it, is much after the fashion of the Isle of Sicily, every
side of the triangle being about nine miles in length, and 28 in the whole
compass. In this circuit are comprehended ten Parishes, whereof the principal
is that of St. Peter's on the Sea, as having a fair and safe peer adjoining to
it for the benefit of their Merchants, and being honored also with a Market,
and the Plaidery or Court of Justice. The number of the Inhabitants is reckoned
near about twenty thousand, out of which there may be raised some two thousand
able men; although their trained Band consists only of twelve hundred, and
those, God knows, but poorly weaponed. The air hereof is very healthful, as
may be well seen in the long lives both of men and women; and the earth said to
be of the same nature with Crete and Ireland, not apt to foster any venomous
creature in it. Out of which general affirmation, we may do well to except
Witches, of whom the people here have strange reports, and if an Ox or Horse
perhaps miscarry, they presently impute it to Witchcraft, and the next old
woman shall straight be haled to Prison. The ground it self, in the opinion of
the Natives, more rich and battle then that of Jarsey; yet not so fruitful in
the harvest, because the people addict themselves to merchandise especially,
leaving the care of husbandry unto their hindes. Yet Bread they have sufficient
for their use; enough of Cattle both for themselves and for their ships;
plenty of Fish continually brought in from the neighbor seas, and a Lake on
the Northwest part of it, near unto the sea, of about a mile or more in
compass, exceeding well stored with Carpes, the best that ever mortal eye
beheld, for ^ast and bigness.

Some other Isles yet there be pertaining unto this Government of Guernzey, but
not many nor much famous. Two of them lie along betwixt it and Serke, viz.
Arvie, and Jet how, whereof this last serves only as a Park unto the
Governor, and has in it a few fallow Deer, and good plenty of Conies. The
other of them is well-neer three miles in circuit, a solitary dwelling once of
Canons regular, and afterward of some Friars of the Order of St. Francis, but
now only inhabited by Pheasants, of which amongst the shrubs and bushes, there
is said to be no scarcity. The least of them, but yet of most note, is the
little Islet called Le^u, situate on the North side of the Eastern corner, and
near unto those scattered rocks, which are called Les Hanwaux, appertaining
once unto the Dean, but now unto the Governor. Famous for a little Oratory of
Cha^tery there once erected and dedicated to the honor of the Virgin Mary, who
by the people in those times, was much sued to by the name of our Lady of Lehu.
A place long since demolished in the ruin of it, Sed jam periere ruinae, but
now the ruins of it are scarce visible, there being almost nothing left of it
but the steeple, which serves only as a seamarke, and to which as any of that
party sail along, they strike their top sail. Tantum religio potuit suadere,
such a Religious opinion have they harbored of the place, that though the
Saint be gone, the walls yet shall still be honored.

But indeed, the principal honor and glory of this Island, I mean of
Guernzey, is the large capaciousnesse of the harbor, and the flourishing
beauty of the Castle; I say the Castle, as it may so be called by way of
eminency, that in the vale, and those poorer trifles all along the Coasts, not
any way deserving to be spoken of. Situate it is upon a little Islet just
opposite unto Pierport or the Town of St. Peter, on the Sea; to which, and to
the peer there it is a good assurance, and takes up the whole circuit of that
Islet whereupon it stands. At the first it was built upon the higher part of
the ground only, broad at the one end, and at the other, and bending in the
fashion of an horn, whence it had the name of Cornet. By Sir Leonard
Chamberlane Governor here in the time of Queen Mary, and by Sir Thomas
Leighton his successor in the reign of Queen Elizabeth, it was improved to
that majesty and beauty that now, it has, excellently fortified according to
the modern art of war, and furnished with almost an hundred piece of
Ordinance, whereof about sixty are of Brass. Add to this, that it is
continually environed with the Sea, unless sometimes at a dead-low water,
whereby there is so little possibility of making any approaches near unto it,
that one might justly think him mad, that would attempt it. And certainly it is
more then necessary that this place should be thus fortified, if not for the
safety of the Island, yet at the least for the assurance of the Harbor. An
harbor able to contain the greatest Navy that ever failed upon the Ocean;
fenced from the fury of the winds by the Isles of Guernzey, Jet-how, Serke and
Arvie, by which it is almost encompassed; and of so sure an anchorage, that
though our Ships lay there in the blustering end of March, yet it was noted
that never any of them slipped an anchour. Other Havens they have about the
Island, viz. Bazon, L' Aucresse, Fermines and others; but these rather landing
places to let in the Enemy, then any way advantageous to the trade and riches
of the people. A place not to be neglected in the defense of it; and full of
danger to the English State and Trafick, were it in the hands of any enemy.

Upon the notable advantage of this harbor, and the convenience of the Peer so
near unto it, which is also warranted with six piece of good Canon from the
Town; it is no marvel if the people betake themselves so much unto the trade
of Merchandise. Nor do they trafick only in small boats between St Malos and
the Islands, as those of Jarsey; but are Masters of good stout Barks, and
venture unto all these nearer Ports of Christendom. The principal commodity
which they use to send abroad, are the works and labors of the poorer sort, as
Wast-cotes, Stockins, and other manufactures made of wool, wherein they are
exceeding cunning; of which wool to be transported to their Island in a
certain proportion, they lately have obtained a license of our Princes. But
there accreweth a further benefit unto this people, from their harbor then
their own trafick, which is the continual concourse and resort of Merchants
thither, especially upon the noise or being of a War. For by an ancient
privilege of the Kings of England, there is with them in a manner a continual
truce; and lawful it is both for French men and for others, how hot soever the
war be followed in other parts, to repair hither without danger, and here to
trade in all security. A privilege founded upon a Bull of Pope Sixtus IV. the
10 year, as I remember, of his Popedom; Edward IV. then reigning in England,
and Lewis XI. over the French: by virtue of which Bull, all those stand ipso
facto excommunicate, which any way molest the Inhabitants of this Isle of
Guerazey, or any which resort unto their Island, either by Piracy or any other
violence whatsoever. A Bull first published in the City of Constance, unto
whose Diocese these Islands once belonged, afterward verifyed by the
Parliament of Paris, and confirmed by our Kings of England till this day. The
copy of this Bull my self have seen, and somewhat also in the practice of it on
record; by which it does appear, that a man of war of France having taken an
English ship, and therein some passengers and goods of Guernzey; made prize and
prisoners of the English, but restored these of Guernzey to their liberty and
to their own.

And now at last after a long passage, and through many difficulties, we are
Anchored in the Isle of Jarsey; known in the former ages, and to Antonine the
Emperor, by the name of Cesarea. An Island situate in the 49 degree of
Latitude, between the 18 and 24 minutes of that degree; distant 5 leagues only
from the Coast of Normandy, 40 or thereabouts from the nearest parts of
England, and 6 or 7 to the South east from that of Guernzey. The figure of it
will hold proportion with that long kind of square, which the Geometricians
call Oblongum; the length of it from West to East 11 miles, the breadth 6 and
upwards, the whole circuit about 33. The air very healthy and little disposed
unto diseases, unless it be unto a kind of Ague in the end of Harvest, which
they call Les Settembers. The soil sufficiently fertile in it self, but most
curiously manured, and of a plentiful increase unto the Barn; not only
yielding Corn enough for the people of the Island, but sometimes also an ample
surplusage, which they barter at St. Malos with the Spanish Merchants. The
Country generally swelling up in pretty hillocks, under which lie pleasant
Valleys, and those plentifully watered with dainty Ril^ or Riverets; in which
watery commodity, it has questionless the precedence of Guernzey.

Both Islands consist very much of small Enclosure, every man in each of them,
having somewhat to live on of his own. Only the difference is, that here the
mounds are made with ditches and banks of earth cast up, well fenced and
planted with several sorts of apples, out of which they make a pleasing kind
of Sider, which is their ordinary drink; whereas in Guernzey they are for the
most part made of stones, about the height and fashion of a Parapet. A matter
of no small advantage in both places against the fury of an enemy, who in his
marches cannot but be much annoyed with these incombrances, and shall be forced
to pay deerly for every foot of ground which there he purchases.

For other strengths this Island is in part beholding unto Nature, and somewhat
also unto Art. To Nature which has guarded it with Rocks, and Shelves, and
other shallow places very dangerous; but neither these, nor those of Art, so
serviceable and full of safety, as they be in Guernzey. Besides the landing
places, here are more, and more accessible, as namely the Bay of St. Owen, and
the Havens of St. Burlade, Boule, St. Katharines, with diverse others. There is,
indeed, one of them, and that the principal, sufficiently assured; on the one
side by a little Blockhouse, which they call Mount St. Aubin; and on the other
by a fair Castle, called the Fort Elizabeth. The Harbor it self is of a good
capacity, in figure like a semicircle or a crescent, and by reason of the Town
adjoining, known by the name of the Haven of St. Hilaries. On that side o^ it
next the Town, and in a little Islet of it self is situate the Castle,
environed with the Sea at high water, but at an ebb easily accessible by land;
but yet so naturally defended with sharp Rocks and craggy cliftes, that though
the access unto it may be easy, yet the surprizall would be difficult. It was
built not long since by our late Queen of famous memory, at such times as the
Civil wars were hot in France about Religion, and the Kings Forces drawn
downwards toward Narmandy. Furnished with 30 pieces of Ordinance and upwards;
and now, upon the preparations of the French, there are some new works begun
about it, for the assurance of that well* On the East side, just opposite and
in the view of the City of Constantia, there is seated on an high and craggy
rock, a most strong Castle, and called by an haughty name Mount Orgueil; of
whose founder I could learn nothing, nor any other thing which might concern it
in matter of antiquity, save that it was repaired and beautified by Henry V. It
is for the most part the inhabitatiou of the Governor, who is Captain of it;
stored with about some forty pieces of Ordinance, and guarded by some five and
twenty wardours. A place of good service for the safety of the Island; if
perhaps it may not be commanded, or annoied by an hill adjoining, which does
equal, if not overtop it.

This Island, as before we noted, is some 33 miles in compass, comprehending
in it* 12. Parishes, whereof the principal is that of S. Hilaries. A^ Town so
called from an ancient Father of that name, and Bishop of Poyctiers in France,
whose body they suppose to be interred in a little Chapel near unto the Fort
Elizabeth, and consecrated to his memory. But of his burial here, they have
nothing further then tradition, and that unjustifiable; for St* Jerome tells
us, that after his return from Phrygia, whereunto he had been confined, he dyed
in his own City, and we learn in the Roman Martyrclogie, that his Obit is there
celebrated on the 13 of January. The chief name the which this Town now has,
is for the convenioncy of the Haven, the Market there every Saturday, and that
it is honored with the Cohu or Sessions house for the whole Island. The other
Villages lie scattered up and down, like those of Guernzey, and give habitation
to a people very painful and laborious; but by reason of their continual
toil and labor, not a little affected to a kind of melancholy
(...)surlinesse incident to plough men. Those of Gue^nzey on the other side, by
continual converse with strangers in their own haven, and by travailing abroad
being much more sociable and generous. Add to this, that the people here are
more poor, and therefore more destitute of humanity; the children here
continually craving alms of every stranger; whereas in all Guernzey I did not
see one beggar.

A principal reason of which poverty, I suppose to be their exceeding
populousness, there being reckoned in so small a quantity of ground, near upon
thirty thousand living souls. A matter which gave us no small cause of
admiration; and when my Lord of Danby seemed to wonder, how such a span of
earth could contain such multitudes of people, I remember that Sir John Payton
the Lieutenant Governor, made him this answer, viz. That the people married
within themselves like Conies in a burrow; and further, that for more then
thirty years they never had been molested either with Sword, Pestilence, or
Famine.

A second reason of their poverty (add also of their numbers) may be the little
liking they have to Trafick; whereby as they might have advantage to improve
themselves, and employ their poor; so also might that service casually diminish
their huge multitudes, by the loss of some men, and diverting others from the
thought of marriage.

But the main cause, as I conceive it, is the tenure of their Lands, which are
equally to be divided amongst all the Sons of every Father, and those parcels
also to be subdivided even ad infinitnm. Hence is it, that in all the Countries
you shall hardly find a field of Corn of larger compass then an ordinary
Garden; every one now having a little to himself, and that little made less to
his posterity. This Tenure our Lawyers call by the name of Gavel-kinde; that
is, as some of them expound it, Give all-kinne, because it is amongst them all
to be divided. For thus the Law speaking of the customs of Kent, in the 16
Chap. De praerogatlva Regis. Ibidem omnes haetedes masculi participabant
haereditatem ^orum, and similiter soeminae; sed soemine non participabunt cum
viri^. A tenure which on the one side has many privileges, and on the other
side as many inconveniences.

For first, they which hold in this Tenure, are free from all customary
services, exempt from wardship, at full age when they come to 15 years, and if
they please, they may alienate their estates either by gift or sale, without
the assent or knowledge of the Lord. But which is most of all, in case the
Father be attaint of Felony or Murder, there is no Escheat of it to the Lord;
the whole Estate, after the King has had Diem annum and vastum, descending on
the Heirs. Et post annum and diem terrae and tenementa reddentur, and
revertentur porximo haeredi cui debuerant descendisse, si felonia facta non
fuisset; so the Lawyers.

On the other side, by this means their estates are infinitely distracted,
their houses impoverished, the Kings profits in his Subsidies diminished, and
no little disadvantage to the public service, in the finding of Armours for
the Wars. Whereupon, as many Gentlemen of Kent have altered by especial Acts
of Parliament, the ancient Tenure of their Lands, and reduced it unto
Knights-service; so is it wished by the better sort of this people, and
intended by some of them, that their Tenure may be also altered and brought
into the same condition. A matter of no little profit and advantage to the
King, and therefore without difficulty to be compassed.

By this Tenure are their estates all holden in every of the Islands, except 6
only which are held in Capite; whereof 4 in Jarsey, and 2 in Guetnzey, and
those called by the names of Signeuries. The Signeuries in Jarsey are first,
that of St Oen, anciently belonging to the Carter^ts; and that of Rossell,
bought lately of Mr. Daminick Perin, by Sir Philip de Carteret now living. 3.
That of Trinity, descended upon Mr. Jeshua de Carteret in the right of his
Mother, the heir general of the L' Emprieres. And 4 That of St. Marie,
vulgarly called Lammarez, descended from the Pains unto the Family of the Du
Maresque who now enjoy it. Those of Guernzey, as before I said, are two only;
viz. that of Anneville, and that of De Sammarez; both which have passed by way
of sale through diverse hands, and now at last are even worn out almost to
nothing. The present owners, Fashion and Androes, both of them English in their
parentage.

The chief Magistrates in both these Isles, for as much as concerns the
defense and safety of them, are the Governors; whose office is not much unlike
that of the Lord Lieutenants of our shires in England, according as it was
established by King Alfred, revived by Henry III. and so continues at this
day. These Governors are appointed by the King, and by him in times of war,
rewarded with an annual pension payable out of the Exchequer; but since the
increase of the domaine by the ruin of Religious houses, that charge has been
deducted; the whole Revenues being allotted to them in both Islands for the
support of their estate. In Civil matters they are directed by the Bailiffs
and the Jurates; the Bailiffs and other the Kings Officers in Guernzey, being
appointed by the Governor; those of Jarsey holding their places by Patent from
the King.

The names of which Officers, from the highest to the lowest, behold here as in
a Tablet, according as they are called in each Island.

GUERNZEY.
The Governor the Earl of Danby. The Lieutenant Nath. Darcell. The Bailiffe
Aims de Carteret. The Provost The Kings Advocate Pet. Beauvoir. The
Comptroller De la Morsh. The Receiver Carey.

JARSEY.
The Governor Sir John Peyton, Sen. The Lieutenant Sir John Peyton, Jun. The
Bailiffe Sir Philip de Cart^r^t. The Vicompt Hampton. Le Procureur Helier de
Carteres. The Advocate Messerney. The Receiver Diss^^.

By those men, accompanied with the Justices or Jurates, is his Majesty served,
and his Islande governed; the places in each Island being of the same nature,
though somewhat different in name. Of these in matters merely Civil, and
appertaining unto public justice, the Bailiffe is the principal; as being the
chief Judge in all actions both criminal and real. In matter of life and
death, if they proceed to sentence of condemnation, there is requisite a
concurrence of seven Jurates together with the B^iliffe; under which number so
concurring, the Offender is acquitted. Nor can the Country find one guilty,
not taken, as we call it, in the matter; except that 18 voices of 24 (for of
that number is their Grand Enquest) agree together in the verdict. Personal
actions, such as are Debt and T^espasse, may be determined by the Bailiffe, and
two only are sufficient; but if a trial come in right of Land and of
Inheritance, there must be three at least, and they decide it. For the dispatch
of these businesses, they have their Term^^, about the same time as we in
London; their Writ^ of Arrest Appearance and the like, directed to the Vicompt
or Provest; and for the trial of their several causes, three several Courts
or Jurisdictions, viz. the Court Criminal, the Court of Chattel, and the Court
of Heritage. If any find himself agrieved with their proceedings, his way is
to appeal unto the Councell-Table. Much like this form of Government, but of
later stamp, are those Courts in France, which they call Les Seiges
Presideaux, instituted for the ease of the people by the former Kings, in
diverse Cities of the Realm, and since confirmed anno 1551 or thereabouts.
Wherein there is a Bailiffe, attended by twelve Assistants (for the most part)
two Lieutenants, the one criminal and the other civil, and other officers;
the office of the Bailiffe being to preserve the people from wrong, to take
notice of Treasons, Robberies, Murders, unlawful assemblies, etc. and the like.

In this order, and by these men, are all such affairs transacted which
concern only private and particular persons; but if a business arise which
touches at the public, there is summoned by the Governor a Parliament, or
Convention of the three Estates. For however Aristotle deny in the first of his
Politics, (...), that a great household nothing differs from a little City, yet
certainly we may affirm that in the art of Government, a little Empire does
nothing differ from a greater; whereupon it is, that even these little Islands,
in imitation of the greater Kingdoms have also their Conventus ordinum, or
assembly of the States; viz. of the Governor as chief, the Bailiffe and
Jurates representing the nobility, the Ministers for the Church, and the
several Constables of each Parish for the Commons. In this assembly general,
as also in all private meetings, the Governor takes precedence of the Bailiffe
but in the Civil Courts and pleas of law, the Bailiffe has it of the
Governor.

In this Assembly they rectify such abuses as are grown among them, appoint
Deputies to solicit their affairs at Court, resolve on public contributions,
etc. and among other things, determine the election of the Justices. For on the
vacancy of any of those places, there is notice given unto the people in their
several Parishes on the next Sunday, after the morning exercise; and there the
people, or the major part of them, agree upon a man. This nomination at the day
appointed for the Assembly of the States is returned by the Constables of each
Village, out of whom so named, the whole body chooses him whom they think most
serviceable for that Magistracy. This done, the new Jurate either then
immediately, or at the next sitting of the Justices, shall be admitted to his
place and office; having first taken an Oath for the upright demeanor of
himself, in the discharge of his duty, and the trust reposed in him. The
tenor of which Oath, is as follows.

YOU Mr. N. N. since it has pleased God to call you lawfully to this charge,
shall swear and promise by the faith and troth which you owe to God, well and
truly to discharge the Office of a Jurate or Justiciar, in the Court Royal of
our Sovereign Lord the King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, etc. in
this Isle of Jarsey; whose Majesty, next under God, you acknowledge to be
supreme Governor in all his Realms, Provinces, and Dominions, renouncing all
strange and forain powers. You shall defend the rights both of his Majesty and
Subjects. You shall uphold the honor and glory of God, and of his pure and
holy word. You shall administer true and equal Justice, as well to the poor as
to the rich, without respect of persons; according to our Laws, Usages and
Customs, confirmed unto us by our privileges, maintaining them together with
our Liberties and Franchises, and opposing your self against such as labor to
infringe them. You shall also punish and chastise all Traitors, Murderers,
Felons, Blasphemers of Gods holy name, Drunkards and other scandalous livers,
every one according to his desert; opposing your self against all seditious
persons in the defense of the Kings Authority, and of his Justice. You shall be
frequently assistant in the Court, and as often as you shall be desired, having
no lawful excuse to the contrary, in which case you shall give your proxy to
some other. Justice, giving your advise, counsel, and opinion according to the
sincerity of your conscience. You shall give reverence and due respect unto the
Court. And shall defend, or cause to be defended, the rights of Widows,
Orphans, Strangers, and all other persons unable to help themselves. Finally,
in your verdict (or the giving your opinion) you shall regulate and conform
your self to the better and more wholesome counsel of the Bailiffe and
Justices. All which you promise to make good upon your conscience. A way more
compendious then ours in England, where the Justices are sain to take three
Oaths, and those founded upon three several Statutes, as viz. that concerning
the discharge of their office, which seems to be founded on the 13. of
Richard II. Cap. 7. That of the Kings Supremacy, grounded on the first of Queen
Elazabeth Cap. 1. And lastly, that of AVegiance, in force by virtue of the
Stature 3 Jac. Cap. 4. Of these Justices there are twelve in all in each
Island; of whose names and titles in the next Chapter.

The other members of the Bailiffes Court, are the Advocates or Pleaders,
whereof there be six only in each Island; this people conceiving rightly, that
multitudes of Lawyers occasion multitudes of business; or according to that
merry saying of old Haywood, The more Spaniels in the field, the more game. Of
these advocate, two of them which are (as we call them here in England) the
Kings Attorney or Sollicitour, are called Advocati stipulantes, the others
Advocati postulantes. Yet have they not by any order confined themselves to
this number, but may enlarge them according to occasion, though it had not been
a Solecisme or a novelty, were the number limited. For it appears in the
Parliament Records, that Edward the first restrained the number both of
Counselors and Atturneys unto 140 for all England, though he also left
authority in the Lord Chief Justice to enlarge it, as appears in the said
Records, Anno 20. Rotul. 5. in dorso de apprenticiis and attornatis, in these
words following. D. Rex injunxit Joh. de Metingham (he was made chief Justice
of the Common Pleas in the 18 of this King) and ^oci is suis quod ipsi per
eorum dis^retionem provideant and ordinent certum numerum in quolibet Comitatu,
de melioribus and legalioribus, and libentius addiscentibus, sec. quod
intellexe^int quod curiae suae and populo de regno melius valere poterit, etc.
Et videtur regi and ejus concilio quod septies viginti sufficere poterint.
Apponant tamen praefati justiciarii plures, si viderint esse faciendum, vel
numerum anticipent, etc. Thus he wisely and happily foreseeing those many
inconveniences which arise upon the multitudes of such as apply themselves unto
the Laws, and carefully providing for the remedy.

But of this, as also of these Islands, and of their manner of Govenment, I
have now said sufficient; yet no more then what may fairly bring your Lordship
on to the main of my discourse and Argument, viz. the Estate and condition of
their Churches.

I shall here only add a Catalogue of the Governors and Bailiffs of the Isle
of Jarsey (for of those of Guernzey, notwithstanding all my pains and
diligence I could find no such certain constat) which is this that follows.

A Catalogue of the Governors and Bailiffs of Jarsey.
Bailiffs. Governors. 1301 Pierre Vig^ure. Edw. II. O(...)o de Grandison Sr.
des Isles. 1389 Geofr. la Hague. Edw. III. Edm. de Cheynie Guard des Isles. 1345
Guill. Hastings. Thom. de Ferrer. Capt. des Isles. 1352 Rog. Powderham. 1363
Raoul L. Empriere. 1367 Rich de St. Martyn. 1368 Iean de St. Martyn. Rich le
Pe^i^. 1370 Jean de St. Martyn. Jean Cokerill. 1382 Tho Brasdefer. Hen. IV.
Edw. D. of York. 1396 Geofr. Brasdefer. V. Jean D. of Bedford. 1414. 1405
Guill. de Laick. 1408 Tho. Daniel. VI. Hum. D. of Gloucester. 1439. 1414 Jean
Poingt dexter. 1433 Jean Bernard Knight. 1436 Jean l' Empriere. 1444 Jean Pain.
1446 Regin. de Carteret. 1453 Jean Poingt dexter. Edw IV. Sir Rich. Harliston.
1462 Nicol. Mourin. 1485 Guill. de Harvy Angl. Hen. VII. Matthew Baker Esquire 1488
Clem. le Hardy. Tho. Overcy Esquire 1494 Jean Nicols. David Philips Esquire 1496 Jean
l' Empriere. 1515 Hell de Carteret. Hen. VIII. Sir Hugh Vaugha^. 1524 Helier de
la Recq. Sir Antony Urterell. 1526 Rich Mabon. 1528 Jasper Penn. Angl. 1562
Hosts Nicolle. Edw. VI Edw. D of Summers. L Protect. Jean du Maresque Cornish.
Geo. Pawlet, Angl. Ma. R. Sir Hugh Pawlet. 1516 Jean Herault Knight. Eliza. R. Sir
Aimer Paulet. 1622 Guill. Park^urst. Sir Anth^. Pawlett. 16 Philip de Carteret
Knight. Sir Walt. Raleigh. now living ann. 1644. Jac. Sir Joh. Peiton. S. a Cross
ingrailed O. Car. Sir Tho. Jermin, now living.

Further then this I shall not trouble your Lordship with the Estate of these
Islands in reference either unto Natural or Civil Concernments. This being
enough to serve for a foundation to that superstructure, which I am now to
raise upon it.

CHAP. II.
(1) The City and Diocese of Constance. (2) The condition of these Islands
under that Government. (3) Churches appropriated what they were. (4) The Black
Book of Constance. (5) That called Domes day. (6) The suppression of Priours
Aliens. (7) Priours Dative, how they differed from the Conventualls. (8) The
condition of these Churches after the suppression. (9) A Diagram of the Revenue
then allotted to each several Parish, together with the Ministers and Justices
now being. (10) What is meant by Champarte deserts and French querrui. (11) The
alteration of Religion in these Islands. (12) Persecution here in the days of
Queen Mary. The Authors indignation at it, expressed in a Poetical rapture.
(13) The Islands annexed for ever to the Diocese of Winton, and for what
reasons.

BUt before we enter on that Argument, The estate and (1) The City
condition of their Churches, a little must be said of their Mother-City, to
whom they once did owe Canonical obedience. A City, in the opinion of some,
once called Augusta Romanduorum, and after took the name of Constance from
Constantine the great, who repaired and beautified it. Others make it to be
built in the place of an old standing camp, and that this is it which is
called Constantia castra in Ammian. Marcellinus, Meantesque protinus prope and
^astra Constantia funduntur in Mare, lib. 15. To leave this controversy to
the French, certain it is, that it has been and yet is a City of good repute;
the County of Constantine (one of the seven Bailiwicks of Normandy being
beholding to it for a name.)

As for the Town it self, (...) at this day accounted for a Diocese of
Constance.
V^cute, but more famous for the Bishopric; the first Bishop of it, as the
Roman Martyrologie (and on the 23, if my memory fail not, of September) does
instruct us, being one Paternus. Du Chesne in his book of French Antiquities,
attributes this honor to St. Ereptiolus; the man, as he conjectures, that
first converted it into the says: his next successors being St. Exuperance,
St. Leonard, and St. Lo; which last is said to have lived in the year 473. By
this account it is a City of good age; yet not so old but that it still
continues beautiful. The Cathedral here one of the fairest and well built
pieces in all Normandy, and yielding a fair prospect even as far as to ^hese
Islands. The Church, it may be, raised to that magnificent height, that so the
Bishop might with greater ease survey his Diocese. A Diocese containing
anciently a good part of Country Constantine, and these Islands where now we
are.

For the better executing of his Episcopal jurisdiction in these places
divided by the Sea from the main body of his (2) The condition of these Islands
under that Government.
charge, he had a Surrogat or Substitute, whom they called a Dean, in each
Island one. His office consisting, as I guess at it by the jurisdiction, of
that of a Chancellor and an Archdeacon, mixed; it being in his faculty to give
institution and induction, to give sentence in cases appertaining to
Ecclesiastical cognizance, to approve of Wills, and withal to hold his
visitations. The revenue fit to entertain a man of that condition; viz. the
best benefice in each Island, the profits ariseing from the Court, and a
proportion of tithes allotted out of many of the Parishes. He of the Isle of
Guernzey over and above this, the little Islet of Le^u, of which in the last
Chapter; and when the houses of Religion, as they called them, were suppressed,
an allowance of an hundred quarters of Wheat, Guernzey measure, paid him by the
Kings receiver for his Tithes. I say Guernzey measure, because it is a measure
different from ours; their quarter being no more then five of our bushels or
thereabouts. The Ministry at that time not answerable in number to the
Parishes, and those few very wealthy; the Religious houses having all the
Prediall* tithes appropriated unto them; and they serving many of the Cures, by
some one of their own body licenced for that purpose.

Now those Churches, or Tithes rather, were called (3) Churches appropriated
what they were.
Appropriated (to dig^esse a little by the way) by which the Patrons Papali
authoritate intercedente, etc. the Popes authority intervening, and the consent
of the King and Diocesan first obtained, were for ever annexed, and as it were
incorporated into such Colleges, Monasteries, and other foundations as were
but sparingly endowed. At this day being irremediably and ever aliened from the
Church; we call them by as fit a name, Impropriations.

For the rating of these Benefices, in the payment of (4) The black book of
Constance.
their first fruits and tenths or Ann^ts, there was a note or tax in the
Bishops Register, which they called the Black book of Constance; like as we in
England, the Black book of the Exchequer. A Tax which continued constantly
upon Record till their disjoyning from that Diocese, as the rule of their
payments and the Bishops dues. And as your Lordship well knowee, not much
unlike that course there is always a Proviso in the grant of Subsidies by the
English Clergy; That the rate, taxation, valuation, and estimation now
remaining on Record in his Majesty's Court of Exchequer, for the payment of a
perpetual Disine or Tenth granted unto King Henry the VIII. of worthy memory,
in the 26 year of his Reign, concerning such promotions as now be in the hands
of the Clergy, shall only be followed and observed. A course learnt by our
great Prelates in the taxing of their Clergy, from the example of Augustus,
(...), in his taxing of the World. For it is reported of him by Ca. Tacitus,
that he had written a book with his own hand, in quo opes publicae
continebantur, wherein he had a particular estimate of all the Provinces in
that large Empire; what Tributes and Imposts they brought in, what Armies they
maintained, etc. and what went also in Largess and Pensions out of the public
finances.

This Providence also exactly imitated by our Norman (5) That of Doomsday.
Conqueror, who had taken such a special survey of his new purchase, that
there was not one hide of Land in all the Realm, but he knew the yearly Rent
and owner of it; how many plow-lands, what Pastures, Fennes and Marshes; what
Woods, Parkes, Farms and Tenements were in every shire, and what every one was
worth.

This Censuall Roll, the English generally call Doomes-day book, and that as
some suppose, because the judgment and sentence of it was as impossible to be
declined as that in the day of doom. Sic cum orta fuerit contentio de his
rebus quae illic continentur cum ventum fuerit ad librum, ejus sententia
infatuari non potest, vel impune declinari; so mine Author. Others conceive it
to be corruptly called the Book of Doomes-day, for the Book of Domus dei, or
the Domus-dei book, as being by the Conqueror laid up in the Maison dieu or
Gods-house in Winchester. A book carefully preserved, and that under three
Keys in his Majesty's Exchequer, not to be looked into under the price of a
Noble; nor any line of it to be transcribed without the payment of a groat.
Tanta; est authorit as vetustatis; So great respect do we yield unto antiquity.

But to return again to my Churches whom I left in (6) The suppression of
Priors Aliens.
bondage under their several Priories, and other the Religious houses. I will
first free them from that yoke which the superstition of their Patrons had put
upon them. So it was, that those Houses of Religion in these Islands, were not
absolute foundations of themselves; but dependent on, and as it were the
appurtenances of, some greater Abbey or Monastery in France. In this condition
they continued till the beginning of the Reign of King Henry the V. who
purposing a war against the French, thought fit to cut of all helps and
succors as they had from England, at that time full of Priors Aliens, and
strangers possessed of Benefices. To this end it was enacted, viz. Whereas
there were diverse French men beneficed and preferred to Priories and Abbeys
within this Realm, whereby the treasures of the Realm were transported, and the
counsels of the King, and the secrets of the Realm disclosed unto the Kings
enemies to the great damage of the King and of the Realm; that therefore all
Priors Aliens, and other French men beneficed, should avoid the Realm, except
only Priors Conventuals, such as have institution and induction: and this also
with a Proviso, that they be Catholic, and give sufficient surety that they
shall not disclose the counsels of the King or of the Realm; so the Statute 1
Hen 5. cap. 7. This also noted to us by Pol. Virgil ad Reip. commodum sanc^tum
est ut post haec ejusmodi externis hominibus nullius Anglicani sacerdotii
possessio traderetur. Upon which point of statute the Britons belonging to the
Queen Dowager, the widow once of John de Montfort Duke of Bretagne, were also
expelled the Land by Act of Parliament, 3 Hen. 5. cap. 3. By this means the
Priors Aliens being banished, their possessions fell into the Kings hands, as
in England so also in these Islands; and their houses being all suppressed they
became an accession to the patrimony Royal, the demaine, as our Lawyers call
it, of the Crown.

These Priors Aliens thus exiled, were properly called (7) Priors dative, how
they differed from Conventuals.
Priors Dative, and removeable; but never such Aliens never so removeable, as
they were now made by this Statute. What the condition of these Priors was, and
wherein they differed from those which are called above by the name of Priors
Conventuals; I cannot better tell then in the words of an other of our
Statutes, that namely of the 27 of Hen. 8. cap.

The Parliament had given unto the King, all Abbeys, Priories and Religious
houses whatsoever, not being above the value 200 l. in the old rent. Provided
always (says the letter of the Law) that this Act, etc. shall not extend nor
be prejudicial to any Abbots or Priors of any Monastery or Priory, etc. for or
concerning such Cells of Religious houses appertaining or belonging to their
Monasteries or Priories; in which Cells the Priors or other chief Governors
thereof, be under the obedience of the Abbots or Priors to whom such Cells
belong. As the Monk or Canons of the Covent of their Monasteries or Priories,
and cannot be sued by the Laws of this Realm, or by their own proper names for
the possessions or other things appertaining to such Cells, whereof they be
Priors* and Governors; but must sue and be sued in and by the names of the
Abbots and Priors to whom they be now obedient, and to whom such Cells belong,
and be also Priors or Governors dative or removeable from time to time, and
accomptez of the profits of such Cells, at the only will and pleasure of such of
the Abbots and Priors, to whom such Cells belong, etc. This once the difference
between them, but now the criticisme may be thought unnecessary.

To proceed, upon this suppression of the Priors and (8) The condition of these
Churches after that suppression.
others the Religious houses in these Islands, and their Revenue falling unto
the Crown; there grew a composition between the Curates and the Governors
about their tithes, which has continued hitherto unaltered, except in the
addition of the Deserts, of which more hereafter. Which composition in the
proportion of tithe unto which it does amount, I here present unto your
Lordship in a brief Diagramme, together with the the names of their Ministers
and Justices now beng.

JARSEY. (9) The Diagram.

Parishes. Ministers. Revenues. Justices. St. Martins Mr. Bandinell sen. the
Dean. The 3 of the kings tithe. Josuah de Carteret Seign. de Trinite. St.
Hilaries Mr. Oliver the Sub-dean or Commissary. The 10 of the kings tithe. Dan
du Maresque seign de Sammarez. St. Saviors. Mr. Effart. The Deserts and 22
acres of Gleb. Ph. L' Empriere Sr. de Delament. St. Clements. Mr. Paris. The 8
and 9 of the kings tithe. Ph. de Carletet Sr. de Vinchiles de haut. St.
Grovilles. Mr. de la Place. The 8 and 9, etc. Eli. du Maresque Sr. de Vinchiles
abas. St. Trinities. Mr. Molles. The Deserts and the 10 of the kings tithe.
Eli. de Carteret Sr. de la Hagne. St. John's. Mr. Brevin. The Deserts, etc. Joh.
L' Empriere Sr. des au grace. S. Lawrences. Mr. Prinde. The Deserts, etc. Aron
Messervie. St. Mary's. Mr. Blandivell, jun. The 3 sheaf of the Kings tithe.
Ben. la cloche Sr. de Longueville. St. Owens. Mr. La cloche. The Deserts, etc.
Jo. Hard. St. Burlads. The 8 and 9, etc. Abr. Herod. St. Peter's. Mr. Grueby.
The Deserts, etc. Ph. Marret.

Note that the taking of the 8 and 9 sheafe is called French querrui; as also
that an acre of their measure is 40 Perches long and one in breadth, every
Perch being 21 foot.

GUERNZEY.
Parishes. Ministers. Revenues. Justices. St. Pierreporte.
St. Peter's on the Sea. M. de la March The 7 of tithe and champarte. Tho.
Andrews Sr. de Sammarez. St. Martins. Mr. de la Place The like. Pet. Carey
sen. La Forest. Mr. Picote. The 9 of tithe and champarte. John Fautrat Sr. ^de
Coq. Tortevall Mr. Fautrat. The 3 of tithe and champarte. Joh. Bonamy. S.
Andrews The 4 of, etc. Joh. Ketville. St. Pierre du boys.
St. Peter's in the Wood. Mr. Perchard. The 3 of the tithe only. James Guile Sr.
des Rohais. St. Saviors The Desert and the tenths in all 600 sheafes. Tho.
Blundell. Chastell. Mr. Panisee. The 9 of the tithe only. Pet. de Beauvoyre Sr.
des Granges St. Mich. St. Michael in the vale Mr. Millet. The 4 of the Kings
tithe only. Pet. Gosselin. St. Sampson The like. Josias Merchant. Serke. Mr.
Brevin. 20 l. stipend and 20 quarters of corn. Pet. Carey jun. Alderney. Mr.
Mason. 20 l. stipend.

Note that the Parish called in this Diagram, La Forest, is dedicated as some
say, to the holy Trinity; as other to St. Margaret, that which is here called
Tortevall, as some suppose unto St. Philip, others will have it to St. Martha;
but that of Chastell to the hand of the blessed Virgin, which is therefore
called in the Records, our Ladies Castle. Note also, that the Justices or
Jurates are here placed, as near as I could learn, according to their
Seniority, not as particularly appertaining to those Parishes against which
they are disposed.

For the better understanding of this Diagram, there are (10) What is meant by
Deserts,
three words which need a commentary, as being merely Aliens to the English
tongue, and hardly Denizens in French. Of these, that in the Diagrams called
the Deserts, is the first. A word which properly signifies a Wilderness, or
any wast ground from which arises little profit. As it is taken at this
present and on this occasion, it signifies a field which formerly was laid to
waste, and is now made arable. The case this: At the suppression of the Priors
Aliens and the composition made betwixt the Curates and the Governors, there
was in either Island much ground of small advantage to the Church or to the
owner, which they called Les Deserts. But the Countries after growing populous,
and many mouths requiring much provision, these Deserts were broke up and
turned into tillage. Hereupon the Curates made challenge to the tithes, as not
at all either intended or contained in the former composition. The Governors
on the other side alleging custom, that those grounds had never paid the
Tithe, and therefore should not. Nor could the Clergy there obtain their rights
until the happy entrance of King James upon these Kingdoms. A Prince of all
others a most indulgent father to the Church. By him and by a letter Decretory
from the Counsel, it was adjudged in favor of the Ministry; the Letter
bearing date at Greenwich June the last, anno 1608. subscribed T. Ellesmere
Canc. R. Salisbury, H. Northampton, E. Worcester, T. Suffolk, Exeter Zeuch,
Wotton, Caesar, Herbert. A matter certainly of much importance in the
consequence, as making known unto your Lordship how easy a thing it is in the
authority royal to free the Church from that tyranny of custom and
prescription under which it groneth.

The next of these three words to be explained, is in the French Querrui,
note French Querrui, which in the note is told us to be the 8 and 9 sheaf; by
which account or way of tithing, the Minister in 50 sheafs receives 6, which
is one sheaf more then the ordinary tithe. The word corrupted, as I and by
conceive, from the French word Charrue, which signifies a Plough, and then
French querrui is as much as Ploughright, alluding to the custom of some Lords
in France, who used to give their husbandmen or villains, as a guerdon for
their toil, the 8 and 9 of their increase.

As for the last, that, viz. which the Diagram calls Champart, it intimates
in the origination of the word, a part or Champart.
portion of the field, that which the Lord in chief reserved unto himself.

In Guernzey it is constantly the 12 sheaf of the whole crop, the Farmer in the
counting of his sheafes casting aside the 10 for the King, and the 12 which is
the Champart, for the Lord.

Now here in Guernzey (for those of the other Isle have no such custom) there
is a double Champart, that namely Du Roy, belonging to the King, whereof the
Clergy have the tithe, and that of St. Michael en leval, not titheable. The
reason is, because at the suppression of the Priorie of St. Michael, which was
the only Religious house in these Islands, which subsisted of it self; the
Tenants made no tendry of this Champart, and so it lay amongst concealments. At
the last, Sir Thomas Leighton the Governor here recovered it unto the Crown by
course of Law, and at his own charges; whereupon the Queen licenced him to make
sale of it, to his best advantage, which accordingly he did.

For the Religion in these Islands, it has been generally such as that
professed with us in England, and as (11) The alteration of Religion in these
Islands.
much varied. When the Priors Aliens were banished England by King Henry V.
they also were exiled from hence. Upon the demolition of our Abbeys; the Priory
of St. Michael, and that little Oratory of our Lady of Lehu, became a ruin.
The Mass was here also trodden down whilst King Edward stood, and raised
again at the exaltation of Queen Mary. Nay even that fiery trial, which so
many of Gods servants underwent in the short Reign of that misguided Lady,
extended even unto these poor Islanders; and that, as I conceive, in a more
fearful tragedy, then any, all that time presented on the Stage of England.
The story in the brief is this;

Katharine Gowches a poor widow of St. Peters-parte in (12) Persect tion here
in the days of Q. Mary.
Guernzey, was noted to be much absent from the Church, and her two daughters
guilty of the same neglect. Upon this they were presented before Jaques Amy
then Dean of the Island, who finding in them, that they held opinions contrary
unto those then allowed, about the Sacrament of the Altar, pronounced them
Heretics and condemned them to the fire. The poor women on the other side
pleaded for themselves, that that Doctrine had been taught them in the time of
King Edward; but if the Queen was otherwise disposed, they were content to be
of her Religion. This was fair, but this would not serve; for by the Dean they
were delivered unto Elier Gosselin the then Bailiffe, and by him unto the fire,
July 18. Anno Dom. 1556. One of these daughters, Perotine Massey she was
called, was at that time great with child; her husband, which was a Minister,
being, in those dangerous times, fled the Island; in the middle of the flames
and anguish of her torments, her belly brake in sunder, and her child, a goodly
boy, fell down into the fire, but was presently snatched up by one W. House one
of the bystanders. Upon the noise of this strange accident, the cruel
Bailiffe returned command, that the poor Infant must be cast again into the
flames; which was accordingly performed; and so that pretty babe was borne a
Martyr, and added to the number of the Holy Innocents. A cruelty not paralleld
in any story, not heard of amongst the Nations. But such was the pleasure of
the Magistate, as one in the Massacre of the younger Maximinus, viz. Canis
pessimi ne catulum esse relinquendum; that not any issue should be left alive
of an Heretic Parent.

The horrror of which fact stirred in me some Poetical Fancies (or Furies
rather) which having long lien dormant, did break out at last, indignation thus
supplying those suppressed conceptions.

Si natura nega^, dabit indignatio versum.
Holla ye pampred Sires of Rome, forbear
To act such murders, as a Christian ear
Hears with more horror, then the Jews relate
The dire effects of Herod's fear and hate,
When that vilde Butcher, caused to cut in sunder
Every Male child of two years old and under.
These Martyrs in their cradles, from the womb
This passed directly to the fiery tomb;
Baptized in Flames and Blood, a Martyr born,
A setting sun in the first dawn of morn:
Yet shining with more heat, and brighter glory
Then all Burnt-offerings in the Churches story.
Holla ye pampred Rabines of the West,
Where learnt you thus to furnish out a Feast
With Lambs of the first minute? What disguise
Find you to mask this horrid Sacrifice?
When the old Law so meekly did forbid,
In the Dams milk to boil the tender Kid.
What Riddles have we here? an unborn birth,
Hurried to Heaven, when not made ripe for Earth;
Condemned to die before it lived, a twin
To its own mother; not impeached of sin,
Yet doomed to death, that breathed but to expire,
That escaped the flames to perish in the fire.
Rejoice ye Tyrants of old times, your name
Is made less odious on the breath of fame,
By our most monstrous cruelties; the Males
Slaughtered in Egypt, weigh not down these scales.
A Fod to equal this no former age
Has given in Books, or fancy on the Stage.
This fit of indignation being thus passed over, I can proceed with greater
patience to the rest of the story of this Island, which in brief is this:

That after the death of Queen Many, Religion was (3) The Islands annexed for
ever unto the Diocese of Wint(...), and for what Reasons.
again restored in the reformation of it to these Islands. In which state it
has ever since continued in the main and substance of it; but not without some
alteration in the circumstance and form of Government. For whereas
notwithstanding the alteration of Religion in these Islands they still
continued under the Diocese of Constance, during the whole Empire of King Henry
the VIII. and Edward the VI. yet it seemed good to Queen Elizabeth upon some
reasons of State, to annex them unto that of Winton.

The first motive of it was, because that Bishop refused to abjure the
pretended power which the Pope challenges in Kingdoms, as other of the
English Prelates did; but this displeasure held not long. For presently upon a
consideration of much service and intelligence which might reasonably be
expected from that Prelate, as having such a necessary dependence on this
Crown, they were again permitted to his jurisdiction.

At the last, and if I well remember, about the 12 year of that excellent
Ladies Reign, at the persuasion of Sir Amias Paulet, and Sir Tho. Leighton then
Governors, they were for ever united unto Winchester. The pretenses that so
there might a fairer way be opened to the reformation of Religion; to which
that Bishop was an enemy, and that the secrets of the State might not be
carried over into France, by reason of that intercourse which needs must be
between a Bishop and his Ministers. The truth is, they were both resolved to
settle the Geneva discipline in every Parish in each Island; for which cause
they had sent for Snape and Cartwright, those great incendiaries of the English
Church to lay the groundwork of that building. Add to this that there was some
glimmering also of a Confiscation in the ruin of the Deanries; with the
spoils whereof they held it fit to enrich their Governments. Matters not
possible to be effected, had he of Constance continued in his place and power.
But of this more in the next Chapter.

CHAP. III.
(1) The condition of Geneva under their Bishop. (2) The alteration there both
in Polity, and (3) in Religion. (4) The state of that Church before the coming
of Calvin thither. (5) The conception, (6) birth, and (7) growth of the New
Discipline. (8) The quality of Lay Elders. (9) The different proceedings of
Calvin, (10) and Beza in the propagation of that cause. (11) Both of them
enemies to the Church of England. (12) The first entrance of this platform
into the Islands. (13) A permission of it by the Queen and the Council in St.
Peter's and St. Hilaries. (14) The letters of the Council to that purpose. (15)
The tumults raised in England by the brethren. (16) Snape and Cartwright
establish the new Discipline in the rest of the Islands.

THus having showed unto your Lordship the affairs (1) The condition of Geneva
under their Bishop.
and condition of these Churches till the Reformation of Religion; I come next
in the course of my design, unto that Innovation made amongst them in the
point of Discipline. For the more happy dispatch of which business, I must
crave leave to ascend a little higher into the story of change, then the
introduction of it into those little Islands. So doing, I shall give your
Lordship better satisfaction, then if I should immediately descend upon that
Argument; the rather because I shall deliver nothing in this discourse not
warranted to be by the chief contrivers of the Discipline. To begin then with
the first original and commencement of it; so it is that it took the first
beginning at a City of the Allobroges or Savoyards, called Geneva, and by that
name mentioned in the first of Cesars Commentaries. A Town situate at the end
of Lacus Lemannus, and divided by Rhodanus or Rhosne into two parts. Belonging
formerly in the Sovereignty of it to the Duke of Savoy; but in the profits and
possession to their Bishop and homager of that Dukedom. To this Bishop then
there appertained not only an Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, as Governor of the
Church under the Archbishop of Vienna, in Daulphinoys his Metropolitan; but a
jurisdiction also temporal, as Lord and Master of the Town under the
protection of the Duke of Savoy. This granted by the testimony of Calvin in his
Epistle unto Cardinal Sadolet, dated the last of August 1539. Habebat sane
(says he) jus gladii, and alias civilis jurisdictionis parts; but as he
conceived, I know not on what grounds, Magistratui ereptas, fraudulently taken
from the Civil Magistrate.

In this condition it continued till the year 1528. when (2) The alteration
there both in Religion,
those of Berne, after a public disputation held, had made an alteration in
Religion. At that time Viret and Farellus, men studious of the Reformation had
gotten footing in Geneva, and diligently there solicited the cause and
entertainment of it. But this proposal not plausibly accepted by the Bishop,
they dealt with those of the lower rank, amongst whom they had gotten most
credit, and taking opportunity by the actions and example of those of Berne,
they compelled the Bishop and his Clergy to abandon the Town, and after
proceeded to the reforming of his and
Church. This also avowed by Calvin in his Epistle to the said Cardinal, viz.
That the Church had been reformed and settled before his coming into those
quarters by Viret and Farellus, and that he only had approved of their
proceedings, Sed quia quae a Vireto and Farello facta essent, suffragio meo
comprobavi, etc. as he there has it.

Nor did they only in that tumult alter the Doctrine and ((...)) in Polity.
orders of the Church, but changed also the Government of the Town, disclaiming
all alleagiance either to their Bishop or their Duke, and standing on their own
liberty as a free City. And for this also they are indebted to the active
counsels of Fare^^us. For thus Calvin in his Epistle to the Ministers of
Zurich, dated the 26 of November 1553. Cum hic nuper esset frater noster
Farellus, cui se totos debent, etc. and anon after, Sed deploranda est senatus
nostri caecitas, quod libertatis suae patrem, etc. speaking of their
ingratitude to this Farellus.

The power and dominion of that City thus put into the (4) The estate of that
Church before the coming of Calvin thither.
hands of the common people, and all things left at liberty and random, it
could not be expected that there should any discipline [be] observed, or good
order in the Church. The Common Council of the Town disposed of it as they
pleased; and if any crime which anciently belonged to Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction, did h^p to be committed, it was punished by order from that
Council. No censures Ecclesiastical, no sentence of Excommunication thought
on at that time, either here at Geneva, or in any other of the popular
Churches. Si quidem excommunicationi in aliis Ecclesiis nullus locus, as Beza
has it in the life of Calvin. And the same Calvin in his Epistle to the
Ministers of Zurich affirms no less in these words, viz. Nec me latet pies
and doctos esse homines, quibus sub principibus Christianis non videtur esse
necessaria Excommunicatio; so he.

Thus was it with the Church and City of Geneva at the (5) The conception.
first coming of Calvin to them; a man of excellent abilities, and one that had
attained a good repute in many places of the French dominions. Not finding that
assurance in the Realm of France, he resolved to place himself at Basil or at
Strasbure. But taking Geneva in his way, upon the importunity of Farellus, he
condescended to make that place the scene of his endeavors, and his assent
once known, he was admitted straight to be one of their ordinary preachers and
their Divinity reader. Men's. Aug. anno 1536. This done he presently negotiates
with the people, publicly to abjure the Papacy: nor so only, but (as Beza has
it in his life) Quod doctrinam and disciplinam capitibus aliquot comprehensam
admitterent; that they also should give way to such a discipline, which he and
his associates had agreed on. A matter at the last effected, but not without
much difficulty, and on the 20 of July, anno 1537. the whole City bound
themselves by oath accordingly; which discipline of what quality it was I
cannot learn: sure I am, it had no affinity with that in use amongst the
ancients. For thus himself in his Epistle above mentioned unto Sadolet,
Disciplinam qualem vetus habuit Ecclesia apud nos non esse [dicis]; neque nos
diffitemur.

The Discipline hitherto was only in conception, before it came unto maturity,
and ready for the birth, the people weary of this new yoke began to murmur, and
he resolutely bent not to vary from his first purpose, was in that
coffeehouse banished the Town, together with Farellus and Coraldus his
colleagues, anno 1538. Three years, or thereabouts (6) The Birth
he continued in this exile, being bountifully entertained at Strasburg; from
whence with unresistible importunity he was again recalled by that unconstant
multitude. A desire to which by no means he would hearken, unless both they
and all their Ministers would take a solemn oath to admit a complete form of
discipline, not arbitrary, not changeable; but to remain in force for ever
after. Upon assurance of their conformity herein, he returns unto them and
like an other Tully unto Rome; and certainly we may say of him as the
Historian of the other, Nec quisquam aut expulsus est invid(...), aut receptus
letius. On the 13 of September, 1541. he is admitted into the Town; and now
(there being strength enough to deliver) the Discipline such as he had
contrived it, was established on the 20 of November following.

This new Discipline thus borne into the world, was yet (7) Growth of the new
Discipline.
crushed almost in the growth of it, by the faction of Perinus at that time
Captain of the people, and of great power among the many. Twelve years
together, but yet with many luoid intervals, did it struggle with that
opposition, and at the last was in a manner ruined and oppressed by it. For
whereas the Consistory had given sentence against one (...), even in the
highest censure of Excommunication, the Common Council not only absolved him
from that censure, but foolishly decreed, That Excommunication and Absolution
did properly belong to them. Upon this he is again resolved to quit the Town;
but at last the Controversy is by joint consent referred unto the judgment of
four Cities of the Switzers. Then did he labor in particular to consider of
it, not as a matter of ordinary consequence, but (as in his said Epistle to
those in Zurich) De toto Ecclesiae hujus statu, etc. such as on which the whole
being of that Church depended. In the end he so contrived it, that the answer
was returned to Geneva, Nil contra tentandum; that they should not seek to
alter what was so well established; and hereupon they were all contented to
obey. By which means this Infant discipline, with such variety of troubles born
and nursed, attained unto a fair and manly growth, and in short space so well
improved, that it durst bid defiance unto Kings and Princes.

The chief means by which this new Platform was admitted (8) The quality of
Lay Elders.
in Geneva, and afterward desired in other places, was principally that parity
and equallty, which it seemed to carry, the people being as it were a double
part in it, and so advanced into the highest Magistracy. For so the cunning
Architect had contrived it, that for every pillar of the Church, there should
be also two Pillasters, or rather underproppers of the people. Non solos verbi
Ministros sedere judices in consistorio; sed numerum duplo majorem, partim ex
minori senatu, partim ex majori delige; so he in his Remonstrance unto them of
Zurich, affixed to his Epistle. These men they honor with the name of Elders,
and to them the charge is specially committed of inquiring into the lives of
those within their division, viz. Sitne domus pacata and recte composita, etc.
as the Epistle to Gasp. Olevianus does instruct us. By which device there is
not only a kind of satisfaction given to the multitude, but a great deal of
envy is declined by the Ministry; which that curious and unneighbourly
inquisition would otherwise derive upon them. And certainly, were there in
these Elders, as they call them, a power only of information, the device might
be so much the more allowable. But that such simple wretches should caper from
the shop-board upon the Bench, and there be interessed in the weigh^iest causes
of the Church. Censure and Ordination is a monster never known among the
Ancients. Especially considering, that the mind of these poor Laics, is all
the while intent upon their penny; and when the Court is risen they hasten to
their shops as Quinctius the Dictator did in Flarus to his plough, Ut ad opus
re^ictum festinasse videantur.

The business thus happily succeeding at Geneva, and his name continually
growing into higher credit; his (9) The different proceeding of Calvin.
next endeavor was to plant that government in all places which with such
trouble had been fitted unto one. Certainly we do as much affect the issue of
our brains as of our bodies, and labor with no less vehemence to advance
them. And so it was with him in this particular, his after-writings tending
mainly to this end, that his new Platform might have found an universal
entertainment. But this modestly enough, and chiefly by way of commendation.
Two examples only shall be sufficient, because I will not be too great a
trouble to your Lordship in the collection of a tedious Catalogue. Gasper
Olevianus a Minister of the Church of Tryers, by his Letters bearing date the
12 of April, anno 1560. gives notice unto Calvin of the State of their
affairs; and withal that he found the people willing to condescend unto a
Discipline. Calvin in his answer presents him with a summary of that platform,
raised lately at Geneva, and then closes with him thus, Compendium hoc satis
putavi fore ex quo formam aliquam conciperes, quam praescribere non debut. Tu
quod putabis utile istic fore, etc. In this he does sufficiently express his
desire to have his project entertained; in that which follows he does
signify his joy that the world had made it welcome. An epistle written to a
certain Quidam of Polonia, dated the year 1561. Wherein he does congratulate
the admission of the Gospel (as he calls it) in that Kingdom. And then, Haec
etiam non poenitenda gaudii accessio, cum audio disciplinam cum Evangelii
professione conjunctam, etc. thus he.

But Eeza his successor goes more plainly to the (10) Beza in the propagation
of that cause
business, and will not commend this project to the Churches, but impose it on
them. This it was, that made him with such violence cry down the Hierarchy of
the Church, the plague of Bishops, as he calls it. Hanc pestem caveant qui
Ecclisiam salvam cupiunt, etc. Et ne illam quaeso unquam admittas (he speaks
it unto Cnoxe) quantumvis unitatis retinendae specie, etc. blandiatur. This was
it which made him reckon it as a note essential of the Church V. cap. 5. n*
without which it was not possible to subsist; a point so necessary, Ut ab ea
recedere non magis quam ab religionis ipsius placitis, liceat. Epist, 83. that
it was as dangerous to depart from this, as from the weightiest mysteries of
Religion. This in a word was it which made him countenance those turbulent
spirits, who had so dangerously embroyled our Churches, and prepared it unto
ruin; but of them and their proceedings more anon.

And certainly it was a matter of no small grief and (11) Both of these enemies
to the Church of England.
discontent unto them both, that when so many Churches had applauded their
invention, the Church of England only should be found untractable. Hereupon it
was that Calvin tells the English Church in Franckford (in his Epistle to them
anno 1555) how he had noted in their public Liturgy, Multas tolerabiles
ineptias, many tolerable vanities; faecis Papisticae reliquias, the relics of
the filth of Popery* and that there was not in it ea puritas quae optanda
foret, such piety as was expected. Hereupon it was that Beza being demanded by
the brethren, what he conceived of some chief matters then in question;
returned a Non probamus to them all. The particulars are too many to be now
recited, and easy to be seen in the 12 of his Epistles, the Epistle dated from
Geneva, anno 1567. and superscribed, Ad quosdam Anglicarum ecclesiarum fratres
super nonnullis in Ecclesiastica polit^ia controversis.

Yet at the last they got some footing, though not in (12) The first entrance
of this Platform into the Islands.
England, in these Islands which are members of it, and as it were the Suburbs
of that City. The means by which it entered, the resort hither of such French
Ministers as came hither for support in the times of persecution and the Civil
wars, anno 1561. and 62. Before their coming that form of prayer was here in
use which was allowed with us in England. But being as all others are, desirous
of change, and being also well encouraged by the Governors, who by this means
hoped to have the spoil of the poor Deanries; both Islands joined together in
alliance or consederacy to petition the Queens Majesty for an approbation of
this Discipline, anno 1563.

The next year following, the Seignieur de St. Oen, and (13) A permission of it
by the Queen, etc.
Nich. de Soulmont were delegated to the Court, to solicit this affair; and
there they found such favor, that their desire received a gracious answer, and
full of hope they returned unto their homes. In the mean time the Queen being
strongly persuaded that this design would much advance the Reformation in those
Islands, was contented to give way unto it in the Towns of St. Peters-port, and
of St. Hilaries, but no further. To which purpose there were Letters Decretory
from the Council directed to the Bailiff, the Jurates, and others of each
Island; the tenor whereof was as follows.

AFter our very hearty commendations unto you. (14) The Letters of the Council
to that purpose.
Where the Queens most excellent Majesty understands that the Isles of
Guernzey and Jarsey have antienly depended on the Diocese of Constance, and
that there be certain Churches in the same Diocese well reformed, agreeably
throughout in Doctrine as is set forth in this Realm; knowing therewith that
they have a Minister which ever since his arrival in Jarsey, has used the
like order of Preaching and administration, as in the said Reformed Churches,
or as it is used in the French Church at London; her Majesty for diverse
respects and considerations moving her Highness is well pleased to admit the
same order of Preaching and Administration to be continued at St. Heliers, as
has been hitherto accustomed by the said Minister. Provided always that the
residue of the Parishes in the said Isle, shall diligently put apart all
superstitions used in the said Diocese; and so continue there the order of
Service ordained and set forth within this Realm, with the injunctions
necessary for that purpose; wherein you may not fail diligently to give your
aides and assistance, as best may serve for the advancement of Gods glory. And
so fare you well. From Richmond the 7 day of August, Anno 1565. Subscribed, N.
Bacon. Will. Northamp. R. Leo^ster. Gul. Clynton. R. Rogers. Fr. Knols. William
Cecil.



Where note, that the same Letter, the names only of the places being changed,
and subscribed by the same men, was sent also unto those of Guernzey for the
permission of the said Discipline in the haven of St. Peter's. And thus
fortified by authority they held their first Synod according to the
constitutions of that platform on the 22. of September, and at St.
Peters-porte in Guernzey, anno 1567.

By this means, by this improvident assent (if I may so (15) The tumults raised
in England by the Brethren.
call it) to this new discipline in these Islands; her Majesty did infinitely
prejudice her own affairs, and opened that gap unto the Brethren, by which
they had almost made entrance unto mere confusion in this state and Kingdom.
For wherea^ during the Empire of Queen Mary, Goodman, Whittingham, Gilbie and
diverse others of our Nation, h^d betook themselves unto Geneva, and there been
taught the Consistorian practices; they yet retained themselves within the
bounds of peace and duty. But no sooner had the Queen made known by this assent
that she might possibly be drawn to like the Platform of Geneva; but presently
the Brethren set themselves on work to impose those new inventions on our
Churches. By Genebrard we learn in his Chronology, ortos Puritanos anno 1566.
and that their first Belweather was called Samson; a puissant Champion
doub^lesse in the cause of Israel. By our own Antiquary in his Annals it is
referred ad Annum 68 and their Leaders were Collman, Buttan, Bellingham and
Benson. By both it does appear that the brethren stirred (...) there, till the
approbation of their Discipline in those Islands, or till the execution of it,
in their first Synod. No sooner had they this encouragement, but they presently
mustered up their forces, betook themselves unto the quarrel, and the whole
Realm was on the sudden in an uproar. The Parliaaments continually troubled
with their Supplications, Admonitions and the like; and when they found not
there that favor which they looked for, they denounce this dreadful curse
against them, That there shall not be a man of their seed that shall prosper to
be a Parliament man, or bear rule in England any more. The Queen exclaimed upon
in many of their Pamphlets, her honorable Counsel scandalously censured as
opposers of the Gospel. The Prelates every were cried down as Antichristian,
Petty-popes, Bishops of the Devil, cogging and cousening knaves, dumb dogs,
enemies of God, etc. and their Courts and Chanceries the Synagogues of Satan.
After this they erected privately their Presbyteries in diverse places of the
Land, and contoned the whole Kingdom into their several Classes and
divisions; and in a time when the Spaniards were expected, they threaten to
petition the Queens Majesty with 100000 hands. In conclusion what dangerous
counsels were concluded on by Hacket and his Apostles, with the assent and
approbation of the Brethren, is extant in the Chronicles. A strange and peevish
generation of men, that having public enemies unto the faith abroad, would
rather turn the edge of their Swords upon their Mother and her children. But
such it seems was the holy pleasure of Geneva; and such their stomach not to
brook a private opposition. Cumque superba foret Babylon spolianda trophaeis,
Bella geri placuit, nullos habitura triumphos.
Yet was it questionless some comfort to their souls, that their devices,
however it succeeded ill in England, had spread it self abroad in Guernzey and
in Jarsey, where it had now possession of the whole Islands. For not content
with that allowance her Majesty had given unto it, in the Towns of St. Peter's
and St. Hillaries; the Governors having first got these Isles to be dissevered
from the Diocese of Constance, permit it unto all the other Parishes. The
better to establish it, the great supporters of the cause in England, Snape and
Cartwright are sent for to the Islands; the one of them being made the
tributary Pastor of the Castle of Cornet, the other of that of Mont-orguel.
Thus qualified forsooth they conveene the Churches of each Island, and in a
Synod held in Guernzey, anno 1576. the whole body of the Discipline is drawn
into a form. Which form of Discipline. I here present unto your Lordship,
faithfully translated according to an authentic copy, given unto me by Mr.
Painsee Curate of our Ladies Church of Chastell in the Isle of Guernzey.

CHAP. IV.
The Discipline Ecclesiastical, according as it has been in practice of the
Church after the Reformation of the same, by the Ministers, Elders, and Deacons
of the Isles of Guernzey, Jarsey, Serke, and Alderney; confirmed by the
authority and in the presence of the Governors of the same Isles in a Synod
holden in Guernzey the 28 of June 1576. And afterward revived by the said
Ministers and Elders, and confirmed by the said Governors in a Sy^od holden
also in Guernzey the 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, and 17 days of October 1597.

CHAP. I.
Of the Church in General.
Article I.
1. THe Church is the whole company of the faithful, comprehending as well
those that bear public office in the same, as the rest of the people.

II.
2. No one Church shall pretend any superiority or dominion over another; all
of them being equal in power, and having one only head CHRIST JESUS.

III.
3. The Governors of the Christian Church where the Magistrates profess the
Gospel, are the Magistrates which profess it, as bearing chief stroke in the
Civil Government; and the Pastors and Overseers [or Superintendents] as
principal in the Government Ecclesiastical.

IV.
4. Both these jurisdictions are established by the law of God, as necessary to
the Government and welfare of his Church; the one having principally the care
and charge of men's bodies and of their goods; to govern them according to the
Laws, and with the temporal Sword; the other having cure of souls and
consciences, to discharge their duties according to the Canons of the Church,
and with the sword of Gods word. Which jurisdiction ought so to be united, that
there be no confusion, and so to be divided, that there be no contrariety; but
jointly to sustain and defend each other, as the arms of the same body.

CHAP. II.
Of the Magistrate.
THe Magistrate ought so to watch over men's persons and their goods, as above
all things to provide that the honor and true worship of God may be preserved.
And as it is his duty to punish such as offend in Murder, Theft, and other sins
against the second Table; so ought he also to correct Blasphemers, Atheists and
Idolaters, which offend against the first; as also all those which contrary to
good order and the common peace, addict themselves to riot and unlawful games;
and on the other side he ought to cherish those which are well affected, and to
advance them both to wealth and honors.

CHAP. III.
Of Ecclesiastical functions in general.
Article I.
1. OF Officers Ecclesiastical, some have the charge to teach or instruct,
which are the Pastors and Doctors; others are as it were the eye to oversee the
life and manners of Christ's flock, which are the Elders; and to others there is
committed the disposing of the treasures of the Church, and of the poor man's
Box, which are the Deacons.

II.
2. The Church officers shall be elected by the Ministers and Elders, without
depriving the people of their right; and by the same authority shall be
discharged, suspended and deposed, according as it is set down in the Chapter
of Censures.

III.
3. None ought to take upon him any function in the Church without being
lawfully called unto it.

IV.
4. No Church Officer shall or ought to pretend any superiority or dominion
over his companions, viz. neither a Minister over a Minister, nor an Elder over
an Elder, nor a Deacon over a Deacon; yet so, that they give reverence and
respect unto each other, either according to their age, or according to those
gifts and graces which God has vouchsafed to one more then another.

V.
5. No man shall be admitted to any office in the Church, unless he be endowed
with gifts fit for the discharge of that office unto which he is called; nor
unless there be good testimony of his life and conversation; of which diligent
enquiry shall be made before his being called.

VI.
6. All these which shall enter upon any public charge in the Church, shall
first subscribe to the confession of the faith used in the reformed Churches,
and to the Discipline Ecclesiastical.

VII.
7. All those which are designed for the administration of any public office
in the Church, shall be first nominated by the Governors, or their
Lieutenants; after whose approbation they shall be proposed unto the people,
and if they meet not any opposition, they shall be admitted to their charge
within fifteen days after.

VIII.
8. Before the nomination and admission of such as are called unto employment
in the Church, they shall be first admonished of their duty; as well that which
concerns them in particular, as to be exemplary unto the people, the better
to induce them to live justly and religiously before God and man.

IX.
9. Although it appertain to all in general to provide that due honor and
obedience be done unto the Queens most excellent Majesty, to the Governors, to
their Lieutenants, and to all the officers of Justice; yet notwithstanding they
which bear office in the Church, ought chiefly to bestir themselves in that
behalf, as an example unto others.

X.
10. Those that bear office in the Church, shall not forsake their charge
without the privity and knowledge of the Consistory, and that they shall not be
dismissed, but by the same order by which they were admitted.

XI.
11. Those that bear office in the Church, shall employ themselves in visiting
the sick, and such as are in prison, to administer a word of comfort to them,
as also to all such as have need of consolation.

XII.
12. They shall not publish that which has been treated in the Consistory,
Colloquies, or Synods, either unto the parties whom it may concern, or to any
others, unless they be commanded so to do.

XIII.
13. They which bear office in the Church, if they abstain from the Lords
Supper, and refuse to be reconciled, having been admonished of it, and
persisting in their error, shall be deposed, and the causes of their deposition
manifested to the people.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Ministers.
Article I.
1. THose which aspire unto the Ministry, shall not be admitted to propose the
word of God, unless they be endued with learning, and have attained unto the
knowledge of the Greek and Hebrew tongues, if it be possible.

II.
2. The Ministers shall censure the proponents, having first diligently
examined them in the principal points of learning requisite unto a Minister.
And having heard them handle the holy Scriptures, as much as they think
necessary, if they be thought fit for the Ministry, they shall be sent unto
the Churches then being void, to propose the Word of God three or four times,
and that bare-headed. And if the Churches approve them, and desire them for
their Pastors, the Colloquie shall depute a Minister, to give them institution
by the imposition of Hands.

III.
3. The Ministers sent hither or resorting for refuge to these Isles, and
bringing with them a good testimony from the places whence they came, shall be
employed in those Churches which have most need of them, giving and receiving
the hand of association.

IV.
4. They which are elected and admitted into the Ministry, shall continue in
it all their lives, unless they be deposed for some fault by them committed.
And as for those which shall be hindered from the increasing of their Ministry,
either by sickness or by age, the honor and respect due unto it,
notwithstanding shall be theirs.

V.
5. The Ministers which fly hither as for refuge, and are employed in any
Parish during the persecution, shall not depart from hence until six months
after leave demanded; to the end, the Church be not unprovided of a Pastor.

VI.
6. The Ministers shall visit every household of their flocks, once in the
year at the least; but this at their discretion.

VII.
7. The Ministers shall propose the Word of God, every one in his rank, and
that once every month; in such a place and on such a day as shall be judged
most convenient.

VIII.
8. If there be any which is offended at the Preaching of any Minister, he
shall repair unto the said Minister within four and twenty hours for
satisfaction. And if he cannot receive it from the Ministers, he shall address
himself within eight days to the Consistory; in default whereof his
information shall not be admitted. If any difference arise, the Ministers shall
determine of it at their next conference.

CHAP. V.
Of Doctors and of Schoolmasters.
Article I.
1. THe office of a Doctor in the Church is next unto the Pastors. His charge
is to expound the Scripture in his Lectures, without applying it by way of
Exhortation. They are to be elected by the Colloquie.

II.
2. The Schoolmasters shall be first nominated by them, to whom the right of
nomination does belong, and shall be afterward examined by the Ministers; who
taking examination of their learning, shall also inform themselves of their
behavior; as viz. whether they be modest, and not debauched; to the end, that
may be an example to their Scholars, and that they by their ill Doctrine, they
bring not any Sect into the Church. After which examination if they are found
fit for the institution of youth, they shall be presented to the people.

III.
3. They shall instruct their Scholars in the fear of God, and in good
learning, in modesty and civility, that so their Schools may bring forth able
men, both for the Church and Commonwealth.

IV.
4. They shall instruct them in Grammar, Rhetoric and Logic, and of Classicke
authors, in the most pure both for learning and language; for fear lest
children reading lascivious and immodest writings, should be infected with
their venom.

V.
5. If they perceive any of their Scholars to betowardly and of good hope, they
shall advise their Parents to bring them up to the attainment of good learning;
or else shall obtain for them of the Governors and Magistrates, that they
maintain them at the public charge.

VI.
6. They shall cause their Scholars to come to Sermons and to Catechismes,
there to answer to the Minister; and they shall take their places near the
chair, to be seen of all, that so they may demean themselves orderly in the
Church of God.

VII.
7. The Ministers shall oversee the Schoolmasters, to the end that the youth
be well instructed; and for this cause shall hold their Visitations twice a
year, the better to understand how they profit. If it be thought expedient,
they may take with them some one or two of the neighbor Ministers.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Elders.
Article I.
1. THe Elders ought to preserve the Church in good order, together with the
Ministers; and shall take care especially that the Church be not destitute of
Pastors, of whom the care shall appertain to them to see that they be honestly
provided for. They shall watch also over all the flock, especially over that
part of it committed to them by the Consistory; diligently employing themselves
to admonish and reprehend such as are faulty, to confirm the good, and
reconcile such as are at difference.

II.
2. They shall certify all scandals to the Consistory.

III.
3. They shall visit (as much as in them (...)) all the households in their
division, before every communion; and once yearly with the Minister, to know
the better how they behave themselves in their several families. And if they
find among them any refractory and contentious persons which will not be
reconciled, to make a report of it to the Consistory.

IV.
4. They shall assemble in the Consistory with the Ministers; which Consistory
shall be holden, if it may be, every Sunday, or any other day convenient, to
handle causes of the Church. And those of them which are elected to go unto the
Colloquies and Synods with the Ministers, shall not fail to go at the day
appointed.

CHAP. VII.
Of the ^eacons.
Article I.
1. THe Deacons shall be appointed in the Church to gather the benevolence of
the people, and to distribute it according to the necessities of the poor, by
the directions of the Consistory.

II.
2. They shall gather these benevolences after Sermons, faithfully endeavoring
the good and welfare of the poor; and if need require, they shall go unto the
houses of those men which are more charitably inclined, to collect their
bounties.

III.
3. They shall distribute nothing without direction from the Consistory, but in
case of urgent necessity.

IV.
4. The alms shall be principally distributed unto those of the faithful,
which are natural Inhabitants; and if there be a surplusage, they may dispose
it to the relief of strangers.

V.
5. For the avoiding of suspicion, the Deacons shall keep a register both of
their Receipts and their disbursements, and shall cast up his accouncs in the
presence of the Minister, and one of the Elders.

VI.
6. The Deacons shall give up their accounts every Communion day, after the
evening Sermon, in the presence of the Ministers, the Elders, and as many of
the people as will be assistant; who therefore shall have warning to be there.

VII.
7. They shall take order that the poor may be relieved without begging; and
shall take care that young men fit for labor be set unto some occupation; of
which they shall give notice to the officers of Justice, that so no person be
permitted to go begging from door to door.

VIII.
8. They shall provide for those of the poor which are sick or in prison, to
comfort and assist them in their necessity.

IX.
9. The shall be assistant in the Consistory with the Ministers and Elders,
there to propose unto them the necessities of the poor, and to receive their
directions; as also in the election of other Deacons.

X.
10. There ought to be Deacons in every Parish, unless the Elders will take
upon them the charge of collecting the alms, and distributing thereof amongst
the poor.

The Liturgy of the Church, wherein there is contained the preaching of the
Gospel, the administration of the Sacraments, the Laws of Marriage, the
Visitation of the Sick, and somewhat also of Burial.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Preaching of the Gospel.
Article I.
1. THe people shall be assembled twice every Sunday in the Church, to hear the
Preaching of the Gospel, and to be assistant at the public prayers. They
shall also meet together once or twice a week, on those days which shall be
thought most convenient for the several Parishes; the Master of every household
bringing with him those of his family.

II.
2. The people being assembled before Sermon, there shall be read a Chapter out
of the Canonical books of Scripture only, and not of the Apocrypha; and it
shall be read by one which bears office in the Church, or at the least, by
one of honest conversation.

III.
3. During the prayer, every one shall be upon his knees, with his head
uncovered. Also during the singing of the Psalms, the administration of the
Sacraments; and whilst the Minister is reading of his text, every one shall be
uncovered, and shall attentively observe all that is done and said.

IV.
4. The Ministers every Sunday after dinner shall Catechize, and shall choose
some text of Scripture suitable to that section which they are to handle; and
shall read in the beginning of that exercise the said text, as the foundation
of the Doctrine contained in that Section.

V.
5. The Church shall be locked immediately after Sermon and the public
prayers, to avoid superstition; and the benches shall be orderly disposed, that
every one may hear the voice of the Preacher.

VI.
6. The Churches being dedicated to Gods service, shall not be employed to
profane uses; and therefore entreaty shall be made to the Magistrate, that no
Civil Courts be there holden.

CHAP. IX.
Of Baptism.
Article I.
1. THe Sacrament of Baptism shall be administered in the Church, after the
Preaching of the Word, and before the Benediction.

II.
2. The Parents of the Infants, if they are not in some journey, shall be near
the Infant, together with the Sureties, to present it unto God; and shall
jointly promise to instruct it, according as they are obliged.

III.
3. No man shall be admitted to be a Surety in holy Baptism, which has not
formerly received the Communion, or which is not fit to receive it, and does
promise so to do upon the next convenience, whereof he shall bring an
attestation if he be a stranger.

IV.
4. They which intend to bring an Infant unto holy Baptism, shall give
competent warning unto the Minister.

V.
5. The Minister shall not admit of such names as were used in the time of
Paganism, the names of Idols, the names attributed to God in Scripture, or
names of office, as Angel, Baptist, Apostle.

VI.
6. In every Parish there shall be kept a Register of such as are Baptized,
their Fathers, Mothers, Sureties, and the day of it; as also of Marriages and
Funerals, which shall be carefully preserved.

CHAP. X.
Of the Lords Supper.
Article I.
1. THe holy Supper of our Lord Jesus Christ shall be celebrated four times a
year, viz. at Easter or the first Sunday of April, the first Sunday of July,
the first Sunday of October, and the first Sunday of January, and that after
the Sermon, in which express mention shall be made of the business then in
hand, or at least a touch of it in the end.

II.
2. The manner of it shall be this, The Table shall be set in some convenient
place near the Pulpit; the people shall communicate in order, and that sitting,
as is most conformable to the first institution; or else standing, as is
accustomed in some places; the men first, and afterward the women; none shall
depart the place until after Thanksgiving and the Benediction.

III.
3. They which intend to be communicants, shall first be catechized by the
Minister, that so they may be able to render a reason of their faith. They
ought also to understand the Lords* Prayer the Articles of their belief, the
Ten Commandments, or at the least the substance of them. They shall also
abjure the Pope, the Mass, and all superstition and Idolatry.

IV.
4. No man shall be admitted to the Lords Supper, which is not of the years of
discretion, and which has not a good testimony of his life and conversation,
and which will not promise to submit himself unto the Discipline.

V.
5. If any be accused before the Justice to have committed any crime, he shall
be admonished to forbear the Supper until he be acquitted.

VI.
6. The Minister shall not receive any of another Parish without a testimony
from the Pastor, or if there be no Pastor, from one of the Elders.

VII.
7. They which refuse to be reconciled, shall be debarred the Communion.

VIII.
8. The people shall have warning fifteen days at the least before the
Communion, to the end they may be prepared for it.

IX.
9. Besides the first examination which they undergo, before they are
partakers of the Lords Supper, every one shall again be Catechized, at the
least once a year, at the best convenience of the Minister, and of his people.

CHAP. XI.
Of Fasts and Thanksgiving.
Article I.
1. THe public Fasts shall be celebrated in the Church when the Colloquie or
the Synod think it most expedient, as a day of rest; in which there shall be a
Sermon both in the morning and the afternoon, accompanied with Prayers, reading
of the Scripture, and singing of Psalms; all this to be disposed according to
the occasions and causes of the Fast, and by the authority of the Magistrate.

II.
2. Solemn Thanksgiving also shall be celebrated after the same manner as the
Fast, the whole exercise being suitable to the occasion of the same.

CHAP. XII.
Of Marriage.
Article I.
1. ALL contracts of Marriage shall be made in the presence of Parents,
Friends, Guardians, or the Masters of the parties, and with their consent, as
also in the presence of the Minister, or of an Elder, or a Deacon, before whom
the contract shall be made, with invocation on the name of God, without which
it is no contract. And as for those which are sui juris, the presence of the
Minister, or of the Elders, or of the Deacons, shall be also necessary for good
orders sake. And from a promise thus made, there shall be no departing.

II.
2. Children and such as are in Wardship, shall not make any promise of
Marriage, wthout the consent of their Fathers and Mothers, or of their Gardians
in whose power they are.

III.
3. If the Parents are so unreasonable as not to agree unto a thing so holy,
the Consistory shall give them such advice as is expedient; to which advice if
they not hearken, they shall have recourse unto the Magistrate.

IV.
4. They also which have been Married shall owe so much respect unto their
Parents, as not to marry again without their leave; in default whereof* they
shall incut the censures of the Church.

V.
5. No stranger shall be affianced without license from the Governors or their
Lieutenants.

VI.
6. The degrees of consanguinity and of affinity prohibited in the word of God,
shall be carefully looked into, by such as purpose to be married.

VII.
7. Those which are affianced, shall promise, and their Parents with them, that
they will be married within 3 months after the contract, or within 6 months
in case either of them have occasion of a Journey; if they obey not, they shall
incur the censures of the Church.

VIII.
8. The Banes shall be asked successively three Sundays in the Church, where
the parties do inhabit; and if they marry in another Parish, they shall carry
with them a testimony from the Minister by whom their Banes were published;
without which they shall not marry.

IX.
9. For the avoiding of the abuse and profanation of the Lord's Day, and the
manifest prejudice done unto the Word of God, on those day^^ wherein Marriage
has been solemnized; it is fo^^d expedient, that it be no longer solemnized
upon the Sunday, but upon some Lecture days which happen in the week only.

X.
10. If any purpose to forbid the Banes, he shall first address himself ^^to
the Minister, or two of the Elders, by whom he shall be appointed to appear in
the next Consistory, there to allege the reasons of his so doing, whereof the
Consistory shall be judge. If he appeal from thence, the cause shall be
referred unto the next Colloquie.

XI.
11. Those which have too familiarly conversed together before their espousals,
shall not be permitted to marry before they have made confession of their
fault: if the crime be notoriously public, before the whole congregation; if
less known, the Consistory shall determine of it.

XII.
12. Widows which are minded to re-marry, shall not be permitted to contract
themselves until six months after the decease of their dead husbands; as well
for honesties sake, and their own good report, as to avoid diverse
inconveniences. And as for men, they also shall be admonished to attend some
certain time, but without constraint.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the Visitation of the sick.
Article I.
1. THose which are afflicted with sickness, shall in due time advertise them
which bear office in the Church; to the end, that by they them may be visited
and comforted.

II.
2. Those which are sick shall in due time be admonished to make their Wills,
while as yet they be in perfect memory, and that in the presence of their
Minister or Overseer, or other honest and sufficient persons, which shall
witness to the said Wills or Testaments, that so they may be approved and stand
in force.

CHAP. XIV.
Of Burial.
Article I.
1. THe Corpse shall not be carried, nor interred within the Church, but in the
Churchyard only, appointed for the buryall of the faithful.

II.
2. The Parents, Friends and Neighbors of the deceased, and all such whom the
Parents shall entreat, as also the Ministers, if they may conveniently (as
members of the Church and Brethren, but not in relation to their charge no more
then the Elders and the Deacons) shall accompany the body in good fashion unto
the grave. In which action there shall neither be a Sermon, nor Prayers, nor
sound of Bell, nor any other ceremony whatsoever.

III.
3. The bodies of the dead shall not be interred without notice given unto the
Minister.

IV.
4. The bodies of those which die excommunicate, shall not be interred among
the faithful without the appointment of the Magistrate.

CHAP. XV.
Of the Church censures.
Article I.
1. ALL those which are of the Church, shall be subject unto the censures of
the same; as well they which bear office in it, as they which have none.

II.
2. The sentence of Abstention from the Lords Supper, shall be published only
in case of Heresy, Schism, or other such notorious crime, whereof the
Consistory shall be judge.

III.
3. Those which receive not the Admonitions and Reprebensions made unto them in
the word of God, which continue hardened without hope of returning into the
right way, after many exhortations; if otherwise they may not be reclaimed,
shall be excommunicate: wherein the proceeding shall be for three Sundays
together, after this ensuing manner.

IV.
4. The first Sunday the people shall be exhorted to pray for the offender,
without naming the person or the crime.

V.
5. The second Sunday the person shall be named, but not the crime. The third,
the person shall be named, his offense published, and himself be excommunicate.
Which sentence shall stand in force as long as he continues in his obstinacy.

VI.
6. Those which are excommunicate, are to be cast out of the bosom of the
Church, that they may neither be admitted unto public Prayer, nor to the
Preaching of the Gospel.

VII.
7. They which bearing public office in the Church, become guilty of any
crime, which in a private person might deserve an Abstention from the Lords
table, shall be suspended from their charge; and they which are found guilty of
any crime, which in a private person might merit excommunication, shall be
deposed.

VIII.
8. In like manner, those which are convict d of such a fault, by reason
whereof they be thought unfit to exercise their functions to the edification of
the Church, shall be deposed.

IX.
9. If the offender repent him of his sin, and demand absolution of the
Consistory, they shall diligently inform themselves of his conversation;
whereupon there shall be notice of it given unto the people the Sunday before
he be admitted, and shall make acknowledgment, to be restored unto the peace of
the Church.

X.
10. The second Sunday he shall be brought before the Pulpit, and in some
eminent place, where he shall make confession of his ^in; demanding pardon of
God, and of the Church with his own mouth, in confirmation of that which the
Minister shall say of his repentance.

CHAP. XVI.
Of Ecclesiastical Assemblies for the rule and government of the Church.
Article I.
1. IN all Ecclesiastical Assemblies, the Ministers shall preside as well to
collect the suffrages as to command silence, to pro^ounge sentence according to
the plurality of voices, as also to denounce the censures; unto which himself
as well as others shall be subject.

II.
2. The censures shall be denounced with all mecknesse of spirit.

III.
3. The Ecclesiastical Assemblies shall commence and end with prayer and
thanksgiving; this is to be done by him that is then President.

IV.
4. All they which are there assembled, shall speak every one in his own order,
without interrupting one another.

V.
5. None shall depart the place without license.

VI.
6. All matters of Ecclesiastical cognizance shall be there treated and
decided according to the word of God, without encroaching upon the civil
jurisdiction.

VII.
7. If there happen any business of importance, which cannot be dispatched in
the lesser Assemblies, they shall be referred unto the greater. In like manner,
if any think himself agrieved by the lesser Assemblies, he may appeal unto the
greater. Provided, that nothing be handled in the greater Assemblies, which
has not been formerly treated in the lesser, unless in case only of remission.

VIII.
8. There shall be kept a Register of all things memorable done in the
Assemblies; and a Scribe appointed in each of them for that purpose.

IX.
9. The Ecclesiastical Assemblies in the main body of them shall not
intermeddle with business appertaining to the Civil Courts; notwithstanding
that, they may be members of the same as private persons, but this not often,
viz. when there is a business of great consequence to be determined.

X.
10. He that is banished from the Lords table, or suspended from his office by
one Assembly, shall be readmitted only by the same.

CHAP. XVII.
Of the simple or unmixt Assembly, which is the Consistory.
Article I.
1. THe Consistory is an Assembly of the Ministers and Elders of every Church,
for the government of the same, for superintendency over men's manners, and
their doctrine; for the correction of vices, and the encouragement of the good.
In this there may be assistants both the Deacons and the Proponents, those viz.
which are nominated to be Ministers, the better to fashion them unto the
Discipline and guidance of the Church.

II
2. The Consistory shall be assembled every Sunday, or any other day and (...)
convenient, to consult about the business of the Church.

III.
3. No man shall be called unto the Church without the advice of the Minister
and two Elders at the least, in case of necessity; and every Elder or Sexton
shall give notice unto those of his division, according as he is appointed.

IV.
4. The Elders shall not make report unto the Consistory of any secret faults,
but shall observe the order commanded by our Savior, Mat. 18. Reproving in
secret such faults as are secret.

V.
5. Neither the Minister nor the Elder shall name unto the Consistory those men
of whose faults they make report, without direction from the Consistory.

VI.
6. The censures of the Consistory shall be denounced on some convenient day
before every Communion; at which time they shall also pass their opinions on
the School master.

VII.
7. The Consistory shall make choice of those which go to the Colloquie.

VIII.
8. The correction of crimes and scandals appertains unto the Consistory, so
far as to excommunication.

IX.
9. In Ecclesiastical business the Consistory shall make enquiry into such
crimes as are brought before them, and shall adjure the parties in the name of
God to speak the truth.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of Assemblies compound, viz. the Colloquies and the Synods.
Article I.
1. IN the beginning of the Assembly, the Ministers and Elders which ought to
be assistant, shall be called by name.

II.
2. The persons appointed to be there, shall not fail to make their appearance,
upon pain of being censured by the next Assembly, unto which they shall be
summoned.

III.
3. The Articles of the precedent Assembly shall be read before they enter upon
any business, to know the better how they have been put in execution. And at
the end of every Assembly, the Elders shall take a copy of that which is there
enacted, that so they may all direct themselves by the same rule.

IV.
4. In every Assembly there shall be one appointed for the Scribe, to register
the acts of the Assembly.

V.
5. In the end of every Assembly, there shall a favorable censure pass, of
the Consistories in general, of the Ministers and Elders which shall be there
assistant; and principally of that which has been done in the Assembly, during
the Sessions.

VI.
6. The sentence of Excommunication shall be awarded only in these Assemblies.

VII.
7. The Justices shall be entreated to intermit the course of pleading, both
ordinary and extraordinary, during the Colloquies and the Synods; to the end,
that those which ought to be assistant, may not be hindered.

CHAP. XIX
(...) Of the Colloquie.
Article I.
1. THe Colloquie is an Assembly of the Ministers and Elders delegated from
each several Church in either Istand, for the governance of those Churches,
and the advancement of the Discipline.

II.
2. The Colloquies shall be assembled four times a year, viz. ten days before
every Communion; upon which day the word of God shall be proposed, according to
the form before established, Chap. Of Ministers.

III.
3. The Ministers of Alderney and Serke shall make their appearance once yearly
at the least, at the Colloquie of Guernzey; but for that one time it may be
such as shall most stand with their convenience.

IV.
4. The Colloquie shall make choice of those which are to go unto the Synod,
and shall give unto them Letters of credence.

CHAP. XX.
Of the Synod.
Article I.
1. THe Synod is an Assembly of Ministers and Elders delegated from the
Colloquies of both Islands.

II.
2. The Synod shall be assembled from two years to two years in Jarsey and
Gu^rnzey by turns, if there be no necessity to exact them oftener; in which
case those of that Isle where the Synod is thought necessary, shall set
forwards the business by the advice of both Colloquies.

III.
3. There shall be chosen in every Synod, a Minister to moderate in the
Assembly, and a Clerk to register the acts.

IV.
4. The Minister of the place where the Assembly shall be holden, shall
conceive a prayer in the beginning of the first Session.

V.
5. The Colloquies shall in convenient time, mutually advertise each other in
general of those things, which they have to motion in the Synod; to the end
that every one may consider of them more advisedly. Which said advertisement
shall be given before the Colloquie, which precedeth the Synod, in as much as
possible it may. And as for matters of the lesser consequence, they shall be
imparted on the first day of the Session.

The Conclusion.
Those Articles which concern the Discipline, are so established, that for as
much as they are founded upon the word of God, they are adjudged immutable. And
as for those which are merely Ecclesiastical, i. e. framed and confirmed for
the commodity of the Church, according to the circumstance of persons, time and
place; they may be altered by the same authority, by which they were contrived
and ratifyed.

THE END.
CHAP. V.
(1) Annotations on the Discipline. (2) No place in it for the Kings Supremacy.
(3) Their love to Parity, as well in the State as in the Church. (4) The
covering of the head a sign of liberty. (5) The right hands of fellowship. (6)
Agenda what it is, in the notion of the Church; The intrusion of the Eldership
into Domestical affairs. (7) Millets case. (8) The brethren superstitious in
giving names to children. (9) Ambling Communions. (10) The holy Discipline made
a a third note of the Church. (11) Marriage at certain times prohibited by the
Discipline. (12) Dead bodies anciently not interred in Cities. (13) The Baptism
of Bells. (14) The brethren under pretense of scandal, usurp upon the civil
Courts. (15) The Discipline incroacheth on our Church by stealth. (16) A
caution to the Prelates.

SIc nata Romana superstitio; quorum ritus si percens^s, ridenda quam multa,
multa etiam miseranda sunt: as in an equal case, Minutius. This is that Helena
which lately had almost occasioned (...) to put all the cities of our Greece
into combustion: This that Lemanian Idol, before which all the Churches of the
world, were commanded to fall down and worship: this that so holy Discipline,
so essential to the constitution of a Church, that without it, Faith and the
Sacraments were to be judged unprofitable. Egregiam vero laudem and spolia
ampla. How infinitely are we obliged to those most excellent contrivers, that
first exhibited unto the world so neat a model of Church Government! with what
praises must we celebrate the memory of those, which with such violent industry
endeavored to impose upon the world, these trim inventions! But this I leave
unto your Lordship to determine: proceeding to some scattered Annnotations on
the precedent text; wherein I shall not censure their devices, but expound them.

Cap. 1. 3. As bearing chief stroke in the Civil Government.] For in the
Government Ecclesiastical, they decline his judgment as incompetent: An
excellent instance whereof we have in the particular of David Black, a
Minister of Scotland, who having in a Sermon traduced the person and government
of the King: was by the King commanded to appear before him. But on the other
side, the Church revoked the cause unto their tribunal, and jussit eum judicium
illud declinare, says mine Author. True it is, that in the next chapter they
afford him power to correct Blasphemers, Atheists, and Idolaters: but this only
as the executioners of their decrees; and in the punishment of such whom their
assemblies have condemned. On the other side, they take unto themselves, the
designation of all those, which bear public office in the Church: Chap. 3 7.
The appointing and proclaiming all public fasts: Chap. 11. 1. The presidency
in their Assemblies: Chap. 16. 1. The calling of their Councels: Chap. 19. 20.
Matters in which consists the life of Sovereignty. No marvel then if that
party so much dislike the Supremacy of Princes in causes Ecclesiastical: as
being ex diametro opposed to the Consistorian Monarchy. A lesson taught them by
their first Patriarch in his Commentaries on the 7. chapter of the Prophet
Amos, verse. 13. in these words, and in this particular. Qui tantopere
extulerunt Henricum Angliae (understand the 8. of the name) certe fuerunt
homines inconsiderati: dederunt enim illi summam rerum omnium potestatem; and
hoc me graviter s^mper vulneravit. Afterward he is content to permit them so
much power as is granted them in the 2. chapter of this Book of Discipline: but
yet will not have then deal too much in spiritualities. Hoc (says he)
summopere requiritur a regibus, ut gladio quo praediti sunt, utantur, ad cultum
dei asserendum. Sed interea sunt homines inconsiderati, qui fac^unt eos, nimis
spirituales. So he, and so his followers since.

Chap. 3. 4. No Church officer shall or ought to pretend any superiority or
dominion over his companions.] And in the chapt. 1. 2. No one Church shall
pretend, etc. And this indeed, this parity is that which all their projects did
so mainly drive at: these men conceiving of Religion as Philosophers of
friendship; cum amicitia semper pares aut inveniat, aut faciat: as in Minutius.
A parity by those of this party so earnestly affected in the Church: the better
to introduce it also into the State. This was it which principally occasioned
G. Buchanan in the Epistle before his libellous Book De jure regn^, to reckon
those common titles of Majesty and Highness, usually attributed unto Princes,
inter barbarismos Aulicos, amongst the solecisms and absurdities of Courtship.
This was it, which taught Paraeus and the rest that there was a power in the
inferior Magistrates to restrain the person of the Prince; and in some cases
to depose him. This was it, which often moved the Scottish Ministry to put the
sword into the hands of the multitude: and I am verily persuaded that there is
no one thing which makes the brethren so affected to our Parliaments, as this,
that it is a body, wherein the Commons have so much sway.

Chap. 3. 6. Shall first subscribe to the confession of the Faith used in the
reformed Churches] But the reformed Churches are very many, and their
confessions in some points very different. The Lutheran Confessions are for
consubstantiation and ubiquity: the English is for Homilies, for Bishops, for
the Kings Supremacy: and so not likely to be intended. The confession then here
intended, must be that only of Geneva, which Church alone is thought by some of
them to have been rightly and perfectly reformed.

Chap. 4. 1. To propose the Word of God.] The fashion of it, this; such as by
study have enabled themselves for the holy Ministry; upon the vacancy of any
Church, have by the Collequie, some time appointed, to make trial (as they call
it) of their gilt. The day come, and the Colloquie assembled, they design him a
particular place of Scripture, for the ground of his discourse: which done, and
the proponent (for so they term him) commanded to withdraw, they pass their
censures on him, every one of them in their order: if they approve of him, they
then send him also to propose unto the people, as in the second Article.

Chap. 4. (...). And that bareheaded] And this it may be, because Candidates;
p(...)venture, because not yet initiated. For themselves having once attained
the honor to be Masters in Israel; they permit their heads to be warmly
covered: a thing not in use only by the Ministers of the Geneva way; but (as my
self have seen it) among the Priests and Jesuits. I know the putting on of the
hat is a sign of liberty; that the Laconians being made free Denizens of
Lacedemon, would never go into the battle, nisi pileati, without their hats:
and that the Gent. of Rome did use to manumit their slaves, by giving them a
cap; whereupon ad pileum vocare, is as much as to set one free. Yet on the
other side, I think it little prejudicial to that liberty, not to make such
full use of it, in the performance of those pious duti(...) True it is, that by
this book of Discipline the people are commanded to be uncovered, during the
Prayers, the reading of the Text, the ^inging of the Psalms, and the
administration of the Sacraments. Chap. 8. 3. But when I call to mind, that S.
Paul has told us this, 1 Cor. 11. That every man praying or prophesying with
his head covered dishonors his head: I shall applaud the pious modesty of
the English ministry; who keep their heads uncovered, as well when they
prophecy as when they pray.

To give them institution by imposition of hands.] A ceremony not used only in
the Ordination (if I may so call it) of their Ministers, but in that also of
the Elder and of the Deacons: persons merely Laical. But this in mine opinion
very improperly: for when the Minister whose duty it is, instals them in their
charge; with this solemn form of words he does perform it! Je to impose les
mains, etc. viz. I lay mine hands upon you in the name of the Consistory; by
which imposition of hands you are advertised, that you are set apart from the
affairs of the world etc. and if so, how then can these men receive this
imposition, who for the whole year of their charge, employ themselves in their
former occupations, at times; and that expired, return again unto them
altogether? A mere mockage of a reverent ceremony.

Chap. 4. 3. Giving and receiving the hand of Association] An ordinance founded
on that in the 2. to the Gal. 5. viz. They gave unto me and Barnabas the right
hands of fellowship: An emblem, as it is noted by Theod. Beza, on the place,
of a perfect agreement and consent in the holy faith; Quod Symbolum esset
nostrae in Evangelii doctrina summae cousensionis: and much also to this
purpose that of learned Chrysostom; (...): This phrase of speech borrowed, no
question, from the customs of those times; wherein the giving of the hand, was
a most certain pledge of faith and amity. So Anchises in the third book of
Aeneids Dextram dat juveni, atque animum praesenti pignore firmat: so in
another place of the same author; Jungimus hospitio dextras. Commissaque
dextera dextrae, in the Epistle of Phillis to Demophoon. Whereupon it is the
note of the Grammarians, that as the front or forehead is sacred to the
Genius; and the knees to mercy: so is the right hand consecrated unto faith.
But here in Guernzey there is a further use made of this ceremony; which is an
abjuration of all other arts of preaching, or of government, to which the party
was before accustomed: and an absolute devoting of himself to them, their
ordinances and constitutions whatsoever. So that if a Minister of the Church of
England should be perchance received among them: by this hand of association,
he must in a manner condemn that Church of which he was.

Chap. 5. 5. That they maintain them at the public charge.] A bounty very
common in both Islands: and ordered in this manner; the business is by one of
the Assembly expounded to the three Estates, viz. that N. N. may be sent abroad
to the Universities of France or England, and desrayed upon the common purse.
If it be granted, then must the party bring in sufficient sureties to be bound
for him; that at the end of the time limited, he shall repair into the Islands,
and make a profer of his service in such places, as they think fit for him; if
they accept it, he is provided for at home: if not, he is at liberty to seek
his fortune.

Chap. 6. 3 How they behave themselves in their several families] By which
clause the Elders authorized to make enquiry into the lives and conversations
of all about them: not only aiming at it by the voice of fame, but by tampering
with their neighbors, and examining their servants. It is also given them in
charge, at their admission into office; to make diligent enquiry, whether those
in their division, have private prayers both morning and evening in their
houses; whether they constantly say grace, both before meat and after it; if
not, to make report of it to the Consistory. A diligence, in my mind, both
dangerous and ^awcy.

Chap. 8. 1. To be assistant at the public prayers] The public prayers here
intended, are those which the Minister conceives according to the present
occasion: beginning with a short confession, and so descending to crave the
assistance of Gods Spirit in the exercise, or Sermon then in hand. For the
form, the Geneva Psalter tells us, that it shall be left alla discretion du
Ministre, to the Ministers discretion: the form of Prayers, and of Marriage,
and of administration of the Sacraments, there put down; being types only and
examples, whereby the Minister may be directed in the general. The learned
Architect which took such great pains in making the Altar Damascenum, tells us
in that piece of his, that in the Church of Scotland there is also an Agenda,
or form of prayer and of ceremony: but for his part having been 13 years a
Minister, he never used it. Totos ego tredecem annos quibus functus sum
Ministerio, sive in Sacramentis, and iis quae extant in agenda, nunquam usus
sum: and this he speaks as he conceives it, to his commendation. Where by the
way, Agenda, (it is a word of the latter times) is to be understood for a set
form in the performance of those ministerial duties, quae statis temporibus
agenda sunt, as mine Author has it. In the Capitular of Charles the great, we
have mention of this word Agenda, in diverse places: once for all, let that
suffice in the 6 book, Can. 234. viz. Si quiis Presbyter in consult^ Episcopo,
Agendam in quolibet loco voluerint celebrare; ipse honori suo contrarius
extitit.

Chap. 8. 5. The Churches shall be locked immediately after Sermon] The
pretense is as it follows in the next words, to avoid superstition: but
having nothing in their Churches to provoke superstition; the caution is
unnecessary. So destitute are they all both of ornament and beauty. The true
cause is, that those of that party are offended with the ancient custom of
stepping aside into the Temples, and their pouring out the soul in private
prayer unto God: because for sooth it may imply, that there is some secret
virtue in those places more then in rooms of ordinary use; which they are
peremptory not to give them.

Chap. 9. 1. After the preaching of the word] And there are two reasons why the
Sacrament of Baptism should be long delayed: the one because they falsely think,
that without the preaching of the word there is no* (...) the other to take
away the opinion of the necessity of holy Baptism; and the administration of it
in private houses in case of such necessity. In this strictness very resolute,
and not to be bended with persuasions, scarce with power. As our being in the
Isle of Gue^^ay, the Ministers presented unto his Lordship a catalogue of
grievances against the civil Magistrate. And this among the rest, that they
had entermedled with the administration of the Sacraments. This certainly was
novum orimen O. Caesar, and ante hoc temp^^ inauditum: but upon examination it
proved only to be thus. A poor man of the Vale had a child born unto him weak
and ^ickly; not like to live till the public exercise; whereupon he defires
Millet the Incumbent there, that he would Baptize it: but after two or three
denials made, the poor man complained unto the Bailiffe; by whom the Minister
was commanded to do his duty. This was all, and crimine ab un^ disce omnes.

Chap. 9. 5. Names used in Paganism] Nor mean they here, such names as occur in
Poets, as Hector, Hercules, etc. though names of this sort occur frequently
in S. Paul's Epistles: but even such names as formerly have been in use amongst
our ancestors; as Richard, Edmund, William, and the like. But concerning this
behold a story wherein our great contriver Snape was a chief party, as I find
in the book called Dangerous positions, etc. verified upon the oath of one of
the brotherhood. Hodkinson of Northampton, having a child to be baptized,
repaired to Snape to do it for him: and he consented to the motion, but with
promise, that he should give it some name allowed in Scripture. The child
being brought, and that holy action so far forwards, that they were come to the
naming of the child, they named it Richard: which was the name of the Infants
Grandfather by the Mothers side. Upon this a stop was made, nor would he be
persuaded to baptize the child; unless the name of it were altered: which
when the Godfather refused to do, he forsook the place, and the child was
carried back unchristned. To this purpose, but not in the same words, the whole
history. But if the name of Richard be so Paganish, what then shall we conceive
of these; The Lord is near, More-tryall, Joy-again, Free-gift, From-above, and
others of that stamp? are they also extant in the Scripture?

Chap. 10. 2. And that sitting etc. or standing etc] In this our Synodists*
more moderate, then those of the Netherlands, who have licensed it to be
administered unto men, even when they are walking. For thus Angelocrator in his
Epitome of the Dutch Synods, cap. 13. art. 8. viz. Liberum est stando, sedendo,
vel eundo, coenam celebrare, non autem geniculando: and the reason,
questionless, the same in both; ob (...) periculum; for fear of bread-worship.
I had before heard sometimes of ambling Communions; but till I met with that
Epitome, I could not slumble on the meaning. A strange and stubborn generation;
and stiffer in the hams, then any Elephant: such as will neither bow the knee
to the Name of Jesus, nor kneel to him in his Sacraments.

Chap. 10. 4. which will not promise to submit himself unto the Discipline] A
thing before enjoined in the subscription to it, upon all such as take upon
them any public office in the Church: but here exacted in the submission to it
of all such as desire to be Communicants. The reason is, because about that
time it seemed good unto the brethren to make the holy Discipline, as essential
to the being of a Church, as the preaching of the word and administration of
the Sacraments; and so essential, that no Church could possibly subsist without
it. For thus Beza in his Epistle unto Cixxe, Anno 1572 Magnum est Dei munus
quod unam and religionem pu^am, and (...), (doctrinae viz: retinendae vinculum)
in Scotiam intulistis. Sicobsecro and obtestor, haec duo simul retinete, ut uno
amisso alterum diu permanere non posse, semper memineritis. So he Epist. 79.
According unto which Doctrine Mr. Dela-Marshe, in his new Catechism, which
lately by the authority of the Colloquie, he imposed upon the Churches in the
Isle of Gu^inzy: has joined this holy Discipline, as a chief note, together
with the others.

Chap. 12. 9. That it be no longer solemnized upon the Sunday] Wherein (so
scarcely did the same Spirit rule them both) the Dutch Synodists have showed
themselves more moderate, then these contrivers, they having licensed marriage
on all days equally; except such as are destinate to the Lords Supper, and to
solemn fasts; Quovis die matrimonia confermari and celebrari poterunt, modo
concio ad populum habeatur: exceptis c(...) diebus, and jejunio sacratis. Cap.
ult. art. 8. By both of them it is agreed that marriage be celebrated on such
days only, on which there is a Sermon: and if the Sermon be any thing to the
purpose, I am content they should expect it. Only I needs must note with what
little reason these men and their abettors have so often quarrelled our Church,
for the restraint of marriage, at some certain seasons: whereas they think it
fit, at some times to restrain it in their own. Well fare therefore our
neighbors of the Church of Scotland: men very indifferent both for the time,
and for the place. For the time; Nu^^um tempus tam sacrum quod ejus
celebratione polluatur: and ^or the place, immo and in praetor^o vel quovis
loco publico* etc. and extra sacra and publicum conventum totius ecclesiae. So
they, that made the Altar Damascenum. p. 872. 865. 866.

Chap. 14. 1. The Corpse shall not be carried ^r interred within the Church]
Which prohibition, whether it has more in it of the Jew or of the Gentile, is
not easy to determine. Amongst the Jews it was not lawful for the Priest to
be present at a Funeral; or for the dead corpse to be interred within the camp:
and on the other side, it was by law in Athens and in Rome forbidden, either to
burn their dead, or to bury them within their Cities. In urbe nesipelito neve
u^ito, says the Law of the 12 Tables; nor do I see for what cause this
generation should prohibit the dead bodies entrance into the Church, and to
permit it in the Churchyards. If for the avoiding of superstition, it is well
known that not the Church only, but the Churchyards are also consecrated. The
reason why they will not bury in the Church is only their desire and love of
parity; the Church will hardly be capacious enough to bury all: and since by
death and nature all are equal, why should that honor be vouchsafed unto the
rich, and not unto the poor? Out of this love of parity it is, that in the next
article, they have forbidden Funeral Sermons; wherein the Dutch Synods, and
those men most perfectly concur* as appears in that collection, cap. 11. 5.
For if such Sermons be permitted, the common people will be forsooth aggrieved,
and think themselves neglected: Ditiores enim hoc officio cobonestabuntur,
neglect is pauperibus.

Chap. 14. 2. Nor any prayers, nor sound of bell] The last for love of parity;
but this for fear of superstition. For prayers at the burial of the dead, may
possibly be mistook, for prayers for the dead; and so the world may dream
perhaps of Purgatory Thesilencing of bells is somewhat juster, because that
music has been superstitiously and foolishly employed in former times, and in
this very case at Funerals. It is well known with what variety of ceremonies
they were baptized and consecrated (as in the Church of Rome they still are) by
the Bishops. Whereby the people did conceive a power inherent in them, not only
for the scattering of tempests, in which cases they are also rung amongst them:
but for the repulsing of the Devil and his Ministers. Blessings which are
intreared of the Lord for them, as appears by one of those many prayers,
prescribed in that form of consecration; by the Roman Pontifical, viz. ut per
factum illorum procul pellantur omnes insidiae inimici, fragor grandinum,
procella turbinum, etc. Whilst therefore the people was superstitious in the
use of bells, the restraint of them was allowable: but being now a matter only
of solemnity, it argues no little superstition to restrain them.

Chap. 16. 6. Without encroaching on the civil jurisdiction] And well indeed it
were, if this clause were intended to be observed: for in the 17. chap. and 8.
art. it is decreed, that the correction of crimes and scandals appertains
unto the Consistory. What store of grist, the word Crime, will bring unto their
mils, I leave unto your Lordship to interpret: sure I am, that by this of
seandal, they draw almost all causes within their cognizance. A matter
testified by his late most excellent Majesty in a Remonstrance to the
Parliament: viz. that the Puritan Ministers in Scotland had brought all causes
within their jurisdiction; saying, that it was the Churches office to judge of
scandal, and there could be no kind of fault or crime committed, but there was
a scandal in it, either against God, the King, or their neighbor. Two
instances of this, that counterfeit Eusebius, Philadelphus in his late Pamphlet
against my Lord of St. Andrews, does freely give us. Earl Huntley upon a
private quarrel had inhumanely killed the Earl of Murray. For this offense his
Majesty upon a great suit, was content to grant his-pardon: Ecclesiae tamen
Huntileum jussit sub dirorum poenis, ecclesiae satisfacere; but yet the Church
(in relation to the scandal) commanded him under the pain of Excommunication,
to do penance. Not long after the said Earl Huntly and others of the Romish
faction, had enterprised against the peace and safety of the Kingdom. The King
resolved to pardon them for this also: Ecclesia autem excommunication is
censura pronuntiavit: but the Church pronounced against them the dreadful
sentence of Anathema; so little use is there of the civil Magistrate, when once
the Church pretends a scandal.

Chap. 17. 9. And shall adjure the parties in the Name of God] And shall
adjure, i. e. They shall provoke them, or induce them to confession, by using
or interposing of the Name of God: for thus adjuration is defined to us by
Aquinas Secunda secundae qu. 9. in Axiom. Adjurare, nihil aliud est (says he)
nisi creaturam aliquam divini nominis, out alterius cujuspiam sacrae rei
interpositione, ad agendum aliquid impellere: the parties, and those not such
as give in the informations, for that is done in private by the Elders: but
such of whose ill same intelligence is given unto the Consistory. If so, then
would I fain demand of the contrivers, with what reason they so much exclaim
against the oath ex officio judicis, used by our Prelates in their
Chancellaries: since they themselves allow it in their Consistories. But thus
of old, as it is in Horace, de Art. Cacilio Plautoq* dedit Romanus, ademptum
Virgi^o Varioque.


Conclus. They are adjudged to be immutable] And no marvail, if as the brethren
and their Beza think, it be so essential to the Church, that no Church can
possibly subsist without it: if so essential, that we may as warrantably deny
the written Word, as these inventions. But certainly, what ever these think of
it; the founder of this platform thought not so: when thus he was persuaded,
that the ordering of the Church of God, for as much as concerns the form of
it, was le^t to the discretion of the Ministers. For thus himself in his
Epistle ad Neocomen^es, dated 1544. viz. Substantiam disciplinae ecclesiae
exprimit disertis verbis Scriptura: forma autem ejus exercendae, quoniam a
Domino praescripta non est, a ministris constitui debet pro aedificatione. Thus
he: and how d^re they control him? Will they also dare to teach their Master?

Thus have I brought to end those Annotations, which I counted most convenient,
for to express their meaning in some few passages of this new platform; and
to exemplify their proceedings. A larger Commentary on this Text had been
unnecessary: considering both of what I write, and unto whom. Only I needs must
note, that as the erecting of these fabrics in these Islands was founded on
the ruin of the Deanries: so had the birth of this device in England been
death unto the Bishoprics. No wonder then if those which principally manage
the affairs of holy Church, so busily bestir themselves in the destroying of
this viper: which by no other means can come into the world, then by the death
and ruin of his mother. Yet so it is, I know not whether by destiny, or some
other means; I would not think; but so it is: that much of this new platform
has of late found favor with us; and may in time make entrance to the rest.
Their Lecturers permitted in so many places, what are they, but the Doctors of
Geneva? save only that they are more factious and sustain a party. And what the
purpose and design of this, but so by degrees to lessen the repute of such
days as are appointed holy by the Church; and fasten all opinion to their
days of preaching? By whose authority stand the Churchwardens at the Temple
doors (as I have seen it often in London) to collect the bounty of the hearers:
but only by some of their appointments, who find that duty (or the like)
prescribed here unto the Deacons, cap. 1. 2. I could say somewhat also of our
ordinary Fasts, how much they are neglected every where: and no Fast now
approved of, but the solemn. Nay we have suffered it of late to get that ground
upon us; in the practice at the least: that now no common business must begin
without it. Too many such as these I fear, I could point out unto your
Lordship, did I not think that these already noted were too many. A matter
certainly worthy of your Lordships care, and of the care of those your
Lordships partners in the Hierarchy: that as you suffer not these new
inventions, to usurp upon our Churches by violence; so that they neither grow
upon us, by cunning or connivence.

CHAP. VI.
(1) King James how affected to this Platform. (2) He confirms the Discipline
in both Islands. (3) And for what reasons. (4) Sir John Peyton sent Governor
into Jarzey. (5) His Articles against the Ministers there. (6) And the
proceedings thereupon. (7) The distracted estate of the Church and Ministry in
that Island. (8) They refer themselves unto the King. (9) The Inhabitants of
Jarzey petition for the English Discipline. (10) A reference of both parties to
the Council. (11) The restitution of the Dean. (12) The Interim of Germany
what it was. (13) The Interim of Jarzey. (14) The exceptions of the Ministry
against the Book of Common Prayer. (15) The establishment of the new Canons.

IN this state and under this Government continued those Islands till the happy
entrance of King James upon the Monarchy of England. A Prince of whom the
brethren conceived no small hopes, as one that had continually been brought up
by and amongst those of that faction: and had so often confirmed their much
desired Presbyteries. But when once he had set foot in England, where he was
sure to meet with quiet men, and more obedience: he quickly made them see, that
of his favor to that party, they had made themselves too large a promise. For
in the conference at Hampton Court, he publicly professed, that howsoever he
lived among Puritans, and was kept for the most part as a ward under them; yet
ever since he was of the age of ten years old, he ever disliked their opinions:
and as the Savior of the world had said, though he lived among them, he was
not of them. In this conference also, that so memorized Apophthegm of his
Majesty: No Bishop, no King: and anon after, My Lords the Bishops (faith he) I
may thank ye, that these men (the Puritans) plead thus for my Supremacy. Add to
this, that his Majesty had always fostred in himself a pious purpose, not only
of reducing all his Realms and Dominions into one uniform order and course of
discipline; which thing himself avoweth, in his Letters Patents unto those of
Jarzey: but also to establish in all the reformed Churches, if possibly it
might be done; together with unity of Religion, and uniformity of devotion. For
which cause he had commanded the English Liturgy to be translated into the
Latin, and also into most of the national Languages round about us: by that
and other more private means, to bring them into a love and good opinion of our
Government: which he oftentimes acknowledged to have been approved by manifold
blessings from God himself. A heroic purpose, and worthy of the Prince from
whom it came.

This notwithstanding, that he was inclined the other way; yet upon suit made
by those of these Islands, he confirmed unto them their present orders, by a
Letter under his private Seal, dated the 8. of August in the first year of his
reign in England; which Letters were communicated in the Synod at St. Hilaries
the 18. of September, 1605. the Letter written in the French Tongue; but the
tenor of them was as follows:

James by the Grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, etc.
unto all those whom these presents shall concern, greeting: Whereas we our
selves and the Lords of our Council have been given to understand, that it
pleased God to put it into the heart of the late Queen our most dear sister, to
permit and allow unto the Isles of Jarzey and Guernsey parcel of our Duchy of
Normandy, the use of the Government of the reformed Churches in the said
Duchy, whereof they have stood possessed until our coming to this Crown: for
this couse we desiring to follow the pious example of our said Sister in this
behalf, as well for the advancement of the glory of Almighty God, as for the
edification of his Church; do will, and ordain, that cur said Isles shall
quietly enjoy their said liberty in the use of the Ecclesiastical Discipline
there now established: forbidding any one to give them any trouble or
impeachment, as long as they contain themselves in our obedience, and attempt
not any thing against the pure and sacred Word of God. Given at our Palace at
Hampton Court the 8. day of August, Anno Dom. 1603. and of our reign in England
the first. Signed above James R.


The reasons which moved this Prince to assent unto a form of Government, which
he liked not; was partly an ancient rule and precept of his own, viz. That
Princes at their first entrance to a Grown ought not to innovate the government
presently established. But the principal cause indeed, was desire not to
discourage the Scots in their beginnings: or to lay open too much of his
intents at once unto them. For since the year 1595. his Majesty wearied with
the confusions of the Discipline in that Church established; had much busied
himself in restoring their ancient place and power unto the Bishops. He had
already brought that work so forwards, that the Scottish Ministers had admitted
of 13 Commissioners (which was the ancient number of the Bishops) to have
suffrage in the Parliament; and to represent in that Assembly the body of the
Clergy: and that their place should be perpetual. Thus far with some trouble,
but much art, he had prevailed on that unquiet and unruly company: and
therefore had he denied the Islanders an allowance of their Discipline; he had
only taught the Scottish Ministry what to trust to. An allowance whereof he
after made especial use in his proceedings with that people. For thus his
Majesty in a Declaration concerning such of the Scottish Ministers, as lay
attainted of High Treason, Anno 1606. viz. And as we have ever regarded
carefully how convenient it is to maintain every Country in that form of
Government which is fittest and can best agree with the constitution thereof;
and how dangerous alterations are without good advice and mature deliberation;
and that even in matters of order of the Church, in some small Island under our
Dominions, we have ^abstained from suffering any alteration; So we doubt not,
etc as it there follows in the words of the Declaration.

On these reasons, or on some other not within the power of my conjecture; this
Discipline was permitted in these Islands: though long it did not continue with
them. For presently upon his Majesty's coming to the Crown, Sir Walter Raleigh
then Governor of Jarzey was attaint of Treason: on which attaindure this with
others of his places, fell actually into the Kings disposing: upon this
variancy, it pleased his Majesty to depute the present Governor Sir John
Peiton, to that office: A Gentleman not over forward in himself, to pursue the
projects of the Powlets his predecessors, (for Sir W. Raleigh had but a little
while possessed the place) and it may well be furnished also with some secret
instructions from the King, not to be too indulgent to that party. Whether that
so it was or not, I cannot say: Sure I am that he omitted no opportunity of
abating in the Consistorians the pride and stomach of their jurisdiction. But
long it was not before he found a fit occasion to place his battery against
those works; which in the Island there they thought impregnable. For as in the
ancient proverb, Facile est invenire baculum ut caedas canem: it is an easy
thing to quarrel one, whom before hand we are resolved to baffle. The occasion
this. The Curate of S. John's being lately dead, it pleased the Colloquie of
that Island, according to their former method; to appoint one Brevin to succeed
him: against which course, the Governor, the Kings Attorney and other the
officers of the Crown protested; as prejudicial to the rights and profits of
the King. Howbeit, the case was overruled; and the Colloquie for that time
carried it: hereupon a bill of Articles was exhibited unto the Council against
the Ministers, by Peiton the Governor, Marret the Attorney, now one of the
Jurates, and the rest: as viz. that they had usurped the Patronage of all
benefices in the Island; that thereby they admitted men to livings without any
form of pretentation; that thereby they deprived his Majesty of Vacancies and
first fruits; that by connivence (to say no worse of it) of the former
Governors, they exercised a kind of arbitrary jurisdiction, making and
disannulling laws at their own uncertain liberty; whereupon they most humbly
besought his Majesty to grant them such a discipline, as might be fittest to
the nature of the place, and less derogatory to the Royal Prerogative.

This Bill exhibited unto the Council, found there such approbation, that
presently Sir Robert Gardener, once chief Justice, (as I take it) in the Realm
of Ireland; and James Hussy Doctor of the Laws; though not without some
former business; were sent into the Islands. Against their coming into Jarzey,
the Ministers of that Island had prepared their Answer; which in the general
may be reduced to these two heads; viz. That their appointment of men into the
Ministry, and the exercise of Jurisdiction being principal parts of the Church
Discipline; had been confirmed unto them by his Majesty. And for the matter of
First Fruits, it was a payment which had never been exacted from them; since
their discharge from him at Constance; unto whom in former times they had been
due. Upon this answer the business was again remitted unto the King, and to
his Council; by them to be determined upon the coming of their Deputies: the
Committees not having (as they said) a power to determine it; but only to
instruct themselves in the whole cause, and accordingly to make report. Other
matters within the compass of their Commission, and about which they were said
principally to be sent over, were then concluded: all which happened in the year
1608. Immediately upon the departure of these Commissioners; and long before
their Deputies had any faculty to repair unto the Court: a foul deformity of
confusion and distraction had overgrown the Church and Discipline. In former
times all such as took upon them any public charge either in Church or
Commonwealth, had bound themselves by oath to cherish and maintain the
Discipline: that oath is now disclaimed as dangerous and unwarrantable. Before
it was their custom to exact subscription to their platform, of all such as
purposed to receive the Sacrament: but now the Kings Attorney, and others of
that party, chose rather to abstain from the Communion; nay even the very
Elders silly souls, that thought themselves as Sacrosancti as a Roman Tribune:
were drown with process into the civil courts; and there reputed with the
vulgar. Nor was the case much better with the Consistory: the Jurates in their
Cohu or Town Hall, relieving such by their authority, whom that Tribunal had
condemned or censured. A pravis ad praecipitia. Such is the inhumanity of the
world, that when once a man is cast upon his knees, every one-lends a hand to
lay him prostrate. No sooner had those of the lower rank, observed the
Ministers to stagger in their chairs; but they instantly begin to wrangle for
the Tithes: and if the Curate will exact his due; the Law is open, let them try
the Title. Their Benefices, where before accounted as excempt and privileged,
are brought to reckon for first fruits and tenths: and those not rated by the
book of Constance, but by the will and pleasure of the Governor. Add unto
this, that one of the Constables preferred a Bill against them in the Cohu:
wherein the Ministers themselves were indicted of hypocrisy; and their
government of tyranny. And which of all the rest was the greatest of their
miseries; it was objected that they held secret meetings and private practices
against the Governor: yea such as reflected also on the King.

In thy confusion and distress they were almost incapable of counsel. They
applied themselves in the next Colloquie unto the Governor, that he would
please to intercede for them to his Majesty: but him they had so far
exasperated by their clamours, that he utterly refused to meddle for them. Nor
did the Ministers, as I conjecture, propound it farther to him, then by way of
due respect: as little hoping that he should bend himself for their relief;
whom they so often had accused to be the cause of all this trouble. At last
they are resolved to cast themselves upon the grace and savor of the King; and
for that cause addressed themselves and their desires unto the Earl of
Salisbury, a man, at that time of special credit with the King, being also Lord
High Treasurer, and chief Secretary. This their address as he took in special
good regard; so did he also seem to advise them for the best: his counsel, that
they should join unto them those of Guernzey, in the perusing of their
Discipline, and the correcting of such things most stomacked by the Civil
Magistrates: and after, both together to refer themselves unto his Majesty. A
counsel not to be despised in the appearance: but yet (as certainly he was of a
fine and subtle wit) of exceeding cunning. For by this means the business not
yet ripe, and the King scarce master of his purposes in Scotland; he gains time
farther to consider of the main: and by engaging those of Guernzey in the
cause, they also had been subject to the same conclusion: But subtle as he was,
he found no art to protract the fatal and inevitable blow of death; for whilst
his Clients busily pursued this project, in reviewing of their platform, he
yielded up himself unto the grave, March 24. anno 1612. upon report whereof,
they laid by the prosecution of that business; referring of it to the mercy
of some better times.

This comfort yet they found in their address unto the Court, that things at
home were carried on in a more fair and quiet course: but long they would not
suffer themselves to enjoy that happiness. The Parish of S. Peter's being void,
Messerny was presented to it by the Governor: one that had spent his time in
Oxenford, and had received the Orders of the Priesthood from the Right Reverend
Doctor Bridges, then Bishop of that Diocese. A matter so infinitely stomacked
by the Colloquie, that they would by no means yield to his admission: not so
much because of his presentation from the Governor, as of his ordination from
the Bishop. For now they thought Annibalem ad portas, that Popery began again
to creep upon them: and therefore they resolved to fight it out, tanquam de
summa rerum, as if the whole cause of Religion were in danger. Messerny
howsoever enjoyed the profits of the living; and a new complaint was made
against them to the Council: In which complaint, there also was intelligence
given unto their Lordships, that the inhabitants generally of the Isle, were
discontented with the Discipline^ and guidance of the Church: and that the most
of them would easily admit the form of English Government; that some of them
did desire it. The matter thus grown ready for an issue, and his Majesty
desirous to bring all things to the most peaceable and quiet end; both parties
were commanded to attend at Court: the Governor and secular states, to
prosecute their suit, and make good their intelligence; the Ministers to answer
the complaints, and tender their proposals. Hereupon the Governor and those of
the laity delegated to the Court, Marret the Attorney, and Messervy the new
Parson of St. Peter's: by whom the people sent a formal Petition to his Majesty,
signed by many of their hands; and to this purpose, viz. that he would be
pleased to establish in their Island, the book of Common Prayers; and to settle
there among them some Ecclesiastical Officer, with Episcopal jurisdiction. On
the other side, there were deputed, for the Ministers, Mr. Bandinell, the now
Dean; Oliveis, the now Sub^dean; Effart, the Curate of St. Saviors; and De la
place, then Curate of St. Mary's. To whom this also was specially given in
charge, that with all industry they should oppose whatsoever innovation (as
they called it) might be proposed unto them: and resolutely bear up for the
present Discipline.

Immediately upon their appearance at the Court, both parties by his Majesty
were referred to the Council: and by them again to my Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury, the Lord Zouche, and Sir John Herbert, then principal Secretary.
Before them the cause was privately argued by the Deputies of both parties: and
the desires of the Governor and of the people, constantly impugned by the
Ministers. But as it always happens that there is no confederacy so well
joined, but one member of it may be severed from the rest; and thereby the
whole practice overthrown: so was it also in this business. For those which
there solicited some private business of the Governors, had finely wrought
upon the weakness or ambition of De la place; bearing him in hand, that if the
Government of the Church were altered, and the office of the Dean restored; he
was for certain resolved upon to be the man. Being fashioned into this hope, he
speedily betrayed the counsels of his fellows; and furnished their opponents
at all their enterviews, with such intelligence as might make most for their
advantage. At last the Ministers not well agreeing in their own demands, and
having little to say in the defense of their proper cause, whereto their
answers were not provided beforehand; my Lord of Canterbury at the
Councel-table thus declared unto them the pleasure of the King and Council:
viz. that for the speedy redress of their disorders, it was reputed most
convenient to establish among them, the authority and office of the Dean; that
the book of Common Prayer being again printed in the French should be received
into their Churches; but the Ministers not tied to the strict observance of it
in all particulars: that Messerny should be admitted to his benefice; and that
so they might return unto their charges.

This said, they were commanded to depart, and to signify to those from whom
the came, they full scope of his Majesty's resolution; and so they did. But
being somewhat backward in obeying this decree, the Council intimated to them
by Sir Phil. de Carteret their Agent for the Estates of the Island; that the
Ministers from among themselves, should make choice of three learned and grave
persons, whose names they should return unto the board: out of which his
Majesty would resolve on one to be their Dean. A proposition which found among
them little entertainment. Not so much out of dislike unto the dignity, for
they were most of them well contented with the change: but because every one of
them conceived hopefully of himself to be the man, and all of them could not be
elected; they were not willing to prejudice their own hopes, by the naming of
another. In the mean time, Mr. David Band^^ell then Curate of St. Mary's,
either having or pretending some business unto London; was recommended by the
Governor as a man most fit to sustain that place and dignity. And being also
approved by my Lord of Canterbury (a^ certainly he is a man of good abilities)
as a person answerable to the Governors commendations; he was established in
that office by Letters Patents from his Majesty, dated the 8. of March, anno
1619. and was invested with all such rights as formerly had been inherent in
that dignity: and that both in point of profit; and also in point of
jurisdiction. For whereas formerly the Dean was settled in the best benefice in
the Island, that viz. of St Martins; and had diverse portions of tithes out of
every of the Parishes: the said St. Martins was allotted to him, upon the next
avoidance; and the whole tithes of St. Saviors allowed him, in consideration
of his several parcels. And whereas also at the suppression of the Deanery, the
Governor had taken into his hands the probate of Testaments, and appointed unto
civil Courts the cognizance of Matrimonial causes and of tithes: all these
again were restored unto him, and forever united to this office.

For the executing of this place, there were some certain Articles, or rather
Canons drawn and ratified to be in force till a perfect draught of
Ecclesiastical constitutions could be agreed on: which it pleased his Majesty
to call the Interim. And this he did in imitation of Charles the 5. which
Prince, desirous to establish peace and quietness in the Church of Germany;
and little hoping that any Council would be summoned soon enough to determine
of the differences then on foot: composed a certain mixture of opinions, in
favor of each party; which he endeavored to obtrude upon that people: the
compilers of it, Julius Pflugi^^, Michael Sido^^us, and Islebius: the time
when, anno 1594, the name of it the Interim: a name given unto it by the
Emperor, eo quod praescriberet formulam doctrinae and ceremoniarum in religione
in terra tenendam, quoad de universa re religionis concilio publico definitum
esset: so the historian of the Council. In like manner, did it please his
Majesty as himself tells us in the next chapter: in the interim, until he
might be fully informed what Laws, etc. were meet and fit to be established
for the good government of the said Island in causes Ecclesiastical, etc. to
grant commission, etc. to exercise the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction there
according to cer^aid instructions signed with our royal hand, to continue only
until we might establish, etc. as it follows in the Original. By this
Interim there was a clause in force, whereby it was permitted to the Ministers
not to bid holydaies, or use the Cross in Baptism, or wear the Surplice, or to
exact it of the people that they kneel at the Communion. In other matters it
little differed from the Canons afterward established, and now in being in
that Island.

Thus fortified with power, and furnished with instructions, home comes the
new Dean into his Country: and in a frequent assembly of the three Estates,
takes full possession of his place, and office. Nor found he any opposition,
till he began to exercise his Jurisdiction; At what time Sir John Herault, then
Bayliffe of the Island, and to whom his Majesty had given the title of St.
Savior; not pleased to see so many causes drawn from his Tribunal, made head
against him. But this disgust was quickly over-blown; and the Bailiffe for four
years suspended by his Majesty from the executing of his office. This done, his
fellow Ministers were called together, and he imparted unto them his
instructions. All of them seeming well contented with the Jurisdiction (De la
place* excepted) who much impatient (as commonly the miscarrying of our hopes
as much torments us, as the loss of a possession) to see himself deluded,
forsook the Country. But to the Liturgy they thought they had no cause to
give admission; nay that they had good cause unto the contrary: viz. as not
being desired by them in their address; and having been for fifty years at
least a stranger in the Islands: a thing also much stomacked and opposed by
many learned men in England; and not imposed as yet upon the Scots, which
people in so many other particulars, had been brought unto conformity with the
English. In the end, having fix months allowed them to deliberate, frangi
pertinaciam suam passi sunt; they were content to bend and yield unto it, upon
such qualifications of it, as in the instructions were permitted. A duty
carelessly discharged and as it were by halfs, by many of them; those viz of the
ancient breed, which have so been wedded to a voluntary frame and fabric of
devotion: but punctually observed by those of the lesser standing, as having
good acquaintance with it here in England; and not possessed with any contrary
opinion, whereby it might be prejudiced. And now there wanted nothing to
perfect the intentions of ^his Majesty; and to restore unto the Island, the
ancient face and being of a Church: but only that the Policy thereof was
something temporary and not yet established in the rule and Canon. But long it
was not, ere this also was effected: and a fixed Law prescribed of Government
Ecclesiastical. Which what it is, by what means it was agreed on, how crossed,
and how established; his Majesty's own Letters Patents can best instruct us:
and to them wholly I refer the honor of the relation.

CHAP. VII.
The Canons and Constitutions Ecclesiastical for the Church Discipline of
Jarsey: together with the Kings Letters Patents for the authorizing of the same.

JAMES by the grace of God King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland,
defender of the faith, etc. To our right trusty and well beloved Counselor the
reverend father in God Lancelot Bishop of Winton, and to our trusty and well
beloved Sir John Peyton Knight, Governor of the Isle of Jarsey; and to the
Governor of the said Isle for the time being, and to the Bailiffe and Jurates
of the said Isle for the time being; to whom it shall or may appertain,
Greeting. Whereas we held it fitting heretofore upon the admission of the now
Dean of that Island unto his place, in the interim, until we might be fully
informed what Laws, Canons, or Constitutions were meet and fit to be made and
established for the good government of the Island in causes Ecclesiastical,
appertaining to Ecclesiastical jurisdiction; to command the said Bishop of
Winton, Ordinary of the said Island to grant his Commission unto David
Bandinell now Dean of the same Island, to exercise the Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction there according to certain instructions signed with our royal
hand, to continue only till we might establish such Constitutions, Rules,
Canons and Ordinances, as we intended to settle for the regular government of
that our Island in all Ecclesiastical causes, conformed to the Ecclesiastical
government established in our Realm of England, as near as conveniently might
be. And whereas also to that our purpose and pleasure was, that the said Dean
with what convenient speed he might, after such authority given unto him as
aforesaid, and after his arrival into that Island, and the public notice
given of that his admission unto the said office, should together with the
Ministers of this our Island, consider of such Canons and Constitutions as
might be fitly accomodated to the circumstances of time, and place, and persons
whom they concern; and that the same should be put in good order, and intimated
by the Governor, Bailiffe and Jurates of that our Island; that they might
offer to us and our Council such acceptions, and give such reformations
touching the same, as they should think good. And whereas the said Dean and
Ministers did conceive certain Canons, and presented the same unto us on the
one part, and on the other part the said Bailiffe and Jurates excepting against
the same, did send and depute Sir Philip de Carteret Knight, Jeshuah de
Carteret and Philip de Carteret Esquires, three of the Jurates and Justices of
our said Isle; all which parties appeared before our right trusty and well
beloved Counselors, the most reverend father in God the Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury, the Right reverend father in God the Lord Bishop of Lincoln Lord
Keeper of the Geat Seal of England, and the Right reverend father in God the
said Lord Bishop of Winton, to whom we granted commission to examine the same;
who have have accordingly heard the said parties at large, read and examined,
corrected and amended the said Canons, and have now made report unto us under
their hands, that by a mutual consent of the said Deputies and Dean of our
Island, they have reduced the said Canons and Constitutions Ecclesiastical,
into such order, as in their judgments may well stand with the estate of that
Island.

Know ye therefore, that we out of our Princely care of the quiet and peaceable
government of all our Dominions, especialy affecting the peace of the Church,
and the establishment of true Religion, and Ecclesiastical discipline, in one
uniforme order and course throughout all our Realms and Dominions, so happily
united under us as their Supreme Governor on earth in all causes, as well
Ecclesiastical as Civil: Having taken consideration of the said Canons and
Constitutions thus drawn as aforesaid, do by these deputies ratify, confirm
and approve thereof.

And farther, we out of our Princely power and regal authority, do by these
Patents signed and sealed with our royal Signet, for us, our heirs and
successors, will with our royal hand, and command that these Canons and
Constitutions hereafter following, shall from henceforth in all points be duly
observed in our said Isle, for the perpetual government of the said Isle in
causes Ecclesiastical; unless the same, or some part or parts thereof, upon
further experience and trial thereof by the mutual consent of the Lord Bishop
of Winton for the time being, the Governor, Bailiffs and Jurates of the said
Isle, and of the Dean, and Ministers, and other our Officers in the said Isle
for the time being, representing the body of our said Isle, and by the royal
authority of us, our heirs and successors shall receive any additions or
alterations as time and occasion shall justly require. And therefore we do
farther will and command the said Right reverend father in God Lancelot now
Lord Bishop of Winton, that he do forthwith, by his Commission under his
Episcopal seal, as Ordinary of the place, give authority unto the said now
Dean to exercise Ecclesiastical jurisdiction in our said Isle, according to
the said Canons and Constitutions thus made and established, as follows.

Canons and Constitutions Ecclesiastical, treated, agreed on, and established
for the Isle of Jarsey.
CHAP. I.
Of the Kings Supremacy, and of the Church.
Article I.
1. AS our duty to the Kings most excellent Majesty requires, it is first
ordained, That the Dean and Ministers having care of souls, shall to the utmost
of their power, knowledge and learning, purely and sincerely, without any
backwardness or dissimulation, teach, publish and declare, as often as they
may, and as occasion shall present it self; that all strange, usurped and
forain power (for as much as it has no gound by the law of God) is wholly, as
for just and good causes taken away and abolished; and that therefore no manner
of obedience or subjection within any of his Majesty's Realms and Dominions, is
due unto any such forain power; but that the Kings power within his Realms of
England, Scotland and Ireland, and all other his Dominions and Countries, is
the highest power under God, to whom all men, as well inhabitants, as born
within the same, do by Gods Law owe most loyalty and obedience, before and above
all other power and Potentates in the earth.

II.
2. Whosoever shall affirm and maintain that the Kings Majesty has not the
same authority in causes Ecclesiastical, that the godly Princes had amongst
the Jews and the Christian Emperors in the Church primitive, or shall impeach
in any manner the said Supremacy in the said causes.

III. IV.
3. Also whosoever shall affirm that the Church of England as it is
established under the Kings Majesty is not a true and Apostolical Church,
purely teaching the Doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles. 4. Or shall impugn
the Government of the said Church by Archbishops, Bishops and Deans, affirming
it to be Antichristian, shall be ipso facto Excommunicated, and not restored
but by the Dean sitting in his Court, after his repentance and public
recantation of his error.

CHAP. II.
Of Divine Service.
Article I.
1. IT is enjoined unto all sorts of people that they submit themselves to the
Divine service contained in the book of Common prayers of the Church of
England. And for as much as concerns the Ministers, that they observe with
uniformity the said Liturgy without addition or alteration; and that they
fu^ler not any Conventicle or Congregation to make a sect apart by themselves,
or to distract the Government Ecclesiastical established in the Church.

II.
2. The Lords day shall be sanctified by the exercises of public prayer, and
the hearing of Gods word. Every one also shall be bounden to meet together at
an hour convenient, and to observe the order and decency in that case
requisite; being attentive to the reading or preaching of the Word; kneeling on
their knees during the Prayers, and standing up at the Belief; and shall also
(...) their consent in saying Amen. And further, during any part of Divine
service the Churchwardens shall not suffer any interruption or impeachment to
be made by the insolence and practice of any person, either in the Church or
Churchyard.

III.
3. There shall be public exercise in every Parish on Wednesdays and Fridays
in the morning, by reading the Common prayers.

IV.
4. When any urgent occasion shall require an extraordinary Fast, the Dean with
the advice of his Ministers shall give notice of it to the Governor and Civil
Magistrate; to the end, that by their authority and consent it may be generally
observed, for the appeasing of the wrath and indignation of the Lord by true
and serious repentance.

CHAP. III.
Of Baptism.
THe Sacrament of Baptism shall be administered in the Church with fair water
according to the institution of Jesus Christ, and without the limitation of any
days. No man shall delay the bringing of his child to Baptism longer then the
next Sunday or public Assembly, if it may conveniently be done. No person
shall be admitted to be a Godfather, unless he has received the Lords Supper;
nor shall women alone (viz. without the presence of a man among them) be
admitted to be Godmothers.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Lords Supper.
Article I.
1. THe Lords Supper shall be administered in every Church four times a year;
whereof one to be at Easter, and the other at Christmas; and every Minister in
the administration of it, shall receive the Sacrament himself, and after give
the Bread and wine to each of the Communicants, using the words of the
institution of it.

II.
2. The Masters and Mistresses of Families shall be admonished and enjoined to
cause their children and Servants to be instructed in the knowledge of their
salvation; and to this end shall take care to send them to the ordinary
Catechizing.

CHAP. V.
Of Marriage.
Article I.
1. NO man shall marry contrary to the degrees prohibited in the word of God,
according as they are expressed in a table made for that purpose in the Church
of England, on pain of nullity and censure.

II.
2. The Banes of the parties shall be asked three Sundays successively in the
Churches of both parties; and they of the Parish where the Marriage is not
celebrated, shall bring an attestation of the bidding of their Banes in their
own Parish. Nevertheless in lawful cases there may be a License or
dispensation of the said Banes, granted by the authority of the Dean, and that
upon good caution taken, that the parties are at liberty.

III.
3. No separation shall be made a thoro and mensa, unless in case of Adultery,
cruelty, and danger of life duly proved; and this at the sole instance of the
parties. As for the maintenance of the woman during her divorce, he shall have
recourse to the Secular power.

CHAP. VI.
Of Ministers.
Article I.
1. NO man that is unfit to teach, or not able to preach the word of God shall
be admitted to any Benefice within the Isle, or which has not received
imposition of hands, and been ordained according to the form used in the
Church of England.

II.
2. None of them, either Dean or Minister, shall at the same time hold two
Benefices, unless it be in time of vacancy; and only the Natives of the Isle
shall be advanced to these preferments.

III.
3. The Ministers every Sunday after morning prayer, shall expound some place
of holy Scripture; and in the afternoon, shall handle some of the points of
Christian Religion, contained in the Catechism in the Book of Common Prayers.

IV.
4* In their Prayers they shall observe the titles due unto the King,
acknowledging him the Supreme governor under Christ, in all causes, and over
all persons as well Ecclesiastical as Civil: recommending unto God the
prosperity of his person and royal posterity.

V.
5. Every Minister shall carefully regard that modesty and gravity of apparel
which belongs unto his function; and may preserve the honor due unto his
person; and shall be also circumspect in the whole carriage of their lives to
keep themselves from such company, actions and haunts, which may bring unto
them any blame or blemish. Nor shall they dishonor their calling by Gaming,
Alehouses, Usuries, guilds, or occupations not convenient for their function;
but shall endevor to excel all others in purity of life, in gravity and virtue.

VI.
6. They shall keep carefully a Register of Christnings, Marriages and Burials,
and shall duly publish upon the day appointed to them the Ordinances of the
Courts, such as are sent unto them, signed by the Dean, and have been delivered
to them fifteen days before the publication.

VII.
7. The Ministers shall have notice in convenient time of such Funerals as
shall be in their Parishes; at which they shall assist, and shall observe the
form prescribed in the book of Common Prayers. No man shall be interred within
the Church, without the leave of the Minister, who shall have regard unto the
quality and condition of the persons, as also unto those which are benefactours
unto the Church.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Dean.
Article I.
1. THe Dean shall be a Minister of the word, being a Master of the Arts or
Graduate at the least in the Civil Laws, having ability to exercise that
office; of good life and conversation, as also well affected to Religion, and
the service of God.

II.
2. The Dean in all causes handled at the Court, shall demand the advice and
opinion of the Ministers which shall then be present.

III.
3. There shall appertain unto him the cognizance of all matters which concern
the service of God, the preaching of the Word, the administration of the
Sacraments, Matrimonial causes, the examination and censure of all Papists,
Recusants, Heretics, Idolaters, and Schismatics, persons perjured in causes
Ecclesiastical; Blasphemers, those which have recourse to Wizards, incestuous
persons, Adulterers, Fornicators, ordinary drunkards, and public profaners of
the Lords day; as also the profanation of the Churches and Churchyards,
misprisions and offenses committed in the Court, or against any officers
thereof in the execution of the mandats of the Court; and also of Divorces and
separations a thoro and mensa; together with a power to censure and punish them
according unto the Laws Ecclesiastical, without any hindrance to the power of
the Civil Magistrate in regard of temporal correction for the said crimes.

IV.
4. The Dean accompanied with two or three of the Ministers, once in two years
shall visit every Parish in his own person, and shall take order, that there
be a Sermon every visitation day, either by himself, or some other by hi(...)
appointed. Which Visitation shall be made for the ordering of all things
appertaining to the Churches, in the service of God, and the administration of
the Sacraments; as also that they be provided of Churchwardens, that the
Church and Churchyards, and dwellings of the Ministers be kept in reparations.
And farther, he shall then receive information of the said Churchwardens, or
in their default of the Ministers, of all offenses and abuses which need to be
reformed; whether in the Minister, the officers of the Church, or any other of
the Parish. And the said Dean in li^^ of the said visitation, shall receive 4
s. pay out of the Treasures of the Church for every time.

V.
5. In the vacancy of any Benefice either by death or otherwise, the Dean shall
give present order, that the profits of it be sequestered; to the end, that out
of the revenue of it, the Cure may be supplied; as also that the widow and
children of the deceased may be satisfied according to the time of his service,
and the custom of the Isle; excepting such necessary deductions as must be
made for dilapidations in case any be. He shall also give convenient time to
the widow of the deceased, to provide her of an house, and shall dispose the
residue unto the next Incumbent; for which the Sequestrator shall be accomptant.

VI.
6. In the same case of vacancy, if within six months the Governor do not
present a Clerk unto the Reverend father in God the Bishop of Winton, or if
that See be void, to the most Reverend father in God the Archbishop of
Canterbury, to be admitted and instituted to the said Benefice; then shall the
Dean give notice of the time of the vacancy unto the said Lords the Bishop and
Archbishop, whereby it is in the lapse, that so it may be by them collated. And
then if any one be offered to them, the Dean shall give a testimony of the
Demeanure and sufficiency of the party to be approved by them, before he put
him into actual possession of the said Benefice.

VII.
7. The Dean shall have the Registring and Probate of Testaments; which be
approved by the seal of his office, and afterward enregistred. He shall also
have the registring of the Inventories of the moveable goods of Orphans, which
he shall carefully record, to give copies of them at all times, and as often as
he is required. Also he shall give letters of administration of the goods of
Intestates, dying without heirs of their body to the next of kindred.

VIII.
8. They which have the keeping of the Will, whether he be Heir, Executor, or
any other, shall transcribe and bring it unto the Dean within one month; in
default whereof he shall be brought by process into the Court, and be
constrained to pay double charges. And the said Dean for the said Testaments,
Inventories and Letters of administration, shall have such fees, as are
specified in a Table for this purpose.

IX.
9. All legaoies moveable, made unto the Church, the Ministers, Schools, or to
the poor, shall be of the cognizance of the Dean, but upon any opposition made
concerning the validity of the Will, the Civil Courts shall determine of it
between parties.

X.
10. It shall appertain unto the Dean to take cognizance of all detention of
tithes consecrated to the Church, of what kind so ever they be, which have
been paid unto the Ministers, and which they have enjoyed or had in possession
for the space of forty years; and every person convicted of withholding or
fraudulently detaining the said tithes, shall be adjudged to make restitution,
and shall pay the cost and charges of the party. And for the preservation of
all rights, tithes, rents, lands and possessions belonging to the Church, there
shall be a Terrice made by the Bailiffe and Justices assisted by the Dean and
the Kings Attorney.

XI.
11. The Dean shall have also power to make a Deputy or Commissary which shall
supply the place and office of the Dean, as far as his Commission shall extend;
whereof there shall be an authentic copy in the rails of the said Court.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Overseers or Church wardens.
Article I.
1. THe next week after Easter, the Minister and people of every parish shall
make choice of two to be Churchwardens, discreet men, of good life and
understanding, able to read and write, if such may be had. But if the people
cannot agree on such a choice, then shall the Minister name one and the
Parishioners another, by the major part of their voices; which two shall be
after sworn in the next Court, and there advertised of their duties.

II.
2. Their duty shall be to see that the Churches and Churchyards be not abused
by any profane and unlawful actions; as also not to suffer any excommunicated
person to come into the Church, after the sentence has been published in that
Parish; they shall also carefully present from time to time those which neglect
the public exercises of Divine service, and the administration of the
Sacraments; and genenerally all crimes of Ecclesiastical cognizance; which
said presentations they shall exhibit under their hands; nor shall they be
constrained to present above twice a year.

III.
3. They shall have care particularly that the Churches be well repaired, and
the Churchyard well fenced; and shall see that all things appertaining to the
Church, the administration of the word and Sacraments, from time to time may be
provided. As viz. a Bible of the best translation, and the largest letter; the
book of Common Prayers both for the Minister, as also for the Clerk or Sexton
of the Parish; one Parchment book to Register the Christnings, Marriages and
Burials; a decent Communion table, with a Carpet to cover it during Divine
service; the Fonts for Baptism, cups and vessels dedicated to that use,
together with a fair linen cloth, and a coffer wherein to put the said
utensils; also a trunk or chest for the peoples alms, a cloth and cushion for
the pulpit. They shall also provide bread and wine for the the Communion; and
shall see that the seats and benches be well fitted for the convenience of the
Minister and of the people, with the advice and counsel of the Ministers, and
shall look to the ^ents and revenues of the Churches treasure.

IV.
4. The said Churchwardens shall be enjoined to keep a good and true account
both of their disbursments or receipts, and of the employment which they have
made of the money issuing out of the Church treasury, which shall from time to
time be published according to the custom, and of that also which is remaining
in the hands of them, or of the Overseers of the poor. They shall employ the
said treasure in things necessary and fitting for the Church and the common
good, guiding themselves by the direction of their Minister, and the principal
of the parish in such extraordinary matters as concern the Parish. In case of
public business, the assembly of the Estates shall prescribe them, what they
think expedient for the common profit; and before they quit their charge, they
shall give notice to the Parishioners in the Easter week to hear their
accounts, which shall pass under the hands of the Minister and the chief of
the Parish; if any of the said Parishioners or others shall refuse to pay the
moneys which they owe to the said treasury; the said Churchwardens and
Overseers or any of them, shall prosecute the law against them. In case of any
controversy about the said accounts or abuse to be reformed, the Dean and
Minister of the Parish where the said controversy or abuse shall be, together
with the Bailiffe and Justices shall determine of it as is most convenient.

V.
5. The said Churchwardens on the Sunday during Divine service shall search in
places suspected for games or riot, and having the Constables for their
assistants, shall search also into Alehouses, and houses of misdemeanor.

VI.
6. They shall be careful, that there be no detention or concealment of any
thing appertaining to the Church, and shall also seize into their hands all
goods and legacies moveable given unto the Church, or to the poor, according to
the custom of the Country.

CHAP. IX.
Of the Collectors and Sides-men.
THere shall be two Collectors for the poor appointed in every Parish, which
also shall discharge the place of Sides-men or Assistants; who shall be chosen
as the Churchwardens are, and shall take an oath to carry themselves well in
the said office, and to give an account of their Stewardship twice a year,
before the Minister and the Parishioners, viz. at Easter and at Michaelmas.

CHAP. X.
Of Clerks and Sextons.
Article I.
1. THe Clerks and Sextons of Parishes shall be chosen by the Minister and the
principal of the Parish; men of the age of twenty years at the least, of good
life and conversation, able to read fairly, distinctly, and understandingly,
and to write also, and fitted somewhat for the singing of the Psalms, if it
may be.

II.
2. Their charge is, by the ringing of a Bell, to call the people to Divine
service, and the hearing of the Word, at the proper and ordinary hours; to keep
the Church locked and clean, as also the Pulpit and the seats, to lay up the
Books and other things belonging to the Church committed to their trust, to
provide water against the Christnings, to make such proclamations as are
enjoined them by the Court or by the Minister. And shall receive their stipend
and wages by the contribution of the Parishioners, be it in Corn or money,
according to the custom of the place.

CHAP. XI.
Of School masters.
Article I.
1. THere shall be a School master in every Parish, chosen by the Minister,
Church wardens, and other principal persons therein, and afterward presented
unto the Dean to be licenced thereunto. Nor shall it be lawful for any one to
take upon him this charge, not being in this manner called unto it. The
Ministers shall have the charge of visiting the Schools, to exhort the Masters
to their duty.

II.
2. They shall accustom themselves with diligence and painfulnesse to teach
the children to read and to write, to say their prayers and to answer in the
Catechismes; they shall instruct them in good manners, they shall bring them
unto Sermons, and to Common Prayers, and there see them quietly and orderly
demean themselves.

CHAP. XII.
Of the Court Ecclesiastical.
Article I.
1. THe Court shall be holden every Monday in the year, observing the same
vacations as the Courts Civil.

II.
2. At every Session, in the beginning of it, the names of the Assessors shall
be enrolled, the day, the month and the year, and the decrees perused.

III.
3. After judgment and sentence given in the main matter, the costs of the
parties, and the wages of the officers shall be awarded by censure
Ecclesiastic.

IV.
4. There shall be two Procters duly sworn unto the Court, to the end, the
people may proceed formally and juridically, without any confusion or surprise.
And the Register (being also sworn) shall faithfully record the sentences
pronounced, and give copies of the Acts to such as do require it.

V.
5. The Kings Attorney, or in his absence the Solliciter, shall be assistant in
the Court from time to time in the awarding of punishment, or censure upon all
causes of crime and scandal.

VI.
6. For the serving of citation and summons, the Dean shall swear the Sextons
of every Parish, together with an Apparitour, which shall truly discharge
themselves in giving copies of the original process and citation unto those
whom it concerns, or in the absence of the party, to his servants. In which
process and citations, the causes of their appearance shall be expressed.

VII.
7. If the party will not be found, as either hiding himself, or using any
other collusion, the citation shall be affixed (in case that he have never an
house) on the Church door of the Parish where he dwells, and that upon a
Sunday.

VIII.
8. If it come unto the notice of the Dean by the report of honest men, that
any one has does live notoriously scandalous, he shall advertise the Minister
and Churchwardens of the Parish, to the end, that being thus informed, they
may present such persons as merit to be punished, or censured.

IX.
9. Upon good notice of a crime committed by any of the Ministers, the Dean
after two warnings or admonitions, shall proceed to the reforming of him, by
the advice and consent of two of his brethren, even unto suspension and
sequestration. And in case he continue refractory, the Dean by the consent of
the major part of Ministers, shall proceed to deprivation.

X.
10. No commutation shall be made in lieu of penance, without great
circumspection, and regard had unto the quality of the persons and
circumstances of the crime. And the commutation shall be enrolled in the Acts
of the Court, to be employed upon the poor, and in pious uses; whereof an
account shall be given according to the Register.

XI.
11. After the first default, the nonappearance of the party again cited shall
be reputed as a contempt; if being after peren ptorily cited he does not
appear, then shall they proceed against him by excommunication; and if before
the next Court day he endeavor not to obtain absolution, they shall proceed to
the publishing of the sentence of the minor excommunication, which shall be
delivered to the Minister of the Parish to be read upon some solemn day and in
the hearing of the greater part of the Parishioners. The party still continuing
in his contumacy, they shall then proceed unto the major excommunication;
whereby he shall be excluded a sacris and societate fidelium. If this bring him
not unto obedience and acknowledgement within the space of forty days, then
shall the Dean by his certificate authentic give notice unto the Bailiff and
Justices of the said contumacy, requiring their assistance to seize on him, and
commit him prisoner to some sure place till he be humbled, and shall give
surety that he will submit unto the ordinance of the Church; and before that he
be absolved, he shall be bound to defray the costs and charges of the suit.

XII.
12 In cases of incontinency upon presentment of the Churchwardens, together
with the probabilities of a common fame, scandal and presumptions in this case
requisite, the party shall undergo the purgation upon oath, or else shall be
reputed as convict.

XIII.
13. In causes of Adultery, at the instance of the party, the proceedings shall
go on advisedly by good proofs and informations, even to evidence of the crime
objected; and if the matter or evidence of fact be clear, they may proceed to
separation a thoro and mensa.

XIV.
14. He that shall offend in point of calumny and diffamation, shall make
acknowledgment of the injury according to the exigence of the case, provided
that the business be followed within the compass of the year, and that the
matter of it be of Ecclesiastical cognizance in the crimes above recited.

CHAP. XIII.
Of Appeals.
Article I.
1. Appeals in causes Ecclesiastical shall be heard and determined by the
reverend father in God the Bishop of Winton in person, and if that See be void,
by the most reverend father in God, the Archbishop of Canterbury in person.

II.
2. All Appeals shall be exhibited within fifteen days after notice taken of
the sentence, and the party shall be constrained to take or write out the whole
process, at it is upon the Register or Rols of Court; which Acts of the said
Court shall be delivered to him in form and time convenient, under the seal of
the office, and the Appellant shall pursue the action within a year and a day,
aut sententiae latae stare compellitur.

III.
3. It shall not be lawful to appeal until after the definitive sentence,
unless in these two cases, viz. either when the Interlocutory is such as puts
an end unto the business, or else when the said interlocutory being obeyed
brings such irreparable damage to the party, that he cannot help himself by his
Appeal.

A Table of the Fees appertaining to the Dean and his Officers in all causes
Ecclesiastical.
FOr the proving of a Will where the goods of the deceased exceed not the value
of five pound. To the Dean o. To the Register for writing and recording it 6 d.
For the approving of a Will above the value of 5 l. To the Dean 2 s. To the
Register or Notary 1 s. For a Letter of administration where the goods of the
deceased exceed not the value of 5 l. de elaro. To the Dean o. To the Register
for writing it 6 d. For a Letter of administration above that value. To the
Dean 1 s. To the Register 1 s. For the registring an Inventory of the goods of
minors, where the said inventory exceeds not the value of 5 l. To the Dean o.
To the Register 4 d. For the registring of Inventories exceeding the value of 5
l. To the Dean 2 s. To the Register 1 s. For an authentic copy of the said
Wills, Inventories or Letters of administration. To the Dean for his seal 6 d.
To the Register 6 d. For process compulsory to bring in the Wills 1 s. For
Licenses of marriage. To the Dean 3 s. For the sequestration of the profits of
a Benefice. To the Dean 6 s. For the induction of a Minister. To the Dean 3 s.
For process and citations. To the Dean 2 d. ob. To the Notary 1 d. d. To the
Apparitor for serving the Process and Citations 3 d. To the Sexton for serving a
Citation within the Parish 1 d. d. For absolution from the minor
excommunication. To the Dean 1 s. To the Notary 2 d ob. To the Apparitor 2 d.
^b. For absolution from the major excommunication. To the Dean 2 s. To the
Notary 2 d. ob. To the Apparitor 6 d. In causes Litigious, the party overthrown
shall pay the fees and duties of the Officers, and for the authentic writing.
To the party 4 d. as also to every witness produced in Court 4 d. To the
Proctors of the Court for every cause they plead 6 d. To the Notary for every
instrument entered in the Court 1 d qa. To him for every first default in Court
1 d. qa. To him in case of contumacy 4 d.
According whereunto it is ordained that neither the Dean nor his successors,
nor any of his officers, either directly or indirectly, shall demand, exact, or
receive of the Inhabitants of the said Isle, any other fees or duties, then
such as are specified in the table above written. And it is further ordained,
that whatsoever has been done or put in execution in the said Isle, on any
causes, and by virtue of any Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, shall be forthwith
abrogated; to the end, that it may not be drawn into example by the said Dean,
or any of his successors in the times to come, contrary to the tenure of these
Canons at this present made and established; but that all their proceedings be
limited and fitted to the contents of the said Canons and Constitutions
Ecclesiastical. Also that there be no hindrance or impeachment made by the
Civil Magistrate unto the said Dean and his successors in the peaceable
execution of the said jurisdiction contained in the said Canons, as being
nothing prejudicial to the privileges and customs of the said Isle, from
which it is not our purpose at all to derogate. Given (as before said) under
our signet at our Court at Greenwich, on the last day of June, in the year of
our Reign of England, France and Ireland, the one and twentieth, and of
Scotland the six and fiftieth. CHAP. VIII.
(1) For what cause it pleased his Majesty to begin with Jarsey. (2) A
representation of such motives whereon the like may be effected in the Isle of
Guernzey. (3) The indignity done by a Minister hereof to the Church of England.
(4) The calling of the Ministers in some reformed Churches how defensible. (5)
The circumstances both of time and persons how ready for an alteration. (6) The
grievances of the Ministry against the Magistrates. (7) Proposals of such
means as may be fittest in the managing of this design. (8) The submission of
the Author and the work unto his Lordship. The conclusion of the whole. Our
return to England.

I Now am come unto the fourth and last part of this discourse, intended once
to have been framed by way of suit unto your Lordship, in the behalf of the
other Island not yet weaned from the breasts of their late mother of Geneva.
But finding that course not capable of those particulars which are to follow; I
chose rather to pursue that purpose by way of declaration. My scope and
project, to lay before your Lordship such reasons which may encite you to make
use of that favor which most worthily you have attained to with his Majesty,
in the reduction of this Isle of Guernzey to that ancient order by which it
formerly was guided, and wherein it held most conformity with the Church of
England. Before I enter on with argument, I shall remove a doubt which might be
raised about this business; as viz. For what cause his late most excellent
Majesty proceeded to this alteration in one Island, not in both; and being
resolved to try his forces on the one only; why he should rather sort out
Jarsey. A doubt without great difficulty to be cleared. For had his Majesty
attempted both at once, the Ministers of both Islands had then communicated
counsels, banded themselves in a league, and by a mutual encouragement
continued more peremptory to their old Mumpsimus. It is an ancient principle in
the arts of Empire, Divide and impera; and well noted by the State-historian,
that nothing more advantaged the affairs of Rome in Britain, then that the
natives never met together to reason of the common danger. Ita dum singuli
pugnabant, universi vincebantur. And on the other side his Majesty soresaw for
certain, that if one Island once were taken off, the other might with greater
ease be persuaded to conform. Being resolved then to attempt them single,
there was good reason why he should begin with Jarsey first, as unto which he
was to send a new Governor, not yet engaged unto a party, and pliable to his
instructions. Whereas Sir Tho. Leighton still continued in his charge at
Guernzey, who having had so main a hand in the introduction of the Plat-forme,
could not be brought with any stomach to intend an alteration of his own
counsels.

But not to lose my self in the search of Princes counsels, which commonly are
too far removed from vulgar eyes, let us content our selves with knowing the
event; which was, that by his means the Isle of Jarsey was reduced unto a
Discipline conformable to that of England, and thereby an easy way for the
reforming also that in Guernzey. For the accomplishment of which design, may
it please your Lordship to take notice of these reasons following, by which it
is within my hopes, your Lordship possibly may be persuaded to deal in it. A
Jove principium.

And here (as in a Christian duty I am bound) I propose unto your Lordship in
the first place, the honor which will redound unto the Lord in this
particular, by the restoring of a Discipline unto the smallest Oratory of his
Church, which you assure your self to be most answerable to his holy word, and
to the practice of those blessed spirits the Apostles. For why may not I say
unto your Lordship, as Mardochaus once to Hester, though the case be somewhat
different, Who knows whether you be come unto these dignities, for such a
time as this? And why may it not be said of you even in the application unto
this particular designment, That unto whom so much is given, of him also shall
much be required? Private exployts and undertakings are expected even from
private persons. But God has raised up you to public honors, and therefore
looks that you should honor him in the advancement and undertaking of such
counsels as may concern his Church in public. And certainly, if (as I verily
persuade my self) your counsels tend unto the peace and glory of the Chureh;
the Church, I mean, whereof you are so principal a member: You shall not
easily encounter with an object, whereon your counsels may be better busied. So
strangely do these men disgrace your blessed Mother, and lay her glory in the
dust. Two instances hereof I shall present unto your Lordship to set the better
edge on your proceedings, though otherwise I had forborne to meddle with
particulars. It pleased his Majesty for the assurance of these Islands, to send
into each of them two Companies of Soldiers, which were equally distributed.
But such was the peevish obstinacy of one of the Ministers of this Guernzey,
that he would not allow their Minister to read prayers unto them in his Church,
at such times when himself and people did not use it. At last on much entreaty
he was contented to permit it, but with express condition, that he should not
either read the Litany, or administer the Communion. Since when, as often as
they purpose to receive the Sacrament, they have been compelled to ferry over
to the Castle, and in the great hall there celebrate the holy Supper. As little
is our Church beholding to them in her Festivals, as in her Liturgy. For
whereas, at the Town of St. Peter's on the Sea, they have a Lecture every
Thursday, upon which day the Feast of Christ's Nativity was solemnized with us
in England, anno 1623. the same party chose rather to put off the Sermon for
that time, then that any the small lest honor might reflect upon the day. O
curvae in terris animae, and coelestium inanes. An opposition far more
superstitious then any ceremony, observation of a day, though merely Jewish.

Next to the honor due to God and to his Church, is that which all of us are
obliged to tender to our Princes, as being Gods by office, and nursing fathers
of that Church whereof they are. Therefore I represent in the next rank unto
your Lordship a consideration of the honor which you shall here in do unto
your Kings. To the one, your late Master of happy memory, who gave you first
his hand to guide you unto greatness, in the pursuit of his intendments. So
glorious were the purposes of that Heroic Prince, for the secure and
flourishing tranquillity of Gods holy Church, that certainly it were impiety if
any of them be permitted to miscarry. To the other our now gracious Sovereign,
who has doubled the promotions conferred upon you by his father; in being an
author to him of those thoughts which may so much redound unto his glory; the
rather, because, in case his Majesty should find a time convenient to go
forward in his Fathers project, of reducing all the Churches Protestant unto
one Discipline and Liturgy; there might not an objection thwart him, drawn
from home. Otherwise it may perhaps be unto him by some of those which do not
fan^^ the proposal as Demades once to Philip, (...), etc. That first he might
do well to compose the differences in his own dominions, b(...)re he motion a
consormity to others. At the least, he may be sure to look for this reply from
Scotland, when ever he proposes to them the same business. The Ministers of
Jarsey, a before I have shown your Lordship, denied admission to the book of
Common Prayer, as not imposed upon the Scots; (...) better reason may the Scots
refuse to entertain it, as not imposed on those of Gu^^zey.

Besides the honor due to God, the Church, and to the King, there is an honor
next in order to the calling of the Priest. A calling, as much stomached in
general by all that party, so most especially reviled by those amongst our
selves for Antichristian, tyrannous, a divelish ordinance a bastardly
government, and the like. Nor do I think that those of Guernzey are better
affected to it, though more moderate in professing their dislike: for did they
but approve the hierarchy of Bishops, they would not then proceed so
unwarrantably as now they do, in the ordination of their Ministers. I call it
unwarrantable proceeding, because the lawful and ordinary door of entrance unto
the Ministry, was never shut unto this people; and therefore their
preposterous entry upon this sacred calling, either by the backdoor or by the
window, the more unanswerable. Whereas it may be pleaded in the behalf of those
in some parts beyond the seas, that they could not meet with any Bishops which
would give them ordination, unless they would abjure the Gospel as they then
professed it, and therefore that necessity compelled them to the private way of
imposing hands on one another. In which particular, the case of some reformed
Churches, may not unfitly be resembled unto that of Scipio, as it is related to
us in the third book of Valerius Max. cap. 7. upon some want of money for the
furtherance of the necessary affairs of state, he demanded a supply from the
common treasury. But when the Questor pretending that it was against the Laws,
refused to open it, himself a private person, seized the Keys, Patefacto
aerario legem utilitati cedere coegit; and overruled the Law by the
advancement of the Weal public. In like manner (which is I think the most and
best that can be said in this behalf) to promote the reformation of Religion,
many good men made suit to be supplied out of the common treasury, to be
admitted to the preaching of the word according to the ordinary course of
ordination; which when it was denied them by the Questors or Prelates of those
days; they chose rather to receive it at the hands of private and inferior
Priests, then that the Church should be unfurnished. This may be said for them,
which in excuse of those of Guernzey can never be alleged; whose continual
recourse unto these private keys is done upon no other reason then a dislike
of that high calling to which your Lordship is advanced; which therefore you
are bound, if not to punish in them, yet to rectify.

Two other reasons yet there are which may invite your Lordship to this
undertaking, though not so weighty or of that importance as the former. The
one, that the remainders of that party here at home, may not be hardened in
their obstinacy; the other, that those of Jarsey, be not discouraged in their
submission and conformity. I have already shown unto your Lordship, that the
brethren here in England, never made head against the Church, till the
permission of plat-forme in these Islands. After which, with what violence they
did assail the hierarchy, what clamorus they continually raised against the
Prelates, what superstitions and impieties they imputed to our Liturgy; notius
est quam ut stylo egeat, is too well known to be related. If so, then
questionless it cannot but confirm them in their new devices, to see them
still permitted to this Isle. Nor can they think themselves but wronged, that
still they are contrould and censured for the maintenance of that discipline,
which is by Sovereign authority allowed and licensed; though in other places,
yet in the same dominions. And on the other side, your Lordship may conceive
how just a cause of discontent and of repining it may be to those of Jarsey;
when they shall daily hear it thundered from the Coasts of France, that faintly
they have sold themselves to bondage; whereas the faithful zelots in the Isle
of Guernzey, do still preserve themselves in liberty. Vel ne^trum flammis ure,
velure duos, as the Lover in Ausonius.

From my first rank of motives here presented to your Lordship, which I may
most properly call motives necessary, and in respect unto the cause; I come
next to those of an other quality, which I call motives of convenience, and in
relation to the time. For questionless the time is at this present more
convenient for the accomplishment of this work, then ever we may hope to see
hereafter; whether we consider it in reference unto our Kingdom, or to the
Discipline it self, or to the Governor, or to the people of both sorts, the
Clergy and the Magistrates.

For first, there is at this instant, an established peace between it and
France, concluded on while we were in these Islands, and published immediately
on our coming home; which Realm only carries a covetous and watchful eye upon
those Islands. Were it between us, as it lately was, nothing but wars and
depredations; ^he alteration then perhaps might be unsafe, it being always
dangerous to discontent or charge that Nation, upon whose loyalty we must rely.
Nor can I tell unto what desperate and undutifull practices, the furious heat
of some few Preachers may possibly excite a multitude; when come the worst that
can, there is an enemy at hand that will subscribe to any articles. But now it is
peace, and how long peace will hold, is not easy to determine, depending as it
does, upon the will and pleasure of another.

If, in the second place, we look upon the Discipline it self, we shall find it
well prepared, and ready for a change. For whereas it is ordered in their
Canons (if I so may call them) that the errors of the Consistory shall be
corrected by the Colloquie those of the Colloquie, by the Synod; by the
departure of Jarsey from them, they have no way of further Synods, and
therefore no redress of grivances. So then either the sentence of the
Colloquie must be unalterable, which is expressly contrary to the platform; or
else there must be granted some other jurisdiction to have power above them,
whereby their censures may be moderated. The first of these would estate their
Colloquies in a tyranny more prevalent and binding, then the chair of Rome so
much complained of. The other opens a way for the entrance of Episcopal
authority, for the admission of Appeals, for the directions of their
proceedings. Add hereunto, that at this time they have a noble Governor, no
friend I am assured to any of that party; and such a one which gladly would
resign those rights of old belonging to the Deanery, when ever it shall please
his Majesty to restore that dignity unto the Island. A Peer so perfectly known
unto your Lordship and to all the Kingdom, that I need not say more of him,
then that which once Velleius did of Junius Blaesus, Vir nescias an utilior
Castris, vel melior toga. It were a matter of no ordinary study to determine,
whether he be more able in the Camp or Senate.

But in alterations, such as these, the fancy and affection of the people is
principally to be attended, as those whom such mutations most properly concern;
wherein I find all things made ready to your Lordships hand, if you vouchsafe
to set it forwards. The Magistrates and more understanding people of the Isle,
offended with the severe and unsociable carriage of the Consistories,
especially of late, since the unlimited Empire of the Colloquie has made that
government unsufferable. Before they had enough to keep themselves from
censure, and their houses from the diligence of Consistoriall spies; when yet
there was an higher Court wherein there was some hope of remedy. But there
being none to appeal from in the Consistory, but those which will condemn them
in the Colloquie, they undergo the yoke with much clamor, but with more
stomach. A stomach which estsoones they spare not to disgorge upon them, as
often, viz. as they come within the compass of their Courts, either in way of
punishment or censure. On the other side the Ministers exclaim against the
Magistrates, as presuming too far above their latchet; pretending that by them
their Discipline has been infringed, their privileges violated, and their
Ministry interrupted. Matters that have not been repined at only in a corner,
but publicly presented as on the Theater, and complained of to their
Governors. For at my Lord of Danbies being there, they articled against the
Magistrates for invading the Ecclesiastical jurisdiction; as viz. that they
take upon them to dissolve contracts made in the presence of the Minister, and
with an invocation of the name of God, which in judgment of the Discipline
(Chap. 12. 1.) are undissoluble. That they had intermedled with the
administration of holy Baptism, a duty merely spiritual. That they had seized
upon the treasures of the Church in some places, and disposed of them at their
pleasure. That they had caused the Ministers to be imprisoned, and there
detained them for a long time, to their great discomfort, and the hazard of
their flooks. And lastly that they had deprived them of the liberty of Natives
in denying them their suffrages for the election of the Curates. Other
grievances there were, but these the principal. True it is, that upon due
examination of particulars, it did appear that the Magistrates had more reason
in their actions, then the Ministers in their complaints. But not having been
accustomed to the like usage, they do esteem it a thraldom so incompetent and
unsupportable, that I persuade my self they sooner would resolve to yield to
any course, then have their doings croft by that tribunal. Sure I am, when
they found so small redress for these (as they conceived) great oppressions,
they made petition to his Lordship to bethink himself on some other way for
their relief, and labored to procure me to be their Mediator to his Lordship
in it.

These circumstances also happily concurring, portend, in my opinion, as great
an alteration in this state Ecclesiastical, as the conjunction of some
powerful Planets does sometimes upon the temporal. And if your Lordship
should be wanting now unto present opportunity, it may be such a confluence of
preparatives and helps may hardly be met withal hereafter. Presuming
therefore, that your Lordship will not neglect the advantage offered, I should
next proceed unto those means which might best be used in the effecting of this
work; but what were this but to read a lecture of the wars to Hannibal, to play
a part on the Stage in the sight of Roscius? For whether your Lordship shall
think most fit to treat first of it with my Lord the Governor, that he may
make plain the way before you, and facilitate the business; or whether it may
be thought most proper, that some negotiate with the people and the Jurates, to
commence a suit in this behalf unto the Council; or whether that the Ministers
themselves, in this conjuncture of time, oppressed, as they conceive it, by the
Civil Magistrates encroaching on them, may not with great facility be
persuaded to solicit for a change; who can so well determine as your
Lordship, whom long experience and natural abilities have made perfect in
these arts? Only let me beseech your Lordships leave to enjoy mine own folly,
and for a while to act my part, to read my lecture, though Hannibal and Roscius
be in presence.

At such time as by the Ministers his Lordship was petitioned to resolve upon
some course for their relief; they made request to me to solicit for them
their desires, to be a remembrancer for them to his Lordship. To which I
answered, that I could direct them in a way which should for ever free them
from that yoke which so much they feared, and if they would vouchsafe to see my
Chamber, I would there impart it. A motion not made unto the walls, or lost in
the proposal; for down unto my Lodging they descended, and there we joined our
selves in Council. The Petitioners were five in number, viz. De la March,
Millet, Perchard, Picote, and De la Place; my self alone, and not provided
(save in Wine and Sider) for their entertainment. But as Lactantius in an
equal case, Necesse est, ut me causae bonitas fac^at eloquentem; presuming on
the goodness of my cause, but more upon their ignorance, I was resolved to bid
them battle. Immediately upon the opening of the Counsel, I was importuned my
opinion; whereto I freely made them answer, the only course whereby they might
subsist entire and free from bondage, was to address themselves to his Majesty
for the restitution of the Dean. But this say they is Physic worse then the
disease; and thereupon the battails began to join with greater violence; with
violence it was, and therefore (as we are instructed in Philosophy) of no long
continuance; for presently upon the first encounter their ranks were broken,
and their forces disunited. Picote for his part protested, that he had always
been an enemy to Lay Elders, and that he could not see by what authority of
Scripture they were permitted in the Churches. Perchard was well enough
content, that the dispensing of the poor man's box might be committed unto
others, and that the Deacons as being a degree or step unto the Ministry,
might be employed about the treasures of salvation. Millet stood silent all the
while, and as I think reserved himself to try the fortune of another day. De la
March and De la Place (this De la Place is he who abandoned Jarsey upon his
failing of the Deanship) what they could not make good by reason, supplied by
obstinacy. In my life I never knew men more willing to betray a cause, or less
able to maintain it. My inference hereupon is this, that if his Majesty should
signify unto them, that it is his royal pleasure to admit a Dean among them,
or else repair unto the Court to give a reason of their refusal; they sooner
would forsake and quit their cause, then either be resolved to agree about it,
or venture to defend it. If I were sure to make no use of Logic, till these
men shall run the hazard of a disputation, I would presently go and burn my
Aristotle.

To draw unto an end, for I have been too tedious to your Lordship. Before I
pluck off my disguise and leave the stage whereon I act, I could me thinks add
somewhat here about the choicing of a man most fit for this authority. In which
particular, as I stand well affected to Perchard, for a moderate and quiet man,
so has he also a good repute in all the Island, both for his vein of
Preaching, his liberal hospitality, and plausible demeanor. Or if your
Lordship think a forainer more fit, there being now the Parish of St. Saviors
void, and so full room for that induction, I durst propose to you Olivier of
Jarsey; a man which I persuade my self, I may say safely, not inferior unto
any of both Islands in point of Scholarship, and well affected to the English
form of Government. Add to this that already he is acquainted with the nature
of the place, as having executed the office of the Commissary or Subdean, ever
since the introduction of the charge, and therefore not to seek in the managing
and carriage of his jurisdiction. But good God! what follies do we daily run
into, when we conceive our selves to be disguised, and that our actions are not
noted? It is therefore high time for me to unmaske my self, and humbly crave
your Lordships pardon, that under any habit I should take upon me to advise. A
further plaudite then this I do not seek for, then that you will vouchsafe to
excuse my boldness, though not allow it: the rather because a zeal unto the
beauteous uniformity of the Church did prompt me to it. But this, and this
discourse, such as it is, I consecrate unto your Lordship; for whose honor,
next under Gods, I have principally pursued this argument. For my self, it will
be unto me sufficient glory, that I had any, though the least, hand in such a
pious work; and shall be happy, if in this, or in any other your Lordships
counsels for the Churches peace, I may be worthy of employment. Nor need your
Lordship fear, that in the prosecution of this project, you may be charged with
an innovation. To pursue this purpose is not to introduce a novelty but to
restore a Discipline, to revive the perfect service of God, which so long has
been, to say the best of it, in a Lethargy, and to make the Jerusalem of the
English Empire, like a City which is at unity within it self.

Sic nova dum condis, revocas (vir sum) priord;
Debentur quae sunt, quaeque fuere tibi.
Si priscis servatur honos te Praeside, templis;
Et casa tam culto sub Jove numen habet. Thus (Reverend Lord) to you,
Churches both old and new
Do owe themselves; since by your pious care.
New ones are built, and old ones in repair.
Thus by your careful zeal
Unto the Churches weal,
As the old Temples do preserve their glories,
So private houses have their Oratories.


It is now time to acquaint your Lordship with the success and safety of our
return; all things being done and fully settled for the peace and security of
those Islands, which was the only cause of our voyage thither. Concerning
which, your Lordship may be pleased to know in a word, that the crossnesse of
the winds and roughness of the water, detained us some days longer in Castle
Cornet, then we had intended; but at the last, on Thursday April 2. being
Maundy Thursday, anno 1629. we went aboard our Ships, and hoised sail for
England. It was full noon before we were under sail, and yet we made such good
way, that at my waking the next morning, we were come near the Town of Peal,
and landed safely the same day in the Bay of Teichfeild, where we first took
Ship; his Lordship being desirous to repose himself with the said Mr.
Bromfeild, till the Feast of Easter being passed over might render him more
capable to pursue his Journey.

And now I am safely come into my Country, where according to the custom of
the Ancients, I offer up my thanksgiving to the God of the waters, and testify
before his Altars the grateful acknowledgement of a safe voyage and a
prosperous return, blessings which I never merited.

-- Me tabula sacer
Votiva paries indicat uvida
Suspendisse potenti
Vestimenta maris Deo. My Votive Table on the Sacred wall
Does plainly testify to all,
That I those grateful vows have paid,
Which in the tumults of the deep I made,
To him that does the Seas command,
And holds the waters in his hand.


The End of the Last Book, and the Second Journey.

