

Merlin well verst in many an hidden spell,
His Countries Omen did long since foretell,
Graced in his Time by sundry Kings he was,
And all that he predicted came to pass.
The Life of MERLIN, Surnamed AMBROSIVS.

His Prophesies, and Predictions Interpreted; and their truth made good by our
English Annalls.

Being a Chronographicall History of all the Kings, and memorable passages of
this Kingdom, from BRUTE to the Reign of our Royal Sovereign King CHARLES.

A Subject never published in this kind before, and deserves to be known and
observed by all men.

Quotque aderant vates, Rebar adesse Deos. LONDON: Printed by I. Oaks, and are
to be sold by Jasper Emery in Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the Eagle and
Child, near St. Austins Gate. 1641.

To the worthy (and by me much Honored) Master JAMES METTAM Esquire, etc.
SIR, BY that generous and noble Character, which long since I have heard
conferred upon you, my sole ambition was to attend so happy an opportuninity as
to be any way known unto you: But when time so far seconded my wishes, that
upon an unexpected meeting I was made so fortunate, not only to be admitted
into your company, but accepted into your knowledge, (for which I stand much
engaged to your kinseman and friend Mr. T. B.) I instantly apprehended that
report came much short of your worth and merit, which (I ingenuously confess
transcended my expectation;) for besides your generous affability and
courtesy, (the most graceful garnish, and best decorements that become and
adorn a true-bred Gentleman) finding you not only generally addicted to the
encouragement of all good Arts, and Sciences, but especially to the professors
of Literature and Learning, and when upon further discourse I understood, that
you more particularly had not only took view of some of my weak Labors, but
crowned them with your Verdict: These inducements so far emboldned me, as to
offer these my unpolisht papers to your perusal and patronage, which if you
shall be pleased to countenance; I shall remain confident against all
malicious prejudice: desiring rather to stand to the judicious censure of one
truly rational, then to the ignorant Nonsense of a numerous rabble. Worthy
Sir: complement is a thing I have ever studied to avoid, and (I presume) you
were never pleased to affect: then in a word, wishing you the accomplishment of
all your noble desires, alternatly corresponding to your worthy deserts, I
commend you (my generous Patron) to the Almighties gracious protection, ever
remaining,

Yours obsequiously devoted, T. H.
To the Reader.
COurteous, and considerate Reader, I have here exposed to thy especial
perusal, the life and prophesies of our famous predictor, Merlinus, surnamed
Ambrosius, who though he lived in the time of profane paganism, was a
professed Christian, and therefore his Auguries the better to be approved,
andallowed: thou have withal their exposition and explanation, expressly and
punctually making plain and evident, how genuinely and properly they comply
with the truth of our Chronology: in which you shall find (adding the
supplement of the History from Brute, who laid the first foundation of our
British Colony, to the time of King Vortigernus, or Vortiger the Usurper of the
Crown, under whose Reign Merlin first flourisht) a true catalogue of all the
Kings of this Island, with a summary of all passages of State Ecclesiastical
or Temporal, of any remarke or moment, during their Principalities and
Dominions, in so much that scarce anything shall be here wanting to thy best
wishes, if thou be desirous to be instructed, and faithfully informed in the
knowledge of our English Annalls: For in the steed of a large study book, and
huge voluminous Tractate, able to take up a whole year in reading, and to load
and tire a Porter in carrying, thou have here a small Manuell, containing all
the pith and marrow of the greater, made portable for thee (if thou so please)
to bear in thy pocket, so that thou may say, that in this small compendium
or abstract, thou have Hollinshed, Polychronicon, Fabian, Speed, or any of the
rest, of more Giantlike bulk or binding: to which my short Abbreviary, I
strive to make this my Prologue or Preface to thee alike suitable, being as
succinct and briefly contrived, as the former summarily comprehended, desiring
thee to read considerately, and withal to censure charitably, and so (without
further complement) wishing thy care in the one, and courtesy in the other,
with a favorable pardon, of some few errors committed in the press, I bid
thee farewell.

Thomas Heywood.
A narration of the Kings Reigns from Brute to Vortiger, and from Vortiger to
King Lud, in the first six Chapters: and from K. Lud to K. Charles.

Chap. 1. Brutes first plantation in this Island. How he divided it amongst his
three sons; of several famous Cities, builded here by sundry Kings, and how
diverse Rivers took their first name: Of all the remarkable passages that happened
in their Reigns: A catalogue from Brute, etc.

Chap. 2. A Continuation of the History of the British Kings, unto the time
that Julius Caesar made conquest of the Island: the building of diverse Cities
and Towns. Two things especially remarkable in an indulgent mother, and a most
natural brother: sundry other passages worthy observation. The City of
Troynovant, how called London.

Chap. 3. The first conquest of this land by Julius Caesar: Britain made
tributary to the Romans: The birth of our Savior under Cimbeline K. of
Britain: How Southampton came to be so called, Vespatians conquest of the Isle
of Wight: of Catnesse in Scotland: of Lucius the first Christian K. of the
Britains: and of other Roman Governors.

Chap. 4. The Duke of Cornwall made King of Britain: how Walbrooke took first
name: Constantine the Roman marieth with Helena, daughter to King Coill, and is
made King: His Reign and burial: His son Constantine made King after him, who
was called the Great and was the first Christian Emperor: His great devotion,
and after falling into Heresy: Octavian his Deputy in Britain, usurpeth, and
after made King: Maximinus a Roman, by marriage with his daughter, succeeds him.

Chap. 5. Maximian made King of Britain, and after Emperor: How Armorica came
to be called Little Britain, and this, Britain the Great: Of Ursula, and the
11000 Virgins: Gratian the last Roman that was King of the Land: The great
distresses of the Kingdom: the cessation of their Tribute paid to Rome:
Constantine brother to Aldroenus made K. of the Realm, his death, issue.

Chap. 6. A necessary digression showing the lives and reigns of 33 Kings of
Britain scarce mentioned by any of our English remembrancers, with an exact
computation of the times, etc.

Chap. 1. Of the strange birth of Ambrosius Merlin, whether he were a Christian
or no? and by what spirit he prophesied, etc. page 1.

Chap. 2. In whose Reign Merlin was born. How the state of Britain stood in
those days, with diverse necessary occurrences pertinent to the story. page 9.

Chap. 3. By what miraculous accident young Merlin came to be known to King
Vortiger: of the combat betwixt the red and the white Dragon, and his prophecy
thereof, etc. p. 18

Chap. 4. Merlins former prophecy explained, sundry prestigious acts done by
him to delight the King: His prophecy of the Kings death, etc. p. 25

Chap. 5. Uterpendragon succeeds his brother Aurelius: He is enamoured of
Igerna, wife to the Duke of Cornwall, whom by the art of Merlin he enjoyes, of
whom he begot King Arthur, page 32

Chap. 6. Merlins former prophecy made plain, concerning king Arthur, with
sundry other occurrences pertinent to the English History, page 41.

Chap. 7. Of the conception and birth of these 7 pious and religious brothers.
And being sent to death, how preserved, educated and doctrinated: Merlins
prophesies, and their explanation: p. 49

Chap. 8. He prophesies of the civil wars that shall be in Britain in the
time of Cadwallo: And of the great dearth and desolation in the Reign of
Cadwallader, etc. p. 58

Chap. 9. Of diverse bloody battails fought betwixt Canutus and Edmund: Their
great opposition ended in a single Duel. They make peace, and equally divide
the kingdom betwixt them, p. 68

Chap. 10. Merlins prophecy of Hardy Canutus, and Earl Goodwin, which
accordingly happened: his many Tyrannies, amongst other his tithing of the Norman
Gentlemen, etc. p. 76.

Chap. 11. The landing of Duke William with the Normans: The battle betwixt
him and Harold, in which Harold is slain, being the last King of the Saxon
blood. Will. conquereth, etc. p. 87

Chap. 12. The prediction of the two Dragons, made good by the subsequent
History, in Robert and William, the two sons of the Conqueror, who the Lion of
Justice was: and what was meant by his Alchymy, etc. p. 96.

Chap. 13. A brief relation of the troublesome Reign of King Stephen, and his
opposition against Mawd the Empress, of Henry Short Mantle, and his
proceedings, with a continuance of our English History, etc. p. 106

Chap. 14. Diverse remarkable passages during the Reign of Henry the second,
his numerous Issue, and how they were affected toward him: his vic^ and
virtues, his good and bad fortune: all which were by this our Prophet
predicted, p. 116

Chap. 15. The Inauguration of Richard the first, surnamed Cordelion, a
prediction of his Reign. His wars in the Holy Land, his imprisonment by the
Duke of Austria: his brother John's usurpation, his second Coronation, with his
unfortunate death, etc. p. 127

Chap. 16. The rest of the prophecy made good in the subsequence, the
troublesome Reign of K. John, his loss of Normandy: his Land interdicted by
the Pope, to whom he is compeld to resign his Crown his death, etc. p. 137

Chap. 17. A continuance of some passages in King John's Reign. Henry the third
succeeds his Father, a prediction of his Reign: his brother Richard made king
of the Romans. Henry's long Reign: the mad Parliament, p. 147

Chap. 18. The death of Henry the third, and Richard Earl of Cornwall king of
the Romans: Prince Edwards victories in the Holy Land: His Coronation: the
prophecy of his reign, etc. p. 157

Chap. 19. The right that the Kings of England have anciently had to the Crown
of Scotland, for which they did them homage. K. Edwards victorious wars in
Scotland. The prophecy fulfilled. His death. And coronation of his son, etc.
p. 167

Chap. 20. The Kings unfortunate wars in Scotland: The battle of Banno^urn,
etc. Barwick betrayed to the Scots: The pride and insolency of the Spencers:
Their misleading the K: etc. p. 178

Chap. 21. The deposing of Edward 2d: his repentance, his death, his son Edward
made K^g. A prophecy of his reign. His great victory over the Scots, with the
taking of Barwick. His famous victory at Sea over the French, etc. p. 189

Chap. 22. The famous battle of Poytyers, fought by Edward the Black Prince,
in which he took John the French King prisoner: His conquest in Spain: The
memorable act of William Wal worth, Lord Major, etc. p. 201

Chap. 23. The Duke of Gloucester by a Parliament reformeth the Commonwealth.
John of Gaunt claims his title in Spain, King Richard marries the French Kings
daughter: Difference betwixt the King and Gloucester. His murder in Calice: The
murmur of the Commons, etc. p. 213

Chap. 24. The coronation of Henry the 4, with his great Feast held in
Westminster Hall. A great conspiracy intended against him, but prevented, the
lamentable murder of King Richard the second in Pomfret Castle, by Sir Pierce
of Exto^ His valor at his death. His Epitaph. The great riches found in his
treasury, etc. p. 224

Chap. 25. The Coronation of Henry the fifth: A prophecy of his reign: His
victorious battle over the French at Agencourt: His second Voyage into France:
His victories by Sea and Land: He is made heir (by the marriage of his wife) to
the Crown of France: His third Voyage into France: The birth of Pr. Henry: The
death of Henry the fifth, p. 236.

Chap. 27. The Duke of Gloucester made Protector. The Duke of Bedford Regent of
France, of Joan de pasil a Sorceresse: Henry the sixth crowned in Pa^is. A
prophecy of his reign: the death of the D. of Gloucester. The death of the
Marquis of Suffolk: The insurrection of the Commons under Jack Cade, His
proceedings and death: the Duke of Somerset gives up Normandy. The Duke of
York takes arms, his person seized against the Kings promise, and for
feareset at liberty. p. 248.

Chap. 28. The ambition of Queen Margaret: The battle at Saint Albons, York
made Protector. The Queens practice against the Lords. The battle at
Northampton. York proclaimed heir to the Crown. York slain in the battle at
Wakefield. Henry deposed, and Edward Earl of March made king. A prophecy of
his Reign. The battle at Exham. King Henry taken and sent to the Tower. The
marriage of Edward. He flies the Land. Henry again made king. p. 259.

Chap. 29. Edward proclaimed usurper of the Crown, and Gloucester traitor: his
landing at Rave^sport: the battle at Barnet: the battle at Teuxbury: king
Henry murdered in the Tower, and after him the Duke of Clarence. The death of
Edward the fourth: Gloucester takes upon him to be Protector of the young king,
etc. p. 272.

Chap. 30. Dissension betwixt the King and the Duke of Buckingham: Richard
insidiateth the life of Richmond: Buckingham takes arms against the King, and
is beheaded. Banister perfidious to his Lord: Queen Annes policy and tyranny:
His Laws: Richmond landeth at Milford Haven: The battle at Bosworth: The
death of Richard: Richmond made King: A prophecy of his Reign, etc. p. 283

Chap. 31. The Earl of Northumberland slain by the Commons: The Matchevilian
plots of the Duchess of Burgundy, to disturb the peace of king Henry: Perkin
Warbeck her Creature: he is nobly married in Scotland, and taken for the Duke
of York: the death of the Lord Standley, and others: Diverse insurrections
about Perkin: his death, with the young Earl of Warwick: the death of the
king: A prophecy of the reign of Henry the eighth. p. 293

Chap. 32. Prince Henry married to his brothers wife: he wins Turwin and
Turney in France; Floden-field, with the famous victory against the Scots.
Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolk marries the French Queen the kings sister.
The Emperor Charles the fifth made knight of the Garter, etc. p. 304.

Chap. 33. The death of Henry the eighth: Edward the sixth crowned; a
calculation of his reign: Musse Iborow field won by the Lord Protector, etc.
p. 315.

Chap. 34. The Lady Jane proclaimed Q. Northumberlands Commission to suppress
the Lady Mary: He is arrested of high treason: The Coronation of Q. Mary: A
prediction of her Reign: The Romish Religion restored: The death of
Northumberland: Of Suffolk: Of Guilford Dudley: Of the Lady Jane Gray: her
character: The death of Cranmer, Ridley, and Latimer: The life of Cardinal
Poole, twice elected Pope, etc. p. 326

Chap. 36. King Philips entertainment into the Land, presented with the Garter:
He is made K. of Naples and Jerusalem: the great solemnity of the King and
Queens Marriage at Winchester: Their titles, their riding through London: The
Queen rumoured to be with Child, King Philips cautelous proceedings: he
favors the Lady Elisabet. He leaves the Land: Queen Mary's discontent at
his departure: The loss of Callis, p. 336

Chap. 37. A brief nomination of her troubles, wrought by the Popish Clergy:
Her passage through London, to her coronation with the speeches spoke in the
pageants: A short remembrance of the prime passages in her reign. The former
prediction fulfild, her death: other predictions fathered upon Merlin
explained, etc. p. 347

Chap. 38. The title of King James to the Crown. His coming into England: A
prophecy of his Reign. The first treason attempted against him. The Gunpowder
treason, and what the conspirators were. The king of Denmark twice comes
into England. King Charles proclaimed King, his Fathers Funerals, etc. p. 361

A Chronographical History of the Kings of Britain, from the first plantation
of this Island by Brute, and his Cousin Corinaeus, to the Reign of King
Vortiger: In whose time Ambrosius Merlinus began to utter his Predictions.
CHAP. 1.
Brutes first plantation in this Island. How he divided it amongst his three
sons: of several famous Cities, builded here by sundry Kings, and how diverse
Rivers took their first name: of all the remarkable passages, that hapened in
their reigns: A Catologue of the Kings continued from Brute to the end of his
Line and offspring.

FOr the better illustration of this present work intended, it shall not be
amiss to show you a brief progress of all the memorable passages of the
time, before we come to the Prophecy, with a Catalogue of the Kings of this
Island, and what Remarkable things happened in their reign. To begin with the
first: Brute, who was of the ancient and noble blood of the Trojans, descended
from Aeneas and Creusa, the How Brute was descended.
daughter of King Priam: These had a s^nne called Ascanius, after his Father
King of Italy) Brute was the son of Sylvius, Aenaeas the son of Ascanius:
This Brute at fifteen years of age, being hunting, by the unfortunate
glanceing of an Arrow, slew his father, and had been also in his birth the
death of his mother: but for the last disasterous act, he willingly exiled
himself, and taking with him a choice company of adventurers, thought to
discover some new plantation. To omit his many troubles both by Land and Sea,
in which he was still most victoriously prosperous; at length he incountred
with a small navy of ships, of which, a Trojane, and his near kinseman was
Captain, whose name was Corinaeus, who joining their Corinaeus cousin to Brute
forces together, and after diverse and sundry perils landed in this Island,
(of the white and chalky Cliffes) called Albion, where finding none but Giants
of mighty stature, he destroyed the most part of them: of whom the greatest
both in bulk and command was called Gogmagog, with whom Corinaeus wrestling to
prove their trial of strength, Gogmagog in his gripe broke a rib in the side
of Corinaeus: at which he being enraged, gathering all his spirits about him,
cast him down the high Rock of Dover, (the place where they proved the
mastery) which is called the fall of Gogmagog unto this day: for which, and
other his valiant acts before The fall of Gogmagog.
achieved, he gave him that entire Province, which from his name bears the
title of Cornwall.

Brute then taking full view of the Island, The building of Troynovant, since
called London.
searching up the River of Thames, built upon it a City; which in remembrance
of the late subverted Troy, he called Troynovant, or new Troy, now London: this
done, he put his Soldiers to tilling of the Earth, and governed the Realm
peaceably for the space of twenty four years: He had by his wife Ignogen, the
daughter of Pandrusus, three sons, betwixt whom in his life time he divided
his Kingdom: to How he divided the Kingdom.
Locrine the eldest he gave all that is called England: but then Logria after
his name:) To the second Cambrius, or Cambre he left the Country of Wales (at
first) from him called Cambria: To the third Albanact, he gave the North part
of the Land, then titled from him Albania, now Scotland. That done, he
expired, The death of Brute.
and was buried at Troynovant: and this happened in the year of the world
four thousand fourscore and seven.

Locrine being King of Britain, hearing that a King of Scythia had invaded his
brother Albanacts Dominions, and having slain him in battle, governed in his
stead: He with his brother Cambre assembled a mighty Host to avenge his
death, and in a sharp conflict discomfited his whole Army, and so hotly
pursued him in his flight, that this Scythian (which was called Humber) was
drowned in that River Plow the River Humber came to be so called.
which runne^h up from Ravenspurn up to Hul^, which has since borne his name
even to this day. After which victory, Locrin who had espoused Guendolina,
daughter to Corinaeus Duke of Cornwall, grew inamoured of Estrild a beauteous
Lady, and Daughter to the aforesaid Humber, by whom He had a Daughter named
Sabrina: of which his Queen having intelligence, the accited her Father and
friends to make War upon her Husband, and flew him in fight, when he had
governed the Realm for the space of twenty years: then the Masculine spirited
Lady took his Concubine Estrild, with her beautiful young daughter Sabrina,
and caused them to be both drowned in that River which parts England and
Wales, and from Sabrina is called Severne to all posterity: The River Severne
whence called.
Then Guendolina took upon her the government of the Land, till her young Son
Madan came to mature age, and then resigned it up entirely into his own hands,
after she had Soveraigniz'd fifteen years.

Madan began his Reign in the year of the World four thousand one hundred
twenty two, of whom is little left worthy memory, but that he tyrannized over
his Subjects, and in the fortieth of his Reign, being at his disport of
Hunting, and lost by his Train, he The death of Madan
was devoured of Wolves, which were then plenteous in the Land, leaving two
Sons, Memprisius and Manlius. These two brothers were at mortal enmity, till
in the end Memprisias the elder caused the other to be traitorously slain,
after which he fell into all kind of vices, and abandoning the bed of his
lawful wife, used the company of many prostitutes and Concubines: and then
into the brutish sin of Sodomitry, for which he grew hated both of God and
man, whose body also was (in hunting) torn to pieces by wild beasts, leaving
behind him one The death of Memprisius
son begotten in lawful wedl^cke, named Ebrank.

He began his Reign in the year of the World four thousand one hundred
fourscore and two: he had one and twenty wives, of whom he received twenty
sons and thirty daughters. The eldest of which was Gualeu: al of Anumerous
issue.
them he sent to Alba Silvius, (the eleventh King of Italy, and sixth of the
Latins) to have them married to the bl^ud of the Trojans: He was a great
Warrior, and conquered in Germany and els-where: he builded Caerbranke, now
called York, one hundred and forty years, after the The building of York.
erecting of London, he built also in Scotland, the Castle of Maidens, now
called Edenborough Edenborough Castle.
Castle. And after with a strong army pierced Gallia, returning thence, with
great triumph and riches, who when he had reigned sixty years died, and was
buried in York, leaving his eldest son Brute Greenshield to succeed him in
the Kingdom, of whom is left no memory worthy the recital, but that he
expired, and lies buried by his Father, whose successor was his son Leil or
Leir, who built Careleir or Carleil, The (...) of (...).
who in the latter end of his Reign gave himself wholly to sloth, by which
diverse uprores grew in the Realm, not at his death appeased, whom succeeded
his son Lud, surnamed Hurdebras, who was inaugurated in the year of the
world four thousand two hundred The building of Canterbury, Winchester, and
Shaftsbury
threescore and nineteen, he prudently appeased those combustions begot in his
fathers days. He builded the Town of Kaerkin, now called Canterbury, and
Caerguent, now Winton, or Winchester, and another titled Mount Palatine, now
Sexton or Shaftsbury: he reigned thirty nine years, and left a son called
Bladud.

This Bladud professed himself a great Astrologer, and studied the art of
Necromancy, he builded the Town of Caerbadon, now called Bath, and was the
first founder of the hot Baths: Bathe and the hot Baths.
this King attempting to fly from the top of Apollo's Temple to the ground,
his art failing him, he broak his neck in the fall, when he had reigned twenty
years, leaving his son Leir to The death of Bladud.
succeed him. Leir was of noble conditions, and kept the Land in peace and
tranquillity, he built the City of Caerleir, now Leicester: he Leicester.
had no son, but three only daughters: Gonovilla, Ragan, and Cordeilla (the
youngest whom he best loved,) who being grown in age, desired to know which of
his daughters affected him most? the first protested she loved him better then
her own soul; the second swore, her love was inexpressible, for she
preferred his love before all things under the Sun, which answers Leirs three
daughters.
much pleased him: then he demanded the like of the youngest? who told him
she could not flatter like her sisters, but she loved him as far as he was
worthy to be beloved, and as much as a child ought to love a father: which
answer much distasting him, he married his eldest daughter to the Duke of
Cornwall; and the second to the Duke of Albania, and betwixt them divided his
Land after his disease, but for the younger he reserved no dowre at all.

Notwithstanding which, Aganippus, a King amongst the Galls, hearing of her
great beauty and virtue, came into this Kingdom, and took her to wife, to whom
her father would neither part with gold nor jewels, nor any remembrance of his
love, but glad to be so rid of her; It was not long after that the two sisters
grieved that he lived so long, incited the two Dukes The ingratitude of the two
sisters
their husbands, called Ma^glanus and Hemminus, who rose up in arms against
him, and divided his Dominion betwixt them, so that of force he was compeld to
fly into France to be relieved of his youngest daughter, whom he h^d before
so much despised, whom she no sooner saw, but she expressed unto him all the
filial duty that could be expected from a father, so that he now began to
distinguish betwixt flattery and fair words, and natural and pious
indulgence: briefly she animated her Husband to The love of Co deilla to her
Father.
take his quarrel in hand, who entered into the Land with a puissant army, and
re-instated him in his thr^ne, who after he had ruled the Kingdom forty
years, died and was buried at Caerleil, leaving his daughter Cordeilla to
inherit the Kingdom, who by the general assent of all the Peers and Commons
was admitted as Queen: who for the space of five years governed the Land with
great prudence, and the general love of the multitude, til Morgan, and
Cunedagius the sons to her two elder sisters, invaded her Kingdom, and
surprising her, put her into close prison: which servitude her great spirit not
able to endure, she with her own hands slew her The death of Cordeilla.
self.

These two Nephews to Cordeilla, Morgan and Cunedagius divided the Land betwixt
them: and so continued in great amity for the space of two years, when some
evilly disposed persons, whispered in the ears of Morgan, that it was a great
dishonor unto him, being descended from the elder sister Gonewilla, and her
Husband Maglanus, should part from any of his right to Cunedagius, son to
Ragan the second sister and her Hemminius, and not possess himself of the
whole principality: therefore he made war upon his cousin, who sent to him
messengers to entreat of amity and unity, to which he would by no means
condescend: Therefore Cunedagie, compeld to an unwilling war, gave him
battle, and rowted his whole army, and after chaced him into Wales, where in
a second field Morgan was slain, which place is to this day called Glamorgan,
or Morgans Glamorgan.
Land: after whose death the victor possessed the sole sovereignty, of whom
nothing is left worthy memory, but that after he had reigned three and thirty
years, he was buried at Troynovant, leaving to succeed him a son called
Rivallo. Rivallo.


He governed the Realm honorably, for the space of forty six years, in
which time the greatest thing of remark is, that in the two and thirtieth year
of his Reign, Rome was first The first building of Rome.
builded, in the year of the World four thousand four hundred threescore and
ten, after the first erecting of Troynovant, or London, four hundred and seven
Solary years. After Sisilius.
Rivallo reigned his son Sisilius, forty nine years, and was buried at
Caerbadon, or Bath, leaving no heir of his body lawfully begotten. Him Iago
his Nephew succeeded, he Reigned Iago.
five and twenty years, died without issue, and lies buried by his Uncle
Rivallo, at Caerbrank, or York. Kinimachus his brother governed the Land after
him for the space of fifty four years, and lies buried by the two forenamed
Kings, he left behind him a son called Gorboduc, in whose time, as in the
Reign of the four last Kings nothing happened, deserving the remembrance of a
Chronicle, but that he governed Gorboduc.
the Realm threescore and three years, dyed and was buried at London, and
left behind him two sons, called Ferrex and Porrex.

These two brothers were made joint Sovereignes Ferrex and Porrex.
of this Kingdom, in the year of the world, four thousand, seven hundred and
eleven, and continued in great fraternallamity for a certain time, which
expired, Porrex being ambitious after the sole and entire sovereignty gathered
a strong power, unknown to his brother) purposing to supplant him from all
Regal dignity, so that being unprovided of an army, he was forced to fly into
France, where he implored the aid and assistance of a potent The death of
Ferrex.
Duke named Gunhardus, or Swardus, who furnished him with soldiers sufficient,
so that he re-entred the Land with his Host of Gauls, of which Porrex hearing
met him with his Britans, and gave him battle, in which Ferrex was
unfortunately slain: after which victory, retyring himself to his palace,
where Widen (or as some Authors name her) Iudon his mother remained, she
setting aside all motherly pity entered his chamber, and by the help of her
women in the dead of night, when he was fast sleeping A crue^t mother. The
death of Porrex.
most cruelly slew him, and after not sated with his death, she cut his body
into small pieces: Thus died the two brothers, when they had ruled the Land in
war and peace five years, and in them ended the Genealogicall Line of Brute,
with whom also I conclude this first Chapter.

CHAP. 2.
A Continuation of the History of the British Kings, unto the time that Julius
Caesar made conquest of the Island: The building of diverse Cities and Towns.
Two things especially remarkable in an indulgent mother, and a most natural
brother: sundry other passages worthy observation. The City of Troynovant, how
called London.

AFter the deaths of these two Princes, the Nobles of the Land fell into great
dissension amongst them selves all hating the memory of Gorbodue, and his
issue, in regard that one brother slew the other, and the most unnatural mother
was the death of the surviver, and because none of Brutus Line was left alive,
the Land was divided in four parts, so that in Albania Britain goverred by
four Dukes.
was one Waler, called Staterius: Pinnor governed Loegria, or middle Britain:
Rudanlus guided Wales, and Clotenus Cornwall, whom the Britains held to be the
most rightful Heir, and all these called themselves Kings, to which some add
a fifth, Yevan King of Northumberland. Briefly, Munmutius Donwallo, Dunwallo re
duceth it into a Monerchy.
son to Clotenus, Duke of Cornwall, by vanquishing the rest, became sole
Sovereign of this Island, in the year of the World four thousand seven
hundred forty eight. He was in all his actions very noble, and built within
London a famous structure, which he called the Temple of Peace, which some hold
to be the same now called Blackwell Hall. He instituted many good and wholesome
Laws. He gave great privileges to the maintaining of Temples, Cities,
Ploughes, etc. He began the four high ways of Britain, which were perfected
by his son Belinus: He built the two Towns of Malmsbury and the Vies, and
was the first that made for himself a Diadem of Gold, with which he was
crowned with great solemnity. Insomuch, that some Writers name him the first
King of Donw^llo the first crowned King of Brit.
Britain, stiling all his predecessors only Dukes, Rulers, and Governors. He
when he had well and honorably governed the Land for the term of forty
years dyed, and was buried in the foresaid Temple of Peace within London,
leaving to succed him two sons, Belinus and Brennus.

These two brothers divided the land betwixt them, and continued in great
fraternall unity for the space of five years: after which term Beliuns and
Brennus.
Brennus ambitious to have more Land or all, made mortal war against his
Brother, who vanquished him in battle, so that he was forced to forsake the
land, and arrived in Armorica, now called Little Britain, some write into
Norway: Howsoever, by the supply and assistance of foreign Princes, he made
many inroads into the Land, (too long here to relate) to the great disturbance
of his brother: At length he assembled a strong and puissant Army, against whom
Belinus came with a mighty host, as his manifest and mortal enemy. But as
their armies were ready to join battle, their Mother, whose name was or
Corniven na.
Corneway, (of An indulgent mother.
a more indulgent and penetrable nature, than the cruel and savage Widen,
before named) exposed her self in person between the two Hoasts; and in a
discreet manner and motherly demeanor, using withal such passionate and
moving Oratory to her two sons, that at length she settled a steadfast unity
and peace betwixt them: After which accord made, they joined both their hoasts,
and with them Conquered a great part of Gallia, Italy, and Germany: which done,
Belinus returned into Britain.

Where when he came, he repaired old and decayed Cities, and also built a new
one upon The City of Legions, Carleon.
the River of Vske, near unto Severne, called Careuske, and after the City of
Legions: because in the time of Claudius Caesar diverse Roman Legions were there
billited and lodged, now called Carleon: He built also an harbor or small
Haven for ships to ride in, in Troynovant; in the Summet or top whereof stood a
vessel of Brass, in which after his death his burnt ashes were enclosed,
which still retains the name of Belingsgate. In which interim, The building of
Belli^sgate.
Brennus desirous to win fame and honor abroad, with an host of Senonensian
Galls, (so called because they dwelt about the City of Sena) built in Italy,
and Gallia, these Cities following, Cities builded by Brennus.
Mediolanum, or Milleine, Papia, or Pavie, Burganum, Sena, Comum, Brixia,
Verona, Vialcnza, Cremona, Mautua, etc. He overcame the Romans at the River
Albia, eleven miles from Rome, and took the City all save the Capitol, to
which they laid siege, and one night whilst the Guardians thereof were asleep,
they undermined the earth, and were likely to have won it, but a noble Roman
named Manlius Torquatus waking, by the cry of Geese and Ganders, prevented the
Galls, and saved the Capitol: For which cause the Romans, for a long time
after, on the first day of June, The feast of Ganders.
did annually celebrate the feast of Ganders.

But Brennus and his people held the Romans so short, that they slew many of
the Senators, and compelled the survivers to lay him down a thousand pound
weight in Gold, besides they took the spoil of the City, so that they were
enforced to call back Furius Camillus, whom they had before most ungratefully
banished from Ardea, and created him the second time Dictator, who gave strong
battle to the Galls, and won from them all the gold and jewels, which they
had taken from the Romans: Therefore Bren ne^ his Army toward Greece, entering
Brennus inva death Greece
Macedonia, and dividing his people into two hoasts, the one he retained with
himself, and sent the other into Galatia, which after was caled Gallograecia,
and lastly from Gallograecians the Nation were termed Galathians: Then Bren
conquered Macedonia, and overcame their Duke or King Sosthenes, and after
spoiled the gods of their Temples, and said in sport, Rich gods ought to
contribute toward men some part of their wealth. Thence he came to Delphos
where the Oracle was, and robbed the Temple of Apollo: upon which, there was a
great Earthquake, and Haile-stones of mighty weight and bigness, which
destroyed some part of his Host, and upon the rest an huge part of the rockie
mountain fell and buried them in the Earth; and Bren being wounded, and
despairing of safety, drew his Sword and killed himself. And his ^rother
Belinus, after he had honorably governed the The death of Brennus.
Kingdom of Britain, with his brother, and alone, for the space of twenty
six years, expired, and was buried at Belingsgate, leaving a Son behind
him called Gurguintus Barbarosse, or Gurguint with the red Beard. Gurguintus.


He began his Reign in the year of the world four thousand eight hundred
thirty four, he conquered Denmark, and forced from them an annual Tribute of
one thousand pound. Denmark made t^butary to England.
After which victory he sailed toward England in great triumph, but in his
course upon the sea, he met with a Fleet of thirty Sail, who hali^g them, and
demanding of what Country they were, and the purpose of their Navigation? they
answered him, Their people were called Balenses, and that they were exiled from
Spain, and with their wives and children had long sailed upon the sea,
beseeching the King to have compassion of them, and to grant them within his
large dominions some place to inhabit; and they would be his true and
faithful subjects. The King commiserating their estate, by the advice of his
Barons, granted them a wide and vast The first plantation of Ireland.
Country, which is the farthest of the western Islands, which of their
Captain Irlomall was called Ireland, and that was the first plantation of that
Country. And after this Gurguintus had established the Laws of his
forefathers, and exercised justice amongst his Subjects for the space of
nineteen years, he dyed and was buried at Troynovant, leaving a son called
Guintolinus.

He with great honor and clemency guided the Land, taking to wife an
honorable and learned Lady called Marcia, who added to the former Laws of the
Land other wholesome statutes and decrees, which were greatly embraced, and
continued long of efficacy and force, which Alured long after King of England
caused to be translated out of the British into the Saxon tongue, and called
them Marthe he lege, or the Marcian Laws: to this woman, for her great
wisdom, the government of the Kingdom was committed, with the Guardianship
of his son Cecilius, for the space of twenty Cecilius.
six years: after which time, the King expired, and was buried at London: of
this Cecilius there is little or nothing remembered, but that he governed the
Realm 15 years, leaving to succeed him his son Kimarus, who was a wild young
Kimarus.
man, and irregular both in his private life, and public government, who when
he had reigned three years, being in his disport of hunting was traitorously
slain by his servants: Him succeeded his son Elanius, who expired in the
second Elanius.
of his reign, whom succeeded his bastard son called Morindus, begotten of
his Concubine Faugrestela. Morindus.


He was made King in the year of the world four thousand eight hundred
fourscore and ten, who was a Prince of great valor and courage, but given to
wrath and cruelty, of goodly presence and comely personage, but a mervailous
strength above all the Nobles of the Realm. In his time came the King of
Mauritania, and invaded his Realm, whom he incountred with a puissant army,
and chased to sea, taking many of his Soldiers prisoners, whom he caused in
his own view to be put to many cruel and tormenting deaths: at length riding
upon the Sea Strand, he espied an huge Monster which the waters cast up alive,
which out of his great courage, and ambitious of glory, purposing to slay with
his own hands, he was by it devoured, after he had governed the kingdom eight
years, leaving behind him five sons, Gorbomannus, Archigallo, Elidurus,
Vigenius, and Peridurus: Gorbomannus being the first begotten son of
Gorbomanus.
Morindus, succeeded his Father, being a just Prince, in whose time was more
riches and plenty than in any of the days of his predecessors: who to the
great sorrow both of his Peers and people dyed without issue, after he had
reigned eleven years: after whom, his second brother Archigallo was instated
in the Sovereignty: Archigallo
this Prince was of a contrary condition to the former, who gave himself to
dissen ion and strife, imagining causes against his Nobles to deprive them of
their possessions and dignities, and raising men of base and sordid birth and
quality to office and honor: And so he could enrich himself, not caring how
he impoverisht his subjects. For which, by one assent of the Nobility and
Commons, he was deposed from all regal dignity, after he had tyrannized five
years.

In whose stead was instated the third brother Elidurus.
Elidurus, in the year of the world four thousand nine hundred and fifteen,
who was so mild and gentle to his Subjects, that they added to him a surname,
and called him Elidure the meek: To express the goodness of his condition,
it happened that hunting in a Wood called Calater, near unt^ York, he found
his banished brother wandering in the thick of the Forest, whom he no sooner
saw, but dismounted A^are president in a brother.
from his Steed, and embraced him in his arms, and so conveyed him into the
City privately, where he concealed him for a time, and at length feigning
himself sick, he so wrought with his Nobility severally and apart, that he
had won them to re-instate his brother Archigallo in the Throne, after he
himself had governed for the term of five years, who being again advanced
to the supreme power and Majesty, he changed his former Conditions, ordering
all things according to equity and Justice during his natural life, and then
dyed, after he had lastly reigned ten years, and lies buried at York. Then
was Elidurus again The death of Archigallo.
made King: against whom his two younger brothers Vigenius and Peridurus had
great indignation, because for his virtue and piety he was so much beloved of
the Britons, therefore they conspired against him, and took him prisoner in
battle, when the second time he had reigned two years, committing him unto
safe custody.

These two Brothers were then jointly made Kings, and divided the Land betwixt
them: Vigenius dyed, after he had governed his part of the Kingdom seven
years: after whose death Peridurus seized the whole under his Dominion, who
ruled with great Temperance and Prudence: insomuch, that he was praised above
his other brethren, and Elidurus quite forgot, who after he had reigned with
his brother and alone for the term of nine years expired: after whom Elidurus
was fetched from prison, Elidure the third time made King.
and the third time instated in the Throne, who continued in his former
sincerity and integrity; and lastly, being of a good age, ended his life, when
he had this last time governed four years, and was buried at Carleil,
leaving a Son called Gorbomannus, who began his reign in Gorbomanus the second.
the year of the World four thousand nine hundred forty five: after whom
succeeded Margan, and after Margan, his brother Emerianus, Margan. Emerianus.
who was deposed for his cruelty and tyranny: after whom successively reigned
twenty Kings, of whom small or no mention is made by any approved Author: the
last of which was called Blegabridus a cunning Musician, who Blegabridus.
for his excellency in that faculty, was called of the Britains, god of
Glee-men, or Minstrells. After whom succeeded nine Kings (of whom there is left
neither name or memory, saving that the last of them was named Hely, who
governed King Hely.
the Kingdom forty years, wanting seven months, which time of thirty three
successive Kings, that is, from Elidure to the last year of Hely, amounted to
one hundred fourscore and six years: This Hely left behind him three sons,
Lud, Cassibeline, and Nennius. King Lud.


Lud the eldest son of King Hely began his Reign in the year of the world
five thousand one hundred thirty one, who in all his actions showed himself
honorable, repaired old Temples, and builded new, and so of Cities and Towns:
but especially in Troynovant he caused sundry structures to be made, both for
the enlarging and beautifying of the City, walling it round, and ditching it
about, and in the west part of the Wall made a strong gate, and commanded it to
be called after his name Ludsgate: Luds Town, now London.
and for he much affected the City, as the place where he most frequented, he
changed the name thereof from Troynovant to Caerlud, or Luds Town, now London:
He was strong and mighty in subduing his enemies, liberal, given to
hospitality, and much loved and feared of the Britains, who reigning in great
peace and prosperity eleven years then dyed, and was buried in Port-Lud, or
Ludgate, leaving two Sons, Androgeus, and Tenantius.

In regard of the pupillage and minority of Cassibelan made King of Britain.
the two young Princes, Cassibelan their Uncle, and brother to King Lud was
made King in the year of the world 5142. This man was of great wisdom and
courage, exercising Justice mixed with mercy amongst his subjects: insomuch,
that they favored him greatly above his Nephews: yet he provided that they
were royally educated according to their births, and when they came to years
of discretion, he gave to Androgeus the City of London, and the Earledom of
Kent, and to Tenantius the Dukedom of Cornwall, etc.

CHAP. 3.
The first conquest of this Land by Julius Caesar: Britain made tributary to
the Romans: the birth of our Savior under Cimbeline King of Britain: How
Southampton came to be so called, and the City of Gloucester, and Coilchester:
Vespatians conquest of the Isle of Wight: of Catnesse in Scotland: of Lucius
the first Christian King of the Britains: and of other Roman Governors.

Caius Julius Caesar, being employed by the Senate of the famous City of Rome,
with Lucius Publius his Colleague in the wars of Gallia, now called France,
being on the Sea side, at Callis, beholding the white Cliffes and Rocks of
Britain, Julius Caesar ambitious to Conqeur Britain.
demanded of the Natives what manner of people inhabited this Island, and being
fully satisfied concerning the people and commodities thereof, he was ambitious
to add it to the Roman Empire; and to that purpose sent Messengers to
Cassibelan, then King, to make him and his Land tributary to Rome: At which he
being highly moved, sent him back peremptory answer, that every Sovereign was
bound to keep his Subjects from slavery and servitude, and maintain them in
their Franchises and liberties, and that he would do to his utmost ability
and power: With this answer Caesar, who was of an invincible Courage, much
incensed, instantly made ready his Navy, and sailed toward Britain, with
purpose to add His first attempt and success.
this Kingdom to his conquest of France, but the Britains had pi^cht stakes
on the shore, which much hindered their landing, whilst Cassibelan gathering a
strong Host gave the Romans battle, and beat them back unto their ships: but
after he had new rigged and repaired his Navy, and furnished himself with a
sufficient Army ^e returned again the second time, and His second attempt.
was likewise beaten back to his great dishonor: For which victory twice
obtained by the Britains, he assembled all his Lords, and made a great triumph
at London, where were sundry martial exercises performed: in the performance
of which, one of Androgeus his Knights having slain one of the Kings Kinsmen,
whom he much loved, he sent to have him stand to the trial of the cause; but
Androgeus denied to give up to the censure of the Law, and departed Difference
betwixt the (...). and Androgeus.
in secret, (without taking leave) from the Court, which gave Cassibelan great
cause of incensement against him.

Whose indignation Androg us justly fearing, sent Letters unto Caesar, that if
he would make a third attempt upon this Country, he with all his whole power
would be re^dy to assist him against his Uncle, pretending that he not only
usurped his right in the Crown, but had done to him diverse other affronts and
injuries. Caesar glad of so good an opportunity, after Hostages given for his
fidelity, (which were his son Sceva with thirty others of the sons of his
Nobility and Gentlemen) a third time invaded the Land, which Cassibelan
hearing, gave him a strong battle in a valley near unto Canterbury, in which
he had the better Caesar's third attempt upon this Island.
of the day, till Androgeus coming in with his fresh forces turned the Die of
war, so that Cassibelan with his Britains, were forced to forsake the field,
and after a great slaughter of the Britains, retired himself to a place of
safety, where Caesar kept him so strictly in, that he was forced to submit
himself, paying to the Romans an annual tribute of 3000 pounds: After which,
Caesar would have made Androgeus King; but not daring to trust his Nation
Britain made Tributary to Rome.
which he had so lately betrayed, he went with Caesar to Rome, where he ended
his life. Cassibelan reigned after this conquest of the Romans seven years, in
all sixteen: and dying, left the Scepter to the younger son Tenantius, who
governed the Realm with all diligence Tenantius.
and Justice for the space of twenty three years, leaving the Sovereignty to
his son Cimbelinus.

He was made King in the year of the world five thousand one hundred and
fourscore, in the nineteenth of whose Reign our blessed Savior was borne of
the Virgin Mary, which makes the year of the world from the Creation The
birth of our Savior.
of Adam to the Incarnation of our Redeemer (by the computation of Isidore,
Bid and others) five thousand one hundred and twenty nine years: so that
Christ was Incarnate from Noah's flood, or the general Deluge two thousand nine
hundred and fifty seven: after Abraham, two thousand and seventeene: after
David King of Israel, one thousand threescore and fifteen: from the
Transmigration or the Captivity of the Jews to Babylon five hundred A
computation of the times.
and twenty: After Brutes plantation in this Island, eleven hundred thirty
six: After Alexander the great about three hundred twenty five: After the
building of Rome, seven hundred twenty nine: and in the beginning of the two
and fortieth year of Octavius Augustus Caesar then Emperor of Rome, etc. But
to come back to the History, Cimbeline after he had worthily governed the
Land thirty five years, yielded his due to nature, and was interred in
Caer-Lud, or London, leaving two sons, Guiderius and Arviragus.

Guiderius, the eldest son of Cimbelinus, began Guiderius K. of Britain.
his Reign in the year after our Blessed Saviors Incarnation seventeene, who
having a great confidence in his riches and strength, denied to pay any tribute
to the Romans, which had been tendered annually from the time of Julius Caesar
to his days: For which, Claudius then Emperor of Rome came over with a mighty
Host, and recovered it again: in the Host of the Romans was a great Captain
called Hamo a great Captain of the Romans.
Hamo, who in the Battle pur upon him the Armor and habit of a Britain: By
which means, having access to the place where the King fought in person, he
slew him, and escaped: Of which disastrous accident his brother Arviragus
having intelligence, armed himself with the Cognizance of the dead King, and
continued the battle with such valor and courage, that in the end he put
the Romans to slight. Guiderius being thus slain by Hamo, after he had ruled
the Kingdom twenty eight years, leaving no issue to succeed him, his brother
Arviragus by the general suffrage both of the Peers and people, was invested
in his stead.

This Martial and magnanimous Prince Arviragus made King.
took upon him the government of the Land in the year of our Savior forty
four: He was also for his great valor by some Authors called Orbearing Arms.
Armager: who strongly made war upon the Romans, and after in a battle slew
Hamo, (who had formerly cowardly killed his brother) near to an Haven or Port of
the Sea, and after causing his body to be peecemeale cut, cast it into the
Ocean, for which it was called Hamoes From whence Southampton took its name.
Haven, and since Southampton: Claudius much admiring the courage of Arviragus,
sent to Rome for his daughter Gemissa, and gave her in marriage to him upon
conditions of peace: and to make the solemnities of the Nuptials more famous,
he called the City where they were kept Claudio Cestria, which before was styled
Carleon, and after Glovernia, of a Duke called Claudio Cestria, or Gloucester.
Glovio, but now Gloucester: after which, Claudius sent certain of his Legions
to govern Ireland, and departed toward Rome, Arviragus then repaired decayed
Cities and Castles, and ruled with such justice and integrity, that he intyred
to him all the hearts of his Subjects, and as his riches, so also increased his
pride, so that he denied the Tribute to Rome before granted: therefore a great
Duke called Vespatian was sent from the Senate, who overcame him in battle,
and forced him to become tributary, which some writers affirm was merely at
the intercession and entreaty of the Queen Genissa, and no coaction or
constraint from Vespatian, who after he had won the Isle of Wight returned
The Isle of Wight conquered by Vespatian.
with honor to Rome: After which, Arviragus grew more tractable toward the
Romans, and continued in their great grace and favor: who after he had nobly
governed the Britains for the space of 30 years expired, and was interred at
Claudiocestria, or Gloucester, leaving to succeed him a son called Marius.

He was crowned King in the year of our blessed Savior threescore and
fourteen, a Marius King of Britain.
wise and just man, and flourished in great prosperity and wealth: in whose
time one Loudricus (whom some writers call Rodicus) with a mighty Army of
Picts, or Scythians, whom some also call Goths, and Huns, landed in a part of
Scotland, wasting and spoiling wheresoever he came with Iron and fire, whom
Marius met in Battle, and gave him a great overthrow, in which their Duke
Loudricus was slain: in remembrance of which victory, in Stanismore, a place
of Westmaria, or Westmerland, where this battle was fought, he caused a great
stone or pillar to be erected, upon which was inscribed in capital Letters
Marii victoria. The remnant of the Army that survived the battle, humbly
besought the King to allow them some place under his dominions in which to
inhabit, who commiserating their case, granted them a place Cathnesse in
Scotland when inhabited, and by whom.
in Scotland, called Cathnesse, to whom the Britains disdaining to give their
daughters in marriage, they allied themselves with the Irish, and were after
called Pictavians: Marius having thus subdued his enemies, gave him soly to
study the weal of his Subjects, and lived peaceably his whole life time after:
and lastly, paid his natural Tribute, and was buried at When he had reigned
52 years.
Carleil, leaving a son named Coillus, or Coill.

Coill was inaugurated in the year of the Incarnation one hundred twenty six.
This Prince had his breeding in Italy amongst the Romans, Coil King of Britain.
by which reason there grew great affinity and friendship betwixt the two
Nations, for he became their willing Tributary: He was very bountiful to all
men, by which he purchased great love both from the Lords and Commons: H^e
built the Town in Essex called Coilchester, and when he had peaceably governed
the Realm for the space of four and fifty years, he dyed and was buried at
York, leaving a son called Lucius, who was inaugurated in the year of grace
one hundred and four Lucius the first Christian King in Brita^ne.
score, who had the honor to be called the first Christian King of this
Island, who being a man devoutly given, sent to Eleutherius then Bishop of Rome
to be instructed in the true faith, who to that purpose employed two learned
men, called Fuganus, and Dimianus, who were honorably received by this King
Lucius, and by whom he, and a great part of the Britains were converted from
Paganism and Idolatry to the true Christian belief, which happened in the
eighth year of his Reign, who after his conversion ordained that all the
Idolatrous Arch-Flamins and Flamins should be made Archbishops and Bishops,
to the number of three Archbishops, and twenty eight Bishops, and should have
the government of the Church lately established. These being confirmed by the
forenamed Bishop of Rome, he endowed them with lands and possessions, and
consecrated all the Pagan Temples to the worship of Christ: and when he had
peaceably governed the Land for the space of twelve years, he left this
earthly Tabernacle for a better, and was buried at Gloucester: who because he
dyed without Heir, the Land grew into great combustion for Lucius dies
without issue.
the term of fifty years, in which none had the absolute nomination of King
or Sovereign.

Then Severus the Roman Emperor took upon him the government of the Realm in
the Severus named himself King of Britain.
year of grace two hundred and eight, and ruled the Kingdom five years; in
which time he caused a Ditch and Wall to be made of Turves and stakes of an
hundred and two and twenty Miles in length, from Durham to the Scotch Sea,
during which, the Picts with their Duke or Leader Fulgenius came out of
Scotland with a strong army, and destroyed much of the Country beyond Durham,
against whom Severus (for his Conquest of Parthia) surnamed Parthicus,
assembled a great Host of Romans and Britains, and gave them battle near
unto York, in which he was slain, and his army discomfited, and in that City
lies interred, leaving behind him two sons, namely Geta and Bassianus. This
Bassianus was the son of Severus a British woman, Bassianus made King of
Britain.
and he had Geta by a Roman Lady; the Britains therefore made the son of their
Country-woman their Sovereign, in the year of Grace two hundred and twelve:
But the Romans held for Geta: For which, mortal war grew betwixt the two
brothers, in which Geta was slain, and Bassianus, who was after made Emperor
having incestuously married his stepmother; for which, and many other tyrannies
exercised by him on the natives, he grew into great hatred of the people, and
was slain at a place called Edessa, after he had been Emperor for the space
of seven years. Carassius aspireth to the Crown.


In this interim of his Reign, one Carassius (...) Britain of low birth, but
eminent in arms, and the practice of Martial Exercises, obtained of the
Senate the keeping of the Coasts and Frontiers of the Land, and to oppose the
invasion of all strangers: so that he drew to him many hardy Knights of the
Britans, promising unto them many donatives, with honor and office, if they
would make him King of the Land: which so far prevailed with them, that they
with an unanimous consent proclaimed him their Sovereigne and King, against
whom Bassianus moving battle, and to suppress them as rebels, was slain by
this Carassius, who took upon him the Regal Dignity in the year of the
Incarnation of Christ, two hundred and eighteen.

When the Romans had notice of the death of Alectus made Ruler of Britain.
their Emperor Bassianus, they sent into Britain a great Captain called Alectus,
with three Legions to punish the pride and rebellion of Carassius, to which
Captain Fortune was so favorable, that he chaced him from place to place, and
in the end slew him in battle, after he had eight years usurped. This Alectus
for his good service done, was made Consul of Rome, and Governor of the Land,
who hotly pursued diverse British Lords, who had took part with Carassius
against the Romans, and exercised great tyranny amongst them, so that he grew
into great hatred and contempt of the Natives. And therefore they accited one
Asclepiodotus Duke of Cornwall, who gathered a great host of the Britains, and
made war against the Romans, chasing them from place to place, and Country to
Country; so that at the last Alectus was glad to retire himself within the
fortifications of London, whither Asclepiodotus pursued him, and laid siege
about the City, provoking him to battle, who at length issuing out with his
forces, many were slain on both sides, but in the end Alectus was slain,
after he had six years The death of the Roman Alectus.
governed the Land.

When Livius Gallus a Roman Captain understood the death of their General, he
with the survivours of the Army, retired into the City for his best security,
where for a while I leave him.

CHAP. 4.
The Duke of Cornwall made King of Britain, how Walbrook took first name:
Constantius the Roman marries with Helena, daughter to King Coill, and is made
King: His Reign and burial: His son Constantine made King after him, who
was called the Great, and was the first Christian Emperor: His great Devotion,
and after falling into Heresy: Octavian his Deputy in Britain, usurpeth, and
after made King: Maximinus a Roman, by Marriage with his daughter, succeeds
him, etc.

ASclepiodotus Duke of Cornwall, began Asclepiodorus King of the Britains.
his Dominion over the Britans in the year of Grace, two hundred thirty two,
who entered the City of London, before by him besieged: where he slew this
Livius Gallus, near unto a Brook which ran then through a part of the City,
from Whence Walbrook took the name.
whom it was called Gallus, or Wallus brook, and the street VVal-brooke even
unto these times. Thus having quite vanquished the Romans, he governed the
Realm in great peace, exercising Justice, exalting meriting and good men, and
punishing the refractory, and evilly disposed, till at length, a great
discontent (s^rred up by wicked and seditious persons) was raised betwixt him
and Coillus or Coil, who was then Earl or Duke of Kaircollin, or Colchester:
so that they assembled their several forces, and met in battle, in which
conflict Asclepiodotus was slai^e, after he had governed the Realm (according
to the most Writers) thirty years.

Then Coil began his Dominion over the Land in the year of the Incarnation two
hundred, Coil made (...) Britains.
threescore and two, who governed peaceably for a time: for the Senate of Rome
were glad of the death of the former King who had been a great enemy and
persecutour of their Nation, and being then in great trouble amongst
themselves, could not conveniently send over fresh forces in the Land, but at
length their domestic discords being compounded, and the State settled in
peace, Hearing that this Coil also denied them tribute, they sent hither a
Noble and Constantius first coming into Britain.
prudent Prince called Constantius, with a puissant army, against whom Coil
assembled his Britains, but greatly dreading the power of this Roman President,
he sent to him to commune and treat of peace, with the acknowledgment of the
Tribute due unto the Senate, of which assurance being given and taken on both
sides, Coil died within a month after, having governed the Britains for the
term of twenty seven years.

Constantius at the intercession of the Nobles of the Land took to wife Helena
the daughter Constantius married to Helena.
of the late King, with the entire possession of the Realm, and was
inaugurated in the year two hundred fourscore and nine. This Helena was held
to be the fairest Lady in the whole land, and withal very well verst in
literature and language, by whom he received a son called Constantine: This
Constantius being of great courage and valor, ambitious to add unto his
Dominion subdued the Almains, or Germans, and slew of them in one battle
threescore thousand, and after many other victories, the two Emperors
Dioclesianus and Maximinianus resigned up their Imperial Dignity to
Constantius, Constantius made Emperor.
making one Galerius a partner with him in the Empire, which these two Caesar's
divided betwixt them. Galerius governed in the East, that is, Illiricum, and
all Graecia, with the Islands, and Constantius Italy, and the Western
Kingdoms: after he subdued Spain, and a great part of Gallia or France, of
which two Kingdoms he made his son Constantine President and Governor: in the
time that Constantius was King of Britain, under the two foresaid Emperors,
S. Albon was martyred at Ver^m, in the tenth persecution of the Church, which
began in the eighteenth year of Dioclesian, and endured for the space of ten
years, which was so violent and cruel, that in the space of one month were
martyred seventeene thousand holy men and women, for the faith of Christ: This
Noble Prince Constantius, after he had governed Britain, and the West part of
the Empire, for This Constan tius lies buried at York.
the term of thirty years, leaving his Successor Constantine his son by the
famous Queen Helena.

Who began his Reign in the year of Grace three hundred and nineteen: and at
the decease Constantine made King of Britain.
of his Father was busied in the wars of Gallia, but hearing the report of his
death, came over into Britain, and was made King. He was off a noble and
affable condition, who though he ^ere a Pagan and misbeliever, yet he used no
^yrannie toward his subjects, neither compeld them to the worship of Idols,
but to use their own laws with the liberty and freedom of conscience: whilst
he thus governed Britain, with the Western part of the Empire: one Maxentius
son to Herculeus Maximianus, who was parrner with Dioclesian in the Imperial
purple, Max^s.
was by assent of the Senate, chosen Caesar, who first insinuated with all
cunning affability into the hearts of the plebeian multitude: but when he found
himself strong in their opinions, he exercised all tyranny that could be
possibly devised, especially against the Christians: He likewise expelled h^
Father Maximianns from Rome, who sought to be again Emperor, with other great
oppressions used against the Senate and Prime Nobility, of which Constantine
having intelligence, he assembled a strong host of Br^tains and Galls to
suppress his great pride and insolence: leaving in his absence a great Duke
called Octavius, or Octavian to govern Octavian made D^puty Governor of
Britain.
the Land of Britain as his Vicegerent, or Deputy.

Constantine having settled the State here, being on his journey, he saw (as in a
Vision) being upon his bed a Cross shining in the firmament, held by an Angel
who said unto him, Constantine i^ hoc signo vinces, that is, of Constantine,
under this sign or banner thou shall have victory: After which awaking, and
considering well of his vision or dream, he called his chief Captains about
him, and acquainted them therewith presently giving order that the Cross
should be The Cross first used in any Imperia^ Ensign.
portrayed in all his Ensigns, Escutcheons and Banners: being thus
accommodated, he marched against the Tyrant Maxentius, and met him at a bridge
called Pont Milvium where after long fight he chaced him and his whole army,
where Maxentius drowned.
a great part of them were drowned in the River with himself also, when he
had ruled as Caesar about five years: after which victory, Constantine marched
to Rome, where he was received of the Senate and people, with great honor and
triumph: soon after he received the Christian Faith, and was baptized by
Sylvester the first of that name Bishop of Rome: which done, he opened the
prisons, and destroyed the Temples of the false gods, and dedicated others to
the true and everliving God, pulling down their idols and opening those
Christian Oratories as had been shut, commanding divine service to be said in
them: He was the first also that gave any possessions to the Church of Rome,
and ordained that the Bishop of Rome should be a chief Bishop, Constantinus
great devot. on and zeal.
and all others to be obedient unto him, (which was before any superstition
crept into the Church) he also bore clay and stones upon his shoulders, to the
foundation of the great Church dedicated to Saint Peter.

Whilst Constantine thus labored to plant the Christian Faith, his mother
Hellen being then Hellen the mother of Constantine.
in Britain, sent unto him commendatory Letters, gratulating his great
victories, in which she seemed to rejoice that he had suppressed Idols, and
demolis^ their Temples, but wondered, that he had chosen for his God, a man who
had been nailed to a Cross, etc. to which he returned her answer, that he
would sufficiently prove the God whom he honored and worshipped was the
Creator of Mankind, and Maker of the World and all the creatures therein, and
not man only, but God and Man, etc. For proof of which, after she had assembled
a Synod of Jews, to the number of sevenscore, Sylvester with other Christian
Clerks were appointed to dispute with them concerning the Faith and Gospel, in
which arguing, the Jews were confounded, and she converted, and was a constant
professor of the true Faith and Religion all her life time after, I leave what
the Legend relates concerning her seeking and finding the true Cross, and the
nails with which our blessed Savior was fastened thereto, and return to
Hellena sindeth (...) Cress^.
her son the Emperor, who greatly enlarged the famous City Bizantium, and
beautified it with stately and sumptuous buildings, and for the pleasure which
he took in the situation thereof, made it his Royal Seat, and caused it to
be called after his name Constantinople, which is the City of Constantine: He
was also of such power and might in arms, that he purchased to himself the
Title of Constantine the Great. Constantine the Great.


He was, moreover, styled the first Christian Emperor, and did many things
for the upholding of the Faith: of which seven by a learned Author are
especially noted. First, that Christ our blessed Savior should be worshipped
as God, throughout his whole Dominions: Secondly, Seven Derees made by
Constantine to the honor of his Savior.
that what man or woman soever spoke any blasphemy against him, he should be
most severely punished: Thirdly, that person who did any violence or injury to
a Christian man, because he was of that belief, should forfeit half his goods
and possessions: Fourthly, that as the Emperor of Rome is Head of all temporal
Princes, so the Bishop of Rome should be chief of all Ecclesiastical Prelates:
Fifthly, that who so fled to a Church for refuge, and made it his Sanctuary,
should be there free from molestation and danger: Sixthly, that no man should
offer to erect any Church or Temple without the leave and license of the Bishop
of that Diocese: Seventhly, that every Prince should give the tenth part of
his Revenues toward the mayntenance of Churches and Temples, which law for
example sake he confirmed by contributing unto them from his own possessions:
after all which care of his to establish the true Faith and Gospel, he fell
into the detestable Heresy of the Arrians, banished Bishop Sylvester
beforenamed; and persecuted many zealous and godly professors, Constantine
infated with the A^rian, heresy.
after which (as mine Author affirms he was struck with an incurable
Leprosy. But now I return to Octavian, whom he left his substitute in Britain.

Who during the long absence of the Emperor, ruled the Land to the great
content of the Natives, but (when he had thoroughly invested himself into the
hearts of the people, and thinking his Lord so far remote, and could, not
easily be drawn from so great a charge as the government of both the East and
Western Octavian usurpeth the Crown of Britain.
Empires, He thought to usurp the Title of King, and to that purpose
distressed such Romans as Constantine had left here in the Land, and so took
upon him the sole Soveraignity: of which when the Emperor had notice, he sent
hither in all haste a Prince called Traherne, who was uncle to his mother
Helena, with three Legions of Romans, every Legion consisting on six thousand
six hundred and six Knights, whom Octavian met in battle near unto
Portchester, or as some Authors write, near Winchester, and Trahernesent into
Britain.
compeld Traherne to forsake the field, and fly toward Scotland, whither
Octavian pursued him and gave him a second battle, where he and the Britains
were discomfited, and himself with some few took shipping and sailed to
Norway: but not long after he returned into England, with a strong Arm^ of
Britains, and Norwayes, in which interim, a British Earl who greatly loved
Octavian, slew Traherne, so that with little difficulty he subdued the rest of
the Commons, who were left without a Commander, and repossessed the Land, which
was from the time that Constantine made him Governor or Protector of the Land
ten years.

Octavian thus re-instated, gathered great Octavian made absolute K. of Britain.
riches and treasure, in so much that he feared not the power of any foreign
Prince, and ruled the Nation in great peace and quietness, who being grown
aged and full of years, by the counsel of some of his British Noble men, he
sent one Mauritius son to Caradock Duke of Cornwall unto Rome. For an hopeful
young Gentleman called Maximian, who was near allied to Helena the mother of
Constantine, that he would come into this Land, and by marrying his only
daughter, enjoy the Kingdom of Britain, after him: though diverse persuaded him
to confer that honor upon Conan Meriadock his near Cousin: but the former
motion prevailed: Conon Meriadock.
And Maximian the son of Leonine brother to Hellen, and Uncle to Constantine
the Great, was sent over with the beforenamed Mauritius, and with a sufficient
guard of Romans landed safely at the port of Southampton: which Conan Meriadock
hearing, he gathered a company of his friends and kinsmen, and because the
other came Maximians first entrance into Britain.
to dispossess him of that which he held to be his right, Her purposed to
ambush him in the way, and give him battle: which being told to the King, he
by his wisdom, and power p^evented it, so that Maximian came peaceably to
Court, unto whom the King gave his daughter, and the Land with her for her
Dower, and dyed soon after, when he had nobly and peaceably governed the
Kingdom for the space of fifty four years.

CHAP. 5.
Maximian made King of Britain, and after Emperor: How Armorica came to be
called Little Britain, and this, Britain the Great: Of Ursula, and the eleven
thousand Virgins: Gratian the last Roman that was King of the Land: The great
distresses of the Kingdom: the cessation of their Tribute paid to Rome:
Constantine brother to Aldroenus made King of the Realm, his death, and issue.

MAximian the son of Leonine, and Cousin German to Constantine the great, was
made King of Britain Maximian K. of Britain.
in the year of Grace three hundred fourscore and two, who proved a valiant
and victorious Prince, but somewhat proud, and withal a persecutor of the
Christians. And first there was great strife betwixt him and Conan, with sundry
Conflicts, in which they sped diversely, but at length they were reconciled and
made friends, so that he reigned for a time in great peace: in which interim,
he gathered together much treasure and riches: At last he was accited to move
war against the Galls, and landed with a great Host in Armorica, now
Armorica first called Little Britain.
called Little Britain, which after he had subdued by the sword, he gave it
to Conon Meriadock to hold of him, and of the Kings of great Britain for ever,
commanding from that time, Armorica to be called Little Britain, and this Land
Britain the great: For which victory and others, his Knights proclaimed him
Emperor, which increased both his pride and tyranny, so that he invaded the
Lands of the Empire, and conquered a great part both of France and Germany,
which was contrary to his Oath before sworn to the two Emperors, Gratian and
Valentinian, to whom when tidings was brought of this his invasion, Gratian
prepared to resist him, but fearing his power and potency, fled to Lions, where
he was Maximian breaks his oath, which was to be true to the Empire.
slain, and Valentinian compelled to forsake Rome and fly to Constantinople:
Then Maximian made his son Victor fellow with him in the Empire.

During whose wars in Italy, Conon Meriadock not willing that he or his
people should marry with any of the French Nation, sent Messengers to Dionotus
Duke of Cornwall, and governor of the Kingdom under Maximian, to send him his
daughter Vrsula, with a certain number of Virgins to be coupled to him and
his Knights in marriage, who according to his request sent his daughter, with
eleven thousand maids toward Britain to that purpose, who by the way were
taken at Sea, and pi^eously Urfula with eleven thousand Virgins.
murdered: who so will know the manner thereof, I refer them to the Legend of
Saints. Maximian thus tyrannizing in Italy, to great Commanders called Guanus
and Melga were sent into Britain to chastise all such as favored the party of
Maximian, who did here much outrage upon the Natives, afflicting them with
great strage and massacre. Against whom, the Emperor sent a great Captain
called Gracianus or Gracian, with two Legions, who so knightly behaved
himself, that he chaced them in short space into Ireland, holding the land in
peace for Maximian. In this interim, Maximinian continuing wars against the
Empire to be absolute Caesar, Theodosius surnamed the elder, then Emperor of
the east part of the world, hearing the death of the first Gracian, and the
chacing of Valentinian, he with a mighty host sped himself to meet with
Maximian, and gave him battle at Aquilea a great City in Italy, in which
Maximians forces were utterly discomfited, and himself took prisoner, whose
head Theodosius commanded to be cut off: of whose death Gracian his deputy in
Britain, The death of the tyrant Maximian.
having knowledge, he seized the Land to his own use, after that Maximian had
governed the same by the term of eight years.

Gracian, who of some writers is called Gracian King of Britain.
Municeps (which word may be diversely taken, either for an hired or waged
Knight, or for a keeper of Presents and Gifts, or bearing chief rule in a City
or Province) began his dominion over the Britains in the year of grace
three hundred fourscore and ten. He exercised great exaction and tyranny on
his subjects, for which he was very much hated and despised amongst them, so
that they sundry ways labored his supplantation, and hourly insidiated his
life: but after many dangers escaped, they with a common assent invaded his
Palace, and slew him, when he had reigned, or rather usurped, for the space of
The death of Gracian.
four years.

Of whose death Guanus and Melga having Guanus and Melga.
knowledge they returned out of Ireland, and with fire and sword made great
havocke in the Land: of which the Romans understanding, because the Realm was
then under their Tribute and tuition, they sent one Constantine to have the
rule of the Land, and the Regions about: Constantine.
but being found to be an enemy to the Empire for diverse outrages done by him
during his Regency in France, therefore by the commandment of Honorius (then
Caesar) they sent against him a valiant Captain named Constantius, who slew
him, near to a Town called Constantius.
Arelat: after which the Britains were much distressed by the Picts, the
Scots, and other strange Nations, by reason whereof they were again
constrained to send to Rome for aid, with a covenant that they would all
continue subjects and servants to the Senate. Upon which request and promise,
the Emperor Honorius The (...) Honorius.
himself came hither in person, and chaced hence all their foreign enemies,
and leaving the Land in peace, returned to his greater affairs in Italy.

Who was no sooner departed, but the same enemies again invaded them, to whom
Honorius sent a second deliverance, exhorting them withal to be manly and
courageous: But in regard of the remoteness of the place, and the great
troubles the Empire was then in, to trust to their own valor and fortune, but
to expect no more supplies either from Caesar or Senate; The Britains for
saken of the Romans.
the Roman supplies being then took out of the Land to maintain the Imperial
wars, the Natives were worse distressed than before, for the Picts and Scots
came out of their Dens and Caves where they had concealed themselves, and
invaded them by multitudes: insomuch that by the enemies spoils and robberies,
they were brought to that extremity of poverty and misery, that they were
enforced to pilfer and steal one from another; in which, sundry murders were
also committed, so that The great dist^esse of the Britains.
the ground lay unsowed, or manured, upon which great Dearth and hunger
immediately insued.

Which to prevent, and withal to rid them from these great extremities, the
best amongst them petitioned unto Aetius, (who was Master of the Chivalry of
Honorius the Emperor, Aetius denies them succor.
and at that time governed France) to commiserate their estate, which to him
they most passionatly expressed, but all was to no purpose, for he slightly
put them off with a peremptory denial to lend them any succor at all: still
their calamities augmented and the famine increased: so that lastly the noblest
and discreetest amongst them, especially the Archbishop Guethelinus
Archbishop of London.
of London, whose name was Guethelinus, whom our English Chronicles call
Gosseline, concluded to send an Embassy to the King of little Britain, whose
name was Aldroenus: which this Archbishop being learned and well spoken in
person undertook, who delivered their calamities and distresses with such
passionate efficacy that it wrought great commiseration and compassion in the
King, who after advice taken of his Lords, granted them a supply of sufficient
forces to recover their Franchises, and liberties, upon condition, that if God,
who is Aldroenus commiserates the Britains.
the Lord of Hoasis gave them victory, they should Crown his brother
Constantine King of Great Britain, acknowledging him their Liege and
Sovereign, which conditions they gladly accepted, and swore to perform with
all truth and fidelity.

Now it appears from the time of Gratian the last Roman that was King of the
L^nd, the How long Britain was without a King
Nation of the Britains during their multiplicity of miseries, were without a
Monarch or sole Sovereign for the space of thirty nine years, till the
coming in of the forenamed Constantine brother to Aldroenus, King of Little
Britain.

It is further to be observed, that here ended The end of the tribute and
government of the Romans.
the Tribute and Dominion of the Romans: neither had any of that Nation any
rule over the Land after that time, which Tribute lasted and was paid to Rome,
from the ninth year of King Cassibelan, to the days of the Emperor Severus,
amounting to two hundred and fifty five years. And from the Reign of Severus
to the first year of Gratian one huadred fourscore and three, and from the
first of Gratian to the last year of their great misery (before expressed)
forty three years; so that from the time that Julius Caesar made this Isle of
Britain first tributary to the Roman Empire, to the coming in of Constantine,
amounts to four hundred and one and thirty years: after this small
digression, and yet worthy observation, I return to the passages and
proceeding in this Land of An exact computation of the times.
Britain, and how it was governed.

The Archbishop with the Lords of this Realm, having sealed to the Covenants
before named, they returned with a sufficient army under the conduct and
command of Duke Constantius, and safely arrived at Totnesse in Devonshire, (the
place where Brute landed, the first Prince and Planter of this Island) whither
assembled all the flower of the Nation who before were compeld to hide
themselves in Dens and Caves: and to seek shelter amongst Rocks and
Mountains: by whose power and martial prowess, all the enemies of the Land
were rowted and chaced, not one daring to show his head. After which victory
the Land being again settled in peace and quietness, they conveyed their
Captain Constantine, to the tower of Kaercegent, now called Cicester, and
according to their former Covenants made with Aldroenus, saluted him as their
Chief Lord Sovereigne, and there crowned, him King, in the Constantine King of
the Britains.
year of our blessed Saviors Incarnation, four hundred and three and thirty.

This Constantine governed the Realm with great manhood and policy, so that
he was not more beloved at home, then dreaded abroad: notwithstanding, of any
foreign achievement done by Him, the English Annals make no mention, neither
of any memorable thing performed by Him in His own Kingdom, save that He kept
it in great tranquillity and rest, and that He received by His Wife three
sons, the eldest named Constant or Constantius, the second Constantines
Royal Issue.
Aurelius Ambrofius, the third Vterpendragon, all which in process succeeded
Him in the Sovereignty: But for Constance the eldest, being somewhat heavy and
dull witted, thinking Him not able to take upon Him any Regal Sovereignty,
especially to govern so noble a Nation, He caused Him to be shorn a Monk, and
put him into the Monastery of Saint Amphiable, after called Saint Swithins at
Winchester, and the other two How he disposed of his children.
being then but young children, He committed to Guardianship of the
before-remembred Gosselin Archbishop of London: In the Court of this
Constantine was a certain Pict or Scot, much favored by the King, and on whom
he had conferd many graces and Honors, making him of His Closet Counsel, and
a partaker with Him in all his secrets, which perfidious and ungrateful
traitor, watching his opportunity, slew Him in his Chamber when he had ten
years ruled the Land. The death of K. Constantine


There lived at that time in the Land a potent Duke called Vortigerus, or
Vortigernus, who Vortiger, or Vortigern.
was a man wondrously politic and exceedingly ambitious, who taking the
advantage of the time, knowing the stupidity of the eldest son, and the
inability of the two younger (in regard of their minority) to reign, He
colored his aspiring to the Crown by a notable project, for he pretending the
right of the eldest brother, had it as a matter of conscience to make Him King:
and therefore took him out of the former Monastery and invested him in the
Throne, in the year of Grace, four hundred forty three; by which means he had
the sole management of Constantius made K. of Britain.
the whole Kingdom, and Constantine the name only: whom after he in short
time supplanted, and reigned in his stead: in whose days Ambrosius Merlinus
the subject of our discourse was born and uttered his predictions, etc.

CHAP. 6.
A necessary digression showing the lives and reigns of 33 Kings of Britain
scarce mentioned by any of our English remembrancers, with an exact computation
of the times, etc.

TO make the former passages the more plain to the Reader, it is fit to keep a
true computation of the Times, and looking back into our former historical
narration, perfect those things which were left doubtful, especially in the
Inter-regnum before spoken of: In which the names of many Kings, Princes, and
Governors of the Kingdom were conceald: Diverse Historiographers who write the
passages of those times, reck on from the last year of Eliodure, to the first
of Hely, the father of K. Lud, 186 years, during Of three and thirty Kings
before scarce remembered.
which times, here reigned 33 Kings, (according to Galfridus and others) whose
names thus follow, Gorbovinian (whom Lanquet the Chronicler calls Reygay) son
to Garbomanus, reignned Gorbovinian.
for the term of ten years, after him Morgan, 14 years, whom succeeded
Emerianus, or Emerian, Morgan. Emerianus.
who held the pincipali^y seven. Iuall called also Ivall followed him, and
swayed the Scepter Ivall.
twenty, after whom came Rimo, and held the Dominion over the Britains 16,
after whose expiration Rimo.
Geruntius was by the general suffrage Geruntius.
of the peers and people, admitted to the throne, and governed in greatpeace
and prosperity 20 complete years, who uo sooner expired, but they made election
of Catellus, or Catel, who ruled without any great molestation or disturbance
Catellus.
ten: and then left the Dominion to Coill, who Coil.
ruled with great humanity and gentleness for the space of 20 years, and dying
in a mature age, yielded up the crown and Scepter into the hands of Porrex, who
kept and maintained them Porrex.
(though with some difficulty) five years, resigning the principality to
Cherimus, who tyrannizing Cherimus.
over the people was supplanted, being compeld to yield up al his power and
authority, after he had governed but 12 months into the hands of Fulgen, or
Fulgentius who kept it peaceably, Fulgentius.
and to the great liking and applause both of the Nobles and Commons three
years, and some odd months, who had no sooner yielded to the common fate due
to all mortality, but Eliud by some writers called Eldred, stepped into his room,
Eliud, or Eldred.
but enjoyed it but for a short season, for he died within the compass of one
year, after he came to take upon him the Sovereignty.

Then Androgeus aspired unto the Regal dignity, Androgeus.
but bore him so proudly and haughtily in his Sovereignty, that his subjects
unanimous consented and made an insurrection against him, surprising him in his
palace, and forcing him to give up his Sword and Scepter, after he had
tyrannized one whole year, to his son Vrian, who Vrian.
sat in the Throne but three years, and then yielded up his due to Nature,
after whom Eliud was invested in the state, who (as the rest of his
predecessors) Eliud.
left little or nothing behind him worthy memory, and when he had been King
five years, departed this life, Galfridus reckons 3 other Kings Three Kings
by some Authors not admitted.
successively to follow Eliud, namely, Dedacus, Cloterus, and Gurginetus, but
Lanquet (an Author well approved) will not admit them into his Chronicle, I
therefore proceed with the rest.

It is agreed by all, that Merianus was King, and two years enjoyed the
principality, but of what condition Merianus.
he was, there is left no memory to posterity. Four years also reigned his
successor Bledinus, whom some call Bladunus, a man raised to that honor by his
Bledinus.
valor, but being descended from obscure parentage, and therefore not knowing
himself well in his greatness (as is commonly seen by many) it was the cause of
shortning both of his life and sovereignty, for he was slain by the treason of
his own servants, of whose treacherous murder Capenus taking advantage, being
Capenus.
a potent Lord, and in great opinion with the people, he so far insinuated
into their affections, that with an unanimous suffrage, they proclaimed him
King (for his predecessor died and left no heir behind him) in which authority
he demeaned himself like a royal and worthy Prince, and when he had swayed
the Scepter the years, he died, being very aged, and much lamented.

Him succeeded one Owen a Cambrian Britain, who Owen.
though he could neither claim the privilege of blood, birth, or title, yet
being valiant, prosperous in all his martial employments, as managing the wars
under Capenus, by whom he was greatly honored, being also politic and wise,
and a good souldiou^, so a discreet statesman, he was thought the worthiest
then in the Kingdom, to take upon him the Dominion of the Realm, and so ended
some troubles raised in his predecessors days, by his valor and wisdom he
brought to a happy issue, and so died a single man, after he had two years
governed the Kingdom: next him was inaugurated Sisillius, otherwise called
Cecilius, Cecilius.
who bore himself with great humanity and affability, during the time of his
living a subject, studying popularity, and by sundry ways, insinuating himself
into the hearts of the people, but when he came to the Regal Title, and that
the power and sovereignty was wholly in his own dispose, he then began to
express his natural avaritious conditions, by exacting on the Commons,
imposing diverse taxes and tributes upon them, by which they were sore vexed and
grieved, in so much that a rumor was raised amongst them, which they first
only whispered, but at length animated by their intolerable impositions, they
feared not to clamor aloud, that their former King died not without suspicion
of poison: of which they spa^ed not to accuse him, not only as an accessory,
but the prime causer and procurer thereof: and therefore rising in arms
against him, they drove him to that ^rrow exigent, that he was forced to fly
from one place of refuge to another, who at length gathering some few forces
about him gave them battle in which he was slain, after he had governed the
Kingdom two years, after whom Blegabredus (...)
reigned in his stead: this man had in him more music then majesty, for he
was held most excellent both in minstrelsie and poesy, so that he seemed to
be son, or at least minion of Apollo, for he not only composed his own Hymns
and Dities, but set them, and then sung and played to them, and because it was
an art rarein those times, and practiced by few, especially by any of generous
condition and quality, being excellent and eminent in a Prince, he was
therefore by it the more honored and admired, who having swayd the Scepter 20
years departed this life, leaving to succeed him his brother Archemail, who was
of a more stern and robustuous nature, a man unlettered, Archemail.
and therefore a contemner of all Arts and Sciences, who after he had governed
the Realm two years (but with more austerity and rigou^ then his brother
before him had done) in a full age expired.

After him reigned Eldon, or Eldol, no son, but a kinsman (for the two
brothers died issuless) who was Eldol.
a man of peace, and therefore the more indeered unto the hearts of his
subjects, under whose Reign they lived in great rest and prosperity, gathering
great store of wealth about them, during the four years of his Reign, after
which season he changed this life for a new, being much lamen^d of his people,
after whose death, stepped up into the ^hrone Rodrech, or Rodian, Rodrech, alias
Rodian.
a man not (like his predecessor) beloved, as being litigious, and always in
contention with the Commons as holding them in contempt, only favoring the
Nobility and Gen^ry, and to prefer and advance them greatly oppressed the
other, extorting from them by sundry exactions, for which he grew into great
hatred amongst them: of which having intelligence, he thought severely to
punish them by arms, but was prevented by death, after he had governed the
kingdom not fully 4 years. In his place reigned Samuel Pennisel.
Samuel Pennisel, whom some Writers would make two men, (but their judgments
are not altogether approved) this man with great care and industry sought and
labored to pacify the tumults and combustions before raised, and to that
purpose, kept the Nobility and Gentry more short, so that he suffered them not
(as before) to insult and tyrannize over the Country, but granted to them
sundry immunities and privileges, for which he was greatly beloved by them, but
left the world after he had 5 years swayd the Scepter: whom Pyrpyrhus next
succeeds, a man much affected Pyrpyrhus
by the people, and fortunate in all things saving his short Reign, who died
after two years sovereignty.

Capoyr came next to the Crown, and governed an equal Capoyr.
time with them, of whom no memorable thing is recorded, for in two years
Reign, a Prince has scarcely time to express himself, what manner of King he
would be, whether a tyrant, or father of his people, whether addicted to peace
or war: he left one to succeed him named Gligurt Divill, who was a Prince very
sober and discreet in all his actions, and was an upright Iusticer, maintaining
good Laws in his Dominions, but reigned four years only: his son Hely succeeded
him before spoken of: so that all the time of H^ly the father of King Lud.
these several Kings Reigns, ^y those who writ contemporaries of the passages
of seasons, and sought to reconcile them, by their computation, amounts to
124 years. Thus desiring the Reader to excuse this necessary digression,
without which there must needs be a great maym in the Chronicle. I now fall
punctually upon Merlin's Prophesies, continuing them, and confirming their
truth by Chronology, from the time in which he uttered them, to the Reign of
King Charles, our royal Lord and Sovereigne, etc.

A true History of the strange Birth of Ambrosius Merlin, and his wonderful
Prophesies.
CHAP. 1.
Of the Birth of Merlin, surnamed Ambrosius, whether he were a Christian or no?
and by what spirit he prophesied, etc.

TO Prophets there be several attributes given, some are called prophetae,
some vates, others videntes: that is, Prophets, Predicters, and Prophets,
predicters, and seers.
Seers: and these have been from all antiquity. The name of prophets was, and
ought to be peculiar, to those only that dealt only in divine Mysteries, and
spoke to the people the words which the Almighty did dictate unto them
concerning those things which should futurely happen, and such also are called
in the holy Text Seers. But vates was a title promiscuously conferd on prophets
and poets, as belonging to them both: of the first were Moses, Samuel, David,
Isaiah, Jeremiah, Daniel, and the rest, whose divine Oracles are extant in the
old Testament: others there were in the time of the Gospel, as John Baptist,
of whom our Savior himself witnesses, that he was not only a prophet, but
more than a prophet: and we read in the Acts of the Apostles, Cap. 11. 27. And
in those days also came Prophets from Jerusalem to Antiochia. And there stood
up one of them called Agabus, and signified Prophetical Poets.
by the spirit, that there should be great famine in all the world, which came
to pass under Claudius Caesar: of the Vaticall or prophetical poets amongst
the Greeks were Orpheus, Linus, Homer, Hesiod, etc. and amongst the Latins,
Publius Virgilius Maro, with others.

But before I come to enquire, in which of these lists, This our Countryman
Merlin, whose surname was Ambrosius, ought to be filed; It is needful that I
speak something of his birth, and The birth of Merlin.
parents; His mother being certain, but his father doubtful, (for so our most
ancient Chronologers have left them) that is, whether he were according to
nature begot by a man and a woman, or according to his mothers confession, that
he was conceived by the compression of a fantastical spiritual creature,
without a body, which may be easily believed to be a mere fiction, Me^lin
the son of a Kings daughter.
or excuse to mitigate her fault, (being a Royal Virgin the daughter of King
Demetius) or to conceal the person of her sweetheart by disclosing of whose
name she had undoubtedly exposed him to imminent danger, and this is most
probable. And yet we read that the other fantastical congression is not
impossible. For Speusippus the son of Platoes sister, and Elearchus the
Sophist, and Amaxilides in the second book of his philosophy, affirm in the
honor of Plato, that his mother Perictione having congression with the
imaginary shadow Plato and Merlin had fathers alike.
of Apollo, conceived, and brought into the World him who proved to be the
Prince of Philosophers.

Apuleius also in his book entitled, De Socratis Daemonio, of Socrates his
Demon, or genius, writes at large, that betwixt the Moon and the Earth
Spirits inhabit, called Incubi, of which Spirits betwixt the Moon and the
Earth.
opinion Plato was also, who says, That their harbor was between the Moon
and the Earth, in the moist part of the air. A kind of Demons which he thus
defines: a living creature, moist, rational, immortal and passible, whose
property is to envy men: because to that place from whence they were
precipitated by their pride, man by his humility is preferred; and of these,
some are so libidinous and luxurious, that sometimes taking humane shape upon
them, they will commixe themselves with women, and generate children, from
whence they have the name of Incubi, whom the Romans called Fauni, and Sicarii:
and of such Saint Augustine Spirits called Incubi.
in his book De civitate Dei, makes mention.

It further may be questioned, whether he were a Christian or a Gentile? as
also by what Whether Merlin were a Christian or an Heathen.
spirit he prophesied, a Pythonick; or Divine? that is, by the Devil who spoke
delusively in the Oracle of Apollo; or by holy and celestial revelation? For
the first, it is not to be doubted but he was a Christian as being of the
British Nation: This Kingdom having for the space of two hundred and odd
years before his birth, received the Gospel under King Lucius, the first King
of this Land, by the Substitutes of Pope Eleutherius, by whose preaching, the
King and a great part of his people, quite renounced all Pagan Idolatry, and
were baptized into the Christian Faith: but by what spirit he so truly
predicted, is only known to the God Prophets and Prophetesses, in all Nations.
of all spirits, who in every Nation and Language, picked out some choice
persons, by whose mouths he would have uttered things which should futurely
happen to posterity, according to his divine will and pleasure, and amongst
these was this our Merlin: to prove the former.

Holy Job was but a Gentile, a man of the land of Chus, yet none of the holy
Prophets of the The former proved.
Lord did more plainly, more faithfully, and more pathetically acknowledge
Christ, and the Resurrection than himself, when he says in a most raptured
Emphasis, Job 19. v. 23. O that my words were written even in a book, and
graven with an iron pen in lead or in stone for ever. For I am sure my Redeemer
lives, and he shall stand the last on the earth, and though after my skin,
worms destroy this body, yet I shall see God in my flesh, whom I my self
shall see, and mine eyes shall behold, and none other for me, though my reins
be consumed within me.

Neither was this any wonder in blessed Job, Of the Sibyls.
whose like for holiness and uprightness of life was not to be found upon
the face of the whole earth, when even all the Sibils (who were Prophetesses
and Virgins, and Gentiles of several Nations (for so Varro affirms) predicted
not only of the Incarnation, passion, and death of our blessed Savior, but of
his second coming to judgment, of the consummation and dissolution of the
World, the Resurrection of all flesh, the glory of the Saints, and the
condemnation of the Reprobates, especially Sibylla Cumana, whom the renowned
Doctors of the Church, and more especially Saint Augustine, S. Austine and
other of the Fathers approve of the Sibyls prophesies.
quoted in her prophesies, and not thought them altogether unworthy to be
remembered in their works, of which also Virgil makes men^ion in his fourth
Eglogue: in which Saint Augustine Virgil prophesied of Christ.
himself witnesses that he (though an Heathen) predicted the Incarnation of
our blessed Savior, for he insinuates that he is to speak of a great mystery
in his first words, which are these:

Sicelides Musae, paulo major a canamus.
As speaking to the Muses, or invocating their assistance, that he is now to
sing of more stupendous and high things: and a little after it follows,
Vltima jam venit Cumaei carminis aetas:


That is: now is fulsilled the prophecy of Sibylla Cumana (so called from
Cuma, once a famous City in Greece, where she was borne) he Sibylla Cumana.
further proceeds, Magnus ab integro seclorum volvitur ordo,
Iam redit and virgo, redeunt Saturnia regna.
Iam nova progenies coelo demittitur alto.
Intimating in those words, that by revolution, the great order and course of
the World should feel a change which was not from the beginning, and that now
the Celestial Maid (which figured Justice) or the mother of the most righteous
that Prophet could come nearer to the truth^
should return, and that we should see again those innocent and blessed
days which were in the reign of Saturn (which was called the golden World)
and that a new birth should be sent down to the earth from the highest heaven,
meaning our blessed Savior, God, and man, born of the immaculate Virgin Mary:
nay, further in the two subsequent Verses, he implies, that he came to take
away the sins of the world, which are these: Quo duce, si qua manent sceleris
vestigia nostri,
Irrita perpetua solvent formidine terras.


So much for Virgil: there are diverse other prophets of the Gentiles both men
and women, as Cassandra, Chrysis, Phiomaene, etc. and what shall we think of
Balaam? whose Oracles Moses Other Prophetesses. Balaam the son of Bosor
inserted in the sacred Text, and whose prophesies the great Clerks and
Doctors of the Church have expounded in large voluminous Works: yet for his
person, some have held him for no better than a Southsayer, or a Wisard, and
hired for a reward to curse the children of Israel Gods selected people, and
they by his counsel after enticed to fornication and idolatry, of whom the
blessed Apostle Saint Peter in the second Chapter of his second Epistle and
fourteenth Verse gives him this character (speaking of such whose hearts were
exercised in covetousness, and children of the curse) who forsaking the right
way have gone astray, following the way of Balaam the son of Bosor, who loved
the wages of unrighteousness, but he was rebuked for his iniquity, for the
dumb beast speaking with man's voice, forbade the foolishness of the prophet.
These former examples may beget an hesitation or doubt, by which of the two
spirits the good or bad, our Countryman Merlin uttered his predictions.

But whosoever shall make question of the true events of his prophesies, I
shall refer him A just si^tion of the truth of Merlins prophesi^s. D^ctor
Alanus de Insulis
to the reading of that most excellent Orator ^olyhistor, and Theologist of
his time, Alanus de Insulis a German Doctor, for his admirable and
multifarious Learning surnamed Vniversalis: and Rector of the Parisian Academy
in his Explanation or Comment upon Merlins Prophesies, the original being
extracted out of Ieffery of Monmouth, part of his words are these: In all his
prophesies I find nothing dissonant, incongruous, or absurd: nor any thing
foreign, or averse from truth: And those who shall live in ages to come,
shall find those his predictions as constantly to happen in their days
(according to the limit of time) as we have hitherto found them certain and
infallible even to the age in which we now live. And for these signs and
tokens which before the consummation of the World shall appear, he divineth
and foretells of them in the Sun and Mo^ns, and the other five Planets; Juno,
Mars, Mercury, Venus, Satnrne, and other stars, how they shall confound and
alter their courses which they had His predict on from the Planets.
in the Creation, according to that in the holy Evangelist Saint Luke, cap. 21.
v. 25. Then there shall be signs in the Sun, and the Moon, and in the stars:
and upon the earth trouble amongst the Nations with perplexity, the Sea and the
waters shall roar, and men's hearts shall fail them for fear, and for looking
after those things which shall come in the World, for the powers of Heaven
shall be shaken, etc. But of the new heaven, and the new earth, and the
resurrection of the dead to new life, how truly he spoke according to the
Prophetical, Evangelicall, and Apostolical Traditions; it is manifest, that
he no way deviated or erred from the orthodoxall Christian Faith, and so much
Doctor Alanus concerning the truth of his prophesies, with whom I conclude this
first Chapter.

CHAP. 2.
In whose Reign Merlin was borne. How the state of Britain stood in those
days, with diverse necessary occurrences pertinent to the story.

THe better to illustrate this our History of Merlin, (the subject now in
agitation) it is necessary that I show you in what Kings Reign he was borne,
in what state the Kingdom stood at that time, and how our prophet came to be
first known in Court. He was born in the reign of King Vortiger, who by
usurpation aspired to the Crown: who being a potent Duke of the Merlin born in
the reign of King Vortiger.
Britain: after the death of Constantius, took his son Constantins out of a
Monastery (being a simple man and incapable of so great a charge, and made him
King) so that Duke Vortiger being a popular man, had the whole government of
the Land, and Constantine only the name of King, who taking advantage of his
Sovereigns easy nature and mild disposition, cast in his thoughts how by the
death of his Lord and Master, to compass the Crown to himself, and Vortigers
ambition to the Crown.
to accomplish his ambitious design he placed, as a guard about him, an
hundred Picts and Scots, whom he so bribed with continual gifts and rewards,
that they feared not openly to say that Vortiger better deserved the Imperial
dignity then Constantine: in which interim he got into his possession, all the
treasure, howsoever diverse thereat grudged: and the strangers in hope to
purchase his greater favor, took their opportunity to lay violent hands upon
the King, and presented his head to Vortiger, being King Constantine sl^ine by
his guard.
then at London.

Who in his Crocodile coming, and to blind the eyes of the Britains, to make
them think he had no hand in his death, wept exceedingly, and made great show
of sorrow, and to express his great justice, caused all those honored Knights
to be beheaded according to the Treason rewarded.
Laws of the Kingdom, by which he was held both by the peers and people
innocent of the Treason: but those that had the Guardianship of the Kings two
younger brothers Aurelius and Vter, the one surnamed Ambrosius, the other
Ambrosius and Vt^r the Kings younger brothers.
Pendragon, fearing the power and potencie of Vortiger fled with them into
little Britain, where they continued, yet it pleased God otherwise to dispose
of them.

Then was Vortiger by a general and unanimous consent crowned King in the
year of the Vortiger crowned King.
Incarnation of our blessed Savior four hnndred forty eight: but it was not
long ere the Picts and Scots, having knowledge of the death of their
countrymen, invaded the Land with great hostility: in so much that he was no
way able to withstand their malice and fury, in this great distress, retyring
himself to Canterbury, news was brought him of theer great ships full of
Ammunition and armed men, landed in the Isle of Tenet: at first he feared that
they were the late Kings brothers, Ambrose and Vter, who came to lay claim to
the Kingdom, but finding them to be strangers: he sent to know of what Nation
they were: and the purpose of their landing? Who returned him answer that they
were Saxons, so called of a Province in The first landing of the Saxons.
Germany, who came to seek adventures abroad, and since fortune had brought
them into this Land, they besought him to receive them into service, as being
both ready and able to be his faithful soldiers, and to fight for him in the
defense of his Country against all foreign invaders? and their Captains were
two brothers, Hengist and Horsus.

The King in regard of his present necessity, which much moved him to
correspondencie, was exceeding glad of their liberal proffer, and accepted of
them, yet sorry that they were Miscreants, and of the Pagan belief, for as
Reverend Bid has left recorded, with Gulielmus de Regibus, They at that time
worshipped an Idol or false god, called Woden, and a Goddess named Fria, in
the honor of which god, they called one day of the week Wodens-day, which When
Wednesday and Friday had their app^llation.
we term Wednesday, and another in the honor of the Goddess Fria, Frisday,
by us still continuing the name Friday. But it follows in the story; Vortimer
by the aid of these Saxons, having freed his Land from all foreign enemies,
Hengist in reward of his former service, demanded of the King so much ground as
the hide of a Bull would compass, which request appeared to the King so
reasonable, that he easily granted it, which skin he caused to be cut into
small and slender thongs, with which he measured a large circuit of earth,
upon which he builded a great and strong Fort, which he called The building of
Thonge Castle.
Thonge Castle, which stands in the County of Lyndsee.

When news arrived in Germany of the plenty and goodness of this Land, with
all the commodities thereto belonging, they came hither in multitudes
covenanting with the Britains, that they should only intend their Tillage and
Husbandry, and themselves would as their soldiers, defend the Land from all
incursi^ns and invasions, demanding for that service only competent means and
wages, in which interim Hengist The policy of the Saxons.
sent for sixteen sail more well furnished with men, and all necessary
provision. In which fleet came also his daughter Rowen, a beautiful Lady,
concerning whom, to cutoff all circumstances, Hengist invited the King to his
new Castle, where his fair daughter gave him entertainment, with whose beauty
he became so surprised, and perditely enamoured, that for her sake he
repudiated his lawful wife, by whom he had three noble sons, Vortimerus,
Catagrinus, and Pascentius, to marry with this young Saxon Lady, and that he
might enjoy her, gave to her Vortimer forsakes his Queen to mary with Rowen,
the daughter of Hengist.
Father the Dukedom or Province of Kent, though Garagonus, then Lord thereof,
with diverse other of the British Peers, thereat much grudged.

For which, and many other honors and revenues conferred upon the Saxons, as
also that he left his own Christian Consort, to marry with an Infidel, and
that Hengist had sent for his son Octa to come over with a fresh supply of
his Countrymen: The Lords of Britain considering An assembly of the British
Lords.
what dangers were like to fall upon the Land, assembled themselves, and
coming to the King, laid open to him the inconvenience and peril which was
likely to fall both upon himself and the Kingdom, by the multitude and
strength of these strangers, humbly beseeching him for their general
security, to banish them all or the greatest part of them the Land. But the
King was deaf of that ear, for the Saxons were in such favor with him, by
reason of his beautiful young Queen, that he preferred them before the love
of his own wife, sons, subjects, kinsmen, and friends, wheref^re the
Britains with one will and assent, crowned his eldest son Vortimer King,
depriving him of all Regal dignity, when he had fully King Vortiger deposed.
reigned (after the consent of the best Histories) sixteen years.

A word or two by the way, of our new King Vortimer, who assisted by the
resolute Britains, Vortimers many brave victories over the Saxons.
in all haste pursued the Saxons, and gave them a great battle upon the River
of Darwent, in which the Saxons Host was quite discomfited: He fought with
them a second upon the Foord called Epiford, or Aglisthorpe, in which fight
Catrignus the brother of Vortimer, and Horsus the brother to Hengist, meeting
in the battle fought together a brave combat, and slew each other, in which
the Britains also were Victors: He gave them a third, near unto the Seaside,
in which the Saxons were chaced, and forced to take the Isle of Wight for their
refuge: and likewise a fourth main battle upon Colemore, which was long and
courageously maintained by the Saxons, by reason that they now closed a great
part of their Host so defensively, that the Britains could but with much
difficulty approach them, for the danger of their Vortimer conquered the Saxons
in seven several battails.
shot, yet in the end they were rowted, and many of them drowned and swallowed
in the Moore. And besides these four principal and main battles, he had
diverse other conflicts with them, one in Kent, another at Thetford in Norfolk,
a third in Essex, near unto Colchester, from all which fields he departed a
glorious Victor, neither did he leave their pursuit, till he had deprived them
of all their possessions in the Land, saving the Isle of Tenet, which he
continually assaulted with his Navy by Sea: which when his step mother Rowen
saw, and how much her Father Hengist with his Saxons, by his Martial Vortimer
poisoned by his stopdame Rowen.
prowess were distressed, she used such means that he was poisoned, after
he had victoriously governed the Kingdom for the space of seven years.

All which time Vortiger, the Father of the late dead Vortimer, lived privately
in Chester, where he so well demeaned him toward the King his son, by
aiding him with his counsel and otherwise, that by the Britains general
assent, he was again restored to the Kingdom: Hengist again pierced the Land
with a mighty Vortiger restored to the Kingdom.
Host of his Countrymen, which Vortiger hearing made toward him with his Army
of Britains. But Hengist, who had before tasted of their hardness and courage,
made means of a treaty for peace, whence lastly, it was concluded, that a
certain number of Britains, and as many Saxons should meet upon a Mayday
weaponlesse, upon the Plain of Salisbury, on which prefixed day, Hengist
bethought him of a strange and persidious Treason, charging all his Saxons,
that every one should put a long Knife in his hose, and when he gave this
watchword Nempnith, your Sepis, they should suddenly fall upon the A most
unk^ngly treason.
unarmed Britains, and kill them to one man: Briefly, they met at the time and
place appointed, where Hengist and his Saxons received him and his power, with
a countenance of peace and love, but they had not long spoken together when
Hengist giving the watchword, the Britans were basely and barbarously
butchered, unless any by his manhood and strength wrest the Knife from his
enemy, and defend himself:, amongst the British Lords was one Edolf Earl of
Chester, who (as Gunfride affirms) seeing his friends and fellows thus
murdered, he found the stake of an hedge by chance their scattered, with which
he not only saved his own life, but A valiant Britain.
slew seventeene of the opposite side, and got safely into the City of
Salisbury, after which treason executed, the King remained with Hengist as
prisoner.

Hengist by his Treason having thus gotten the upper hand, and reteining the
King in his Vortiger suppressed by Hengist.
power and custody, he compelled him to give him three Provinces in the East
part of Britain, Kent, Suffex, Norfolk, and Suffolk, to which some add
Essex, etc. of which being safely possessed, he suffered the King to go at
large, sending for some other of his Kinsmen to take possession of other
Provinces in the Kingdom, crowning himself King of Kent, and from his Britain
first called England
own name, caused this Realm to be called Hengists Land, or (as we now
pronounce it) England: and the Saxons now spreading and quartering themselves
in the best and most fertile soyles of the Land, as having the Sovereignty over
London, York, Lincoln, Winchester, with most of the principal Cities in the
Realm. The Saxons still increasing in multitude and power, and the Britains
daily decreasing, both in number and strength. Vortiger was forced to fly or
retire himself into Wales, where Vortiger forced to fly into Wales.
(after some writers) thinking to fortify himself, he began to lay the
foundation of a Castle called Generon, or Gwayneren, in the West side of the
River Grana, upon an Hill called Cloaricus: But what success he had in the
building thereof, and how Merlin came first to be known to the King with part
of his Prophesies, I will refer to the subsequent Chapter, giving withal the
intelligent peruser of this story, to better his knowledge, this Item; that
without the laying open of the true passage ofthose tim^, which I have (as
briefly as possibly I could in the premises) these our prophets predictions
which now seem plain and easy, would have been much more intricate, and
hard to be understood.

CHAP. 3.
By what miraculous accident young Merlin came to be known to King Vortiger:
of the combat betwixt the red and the white Dragon, and his prophecy thereof,
etc.

WHen Vortigers Architectors had caused the Hill to be dug, and the
foundation to be laid on which to erect this new structure, after the weak
men had dug the circuit of the place, where the great stones were to be set
in order: they were no sooner laid in the hollow of the earth, but they
instantly sunk down, and were swallowed up and no more seen: at which the
Workmen wondered, and the King himself was much astonished, and the more proofs
they made, the greater cause of admiration they had, especially the situation
being upon an Hill, and no moorish or uncertain ground: therefore the King
commanded a cessation from the work for the present, and sent to the Bards and
Wisards (of which that age afforded plenty) Vortiger inquires of the Wizards.
to know a reason of that prodigy? or at least what it might portend? who
being gathered together, and having long consulted amongst themselves, and not
finding by any natural or supernatural reason, what the cause thereof might
be, they concluded in the end, to save their credits, and to excuse their
ignorance, to put the King off with an impossiblitie: and when he came to
demand of them what they had done in the matter? they returned him this answer,
that those stones could never be laid together, or the place built upon, till
they were cemented with the blood of a man-child, who was borne of a mother,
but had no man to A cunning evasion.
his father.

With this answer the King satisfied, the soothsayers departed from him (not
meanly glad that they had put him off, according to our English word, with a
flam or delirement) without any disparagement to their art and cunning, who no
sooner left his presence, but the King called his servants about him, commanding
them to ride and search into, and through all Provinces and Countries till they
could find such an one as the Wisards had spoken of, and by fair or foul
means to bring the party unto him, but not acquainting him with the Cause, but
that the King seeing such an one would send him back richly and bountifully
rewarded: having received this commission (or rather Imposition, from the King
their master, we leave them to their several adventures, every of them being
sufficiently accommodated for so uncertain a journey.

One of them amongst the rest happened to come to a Town or City called Kaier
Merlin Merlins City, since from him so called.
which implies Merlins Town or Merlins borrough, which is no doubt the same
which we call at this day Marlborrow, but my author terms it a City at whose
gates the messenger of the king arriving, it happened that a great many young
Lads were sporting themselves without the walls, and of the company, two of
them in gaming fall out, the one young Merlin, the other called Dinabutius, who
amongst other breathing words cast into Merlins teeth, that he was but some
Moon-calfe, as born of a mothsr, who knew not his father: The servant taking
notice of this Language, presently demanded what he was? and who were his
parents? who returned him answer, that for any father he Merlin first
discovered.
had, they knew none, but his mother was daughter to the King Demetius, and
lived a Votaresse in that City, in a Nunnery belonging to the Church of Saint
Peter: which having heard her, presently went to the chief Magistrates, and
showed them his Commission from the King, which they obeying, sent both the
mother and son under his conduct, to attend the pleasure of his Majesty,

Of whose coming the King was exceeding joyful, and when they appeared before
him Merlin and his mother appear before the King
(both ignorant of the occasion why they were sent for) the King first asked
him, if that were his natural son? Who replied that he was, and borne of
her own body, he then desired to know by what father he was begot? to which
she likewise answered, that she never had the society of any one mortal or
humane, only a spirit assuming the shape of a beautiful young man, had many
times appeared unto her, seeming to court her with no common affection, but
when any of her fellow Virgins came in, he would suddenly disappear and vanish,
by whose many and urgent importunities, being at last overcome, I yielded,
says she, to his pleasure, and was comprest by him, and when my full time of
Teeming came, I was delivered of this son (now in your presence) whom I caused
to be called Merlin: which words were uttered with such modesty and
constancy, considering withal the royalty of her birth, and the strictness
of the order (in which she now lived) that the King might the more easily be
induced to believe that whatsoever she spoke was truth.

When casting his eye upon Merlin he began to apprenend strange promising
things in his aspect, as having a quick and piercing eye, an ingenious and
gracious countenance, and in h^ youthful face a kind of austeritie and
supercilious gravity, which took in him such a deep impression, hat he thought
his blood too noble Cruelty changed into pity.
to be mingled with the dust and rubbish of the earth, and therefore instead
of sentencing him to death, and commanding him to be slain, he opened unto
him, the purpose he had to build this Castle, and the strange and prodigious
impediments, which hindered the work, then his assembly of the Bards and
Wisards, and what answer they returned him of his demand, but bad him withal
be of comfort, for he prized his life being a Christian above ten such
Citadels, though erected and perfected with all the cost and magnificence that
humane art or fancy could devise.

To which words Merlin (who had all this Merlins speech to the King.
while stood silent and spoke not a word) thus replied Royal Sir, Blind were
your Bards, witless your Wisards, and silly and simple your Southsayers; who
showed themselves averse to Art, and altogether unacquainted with the secrets
of Nature, as altogether ignorant, that in the breast of this Hill, lies a vast
Moat, or deep Poole which has ingurgitated and swallowed all these materials
thrown into the Trenches. Therefore command them to be dug deeper, and you
shall discover the water in which your squared stones have been washed, and in
the bottom of the Lake you shall find two hollow Rocks of stone, and in them
two horrible Dragons fast sleeping: which having uttered, he with a low
obeisance made to the King left speaking.

Who instantly commanded pioners with Merlins words found true.
pickaxes, mattocks, and shovels to be sent for, who were presently employed to
dig the earth deep, where the pond was found, and all the water drained, so
that the bottom thereof was left dry, then were discovered the two hollow
Rocks, which being opened, out of them issued two fierce and cruel Dragons,
the one red, the other white, and made betwixt them, a violent and terrible
conflict. But in the end the white Dragon prevailed over the red, at which
sight the King being greatly stupefied and amazed, demanded of Merlin, what
this their combat might portend? Who fetching a great sigh, and tears in
abundance issuing from his eyes, with a prophetical spirit, made him this
following Merlins first prophecy.
answer. Woe's me for the red Dragon, for alach,
The time is come, he hastes to his match:
The bloody Serpent, (yet whose souls are white)
Implys that Nation, on which thy delight
Was late sole-fixt, (the Saxons) who as friends
Came to thee first, but aiming at shrewd ends
They shall have power over the drooping red,
In which the British Nation's figured:
Drive shall he them into caves, holes, and dens,
To barren mountains, and to moorish fens,
Hills shall remove, to where the valleys stood,
And all the baths and brooks shall flow with blood.
The worship of the holy God shall cease.
For in thilk days the Kirk shall have no peace:
The Panims (woe the while) shall get the day,
And with their Idols mawmetry bear sway,
And yet in fine she that was so oppressed,
Shall mount, and in the high rocks build her nest.
For out of Cornwall shall proceed a Bore,
Who shall the Kerk to pristine state restore,
Bow shall all Britain to his kingly beck,
And tread he shall on the white Dragons neck.


Then casting a sad look upon the King, as reading his fate in his forehead,
he muttered to himself and said, But well-away for thee, to Britain dear,
For I foresee thy sad disaster's near.
Which accordingly happened, and that within few years after, for Vortiger
having builded this Castle, and fortified it making it defensible against any
foreign opposition, the two sons Ambrose and Vter invade the Land at Totnesse.
of Constantine whom Vortiger had before caused to be slain, assisted by their
near Kinsman Pudentius, King of Armorica, or little Britain, (where they had
been liberally fostered and cherished) passed the Sea with a complete Army,
and landed at Totnesse, whereof when the Britains who were dispersed in many
Provinces understood, they crept out of their holes and corners, and drew unto
their Host, which was no small encouragement to the two brothers, Ambrosius
Aurelius and Vter-Pendragon, who now finding their forces to be sufficiently
able both in strength and number, made their speedy expedition toward Wales,
with purpose to distress Vortiger the Usurper.

Who having notice of their coming, and not able in regard of the paucity of
his followers to give them battle, he made what provision he could for the
strengthening of his Castle, to endure a long siege, and to oppose the rage of
any violent battery, till he might send for supply elsewhere. But such was the
fury of the assaylants, that after many fierce and dangerous attempts finding
the Walls and Gates to be impregnable; casting into the Castle balls of wild
fire, with other incendiaries, they burnt him and his people alive, amongst
whom not one escaped. Of him it is reported, that he should have carnal
society with his own daughter, The lamentable death of King Vortiger.
in hope that Kings should issue from them: Thus died he most miserably when
he had reigned since his last Inauguration nine years and some odd months:
The explanation of the rest of his prophecy, I will leave to the Chapter
following.

CHAP. 4.
Merlins former prophecy explained with sundry prestigious Acts done by him to
delight the King: his prophecy of the Kings death. And bringing Stonehenge
from Ireland.

YOu have heard what the red and white Dragons figured, namely, the British and
Saxon people, we will now punctually examine the truth of his prediction in
the rest. The caverns, corners, mountains, and moorish places, express into
what sundry distresses the Natives were driven unto by the merciless cruelty
of the strangers, by the Hills and Valleys, shifting places, that there was no
difference amongst the poor Britains, betwixt the Courtier and Cottager, the
peer and the pesant, by the Rivers flowing with blood. The many Battails
fought betwixt the two Nations, and that in those days Religion and the true
Worship of God was suppressed, happened under Hengist and Horsus, and their
posterity: Octa the s^nne of Hengist, who succeeded his Father in the Kingdom
of Kent, Tosa, Pascentius, and Colgrinus, all Pagans and Princes of the Saxons:
for when the Britains, from the time of Eleutherius, whom the Romists write was
the fourteenth Pope after the blessed Saint Peter had received the Christian
Faith, under King Lucius, of glorious memory, and had continued it for many
years unto that time.

The Saxons after their coming into the The Saxons suppressed the faith of
Christ.
Land, being then Miscreants, labored by all means to suppress the same, and
in the stead thereof, to plant their Pagan Idolatry, which they accomplished
even to the coming of St. Augustine, sent hither by Pope Gregory, in Aur^lius
and Vter maintainers of the true religion.
whose time it began again to flourish and get the upperhand, in the Reign of
Aurelius Ambrose, and his brother Vter-Pendragon, (which is by interpretation
the Head of the Dragon) who succeeded him: By the Bore which should come out of
Cornwall, and tread upon the neck of the white Dragon, is meant the invincible
King Arthur, who vanquished the By the Boar of Cornwall is meant King Arthur.
Saxons, and subdued them in many Battails, and was a great maintainer, and
exalter of the true Christian Religion, of whose begetting and birth, in this
our History of Merlin, we shall have occasion to speak hereafter.

As Merlin was plentifully endued with the Some held Merlin to be a Magitian.
spirit of divination, so by some authors it is affirmed of him that he was
skillful in dark and hidden arts, as Magic, Necromancy, and the like, and
relate of him, that when King Vortiger lived solitary in his late erected
Castle forsaken of the greatest part of his followers and frinds, and quite
sequestered from all Kingly honors, he grew into a deep and dumpish
melancholy, delighting only (if any delight can be taken therein) in solitude
and want of company: to expel which sad fits from him, which might be
dangerous to impair his health, he would devise for his recreation and disport
many pleasant fancies to beget mirth and sometimes laughter, by solacing his
ear with several strains of Music, both courtly and rural; the sound
heard, but the persons not seen; as with the Harp, Bag-pipes, Cimball, and
Tabret: and sometimes again Several sports devised by Merlin to make the
melancholy King merry.
with the Lute, Orphorian, Vial, Sackbut, Cornet, and Organs: then to recreate
his eye, he would present him with stately Masks and Anti-Masques, and
again, for variety sake with Rustic dances presented by Swains and
Shepherdesses: and where these grew any thing stale or tedious to his eye or
ear, he would take him up into the top of one of his turrets whereon he
should see Eagles and Hawks fly after sundry Games, and what foul the King
liked, they would strike it into his lap, to add unto his slender provision
for dinner and supper, which gave the King no small contentment.

Sometimes he would have an Hare, or Heart hunted and chased by a pack of
Dogs in the Strange sports in the air devised by Merlin.
air, the Game flying, the Hounds with open and audible mouths, pursuing,
with Huntsmen winding their Horns, and following the Chase with all the
indents and turnings, losses and recoveries, the Champaigne Plains, the Woods,
and Coverts appearing as visible and natural as if the sport had been upon
the firm and solid earth.

Upon a time being in the Kings Summer Parlour, who was desirous to be
partaker of Other Magic sports to content the King.
some novelty which he had never seen, there instantly appeared upon the
Table a pair of Butts and Whites in the middle to shoot at, where suddenly
came in six dapper and pert fellows like Archers, in stature not above a foot
high, and all other members accordingly proportioned, their bows were of the
side bones of an overgrowne pike, their strings of a small slevy silk, no
bigger then the thread of a Cobweb, their arrows less then pick-tooths,
feathered with the wings of small Flies, and headed with the points of Spanish
Needles, who made a show as if they were to shoot a match three to three, and
roundly they went about it: in the middle of their Game, there was a shot which
rested doubtful, which as it appeared, the Gamesters could not well decide:
then Merlin called to one of the servants (who had something a big nose) that
stood by, and bade him measure to the mark, and give it to the best: To which
whilst he stooped, and inclined his face, the better to umpire the matter, one
of the Pigmey Archers who had an arrow to shoot, delivered it from his bow,
and shot him quite through the nose, at which he started, and the King heartily
laughed: (for there was no room to be seen) and the Butts with the Archers
together disappeared.

But when Merlin knew the Kings fate, to Merlin leaves the King.
draw nigh, and not willing to partake in his disaster, he fained occasions
abroad, and though with much difficulty, had at length leave to depart, leaving
behind him a paper which he put into the Kings Closet where upon occasion he
might easily find and read this ensuing prophecy. Fly from these fatal
several sires o King, His prophesies of the Kings death, etc.

Which from less Britain the two exiles bring:
Now are their ships arigging, now forsake,
The Armoricke shoares, and toward Albion make,
To avenge their murdered brothers blood on thee,
In Totnesse road to morrow they will be,
The Saxon Princes shall contend in vain.
For young Aurelius having Hengist slain,
Shall peaceably possess the British throne,
Striving the opposite Nations to atone.
He the true Faithshall seek to advance on high,
But in the quest thereof, by poison die,
The Dragons head, his brother shall succeed, Vter-Pendragon.

And after many a brave heroic deed,
By him performed, the Fates shall strive to wast,
His soul ore Styx, by a like poisonous draught,
But those who sent them to the Elizian bower,
His sonue the Bore of Cornwall shall devour.


This History needs no comment, being so plain in it self by the success
thereof: only thus much let me entreat the Reader to bear in memory, that that
Arthur figured under the name of Aper Cornubiae, that is, the Boar of
Cornwall, was son to Vter-Pendragon, here called, the head of the Dragon.

Amongst many brave Heroical Acts done by this Aurelius Ambrose, after the
death of Vortiger, he maintained the middle part of Aurelius Ambrose against
the Saxons.
the Kingdom of Britain, with all Cambria and Wales, endevoring to repair all
the ruined places in the Land, as Forts, Castles, and Cittadels, but especially
the Temples which were much defaced by the Pagan Idolaters, and caused Divine
Service to be every where said in them, and after that encountered the Saxons
in the hill of Baden or Badove, where he slew many of them and utterly rowted
their whole Army; after which defeat, another Saxon Prince named Porthe with
his two sons landed at an Haven in Sussex, after whom as some Authors
affirms, the place is called Portsmouth unto this day, others landed also in
several parts of the Kingdom: so that Aurelius had with them many conflicts
and Battles, in which he sped diversely, being, for the most part Conqueror,
and yet at some times repulst and over-set. Now called Stonehenge. Merlin ^eth
Stone henge from Ireland.


Our English Chr^nicles and others say, that he by the help of Merlin caused
the great stones which stand till this day on the plain of Salisbury to be
brought in a whirl-winde one night out of Ireland, and caused them to be
placed: where they now stand, in remembrance of the British Lords there
slain, and after buried in the time of the pretended treaty and communication,
had betwixt Vortiger and Hengist, as is formerly touched, but Polychronicon and
others ascribe the honor of their transportage to his Brother Vter-Pendragon,
at whose request to Merlin, that miraculous conveighance was performed: which
if by art he were able to do; No question to be made of the truth of those
former prestigious feats, in this Chapter before remembered.

CHAP. 5.
Uter-pendragon succeeds his brother Aurelius, he is enamoured of Igerna,
wife to the Duke of Cornwall, whom by the art of Merlin he enjoys: of whom he
begot K. Arthur the worthy. Merlins prophecy of him before his birth.

AVrelius Ambrose in the prime of his age, and honor being taken away by
poison, his brother Vter-Pendragon Vter-Pendragon crowned King.
by the general suffrage both of the Clergy, Peers, and people, was made
King, who pursuing his brothers former victories, gave the Saxons many
battails, in which he came off with great honor and victory, as awing them so
far that they durst not once approach his Confines and Territories: After he
began to repair the decayed and ruinated Churches, and to provide that God
should be carefully worshipped, rest ring to his people all those goods and
possessions, which by the Enemy had been extorted from them: and after having
slain Pascentius the son of Hengist in Vter-Pendragons victories over the
Saxons and others.
battle, with Guillamore King of Ireland, who came in his assistance, who had
with great tyranny afflicted his subjects of the North, with fire, sword, and
sundry direptions and spoil, and having taken Octa (who was also the son of
Hengist) and Cosa his Nephew, and put them in prison: he made a great
solemnity at the Feast of Easter, to which he invited all his Nobility and
Gentry with their Wives and Daughters, to gratulate with him his former
victories. Amongst the rest of his Peers was then present Gothlois Duke of
Cornwall, with his most beautiful Igerna, who was held to be the prime
Paramont of the whole English Nation.

With whose beauty and demeanure, the King was so infinitely taken, that all
other his most necessary affairs neglected, he could not restrain or bridle
his extraordinary affection, but he The King enamoured of Igerna, wife to the
Duke of Cornwall.
must needs court and kiss her openly in the presence of her husband, at which
he incensed with the rage of jealousy presently without any leave taken of the
King, or the rest of his fellow peers: rose from the Table, and taking his
wife with him along, by no persuasion could be moved to stay, but instantly
posted with her into his Country, which the King (being perditely enamoured of
his Lady) took in such ill part, that he sent for them back, pretending, they
must use his counsel in matters of state, to make his speedy return. But he
more prizing his Lady then all his other fortunes (whether favorable or
disastrous) which way soever they should happen, disobeyed the Kings command,
with a peremptory answer, that he would not come. At which the King more
enraged, sent him word, that if he persisted in his obstinacy, he would invade
his Dukedom, and beat his Towers and Turrets (to which he trusted) about his
ears, but vain were his menaces: for loath to lose so sweet a bedfellow, he
set the King at public defiance.

To chastise whose pride (as he pretended) Vter-Pendragon invadeth Cornwall.
Vter-Pendragon gathered a strong Army, and invaded his Country with fire and
sword, but Gothlois perceiving himself unable, to oppose so potent a Prince,
attended with such multitudes of experienced and tried soldiers: he betook
himself to a strong Castle, then called Dimelioch: and there fortified
himself, daily expecting forces from Ireland, but because he would not hazard
all his estate in one Bottom, he like a wise Merchant sent his wife to another
impregnable Fort called Tindagol, being round environed with the Sea, and one
way leading unto it, which three men, elbowing one another, could not pass at
once. A few days being past, in the besieging of that form^ Castle, which the
Duke maintained against him, he grew still the more besotted with the love of
the Lady, in so much that he could neither enter nor escape: At length he
uttered the impatience of his affection to one whom he had amongst many other,
chosen for his familiar friend, whose name was Vrsin of Ricaradoch: who Vrsin
of Ricaradoch.
when he had truly pondered all that the King had delivered unto him, he
returned him answer, that he could perceive small hope for the King to attain
to his amorous ends, in regard that the Fort in which she resided, by reason of
the situation of the place (munified both by Art and Nature) was altogether
inaccessible. For three armed men (so straight was the passage) might keep out
his whole Army: one refuge only remained, that if the Prophet Merlin, who was
then in the Army, would undertake the business, it might be accomplished, but
otherwise not.

The King being attentive to his language, Merlin sent for by the King.
presently caused Merlin to be sent for, and told him, how ardently he was
affected to the Countess, without enjoying whose person he was not able to
subsist alive: aggravating the trouble and perplexity of his mind, with much
palenesse in his face, many deep suspires, and extraordinary passion, which
Merlin commiserating, he told his Majesty, that to compass a thing so
difficult as that was, being but a little degree from impossibility, he must
make proof of Art mystical and unknown, by which he would undertake by such
unctions and medicaments as he would apply, to metamorphose his Highness into
the true figure and semblance of Duke Gothlois, his friend Vrsin into Jordan of
Tintegell, his familiar companion and Counselor. Merlins strange
Metamorphosis.
And himself would make the third in the Adventure, changing himself into
Bricot, a servant that waited of him in his Chamber, and they three thus
disguised, would in the twilight of the evening, whilst the Duke in one place
was busied in the defense of his Castle against the assaylants, command their
entrance into the other Fort in the name and person of the Duke, where they
should be undoubtedly received.

This prestigious plot much pleased the King, who impatient of delay, gave
order to his chief Captains and Commanders concerning the siege, excusing to
them his absence for some certain hours: he in the mean time, the same night
committed himself to the charge and art of Merlin: who disguised as aforesaid,
knocked at the gates of Tindagoll, to whom the Porter (thinking he had heard his
Lords voice demanding entrance.) Instantly opened the gate, and The King,
Merlin and Vrsin enter the Fort of Tind^gol.
meeting him with Vrsin and Merlin, taking them for Jordan and Bricot, so that
the King was presently conducted to the Chamber of Igerna: who gladly and
lovingly received him as her Lord and Husband, where he was bountifully
feasted, and bedding with her, he freely enjoyed her most loving embraces to
the full, sa^iating of his amorous desires, where betwixt them that night was
begot the Noble Prince Arthur, who for his brave facinorous, and high and
Heroical Achievements, made his name glorious and venerable through the face
of the whole earth: of whom Merlin long before his begetting, or birth thus
prophesied. The Cornish Bore shall fill with his devotion,
The Christian World: the Islands of the Ocean,
He shall subdue: the Flower de Lyces plant,
In his own Garden, and prove Paramant,
The two-neckt Roman Eagle he shall make
To flag her plumes, and her faint feathers quake.
Pagans shall strive in vain to bend or break him,
Who shall be meat to all the mouths that speak him,
Yet shall his end be doubtful: Him six Kings
Shall orderly succeed, but when their wings
Are clipped by death, a German Worm shall rise
Who shall the British State anatomise.
Him, shall a Sea-wolfe waited on by Woods
From Afric brought to pass Saint Georges floods
Advance on high: then shall Religion fail,
And then shall Londons Clergy honor veil
To Dorobernia: he that seventy shall sit
In the Eboracensick Sea; be forced to flit
Into Armorica: Menevia sad
Shall with the Legion Cities Pall be clad,
And they that in thilk days shall live, may see
That all these changes in the Kirk shall be.


But before I come to the opening of this Prophecy, which to the ignorant may
appear rather a ryming Riddle, then to be grounded on truth or reason, it is
necessary that I look back to where I late left, and proceed with the History
which thus follows: the King more extasied in the embraces of his sweet and
desired Bedfellow, his soldiers without any commission by him granted, make a
strange and terrible assault upon the other Fort, in which Gothlois was
besieged, who being of an high and haughty spirit, scorning to be long immured,
and coapt up without making some expression of his magnanimity and valor,
issued out of the Castle, and with great rage and resolution sat upon the
Camp, in hope with his handful of men, to have dislodged and rowted a
multitude, but it fell out far contrary to his expectation, for in the
hottest brunt of the first encounter, he The death of Gothlois Duke of
Cornwall.
himself was slain, and all his soldiers without mercy offered, or quarter
given, most cruelly put to the sword: the Castle entered and seized, and the
spoil divided amongst the soldiers.

Early in the morning before the King or the Countess were ready in their
wearing Habits and ornaments, some of the besieged who had escapt the Maslacre,
bounced at the gates of Tindagoll, and being known to be of the Dukes party,
were received; who told the Porter and the rest, that they brought heavy news
along, which they must first deliver to their Lady, of which she having
notice, and knowing they came from that Castle, caused them to be admitted
into her presence, and demanding of News of the Dukes death brought to the
Duchess.
them what news? They made answer, The tidings they brought was sad and
disastrous, that the Fort was the precedent night, robustuously assaulted by
the Enemy, whom the Duke her Husband valiantly encountered without the gates,
that all their fellow soldiers were put to the sword, the Castle taken and
rifled, and that the General her Lord and Husband, by his over hardiness was
the first man slain in the conflict: at the relation of the first part of their
news, she seemed wondrously disconsolate and dejected, but casting her eyes
upon the King, she was again somewhat solaced in the safety of her Husband.

They also when they saw the King taking A just cause of their doubt.
him for the Duke their General, began to blush at their report of his death,
being wondrously astonished that him whom to their thinking they had left
wounded and breathless in the field, they now see living and in health, musing
withal that they posting thither with so much speed should arrive thither
before them being altogether ignorant of the admirable transformation that
Merlins art had wrought upon them: In this anxiety and diversity of thoughts,
the King, more glad of the Dukes fate then the rifling of his fort: thus
bespoke the Duchess: most beautiful, and my best beloved Igernan; I am not as
The Kings speech to the Duchess.
these report dead, but as thou see, yet alive; but much greived both for the
surprisall of my castle and the slaughter of my soldiers, upon which victory
it may be feared that the King animated by his late success, may raise his
Army thence and endanger us here in our Fort of Tindagol: therefore my best and
safest course is to leave this place, for the present, and to submit my self
to the King in his Camp, of whose acceptance and grace I make no question, as
knowing him to be of a disposition flexible and merciful: then be you of
comfort, for not after many hours expect to hear from me, with all things
answerable to your desires and wishes: with which words Igerna was much pleased
and fully satisfied.

So with a loving kiss they parted, she to her Chamber, and he with his two
followers, toward the Camp, who no sooner from the sight of the Citadell, but
Merlin began to uncharme, and dissolve his former incantations and spells, so
that the King was no more Gothlois, but Vter-Pendragon, and his friend ceased
to be Jordan of Tindagol, but Vrsin of Ricaradoch, and the Mage, who had made
this Transformation, Their retransformation.
left the shape of Bricot, and turned again to be Merlin: and the King being
now arrived at his Army, first caused the body of Gothlois to be searched for
amongst the slain soldiers, after to be embalmed and honorably interred, and
first acquainting Igerna by letters with all the former passages, how they
stood, and how much he had hazarded his person for the fruition of her love,
he invited her to her Lords Funeral, at which the King and she both mourned,
but after the celebration thereof ended, he the second time courted her, and in
few The King espouseth the Duchess.
days made her his Queen of a Duchess: by whom he had Arthur and Anna, by
which match the fame of Merlin spread far abroad, the explanation of whose
former prophecy, I leave to the following Chapter.

CHAP. 6.
Merlins former prophecy made plain, concerning King Arthur, with sundry
other occurrences pertinent to the English History.

ARthur the son of Vter-Pendragon, and Igerna, succeeded his Father A summary
of King Arthurs noble conquests
in the Principality, therefore called, the Bore of Cornwall, because begot and
borne in that Country, and of a Cornish Duchess. He was a great planter and
supporter of Religion, and the Christian Faith: for so all our British
Chronologers report of him: His Conquests were many, and some of them
miraculous. By the Islands of the Ocean are meant, Ireland, Island, Scotland,
and the Orcades, Gotland, Norway, and Dacia: all which are called Provincial
Islands, which he brought under the obedience of his Scepter. By the planting
of the Flower de Lyces, in his own Garden, is likewise intended his conquest
of France, with sundry other appendant Provinces: as Flanders, Poland,
Burgundy, Aquitaine, Andegavia, and Normandy: all which with diverse others
paid him an Annual Tribute, and of which Countries for their long and
faithful services, he gave the Earldome of Andegavia to Gaius his Taster, and
the Dukedom of Normandy to Bedverus his Cupbearer; in memory of whose Regal
bounty, it grew to a custom, A custom derived from K. Arthur.
for the Kings of France to make their Tasters and Cupbearers, Earls and Dukes
of Andegavia, and Normandy.

By his pluming and shaking off the Eagles feathers, was his great victory over
the Romans foretold, who when their Prince Lucius with ten other Kings, invaded
this his Land of Britain with a numberless Army of Soldiers, the most of
them he slew, acquitting the Tribute paid to Rome since the time of Julius
Caesar, and those who survived he made his Feodors and Vassals, by which he
got the sovereignty over many Provinces before subjugate to the Roman Empire,
sending the dead body Lucius the Roman Emperor slain by Arthur.
of their Emperor back to Rome there to be interred: next where it is said
his name shall be as meat to all those mouths that shall speak of his notable
and noble achievements by which no other thing is meant, but that the very
relation of his brave Gests shall be a refreshing and delight to all such as
shall either read them or hear them with much pleasure by others reported,
whose very begetting, conception and birth, carry with them the novelty of a
Miracle: And where it is further said that his end shall be doubtful, he that
shall make question of the truth of Merlins prophecy in that point (let him to
this day) but travel into Armorica or Little Britain, and in any of their
Cities proclaim in their streets that Arthur expired after the common Of
Arthurs death.
and ordinary manner of men; most sure he shall be to have bitter and railing
language asperst upon him: If he escape a tempestuous shower of stones and
brick-bats.

The six Kings that succeeded him in order The s^ Kings that ord^rly succeeded
King Arthur.
were Constantinus the eldest son of Cador Duke of Cornwall, (and Arthurs
Cousin German) the second was Constantinus brother, the third Conanus Aurelius,
their Nephew, the fourth Vortiporius, the fifth Malgo, the sixth Caretius, for
when Arthur in that great battle which he fought against his Cousin the
Archtraytor Mordred whom he slew, himself being mortally wounded, and
therefore had retired Mordred slain by Arthur.
himself into the vale of Avalan, in hope to be cured of his hurts, before his
death (and the manner of which is uncertain) he sent for his Cousin
Constantine, before named (a man of approved virtue, and expert in all Martial
Discipline) and made him King, against whom the Saxons assisted by the two
sons of Mordred, assembled themselves, who having defeated Constantinus noble
victories.
them in sundry battails, The elder son of Mordred, who had for his refuge
fortified Winchester, he took, in the Church of Saint Amphibalus (whither he
had fled for Sanctuary) and slew him before the Altar: the younger he found hid
in a Monastery in London, whom he caused likewise to be slain, and this
happened in the year after the Incarnation of our blessed Savior, 543. but in
the third year after he was perfidiously betrayed to death, by the practice of
his Nephew Conanus Aurelius, and his body royally interred, in the Mount
Ambria, near unto Vter-Pendragon.

Then reigned his brother, whom Conanus suffered not to rest one hour in
peace, till he had incarcerated him, and in the same year usurped the
Diadem, a young man of excellent parts Conanus and his conditions.
and noble carriage, had he not been tainted with ambition, the love of
Civil Wars, and Parricidiall Impiety, having slain one of his Uncles,
imprisoned the other, and killed his two sons to attain to the Regal
Sovereignty, which not long he enjoyed, for the next year after he expired,
whom succeeded Vortiporius, against whom the Saxons made a new Insurrection,
Vortiporus and his victories.
and by whom they were utterly subverted, by which he became absolute Monarch
of this Island, but after four years yielded his body to the earth, and left
his Crown to Malgo, who was invested in the year of Grace, after some
Authors 581.

This Prince was strong in body, fortunate in Malgo's description and character.
Arms, and of larger size and stature then any of his Antecessours, who was a
great suppressor of Usurpers and Tyrants, for he not only enjoyed this
Kingdom entire, but conquered by his sword, all the six provincial Islands,
of whom it is reported that he was the fairest of all the British Nation, but
those excellent gifts of Nature he shamefully abused, as being much addicted to
Sodomitry, and as he was a proditor of others Chastities, he was also
prodigal of his own, after whose death in the year 586, Caretius a most
wicked King.
Caretius was instituted in the Throne, a Prince hateful to good men, an
incendiary of Civil and Domesticke combustions, an exiler of his Nobles, a
slayer of his Citizens, a robber of the rich, a suppresser of the poor, and
indeed subject to all the vices can be named.

By the German Worm, and the Sea Wolf, What was meant by the German worm and
the Seawoolfe.
waited on by woods, brought from Africa, through Saint Georges Channel, which
shall support him, our Prophet would have us to know that the Saxons are
comprehended; in the Worm and in the Wolf, Gormondus King of Africa, who in
the time of this Caretius, came with a mighty Navy upon the British Seas, first
with three hundred and sixty thousand soldiers, who first invaded Ireland, and
made great spoil of the Country, and from thence he was invited by the
Saxons, to assist them against the British Nation, to which he assenting,
invaded the Kingdom with fire and sword, committing many direptions, and
outrages, chasing the King from place to place, and from City to City, till
he was in the end forced to fly into Wales, where they shut him up: and by
this means the German Worm, by the means of this Sea-wolfe had the upper hand
of the Red Dragon: whilst these things were thus in agitation, there came to
this great General of the Africans, from the transmarine parts of Gallia, one
Isimbardus Isimbardus the Nephew to Lewis the French King.
Nephew to Lewis the French King, who complained unto him that his Uncle,
against all Justice, kept his right from him, imploring his aid for the
recovery thereof, promising him great rewards: in pledge whereof, like a
wretched Apostata, he renounced his Faith and Christianity: of which proffer
Gormundus accepted, and made his speedy Expedition for France.

But the Miscreant Isimbardus failed of his purpose, and was justly punished by
the hand of God for his Apostasy: for at their landing in the Port of Saint
Waleric, a young Gentleman called Hugo, son to Robert Earl of the Mount,
having received an affront from this Isimbard, challenged him to a single
Duel, who entertaining the Challenge, was by the foresaid King left dead in
the field, and the French setting A just reward of ^postasie.
upon the Host of the Pagans, gave them a great discomfiture, in so much that
of all that infinite number, scarce any were left to bear the tidings of their
disaster into their Country, but either perished by the sword, or were drowned
in the Ocean: in which time says the prophet, Religion shall fail, which
happened when The failing of Religion made good in Gormundus and the Saxons.
this Gormundus with the Saxons rioted and made havoc in this Island,
suppressing Religious Houses, and ruinating Churches, so that scarce a
Christian Native, durst show his head, but he was subject to persecution and
torture.

But it follows in the prophecy, that the honor of Londons Clergy shall give
place to Dorobernia or Canterbury, that the Seventh who sat in the
Eboracensian See, which is the Archbishopricke of York, shall be compeld to
fly into Armorica, or Little Britain, and that Menevia shall be adorned with
the Pall that belonged to the City of Legions, give me leave to use a little
circumstance in the explaining of these: that finding the truth of his
predictions, by the success, the Reader may be more easily induced to give
credit unto the rest, in which I shall strive (though plain) to be much briefer.

The three prime Seats or Sees, were the three The former Prophecy explained
Archbishopricks, which were London, York, and the City of Legions: now note
how punctually he comes to the purpose: the dignity of Londons Metropolitanship
was transferd to Canterbury by Saint Augustine, whom Pope Gregory sent hither
with others to preach the Gospel, who also gave the primacie of the City of
Legions unto Menevia a City of Wales situate near to the Demeticall Sea, but
the City of Legions stands upon the River Osca not far from the Severne Sea,
which was first erected by King Belinus, whose valiant brother Brennus, being
General of the Senon Galls, after many Honorable exployts and glorious
Victories by him atcheived, assaulted the famous City of Rome, took, sacked
and spoiled it in the days of Ahashuerosh and Hester, Gabinus, and Porsenna
being Consuls the first of whom he slew in Battle, and the other took
Prisoner, etc.

By the Archbishop of York the seventh, inaugurated Of Samson Archbishop of
York, and his six brothers.
into that See, who should be compeld to seek shelter in Little Britain, is
intimated, Samson then Resident, who in that great persecution, made by the
Africans, and the Saxons, with six of his brothers all Clergiemen, and of great
sanctity of life, fled into the less Britain, and there established his
Metropolitan Cathedral: The rest of his six brothers, whose names were
Melanius, Matutus, Maclovius, Pabutaus, Paternus, The names of the Archbishop
Samson's six brothers.
and Waslovius, being all Divines, were made the Rectors of other Churches, and
became in short time to be capable of Episcopal Dignities, which seven
Brothers not only the Natives of the Country, but all the bordering Provinces,
call the seven Saints of Britain (meaning the less Britain) even to this day,
now let it be held any deviation or digression from the subject now in hand, if
I borrow so much patience of the Reader to acquaint him with a strange and
almost miraculous story, or legend, by what accident, or rather Divine
providence, these seven holy and devout brothers, were by the mutual congresse
of two Noble parents (the Father and Mother) begot, and conceived in one womb,
and after mature time of Teeming, delivered into the World at one day: but
because I am loath to swell the pages of this Chapter beyond the limits of the
former, I will refer the relation thereof unto that next ensuing.

CHAP. 7.
Of the conception and birth of these seven pious and religious Brothers: and
being sent to death, how preserved, educated, and doctrinated: with a
continuance of Merlins Prophesies and their explanation.

THe Legend reports that their mother The like is reported by the Countess
Altorfence the Mother of the Guelfi in Italy.
being a Noble and chaste Matron, but in her feminine ignorance not acquainted
with the accidents belonging to other women, conceived a strange opinion, from
which she could not be removed, that it was not possible for any of that sex,
to conceive more then one at once, unless she had had the consociety of so
many several men as she brought forth children, in so much that she vilisied
and disreputed, holding all those no better then adulteresses and prostitutes,
who were delivered of Twins, or a more numerous issue: But the God of all
flesh, and the Creator God the justifier of innocence.
of Nature, being also the searcher of hearts, and a justifier of innocence (to
convert this Lady from her erroneous belief, and to clear these unjust
aspersions, with which she had branded other chaste and fruitful wombs) so by
his providence ordained, that by her sole Lord and Husband, she at one
congression, was conceived of seven sons, and delivered of them at one time,
being within the compass of one day.

Which she seeing, and much amazed at the prodigious novelty of such an
unexpected issue and now favoring by a reciprocal retribution these
accusations and suspicions which she had so often cast upon other good women
might be thrown upon herin a desperate way; thereby thinking to salve her
reputation (which she thought hazarded at last, if not quite lost) she
consulted with the midwife, and one of her most trusty maids, (having hired
them to A cruel purpose of a mother.
that purpose,) to take the young spralling infants and either to kill them or
to cast them into the next River to which purpose, as they were hasting, and
carrying them in little baskets, it pleased the higher powers that a grave and
reverent Bishop met them upon the way, and as he passed by the women he heard
the infants to cry and make moan which he imagined was Gods providence in the
preservation of the children.
to implore his help and aid: therefore he made stay of them and would needs
see what they carried in their laps concealed, which they (as loath to betray
their ladies secrets unwilling to show, he grew the more suspicious and
compelled them having some servants then about him to discover what was hid in
their baskets, which being opened, the babes all living seemd to rejoice at his
sight and smile in his face, with which he was much delighted.

Then more strictly examining them to what purpose they carried them in that
manner? and threatening them with the severity of the Law, if they told him not
the truth, they knowing the power and authority of the Church, and danger of
Ecclesiastical censure, and that their attempt deserved (if not execution) yet
excommunication at the least, concealed no part of the truth, but earnestly
solicited him, whatsoever became of them, to have a care of their Ladies
honor: the pious and charitable Prelate having been before himself of her
perverse opinion, and now seeing how justly the Creator of all things, had
dealt with her, and to what desperation she was brought, by thinking to save a
A good and charitable Prelate.
poor credit in this life by the murder of so hopeful an issue, to forfet
all the hopes she had in the World to come; he dismissed the bearers without any
further trouble: adjuring them to tell their Lady, that they had wounded the
young Infants according to her commandment (of which he himself would take
charge, and adopt them for his own) and causing them to be born to his palace,
and after to the Church, he himself baptized them, and gave them their names
as aforesaid, then sent for Nurses, and commanded that they should be
carefully educated, and when they came to any understanding, he set them to
school, and caused them to be instructed in all the seven Liberal Arts (for
he found them to be of pregnant and capable apprehensions) who after by his
means came to be preferred to Church promotions, and after to The seven children
proved seven Bishops.
Episcopal Dignities: I now proceed to Merlins next prophecy, which thus
follows. The Heavens in stead of water, blood shall shower,
And famine shall both young and old devour:
Droop and be sad shall the red Dragon then,
But after mickle time be blithe again,
And now the Serpent that was white before,
Shall have his silver scales, all drencht in gore.
Seven scepter-bearing Kings in field shall die,
One of whose Sainted souls shall pierce the Sky,
Kept shall the babes be from their Mothers wombes:
And soon as climb on earth, grope for their Tombs.
All by a brazen man shall come to pass,
Who likewise mounted on his Steed of brass,
Both night and day will Londons prime Gate keep,
Whether the careless people wake or sleep.


Whosoever shall read Matthew of Westminster, our ancient English Chronologer,
page 29. shall find that in the days of Cadwallo, King King Cadwallo and his
fortune.
of this Island the thirteenth after Brute, that for three days together blood
dropped from the clouds, after which came great swarms of infectious Flies: by
whose bytings or stingings there was great mortality in this Land, and by the
shower of blood is further intimated, the great effusion of British blood,
sometime by public hostility, sometimes by Civil and Domesticke enmity,
profusely wasted: in so much that the earth appeared, as if blood had been
powered down from the Heavens, after which by the barrenness of the earth
followed so great a Famine, that nothing was found for A great F^mine.
the people to feed on, but the roots of withered Herbs and Grass, and such
flesh as they could catch by hunting.

No wonder then if this made the British Nation (figured under the Red Dragon)
greatly to Britain much distressed.
droop, which after much sufferance and labor, was restored to his pristine
state and dignity: For Cadwallo, who was King Anno salutis 633, after many
horrid crosses and disasters, ^xile, expulsion from his Kingdom, and the loss
of his whole Inheritance was forced with a few of his followers that remained
of his many Legions, to retire into the less Britain, to his Cousin King
Solomon, who courteously received him, where he wintred, and in the spring
when Kings go customably out to war, he Cadwallo returns to Britain.
furnished him with an Army of ten thousand able men, when having shipped her
safely, and prosperously arrived in this his own native and hereditary
provinces, And hearing that Paeanda King of Mercia (or middle England) had
besieged in Exeter, his Cousin Briant, with those poor remainder of Britons,
which he had left behind: dividing his soldiers into several Squadrons, not
only removed the siege, but took the King prisoner, who having given him
sufficient hostages for his truth and fidelity, Cadwallo receives Paeanda into
league.
gave him also his only daughter to wife, so that he became the Father in Law,
who made him General of his Army.

After which Cadwallo calling all his exiled subjects (dispersed abroad in
several provinces) into the Kingdom, he raised a competent Army, and invaded
Northumberland with fire and sword, of which Edwinus was then King, who
assembling to his aid all the Reguli, (or less Kings) gave him a strong
encounter, in which his whole Army was discomfited, and himself slain in the
field, whom succeeded his son Assricus, assisted by Chaldodus, Duke of the
Orcades Cadwallo victorious over the Northumbers.
whom Matthew of Westminster calls Offridus and Gothaldus) now Cadwallo not
contented with his former victories, gathered his whole forces together,
against Offricus; whom he also slew in battle, with his two Nephews, and
Cadamus the Scots King, who came to take part with the Northumbers: which done
he past through all the Kingdom, being so maliciously and cruelly bent against
the Saxons, that he His cruelty against the Saxons.
neither spared age, nor sex, killing the old and young Infants newborn, and
those that never saw the sun in their mothers wombs, purposing utterly to
extirpate and root out all the Saxon Nation: thus you see the red Dragon,
namely the British Nation after much dejection exalted, and the s^ales of the
white Serpent (the Saxons) stained in sanguine tincture, by so general a
massacre.

It follows, seven Scepter-bearing Kings shall be slain in the field, of
which one of them shall be The names of the seven Kings slain by Cadwallo.
Sainted: now these seven Kings slain by Cadwallo, and his father in law
Paeanda, were Edwinus, his son Offricus, and Oswaldus (the Saint spoken of)
which were three Kings of Northumberland, Segebartus, Egricus, and Anna, who
reigned over the Oriental Britons, and Cadamus the Scotch King, concerning
which Oswaldus his sanctity and other pious virtues, the ancient Chronicles
write largely, (as also the The story of Sa^t Oswaldus.
Lords of those ^imes) many panegyricks in his praise, which would be too
tedious here to insert, yet some (...) of him, howsoever credible or n^, I
^hought fitting to remember, it was said of him, that when Aldanus Bishop of
Scotland (whose language neither he nor any of his Saxons understood) did at
any time p^h before him and his people, he would put upon him a royal
garment, worn only on solemn Festival days, and whether by virtue of that, or
by divine rapture, he would deliver all that Sermon word for word to his
Countrymen in their proper and modern language: he was also so H^ temperance
and charity to the poor.
temperate in his own diet, and withal so liberal to the poor, that when he
had guests at his Table, he would not only spare from his own stomach, but if
he saw any of them to gormondize, or feed more then became them, he would bid
them to eat more sparingly, and toremember those hungry bellies at the gate,
which attended the reversion and fragments from his board and bounty.

This reverent Bishop Aldanus being feasted by him on an Easter day, the King
commanded a great silver Charger filled with the best meats at his Table, to be
carried to the beggars at his gate, who when they had eaten the meat, he sold
the dish, and equally divided it amongst them, which the Bishop seeing, said
aloud, Live may that liberal hand, o may it always live and never taste of
corruption, which (if we will believe the Roman Legend) proved according to his
prophetical acclamation, for many years after his death, when his Tomb was
searched, and all the rest of his body according to the A pr^tended Miracle.
common course of Nature was putrified and turned to dust, that hand and arm
alone were preserved, from corruption and rottenness, and remained as entire,
flesh, blood, veins, and arteries, as when he was interred.

It follows in the History six of these before named Kings, being slain in
several conflicts, Cadwallo whose high spirit was irreconciliable toward the
Saxons: pursued this Oswald from province to province, chasing him even to the
wall which Severus the Roman Emperor built, to part and divide the two
Kingdoms of Britain and Scotland, and then sent his General and Father in
law Paeana, to give him battle at a place called Hed-field, or holy Camps, in
which by the prayers of this Oswaldus. The Britons The battle of Headfield.
Host was quite discomsited, of which defeat when King Cadwallo understood, he
gathered a fresh Army, and gave him a second battle at a place called Bourne:
in which Oswaldus and his Army were wholly routed, and himself The death of
Oswaldus.
died lamented in his own pious blood, for whose charity and sanctity he was
after canonized, and remains to this day one of the Saints blessed in our
Calendar, whose death happened in the year of our Savior, 644: which improved
that part of Merlins prophecy, Seven Kings shall be slain, of which one
shall be Sainted.

By the brazen man, mounted upon a steed of brass, who is said to do all
these, is antonomasti^e meant King Cadwallo, to honor whom, after his death,
for his many brave victories, and expelling Cadwallo the brazen man, and why so
called.
the Saxons out of the land, the peers and people caused his statue, at his
full size and proportion to be cast in brass, sitting also upon an Horse of
brass, in whose buckler they intombed his embalmed body, and after set it upon
the prime gate of the City London, (it being a piece of admirable art and
pulchritude) and near unto the same, in further memory of him built a Church,
dedicated to Saint Martin, therefore says the Prophet, The brazen Horse and
Man shall watch the Gate whether the people wake or sleep, which continued for
many years after.

CHAP. 8.
He prophesies of the civil Wars that shall be in Britain, in the time
of Cadwallo, and of the great dearth and desolation in the reign of
Cadwalloder: of the Saxons, exalting themselves, and of the first coming in of
the Danes, into this land, etc.

AS Merlin in all his prophesies aims at a continued History of the maine A
continuation of the History.
passages in this I Will of Britain: so I also desire to observe a concordance of
times, left the neglect of either might breed a confusion in both, as shall be
made good in the sequel: his prophecy follows. The crimson Dragon with his
own fierce paws
Shall tear his proper bowels against the Laws:
Of wholesome Nature, plague, and famine then
Shall fill the barren earth with shrowds of men.
After, the Dragon whose smooth scales are white,
Hither the Almans daughter shall invite,
And crown themselves: Against whom shall rise
An Eagle from the Rock, and both surprise,
Two Lions shall a dreadful combat make,
Having their Lists incompast by a Lake.
At length be atton'd, and after shall divide,
The glorious prey: a speckledscale, whose pride,
Shall aim at high things; will his Lord betray
Poisoning the Royal nest in which he lay
Of the white Dragon, so the Fates agree,
At length a Decemvirum there shall be:
What time the Red shall to his joy behold
The roofs of all his Temples decked with gold, etc.


By the Crimson Dragon is still meant England, which after the death of
Cadwallo, being The conquering Britains fall at ods with themselves.
impatient of peace, for want of foreign Enemies shall be at Civil
dissension in it self, of which shall ensue much strage and mortality, such
Dearth, also Famine and Desolation which shall happen by the plague, that
destroys the men, and the Murrian that kills the cattle, that the Natives
shall be forced to leave the Kingdom as a Wilderness unpeopled, the
remaynder of the living being scarce sufficient in number to bury the dead,
which strange depopulation sell in the third and last year of Cadwallader the
son of Cadwallo, which was in the year of Grace six hundred fourscore and
six, which makes up the year of the World, Cadw^llader the last King of the
Britains.
by the account of Polycronicon, and other of our English Chronologers, five
thousand eight hundred, fourscore and five, so that it appears the native
Britains had the title and sovereignty of this Kingdom from Brute: first
landing by the space of one thousand eight hundred, and two and twenty years,
Cadwalloder being the last King of the Britons, after whom the Saxons or
Angles, had the full dominion thereof, which makes good that in the prophecy,
The white Dragon shall invite the Almans daughter, which implies a greater
supply of the German nation, and crown themselves. For from that time they
bare the Scepter, and had the absolute jurisdiction over the whole Land, which
they continued for a long season.

To pass over all the Saxon Kings to the time K. Etheldred the son of
Alfride.
of Ethelredus, in whose days An Eagle from the Rock (which was Swanus King of
Denmark) shall rise etc. The better to explain our prophet, and to carry the
History along, this Etheldred the son of the most Royal King Edward, by his
second Wife Alfrida, by some called Estrild, when he came to be crowned, by
Dunstane Archbishop of Canterbury, he could not contain himself, but with a
prophetical spirit uttered those words: because by the bloody slaughter of thy
brother thou have aspired to the Kingdom, The sin of thy most wicked and
mischievous mother shall never be expiated, nor any who were of her
Diabolical counsel, but by the greatest effusion of the Saxon blood, that
ever was shed since their first coming into Britain, and further the
beginning of thy Reign shall be cruel, the middle thereof miserable, and the
end shameful, all which accordingly happened.

His Father King Edgar, of ever surviving memory, Edward the eldest son of
King Edgar made King.
had by his first wife called Egelsleda, a noble son named Edward, and by his
second Alfrida, this Etheldred, Edgar being dead, the Barons assembled, and
made Edward King in the year of grace eight hundred threescore and fifteen,
at which his stepmother greatly repined, using all the means both of power,
proof, and friends to have inaugurated her son Etheldred, being then a lad
but of seven years old, which in the end most traitorously she accomplished,
for the King hunting in the Forest, near unto the Castle of Corffe, in the
West Country, who having lost all his company, bethought himself that his
stepmother with her A wicked stepmother.
son lived in that Castle, to whom he would give a friendly visit, who
spying from her window afar of, called to a Villain that attended her, and
whispered in his ear what he should do: by this the King was come to the
gate, and she descended to meet him, saluting him with a Judas kiss, and
entreated him to alight and sojourne with her for that night, which he
modestly refusing, said he would only drink a horsback and so be gone, which
being brought, as the cup was at his mouth, her traiterous servant with a long
Dagger struck him quite through the body, at which he put spurs to his horse
thinking to have recovered his servants, but through his great loss of blood
he fainted, and falling from his horse, one of his feet was fastened in the
stirrup, and so hurried to a place called Corisgate, where his miserably
mangled body was found, and not being known at that The base murder upon King
Edward.
present to be the King, without ceremony buried, whom as you have heard, his
brother by the Fathers side succeeded.

In whose reign happened diverse prodigies pretending great disaster, among which
was the sterility of the earth, the burning of London by an accidental fire,
but the most ominous and terrible was the invasion of the Danes and their many
massacres and inhuman butcheries committed through all the shires and provinces
of the Kingdom, as more amply hereafter, but by the way is to be noted that in
the eighth year of his reign he was espoused to Ithelgina, whom Ethelredus
marriage and Issue.
some call Elgina, daughter to Earl Edgebertus by whom in process of time he
received a son called Edmund (after for his notable valor, surnamed
Ironside) and two others, Edwin and Ethelstane, with a daughter named Egina.

About the eleventh year of his reign the The Invasion of the Danes.
Danes pierced the land in sundry places, against whom the King being wholly
addicted to effeminacie and cowardice, durst make no hostile opposure, but for
the present appeased them with great sums of money, which being spent they
fell to new robberies. Then the King bribed them with more, notwithstanding
which, they spoiled Northumberland, and at last laid siege to London, and to
increase his sorrow and trouble, Earl Elphricus who was Admiral of The son
punished for the
the Navy, fled like a Traitor to the Danes, and took part with them against
his natural Liege, for which the King commanded that his son Algarus should
have his eyes torn out of his head: during which time, burning Fevers, and the
bloody Flix destroys many of the Natives, to which was added scarcity and
penury amongst the commons, in so much that they were forced to rob and steal
from one another, so that what by their own pilfering and pillage Fathers
treason.
of the Danes, the land was brought to extreme misery, by whose continual
invasions, and the Kings pusillanimity, the Tribute paid unto them was raised
from ten thousand pounds to forty thousand (named for the continuance thereof
Dane-gelt) they yet not satisfied: to add to the former, the British Peers
were so hollow brested Dane-gelt.
amongst themselves, that when they were at any time assembled, and had
determined any thing to the impeachment of the Danes, they were warned thereof
by some of the falshearted Counsel, of whom were most suspected Elphricus,
Edricus intended by the Snake.
and Edricus, the Snake formerly mentioned in the prophecy.

The Land besides other distresses continuing under this grievous Tribute, the
King by the The Kings second marriage.
advice of those familiars who were about him, married Emma the daughter of
Richard the third Duke of Normandy, and first of that name, who was for his
boldness and valor surnamed, Richard the Hardy, or without fear: and she (by
the French Chronicles) Emma the flower of Normandy, by which Match he was
greatly animated and encouraged, so that presuming on the power of his Father
in Law, he sent into all the Towns, Cities, and Villages of this Land, secret
and straight Commissions, charging the Rulers and Magistrates upon the night
succeeding the day of Saint Brice, that all A general Massacre of the Danes
throughout all the Land.
the Danes should be murdered in their beds, the execution whereof they
committed to their Wives and Women, which was also, accordingly performed (a
strange wonder that so great a secret should pass generally through that sex,
without uttering or discovery.)

This general Massacre of the Danes (as same reports) began at a little Town
in Hertfordshire twenty four miles from London, called Wealwin, from which act
it took first name, as if there the weal of their Country was first warm, and
the day of Saint Brice: happened that year upon the Monday, which to this day is
called Hoc, or Hop-monday, but wherefore I know not, unless by Hoc: this day
as a remarkablenote Hoc, or H^p Monday.
to posterity, or by Hop, as that day the Danes (according to a proverb we
retain from Antiquity) as that day hopt without their heads.

Now concerning the pride of the Danes and their incredible tyranny exercised
throughout The pride and insolency of the Danes over the Britains.
the whole Kingdom, which was the occasion of this their universal slaughter,
our English Historians have thus recorded of them, they caused the Farmers and
Husbandmen to plow, sow, and ear the ground, and to do all the servile labor
that belonged to agriculture and husband^y, whilst they kept their wives and
commanded their daughters and servants at their pleasure, and when the Master
of the house came home, he was forced to salute his superintendent Dane as his
Lord, and whilst the Usurper eat and fed of the best, the poor oppressed
owner could scarcely have his fill of the worst: besides, for fear and dread
they called them in every house where they had rule Lord Dane, which after when
the English had attained to their former honor grew to a title of great
opprobry and contempt, for when Lord Dane turned into Lurdain.
any one would rebuke or revile an other he would in scorn call him Lurdan, a
word in the Country in use even to this day.

But now comes in the Eagle by which is intended Swanus K. of Denmark, who
surpriseth both, that is subdueth the Saxons and the other Almans or Germans,
whom they had admitted into the land, and after infinite devastations,
depopulations and spoils with his broad wings soared over the whole Kingdom
and made prey in every province thereof (the particulars would ask much time
and paper) who in conclusion took from the White Dragon the Saxons after they
had held the sovereignty by many successive Kings both Crown and Scepter: but
before this happened the unfortunate King: whose only fight was with money to
impoverish his own people, and enrich the enemy (for he often bought his
peace which proved to no purpose) Edricus crea ted Duke of Mercia.
he made Edricus whom Merlin calls the Snake, Duke of Mercia, who was of low
and base birth and parentage, yet had attained to great wealth and rich
possessions, false of tongue, subtle of brain, and eloquent in speech, and
persidious in purpose and promise, which will more at large appear hereafter.

In this interim, Swanus so far prevailed, The King with his Queen forced to
fly the Land.
that the King fearing the continual persecution of the Danes, first sent Emma
his Queen, with his two younger sons which were Alfred and Edward, to
Richard the second of that name, and fourth Duke of Normandy, who was her
natural brother, and after was compeld to fly thither in person, with a
slender train of followers, of which when Swanus had notice, he grew inflamed
with greater pride and insolence: and amongst other of his Tyrannies, he fired
the City of Canterbury, and slew nine hundred religious persons tithing them,
as killing nine and saving the tenth, with 8000 women and children, and because
the reverend Bishop would not, or could not pay him down three thousand
pounds, he kept him prisoner seven months, The Bishops name was Elphigus.
and caused him after at Greenwich, four miles from London, to be stoned to
death: and wheresoever he came, he reserved all the women to be vitiated and
defloured, as well the religious as others: robbing the Shrine of Saint Edmond,
not leaving any cruelty which could find a name, unperformed. At length upon
the day of the Purification of the blessed Virgin in the year one thousand and
fourteen, he died miserably howling and crying, three days and nights together
before his death: whom succeeded The death of the Tyrant Swanus.
his son Canutus. And two years after, at one thousand sixteen expired at
London, King Edelfred, and was buried in the Church of Saint The death of
Edelfredus.
Paul: whom succeeded his son Edmund, surnamed Ironside, and these two
Princes were the two Lions spoken of in the former prophecy, of whom you shall
hear more in the ensuing Chapter.

CHAP. 9.
Of diverse bloody battails fought betwixt Canutus and Edmund: their great
opposition ended in a single Duel. They make peace and equally divide the
Kingdom betwixt them: the traiterous death of Edmund: Canutus revengeth it
upon the murderer, with other occurences pertinent to the story, etc.

EDmund surnamed Ironside, the son of Egelredus, and Canutus the son of
Swanus King of Denmark, began to rule the English Nation, Anno 1016, and in
the twenty ninth year of Robert King of France, the Londoners with some of the
English Nobles favoring Edmund, but the greater part of the Nobility, and
Clergy adhering to Canutus, betwixt which young and valiant Princes were fought
sundry cruel and bloody battails (too long here to rehearse.) In which infinite
both of the Natives and Strangers fell by the sword: one of which was fought in
Dorsetshire, besides a Town called Gillingham: another in Worcestershire,
which continued from morning till night, when they surceased In which battle
Canutus was overcome by Edmund.
fight either for great weariness, or for want of light, when both Hoasts
joined the next morrow early, and eagerly; in which battle the Traitor
Edricus perceiving the fortune of the day to incline toward Edmund, pitched a
The treason of Eldricus.
dead man's head upon a spear, and calling to his Countrymen, cried out with
this acclamation, Fly you Englishmen, and preserve your lives, for behold this
is the head of Edmund your King: of which the Prince being warned, hasted to
that part of the field, and plucking off his Helmet to show that he was living,
so comfortably and courageously demeaned himself among his soldiers, that in
the end he had the better of the day.

In the preparation of another field, when both the Hoasts were ready to join
battle, upstarted This Commander was of K. Edmunds party.
one of the Commanders, and appearing between the two Armies, in the Front of
either, spoke aloud as follows: You Princes both, to you I declare my self:
you see how we daily perish, for neither of you gain an absolute victory:
Edmund cannot be overcome because of his great strength and courage, and
Canutus cannot be subdued, being also much favored by Fortune: what then shall
be the final success of this inveterate malice and contention? when all your
Knights and soldiers are slain; shall you not be then enforced either to
compound your enmity, or to fight hand to hand, betwixt your selves? If this
must be the end; why do you not one of these two? For the first, Is not this
Kingdom now sufficient for two, which before contented seven? or if your
spleen be so great that it cannot be reconciled, by an equal division of the
Land; why do not you two fight alone, that strive to be Lords alone? For if we
all perish, who shall be left either to serve you, or to keep foreign
invaders out of the Land?

Which words were so emphatically delivered, and took such impression both in
the Princes themselves and both their Armies, that a Truce being made, they
agreed to end the war betwixt them in a single Duel, for which was assigned
an Isle called Olkney near Gloucester, incompast with the water of Severne, which
makes good the prophecy. Two Lions shall a dreadful combat make,
And have their Lists incompast by a Lake.
In which place at the day prefixed, the two worthy and warlike Champions
completely armed, singly met, the two Hoastsstanding without the Isle, where
first they encountered with sharp The combat betwixt Edmund and Canut^s.
Lances on Horsback, breaking them even to the very Truncheons: then they
alighted and fought long on foot with their keen swords, till their armours
were broken in diverse places, and they both were dangerously wounded, when
retyring for breath, by the first motion of Canutus, they made an accord
betwixt themselves, Canutus made the first motion of peace.
embracing one another as brothers, to the great rejoicing of both Armies.

After which, they made an equal partition of the Land, and Canutus married
Emma the mother of Edmund: but the Snake Edricus, whom his Lord had not only
pardoned for his former Treason, but promoted unto further dignity, by creating
him Earl of Kent, notwithstanding which, he corrupted his son then attending
the King, who awaited his opportunity, and as he was doing the necessiites of
nature, struck him with a Spear into the fundament, of which mortal wound
he dyed soon after at Oxford: Edmund slain by the traitor Edricus.
Then Edricus posted in haste to Canutus, and saluted him by the Title of sole
Sovereigne of the Kingdom, insinuating, that for his love and honor he had
removed his Competitour, and told him the manner how; which Canutus having
truly understood, and that the Treason was uttered from his own mouth, and in
his personal hearing, like a just and wise Prince, he replied unto him:
Forasmuch, o Edricus, as for my love, thou have slain thy natural Lord whom I
entirely affected, I shall exalt thy head above all the Lords of England, and
presently commanded his head to be struck off, and pitched A traitors just
reward.
upon a pole, and set upon the highest gate of London, and his body to be
thrown into the River of Thames; yet Marianus and others write otherwise
concerning the manner of his death, which makes good what is formerly spoken,
that a speckled Snake, Aiming at high things shall his Lord betray,
Poisoning the Royal Nest in which he lay.
Meaning the Kings Treason in which the Traitor was closeted, as one whom he
most favored and honored.

Canutus being now sole Monarch, the white Canutus sole Monarch of England.
Dragon was forced to stoop to the Eagle, that is, the Saxons were compeld to
be under the subjection of the Danes, by whom they were so miserably oppressed,
that scarce the tenth part of them were left in the Land, and these that
remained were forced to tithe their goods, and pay it as a tribute to the
Danes: therefore says the Prophet, Of the white Dragon (so the Fates agree)
A Decimation in the end shall be.


It follows in the History, in a great assembly made of the King and his
Barons: a question was propounded whether in the composition made betwixt
Edmund and Canutus, there was any mention made of Edmunds children to have the
inheritance of their Father after his death, that was, in half part of the
Kingdom? to which a great part of them, thinking thereby to insinuate unto the
Kings favor answered, Nay: but it happened unto them contrary to their
expectation, for knowing them to be natural Englishmen, and before sworn to
King Edmund and his heirs, he hated them for their perjury, never trusting
them after, but some he exiled, The Kings conscionable justice.
and some were slain, and others being struck with the hand of God died
suddenly: It was likewise ordered by the foresaid Counsel, that the two sons
of Ironside, Edmund and Edward should be sent to Swanus (the elder brother of
Canutus) King of Denmark: the purpose is diversely reported, some say to be
slain, What became of the sons of Edmund Ironside.
and that Swanus abhorring the Act, sent them to Solomon then King of Hungary,
where, Edmund died of a natural death, but his brother Edward in the process
of time, married Agatha, the daughter of Henry the fourth of that name
Emperor, and by her (besides daughters) had a son surnamed Ethelinge: This
Edward of our English Chronologers, is named the Outlaw, because he never
returned into England his native Country. In this interim died Swanus King of
Denmark, and the Crown fell to Canutus, so that he was sole Sovereigne of
both Nations, the English and the Danes.

Canutus landed in Denmark, with a strong Army to possess himself of his
lawful Inheritance, and to oppose the Vandals who had pierced that Land, and
when the King was otherwise negotiated, Earl Goodwin with a band of Englishmen
set upon the Invaders by night, and rowted their whole Army, for which noble
act the King had him in great favor, and the English Nation ever after: This
King was greatly beloved of his subjects, for many of his virtues, as being
very charitable and devout, a great repayrer and decorer of Churches,
especially of diverse Cathedrals which he caused to be richly beautified with
gilding, their Altars and Roofs more gloriously then in former ages: thereby
confirming that part of the prophecy. What time the red shall to his joy behold
The rooffs of all the Temple shine with gold. Meaning the red Dragon.

Some attribute the cause of his devotion to a noble care he had, to repair
what his tyrannical Father had before ruined, that the memory of his
Atheistical cruelty might be quite forgot; others that it was at the Altar of
Emma his Queen, the Widow Dowager of Egelredus, and mother of Ironside, who was
a Lady of great religious sanctity: He made also a Voyage to Rome, where he
was pontifically received by Bennet the eight of that name, and demeaned
himself with great magnificence and honor. It is further reported of him,
that after his great entertainment there, and return from rhence, he was so
tumoured with pride, that standing by the Thames side, at a flowing tide, he
charged the water that it should presume no further, nor dare to touch his
feet, which was so far from obeying his command, that he still keeping his
ground, from his ankles it came up to his knees, at which suddenly stepping
back out of Vain pride soon repented of.
the River, he blushing said: By this all earthly Kings may know, that their
powers are vain, and transitory, and that none is worthy of that name but he
who created the Elements, and to whom they only obey.

This Canutus married his eldest daughter, by his Wife Elgina, the daughter to
the Earl of Hampton, to Henry son of the Emperor Conradus The death of
Canutus.
the second of that name, and soon after died at Shaftbury, and was buried at
Winchester, when he had reigned nineteen years, leaving two sons, Harold,
surnamed for his swiftness in running, Harefoot, and Hardy Canutus, whom
Harold son of Canutus King of England.
in his life time he caused to be crowned King of Denmark: Harold succeeded
his Father in the Crown of England, in the beginning of whose Reign: there
was great doubt made of the Legitimacie of his birth, or whether he were the
Kings son or no: but more especially by Earl Goodwin, who was a man of a
turbulent spirit, who to the utmost of his power, would have disinherited him,
and conferred the Kingdom to his brother. But Leofricus whom the King much
loved and trusted by the assistance of the Danes, opposed mightily Goodwin, and
his son, so that they were utterly disappointed of their purpose.

Harold was no sooner settled in the Kingdom, but he robbed his stepmother
Emma, (that good and devout Lady) of her Jewels and Emma wife to Canutus
banished.
Treasure, and then banished her the Land, wherefore she sailed to Baldwin
Earl of Flanders, where she was nobly entertained and continued, all the
Reign of this Harold, in which he did nothing worth register, or deserving
memory, who after three years and some few months died at London, (or as some
say at Oxford) and having no issue, left his brother Hardy Canutus, heir to
the Crown, with the death of whose elder brother I conclude this Chapter.

CHAP. 10.
Merlins Prophecy of Hardy Canutus, and Earl Goodwin, which accordingly
happened: his many Tyrannies, amongst other his Tithing of the Norman Gentlemen:
the death of Prince Alured son to Canutus and Emma: the strange death of
Earl Goodwin. After the death of Edward the Confessor, Harold Earl Goodwins
son usurpeth.

YOu see how hitherto Merlin has predicted nothing which the success and
event have not made good: we will yet examine him further, and prove if he
have been as faithful in the future as the former: who thus proceeds. And
Helluo then with open jaws shall yawne,
Devouring even till midnight from the dawn:
And he an Hydra with seven heads shall grace,
Glad to behold the ruin of his race,
And then upon the Neustrian blood shall prey,
And tithe them by the pole (now well away)
Burst shall he after gordg'd with humane blood,
And leave his name in part of the salt flood.
Iron men, in wooden Tents shall here arrive,
And hence the Saxons with her Eglets drive, etc.
It follows in the History, Hardy Canutus the Hardy Canutus the Dane crowned
King of England.
son of Canutus and Emma, began his Reign over England, in the year of
Grace, one thousand forty one, who was o^ such cruelty, as that he was no
sooner settled in the State, but he presently sent Alphricus Archbishop of
York, and Earl Goodwin to Westminster, to take up the A barbarous cruelty in
a brother.
body of his dear brother, and having parted the head from the shoulders, to
cast them into the River Thames, which was by them accordingly performed, the
cause thereunto moving was for rifling, and after exiling his mother Emma, whom
he caused with great honor to be brought again into the Land.

He revived also the (almost forgotten) Tribute His riot and e^cesse.
called Dane gelt, which he spent in drinking Deep, and Feeding high, for
these were his delights: For besides his immoderate quaffing, he had the Tables
through his Court spread four times a day, with all the riot and excess that
might be devised: who himself minding only gormondizing and voracitie,
committed the whole rule of the Land to Emma and Goodwin, (who had married the
Daughter of Canutus, by his first wife Elgina) by whom many things were much
misordered to the great discontent of the Commons. This Earl had many sons
(as witnesses Polychronicon, lib. 6. cap. 15.) by his Earl Goodwins sons and
daughter.
first wife who was sister to Canutus, he had but one, who by the striking of
an Horse, was thrown into the Thames and there drowned, whose mother after
died by Lightning, and was of such incontinent life, that she prostituted
Virgins and young women, to make base and mercenary use of their bodies: she
dead, he married a second, of whom he begot six sons, Swanus, Harold,
Tostius, Wilnotus Syrthe, or Surthe, and Leofricus, with a daughter named
Goditha who after was married to Edward the Confessor.

Hardy Canutus wholly devoted to all voluptuousness, being at a Feast at
Lambeth, in the midst of his mirth and jollity, drinking a carowse out of a
bowl, elbow-deep, fell down Hardy Canutus dies drinking.
suddenly and rested speechless for the space of eight days, at the end
whereof he expired, in the eight day of June, when he had reigned two complete
years, leaving no issue lawful of his body, and was buried by his Father at
Winchester, in whom ended the Line and Progeny of Swanus, so that after this
King the blood of the Danes was quite extinct, and made incapable of any Regal
Dignity within this Land. The end of the Danish persecution and how long it
continued.
Their bloody persecution ceasing, which had continued (counting from their
first landing in the time of Brightricus King of the West Saxons) by the space
of two hundred fifty five years, or thereabout: by this Hardy Canutus, Merlin
intended his Helluo, as being a gluttonou, Prince, whose bibacity and voracity
would continue from morning till midnight, in the first year of whose Reign,

The two sons of Egelredus and Emma, namely Alphred, and Edward, who before
were sent into Normandy, came into England to see their Mother, and were
Princely attended by a great number of brave Norman Knights and Gentlemen, of
which Earl Goodwin (that By the seven heads are meant he and his six sons
who a^sisted him in all his bloody projects
subtle seven-headed Hydra before spoken of) having notice', he began to plot
and devise how to match his only daughter Goditha to one of the two Princes,
but finding Alured the eldest to be of an high and haughty spirit, and would
disdain so mean a marriage, he thought by supplanting him to confer her upon
the younger, who was of a more flexible disposition, Earl Goodwins p^te.
to compass which, he pretended to the King and Council, that it might prove
dangerous to the state to suffer so many strangers to enter the Land without
license.

By which he got authority and power to manage that business according to his
own discretion, as being most potent with the King, and a great incourager of
his profuseness and riot: therefore being strongly accompanied he met with the
two Princes and their train, and set upon them as Enemies, killing the greater
part of them at the first encounter, and having surprised the rest upon a place
called Guil-downe he slew nine and saved the tenths, and then thinking the
number of the survivors too Earl Goodwins great cruelty.
great, he tithed again that tenth putting them to cruel deaths, as winding
their guts out of their bellies, with other torturing deaths) then he caused
the elder brothers eyes to be plucked out and sent to a religious house in Ely,
where he dyed shortly after, but the younger he preserved as an husband for
his daughter, and sent him to his mother Emma: all which fulfils the former
prophecy which says. And he an Hidra with seven heads shall grace,
Glad to behold the ruin of his race.
And then upon the Neustrian blood shall pray, By Neustria is understood
Normandy.

And tithe them by the pole etc.
Emma not trusting the tyranny of Goodwin by whom she had left one son, the
better to secure the other, she sent him into Normandy, but Edward after
surnamed the Co^fessor made King.
Hardy Canutus being dead, he was sent for over to receive his just and
lawful inheritance: so that this Edward the son of Egelredus and his last
wife Emma, began his Reign over England in the year of Grace 1043. and was
soon after married to Goditha (whom Guido calls Editha) the sole daughter of
Earl Goodwin, who as all Authors affirm, lived with her without any carnal
society, whether it were in hatred of her kindred, as by the greatness of her
father compelled to that match, or for that he altogether devoted himself to
chastity, it is left uncertain.

In the beginning of his Reign his mother The Kings mother accused of
adultery, with Alwin Bishop of Winchester.
Emma, was accused to have too much familiarity with the B. of Winchester,
therefore the King by the counsel of Earl Goodwin seized upon many of her
jewels, and confined her to a strict keeping in the Abbey of Worwell, the Bishop
Alwin was also under the Custody of the Clergy; but she more sorrowing for his
defame then her own, wrote unto diverse Bishops to do their Justice, affirming
she was ready to undergo any trial whatsoever, to give the World satisfaction
of her innocence, who labored to the King that their cause might have a just
and legal hearing: but Robert Archbishop of Canterbury Robert Archbishop of
Canterbury against the mother Queen.
not pleased with the motion, said unto them, My Brethren Bishops, how dare ye
plead for her, who is a beast and no woman? as by defaming the King and her
son, and yielding her self a prostitute to the incontinent Alwin:
(proceeding further) but if it be so that the woman would purge the Priest, who
shall then purge the woman? who is accused to have been consenting to the death
of her son Alfred, and has prepared infectious Drugs for the poisoning of
her son Edward: but be she guilty or no; if she will agree to go bare foot
upon nine plough-shares burning and fiery hot, for her self four shares, and
for the Bishop five, he may be then cleared, and she also.

To which she granted, and the day of her This (...) Chronicles of same for
truth.
purgation assigned, at which day the King in person with many of his Lords
were present, she was hoodwinkt and led to the place where the Irons lay
glowing hot, and having passed over the nine shares unhurt, she said, Good
God, when shall I come to the place of my purgation? When they opened her eyes,
and she saw that she had past the torment without any sense of pain, she
kneeled down, and gave thanks to the protector of chastity and innocence.
Then the King repented him of his credulity, restoring unto her what he had
before taken from her, asking of her forgivenes and blessing. But the
Archbishop Robert, who was once a Monk in Normandy, and was sent for over by
the King, and first made Bishop of London, and Emma acquit from the suspicion
of Incontinency.
after raised to be Metropolitan, fled into his Country, and was no more seen
in England after.

After many insolences committed against the King, by Earl Goodwin and his
sons (too long to rehearse) they were forced to abandon Earl Goodwin and his
sons fly the Land.
the Land, and fly into Flanders to Earl Baldwin, (whose daughter Judith,
Swanus his eldest son had married) and then by a Parliament they were made
Out-lawes and Rebels, and their goods and Lands seized: where they continued as
exiles for the space of two years: during which time William the bastard Duke
of Normandy came with a Noble Train to visit the King his Cousin, and were
royally entertained, returning with great gifts and presents into his Country,
after which Goodwin by intercession of his friends here in England, was called
home with his sons, who were received into grace, and restored to their
former dignities and possessions: giving for pledges of his fidelity, his son
Wilnotus and Hacun the son of Goodwin and his sons restored.
Swanus, whom the King sent to William Duke of Normandy, to be kept in safe
custody.

Not long after, in the twelfth year of the Reign of this Edward the
Confessor; upon an Easter Monday, Goodwin sitting with other Lords at the Kings
Table, in the Castle of Winsor, it happened that the Kings Cupbearer stumbled,
but recovered himself of a fall, at which the Earl laughed heartily, and
said; there one brother helped the other, meaning one leg had supported the
other, which the King observing, said, yea, and so my brother Alphred might
have lived to have helped and sustained me, had it not bin for Earl Goodwin, by
which words the Earl apprehending, that he upbraided him with his brothers
death, thinking to excuse himself of the Act, said, so may I safely swallow
this morsel of bread that is in my hand, as I am innocent of that deed, in
swallowing of which he was choked: which the King seeing commanded him to be
dragged from the board, his body being Goodwins remarkable death.
conveyed to Winchester, and there interred: Macrinus says, that he was
suddenly struck with a palsy of which he died ^hree days after: howsoever he
underwent a most remarkable judgment: His eldest son living who was Harold
(for Swanus died in his pilgrimage to Jerusalem) had all his Fathers Dignities
and Honors conferd upon him: But in process of time all those his Lands in
Kent (of which he was Earl, were eaten up and devoured by the Sea, upon whose
dangerous shelves and quicksands, many thousands have been wrackt and drowned,
and they are called Goodwins Sands, unto this day, which verifieth that part of
the prophecy of the Hydra, where he says, Burst shall he after gordg'd with
humane blood,
And leave his name in part of the salt flood.


Harold having done many noble services for the King and the country, in all
which he came off with great honor and victory: about the 20. year of King
Edward, he sailed toward Normandy to visit his brother Wilnotus and his
Nephew Hucun, who lay there as pledges for the peace betwixt the King and
Harold sayleth into Normandy.
Earl Goodwin; buteither by the mistake of the unskilful Pilot or by the
extremity of tempests, he was driven upon the province of Pountithe, and there
surprised, and sent as prisoner to William Duke of Normandy, who some say,
forced him to take an oath to marry his daughter and keep the Kingdom of
England to his behoof: but that which carries more show of truth, is that
Harold to insinuate into the Dukes favor, in whose power he now was, told him
that his King in the presence of his Baronry had selected him his Heir, and
covenanted with him that if he survived his sovereigne, he would keep the
Crown to his use; for which Meaning the Duke.
the Duke gave him his daughter in contract, with promise of a large dowry; but
she was yet in her minority not ripe for marriage; in confirmation of which,
Duke William gave him also his brothers son Hucon one of the Hostages and
kept the other, and after sent him over, with rich gifts: all which at his
return to England he acquainted the King with, who expired the fourth day of
January, when he had reigned twenty three years seven months and The death of
Edward the Confessor.
odd days, and lies buried in the Monastery of Westminster which he before
had much beautified and repaired.

After whom succeeded in the Throne Harold, the second son of Earl Goodwin,
and last King Harold crowned King of England.
of the Saxons, who began his Reign over England in the year one thousand
forty six: the ambition to gain a Crown, making him forget his oath and
promise made to Duke William: In the beginning of his Reign his Land was
invaded by his brother Tostius, who was beat out of the Kingdom by Edwin, and
Malcharus Earls of Mercia and Northumberland: then Harold Hafagar King of
Denmark and Norway, (whom Guido the Historiographer calls the son of
Canutus) hearing of the death of Edward, with an Army of three hundred England
invaded by the Danes.
ships, entered the mouth of the River Tyne, pretending to conquer England, as
his right and lawful inheritance, which Harold hearing sent the two aforesaid
Earls of Mercia and Northumberland, till he himself had gathered sufficient
forces: who gave the Danes a strong battle, but being overset with
multitudes, they were forced to give back, so that the enemy entered further
into the Land, which the King hearing, Harold made haste with his powers. And
met them at a place called Stratford bridge. In which Interim Tostius came out
of Scotland, and took part against his brother: Betwixt these two Hoasts was
fought a bloody A bloody battle in which Harold was victor.
and cruel battle. In which many brave Knights breathed their last, and
amongst them Tostius: the two Harolds of England and of Denmark, met and
fought hand to hand, in which combat Harold of Denmark, fell under the hand of
Harold of England, who was likewise Master of the field, in which Olanus
brother to Harfagar, and Paulus Duke of the Orcades were taken prisoners: of
whom Harold took sure pledges for their fidelity and homage.

CHAP. 11.
The Landing of Duke William with the Normans: the battle betwixt him and
Harold, in which Harold is slain, being the last King of the Saxon blood.
William remains Conqu^rour, and is crowned King of England, His death, and
the success of the Prophecy.

HArold ambitiously puffed up with this great victory, divided not the spoil
Some think it was a great cause of his loss of the battle against William.
from the enemy taken, equally, but avaritiously kept the greatest part to his
own use, and the remainder he distributed not to those who had best fought,
but to those whom he most favored, by reason whereof he lost the Harolds
answer to Duke William.
hearts of many of his Knights: in this Interim, died the Daughter of Duke
William (before contracted to Harold) by which he thought himself fully
discharged of his former duty and promise: But Duke William was of a contrary
mind, and by diverse messengers mixing fair terms with menaces, put him in
remembrance of the breach of both, to which Harold gave a slight answer, that
rash and unadvised covenants might be as well violated as kept, that it was
not in his power to dispose of the Crown and Kingdom, without the assent of
the Peers and Barons of the Realm, besides oaths and promises made either by
fear or force, were of no validity, and therefore left him to take what course
he pleased according to his best direction: for that was his peremptory answer.

At which Duke William being much incensed, gathered a selected Army, which he
caused to be shipped with all things necessary for so great Duke William ^ndeth
in England.
an Enterprise, and launching from the port of Saint Valery, In shorttime
landed near Hastings in Sussex, at a place called Penusy, making three Three
pretenses for his Invasion.
pretenses for his invasion: The first and chief was to challenge his right to
the Crown, as next Heir, and moreover bequeathed unto him by his Nephew
Edward the Confessor upon his deathbed. The second was to vindicate the bloody
murder of his Cousin Alfred, and brother of the late King, committed by E.
Goodwin, upon Guildowne, which was done (as he pretended) by the especial
instigation of Harold: The third was to revenge the banishment of Archbishop
Robert (before remembered in the accusation of Queen Emma) with which also he
charge Harold, as the sole animatour of his exile; and hitherto Merlins
Prophesies admit no contradiction, when he faith, Iron men, in wooden Tents
shall here arrive,
And hence the Saxons with the Eglets drive.


By the Iron-men, meaning the Normans, in The prophecy explained.
Iron Casks and Corslets; by wooden Tents, their Navigable Vessels, who in
Harold extinguished the blood of the white Dragon the Saxons, and expelled the
Eglets, who were the Danes, the brood of Swanus in that Princely bird so
emblematized: the story follows, Duke William landing one of his feet slipped,
and the other stuck fast in the sand, which one of his Knights observing, A
good Omen.
cried aloud, A good Omen, now William, England is thine own, and thou shall
change the title of Duke into King, at which he smiled, and piercing further
into the Land, he made proclamation, that no man should take any prey, or make
any spoil, or do any violence to the Natives; saying, it were no reason that
he should offer outrage to that which should be his own.

Harrold was at that time in the North, who hearing the Normans were landed,
gathered his forces by the way as he came, to supply his army, which was much
weakened by reason of the last battle fought against the Danes and Norways,
and sending spies into the Dukes host to Harold sends spies into the Dukes
Host.
discover their strength, word was brought him that his soldiers were all
priests and lawyers, as having their upper lips chins and cheeks shaven, (which
was their custom then, and the English used to wear their Mouchatos thick and
long) to which Harold answered: but we shall find them neither Barmen, nor
Bookemen, but valiant Knights expert in all manner of warlike discipline. Then
Gurth or Surthe one of the youngest brothers of Harold advised him in person to
stand apart, and that himself with the Lords and Barons would inc^unter the
Normans, because he was sworn to the Duke, and they not; and if they were put
back, he then might rally their dispersed troops and maintain his own claim
and his Countries quarrel, to which he would by no means assent.

Then Duke William by a clergy man sent him Three profers made by the Duke to
the King before the battle.
three proffers of which to take his choice; the first, that according to his
oath he should deliver up the Crown, and all the rights thereto belonging,
which done, to receive it again and hold it of him as in fee during the term
of his life, and after his death to return it again to the said William, or
to such an one of his sons as he would assign it unto: the second, to depart
and leave the Kingdom without more contention: The third, that to spare the
shedding of Christian blood, they two might singly end the quarrel by the
sword: All which offers Harold refused, returning answer by the Prelat, that
he would try his cause by the dint of swords, and not of one sword, and that
he and his Knights were ready, to defend their Country against all Foreign
Invaders whatsoever: The Duke hearing this his answer delivered unto him, he
gave strict charge, that all his people that night should watch and spend the
hours Two different dispositions in the boasts.
in prayer with the Priests, when on the contrary the English Host past away
the time in dancing and drinking.

The next morning (being Saturday) the fourteenth day of October, the two
Hoasts met at a place where now stands Battle Abbey in Battle Abbey in
Sussex.
Sussex, (which was after built, and so called by Duke William, in memory of
this battle there fought, and his great victory then achieved) in the
beginning of which conflict a Norman Banneret called Thilfer, slew three
English Gentlemen one after another, but in attempting the fourth was himself
slain. Then began a The battle betwixt King Harold with Duke William
terrible noise of the clattering of Harness, the rushing of shields, the
trampling of Horses, with loud cries and acclamations on both sides, in which
the Normans opposed mightily, and the English defended themselves manfully, and
the better, because they fought close keeping their battle whole without
scattering, or ranging abroad; which when Duke William observed, he gave a
sign to his Commanders that they should give back, as if they were almost
compeld to fly and forsake the field, yet subtlely embattailing the foot, and
placing the Horse for Wings on either side: the English hoping instantly to
have routed them, dissevered their Squadrons as for present pursuit: but the
Normans returning took them at that disadvantage, and struck them down on
every side: yet was this battle so stoutly fought by the Englishmen, that
Duke William was there that day beaten from his Steed, and three Horses slain
under him: but in the end Harold was slain, being shot into the eye with an
arrow, King Harold slain in the eye with an arrow.
and fell down dead in the field: which his army seeing, they dispersed
themselves, and every man fled to his best safety.

Thus died this valiant King Harold, having worn the Crown from the fifth of
January to the fourteenth of October, making up nine months, and some odd
days, and was buried in the Monastery of Waltham which he himself The end of
the Race of the Saxons.
had founded; in whom ended the blood of the Saxons which had continued from
the beginning of King Hengists reign, for the space of five hundred fourscore
and one year, all which time they had reigned as Kings in this Land, (saving
those four and twenty years in which Edward the Confessor had the
Sovereignty) who was of the Norman blood by his Mother Emma, daughter to
Richard the Hardy, the third Duke of Normandy, and first of that name.

Then Duke William buried his slain men, and suffered the English to do the
like. Now when Mercia and Northumberland, not in this battle.
the news of Harolds death came to the two Earls of Mercia and Northumberland,
who were not then in that battle (some think, that by reason of the distance
and difficulty of the way they could not arrive with their forces soon enough,
but others have conjectured, that they purposely absented themselves, because
in the division of the Danish spoils, they were neglected, but howsoever, they
came to Duke William, and submitted themselves, giving pledges Duke William
crowned King of England.
for their truth and fealty: thus William Duke of Normandy, surnamed the
Conqueror, base son to Robert, the sixth Duke of that Province, and Nephew
unto Edward the Confessor, began his Dominion over this Realm of England, in
the year of Grace, one thousand threescore and nine, the fifteenth day of
October, and was crowned upon Christmasse day (by Aldredus Archbishop of York)
next following: I now proceed to Merlins next prophecy. He that Iron Nation
who leads forth for prey
Shall find full spoil, and where he feeds, will stay:
Suppressing the red Dragon for a space.
Then shall arise two Dragons from his race:
One, aims at, but attains not his desire.
By Envies Dart the other shall expire.
The Lion next of Justice must appear,
Who against the Celticke Towers will ladders rear.
And cause the Lily like the Aspen shake,
Whose rore shall all the Island Serpents quake.
(A cunning Alcumist) who has the skill
Gold, both from flowers, and Nettles to distill.


The first part is plain and easy, the appearance Part of the Prophecy
explained.
whereof is gathered from the former circumstances: under the man, who leads
the Iron Nation forth to prey, is figured the Conqueror, who brought into this
Kingdom the strongly armed Normans, where finding fat spoil, that is, a rich
and fertile Island, where he feeds will stay: that is, where he fares well, and
has all things in his own power, to his will and pleasure; there he will make
his abode and plant himself, (suppressing the red Dragon for a space, that is,
the first Britains, after mingled with the Saxons, and from Hengists-men called
Englishmen, then with the Danes, and now again oppressed by the Normans, yet was
the blood of the first Natives (howsoever mingled) never extinguished, and the
Nation howsoever extremely suffering, yet never altogether eradicated and
extirpt: but to pass over the Reign of the Conqueror (because no further
aimed at by my Author) I proceed to the rest: Then shall two Dragons issue from
his race.


Meaning from Duke William now living, (by which two Dragons are intimated his
two eldest Sons: Robert surnamed Corthose or Shorthose, and William Ruffus, so
styled because of his ruff hair and beard.)

This Robert the eldest, because he might Robert rebelleth against his Father.
not be possessed of the Duchy of Normandy, which his father had before promised
him, he by the aid of the French King Philip, and Lewis his son, invaded
that Duchy and took diverse prizes thence; which put his Father to much
grievance and trouble; in so much, that at length the father and the son with
two great Hosts met in the plain field, where betwixt them was fought a cruel
and bloody battle, in which King William, was wounded and beaten from his
horse, and in great danger to be took or slain; which his son Robert
hearing, in true filliall piety he restored his Father, set him upon a fresh
Horse, and delivered him from all danger: howsoever in that conflict many of
the Kings men fell by the sword, and his son William received many wounds, so
that they were compeld to forsake the field and yield the honor thereof to his
Son Robert, for which Robert gains the day of his Father.
rebellion as some have related, he laid an heavy curse upon him, which proved
fatal unto him in the end.

Some write that by the leaping off an horse he got such a strain (meaning
King William) that it was the cause of his death, and when he found that he
was pasthope of life, he called his three sons unto him exhorting them to
fraternall love and unity, and by his will appointed to Robert the eldest, the
Duchy of Normandy, to William the second, the Kingdom of England, and to his
third son Henry, (because K. Williams admonition to his sons.
he was a piece of a Scholar, surnamed Beauclerke) he bequeathed his
movables and treasure: then he informed his two eldest sons of the
disposition of the people, whom they were to govern, advising William to be
affable, courteous, and liberal to the English: and Robert to behave himself
roughly and sternly toward the Normans: which having uttered, he The death of
William, surnamed the Conqueror.
died within few hours after in Normandy, and was buried in the City of Cane,
in the third year of his Duchy, but of his Reign over England, one and
twenty years and ten months, in the month of July: in which time of his
Sovereignty, he kept the English so straight and low, that none of the Nation
bore any office of profit or honor, but he somewhat favored the City of
London, by granting them their first Charter, which is written in the Saxon
Londons first Charter granted by King William.
tongue, and sealed with green Wax, and is comprehended in eight or nine lines
at the most: with whose death I also conclude this Chapter.

CHAP. 12.
The prediction of the two Dragons, made good by the subsequent History, in
Robert, and William the two sons of the Conqueror: who the Lion of Justice
was: and what was meant by his Alchymy, etc.

WIlliam the second of that name, surnamed William the second crowned King of
England.
Rufus, or the Red, began his Reign in the month of July, in the year of
Grace, one thousand sourescore and nine, but Rainolf Monk of Chester, in his
Polychronicon, affirms that Robert was absent at the death of his Father, and
hearing that he had preferred his younger brother to the Crown of England, he
was greatly enraged, and laid his Dukedom to pawn to his brother Henry, for
certain sums of money, with which he hired an Army, and landed at Hampton:
of which his brother having intelligence, sent unto him with this submission
following, A strange submission of a King.
Thy brother William entreats thee to be no way incensed at what I have done.
For he calls himself not absolute King, but Viceroy and thy Substitute, and
to reign under thee, being greater, and therein better, because before him
borne, who has taken upon him this charge, only because of thine absence; yet
since he is now in place and authority by thy sufferance, he humbly prays thee
that he may under thee still so continue, paying unto thee annually three
thousand mark, with condition, that the survivour of the two may peaceably
enjoy the Kingdom.

Duke Robert who was not unacquainted with the politic proceedings of his
brother, shaked his head, and began to pawse, about an answer, and being of a
loving and gentle disposition, The two brothers attowd.
bountiful withal, and still preferring his honor before his profit (as in
all his after proceedings he made manifest) condescended to his brothers
request, and returned into Normandy: but William was of a more subtle and
crafty condition, and yet withal ambitious after vainglory, to maintain
which, he extorted both from the Spiritualty and Temporalty. He builded He
builds Westminster Hall.
Westminster Hall, and by reason that his brother Robert, was then in the holy
Wars, to redeem Jerusalem from the Pagans, he spent some time in Normandy,
about his brothers affairs: but at his return, the building of the Hall being
finished, he seemed much discontented with the littleness thereof, saying it
was more fit for a Dining Chamber then a Kings Hall, purposing, if he had
lived, to have made a far greater.

In the beginning of the thirteenth year of his Reign, the third day of
August, being hunting in the New Forest, by the glancing of an Arrow shot by
the hand of one Sir Walter Tyrrell, The King murdered to death by Sir Walter
Tyrrell.
the King was wounded to death in the forty fourth year of his age; who
escaped and saved himself, for none pursued him, and few (in regard of his
former tyranny) sorrowful for his death: some think that this arrow was
purposely aimed at him, to fulfill the prophecy of the two brothers. One aims
at, but attains not his desire,
By envies dart the other shall expire.


Now Robert, though he still aimed at the Kingdom, yet never attained unto
it, and the other died, according to Merlins words, spiculo Invidiae, by the
dart of Envy: the King thus wounded was laid in a Horse-litter, and conveyed to
Winchester, where he died and was buried: In his life time he took upon him
great The Kings Character.
things: the day before he died, one asked him where he purposed to keep his
Christmasse? to which he answered, at Poyctiers, for the Earl intends a
Voyage for Jerusalem, meaning to seize upon his Earldome.

Henry of Huntington reports of him, that though he was generally reported
avaritious and gripple-handed, yet he was in his own condition, bountiful,
and liberal, as may appear by the narration following. The Abbot of a great
Monastery being dead, too wel-monied Monks of the same place made friends to
the King offering Justice and liberality in the King.
large sums, to be promoted to that dignity: there was also a third Monk, who
out of his meekness and humility had accompanied them to the Court, and to
give attendance on him whom the King should admit to be Abbot: who called to
the Monks severally, and either of them outbid the other: the King casting his
eye upon the third (who came as their servant) thinking, his business had been
to the same purpose, demanded of him, if he would give more then his brethren
had proffered: who answered him again, that he would neither offer nor give to
the value of one penny, neither would he take any such charge upon him which
came unlawfully by symony: whose words when the King had duly considered, he
said that he of the three was best worthy to take so holy a charge upon him,
and gave it him freely.

Duke Robert being at this time in the holy Henry usurpeth the crown.
Wars, the youngest brother Henry, third son to the Conqueror, and first of
that name, began his Reign the fifth day of August, in the year of our Lord
eleven hundred and one, and this was he whom Merlin calls Leo Iustitiae, the
Lion ^f Justice: who banished from his Court all flattering and effeminate
Sycophants: he was also abstinent, and abhorring gormondizing, and the excess
of Feasts: he was further well studied in the seven Liberal Arts, and used to
fight more with counsel then the sword, and yet upon just occasion, he would
show himself as valiant as he proved fortunate.

In the second year of whose Reign, Robert his brother, being there employed
in the Wars of Palaestine, against the Miscreants and Infidels, receiving news
that his brother William was dead, and that his brother Henry had usurped Duke
Robe^t offered to be made King of Jerusalem.
the Crown of England, notwithstanding that the Christian Princes offered to
make him King of Jerusalem, yet he refused that honor, but with great speed
returned into Normandy, and there raised forces, to claim his right unto the
Crown of England, and landed at Portsmouth, but a mediation of peace was made
betwixt them, and that he should have the same yearly revenue of three
thousand Marks, which he had in the days of King William: with which he
returned fully satisfied, at which his Lords and Peers were much discontented,
as also for other things which in his easy nature he had yielded to, both
against his honor and profit, Duke Robert neglected by his Peers.
for which he was by them less regarded, and in the end quite neglected.

This Robert in his Fathers days was in all his enterprises victorious, and
after did many brave exployts at the siege of Acan against the Turks: and (as
is before said) was by the great suffrage of the Christian Host chosen King of
Jerusalem, but whether he thought it to be an honor with too much trouble, or
for the covetousness of the Crown of England, he made refusal thereof, for
which it has been thought, that he sped the worse in all his endeavors
after. For a dissension fell betwixt him and his Nobles, so that they sent to
King Henry his brother, that if he would come over into Normandy, they would
deliver up the whole Country into his hands, and acknowledge him their sole
Lord and Governor, of which profer it is said, Henry accepted: but before any
hostility was threatened, Robert came into England to visit his brother and new
sister (for the King was lately married to Mawd the Duke Roberts easy and
liberal disposition.
daughter of Malcolme, King of Scotland) at whose request he released to his
brother the tribute of three thousand Marks by the year, and so departed.

Notwithstanding which, by the instigation of bad and wicked Counselors, this
seeming brotherly love was quite abrogated and dissolved, so that the King with
a strong Army invaded Normandy, and by reason that Roberts Peers and Nobles
fell from him, he chased him from place to place, and won from him his Cities,
Cane, Roan, and Faloys, with all other places defensible; so that Robert was
forced to defire aid of Philip the French King, and after of the Earl of
Flanders, but they both failed him, so that with those few forces which he
could make, he gave battle to his brother, in the which he was surprised
and taken prisoner, and sent over into England, and put Duke Robert taken
pr^soner by his b^other.
into the Castle of Cardiffe in Wales, where he remained his whole life time,
and being dead was buried at Gloucester, and thus he who might have been King
of Jerusalem, and twice King of England (had he taken the opportunity offered
The Duchy of Duke Robert.
him) died with no greater title, then the bare Duke of Normandy.

Wars then grew betwixt the King of England, and the French King, in which
they sped diversely, but in the end Henry beat him in his own Country, and had
of him a glorious victory, to the great terror and astonishment of all the
French Nation, and those lesser Princes of his Confederacy, making good that
of the Prophet: The Lion next of Justice, shall appear,
Who against the Celticke Towers shall ladders rear,
And cause the Lily like the Aspen shake,
Whose rore shall all the Island Serpents quake.
By the Lily is meant the Flower de Lyce, which The Prophes^e explained.
the French King bears in his Scutcheon, which was said to quake like an
Aspen, (whose leaf of all others is soonest moved with the wind) by reason of
the great affright and terror he put the French into at the noise of his
Drums, the thundering of his Horses hoofs, and the lowdnesse of his warlike
instruments.

About the twentieth year of this Kings Reign, when he had been three years
together in Normandy, the King took shipping at Harflute (a part of that
Duchy) the four and twentieth day of November, and arrived safe in England,
not many hours after: And soon upon that his two sons, William who was Duke
of Normandy, with Richard his brother, with Notha the Countess of Parsie,
Richard Earl of Chester, with his wife the Kings Niece, The Archdeacon of
Hereford, with Knights, Gentlemen, and others, to the number of an hundred and
forty persons: These took shipping at the same Port to follow the King, but in
their passage, the ship sunk under them, and they were all drowned to one man,
saving a Butcher, who reported that this disastrous misfortune fell The Kings
two sons with many others drowned.
by the negligence of the Master and Sailors, who in the night being at
dissension amongst themselves, ran the Vessel upon a Rock, and split her;
from which danger the young Duke William was escaped by getting into a boat
near the sh^are: but when he heard the lamentable outcry of the Countess
Notha, he commanded the Rowers to row back, and if it were possible to save
her life, who having recovered her into the boat, they were by a tempestuous
gust so overcharged, that it was violently overturned, and they all swallowed
in the Sea, of which strange accident Merlin also prophesied in these words:
The Lions whelps their nature shall forsake, Catuli Leonis in aequoreo; pisces
transformabuntur.

And upon them the shape of sishes take.


The King to maintain his former Wars which proved so terrible to the French
and others, was forced to exact money from all manner of people, not sparing
the Clergy nor the Laity, and therefore Merlin calls him A cunning Alcumist,
who has the skill
Gold, both from flowers, and Nettles to distill.
By the Flowers, meaning the Spiritualty, by the Nettles the Temporalty: in the
twenty seventh year of this Kings Reign died Henry the fourth Emperor of that
name, who had before married Mawd, the daughter to Henry King of England, after
whose death she came to her Father in Normandy, who because he had no heirs
male left of his body, he caused all the Bishops and Barons to swear in his
presence, that they The Lords sworn to the succession of Mawd the Empress.
should keep the Crown of England to the use of this Mawde the Empress, if
he died without issue male, and she surviving.

In the eight and twentieth year of his Sovereignty, Ieffery Plantaginet Earl
of Anjoy, was espoused unto Mawde the Empress, from whom Her second marriage.
descended Henry the second, surnamed Short-Mantle, who after Stephen was King
of England; King William being in Normandy, (as some write) fell either with
his Horse or from his Horse, which after was the cause of his death. But
Rainolph says, that he took a surfeit by eating of a Lamprey, and died of
that, when he had reigned thirty five years and odd months, The death of
Henry the first of that name.
whose body when it was embowelled, before it could be embalmed, cast such a
stench that none could abide the place, where he was dissected, and though it
was wrapped in a Bulls skin, yet it little abated the smell, in so much that
diverse were infected therewith, and the Chyrurgion who cleansed the head, died
of the unwholesome scent which proceeded from the brain, which some conjectured
to be a just judgment laid upon him for his merciless cruelty showed upon
his brother Robert, whose eyes (as some have reported) he caused to be torn
out of his head during his imprisonment: his body was brought into England, and
was afterward buried in the Abbey of Reading which he before had founded;
after whose death, Fame spoke of him, as of all other Princes, both in the
better and worse part. Diverse said, that he surpassed many of his Predecessor
Kings in three How the King was spoken of after his death.
things, in wit, in eloquence, and good success in battle; and others spared
not to say that he was pestilently infected with three notorious vices:
Covetousness, Cruelty, and Lechery.

CHAP. 13.
A brief relation of the troublesome Reign of King Stephen, and his
opposition against Mawde the Empress, of Henry Short-Mantle, and his
proceedings, with a continuance of our English History. In every circumstance
making good Merlins Prophecy.

STephen Earl of Bolloigne, and son Stephen Earl of Bulloigne crowned King.
to the Earl of Bloys, and Mawd sister to the wife of Henry late deceased,
began his Reign over the Realm of England, in the year of grace, one
thousand one hundred thirty six, who was valiant and hardy, but as some
affirm, contrary to the oathe made to King Henry concerning Mawd the Empress,
he usurped the Crown, and was inaugurated by the Archbishop of Canterbury, at
West minster, upon the day of Saint Stephen, in Christmasse week, which
Archbishop (who had taken the same Oath) died shortly Perjury punished by the
hand of God.
after, with diverse other Lords guilty of the same perjury: which as some
write, was animated and encouraged by one Hugh Bigot; who was Steward to King
Henry, and presently after his death came over into England; and before the
said Archbishop came, other Lords took an Oath, and swear that he was present
a little before the Kings death, when he heard him to disinherit his Daughter
Mawd, for some distaste that he had taken against her, and had adopted, as his
lawful Heir Stephen his Nephew: to which the Archbishop with the rest gave
too hasty battle: neither did this Hugh for his wilful perjury escape
unpunished, who soon after with great trouble of conscience most miserably
expired: but before I proceed Hugh Bigot dies miserably
further in the story, I will deliver unto you Merlins Prophecy of those
times: which follows. Drop must a Sagittary from the Skies, The prophecy.

But against him an Eglet will arise,
(That in the Morian Mountains built her nest)
And against that Celestial sign contest.
She failing, will a Lions whelpe appear,
Whose rore shall make the Centaure quake with fear.
But when the two shaped Monster shall be tamed,
By gentle means, the whelpe will be reclaimed:
And when the Iron brood in the Land shall fail,
The blood of the white Dragon must prevail.
By the Sagittary, which is one of the twelve Celestial Signs, and is the
same which he calls Part of it ex^laned
the two shaped Centaure, is figured King Stephen, who gave not the Lions, as
his former predecessors had done, but emblazed the beforenamed Sagittary in
his Scutcheon: and therefore he is by the Prophet so styled: by the Eglet is
also intended Maud the Empress, and by the Morian Mountains a place in Italy
so called, siguratively including all Italy by a part thereof: now let us see
how this with the rest is m^de good by the event.

In the beginning of his reign, King Stephen King Stephen extorteth both from
the Clergy and the Laity.
used great rigor against the Clergy, as fining some Bishops, and imprisoning
others. Besides he seized on all the strong holds and Castles within the Realm,
as still fearing the coming in of Maud the Empress: in which time Robert
Earl of Gloucester, the base son of King Henry took displeasure against the
King, for seizing the strong holds of Gloucester, Hereford, Webly, Bristol,
Dudly and others, part of which belonged to his Inheritance; and therefore he
sent letters to his sister Maud, promising to assist her in the just claim of
her Inheritance.

In the month of July and sixth year of King Mawd the Empress landeth in
England.
Stephen, ^aud the Empress landed at Portsmouth and made toward Bristol, at
what time Stephen laid siege to the Castle of Walling-ford, who hearing of her
arivall gathered all the forces he could make, and drew toward the Enemy; in
which time Robert Earl of Gloucester and Ranulph Earl of Chester were joined
to the Empress; and when both their hoasts were in the field, ready to give
the alarm, Ranulph Earl of Chester thus spoke to his soldiers and said.

I require you friends and Countrymen, that I The Barons Oration to their
soldiers.
who am the cause to bring you here, to hazard lives, may be the first man to
put mine own in danger: whom Earl Robert interrupted, and said, It is not
unworthy to thee, who demandest the first stroke and hazard of this battle,
who both for thy nobleness of blood, and thy known magnanimity and courage
far surpassest other men; but the Kings false oath has levied men to this
unjust war, in which we must either strive bravely to win the mastery, or
else be basely overcome; and we now are run into that hazard, that none of us
is safe, which shall not acquit himself by his resolution and Knightly
boldness: therefore show your valor, and be assured of victory.

Then Earl Baldwin standing in the front of Earl Baldwins encouragement to to
the Kings Army.
the Kings battle, began to encourage his soldiers in this manner: To men
that shall fight three things are by them to be observed: The first, the
Justice of the cause, lest they endanger their souls, which is clear on our
part, who sight for our King and Country: the second is the number of men, and
the accommodation of Arms, for few are not to oppose a multitude, nor naked
men against armed; and we parallel, if not exceed them both in ammunition and
number: the third is, boldness and courage, not for defense only, but offense:
which me thinks I espy in your faces: and therefore of all these three our Army
is sufficiently furnished. Now what be our enemies? A weak and distressed
woman, assisted by two weak supporters; Robert Earl of Gloucester, a man daring
without deed, and accustomed to word, with words, not weapons: and Ranulph
Earl of Chester, haughty, but withal foolhardy, constant in nothing, and
conscious only of Conspiracies, who proposes great enterprises, but never
brings any to good effect: and for many Legions, conducted by such Leaders; the
more they be in company, the sooner they be overcome.

At which word, he was cut off by the violent The battle betwixt the King and
the Empress.
coming on of the enemy: and now began a cruel battle, resolutely and
bravely fought on both sides, the violence whereof lasted long uncertain who
should be victors; but in the end, the Kings Host was utterly routed: but he
of a more heroicke spirit (as scorning to fly) mayntained the fight with some
few of his Knights, The King taken prisoner.
and was taken prisoner; and being brought before the Empress, she commanded
him to be conveyed under safe custody to the Castle of Bristoll, where he
remained indurance, from Candlemasse to holy Rood day next ensuing: after which
victory, she was so exalted in thought, and puffed up with pride, that she
thought now she had the whole Kingdom in her own possession, and came
triumphantly to Winchester: after to Wilton, to Oxford, to Reading, to Saint
Albans, and lastly, to London: in all which places she was royally received:
and during her abode there, the Queen made assiduate labor, for the delivery
of the King her husband, promising he The Queens p^tition to the Empress.
should surrender the whole Land into her possession, and either be take
himself to some Religious Order, or to become a banished Pilgrim to the end of
his life: but all was in vain, she could receive no comfort from the Empress
upon any conditions.

The Citizens of London likewise petitioned unto her, that they might use the
Laws of Edward the Confessor, as they were confirmed by the Conqueror, and
that she would be pleased to disanull the strict innovations imposed on the
land by her Father Henry: to which she nor her Counsel would in the least wise
condescend: but the tide soon turned, for Kent took part The Londoners and
Kentishmen take part with the King.
with the King, and the Londoners being discontented at the denial of their
suite, and being assured that the Kentish men would in all their Enterprises
assist them, they purposed to have surprised her person; of which she having
secret intelligence, left a great part of her Jewels and household stuff, and
fled to Oxford: in which slight many of her adherents were disheartened, and a
great part of her forces dispersed and scattered.

Then the Queen before so much despised, The Queen pu^sueth the Empress.
by the aid of her friends, the Kentish men, Londoners and others gathered a
strong host, under the conduct of one William De-Pre, to pursue the Empress;
who understanding the Queens forces daily to increase, and hers assiduatly to
diminish, she left Oxford, and secretly escaped to Gloucester, whither the
Queens host followed her: in defense of which City Robert brother Earl Bobert
of Gloucester taken prisoner
of the Empress making an excursion from the town was surprised and taken:
Briefly, a Communication was held between the two opposite parties, in which
after much debating the business on both sides, it was concluded that there
should be one exchange made of the two prisoners, so that the King upon Holy
rood day in harvest King Stephen released in exchange of Earl Robert.
was released and delivered up to the Queen and her Army, and Robert of
Gloucester was surrendered to his sister Maud the Empress.

The Land in this time was much distressed by these two Armies who were in
continual agitation, sometimes the King having the better, and sometimes the
Empress, to relate which at large would ask too long circumstance: but in the
end the King had the better, in the seventeenth Year of whose Reign, dyed
Ranulph Earl of Chester, and Ieffry Plantaginet husband to Maud the Empress,
after whose death their The death of I^ffery Plantaginet.
son Henry surnamed short mantle (because he used to go in a short Cloak)
was created Duke of Anjou, and Normandy; whose son few years after married
Elenor daughter to the Earl of Poyctow, who had before bin married to Lewis The
marriage of Henry Duke of Normandy.
the French King: but for the too neernesse of blood divorced, after he had
received two daughters from her, Mary, and Alice: so that this Henry was the
Earl of Anjou by his father, Duke of Normandy by his mother, and Earl of
Poyctow by his wife.

This King Stephen had a son named Eustace, Eustace the son of King Stephen.
who by aid of the French King, warred upon the forenamed Henry, in which the
Duke so Knightly demeaned himself, that it proved to their great disadvantage:
some say that King Stephen would have crowned his son in his life time, but
the Clergy would not agree thereto, having a command from the Bishop of Rome,
to the contrary, and therefore his purpose took no effect. Then the King said
siege to the Castles of Newbery, Wallingford, Warbycke, and Warwell, which had
been kept by the friends of the Empress to her use, in hope of the coming
over of her son Duke of Duke Henry landeth in England.
Normandy, etc. who the same year, with a great Host entered England, and
first wanne the Castle of Malmsbury, and after came to London, and possessed
himself both of the City and the Tower, which more by his policy and promise,
then his potencie and power performed.

Then King Stephen with his Host, drew near to Duke Henry, but by the
mediation of Theobald, Archbishop of Canterbury, and others of the Clergy and
Nobility (who met at a place called the water of Vrme) they were kept from A
peace mediated betwixt the King and the Duke.
present hostility, some endeavoring peace, others laboring war, as their
humors and affections guided them. After which the King took his way toward
Ipswich in Suffolk, and the Duke toward Shrewsbury: in which interim died,
and was drowned Eustace the son of King Stephen, and was buried at Feversham
in Kent, in the Abbey which his Father before The death of Prince Eust^ce
had founded.

After which, Theobald with others, ceased not to bring these two Princes to an
atonement, which was so earnestly labored; that a peace was concluded, upon
the conditions following, namely, that the King (having now no heir) should
continue in the sole Sovereignty during his life: and immediately after the
conclusion and establishing of that Edict, Henry should be proclaimed Heir
apparent, in all the chief Cities and Bor^ughs of England; and that the King
should take him for his son by adoption, as immediate Heir to the Crown and
Kingdom, wherein that part of the prophecy is fulfilled, which says, She
failing, will a Lions whelpe appear,
Whose rore should make the Centaure quake with fear:
But when the two shaped Monster shall be tamed
By gentle means the whelpe shall be reclaimed.
By the Centaure, and two shaped Monster, or the Sagittary, which are all one,
meaning the King, and by the Lions whelpe, Henry Duke of Normandy, The death of
King Stephen.
etc. and after King of England. In the end of this year died King Stephen,
when he had reign^d eighteen years and odd months, and was buried by his
son Eustace at Feversham.

This King spent his whole Reign in great vexation and trouble, which (as some
conjecture) happened because he usurped the Crown contrary to his Oath made to
Henry the first: that he should maintain the inheritance of his daughter Mawd
the Empress: this Stephen Upon what grounds Stephen pretended his title to the
Crown.
was the son of Eustace Earl of Bulloigne, and of Mary sister to Mawd who
was married to his predecessor Henry: these two are the daughters of Margaret
the wife of Malcolm King of Scots, which Margaret was the sister to Edgar
Etheling, and daughter of Edward the outlaw, who was son to Edmund Ironside.

Mawd the Empress daughter to Henry Beauclarke, had by her second husband
Ieffery Plantaginet, this Henry the second of that name, by whom the blood of
the Saxons again returned to the Crown, partly by King Stephen, but more
fully by him, so that consequently the blood of the Normans continued but
threescore The Norman blood in sixty years extinguished.
and ten years, accounting from the first year of William the Conqueror, to
the last of the reign of Henry first, completing those words the prophecy.
And when the iron brood in the land shall fail,
The blood of the red Dragon must prevail.


CHAP. 14.
Diverse remarkable passages during the Reign of Henry the second, his numerous
issue, and how they were affected toward him: his vices and virtues, his good
and bad fortune: all which were by this our Prophet predicted.

HEnry the second, son of Ieffery Plantaginet, The Coronation of King Henry
the second.
and Mawd the Empress, began his Reign over England, in the month of
October, and the year of our Lord God, one thousand one hundred fifty five, of
whom before it was thus prophesied. The Eglet of the Flawde league shall
behold, The prophecy of his Re^gne.

The Fathers of her prime bird shine in gold,
And in her third nest shall rejoice: but he
Who from the height of the great Rock may see
The Countries round (both near and far away)
Shall search amongst them, where he best can pray:
Some of whose numerous ayrie shall retain
The nature of the Desert Pelican,
The all commanding keys shall strive to wrest,
And force the lock, that opens to his nest,
But break their own wards: of all flowers that grow
The Rose shall most delight his smell, and so
That least it any strangers eyes should daze,
He Will plant it close in a Dedalian Maze.
Fortune at first will on his glories smile,
But fail him in the end; alack the while.


The first words of this Prophecy seem to reflect Part of the prophecy
explained.
upon the Empress his Mother: by rejoicing her third nest, may be intended,
that having three sons, Henry, Ieffery, and William, the two later failing,
(as dying in their youth) she might rejoice in him whose Father (being King)
she saw to shine in gold: or else, being first espoused to Henry the Emperor,
and next to Ieffery Plantaginet, she might in her death rejoice in her third
espousall with her Savior: but again, where he styles her the Eglet of the
Flawde, or Borbon League; It may be conferd upon the Queen, who being first
married to the King of France, and through neernesse of blood divorced from
him, and sent to her Father, and after married to this King, being then Duke of
Normandy, she may be said first to have built her nest in France, secondly, in
Normandy, and thirdly, and last in England.

This Prince (as the Chronicle describes him The Kings Character.
to us) was somewhat high-colored, but of a good aspect, and pleasant
countenance, fat, full chested, and low of stature: and because he grew
somewhat corpulent, he used a sparing and abstinent diet, and much exercised
Hunting. He was well spoken, and indifferently learned, Noble in Knighthood,
and wise in counsel, bountiful to strangers, but to his familiars and
servants gripple-handed, and where he loved once or hated, constant, and
hardly to be removed: he had by his wife Eleanor six sons and three
daughters: The names of five of them His Issue.
were William, Henry, Richard, Godfery, and John; of which two came to succeed
him in the Throne, Richard and John, of the sixth there is small or no mention:
the eldest of his daughters hight Mawd, and was married to the Duke of Saxony;
the second Eleanor, to the King of Spain; the third named Jane, to William
King of Sicily.

This King was prosperous in the beginning of his Reign, but unfortunate in
the end, as the sequel will make apparent: he was of such magnanimity and
courage, that he was often heard to say, that to a valiant heart, not a whole
World suffices, and according to his words he greatly augmented his Heritage,
and much added The Kings Dominions.
to his Dominions. For he won Ireland by strength, and in the seventh year
of his Reign, (for diverse affronts offered him by William King of Scotland) he
made such cruel war upon him, that in the end he took him He takes the
Scots King prisoner.
prisoner, and compeld him to surrender into his hands, the City of Carlisle,
the Castle of Bamburch, the new Castle upon Tyne, with diverse other holds, and
a great part of Northumberland, which William before had won from the
Borderers. He likewise added the whole Kingdom to his own, and from the South
Ocean to the North Islands of the Orcades, he closed all those Lands, as under
one principal; which done, and receiving fealty and homage of the said King,
having a certain sum of money promised to be paid unto him within nine
months following, he suffered him to go at liberty.

He spread his Empire so far, that none of all his No King before him of such
large Empire.
predecessors had so many Countries and Provinces under their Dominion and
rule: for besides the Realm of England, he had at once in his possession,
Normandy, Gascoine, and Guien, Anjou, and Chinou, with Alverne and others, and
by his wife as her rightful Inheritance, the Pyrene Mountains, which part
France and Spain: which proves -- that he
Who from the height of the great rock may see
The Countries round (both near and far away)
Shall search amongst them, where he best can prey.
In the seventh year of his Reign, died Theobald Tho Becket created
Archbishop of Canterbury.
Archbishop of Canterbury, and Thomas Becket, who was then Chancellor of
England, was translated unto that See: and in the ninth year the King called a
Parliament, at Northampton. where he intended to abolish some privileges which
the Clergy had usurped, amongst which one was, that no Priest, or Clergy man,
though he had committed felony, murder or treason against the Kings own
person, yet had he not power to put him to death, which he purposed to have
reformed; in which Thomas Becket then Archbishop violently opposed him, and
gave him very peremptory and unseemly language, vilifying the Kings prerogative
and authority, The Archbishop opposes the King.
to his face; but when he saw he had not power to prevail against the King,
he in great heat and have, sped him to Alexander then Bishop of Rome,
grievously complaining on the King, and suggesting, what injuries and
innovations he would put upon the holy Church continuing there partly in Italy,
and partly in France, for the space of six years together.

After which time Lewis King of France, reconciled The King and the Archbishop
atton'd.
the King and the Archbishop (the King being then in Normandy) and Becket
returned to his See at Canterbury, whither he summond all such persons as in
his absence had spoiled, and rifled his movables and goods, advising them
first by fair means to restore them; but when he saw that course prevailed
not, he took The King cursed by the Archbishop.
a more severe and compulsory way, excommunicating and denouncing all such
accursed in his Anathema (not sparing the Kings royal person,) at which the
parties here in England, whom it particularly concerned, sailed over unto the
King in Normandy; and made a grievous complaint against the Archbishop, at
which his being extraordinarily incensed, said in the open audience of those
then about him, had I any friend that tendered mine honor and safety, I had
ere this time been revenged of that traitorous Archbishop.

At that time were present, and heard these words, Sir William Breton, Sir Hugh
Morvill, Sir Richard Fitzvile, and Sir William Tracy, which four Knights,
having communed and considered amongst themselves, with an unanimous resolution
took shipping, and landed at Dover, and road thence to Canterbury, where the
fifth day in Christmasse week, they slew the said Bishop in the Church as he
was going to the Altar, who had before in the open pulpit The Archbishop slain
going to the Altar.
denounced the King, and diverse others of his subjects accursed: which answers
to the former, The All-commanding keys shall strive to wrest,
And force the lock that opens to his nest:
But break their own wards, etc.


By the All-commanding Keys, is meant the power of the Keys of Rome, who
striving to force the lock opening to his nest, that is, his principality and
prerogative, broke their own wards, which proved true in this Th. Becket,
Primate and Metropolitan, who was slain in the year 1170, over whose Tomb
this Distich was inscribed: Anno milleno, centeno septuageno,
Anglorum primus corruit ense thronus.
which with small alteration may be thus paraphrased, Anno, one thousand one
hundred seventy died,
Thomas the Primate, in his height of pride. The inscription over his Tomb



Henry in the fourteenth year of his Reign, caused his eldest son Henry to
be crowned King of England, at Westminster, giving him full power over the
Realm, whilst he himself was negotiated in Normandy, and his many other
provinces, which after proved to his great Henry crowns his son Henry King.
disadvantage and trouble. In which interim he had cast his eye upon a most
beautiful Lady called Rosamond, on whom he was so greatly enamoured, that it
grew even to dotage, insomuch that he neglected the Queens company, The fair
Lady Rosamond.
insomuch that she incensed all his sons, who took up arms against their
Father in the quarrel of their mother, by which the peace of the Land was
turned to hostility and uprore; yet the King so far prevailed, that he
surprised the Queen, and kept her in close prison, and withal The King
imprisons the Queen.
was so indulgent over his new Mistress, that he built for her a rare and
wondrous fabric, so curiously devised, and intricate with so many turning
Meanders, and winding indents, that none upon any occasion might have access
unto her, unless directed by the King, or such as in that business he most
trusted: and this edifice ^e erected at Woodstocke, not far from Oxford, and
made a Labyrinth which was wrought like a knot in a Garden called a Maze, in
which any one might lose himself, unless guided by a line or thread, which as
it guided him in, so it directed him the way out: But in process it so happened,
that the sons having the better of The Sons release their mother.
their Father, set at liberty their Mother, who when the King was absent, came
secretly to Woodstocke with her train, at such a time when the Knight her
Guardian being out of the way, not dreaming of any such accident, had left the
Clue carelessly and visible in the entrance of the Labyrinth.

Which the Queen espying, slipped not that advantage, but wound her self by
that silken thread, even to the very place where she found her sitting, and
presenting her with a bowl of poison, she compeld her to drink it off in her
presence, after which draught she within few minutes expired, and the Queen
departed thence in her revenge fully satisfied, for which cruel act the King
could never be drawn to reconcile Lady Rosamond poisond by the Queen.
himself unto her after, and this makes good that of Merlin. -- of all the
flowers that grow,
The Rose shall most delight his scent: and so
That lest it any strangers eyes should daze,
He plants it close in a Dedalian Maze.


Rosamund being dead, was buried in the Monastery of Goodstow, near unto
Oxford, upon whose Tomb was inscribed, Hic jacet in tumba, Rosamundi non
Rosamunda: Her inscription on her tomb.

Non redolet, sedolet, quae redolere solet.
Which by an ancient Writer was thus paraphrased into English. The Rose of the
World, but not the clean flower
Is graven here, to whom beauty was lent
In this grave full dark, now is her bower
That in her life was sweet and redolent:
But now that she is from this life blent,
Though she were sweet, now foully does she stink,
A mirror good for all that on her think.
Such was their English poetry in those days. Long after the death of Rosamond
was showed in that Abbey, a rare Coffer or Casket of hers about two foot in
length, in which was a strange artificial motion, where were to be seen Giants
fighting, Beasts in motion, Fowls flying, and Fishes swimming: This Henry was
troubled by the Queens animating of his sons against him: betwixt whom were
diverse conflicts, which would appear tedious to be rehearsed. It is written
of this King, that in his Chamber at Windsore, he had painted an Eagle with
four Henry's character of his four sons.
young ones, whereof three of them, pulled and pecked the body of the old
Eagle, and the fourth picked at his eyes: and being asked what that picture
should signify, he made answer, This old Eagle figureth my self, and the
four birds, my four sons, who cease not to pursue my life: but most of all
my son John, whom I most have loved, and therefore Some of his numerous ayrie
will retain
The nature of the Desert Pelican.
The nature of the Pelican in the Desert being to pierce her breast with her
bill, and feed her young ones with her own blood. In the The death of King
Henry son of King Henry.
twenty eight year of this Henry, died his eldest son Henry; whom he had
before crowned, much repenting on his deathbed, for his unnatural rebellion
against his Father.

Rainold Monk of Chester relates, that soon after the death of the Lady
Rosamond, Lewis the French King, and the eighth of that name, sent to King
Henry one of his daughters to be kept for his second son Richard, whom the
King vitiated, and labored to Haguntia a Cardinal then in the Land, for a
Divorce betwixt Henry labors a divorce betwixt him and his wife.
him and his wife, intending to have married that French Lady; but he failed of
his purpose (for he meant by that match to have disinherited his unnatural
sons.) It is further recorded, that when William King of Scots was taken by
the King of England, He did him Homage at the City of York, and in witness
of subjection, he offered his Hat and Saddle upon Saint Peter's Altar, which
were kept there many years after.

This King had many strange admonitions for Sundry admonitions to the King to
amend his life.
the amendment of his life: one was that in his return from Ireland, as he was
taking his horse, there appeared unto him a man of a pale and meager aspect,
barefoot, and in a white Mantle, who spoke unto him and said, I am sent to
thee from the Lord of the Sabbath, who commands thee to take order that no
Markets be kept, nor any servile work be done on the Lords day (dressing of
meat excepted only) which if thou feast performed, whatsoever thou purposest,
thou shall bring to a good and happy end: whose speech the King seemed to
distaste, and said to him, that held his bridle, ask of this Churl, if he
have dreamed that which he speaks? to which the apparition answered again:
whether I have dreamed or not; take thou heed to my words, and amend thy life,
or what thou now mockest, shall return to thy great misery, which having said,
he vanished suddenly: the strangeness whereof though he seriously apprehended,
yet of the former there was nothing amended.

He had a second admonition by an Irishman, His second admonition.
who told him all things which the King had done in secret, which he had
thought none had known but himself, and withal advised him to repentance and
amendment of life, but he regarded it as the former: about which time being
the four and twentieth year of his The bones of King Arthur and his Queen
found.
Reign, were taken up the bones of King Arthur, and his Queen Guenever, in
the Vale of Avalon, the hair of her head seeming white, and of a fresh color,
but as soon as touched, they turned to powder: their bones were after
translated to the Church in Glastenbury, and there the second time buried: they
were found by a Bard or Singer of Rythmes under the root of an Oak fifteen foot
within the ground: his third admonition I leave to the next Chapter.

CHAP. 15.
The inauguration of Richard the first, surnamed Cordelion, a prediction of his
Reign. His wars in the Holy Land, his imprisonment by the Duke of Austria:
his brother John's usurpation, his second Coronation, with his unfortunate
death, etc.

A Knight called Sir William Chesterly, alias Lindsey, told him boldly, that
His third admonition.
there were seven several things by him specially and suddenly to be reformed
First, to see better to the defense of the Church, and provide for the
maintenance thereof: Secondly, to see his Laws better executed, and Justice
more exercised: Thirdly, not to rob the rich, nor extort from them their goods
by violence: Fourthly, to make restitution of all those lands and goods as he
had so wrested: Fifthly, to make no demurre or delay in just sentence, but
suffer the right to have lawful process: Sixthly; to see his subjects
satisfied for such things as had been taken up to his use, and to pay his
servants and soldiers which fell to robbery, for that default. Seventhly, that
he should speedily cause the Jews to avoid the Land. But this advise prevailed
with him as the former.

In his thirtieth year, Heraclius Patriarch of Jerusalem, came into England,
to solicit his aid against the Saracens (who had invaded the Christian
Territories:) and to defend the holy City, which by Saladine King of Surry, was
won soon after. For by the relation of Peter Desroy, a French Chronicler,
Jerusalem was won by Godfrey of Bulloigne, in the year of Grace, one
thousand fourscore and nineteen, and continued under nine Christian Kings, of
which Guy of Resingham was the last: this Heraclius Nine Christian Kings reign
successively over Jerusalem.
further proffered the King the keys of the holy City, and of our Lords grave,
presenting him Letters from Pope Lucius, the third of that name, which charged
him to take upon him the journey, according to an Oath by him formerly made: to
which the King answered, The King refuses to be General for the Holy Land.
he could not leave his Land in trouble as a prey to the French, and his own
aspiring son; but he would give largely out of his own coffers, to such as
would take that voyage in hand.

To which the Patriarch replied, we seek a man, not money, every Christian
Prince sends us money, but none sends us a Prince, and therefore we demand
a Prince that needs money, and not money that needs a Prince; who finding
no other comfort from the King, departed his presence much discontented: but
the King thinking to sooth him up with fair words followed him to the
Seaside; but the more the King labored to humor him, the more harsh, and
hardened he grew against the King, and said unto him, hitherto thou have,
reigned gloriously, The Patriarchs answer to the King.
but hereafter thou shall be abandoned of him whom thou forsakest: think what
he has given to thee, and what thou in gratitude have returned to him again:
who at the first wast false to the French King, and after slewest Thomas
Becket, and now lastly forsakest the protection of Christ's faith: at which
words the King was much moved, and said to the Patiarch, though all the people
of the Land were one body and spoke with one mouth, they durst not say to me as
thou have done: true, says the Patriarch, for they love thine, and not thee;
the safety of thy goods temporal, but not the safety of thy soul: then he
offered his head to the King, saying; now do me that right which thou did
to thine Archbishop: for I had rather be slain by thee, then by the Sarazens.

The King kept his patience, and replied; should I depart out of the Land, mine
own sons would seize upon my Crown and Scepter in mine absence: no wonder
(answered the Patriarch) A proud and peremptory Patriarch.
for of the devil they come, and to the devil they shall: and so departed from
the King in great anger: after which all things went averse and against him:
Giraldus Cambrisius writes of him, that he cherisht strife amongst his own
children, thinking thereby to live himself in the more rest and further says,
that he was peerless for three things; wit, war, wantonness. He Reigned
twenty six years victoriously and gloriously, four years distractedly and
doubtfully, and his five last years infortunately and miserably: in the end by
mere vexation and anger he fell into a fever, and dyed thereof in the Castle
of Chinon in Normandy in the month of The death of King Henry the second.
July, when he had reigned thirty four years eight months and odd days, and
was buried at Founte-blew: fulfilling that of the former prediction. Fortune at
first, shall on his glories smile,
But fail him in the end, etc.


Richard the first of that name, and second son Richard the first succedeth
his father.
of Henry surnamed Short Mantle, succeeded his father, and began his Reign
over England in the month of July 1189, who upon the day of his Coronation,
commanded that all the prisoners about London, which lay in for the Kings debt
or otherwise (murder and treason excepted) should be set at large, of whose
future Reign it was thus predicted. The Lions heart weel against the sarazen
rise,
And purchase from him many a glorious prise.
The Rose and Lilly shall at first unite,
But parting of the prey prove opposite.
Iebus and Salem will be much oppressed
As by the lame and blind again possessed.
The Lion-hearted amongst Wolves shall range,
And by his art, Iron into silver change.
But whilst abroad, these great acts shall be done,
All things at home shall to disorder run,
Coopt up and cag'd, then shall the Lion be,
But after sufferance ransomed and set free.
Then doubly crowned: two mighty ones whose prides
Transcend; twixt whom aseas arm only glides,
(Ambitious both shall many conflicts try;
Last, by a poisonous shaft the Lion dye.
This King soon after his Coronation, conferd upon his brother three great
dignities and honors, as the Earldome of Nottingham, Cornwale, Chester, and
Lancaster, and married him to the daughter of the Earl of Gloucester who was his
only child, by which he was heir to that Earldome also, all which he after
but cruelly requited: then the king sought to be absolved for his rebellion
against his father, which he easily purchased upon promise to pursue the wars
Richard undertaketh the holy voyage.
in Palestina which his father refused, and to expedite that voyage, he gave
over the two Castles of Barwick and Rocheborough to the Scotch king for ten
thousand pound toward the charges of his journey: moreover he sold to the old
Bishop of Durham that Province for a great sum of money, and (as he had
covenanted) made him Earl thereof: which done the king laughed and said to the
standers by, observe what art and cunning is in me, who can make a young Earl
of an old Bishop: by such means he emptyed many of the Clergies bags and
filled his own coffers, granting large fees and annuities out of the Crown; for
which some (as far as they durst) blaming him, he replied unto them, that it
was good for a man to aid himself with his own: adding; that if the city
London were his, at that time of his need he would sell that also, if he could
meet with a merchant able to buy it.

In the second year of his Reign he made The Bishop of Ely made Vice Gerent
in the Kings absence.
William Longshamp Bishop of Ely, Chancellor of England, leaving the whole
Land to his guiding, then sailed he into Normandy, and thence into France to
Philip the second, and after covenants drawn betwixt them, for the continuance
of so great and hazardous a journey, in the spring of the year they set
forward, Richard by sea, and Philip by land, appointing their randevouz in
Sicily: where meeting (as it was agreed) a difference grew betwixt the 2.
Kings, Difference betwixt the English and French Kings.
in so much that King Phillip left Richard in Sicily, and departed toward Acon
or Acris: in which time the King of Cyprus took two of king Richards ships,
and peremptorily denied their delivery.

For which he invaded the kingdom of Cyprus, making sharp war therein,
chacing the King from City to City; in so much that K. Richard conquered the
Kingdom of Cyprus.
he was compeld to yield unto him upon condition, that he should not be laid
in bonds of iron, whereof the king accepted, and kept his promise, causing him
to be fettered in chains of silver, verifying that of the prophecy, The
Lion-hearted amongst Wolves shall range,
And by his art iron into silver change.


When he had remained there for the space of 2. months taking his pleasure of
the country, and victualled his navy, he steered his course toward Acon, and
by the way he encountered a great ship of the Soldans furnished with store of
ammunition and treasure, which he surprised and seized, after which he safely
arived at the foresaid city, and met with the king of France, of whom he was
joyfully received: for not long before, 2000 of his army were cut off by the
Sarazens: then King Richard caused the City to be violently assaulted on every
side, so that they were forced to yield it upon these covenants The City of
Acon taken by the Christans.
following; to depart the place, leaving behind them horse, armor, victuals,
and all things belonging to war, and further, restore, and set at liberty all
such Christian prisoners, as were then under their yoke and bondage, with
diverse other conditions, but these the chiefest: and this was done in the
month of August, and in the year of our Lord one thousand one hundred
fourscore and twelve.

But in dividing the spoil of the city, which was great and rich, there fell
out also a division Causes of the second breach between the two Kings.
betwixt the 2 Kings, which kindled a fire which was never quenched, the motives
inducing there to were (as Polychronicon reports) because Richard denied to
Philip half of the spoil and booty taken in Cyprus, alleging that their
covenants stretched no further then to those purchased in the holy Land;
another was, that king Richard being in Sicily married the daughter of the king
of Navar, where before he had promised to espouse the sister of the King for
which and other causes the French King with a small number of ships, departed
from Acan, thence to Puis, after The French King departs to his country.
to Rome, and so into his own country, leaving the Duke of Burgundy General
of the French in his stead, which fulfils that part of the prophecy. The Rose
and Lilly shall at first unite,
But parting of the prey prove opposite.


During King Richards stay there, he sold the kingdom of Cyprus to the knight
Templers, for 30000 marks, and (as the French Chronicle reports) forced it from
them again by strength Richard sels the Kingdom of Cyprus.
and gave it to Guy of Lesingham the last K. of Jerusalem, and further for an
affront offered him, he took the Duke of Austria's Banner, and stamped it and
trampled it under his foot, for which the Duke sought all advantages to be
revenged on him, (as shall be related hereafter) he then, because the Turks had
not delivered to him the He vilisieth the Duke of Austria.
holy cross according to their agreement at the taking of Acon, slew all that
were in the City with their pledges and hostages, the whole number as some
write, amounting to 5000 persons: then he provided for the present seige of
Jerusalem, which as he was given to understand, He intends to besi^ge Ierus^lem
was at that time much distressed: for it follows. Iebus, and Salem shall be
much oppressed,
As by the lame and blind again possessed.


Of Iebus and Salem, the holy City had the denomination of Jerusalem: and by
the lame and blind is intended the idols of the infidels, who have feet and
walk not, eyes and see not, etc. King Richard marching within five mile of the
place, purposed to inviron it round, that no supply or succor might be
brought unto it; daily expecting when the Duke of Burgundy with the French
would follow him, who perfidiously against his oath and promise, made an
oration to his soldiers as follows: It is known unto you all noble friends
and countrymen, that The Duke of Burgundies Oration to his Soldiers.
though our Sovereign Lord the King be absent, yet all the flower and chivalry
of France are here present, and whatsoever is done to the dignity of the
Christians, and disgrace of the infidels, is most likely by us to be achieved,
the English being cowards and meacockes, and we courageous and manly; yet
whatsoever noble act shall be attempted by us, the honor thereof shall be
attributed to them, their King being resident here, and ours so far remote from
hence: my counsel is therefore, that we march back to Acon, and leave them to
the hazard that aim at the honor: which speech so prevailed with his people,
that Richard was prevented in his The death of the Duke of Bugundy.
former purpose, and the Duke of Burgundy soon after dyed.

Yet this Lyon-hearted leader was no way dauted with the French delirements:
but raising his siege, he pursued the Soldans, who then begirt the town and
Castle of Iaphath, and won it, taking there many Christians prisoners, and then
manned it with his own men, sending them whom he surprised to be else where
imprisoned, whom K. Richard coming too late to the siege, most fortunately met
and rescued: which done he set upon the King Richards victory over the
Souldiars.
town and Castle and took them, setting there a strong garrison of
Christians. After which victory he won Dacon and Garles, two great Cities,
and repaired the Castle of Askelon with sundry others, which the Pagans had
much defaced and ruined: after which, he commanded all his prisoners to be
slain, which others sold to their profit (and advantage) by which he grew to
be the greater terror to the Turks: but victuals daily diminishing and sickness
increasing in his army, and the French failing him, having set things there in
the best order that necessity King Richard leaves h the Holy Land.
would permit him, he took shiping at Acon (called also Tholomida, and from
thence he sailed into Cyprus: then he sent his wife and her sister with the
greatest part of his people, into Sicilia, and because he could not well brook
the Sea, he thought to make a short cut into Histria, but by force of weather
was driven a shore betwixt Venice and Aquilea, where landing with that small
train which followed him, He was espied, by some of the Duke of Austria's
Knights (whose standard he had trod under foot, who after laid wait for him,
and took him; the manner whereof I leave to the ensuing Chapter.

CHAP. 16.
The rest of the Prophecy made good in the subsequence; the troublesome reign
of King John, his loss of Normandy: his Land interdicted by the Pope, to whom
he is compeld to resign his Crown, and after hold it as from him: his death.

IN the absence of the King, whilst The tyranny of the Bishop of Ely, made
protector of the Land.
he was busy in his wars abroad, the Bishop of Ely Chancellor, and Pro-rex
at home; opposed the Lords, abused the Commons, and oppressed the Clergy: he
rid not abroad, attended with less then a thousand horses; to maintain which
pomp, and Luciferian pride, he extorted from the poor, from the Peers, but
especially from the Prelates; holding in his hands at once, besides Ely, the
two Archbishopricks of Canterbury, and York: imprisoning whom he pleased, and
releasing where he liked: nor was the King more earnest in vexing the Pagans
and Infidels in the Land of Palestine, then he was eager and extreme against
his Christian brethren, whose patronage and protection were committed to his
charge, so that it verifies; Whilst that abroad such great acts shall be done,
All things at home will to disorder run.


In which interim, the King being on all sides King Richard ambusht in his
return.
ambusht by the Austrians, for betwixt Venice and Aquilea, in a Province
belonging to the Duke, he was beset by one Mainart de Goresen, but with loss
of some of his train, he by his manhood escaped. After at a town named
Frisach, one Frederick de Saint Soon made a second attempt upon him, and took
six of his Knights, but he by his noble valor made his way through the ambush
of the enemy, without surprizall, and struck up toward Germany: but spies
being set to know what course he King Richard taken.
took, he was at length betrayed into the hands of the Duke of Lemple cousin to
the Emperor, who sent him to the Duke of Austria: he presently rifled him of
all the treasure and jewels he had about him, and committed him for a month
to strait and close prison.

During which time (as some write) the Duke Hence he had the appe^ation of Cur
de Lion.
put him to cope singly with a great and mighty Lion, weaponlesse and unarmed,
who having conquered the beast, ripped up his heart and flang it in the Dukes
face, and after that with a blow under the ear he slew the Dukes son; and
further, that his daughter being enamoured both of his person and great valor,
he left her vitiated and deflowred: but howsoever in this all witnesses agree,
that when the month was expired, he sent him to the Emperor who was Henry the
first of that name, and son to Frederick the first, who put him into a dark
and obscure dungeon, covenanting with the Duke, that he should have the third
part of his ransom: there he remained for the space of a year and three
months, at length upon a palm sunday, he caused him to be brought before his
Princes and Lords, to answer what could be objected against him, where he
appeared with such a manly and maiestick aspect, and withal answered so
directly and discreetly to whatsoever was laid to his charge, that they
generally comiserated his iniust durance: then King Richard ransomed at an
hundred thousand pound, and set at liberty.
his ransom was set at an hundred thousand pound sterling, and hostages given
for the payment by such a time: which done, he was set at liberty: which
verefies, Coopt up, and cag'd then shall the Lion be,
But after sufferance ransomd and set free.


The King in the eight year of his Reign, The Kings arrival into England.
about the latter end of March landed at Sandwich, and came straight to London,
where he was joyfully received, and then calling a Counsel of his Lords, he
first took order to pay his ransom: and because his brother John in his
absence had usurped the Diadem and was at that time in France, he deprived him
of all Honor and title, and took from him, all those Earledomes and revenewes
that he before had conferd upon him, and caused him self at Winchester to be
the second time crowned, and then began the ancient grudge to revive between
the two Kings of England and France, which was the more aggravated, because the
French King supported John, against the King his Brother: But Prince John
seeing how much his fame was magnified in the mouths of all men, and that all
the parts both of Christendom, and Paganism, resounded with his praise, he
made means to his mother Queen Eleanor, by whose mediation a John reconciled
to the K. his brother.
peace was made betwixt her two sons, whilst the wars in Normandy and
France, went still forwards.

Many weary the battles fought betwixt the two Kings, and much effusion of
blood on both sides, where sometimes the one, sometimes the other had the
better, but for the most part Richard the best, during which combustion before
the last 20000 pound for his ransom was paid, his two hostages the Bishops of
Bath in England, and Roan in Normandy, came unto him and told him that they
were set at liberty by the Emperor, and further showed, that his great enemy
the Duke of Austria, was accused of Innocent the third then Pope, for the
injuries before offered him, and that upon Saint Stephens day he pricked his
foot with a thorn, which gangrend, and should have been cut off, and being
told he must die, he sent to his Bishops to be absolved, which they had denied
to do, till he had shown himself repentant, for the foresaid wrongs, and
released his hostages, which being The death of the Duke of Austria.
accordingly done, the Duke died, and they were delivered.

In the process of the wars before spoken of, King Richard, in the tenth year
of his Reign, after Christmasse, besieged a Castle in France near Lymoges,
called Gaylyard, the cause was, that a rich treasure being found within the
Seigniory of the King of England, by one Widomer Vicount of Lemruke, he had
denied to render it up, and fled thither for his refuge, and defended it
manfully till the fifth day of April, upon which day the King walking
unadvisedly, to The King too unadvised.
take view of the Fort, and where it might be best entered, one named Bertrand
Genedow (whom some Writers call Pater Basale,) marked the King and wounded him
in the head, (but some say in the arm) with a poisoned arrow, after which hurt
received, he caused a violent and desperate assault to be made, in which he
won the Castle, then he made inquiry, who he was that had wounded him? who
being found and brought before him, the King demanded of him, why he should
rather aim at his person, than any of those who were then about him? who
boldly made answer, because thou slewest my Father and my brethren, for which I
vowed thy death whatsoever became of me: the King after some pawsing leisure,
for that answer gave him his pardon and liberty, but the rest of the soldiers
he put to the sword, and caused the Castle to be razed to the earth, The death
of King Richard the fir^.
and dyed the third day after, whose body was buried at Fount E-a-Bleu, at the
feet of his Father, which no way erres from the prophecy. -- For potent Kings,
whose prides
Transcend: 'twixt whom, a sea-arm only glides,
(Ambitious truth) shall many conflicts, try
Last, by a poisonous shaft the King shall die.


John the youngest son to Henry the second, John made King of England.
and brother to the late deceased Richard, was proclaimed King, the tenth day
of April, in the year of Grace, one thousand one hundred fourscore and
nineteen, and was crowned at Westminster, upon holy Thursday next ensuing: of
whom it was thus predicted: The subtle Fox into the Throne shall creep,
Thinking the Lion dead who did but sleep,
But frighted with his walking rore, finds cause
To fly the terror of his teeth and paws,
After this Leopard, stained with many a spot
Shall lose all Rollo by his Gilla got,
Then shall those keys whose power would awe the fates
For a long time, lock up his Temple gates,
Unburden him of all the charge he bears,
And wrest from him the Laurel that he wears.
Woes me, that from one Leopard should be torn
What many Lions in their pride have worn.
Hither the French flower would it self transpose
Where must spring after, many a glorious rose.
He that did (all he might) the Kirk despise,
Against his life shall a base Kirk-man rise.
The former part of this prediction is apparent John cold here the Fox, and
after the Leo pard.
in the premises, where John sought like a Fox subtlely and craftily to
insinuate into the peoples hearts, and rob him of his Kingdom, thinking his
brother all that time as dead, when he was utterly despairing of his liberty,
but finding him waking, as being enfranchised and set at large, he then was
frighted by the least frown of his brows, being glad to mediate his peace by
his Mother: the rest shall follow in order: he was King John's ch^acter.
of a disposition, course, and retrograde, selfwill'd, and proud, in all or
most of his undertakings very unfortunate. In the first year of his reign, he
divorced himself from his first wife daughter to the Earl of Gloucester,
pretending too near propinquitie in blood, and soon after married Isabel
daughter to the Earl Angolesme, King John's second marriage and issue.
in France, by whom he had issue two sons Henry and Richard, and three
daughters, Isabel, Eleanor, and Jane: He was before his coronation girt with
the sword of the Dukedom of Britany, and suffered it to be taken from him by
his young Nephew Arthur, son to Ieffery Plantaginet, to his great derogation and
dishonor, he after left all Normandy, which the French King won John loses
Normandy.
from him, even to one Town and Village, approving that of the Prophet. After
this Leopard, stained with many a spot, Rollo and Gilla.

Shall lose all Rollo, by his Gilla got.
The Prophet, for his stained and contaminated life and government, would not
vouchsafe him the name of a Lion, but a Leopard alluding, as well to his
spotted fame as his skin, by whose cowardly and unkingly proceedings Philip the
French King, seized all Normandy, and took it into his absolute possession,
annexing it to his Crown, which no French Monarch ever had, since the time of
Charles the Simple, who gave that Duchy to Rollo as a dowry, with Guilla his
daughter, which had successively continued under the Sovereignty of the Dukes
of Normandy, and the Kings of England, three hundred years and upwards.

In the first year of his Reign, Stephen Langton being chosen Archbishop of
Canterbury, by the Monks, the election was opposed by the The ground of a great
quarrel betwixt the King and the Archbishop.
King, for which he complained him to the Pope, who sent unto him loving and
kind Letters, to admit of the said Stephen, to which his Lords advised him;
but the more he was importuned, the more implacable he grew, returning the
Popes messengers back with peremptory denial. The next year came a strict
commandment from Rome, that unless the King would peaceably suffer the
Archbishop to enjoy his See, that the whole Land should be interdicted,
charging these four Bishops, William of London, King John's obstinacy.
Eustace of Elie, Walter of Winchester, and Giles of Hereford, to denounce the
King and his Land accursed, unless his command were punctually obeyed: but
though these Prelates, with the rest of his Peers were urgent with him, to
eschew the rigorous Censure of the Church, all was to no purpose, for which,
upon the six and twentieth day of March, they began in London, and first shut
up the doors of all Temples, Churches and Chapels, with all the other places
where Divine Service was used, and as in London, so they did through the whole
Land, The whole land by the Pop^ accursed.
for which the King was so enraged, that he seized all their temporalties into
his hands, putting them into such fear, that they were forced to fly to the
banished Archbishop, some write, that this interdiction was of such power and
validity, that during the time thereof, which was six years, three months and
odd days, no Service was said, no Sacraments administered, no Child
Christened, none Married, and not any suffered An uncharitable Bull.
to come to Confess.

In this interim, the King from anger grew to The Kings Proclamation.
rage, proclayming that all persons Spiritual or Temporal, that held any
Lands or other livelihood here, shall by the next Michaelmasse return into the
Land, or failing therein, forfeit their whole estates, besides that diligent
search should be made, what Letters should be brought from Rome, which should
be delivered to the He extorteth from the Clergy.
King: then he extorted from all the Monasteries, not sparing any Religious
House that had dependence on the Clergy: For which a new Commission was sent
from Rome, by virtue whereof the Curse of interdiction was again denounced, to
which by the authority of the Pope was added, that this his Bull acquitted and
absolved all the Lords of England, as well spiritual as Temporal, from all
duty and allegiance before sworn to the King, and that they might lawfully
rise in arms against him, to depose and deprive him of all Regal honor and
dignity; but all these took no more impression The Lords and others acquit of
their allegiance by the Pope.
in him, then if they had been clamoured in the ears of a deaf man, or
proclaimed to a Statue of Marble.

But by the way (which I cannot let pass) this King John, in the tenth year
of his Reign, and of grace, one thousand two hundred and ten, The first Major
and She^iffs of London made by K. John.
granted to the City of London by his Letters Patents, that in stead of two
Bailiffs, by which their Magistracy was held, they should yearly choose
themselves a Major, and two Sheriffs; which Major was Henry Fitz-allwin, and
Peter Duke, and Thomas Neale, Sheriffs. The same year London bridge which
before was of timber, London bridge Saint Mary Overies.
was begun to be builded of stone, and Saint Mary Overies Church to be erected
in Southwark.

CHAP. 17.
A continuance of some passages in King John's Reign. Henry the Third succedeth
his Father, a prediction of his Reign: his brother Richard made King of the
Romans. Henry's long Reign: the mad Parliament. The Barons Wars, etc.

I Proceed where I left: in the same year the Pope sent over his Legate More
thunderings from the Pope.
Pandolphus, with another a Latere, to accompany him, to solicit the same
business, who were sent back with a like frivolous answer: yet he sent again
the year following, the same Pandolphus threatening wonders if he did not
receive Stephen Langton into his Archbishopric, and make restitution of all
such moneys and other movables of which he had robbed the Monasteries, etc.
Then at last, the King considering, into what dangers he had intricated
himself hy his peremptory denials, how he had lost Normandy abroad, and then
in what desperate case his Kingdom stood King John's submission.
at home: that his Lords were acquitted of their allegiance, and in what danger
his souls and his peoples were, he and his whole Nation standing accursed, he
at length condiscended, to submit himself to whatsoever the Court of Rome
should determine. The Articles proposed by the Pope, and by him to be performed
were these following.

Peaceably to suffer Stephen Langton to enter The Articles that he should
yield to.
into the Land, and to enjoy the primacy and profits of his Archbishopric,
that these whom he had banished should be repeald, and their goods whom he had
rifled, should be to them restored: and that he should yield up his absolute
right and title to the Crown of England, and he and his heirs, thence-forward,
to hold it of the Pope and his successors: to which having granted, and he and
his Lords being sworn to observe John delivers up his Crown to the Popes use.
the same, He kneeling took the Leg^te to him, the Crown from his head, and
delivered it to the Popes use, saying these words, I here resign up the Crown
of the Realms of England and Ireland, into the hands of pope Innocent the
third, and put my self wholly into his power and mercy; then Pandolph as
Deputy for the Pope took the Crown, and kept it five days in his possession,
and then the King received it from him again: First, having sealed and
delivered up an Instrument or writing, the effect was, that he could challenge
no power but by permission of the Pope; and further to pay unto the Apostolic
See yearly a thousand Marks of silver, seven hundred for the Crown of England,
and three hundred for the Kingdom of Ireland: for the payment of which Tribute
yee^ly paid by King John to Rome
tribute but the Peter Pence were after gathered, and this confirms the
premises expressed in the prophecy. Then shall those keys whose power would
awe the fates,
For along time lock up his Temple gates,
Unburden him of all the charge he bears,
And wrest from him the Laurel that he wears.
Woes me, that from one Leopard should be torn
What many Lions in their pride have worn.
It is made so plain, that it needs no further Interpretor: In those days,
lived one called Peter Peter of Pomfret.
of Pomfret, a Bard, (and such then were held as Southsayers and prophets) who
predicted diverse of the Kings disasters, which fell out accordingly: amongst
which one was, that he should reign but fourteen years: but when the King
had entered the fifteenth, he called him into question for a false prophet, to
which he answered, that whatsoever he had foretold was justifiable and true.
For in the fourteenth year he gave up his Crown unto the pope, and he paying
unto him an annual tribute, the pope reigned, and not he: notwithstanding
which apology he caused him as a Traitor to be hanged and quartered.

After which he bore himself so aversly, toward his Barons, that the greatest
part of them Lewis son to the French King called in to England by the Barons.
fell from his Allegiance, and called in Lewis (son to the French king) into
the Land, covenanting to make him king, who was received with his whole Army,
and possessed of London, the Tower, and many other strong holds in the
kingdom; betwixt whom and the king were sundry conflicts and skirmishes, in
which they diversely sped, during which dissension in the seventeenth year of
his Reign he expired (as the Author of Polychron. says) at Newarke, of The
death of King John.
a bloody flix. But by the relation of our English Chronicle, to which we give
more credit, as also by the authority of Master Fox in his Martyrologie, he was
poisoned by a Monk (having been a great Rifler of their Monasteries) and dyed
at Swinsted Abbey in Lincolnshire (this Monk being of the same House) and his
body was after buried in the Cathedral Church at Winchester, which fatal
accident happened unto him the day after Saint Luke, being the eighteenth of
October, after he had reigned sixteen years, six months and odd days,
leaving behind him two sons, Henry and Richard. In his death verifying, He
that did (all he might) the Kirk despise,
Against his life, shall a base Kirkman rise.
Not forgetting the former, which was predicted of Lewis coming into the Land,
Hither the French flower would it self transpose
Where must spring after many a glorious Rose.


Henry the third of that name, and eldest son Henry the third crowned King.
to King John, at the age of nine years began his Reign over the Realm of
England, the twentieth of October, in the year of Grace one thousand two
hundred and sixteen, Philip the second being then king of France: this king
reigned the longest, and did the least (of remarkable memory) of any of his
predecessors: Of whom it was thus predicted, Dream shall the Leopards issue
in the throne, The Prophecy.

(Crudled in rest) careful to keep his own:
Nor forcing ought from others: changing then
His Leopards spots, a Lion turn again,
Abroad the second whelpe for prey will rore
Beyond the Alps, and to Jove's bird restore: (rage
Her decade plumes: the King of beasts whose
His youth concealed, shall rowse him in his age,
Against the Boar, the Talbot, and the Bear,
The Mountain Cat, and Goat: with whom cohere
Of fowls, the Falcon, Hearn, the Peacock, Swan,
With Fishes too, pressed from the Ocean,
With whose mixed bloods the Forest shall be did,
Till love unite, what discord did divide.
Presently upon the young Kings Coronation, the greatest part of the English
peers, revolted The English Lords revolt from Lewis to Henry.
from the French party, and acknowledged him their sole King and Sovereign, so
that within a short season, they quit both him and all the Aliens, and
Strangers out of the Land: in the eight year of his Reign was held a
Parliament The first granting of Wards.
in which was granted to the King and his successor Kings, the Wardship and
Marriage of all the Heirs: which act was called by wise men of that age,
Initium Malorum.

In the thirtieth year of his Reign dyed Frederick the Emperor who had
before married Isabell the Kings sister. who for his contempt of the church of
Rome was accursed, of The death of the Emperor Frederick.
whom was made this Epitaph, Fre: sremit in Mundo, De: deprimitalta profundo.
Ri: res rimatur, cus: cuspide cuncta minatur.


Which though it cannot sound so well in our English tongue, yet is thus
paraphrased. Free: frets the world: De: Height, which depth confounds.
Ri: searches all things, Cus with the weapen wounds.


After whose death the Electors could not agree in the choice of a successor:
some nominated the Duke of Thoring, others the Earl of Holland, and some
again stood for Richard Earl of Cornwale the Kings brother, but in the end
Rodulphus Duke of Habspurg, was inaugurated by Pope Gregory the ninth: so that
great variance and strife continued for the space of 27 years, to the great
Impoverishment of Italy and the lands of the empire, in the fortieth year of
the King landed in England upon Innocents day in Christmas Richard Earl of
Cornwall crowned Emperor.
week, diverse Princes of the Empire, and did their homage to Richard Earl of
Cornwale, as King of the Romans and Emperor, who upon Ascension day after was
crowned in Aquisgrane, verifying: Abroad the second whelp, for prey will rore
Beyond the, Alps and to Meaning the Eagle.
Jove's bird restore
Her decai'd plumes.


In the 41 year, about Saint Barabas day in the month of June, the king
called his high The mad Parliament.
Court of Parliament at Oxford, which was called the mad parliament, because in
it diverse Acts were concluded against the Kings pleasure, for the reformation
of the state: for which, after great dissension grew betwixt the King and his
Nobles, called the Barons Wars, which proved the perishing of many of the
Peers, and almost the ruin of the whole Realm: for in that Session were
chosen twelve Peers, whom they called the Douz Peers, who had full Commission
to correct and reform whatsoever was done amiss in the Kings Court, the
Courts of Justice, and Exchequer throughout Twelve of the Nobility chosen, and
called the Douz Peers.
the Land, to whose power the King and Prince Edward his son signed and
assented unto, though somewhat against their wills: of all which passages, such
as would be fully satisfied, I refer them to our English Chronicles, or to
Michael Draytons Poem of the Bar^ns Wars, wherein they are amply discoursed:
and my narrow limits will not give me leave to relate them at large: yet I
borrow permission to insist a little further on one particular.

All things being in combustion betwixt the The Barons Letter to the King.
King and his Peers, and their Armies assembled on both sides, the Barons
framed a Letter to the King to this purpose. To the most excellent Lord King
Henry, by the grace of God King of England, Lord of Ireland, Duke of Guian,
etc. The Barons, and other your faithful servants; their fidelity and oath to
God and you coveting to keep, sending due saluting, with all reverence and
honor under due obeisance, etc. Likes it your Highness to understand, that
many being about you have before time showed unto your Lordship of us many
evil and untrue reports, and have found suggestions not only of us, but also
of your self, to bring your Realm to subversion: Know your excellency, that
we intend nothing but health, and security to your person, to the uttermost of
our powers. And not only to our enemies, but also yours, and all this your
Realm, we intend utter grievance and correction, beseeching your grace
hereafter to give to them little credence; for you shall find us your true and
faithful subjects to the uttermost of our powers. And we Simon Mountfort,
Earl of Leceister, and High Steward of England, and Gilbert Clare, Earl of
Gloucester, at the request of others, and for our selves, have put to our Seals
the 10. of May.

To which Letter the King framed this Answer. The Kings answer to the Barons
Letter.
Henry by the grace of God, King of England, Lord of Ireland, and Duke of
Guian: to Simon de Mountfort, and Gilbert de Clare, and their Accomplices:
Whereas by War and general disturbance in this our Realm, by you begun
and continued, with also burnings and other enormities, it evidently appears
that your fidelity to us due, you have not kept, nor the security of our person
little regarded: for so much as our Lords, and other our trusty friends, which
daily abide with us, ye vex and grieve, and them pursue to the utmost of your
powers, and yet daily intend; as you by the report of your Letters have us
ascertained: we, the grief of them admit, and take for our own, especially
when they for their fidelity, which they to us daily impend, stand, and abide
by us, to suppress your infidelity and untroth: Wherefore of your favor and
assurance we set little store, but you, as our enemies, we utterly defy.
Witness our self at our Town of Lewis, the twelfth of May.

Moreover, Richard his Brother King of the Romans (who was come over into
England with his wife and son) with Prince Edward and other Lords about the
King, sent them another Letter, Richard the Emperor and Prince Edwards Letter
to the Barons.
the tenor whereof was this: Richard by the grace of G^d King of the Romans,
semper Augustus, and Edward the Noble first begotten son of the King of
England, and all other Barons firmly standing and abiding with our Sovereign
Lord the King: To Simonde Mountfort, and Gilbert de Clare, and all other their
false fellows, etc. By the Letters which ye sent to our Sovereign Lord, we
understand that we are defied of you; nevertheless, this word of defiance
appeared to us sufficiently before, by the deprivation, and burning of our
Manors, and carrying away of our goods; wherefore we will that ye understand,
that we defy you as our mortal and public enemies, and whenever we may
come to the revengement of the injuries that you to us have done, we shall
requite it, to the utmost of our power; and where ye put upon us, that neither
true nor good counsel to our Sovereign Lord we give, you therein say falsely
and untruely: and if that saying, ye Sir Simon de Mountfort, and Sir Gilbert
de Clare, will testify in the Court of our Sovereign Lord, we are ready to
purchase to your surety and safe coming, that there we may prove our true and
faithful innocence, and your false and traiterous lying. Witnessed with the
Seals of Richard King of the Romans, and Sir Edward Prince, before named.
Given at Jews the twelfth of May. The success of the Battle follows in
the next Chapter.

CHAP. 18.
The deaths of Henry the third and Richard Earl of Cornwale King of the
Romans: Prince Edwards victories in the Holy Land: his Coronation: the
prophecy of his Reign: his first reducing of Wales under his dominion, for
ever: the beginning of his wars in Scotland, etc.

WHen the Barons had received these letters, they were resolved to try it out
by the sword, and on wednesday being the 24 day of May, early in the morning,
both hoasts met, where the Londoners who took part with the Barons, gave the
first assault, but were beaten back, somewhat to the The battle betwixt the
King and the Barons.
dismay of the Barons Army: but they cheared their fresh and lusty Soldiers in
such wise, that they valiantly came on: by whose brave resolution, those before
discomfited resumed their former strength and virtue, fighting without fear: in
so much that the Kings vaward gave back and left their places: in this battle
the father spared not the son, nor the son the father, (such was the misery
of those home bred wars) in so much that the field was every where strowed with
dead b^dyes, for the fight continued the greatest part of the day: at last the
victory fell to the Barons: so that were taken the King, the King of the
Romans, and prince Edward The King taken prisoner with the King of the Romans
and P. Edward.
with five and twenty Barons and Bannerets, and the people slain on both
sides, amounted to above twentythousand.

These royal prisoners being put in safe keeping, a peace was after debated,
and at length concluded, and they released, but it proved to small purpose, for
many battles were after fought betwixt them, in which sometimes the King,
sometimes the Barons had the better (the circumstances are too long to relate)
in which Prince Edward bore himself bravely: in process the five and fiftieth
year of this Kings Reign, the King of the Romans made atonement betwixt the
King his brother, and Gilbert Clare Earl of Gloucester, who had continued the
wars of the Barons, upon condition that he should take a Voyage into the Holy
Land for the King, for which he should have toward his charge eight thousand
Marks in hand, and when he was on shipboard four thousand more, and to be
ready the first day of May next following: but this failing in him; Prince
Edward undertook it in his stead, and the year after ab^ut the end of March,
dyed Richard Emperor of The death of Richard K. of the Romans.
Almaine, King of the Romans, and Earl of Cornwall, being the Kings brother,
after he had governed the Empire betwixt fifteen and sixteen years, and was
buried at Hales an Abbey of white Monks which he had before time founded: and
the year following, upon the sixteenth day of November, died Henry the Third
King of England, after he had governed the Realm fifty The death of Henry the
third.
six years, and twenty seven days, leaving for his Heir Prince Edward, who
was then in the Holy Land, and another son called Edmund Crowchbacke: His
body was buried in the Abbey of Westminster, and over him inscribed: Tertius
Henricus jacet hic, pietatis amicus: His Epitaph.

Ecclesiam stravit istam, quam post renovavit.
Reddat ei munus, qui regnat trinus and unus.


Thus Englished, Third Henry here does rest,
Of Piety possessed,
Down first this Church he threw,
And after did renew.
O grant him thy immunity,
Thou Trinity in Unity.


The premises confirm the prophecy of his Reign toward the latter end of
his time: which was turbulent and troublesome, to the exhausting of the Kings
treasure, the deaths of many of his Noble Barons, and almost to the destruction
and desolation of the whole Realm: therefore it was truly said of him: -- The
King of beasts whose rage
His youth concealed, shall rouse him in his age,
Against the Boar, the Talbot, and the Bear,
The Mountain Cat and Goat, with whom cohere, etc.


By the Lion the King is personated, and by the rest of the beasts and birds
named, the several Crests and Emblazons in the Barons Arms and Scutchions, by
which they were distinguished. Prince Edward his son was at the time of his
death in the Land of Palaestine. Of whom also it was thus predicted. An
Occident all Dragon bright as noone, The Prophecy.

Shall (breathing flames) dark the Oriental Moon.
The Cambrian Wolves he through their Woods shall chase,
Nor cease till he have quite extirpt their race.
Then from the North shall fiery Meteors threat,
Ambitious after blood) to quench their heat
(The Dragons blood) at which his Crest will rise,
And his scales flame: and where he treads as flies
Fright all shall him oppose: the Northern Dyke
Pass shall he then, and set his foot in Wyke.
After which, showers of blood will fall upon
And barren the fair fields of Caledon.
Then having ended what he took in hand,
Die in the Marches of another Land.


He in the year one thousand two hundred Prince Edwards expeditio^ to the
Holy Land.
threescore and eleven, and in the year of his fathers Reign fifty five, upon
the twentieth of August, took shipping at Dover, and sailed thence to
Bordeaux, but because the French Army (b^und upon the same adventure, was
removed thence, he sped after, and met with them at Tunis, and from thence he
took shipping for the Holy Land, and arrived with some French forces joined
with his own. At Acris or Acon, what time the Christians possessed that City
only, and the City of Tire, holding some few Castles to preserve them from the
rage of the Sultan, There he was honorably received, and with great joy: after
whose being there; the Sultan or Saladine, who had won all the Country there
about, came thither with an Host of an hundred threescore thousand Sarazens;
and besieged the City, and made many bold and bloody assaults. But the Prince,
so Prince Edwards valor in defending Acris.
valiantly demeaned himself, that he defended the City, the Castles belonging
to it, and all the Territories about, that notwithstanding the multitude of the
Soldans Army, he was compeld to forsake the siege to his great shame and
dishonor.

Even the French Chronicles, whose custom The French Chronicles testify of P.
Edwards valor.
is to write boastingly of themselves, and sparingly of others; bestow on him a
character of invincible courage, and that in all his stratagems and martial
exploits, he so honorably behaved himself, that his very name was a terror
to the Turks, for many years after: who seeing his great boldness, and that
they were not able to stand him in battle, they plotted how to take away his
life by Treason, and to that purpose, when he was resident in Acon, they sent
to P. Edward traitcrously wounded.
him a Sarazen, in the name of a Secretary, who in delivering unto him a
counterfeit message, wounded him in the arm with an empoysoned Knife, which he
wresting from the Infidels hand, slew with the same weapon, so that he died
incontinently: Then he called for a Surgeon, and with incomparable sufferance,
commanded him to cut out all the putrified and corrupted flesh, even to the
scaling of the bone, without the least shrinking or alteration of countenance:
of which base treachery he was after revenged upon them to their great
detriment and damage: and thus, The Occidentall Dragon, bright as noon,
Did (breathing flames) dazzle the orienial moon.
He is called Occidentall, as being bred in this our Western Island, and the
Sultan is figured in the Oriental Moon, being a Prince in the Eastern part
of the World, and bearing the semicircled Moon in his Banner: Prince Edward
during his abode there, had by the Princess his wife, a daughter called Ioane,
who took a His wife was Isabell of Spain. Joan of Acris.
name from the place, and was called Ioane of Acris, because there born, and
was after married to the Earl of Gloucester: After his being there some two
years and upward, his father dying, he was called home to take possession of
the Crown of England.

Edward the first of that name, and son of Henry the Third (by reason of his
tall stature, surnamed Long-shanks, began his Reign, Novem. 17. the year of
Grace, one thousand two hundred threescore and twelve who came to London, the
second day of August, and was crowned at Westminster, the fourteenth of
December following The Cororati of P. Edward, surnamed Lo^gshanks.
being the second year of his Reign, at whose Coronation was present
Alexander King of Scots, who the morrow following did homage to him for the
Kingdom of Scotland: but Lewellin prince of Wales, refused to come to that
solemnity, for which King Edward gathered a strong power, and subdued him in
his Lewellin P. of Wales rebeileth.
own borders: and in the year after he called his high Court of Parliament,
to which also Lewellin presumptuously denied to come, therefore after Easter,
he assembled new forces, and entering Wales, he constrained him to submit
himself to his mercy, which with great difficulty Lewellin took to mercy.
he obtained: then the King built the Castle of Flint, and strengthened the
Castle of Rutland, to keep the Welsh in due obedience.

He gave also uuto David brother of Lewellin, David brother to Lewellin.
the Castle of Froddesham, who remained in his Court, and with his seeming
service much delighted the King: but David did it only as a spy, to give his
brother secret intelligence, of whatsoever the King or his Counsel said of him
or against him, who took his opportunity, and privately left the Court,
stirring up his bro^her to a new Rebellion, of which the King being informed,
he could hardly think that he could prove so ungrateful, but being better
ascertained of the truth, he made fierce war upon them: at length Lewellin
was strictly besieged in Swandon Castle, from which when he thought early in a
morning to escape with ten Knights only, he was met by Sir Roger Mortimer,
(upon whose Lands he had before done great outrage) who surprised him and cut
off his head, and sent it to the King being then at The death of Lewellin P. of
Wales.
Rutland, who commanded it to be pitched on a pole and set upon the Tower of
London, and further, that all his heirs should be disherited, and their claim
to the Sovereignty of Wales to be deprived the right thereof, solely remaining
in the Kings of England, and their Successors. So one after was his brother
David taken, and after doomed to be drawn, hanged and quartered, The death of
David his brother.
and his head sent to the Tower and placed by his brother Lewellins: in which
the prophecy is verified: The Cambrian Wolves, he through their woods shall
chase,
Nor cease till he have quite extirpt their Race.
Of this Lewellin a Welsh Metrician writ this Epitaph, Hic jacet Anglorum
tortor, tutor Venedorum,
Princeps Wallorum, Lewelinus regula morum, A Welsh poet upon the death of
Lewellin.

Gemma Coaevorum, flos regum praeteritorum:
Forma futurorum, Dux, Laus, Lex, Lux populorum.
Thus anciently Englisht: Of Englishmen the scourge, of Welsh the protector,
Lewellin the Prince, rule of all virtue,
Gemme of Livers, and of all others the flower:
Who unto death has paid his debt due,
Of Kings a mirror that after him ensue,
Duke, and Priest, and of the Law the right,
Here in this grave, of people lies the light.
To which an English Poet of those times made this answer, Hic jacet errorum
princeps ac praedo virorum, An English poets answer to the former.

Proditor Anglorum, fax livida, sectareorum,
Numen Wallorum, Trux, Dux, Homicida piorum:
Fex Trojanorum, stirps mendax, causa malorum.
Here lies of Error, the Prince if ye will ken:
Thief and Robber, and traitor to Englishmen,
A dim brood, a Sect of doers evil,
God of Welshmen, cruel without skill,
In slaying the good, and Leader of the bad:
Lastly rewarded, as he deserved had:
Of Trojans blood the dregs, and not the seed;
A root of falsehood, and cause of many evil deed.


In the twentieth year of the King, upon Saint Andrews Eve, being the twenty
ninth of November, died Queen Eleanor, sister to the The death of Q. Eleanor
King of Spain: by whom the King had four sons, John, Henry, Alphons, and
Edward; the three first died, and Edward the youngest succeeded his Father, and
five Daughters, Eleanor who was married to William of Bar, Joan of The Kings
R^yall Issue.
Acris, to the Earl of Gloucester, Gilbert de Clare: Margaret to the Dukes
son of Brabant, Mary who was made a Nun at Ambrisbury, and Elisabeth espoused
to the Earl of Holland, and after his death to Humphrey Bokun Earl of
Hereford.

This year also died old Queen Eleanor wife The death of K. Edwards mother.
to Henry the third, and mother to King Edward. I come now to the twenty fourth
year of his Reign, in which Alexander King of Scotland being dead, he left
three Daughters: the first was married to Sir John Baliol, the second to Sir
Robert le Bruise, the third to one Hastings. Amongst which there fell
dissension about the Title to the Crown, as shall appear in the next Chapter.

CHAP. 19.
The right that the Kings of England have anciently had to the Crown of
Scotland, for which they did them homage. King Edwards victorious wars in
Scotland. The Prophecy fulfilled. His death. And Coronation of his son, etc.
The death of Gaveston, with a Prophecy of King Edward the Second.

THese three before-named, Baliol, Bruise and Hastings, came to King Edward as
chief Lord and Sovereigne Authority by which England claimed homage from the
Scotch Kings.
of that Land, to dispose of the right of their Titles to his pleasure, and
they to abide his censure, who to the intent that they might know he was the
sole competent Judge in that case, caused old Evidences and Chronicles to be
searched, amongst which was Marianus the Scot, William of Malmsbury, Roger of
Hungtington, and others, in which were found and read before them, that in the
year of Grace nine hundred and twenty, King Edward the elder made subject unto
him the two Kings of Cambria and Scotland: In the year nine hundred twenty
one, the said Kings of Wales and Scotland, chose the same Edward to be their
Lord and Patron. In the year nine hundred twenty six Ethelstane King of
England, subdued Constantine King of Scots, who did him fealty and homage. And
Edredus brother and successor to Ethelstane, subdued the Scots again, with the
Northumbers, who reigned under him.

It was also found in the said Chronicles, that King Edgar overcame Alpinus,
the son of Kinudus, King of Scots, and received of him homage, as he had
done of his father before time. And that Canutus in the sixteenth year of his
Reign, overcame Malcolm K. of Scots, and received of him oath and homage: that
William the Conqueror in the sixth year of his Reign, was victorious over
Malcolme, who before received the Kingdom of the gift of Edward the Confessor,
who did him fealty; the like did Malcolme and his two sons to William
surnamed the Red, son to the Conqueror: David King of Scots did homage also
to Stephen King of England. William King of Scots did the like to Henry the
third at the time of his Coronation, and when this Henry was dead, This Henry
called the third, was son to Henry the se cond, and was crowned, but dyed
before his Father.
he came after to his father Henry the second, into Normandy; and did the like
to him also. Alexander King of Scots in the thirty first year of Henry the
second, (son of King John) married at York the Daughter of the said Henry,
and did him homage for the Realm of Scotland, etc.

Further, was showed unto them the Popes Bulls, sent into Scotland; by virtue
whereof, those of their Kings were accursed that would not be obedient to
their Lords, the Kings of England: Briefly, they acknowledging all these
Authoriy from Rome.
to be true, Bonds were made on both sides, in which thing Edward was tied in
an hundred thousand pounds to nominate their King, and the Scots again bound
to obey him, nominated as their Sovereign: After which writings sealed, they
delivered the possession of the Kingdom of Scotland into King Edwards hands,
to preserve it to his use, of whom he would make election, who made choice of
Sir John Balioll, as true and immediate heir, by marrying Sir John Balioll
made king of Scots.
the eldest sister, for which he did him homage and swear him fealty: which
done, the Scots with their new King, departed joyfully into Scotland.

But soon after, Baliol repented him of his Oath, and as some say, by the
Counsel of the Abbot of Menrosse, others by the instigation of the King of
France; but whether by one or both, certain it is, that he perfidiously
revolted, and made war upon England, which Edward hearing, sped him with a
great host into The Scots revolt.
Scotland, and laid siege to Barwicke, but they bravely defended the Town, and
burnt some of our English, with which they were so inflamed with pride, that
they made this scornful Rhyme upon the English: What ween is King Edward with
his long shanks,
To have won Barwicke, all our unthankes,
Gaas pikes him,
And when he had it,
Gaas dikes him.


At which King Edward being mightily moved, so encouraged his soldiers, that
they first won the Ditches, and after with great difficulty the Bulwarks,
and then came to the gates, which they enforced, and entering the Town, slew
twenty five thousand, and seven hundred Scots, and lost no man of note, save
Richard King Edward wins Barwicke.
Earl of Cornwall, and of meaner people twenty seven and no more; which
hitherto upholds the former prediction. Then from the North shall fiery Meteors
threat,
Ambitious after blood to quench their heat.
(The Dragons blood) at which his Crest will rise,
And his skales flame: and where he treads or flies
Fright all shall him oppose, the Northern Dyke
Pass shall he then, and set his foot in wyke.


By the Northern Dyke is employed the River Tweede, and by Wyke the Town of
Barwicke: but I pursue the History: The King having possessed the Town and
Castle, he sent Sir Hugh Spencer, with Sir Hugh Parcy, and other Noble men to
besiege Dunbar, whither came a mighty Host to remove them thence, with whom the
English had a fierce and cruel battle, A glorious victory at the taking of
Dunbar.
in which were slain of the Scots twenty two thousand, and of the English a
very small number, wherefore the English to reproach the Scots in regard of
their former Rhyme made this, These scattered Scots Hold we for sots.
Of wrenches unware,
Early in a morning, in an evil timing,
Came ye to Dunbar.


After the taking of the Town and Castle of Dunbarre, the King besieged the
City of Edenborough, and won both it and the Castle, Edenborough taken, with
the Castle, Crown, etc.
in which were found the Regalities of state, which King Edward took thence,
(and offered them at the shrine of Saint Edward, upon the eighteenth day of
June the year following.) Then Sir John Baliol, with diverse of his Clergy and
Nobility, submitted themselves to the kings grace, and having settled the
affairs of Scotland, he brought them up to London, and then asked them what
amends they would make him for all the trouble and damage they had put him to?
who answered, they wholly submitted themselves to his mercy. He then replied,
your Lands nor your goods do I desire, but I will that you take the Sacrament,
to be my true Feodaries, and never more to bear Arms against me: to which
they willingly assented, of which were sir John Commin, the Earl of Stratherne,
and the Earl of Carick, and four The Scotch sworn on the Sacrament.
Bishops took Oath in the behalf of themselves and the whole Clergy: which
done, the king gave them safe conduct into their Country.

But not long after, they hearing the king was busied in his wars of
Gascoyne, against the French king, they made a new insurrection, having They
break their oath.
one Will. Wallis a desperate Ruffin and of low condition to be their chief
Leader: which the King hearing, having ordered his affairs in ^rance, he sped
toward Scotland, and entering the Kingdom, he burnt and wasted wheresoere he
came, sparing only all Churches, Religious Houses, and the poor people who
besought him of mercy. At length he met with the Scottish Army upon Saint Mary
Mawdlins day, at a place called Fonkirke, where he gave them The b^ve battle
at Fonk^ke.
battle, and slew of them thirty three thousand, with the loss only of
twenty eight men and no more, and finding no other enemies able to resist him,
he returned into England; and after married Margaret the French Kings sister,
by which King Edward marries the French Kings sister.
a peace betwixt England and France was concluded.

Then went king Edward a third time into Scotland, and almost famished the
Land, and took the strong Castle of Estrevelin, and soon after was taken
William Wallis at the Town of The end of William Wallis.
Saint Dominick, who was sent to London, where he received his judgment, and
upon Saint Bartholomews Eve, was drawn and quartred, his head stooke off and
set on London bridge, and his four quarters sent to be hanged up in the four
chief Cities of Scotland: after this Robert le Bruce claymed the Crown of
Scotland, without acquainting king Edward therewith, and drove all the
Englishmen out of the Land; of which he vowed revenge, and to hang up all the
Traitors in that kingdom: who before he set forward on that expedition made
four hundred and four knights at Westminster, upon a Whitson Sunday, with
whom and the rest of King Edward makes 400, and four Knights.
his Army he once more pierced Scotland, and upon Friday before the Assumption
of our Lady, he met with Robert le Bruce and his Host, beside Saint John's
Town, and slew of them seven thousand at the first encounter, and the rest
fled. In this battle was taken Sir Simon Frizell, and sent to London, where
he was drawn, hanged and quartered: there suffered also John Earl of
Athelus, and John brother to William King Edwards last victory over the Scots.
Wallis, but Robert le Bruce fled from Scotland into Norway, to the King, who
had married his sister.

When King Edward had thus abated the pride of his enemies, he returned again
Southward, and a great sickness took him at Bozroes upon Sands, in the Marches
of Scotland, beyond Carlisle, and when he knew he should die, he called unto
him Aymer de Valence Earl of Pembroke, Sir Henry Piercy Earl of
Northumberland, Sir Henry Lacie Earl of Lincoln, and Sir Robert Clifford
Baron; and swore them to crown his son Edward of Carnarvan after his death:
then he called his son, charging him with many things upon his blessing, but
The Barons sworn to the successor.
especially that he shall never receive Pierce Gavestone his old companion
(before banished) into the Kingdom: and so dyed upon the seventh of July, when
he had reigned four and thirty years, seven months and odd days, and The
death of K. Edward the first.
thence his body was conveyed to Westminster, and there buried: approving the
prophecy. After which, showers of blood will fall upon,
And barren the fair fields of Caledon:
Then having ended what he took in hand,
Die in the Marches of another Land.
Upon whose Tomb this Distich was inscribed: Dum vixit Rex, and valuit sua
magna potestas, His Epitaph.

Fraus latuit, pax magna fuit, regnavit honestas.
Thus in those days Englisht: While lived this King, by his power all things,
Was in good plight,
For guile was hid, great peace was kid,
And honesty had might.


Of his son Prince Edward, the Prophecy runs thus: A prophecy of the Reign
of Edward the second.
A Goat shall then appear out of a Carr,
With silver horns (not Iron) unfit for war,
And above other shall delight to feed
Upon the flower, that life and death does breed.
A Cornish Eagle clad in plumes of gold
(Borrowed from others) shall on high behold
What best can please him to maintain his pride.
Whose painted feathers shall the Goat misguide,
Who at length aiming to surprise the Bear,
Him shall the rowzed beast in pieces tear.
Two Owls shall from the Eagles ashes rise,
And in their pride the Forest beasts despise.
They forced at first to take their wings and fly
Shall (back returning) bear themselves so hie,
TO out-brave both birds and beasts, and great spoils win,
By the Goats casing in a Lions skin.
But after, be themselves deprived of breath
By her they scorned (the flower of life and death)
And the crowned Goat, thinking himself secure
Shall (after all) a wretched end endure.
To confirm which, Edward the second of that name (and son of Edward the
first) borne at Carnarvan a Town of Wales, began his Reign over England, the
eighth of July, in the year of Grace one thousand three hundred and seven, and
was crowned at Westminster the fourteenth day of December, whose Fathers
Obsequies were scarcely ended, but forgetting the great His Coronation
charge and command laid upon him in his death, he sent in haste for his old
friend and familiar Pierce Gauestone out of France, whom he received with
great joy, then sailing into Pierce Gavestone revoked from banishment.
France the fifteenth of January following, at Bolloigne in Picardy, espoused
Isabell the His marriage.
daughter of Philip the Fair, and returned with her into England, where soon
after he made Gaveston Earl of Cornwall, and gave him the Gaveston made E^le
of Cornwall.
Lordship of Wallingford, to the great displeasure of the Barons, who were
sworn to his father not to suffer him to come into the Realm.

In the second of his Reign, remembering the complaint that Steph. Langton
Bishop of Chester had made of him and Gaveston for sundry ryots committed in
his fathers days, for which he was banished, he sent him prisoner to the
Tower, where he was strictly kept, and ill attended, The Bishop of Chester sent
to the Tower.
for which end seeing how by this Pierce the kings treasury was howrely
exhausted, the Barons assembled themselves, and contrary to the Kings pleasure,
banished him into Ireland for a Gaveston bani shed into Ireland.
year, where the King gave him the Dominion over the whole Land, but so
mourned and lamented his absence, that by the consent of Lords he was shortly
called back again: where he demeaned himself with greater pride and insolence
then at first, despising the Lords and chief peers of the Land, calling Sir
Robert of Clare Earl of Gloucester whoreson, the Earl of Gave. abuses the
peers
Lincoln sir Henry Lacy Burstenbelly, sir Guy Earl of Warwick, black dog of
Arderne, and the noble Earl Thomas of Lancaster churl: and moreover having
the keeping and command of all the kings treasure, he took out of the
Iewell-house a table of Gold and tressels of the same, which once belonged to
King Arthur, with many other invaluable Jewels, and delivered He robs the Kings
treasury
them to a merchant called Amery of Friskband, to bear them over into
Gascoigne, which was a great loss to the kingdom: and further by his loose
and effeminate conditions, he drew the King to many horrible vices, as adultery
(and as some think) sodomitry, with others: therefore the Lords again
assembled, and maugre the king, banished him into Flanders.

In the first year upon the day of saint Brice He is banished into Flanders
being the 13 day of November, was born at Winsor the first and eldest son of
King Edward that after his father was king of England, and named The birth of
Edward the third.
Edward the third: and the same year Gaveston was called out of Flanders by
the king, and restored to all his former honors; and then he demeaned himself
more contemptuously toward the Barons then before, who besieged him in the
Castle of Scarborough, and won it, and took him and brought him to Gaversed
The death of Pierce Gave.
besides Warwick, and there smote off his head, which was done at the
instigation of Thomas Earl of Lancaster (whom Merlin calls the bear) and this
approves the premises: A Cornish Eagle cladin plumes of gold,
(Borrowed from others) shall on high behold,
what best can please him to maintain his pride.
whose painted feathers shall the Goat misguid:
who at length aiming to surprise the Bear,
Him shall the rowzed beast in pieces tear.


CHAP. 20.
The Kings unfortunate wars in Scotland: The battle of Bannocsbourn, etc.
Barwick betrayed to the Scots: The pride and insolency of the Spencers: Their
misleading the King. Their hate to the Queen, she is sent over into France: Her
victorious return with the Prince: The King and his Minions taken: the death of
the two Spencers, etc.

BY the Cornish Eagle in the former Chapter is meant Pierce Gavestone Earl of
Cornwall; by his plumes of gold, his pride and riches borrowed and extorted
from others: by the Goat, the King who was given to all intemperate
effeminacie: by the Bear, Thomas Earl of Lancaster, etc. This King was of a
beautiful aspect, King Edwards Character.
and excellent feature: of a strong constitution of body, but unstedfast in
promise, and ignoble in condition, as refusing the company of men of honor, to
associate himself with lewd and vile persons, he was much addicted to
bibacity, and apt to discover matters of great counsel and of stupration, and
adultery, persuaded thereto by his familiars the French men, for whose death
the King vowed an irreconciliable revenge against the Barons, which he after
performed: indeed so unking-like was his misgovernment, that a base Villain
called John Tanner, named himself the son of Edward the John Tanner an Impostor.
first, and that by the means of a false nurse, he was stolen out of his
cradle, and this Edward being a Carters son was laid in his place, which the
people for the former reasons were easily induced to believe: but the Impostor
was discovered, and by his own confession, judged to be hanged and quartered.

In the seventh year of his Reign, Robert le Robert le Bruce wars against
England.
Bruce, King of Scots, whom his Father made fly into Norway, hearing of the
misguiding of the Kingdom, and the dissension betwixt him and his Barons,
war strongly against him and his friends in Scotland, and won from them
Castles and Holds howsoever well munified, to the great damage of the English,
who were interessed The Kings power against Scotland.
in the Land. For which affront, the King assembled a great power, and invaded
Scotland by Sea, burning and destroying all such Towns and Villages as were in
his way, which Robert le Bruce hearing, he hasted with a strong Army, and upon
S. John Baptists day both Hoasts met at a place called Estrivelin, near unto a
fresh River called Bannoksburne, where betwixt them was fought a cruel
battle, in which the English were compeld to forsake the field. For which, in
derision of the English, the Scots made this Ryme Doggerill, Maidens of
England, sore may you mourn, The Scots derision of the English.

For the Lemans you have lost at Bannocksborn With a heave and hoe:
What weened the King of England, so soon to have won Scotland?
With a Rumby low.
In his ninth year, Barwick was betrayed to the Scots, by one Peter Spalding
whom the King had Barwick betrayed to the Scots.
made Governor of the Town and Castle: and in the eleventh ye^re, the Scots
entered the borders of Northumberland, most cruelly robbing and burning the
Country, even the houses of women who lay in Childbed, not sparing age, The
cruelty of the Scots.
nor sex, religious nor other: therefore the King raised a new Army, and laid
siege to Barwick, in which interim the Scots past the River of Swale, and
leaving the Coast where the Kings people lay, came into the Borders of
Yorkshire, to whom the Archbishop with Priests and ploughmen (unexercised in
arms) gave battle, but were discomfited, in which so many Priors, Clerks,
Canons, and other Clergymen were slain, that they called it the white
battle: when The white battle.
the King heard of this overthrow, he broke up his siege, and retired to
York, and soon after to London.

After this, nothing was done without the advice of the two Hugh Spencers, the
father and the son: and in a Counsel held at York, Hugh Spencer the son,
maugre the Lords, was made high Chamberlain of England, who bore him as
haughtily as ever did Gavestone: but let The pride of Hugh Spencer the son.
me take the prophecy along. A Goat shall then appear out of a Carr,
With silver horns (not Iron) unfit for war,
And above other shall delight to feed
Upon the flower, that life and death does breed.
By the Goat is figured lascivious Edward, therefore said to appear out of a
Car, as born in Carnarvan, his horns of silver and not of Iron, denotes his
effeminacie, being unserviceable for war, as may appear, in his success
against the Scots: by the Flower of life and death is intended his Queen
Isabel the Flower of France, at first dear to him as life, but in the end (as
most Writers have suspected) with Mortimer, accessory to his death: but to
proceed with the History.

The Barons (to a great number) seeing how The assembly of the Barons.
the Spencers misled the King and misgoverned the affairs in the Land,
assembled themselves and took a solemn and unanimous vow to remove them out
of the Kingdom: and as their first attempt, certain of them appointed to that
purpose, entered upon the Manors and Castles of the Spencers, in the Marches of
Wales, spoiling and ruining them to the earth, of which riot they complained to
the King, who summoned them to appear before his Counsel, which The petition
of the Barons to the King.
they refused to do, but gathered unto them a stronger Host, and sent to his
Majesty, humbly beseeching him to remove from his person the two Spencers,
which daily did to him great dishonor, and to the Commonweal: which damage,
with humble request the King hearing, and doubting his own safety, called a
Parliament to be held at London, to which the Barons came with a great Host
all suited in demy-parted Iackets of yellow and green, with a list of white,
cast overthwart, for which the common The Parliament of white-bands
people called it the Parliament of white-bands, in which the two Spencers were
banished the Kingdom for ever.

But the year following, the King revoked the Acts made in the former
Parliament, and called them into England, contrary to the will of the Barons,
and set them in greater authority then before, to the great disturbance and
almost utter subversion of the Realm: for now the whole Land was in
combustion, and the King animated by the Spencers, took on him the shape of a
Lion, and ceased not till he had cut off the chief and prime Nobility of the
Land: For besides those that were slain, none was brought to the Bar, but
was thence led to the block: who having got the better of his Barons, he
called a Parliament at York, in which Hugh Spencer the Father was made Earl
of Hugh Spencer the father made Earl of Winchester.
Winchester, and soon after was one Robert Baldock a follow of debaucht life
and condition, made Chancellor of England: Then forfeits Robert Baldock made
Chancellor.
and sines were gathered, without sparing of privileged places or other, till
a mighty sum of money was gathered toward another expedition into Scotland,
and then his Army consisted (according to Caxton and others) of an hundred
thousand men, but he sped in that as in the former, for on Saint Lukes day, at
a place called Bellalaund, or Brighland, he had like to have been taken as he
sat at dinner, which could not have been, had he not had some traitors about
him: and now confer the premises The King almost surprised at dinner.
with the Prophecy: Two Owls shall from the Eagles ashes rise,
And in their pride the Forest beasts despise.
They fore't at first to take their wings and fly
Shall (back returning) bear themselves so hie,
TO out-brave both birds and beasts, and great spoils win,
By the Goats casing in a Lions skin.
The two Owls are the two Spencers, who from the ashes of the Cornish Eagle
Gaveston, grew into the especial favor of the King, who were said to case the
Goat in the skin of the Lion, by animating the effeminate King to the wars
against the Barons, by whose deaths they got many rich spoils, and then forced
to take their wings to fly where they were banished the Realm at the parliament
of white Bands, etc.

The state of the kingdom thus standing, and the two Spencers commanding all
the Land had Wars with France about the Duchy of Guian: to atone which
difference betwixt the two Kings, the two Spencers being in all things The hate
of the Spencers toward the Queen, which was after the cause of their ruin.
opposite to the Queen, whom they had brought to the bare allowance and pension
of twenty shillings a day, they further plotted how to rid her out of the Land,
and persuaded the King to send her into France, to make peace betwixt the two
Kingdoms, having before seized on all her lands, and those belonging to the
Prince. The Queen sent into France.
Briefly, the Queen arrived in France, and was royally received by her
brother, who hearing of her base usage, and by whom, he was much incensed
against the K. and his wicked Counselors, and sent to him under his seal to
come in person into France to do him homage, or he She is royally received by
the King her brother.
should forfeit the Duchy of Guian: Of which K. Edward took little regard, in
hope his Queen would salve all things that were amiss betwixt the brother and
husband.

After the Queens three months abode in France, the Prince desired of his
Father, that he might have leave to visit his mother and uncle, which his
Father granted, and said to him at parting, Go my fair son in Gods
blessing, and mine, and return to me again as speedily as you may: who
passing the Sea and coming to the Kings Court, he joyfully received him, and
said; Fair son, you be welcome, and since your Father came not to do
homage for the Duchy of Guian, as his antecessors have done, I give you the
Lordship to hold of me in heritage, and so the Prince was created, and thence
forward called the Duke P. Edward made Duke of Guien.
of Guien.

Which being known to King Edward he was highly incensed, especially because
the Prince was instated into that honor without his consent and pleasure, and
finding that (notwithstanding his often sending) they made no haste to return,
he made Proclamation, that if within such a day prefixed they made not their
repair into the Land, they should be held as enemies to the Crown and state:
but the Queen much fearing the malice of the Spencers, whom she knew to be
her mortal enemies, she removed not thence: then the King made forfeiture of
all their goods and Lands, before seized, and took the profits of them to his
own use, and sent sharp and threatening Letters to the French King, if he
suffered them The French King refuses to aid his sister.
to sojourne longer in his Realm, upon which he commanded them thence, without
any further comfort or succor.

At that time Sir John Henaud, brother to the Earl of Henaud (a man of great
courage and valor) being in the French Court, much commiserating the Queen
and the Prince, desired her to go with him to his brother the Earl, of which
she was glad, and taking his noble offer, was there honorably received. Then
was a marriage concluded betwixt Prince Edward The Prince contracted to Philip
daughter to the Earl of Henaud.
and Phillip the Earls Daughter, upon certain conditions, one of which was,
that the Earl should send over into England the Queen and her son with 400
men at Arms, under the conduct of his Brother. In which interim, the two
Spencers sent three Barrells of Coin, with Letters, to some of the French
Peers, that if it were possible they should make away the Queen or her son,
or at least send them away disgraced out of the Realm, which money and Letters
were taken by a ship of the Henauders, and brought to the Queen during her
abode The Spencers beat at their own weapons.
there, which the Earls brother seeing, said unto her, be of comfort Madam,
this is a good Omen, the Spencers your enemies have sent you money to pay your
soldiers.

Of which the King of England having intelligence, he sent to all the Ports and
Havens to interdict their landing: notwithstanding which, the Queen and
Prince, with these four hundred Hollanders, and a small company of English
gentlemen, who had fled to her in the time of her exile landed at a port called
Orwel, besides The Queen landeth in Suffolk.
Harwich in Suffolk, the fifteenth of September (Sir John Henaud the Earls
brother being their Captain and Leader) without any opposition or resistance,
to whom after their landing, the people resorted in great companies, and sped
toward London, where the King and the Spencers were then resident, who hearing
of the multitudes that then drew unto her: left Walter Stapleton Bishop of
Exeter, Custos of the City, The King and Spencers fly to Wales.
and with a small company fled toward Wales: she came then to London, where
the people were willing to receive her, which the Bishop with many sharp and
bitter words opposing, the Commons of the City took him violently, and
beheaded him with two of his Esquires, at the Standard in West-cheap, whose
bodies were borne to the Thames side (where the Bishop had begun a new edifice
contrary to their liking) and there unreverently buried.

The Queen with an easy march followed The Queen pursues the King.
the king, who came to Bristoll with the Earl of Arundell, the two Spencers,
and his infamous Chancellor Baldock, where after counsel taken it was agreed,
that Hugh Spencer the father should stay there and take charge of the town and
castle, whilst the King and the rest took shipping thence for Wales, to raise
the Welshmen in his aid, of which the Queen having notice, sent thither the
Earl of Kent, Sir John Henaud, with others, who with small difficulty The
Town and Castle of Bristoll taken.
took the town and castle, with Hugh Spencer the father alive, and delivered
them to the Queen, who remained there till the greatest part of her army
pursued the King and his other Minions into Wales, who took the King, the Earl
of Arundell, Hugh Spencer the son, and the Chancellor, and brought them all
prisoners to Hereford, in which interim the Citizens The tower of London taken
by the Citizens
of London won the tower of London, and kept it to the Queens use.

Upon the morrow after the feast of Simon and Jude, the same day that the L.
Major takes Hugh Spen^: the father put to death.
his oath, was Hugh Spencer the father put to death, and after buried at
Winchester, and upon Saint Hughs day following, being the eighteenth Hugh the
son drawn, hanged and qu^rtered.
day of November, was Sir Hugh the son drawn, hanged and quartered at
Hereford, and his head sent to London, and set upon the Bridge, making good:
They after be themselves deprived of breath,
By her they scorned, the flower of life and death.
The common fame went, that after this Hugh was taken, he would take no manner
of sustenance, and that was the cause he was the sooner put to death, of whom
was made this Distich following. Funis cum lignis, ate, miser ensis and ignis:
Hugo, securus equus, abstulit omne decus.
Rope, gallows, sword, and fire, with a just knife
Took from thee Hugh, thy honor with thy life.
Four days after was the Earl of Arondell put to death and Robert Baldock
the Chancellor being committed to Newgate, dyed miserably Baldock the
Chancellor dies in Newgate.
in prison: then the Queen with the Prince her son with the rest of the Lords,
were with great joy the fourteenth day of December, received at London, and
thence conveyed to Westminster, where a Parliament was called, the effect
whereof expect in the following Chapter.

CHAP. 21.
The deposing of Edward the second: his repentance, his death: His son Edward
made King. A Prophecy of his Reign. His great victory over the Scots, with
the taking of Barwicke. His famous victory at Sea over the French: He lays
claim to the Crown of France: instituteth the Order of the Garter. His
victory at Cressie. His taking of Calice, etc.

FRom this Parliament were Messengers sent to the King, then prisoner in
Kenelworth Castle, three Bishops, three Earls, two Abbots, two Barons, two
Judges, with Sir William Trussell, Procurator of the Parliament, to depose him
of all Kingly dignity, who the five and twentieth of January, in the presence
of the aforesaid Lords, from the body of the whole House delivered unto him
these words following.

I William Trussell, in the name of all men of King Edward deposed from all
Kingly power.
this Land of England, (procurator of this Parliament) resign to thee Edward,
the homage that was sometimes made to thee, and from this time forth, deprive
thee of all Kingly power, and I shall never be attendant on thee as King after
this time. And thus was Edward the second deposed (and his son Edward made
King) when he had reigned full eighteen years six months and odd days,
who during his imprisonment, first, at Kenelworth, and after at Barckley Castle
grew greatly repentant of his former course of life, finding at length what it
Edward greatly repentant.
was to be misled by upstarts and people of mean condition: many of whose
penitential fancies are still extant. And amongst the rest this following.
Most blessed Jesus,
Root of all virtue,
Grant I may thee sue,
In all humility;
Sen thou for our good
List to shed thy blood
And stretch thee on the Rood
For our iniquity:
I thee beseech,
Most wholesome leech,
That thou will seech
For me such grace,
That when my body vile
My soul shall exile,
Thou bring in short while,
It in rest and peace.
Edward the third of that name, son of Edward the second, and Philip sole
daughter of Philip Edward the third made King.
the Fair, at fifteen years of age began his Reign (his father yet living)
the six and twentieth of January, in the end of the year of Grace one thousand
three hundred and twenty six, and was crowned at Westminster, upon the day of
the Purification of our Lady next ensuing, at what time the earth yielded
plenty, the Air temper, the Sea quietness, and the Church peace: he
confirmed the Liberties and Franchises of London, and gave Southwarke to be
under the Lord Majors rule and government. Of whose Reign it was thus
predicted. The spirits of many Lions shall conspire,
To make one (by infusion) so entire:
He by his mighty courage shall restore
What his sire lost, and Grandsire won before:
Neptune his Navall triumphs shall advance.
His Coat he quarters with the Flower of France,
And after mauger the Canicular Tyke,
Tweed shall he pass and win again the Wyke.
A numerous issue shall his Lioness bring,
Black shall the first be, and though never King,
Yet shall he Kings captive, but ere mature,
Dye must this brave Whelp of a Calenture,
And then behind him shall he leave a Kid
To undo all, both sire and grandsire did.
The effect of all these will succeed in their order: in the first year of
this Kings Reign, the late King Edward was miserably slain, and put to a most
cruel death by the means of Sir Roger The death of K. Edward.
Mortimer, who notwithstanding in the Parliament after was made Earl of March:
the same year the four and twentieth of January, the young King married the
Lady Philip, daughter to the Earl of Henault, in the City of York, A
Parliament held at Northampton.
and soon after called a Parliament at Northampton, to which by the means of
Sir Roger Mortimer and the old Queen, an unprofitable and dishonorable peace
was made with the Scots, who caused the King to release them of all fealty and
homage, and delivered up to them all the old Writings sealed by their Kings and
chief Lords of their Land, with all Charters and Patents, and many rich
Jewels, which had before been won from them by the Kings of England, amongst
which the black Cross of Scotland, is especially named, and the year
following, David the son of Robert le Bruce, King of Scots, married Jane sister
to the King of England, whom they after to the derision of the English called,
Jane make peace, and amongst other The Scots taunt the English.
taunting Songs made of our Nation, this was one. Long beards heartlesse,
Painted bodies witless:
Gay coats graceless,
Makes England thriftlesse.
But these merry and jigging tunes were turned to their most lamentable
Aymee's, within few months after.

During the Kings minority all the affairs of the Realm were managed by Sir
Roger Mortimer The pride of Sir Roger Mortimer.
and the Mother Queen, And the great persons appointed to that purpose were
vilified, and not set by: which Sir Roger in imitation of K. Arthur, was said
to keep a round Table, to which many noble Knights belonged, to his infinite
cost and expense. But howsoever in the Articles objected by the Parliament
against Mortimer.
third year of the King, the said Sir Roger was surprised in Nottingham
Castle, though the keys were day and night in his own keeping, and sent to
the Tower, who was accused of the Lords of the Parliament, of these particulars
following, first of the bloody murder of Edward of Carnarvan in Berkley Castle,
secondly, that he had confederated with the Scots against the honor of the
King; thirdly, that he had received great sums of money from Sir James
Douglas Captain of the Scots, delivering unto him the Charter called Ragman,
to the Scots great advantage, and impoverishing of England: Fourthly, that he
had ingrost into his hands much of the Kings treasure, which he had riotously
wasted to his own use, by which means the King was forced to borrow of his
friends: fifthly, that he was more private and familiar with Queen Isabel the
Kings Mother, then was to Gods pleasure and the Kings honor: of which Articles
being convicted, he was by authority of the said Parliament judged to death,
and upon Saint Andrews Eve following at London, drawn and hanged.

In his fourth year about the beginning of August, Sir Edward Baliol, the
son of Sir John The death of Mortimer.
Baliol, sometime King of Scots, obtained such favor of King Edward, that with
the aid of Sir Henry Beaumont, Sir David Stocley, Sir Iefferey Mowbray, and
two thousand Englishmen, they entered Scotland by Sea, where drew to them such
multitude, that in short time, Sir Edward was Lord of a great Host: and kept
his way till he came to a place called Gladismore, (or as some write)
Crakismore, where he was encountered with the power of Scotland, where betwixt
them was fought a sharp and cruel Sr. Edward Balioll crowned K. of Scots
battle, in which a great multitude of the Natives was slain, by reason
whereof he was crowned King at the Town of Stone shortly after, and met with
the King at New Castle, where Edward received of him fealty and homage for the
Crown of Scotland: but soon after the Scots laid plots against his life,
which he narrowly escaped, being forced to fly from place to place, and hide
himself, which King Edward hearing, with a strong army pierced K. Edward of
England besieges Barwick.
the Realm of Scotland, and laid siege to the Town of Barwick.

Upon the nineteenth of July, the Scots with a mighty power made thither, with
purpose to remove the siege, whom King Edward met, and encountered on Halidon
Hill, giving them battle, over whom he had a triumphant victory, insomuch
that he slew of them seven Earls, nine hundred Knights and Bannerets, four
hundred The famous battle at Hallidowne Hill.
Esquires, and of the common people, two and thirty thousand, in which battle
were slain of the English, but 15 persons, after which glorious victory the
Captain of Barwick the morrow following, being Saint Margarets day, yielded to
the King both the Town and Castle, which verifies that -- mauger the Canicular
Tyke,
Tweed shall he pass, and set his foot in Wyke.


Tyke is that which the Northern men call a Dog, and by the Canicular Tyke
is meant the Dog-starre: Tweed is the water which parts the two Kingdoms of
England and Scotland, and by Wyke (as is before remembered) meant the Town of
Barwicke, I only capitulate this one battle, (of many) against the Scots,
purposing the like compendiousnesse in his famous victories over the French.

During the dissension betwixt the two Kings of England and France, which by no
mediation could be atton'd, though there were many meetings English ships taken
by the French.
to that purpose, the French King sent a strong Navy to Sea to take our English
Merchants, and encountered with two good ships of England, called the Edward and
the Christopher, and after nine hours fight, in which were slain of both
parties about six hundred men, the two ships were taken, and all the wounded
Englishmen alive cast overboard into the Sea: after King Edward in his
fifteenth year in the month of June, took shipping, and sailed toward
Flanders, where met him Sir Robert Morley, with the North Navy of England, so
that his Fleet consisted of three hundred sail, and at Midsomer upon Saint
John's Eve, he met and fought with the French Navy, which were four hundred
sail, which lay in wait for him ^eere to the Town called Sluice; their chief
Admirals were Sir Hugh Querret, Sir Nicholas Buchet, and Barbe Nore, in English
black beard: The French Admirals.
Betwixt these two Royal Fleets was a strong and bloody fight which continued
for the space of eight hours before it could be distinguished which way the
victory was likely to incline; yet in the end, by Gods mercy, and the manhood
of the King, the French were chaced, and many of their ships burned and taken,
amongst which were the ships of the two Admirals, Querret and Buchet, who
maugre the French were hanged up in their own Vessels, and amongst the rest
were recovered the Edward and the Christopher, manned with the French: in this
battle the King himself was sore wounded in the thigh, and of the French
were slain thirty thousand A glorious Seavictory.
in that one Navall conflict: soon after, (or as some write) a little time
before, by the advice of his confederate Princes, he laid claim to the
Crown of France, as his rightful inheritance, King Edward lays claim to the
Crown of France.
and for the more authority to countenauce it^ he quartered the English Lions
with the French Flower de Lyces, as they remain to this day, so that we see
Neptune his Navall Triumphs did advance,
(and)
He his Coat quarters with the Arms of France.
I am forced to intermit many and diverse conflicts and skirmishes, with winning
of Forts and Castles, Challenges, that past betwixt the two Kings, with the
particular valors and noble Gests of sundry of our Nation, to relate which
would ask a voluminous Tractate, where my confinement is to a mere epitomy of
Chronicle, passing over all accidents saving what are most remarkable, which
brings me to the eighteenth year of his Reign. In which at a Parliament King
Edwards eldest son created Prince of Wales.
held at West minster, his eldest son Edward was created Prince of Wales, and
he in the year following, first instituted the famous and renowned Order of the
Garter, which was solemnized at Windsor, as it is continued to this day. In his
one and twentieth year, he landed in Normandy, The Order of the Garter first
instituted.
and burnt and spoiled all the Country before him, wasting the Province of
Constantine. Then he laid siege to Caan the chief City, and won it, and
amongst other he took there prisoners the Constable of France, and the Kings
Chamberlain, and all the spoil of the City which was held to be inestimable,
and sent to his ships, which was conveyed into England.

He then entered France, and coasted toward Paris, to Vernon, to Poysie, to
Saint German, still wasting as he went. Then he took and made use of all the
Kings Royal Manors and Palaces, and drunk his Wine, and occupied all such
stuff and necessaries as he there found, and after his departing set them on
fire, as Saint German, Mount-joy, Pezzy, etc. In so much that the French King
thinking it a great dishonor, both to him and the whole Nation, that the
English should pierce the heart of his Kingdom unfought with, he therefore
assembled all his prime Chevalry, and met with the English (far inferior to
them in number) near to a town called Cressie, and upon the twenty sixth of
August, was fought betwixt them a sharp and The famous field of Cressy won
by the English.
bloody battle, in which at the end King Edward was the triumphant Victor,
where were at that time slain of the French party, The King of Bohemia, son
to Henry the Emperor the seventh of that name, with the Duke of Loraine, the
Earl of Alonson, brother to the King, Charles Earl of Bloys, the Earls of
Flanders, Sancer, Harcourt, and of Fiennes: with diverse other, to the number of
eight Bishops and Earls, with seventeene Lords of name: and of Bannerets,
Knights and Esquires, more then sixteen hundred, so that their own
Chroniclers report that the flower of France perished in that battle: besides
of the commons, above eight thousand, and the French King with a small company
sore wounded, fled to a Town called Bray, and The French King wounded.
there lay the night following.

Whom King Edward pursued not, being advertised of another great host coming
toward him, and therefore he kept the field, and A second battle.
set watches, and made great fires through the host, and so continued till the
monday following, upon which day early in the morning, appeared to them a new
army of French men, of which they slew more in number than the Saturday before,
and then having given thanks unto God for his great victory, he marches
toward Bulloine, and thence to Calais, to which K. Edward besieges Calais.
he laid siege for the space of a whole year: then came the French King with a
numerous Army to remove him, but before his coming it was Calais won by the
English.
yielded to King Edward, so that he departed thence sad and ashamed. But King
Edward stayed in the town a month, and removed all the old Inhabitants which
were French, and stored it with English, but especially Kentish men, and having
set all things in order, he sailed with great t^iumph into England, and
arrived at London the twenty third day of October, where he was magnificently
received of the Citizens, and so conveyed unto Westminster.

We have hither to spoke only of the father: it follows that some thing should
be said of the son, the unparalled Edward Prince of Wales, Why Prince Edward
was called the Black Prince.
not for his complexion, but for his terror in battle, surnamed the Black
Prince, who whilst his father rested him in Calais, with a puissant host entered
Gascoyne, and made spoil at his pleasure through the whole Country, and with
great riches and many noble prisoners, he retired himself to Bordeaux, and
though the Earls of Armineck and of Foyz, of Poytiers and Cleremont, with James
de Burbon, and many other Knights who had double the number to the Prince, were
in his way, yet passed he from Tholous to Nerbon, and from Nerbon to Bordeaux
without battle, where having reposed himself awhile, and rested his army, he
sent many of his prisoners into England, and there entered the province of
Berray, and therein made sharp war; which King John of France hearing, he
gathered a mighty number of people, and made toward the Prince, who in the
mean season was passed the River of Loyer, and encountered by diverse of the
Nobility of France, betwixt whom was a sharp conflict, but the fortune of the
day fell to the Prince, who slew many of his enemies, P. Edward victorious
against the French.
and took diverse prisoners; as the Lord of Craou and others of note to the
number of fifty four, whom he had sent to safe custody in Bordeaux, and
himself sped to Towers, whither also K. John came against the prince, who took
his way to Poytiers: where we for a while leave him upon his march, etc.

CHAP. 22.
The famous Battle of Poytiers, fought by Edward, surnamed the Black Prince,
in which he took John the French King prisoner: His other victories in France:
His conquest in Spain: The death of the victorious Prince Edward: King Edward
the Thirds death, and Epitaph: Richard the second made King, a prediction of
his Reign: The insurrection of the Commons: The memorable Act of William
Walworth, Lord Major, etc.

WE left Prince Edward upon his march toward Poytiers: in keeping which way a
French Army encountered A second battle against the French.
him, but he chaced their multitude, and besides many slain took of them forty
prisoners: amongst which were the Earl of Sancer, the Earl of Iurigny, the
Lord Chasterlin Master of the Kings palace, and a Knight called Sir Guilliam de
Daneham, whom he also sent to his rendevouz at Bordeaux, and soon after he
lodged him and his Host near Poytiers: so that the Fronts of both Hoasts lay
within a quarter of a mile each of other, betwixt whom the Cardinal of
Pernigvort sent from pope Innocent the sixth labored to make a peace; but
finding his endeavor frustrate, he retired himself to Poityers, to attend the
success of the battle, which was fought upon Monday the nineteenth of
September, in the year of Grace, one thousand The famous battle of Poytiers.
three hundred fifty six, and the sixth year of Ring John: the manner follows.

The Duke of Athenes, with such of the Nobility as were in the Kings Vaward,
about two aclocke in the afternoon set upon the English Host, which was
strongly munified with wood and trees in the manner of a Barricadoe, so that
the French Cavalry, could not approach them; but the shot of the English Archers
was so violent, that it overturned horse and man: and whilst the Duke of
Athenes, with Sir John Cleremont Marshall of France and others, assaulted the
prince and his people on one side, The Duke of Normandy King John's eldest son,
and the Duke of Orleance the Kings brother, set upon him on another part, which
two Dukes were Leaders of two strong Armies. But these The manner of the
battle.
three battails did little harm to the English, for by reason of their arrows
the French were so gauled and wounded, that they fled, to the great dismay and
discomfort of the King, and the rest of his people.

Who then in person came on with his mayn Host: but the English kept
themselves whole without scartering, and received them on the points of their
weapons with such dexterity and courage, that the French were forced to give
back, of which the English taking the advantage, rowted their whole Army: in
which battle Noble men of France slain in the battle.
were slain of men of note, the Duke of Athenes, the Duke of Burbon, Sir John
Cleremont Marshall of France, Sir Henry Camian Banneret, who bore that day, the
Oriflambe (a special relick that the French Kings used in all battles to have
borne before them) the Bishop of Chabous, with diverse others, to the number of
fifty four Bannerets, Knights, and others.

And of prisoners taken in that battle, were John King of France, Philip his
fourth son, John King of France took prisoner.
Sir Jacques of Burbon, Earl of Poitou, and brother to the Duke of Burbon, Sir
John of Artoys, Earl of Ewe, Sir Charles his brother, Earl of Noble men took
prisoners.
Longevile, Sir Giffard Cousin German to the French King, Sir John his son
and heir, William Archbishop of Sense, Sir Simon Melen brother to the Earl
Canlarvive, and Earl of Vandature. The Earls of Dampmartin, of Vendosme, of
Salisbruch, of Moyson, the Martial Denham with others, as Bannerets, Knights,
and men of name, (according to their own Writers) fifteen hundred and above:
from which battle escaped Charles eldest son of King John, and Duke of
Normandy, with the Duke of Anjoy, and few others of name. And King Edward after
due thanks given to Almighty God for his Charles Duke of Normandy escapes from
the battle.
triumphant victory, retired himself to Bordeaux with his Royal prisoners,
where the King and the rest were kept till Easter following.

In the one and thirtieth year of the King, the sixteenth of April, Prince
Edward being eight and twenty years of age, took shipping with his prisoners
at Bordeaux, and the four and twentieth of May, was received with great joy by
the Citizens of London, and thence conveyed to the Kings palace at Westminster,
where the King sitting in his estate Royal, in Westminster Hall, after he had
indulgently entertained the Prince, he was conveyed to his lodging, and the
French King royally conducted to the Savoy, where he lay long after, and in the
Winter following were royal Iusts held in Smithfield, at which were present,
the King of Three Kings present at the Iusts in Smithfield.
England, the French King, the Scotch King (then prisoners) with many noble
persons of all the three Kingdoms, the most part of the strangers being then
prisoners.

Whilst K. John remained in England, which was for the space of 4 years and
odd days, The king of England and the black Prince his son, with their Armies
overrun the greatest part of France, during the time of Charles his Regency
over the kingdom who was king John's eldest son, against whom they had many
memorable victories, spoiling where they list, and sparing what they pleased:
in so much that king Edward The Father and son victorious in ^rance.
made his own conditions ere any peace could be granted: at length the king
was delivered, and royally conveyed into his country, who so well approved of
and liked his entertainment here, that in the thirty seventh year of king
Edward, he returned into England, and at Eltham besides Greenwich, dined with
the king, and in the same afternoon, was royally received by the Citizens, and
conveyed through London to the Savoy, which was upon the twenty fourth of
January: but about the beginning of March following, a grievous sickness took
him, of which he dyed the eight of April following, King John dies at the
Savoy.
whose body was after solemnly conveyedto St. Denis in France, and there
royally interred.

In the fortieth year of the king, one Barthran de Cluicon a Norman, with an
Army of Frenchmen, entered the land of Castile, and warred upon Peter king of
that Country, and within four months chaced him out of his kingdom, and
crowned Henry his bastard brother in his stead, wherefore he was constrained
to fly to Bordeaux, and to demand aid of Prince Edward, who commiserating his
case, as being lawful king, (howsoever of a tyrannous and bloody disposition)
he granted his request, so that he assisted Peter with his English Archers
against the bastard Henry, with his French Spearmen, whose two Armies m^t near
unto a town called Doming, where betwixt them was a l^ng P. Edwards victoryia
Spain.
and cruel fight, but in the end the victory fell to the Prince and Henry with
his whole army were rowted: In which battle were taken Barthran de Claicon,
and Arnold Dodenham Marshall of France, with diverse others as well French as
Britons, and Spaniards, and slain to the number of five thousand of the
enemies, and of the princes Army sixteen hundred, after which he enstated
Peter in his kingdom, who after perfidiously denied to pay the princes army.

For which he was after divinely punished, as also for killing his own wife,
the daughter to the Duke of Burbon; for his Bastard brother Henry, knowing how
he was justly abandoned by the English, having gathered new forces, gave him
battle, in which being taken, his brother commanded his head to be struck
off, which was immediately done: after which, John of The death of Don Peter.
Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, the Kings son, and Edward his brother Earl of
Cambridge, married the two daughters of this Peter late King of Castile: John
espoused Constance the elder, and John a Gaunts title to Spain.
Edward Isabel the younger, by which marriages the two brethren claimed to be
inheritours to the Kingdom of Castile or Spain.

In the one and fiftieth year of the King, upon the eighth of June, being
Trinity Sunday, dyed that renowned soldier, Edward the black Prince in the
palace of Westminster, whose body The death of the black Prince.
was after carried to Canterbury, and there solemnly interred, who in his life
time was much beloved, both of the Commons and the whole kingdom, especially
for removing from the kings person all such as had misled him in his age, by
which the Common Weal was much oppressed: amongst others was the Lord Latimer
noted for principal, and Alice Pierce the Kings Concubine, with Sir Richard
Skory, Alice Pierce the Kings Con^ine.
all which were according to the Commons just complaint, by the Prince removed:
but he was no sooner dead, but the king contrary to his promise before made,
called them again, admitting them to their former Offices, and Honors, and
Alice his prostitute to his wonted grace and favor.

In the two and fiftieth year, the two and twentieth day of June dyed at his
Manor of Sheen, The death of K. Edward the third.
now called Richmond, the royal and most victorious Prince king Edward, the
third of that name, of whom it was truly predicted: The spirits of many Lions
shall conspire
To make one (by infusion) so entire:
He, by his mighty courage shall restore,
What his sire lost and grandsire won before.
As also that of the unparalleld black Prince his son, who died before his
Father. A numerous issue shall his Lioness bring,
Black shall the first be, and though never King,
Yet shall he Kings captive, but ere mature,
Die shall this brave Whelp of a Calenture,
And then behind him shall he leave a Kid
To undo all both sire and grandsire did.


By the Kid is intended the Prince Richard his son, who succeeded his
grandfather in the Throne, and therefore so called because of his condition, so
suiting with the nature of his predecessor Edward the second, whom the prophet
for his dissoluteness of life, and inability to manage a State, called a Goat,
not a Lion: but to come to the story, King Edward left behind him four sons,
Lionel Duke of K. Edwards Royal Issue.
Clarence, John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, Edward of Langley Duke of York,
and Thomas of Woodstock Earl of Cambridge, taking their sirnames from the
places where they had their birth, by whom, and the rest of the Nobility, his
body was conveyed from Richmond to Westminster, and there solemnly and
sumptuously interred, over whose Tomb hung this inscription. Hic decus
Anglorum, flos Regum praeteritorum,
Forma futurorum: Rex clemens, pax populorum: His Epitaph.

Tertius Edwardus, regni complens Inbilaeum,
Invictus pardus, pollens bellis Machabaeum.
Which for the better understanding of the vulgar, I give you thus paraphrased
in English. Here lies our honor, flower of Kings forepast:
Pattern to future making peace to last,
Edward the third, who reigned a jubilee,
In strength a pard: valor a Machabee.


Richard the second of that name, and son of Edward, surnamed the black
prince, eldest Richard the second of that ^ame made King.
son to Edward the third, a child of the age of eleven years, began his
Reign over the Realm of England, the two and twentieth of June, in the year
of Grace, one thousand twenty seven, and upon the fifteenth of July, being the
day of Saint Swithen ensuing, he was crowned at Westminster: in the first year
of whose Reign about April, landed in Kent, Anne the Daughter of Charles the
fourth, Emperor of that name, late dead, and sister to Wenceslaus then
Emperor, who by the Major and Citizens of London was honorably met upon
Black Heath, and with great triumph conveyed unto Westminster, and His Royal
marriage.
the eight day of May, solemnly espoused to King Richard, of whom it is thus
predicted. Sport shall the young Kid in his youth, and play A prediction of his
Reign.

Against whom shall rise the Hedg-hog and the Gray:
And then the hobnayle and the clowted shoone,
Shall the Kids glory, strive to eclipse at noone:
But by a Daulphin (of the City loved)
That black disastrous cloud shall be removed,
And Phoebus in his wonted or be shine clear,
Who when he shall in his full strength appear,
Four princely Lions were to him allyde,
Gall shall he with his horns in his great pride.
At length a Fox clad in a skin of gold,
Shall snatch the Kid, from midst of all his fold.


The year before (which was the fourth of The insurrection of the Commons.
his Reign) was a great insurrection of the Commons throughout the Land,
especially in Kent and Essex: the reason was, because in the third year at a
parliament held at Westminster, there was granted to the king a Groat of every
person male or female, above the age of fourteen years. The chief Captains
and Leaders of the The Captains of the Rebels.
Rebels Army were Jack Straw, William Wawe, Wat Tyler, Jack Shepherd, Tom
Miller, and Hob Carter, these gathered great multitudes of the Commons, and
assembled themselves upon Blackheath, three miles from London, and upon the
eleventh of June entered the Tower of London where the King was then lodged, and
took They take the Tower.
thence perforce Doctor Sudbury, Archbishop of Canterbury, Robert Hales prior
of Saint John's, and a white Friar Confessor to the King, whom with a mighty
acclamation and voice they drew to the Tower Hill, and there cut off their
heads.

Then by boats and barges they returned into Southwarke, and robbed all
strangers of what Their robberies in Southwarke. In Westminster.
Nation soever, thence they went to Westminster, and took thence all the
Sanctuary men, and came unto the Savoy, which was the Duke of In the Strand.
Lancasters house, and first pilladge it, and after set it on fire, and then to
the palace of Sr. John near Clerkenwell, and spoiled it. After they searched
the Temples and Innes of Court, making havoc of all, burning their Law books,
The Innes of Court.
and killing as many Lawyers and Questmongers as they might find: that done,
they went to St. Martins le Grand, releasing there all that had Their mighty
insolences.
there took Sanctuary, with the prisoners of Newgate, Ludgate, and the two
Counters, tearing their Registers and Books. The like they did to the Kings
Bench and Marshalses in Southwarke, and moreover they did through the whole City
of London, according to their own wills and pleasures.

When Jack Straw who was prime Commander above the rest, had executed all these
The pride of the Captain.
insolences, and saw no resistance against him, he was suddenly so tumoured
with pride, that he thought no man worthy to be his peer, in so much that he
rode again to the Tower, where he found the King but weakly attended, and in a
manner, compeld him to ride through diverse parts and streets of the City, and
so conveyed him into Smithfield, where in the Kings presence, (to whom he did
small or no reverence at all) he caused a proclamation to be made, though
using his Majesty's name, yet to his own wicked end and purpose, which William
Walworth Fishmonger, and then Lord Major seeing, and not able to endure, his so
great presumption and insolency, he stepped toward, and first with a blow on the
head stounded him with his Mace, and after with a short Dagger which he wore by
his side, he wounded him to death, then with a Sword struck off his The death
of Jack Straw.
head, and lifted it upon the point of a Spear, and showing it to the Rebels,
Cried out alowd, King Richard, God save King Richard, who when they saw their
chief Captain slain, they fled in great disorder, of which many were taken
and some slain, and the remnant were chaced, so that both City and Suburbs
were voided of them that night, being the fifteenth The Rebels dispersed.
of June, making good what was predicted. Sport shall the young Kid in his
youth and play,
Against whom shall rise the Hedghog and the gray,
And then the hobnail and the clowted shcon
Shall the suns glory strive to eclipse at noon,
But by a Daulphin (of the City loved)
This black disastrous cloudshall be removd, etc
By the young Kid is intended the wanton King, by the Hedghog, and the gray
beasts frequent in the Country, Jack Straw, VVat Tyler, and the rest of the
Captains and Commons: by the Daulphin, William VValworth, who was free of the
Fishmongers, and they give the Daulphin in their Escutchion, etc.

CHAP. 23.
The Duke of Gloucester by a Parliament reformeth the Common wealth. John of
Gaunt claymes his title in Spain, King Richard marries the French Kings
Daughter: Difference betwixt the King and Gloucester. His murder in Calice: The
murmur of the Commons against the present government: The pride of the Dukes
Court: The Dukes of Hereford and Norfolk banished: King Richard deposed, and
Henry Duke of Hereford and Lancaster made King.

WHen the King saw the great manhood and courage of the Lord Major The Lord
Major and diverse Aldermen Knighted by the King.
and his Brethren, the Aldermen his assistants, he in his own person Knighted
the said William Walworth, with Nicholas Bremble, John Philpot, Nicholas
Twiford, Robert Laundor, and Robert Gayton Alderman: and moreover, in the
memory of that Noble Act, added to the Arms of the City the bloody Dagger, as
it remains to this day: In the eleventh year of this King, Thomas of
Woodstocke Duke of Gloucester, and Uncle to the King; the Earl of Arundell,
with the Earls of Warwick, Darby and Nottingham, taking into their
consideration, how much the land was misgoverned, and his Majesty mislead by
some Sycophants near about him, they met in counsel at a place A Parliament
to rectify the Commonweal.
called Radecockbridg, and having assembled a strong power came to London, and
there caused the King to call a Parliament, whereof hearing Alexander Nevell
Archbishop of York, Lionel Vere Marquess of Divelin, Michael de la Poole
Earl of Suffolk, and Chancellor of England, fearing the censure of that high
Court ^ed the Land, and dyed in foreign Countries: Then the King by counsel
of the foresaid Lords caused to be apprehended Sir Robert Tresilian chief
Justice of England, Sir Nicholas Brembre, late Major of the City, Sir John
Salisbury, of the Persons judged to death.
Kings Household, Sir John Beauchampe Steward of the House, Sir Simon Burleigh,
Sir Thomas Bernes, Sir Robert Belknap, with one John Vske, Sergeant at Arms,
all which by the foresaid Parliament, were convict of Treason and put to death,
some at Tyburne, some at Towerhill, and all such as fled with those that
forsook the land, by the authority of that high Court, banished for ever.

In the thirteenth year, John a Gaunt Duke John a Gaunt clayms his title in
Spain.
of Lancaster, with a strong army, sailed into Spain, to claim the Kingdom
in right of Lady Constance his wife, the daughter of Don Peter, with whom
joined the King of Portugal with his forces, so that of necessity the King of
Spain was forced to treat with the Duke of peace and amity, the conditions
were, that the King of Spain should marry the Dukes eldest daughter, named
Constance, and moreover should give unto the said Duke, to recompense the
charges of his war, so many wedges of gold as should load eight Chariots; and
moreover during the lives of the said Duke and his wife, he should at his
proper cost and charges deliver unto the Honorable conditions of peace.
Dukes Assigns yearly ten thousand Marks of gold, within the town of Bayon,
which conditions being ratified, and assurance given for the performance
thereof, the Duke departed with the King of Portugal, to whom shortly after
he married his second daughter the Lady Anne, so that the elder and the
younger were made the two Queens of Spain and Portugal.

King Richards first wife being dead, after he K. Richards second marriage.
married Isabel the daughter of Charles the sixth K. of France, who was but 8.
years of age, at whose espousalls in the French kings Court, many rich
interchangable gifts passed betwixt them, as first the king of England gave the
French king a Basin of gold and Ewer, who returned him three standing Cups of
gold with covers, and a Enterchangeable gifts betwixt the two Kings.
ship of Gold garnished with pearl and stones: at a second meeting, Richard
gave him a curious O^ch set with rich stones, valued at five hundred Marks:
then the French King gave him two Flagons of gold, and a Tablet of gold set
with Diamonds, and in it the picture of St. Michael, a Tablet of gold with a
Crucifixe, another with the image of the Trinity, and a fourth with the image
of Saint George, all of them set with stones of great splendour, Richard then
presented him with a Belt or Bauldricke, set with great Diamonds, Rubies, and
Emeraulds, which for the riches thereof, the King wore upon him so often as
they met together: many other presents past betwixt them, and a full peace was
concluded between them for thirty years, Peace concluded betwixt England and
France.
and amongst other things King Richard delivered up Breast, which had been long
held by the English.

The year after in the Month of February, the King held a magnificent Feast
at Westminster Hall, whither pressed diverse Soldiers lately discharged from
Breast, whose minds when the Duke of Gloucester the Kings Uncle understood, he
went to his Majesty and said, Sir do you take notice of you Soldiers? who
asked him again what they were? The Duke replied, these be your subjects and
soldiers cashiered from Breast, who have done you good service, and have now no
means to live upon, who have been ill paid, and now are worse rewarded: To
whom the King answered, it was my will they should have been well paid, but if
ought have failed therein, let them petition to our Treasurer: at length the
Duke said, but it savoureth of small discretion to deliver up a strong Fort
with ease, which was got with great difficulty by your Progenitors: The Duke of
Glosters bold replye to the King.
at which the King changed countenance, and said, Uncle how spoke you these
words? which the Duke with great vehemence uttered again: whereat the King
being more moved, replied: Think you I be a Merchant or fool to sell my
Land? by St. John Baptist nay, etc. For these words thus uttered on both sides
great ran^or was kindled betwixt the King and Duke, which was never
extinguished, till by the consent of the K. his uncle was basely murdered.

For the Duke purposing to remove some who were potent about the king, called
to him A second purpose for reformation.
the Earls of Warwick, of Arundel, and of Nottingham, who was Marshall of
England, and of the Clergy the Archbishop of Canterbury, with the two Abbots
of St. Albans and Westminster, and these were solemnly sworn to supplant from
their authority the Duke of Lancaster, the Duke of York, with others
prejudicial to the good of the kingdom. But Nottingham contrary to his oath,
revealed all to the king; A persidious act in the Earl of Notingham
who presently, whilst the other thought themselves secure, called another
Council, in which it was decreed, that the Earls of Arundell and Warwick
should be censured and brought to the King, who in person arrested his Uncle
Sir Thomas of Woodstock, (some say at Plashy in Essex, others at Greenwitch)
in the night time, and taking him in his bed, first sent him to the Tower, and
thence had him secretly conveyghed to Callis, where he was pireously murdered.
After, The murder of the Duke of Gloucester.
the 2 Earls of Arundel and Warwick were judged and executed: After was called
a parliament, in which diverse of the Nobility had more honorable titles
conferred upon them: And other upstarts neither of birth nor quality, were
advanced to office and honor, in which parliament also, many true heirs were
dis-inherited, etc.

For which the people greatly murmured against the King and his Council,
pretending that the revenues of the Crown were wasted The rumor of the
Commons, and the causes thereof.
upon unworthy persons: for which diverse exactions were put upon the Commons:
that the chief rulers about the King were of low birth, and little reputation;
and men of honor kept out of office and favor; that the Duke of Gloucester was
secretly murdered without process of Law; and the Earls of Arnndel and
Warwick put to death contrary to the Kings own proclamation, with diverse
others, to the number of eight and thirty several Articles, all which at his
deposing were publicly protested against him.

Harding the Chronologer reports, that King Richard was prodigal, ambitious,
and luxurious, The estate of the Kings Court.
to whose Court resorted at their pleasures ten thousand persons, pretending
business there; that in his kitchen were three hundred Serviters, and in every
office to the like number: of Ladies, Chamberers, and Landresses, three
hundred, who exceeded in costly and sump^uous apparel, and far above their
degrees: The very grooms and yeomen were clothed in silk, satin, and
damask, scarlet, imbroydery, The great pride of the court.
gold chains and Gold smiths work were then common: such was the pride then
in the Court: It was also commonly voyc'd that he had let to farm the
revenues of the Crown to Bushy, Baggot and Green, which caused the Nobility
also with the Commons to grudge against the King and his government. And this
year being the one and twentieth of his reign, died John a Gaunt, the Duke of
Lancaster, at The death of John a Gaunt Duke of Lancaster.
the Bishop of Elyes Palace in Holborne, and was buried on the North side of
the Quire in Paul's, where his Tomb remains to this day.

This year also fell a great difference betwixt Differences betwixt the two
Dukes of Hereford and Norffolke.
the two Dukes of Hereford (who was son to John a Gaunt) and the Duke of
Norfolk, the cause was (after some Writers) that the two Dukes riding from the
Parliament, the Duke Norfolk, said unto the other: Sir, you see how unstedfast
the King is in his word, and how shamefully he puts his Kinsmen to death,
exiling some and imprisoning others, and no doubt, what has happened to them,
may in time fall upon us, etc. of which words the Duke of Hereford, accused him
unto the King, which the one affirming, the other denying, a day of battle
was appointed them at Coventry, upon the eleventh of September, where the King
and the greatest part of the Nobility were present: where both appearing in the
Lists, and ready for the Combat, the King threw down his warder, and staid the
fight, and forthwith banished The two Dukes banished the Realm.
the Duke of Hereford for ten years, and the Duke of Norfolk for ever: upon
which sentence, Hereford sailed into Britain: and Norfolk, after passing
diverse Countries, lastly, came to Venice, and there ended his life.

In his two and twentieth year, the common fame ran, that he had farmed the
Realm of England to Sir William Scroop Earl of Wilsthire, and Treasurer, and
to Sir John Bushy, Sir John Bagot, and Sir Henry Green, and in the month of
April, the King with a potent Host sailed into Ireland, leaving for his
Pro-rex in England, The Kings journey into Ireland.
his Uncle Edmund Langley, Duke of York. In which Voyage he prospered well,
and quieted the realm to his pleasure, and whether it were for some noble act
done, or out of his grace and bounty (I cannot say) he there Knighted Henry
son to the Duke of Hereford (then in exile) which Henry after his Fathers
death was crowned King of England by the name of Henry the first.

Whilst King Richard was thus busied in Ireland, the Duke of Hereford, late
banished with the Archbishop of Canterbury who had before left the Realm, and
Thomas son to the Earl of Arondell late beheaded, these with others being a
small company in number landed at Ravenspurre, in the North, and under pretense
of The Duke of Hereford lan^s at Ravenspurre.
laying claim to the Dukedom of Lancaster, due to him by John of Gaunt his
Father deceased, he raised the people as he went, to whom multitudes
assembled, being weary with the misgovernment of King Richard: who hearing how
the estate in England then stood, made speedy return from Ireland, and in the
beginning of September, landed in Milford Haven, and sped him thence to
Flint-castle in Wales, intending thither to gather more strength to oppose The
King lands in Wales.
the Dukes proceedings.

Who in the interim proclayming himself Duke of Lancaster, in the right of his
Father John a Gaunt, came to Bristow, where without resistance, he seized upon
Sir William Scroope Earl of Wiltshire and Treasurer of England, Sir John Bushy
and Sir Henry Green, with Sir The Earl of Wiltshire with others executed.
John Bagot, who escaped and fled into Ireland, but the other he there judged
and put to execution, which the King (being then in Flint Castle) hearing, he
much doubted his safety, and so did all these who were then about him,
therefore Sir Thomas Percy Earl of Worcester, and Steward of the Kings
Household contrary to his Allegiance, broke his white Staff openly in the Ha^l,
willing every on^ to shift for himself, by reason of which the King was
forsaken of all his people, and soon after surprised and presented The King
taken and presented to the Duke.
to the Duke, who put him under safe keeping, and himself hasted toward
London.

Who coming near to the City, sent the The hate of the Commons to the King.
King secretly to the Tower, of which some ill disposed persons ambusht him in
the way, and would have slain him because of his former misgovernment; but the
Citizens informed of their malicious purpose, rescued him from their fury: then
the Duke coming to London, (by consent of the King) a Parliament was begun the
thirteenth of September. In which many accusations and Articles concerning his
misruling the Realm, to the number of eight and thirty the King was charged
with: and for which the King subscribing (willing as it was then given out to
his own deposement, he was deprived from all Kingly Majesty: the manner of
the proceedings therein were too long to relate) which sentence being published
and openly read in Parliament, Henry Duke of Hereford, and now of King Richard
deposed.
Lancaster, rising from the place where he before sat, and standing where all
might behold him: first, making the sign of the Cross upon his forehead, and
after on his breast (silence being commanded) he spoke as follows: In the name
of the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, I Henry of Lancaster, Claim the
Realm of England, with the Crown, and all the appurtenances thereto
belonging, as I am rightly descended from the right Line of the blood coming
from that good Lord K. Henry the third, and through the right that God of his
grace has sent me, with the help of my kindred and friends to recover the same,
which was in point to be undone, for default of good governance and justice,
etc.

Which having spoken, he sat down in his The Duke of Here^ord claymes the
Crown.
place: then every one hearing his claim, spoke what he thought; and after
some distance of time, the Archbishop of Canterbury, knowing the minds of
Lords, stood up, and asked the Commons if they would assent with the Nobility
in their election, which they thought to be needful, and for the good of the
Kingdom: to which, with an unanimous voice they said, yea, yea: after which
the Archbishop approaching the Duke, uttered some words to him in private: which
done he arose, and taking him by the hand, led him unto the Kings Seat, and
placed him therein; after made a long Oration to that noble Assembly, the
effect whereof was to prove the Dukes Title to the Crown, and to justify the
deposing of the King, verifying what was before predicted of him. Four
Princely Lions were to him allide,
Gall shall be with his horns in his great pride.
At length a Fox clad in skin of gold,
Shall snatch the Kid, from midst of all his fold.
By the four Lions are figured his four Princely Uncles sons to Edward the
third, whom he severally injured, preferring men raised from nothing, to be
eminent above them both in honor and office: and by the Fox Henry of Balwarke,
who clothed himself with all the golden ornament of Regal Majesty, and
snatched him from the midst of all the fold, that was from amongst his own
subjects and people, and after caused him to be put to a violent and cruel
death.

CHAP. 24.
The Coronation of Edward the fourth, with his great Feast held in Westminster
Hall. A great Conspiracy intended against him, but prevented, the lamentable
murder of King Richard the second in Pomfret Castle, by Sir Pierce of Exton,
his valor at his death. His Epitaph. The great riches found in his treasury: A
prosecution of sundry passages in the Reign of King Henry. He prepares a
journey for the Holy land, but is prevented by death.

HEnry the fourth of that name and son to John a Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster,
took possession of the whole Dominion of England, upon the last day of
September, in the year of Grace one thousand three hundred fourscore and
nineteen: after which he made new Officers clean through the Kingdom, One
and forty Knights of the Bath made.
and then gave order for his Coronation, and the Eve before he in the Tower
made 41 knights of the Bath, of which three were his own sons, and three
Earls, and five Lords, etc. Then the morrow after being Monday the thirteenth
of October, he was crowned at Westminster, King Henry's Coronation.
by the Archbishop of Canterbury, after which solemnity ended, a great and
sumptuous feast was held in the great Hall, where the king being sat in the
midst of the table, the Archbishop The manner of his great feast in
Westminster Hall.
of Canterbury, with three other Prelates, were placed at the right hand of the
same table, and on the left hand the Archbishop of York, with four other of
the Clergy: Henry the kings eldest son stood by his Father on his right hand
with a sword poyntlesse; and the Earl of Northumberland new made Lord
Constable with a poynted sword on his left hand, both swords being held
upright: Before the king stood all dinner time, the dukes of Aumerl, of Surry,
and of Exceter, with two other Earls, and the Earl of Westmerland, late made
Marshall, roved about the Hall, with many Tip Staves to make room, that the
Officers with more ease might serve the Tables.

Of which, the chief upon the right side of the hall was begun by the Barons
of the Cinque ports: and at the Table next the Cupboord upon the left hand,
sat the Lord Major, and the Aldermen of London, which Major being Drew
Barendine Goldsmith, was presented (according to the custom) with a cup of
gold: after the second course came in, Sir Thomas Dimocke, armed at all points,
and sitting upon a The Kings Champion.
good Steed road to the higher part of the Hall, and before the King caused a
Herald to make Proclamation, that whosoever would affirm King Henry was not
lawful inheritour to the Crown and Kingdom of England, he was there ready to
wage battle against him, which Proclamation he caused to be made after in
three other parts of the Hall, in French and English, with many more
observances at such solemnities exercised and done, which feast being ended,
the morrow after being tuesday, the parliament was again begun: of this King
and his reign it was thus predicted. The Fox being eathed according to his
mind,
In the Kids den, a Magazine shall find, The prophecy of his reign.

Yet all that treasure can his life not save,
But rather bring him to a timelesse grave:
Mean time shall study many a forest beast,
By a new way to kill the King in jest:
But crafty Rainold shall the plot prevent,
And turn it all to their own detriment
Wales and the north against him both shall rise,
But he, who still was politic and wise,
Shall quell their rage: much trouble he will endure,
And after, when he thinks himself secure,
Hoping to wash the Kids blood from his hand,
Purpose a voyage to the Holy Land,
But fail: Yet in Jerusalem shall dye,
Deluded by a doubtful augury.


In the former parliament were many Challenges of the peers one against the
other, which came to none effect; but onething was there confirmed, What was
done in the Parliament.
that whosoever had hand in the good Duke of Glosters death should dye as
traitors: For which diverse found guilty after suffered, moreover, sundry acts
made in the time of Richards reign, were disannulled and made void, and others
held more profitable for the kingdoms good and Commonweals, enacted in their
stead.

Then was King Richard removed from the Tower, and thence conveyed to Leedes,
and King Richard removed to Pomphret.
after to the Castle of Pomphret: there was provision made for the King to keep
his Christmas at Windsor, in which interim the Dukes of Amerle, of Surrey, and
of Exeter, with the Earls of Salisbury and of Gloucester, with others of their
affinity, Lords, Knights, and Esquires, made great provision for a Mask to be
presented before the King upon Twelfth night, which grew near, and all things
were in readiness for the performance thereof: But that day in the Morning, A
conspiracy of the Lords against King Henry.
came secretly unto the King the Duke of Aumerle, and discovered unto him, that
he with the foresaid Lords and gentlemen had made a solemn conjuration to kill
him in the said Mask, therefore advised him to provide for his safety: upon
which notice given, the King departed privately from Windsor, and came that
night to London: upon which the Lords finding their plot to be discovered, they
fled westward: but the King caused speedy pursuit after them: so that the Duke
of Surry, and the Earl of Salisbury, were taken at Ciceter, Sir Thomas Blunt,
Sir Benet Saly, and Thomas Wintercell at Oxford, Sir John Holland Duke of
Exeter at Pitwell in Essex, and diverse others in several places; the Noble men
were beheaded, the rest drawn and quartered; but all of their Heads set upon
the Bridge gate at London, approving the premises. Mean time shall study many
a forest beast,
By a new way to kill the Fox in jest:
But crafty Rainold shall the plot prevent,
And turn it all to their own detriment.


The King having well considered of this great conspiracy, and that they
intended by his death to restore the imprisoned King to his diadem, The Foxes
policy.
he bethought himself that he could live in no safety whilst the other was
breathing, and therefore he determined of his death, and to that purpose called
unto him one Sir Pierce of Exton to see his will executed, who presently
poasted to Pomphret, and with eight more well armed entered the Castle, and
violently assaulted him with their Polaxes and Halberds in his Chamber, who
apprehending their purpose, and seeing his own present danger, most valiantly
wrested one of their weapons from him, with which he manfully acquitted
himself, and slew four of the eight before he himself fell; but at the last
he was basely wounded to death by the hand of Sir Pierce of Exton, whose body
was after laid in the Minster at Pomphret to the public view, that all men
might be satisfied of his The Death of K. R^chard.
death, and was after brought up to London, and exposed to all eyes in Paul's,
least any man should after pretend to lay any plots for his liberty.

And now King Henry being in peaceable and quiet possession of the Kingdoms,
thought it time to rifle his predecessors Coffers, in whose Treasury he found
in ready Coin three hundred thousand pound sterling, besides Plate, What King
Richards treasure amounted to at his death.
Jewels, and rich Vessels, as much (if not more) in value: Besides in his
Treasurers hands he found so many gold Noble, and other sums, that all of
them put together amounted to seven hundred thousand pounds sterling: yet could
not all this sum afford him a better funeral than in the poor Friery of
Langley, which after by Henry the Kings son in the first year of his reign
was removed thence, and with great solemnity interred amongst the Kings in the
Chapel of Westminster: All this process verifying the former prediction. The
Fox being earth't according to his mind,
In the Kids den, a Magazin shall find:
Yet all that treasure can his life not save,
But rather bring him to a timelesse grave.


Over his Tomb in the Chapel the King caused these Verses following to be
inscribed. Prudens and mundus, Ricardus jure secundus, K. Richards Epitaph.

Perfatum victus jacet hic sub marmore pictus,
Verus sermon suit and plenus ratione,
Corpore procerus, animo prudens ut Homerus.
Ecclesiam favit, elatos suppeditavit,
Quemvis prostravit, regalia qui violavit.
Thus Englished: Wise and clean Richard, second of that name,
Conquered by fate, lies in this Marble frame.
True in his speech: whose reason did surpass:
Of feature tall, and wise as Homer was:
The Church he favored, he the proudsubdude,
Quelling all such as Majesty pursude.
Concerning which Epitaph one of our English Chronologers, seeing how it
savoured more of flattery then truth, thus expressed himself. But yet, alas,
though this meeter or rhyme,
Thus death embelisht this Noble Princes fame,
And that some Clerk which favored him sometime
List, by his coming, thus to enhance his name,
Yet by his story appears in him much blame.
Wherefore to Princes is surest memory,
Their lives to express in virtuous constancy.


In the second year of King Henry's Reign, The rebellion of Owen Glendour.
Owen Glendour rebelled in Wales, against whom the King entered the Country
with a strong army, but at the Kings coming he fled up to the Mountains whom
the King for the endangering his Host, durst not follow, but returned without
deeming any thing worthy note. In the year following Sir Thomas Percy Earl of
Worcester, and Sir Henry Piercy, son and heir to the Earl of
Northumberland, gathered The battle at Shrewsbury.
a great power, and upon the one and twentieth day of July, met with the King
and his army, near unto Shrewsbury, betwixt whom was fought a cruel and
bloody battle, but at length the King was victor: in which fight Thomas Percy
Earl of Worcester was taken, and his Nephew, Sir Henry with many a brave
Northern man was slain. And upon the Kings part, the Prince was wounded in
the head, and the Earl of Stafford with many others slain. It was observed
that in this battle father fought against son, son the father, brother the
brother, and uncle the nephew: the twenty fifth of July following, was Sir
Thomas Percy beheaded at Shrewsbury, and in August after, the Duchess of
Britain landeth at Flamoth in Cornwall, K. Henry's second marriage with the
Duchess of Britain.
and from thence conveyed to Winchester, where she was solemnly espoused to
King Henry.

Soon after Richard Scroop Archbishop of York, with the Lord Mowbray Marshall
of England, with others to them allied, made a new insurrection against the
King, with purpose A n^ insurrection.
to supplant them, to whom the King gave battle on this side York, where
after some loss on both sides, the King had the better of the day, the
Archbishop and the Martial being both taken in the field, and soon after
beheaded: in that Kings Reign was the Conduit builded in Cornwall, as it now
stands. The Market of the Stocks at the lower end of Cheapside, and the Guild
hall of London new edified, and of a Sumptuous buildings during this kings
Reign.
small cottage and ruinous and decayed house made such a goodly structure, as
it appears to this day. Moreover, the famous and stately Bridge of Rochester,
with the Chapel at the foot of the said Bridge was fully perfited and
finished, at the sole charge and cost of Sir Robert Knolls who in the time of
Edward the third Sir Robert Knolls.
had achieved many brave and memorable victories in France and Britain, who
also re-edified the body of the White Friars Church in Fleetstreet, to which
place he left many good Legacies, and there lies buried: the foundation of
which place was first laid by the Lord Gray Cotner: but to carry our prediction
along with the premises, to prove that they differ not in the least
circumstance; Wales and the North, against him both shall rise,
But he who still was politic and wise,
Shall quell their rage, etc.
We read also of diverse justs and marti^ll exercises Diverse tournaments and
justs performed in Smithfield betwixt Englishmen and strangers.
performed in Smithfield, in the presence of the King, the Nobility and Ladies,
in his sixth year: the Lord Morif a Baron of Scotland, challenged Edmund Earl
of Kent, in which the Earl bore himself so valiantly, that to him was given
the honor of the Turnament, and in the tenth year came the Seneschall of
Henalt, with a brave company of his own Countrymen and strangers to perform
the like martial exercises in the same place before the King. Against the
Seneschall himself ran the Earl of Somerset, to whom was given the honor of
the first day: upon the second day came in a Knight Henalder as Challenger,
against whom rose as defendant Sir Richard Arondell, who after certain courses
run on horsback with their Lances, they combated on foot with Axes, where the
Henalder had the better, for he brought him on his knee: the third day came a
third challenger whom Sir John Cornwayle encountered, and put to the worst: upon
the fourth day appeared an Esquire Henalder, and was met by John Cheyney, who
at the second course overthrew his adversary The honor falls to the English.
horse and man, for which the King instantly made him Knight: on the fifth day
came a fifth challenger, him one John Steward an Esquire opposed, and came off
with honor. Against the sixth challenger, came in a Gentleman called William
Porter, who so courageously demeaned himself, that there he won his
Knighthood. Against the seventh Champion appeared John Standish Esquire, whom
for his valor there shown, the King also Knighted: a Gascoigne also demeaned
himself so well against another stranger, that he was also made knight: upon
the eight and last day, came in two Henalders challengers, against whom came
two English Brothers who were of the Garrison at Calice, betwixt whom was so
long and so violent a bickering, that they were commanded by the King to cease
combat, lest any of them who so well had fought, might in the end have come off
with disgrace. Thus this challenge was finished to the great honor of the
King, who bountifully feasted the Strangers, and with rich gifts sent them
back into their Countries.

In the eleventh year in a Parliament held at A bill put up into the
Parliament house by the commons.
Westminster, the Commons put up a Bill unto the King, to take all the
temporal lands out of the Clergy men's possessions, the effect whereof was,
that the Temporalities disorderly wasted by the Churchmen, which might suffice
to find to the King, fifteen Earls, fifteen hundred The effect of the bill.
Knights, six thousand two hundred Esquires, and an 100 Alms houses to the
relief of poor people, more then were at that time in the land, and besides
all those that the King might put yearly into his coffers twenty thousand
pound, and of this by particulars they made manifest proof, to which bill no
answer was made, but that the King would take thereof further deliberation.

In his fourteenth year, the King called a Counsel at White Friars, in which it
was concluded that speedy provision should be made for the The King prepares a
voyage for the Holy Land.
Kings Voyage to visit the holy Sepulcher, but after the Feast of Christmasse,
whilst he was praying at Saint Edwards shrine, to take there his leave, and
speed him upon his journey, so grievous a sickness took him that they feared
he would there have expired, wherefore they bare him to the Abbots Palace, and
brought him into a chamber, and laid him upon a pallat by the fire, who when he
came to himself, asked what place he was in? those that attended him, told him
that it belonged to the Abbot of Westminster, and finding himself so extremely
sick, he demanded if that chamber had any particular name? they answered that
it was called the Jerusalem: who presently replyde, then thanks be The King
falls sick.
to the father of Heaven, who has thus greatly admonisht me of mine end: For
now I know that I shall die in this chamber according to a prophecy long since
spoke of me, which said I should die in Jerusalem, which spoken, and having
made his peace with Heaven, he in the same place departed this life, the
twentieth The King died the twentieth of March.
of March, after he had reigned fourteen years five months, and one and
twenty days, still upholding the former prediction. -- much trouble he will
endure,
And after when he thinks himself secure,
Hoping to wash the kids blood from his hand,
Purpose a voyage to the Holy Land:
But fail: yet in Jerusalem shall die,
Deluded by a doubtful Augury.
This King left behind him four sons, Henry who was King after him: Thomas
Duke of Clarence, John Duke of Bedford and Humphrey Duke of Gloucester, and two
Daughters, the one Queen of Denmark, the other Duchess of Bavaria, or Bar,
His body was after conveyed by water from Westminster to Feversham in Kent, and
thence to Canterbury, where he was royally interred.

CHAP. 25.
The Coronation of Henry the fifth: A prophecy of his Reign: His victorious
Battle over the French at Agencourt: His second Voyage into France: His
victories by Sea and Land: He is made heir (by the marriage of his wife) to the
Crown of France: His third Voyage into France: The birth of Prince Henry: The
death of Henry the fifth.

HEnry the fifth of that name, and son to Henry the Fourth, began his Reign,
the one and twentieth of March in the year of Grace, one thousand four
hundred and The coronation of Henry the fifth.
twelve, and in the ninth of April following, was crowned at Westminster: this
Prince before the death of his Father applied himself, to all irregularity,
associating himself only with riotous and evilly disposed persons, as
Gamesters, Drunkards, Robbers by the highway, and the like, but he was no
sooner admitted to the government of the Land, but he suddenly became a new
man, changing his dissolute life into a discreet carriage, his wildness to
wisdom, and his sensuality into a wondrous sobriety: who lest he should be
reduced to his former riots, he sent to all those vain fellows with whom he had
been before familiar, such competent gifts as might maintain them in a fair
and even course of life, but with this proviso, that not any of them should
dare to come with in ten miles of his Court, after a day by him assigned; of
whom and whose Reign, it was thus predicted: Note a strange mixture in the
planets seed, A prophesi^ of his Reign.

For now a Mercury, a Mars shall breed,
Who in his arms, accommodate and fit
Shall compass more by war, then he by wit
The Caduceus to a sword shall change,
And grim Orion shall (though it seem strange)
Sit in Astraea's orb, and from her tear:
The three leaved flower she in her hand did bear,
And turn it to a laurel to adorn
The Lions brows, whom late the Toad did scorn.
And after many a furious victory,
At length invested shall the Lion bce
In a new Throne, to which his claim is fair,
As being matched unto the Kingdoms heir:
Living, this royal beast shall lose no time,
But be at last from earth snatched in his prime.
Presently after his Coronation, he caused the corpse of King Richard to be
removed from the Friars at Langley, and solemnly interred upon the South side
of Saint Edwards Shrine in Westminster, by the body of Queen Anne his wife. In
the second year of his Reign, he held his Parliament at Leicester, where
amongst other A parliament held at Leicester.
things, the Commons put up their former Bill, against the Clergy, who kept so
much of the Temporalties in their hands. In fear whereof, lest the King should
give unto it any comfortable audience, certain Bishops and others of the
Clergy put the King in mind to claim his right in France, for which they
offered him great and notable sums, by reason whereof, that Bill was again
put by, and the Prince listening to the motion of the Prelates, aimed only to
set forward his expedition against France, The King prepares for France.
and sent his Letters to the French King to that purpose, who returned him
answer full of derision and scorn, wherefore he made speedy provision for war.

And in his third year road (honorably accompanied) through London, and thence
to Southampton, where he had appointed his army to meet him. There Richard
Earl of Cambridge, Lords arrested of treason.
Sir Richard Scroope, then Treasurer of England, and Sir Thomas Gray were
arrested of Treason, arraigned, and the nine and twentieth day of July
following beheaded: The morrow after the King took the sea, and the sixteenth
of August landed in Normandy, and laid siege to Hareflew, and won it: then
leaving Sir Thomas Bewford his Noble Captain there, he sped him The King lands
in Normandy.
from Calice: with the Dolphin who had then the ruling government of France,
(by reason of the Kings great sickness) having broke the bridges to hinder the
Kings passage over the river Sanne: therefore he was constrained to take the
way toward Picardy, and pass the River Pericon: whereof the French being
aware, assembled their forces, and lodged near to Agencourt, Roland court, and
Blangie.

When King Henry saw that he was thus environed K. Henry environed with the
French.
with his enemies, he pitched his battle betwixt Agincourt and Blangie, having
no more then seven thousand able men: But in those days the yeomen had their
limbs at liberty, Their breeches fastened with one point, and their jacks or
coats of male long and easy to shoot in, drawing bows of great strength, and
shooting arrows of a yard long besides the head: King Henry then considering
the number of the enemy, and that the French stood much upon their horse,
charged every Archer to take a sharp stake, and pitch it aslope before him,
that when the Cavalry with their spears assaulted them, they should give back,
and so the horse should A rare policy of K. Henry.
foil themselves upon the stakes, and then to power their shot upon them: and
when the king had thus providently ordered for the battle over night, the
morrow after, being the twenty fifth of October, and the day of Crispin and
Crispianus, he attended the approach of the enemy, who were in number forty
thousand able fighting men. The number of the French army.


Who about nine a clock in the morning with great pride and scorn set upon the
English, thinking to have overrid them with their horse, and trod them
underfoot, but the Archers as they were before appointed, retired themselves
within their stakes, upon which the French horses were galled, which the
English Archers perceiving, and that their horses being gored with K. Henry's
victorious battle at Agencourt.
the stakes tumbled one upon another, so that they which were foremost were the
confusion of them which followed; the Archers after their arrows were spent
fell upon them with swords and axes, so that the day fell with little loss to
the English, of whom were slain that day the Slain of the English.
Duke of York, who had the leading of the Van, and the Duke of Suffolk, and
not above six and twenty persons more.

But of the French were killed that day morethen Slain of the French.
10000 common soldiers, and of the'nobility the three Dukes of Bar, of
Alonson, and of Braban, eight Earls, and of Barons above fourscore, with
gentlemen in Coat Armours to the number of three thousand: besides in that
fight were taken prisoners, the Duke of Orleance, the Duke of Burbon, the
Earls of Vendosme, of Ewe, Prisoners taken of the French.
of Richmont and Bursigant, then Marshall of France with knights and Esquires
(besides common men) surmounting the number of two thousand and four hundred:
when king Henry had (by Gods help) obtained this glorious victory, and
recalled his people from pursuit of the enemy: news was brought of a new Host
coming toward him, wherefore he commanded his soldiers to be imbattailed,
and then made proclamation through his Army, A sudden policy of King Henry.
that every man should kill his prisoner, which made the Duke of Orleance, and
the rest of the French Nobility in such fear, that they (by authority of the
King) sent to the Host to withdraw, so that the King with his prisoners the
morrow following took their way toward Calais, where for a time he rested
himself and his Army: Thus it was truly prophesied of him. Note a strange
mixture in the planets seed,
For now a Mercury a Mars shall breed,
Who in his arms accommodate and fit,
Shall compass more by war than he by wit.


The Exposition is plain; by Mercury is meant the father, who was politic
and ingenious: and by Mars the son, who by his Military Prowess attchieved
more then the other apprehended; But it follows, the three and twentieth of
November he was met upon Black Heath by the Lord Major, and his brethren, who
conducted him through the City (where were presented many pageants and Shows
to The Kings coming into England.
gratulate his famous victory) to Westminster; whither the same hour came
Sigismond the Emperor, who lodged him in his own palace, and after was Saint
Georges feast kept at Windsor; in the time of which solemnity, during the time
of divine Service the King kept the estate, but in the sitting at the Feast, he
gave it to the Emperor, where he, the Duke of Holland, and The Emperor
Sigismund made Knight of the Garter.
a great Almane prince, called the Duke of Briga, were made Knights of the
Garter, and after seven weeks abode here left the land, whom the King in
person conducted to Callis: in which time of his there being, the Duke of
Bedford, with the Earl of March, and other Lords had a great Sea Fight, with
diverse Caricks of Genoway, and other ships, where after long and cruel fight,
the honor fell to the English, to the Victory by sea.
great loss of the strangers, both of their men and ships, in which three of
their Caricks were taken.

In his first year in a parliament called at Westminster, wherein order was
taken for provision for his second hostile expedition in to France: Richard,
son and heir to the Earl of Cambridge (put to death at Southampton) was
created Duke of York, who after was married to Cecile, daughter to the Earl
of Westmerland, The issue of Richard Duke of York.
by whom he had issue Henry, who dyed young, Edward who was after King; Edmund
Earl of Rutland, Anne Duchess of Exeter, Elizabeth, Duchess of Suffolk,
George Duke of Clarence, Richard Crook-backe Duke of Gloucester, and after King:
and Margaret Duchess of Burgoin: and when all things were accommodated for
the Kings voyage, he made John Duke of Bedford his brother protector of the
Land, and about Whitsunday took shipping at Southampton, and sailed toward
Normandy, where he King Henry lands in Normandy.
laid siege to a place called Took or Towke.

During which, notice was given to the King, that the Vicount Narbon, General
of the French Navy, intended to invade England: to prevent whom, he sent the
Earl of March, the Earl of Huntington, with others, to scour the Seas, who
meeting with their Fleet, after a long and bloody conflict conquered and
overcame them Another Seavictory.
upon the ninth of August; in which they took plenty of Treasure, being the
money which should have paid the French Kings Soldiers: Then was Took with
the Castle delivered up to King Henry, which he gave to his brother the Duke of
Clarence, with all the Signiory thereto belonging, he after took the strong
City of His many conquests in Normandy.
Caan in Normandy with fourteen other strong holds and Castles; and whilst he
was thus busied, the Earl of March, the Earl of Warwick, with others, won
Laveers, Falois, Newlin, Cherburg, Argentine, and Bayons, etc. where the king
kept St. Georges Feast, and made fifteen knights of the Bath.

Then king Henry divided his people into three parts, whereof one he reserved
to himself, the second he committed to the Duke of Clarence, the third to the
Earl of Warwick, which Duke and Earl so well employed their forces, that in
short time they won many strong Towns and Castles, whilst the King laid
siege to Roan, of which one Sir Guy de Bowcier was Captain, which was also
delivered up Roan taken by K. Henry.
into his hands, so that having subdued all Normandy, he then entered France,
and conquered the Cities and Towns as he marched, and upon the twentieth of May
came to Troies in Champaigne where he was honorably received: for the Duke of
Burgoine being slain in the presence of the Dolphin, Philip his son who
succeeded King Charles with his daugh ter and heir in the possession of K.
Henry.
in the Dukedom, refused the Dolphins part, and leaguing himself with King
Henry, delivered unto him the possession both of the French King, and Dame
Katherine his sole Daughter.

Then was such an unity labored by the Lords on both sides to be had betwixt
the two Nations, that by the urgence of the said Philip Duke King Henry
marries the Lady Katherine.
of Burgoin King Henry at Troyes in Champaigne was solemnly married to
Katherine heir to the kingdom of France, upon the third day of June, being
Trinity sunday: Before the solemnization of which marriage, certain Articles
were agreed upon by the two Kings, the effect Articles concluded betwixt the
two nations of England and ^rance.
whereof follows, that Charles should remain King, during the term of his
life, and king Henry should be made regent and governor of the kingdom in the
right of his Queen and wife; and that after the death of Charles, the Crown
of France, with all the rights thereto belonging, to remain unto king Henry,
and his King Henry made heir apparent to the Crown of France.
Heirs kings, etc. And because Charles was then visited with sickness, King
Henry as Regent should have the whole and entire government of the Realm; and
that the Lords of France, as well spiritual as temporal, should make oath to
King Henry, to be obedient unto him in all things, and after the Death of
Charles, to become his true liege-men and subjects, etc.

Further, the Duchy of Normandy and all other Normandy and France made one
Monarchy.
Lordships thereto belonging to be as one Monarchy under the Crown of France,
and that during the life of Charles, Henry sbould not name or write himself
King of France, but Charles in all his Writings should name King Henry his
dearest Son, and immediate Heir to the crown: and that by the advice of both
counsels of the Realms of England and France, such ordinances should be
established, that when the Crown of France fell to King Henry or his Heirs,
that it might with such unity join to the Realm of England, that our King
might Unity betwixt the two Kingdoms.
rule both the Realms as one Monarchy, etc. that King Charles nor Philip Duke
of Burgoyn should make any peace with the Dolphin of Vien, without the consent
of King Henry, nor he make any accord with him without the agreement of Charles
and Philip, etc. thus you see. His Caducaeus to a Sword did change,
And grim Orion, though it might seem strange,
Sit in Astraeas Orb, and from her tear
The three leaved Flower she in her hand did bear.
And turn it to a Laurel to adorn
The Lions brows, whom late the Toad did scorn.


By the Caducaeus turning into a sword, is meant that Mercury was now turned
Mars, and The prophecy explained.
Peace into war: The same is allegorically intended by Orion, who is called
Lucifer for the terriblenesse of his aspect, said by the Astronomicall Poets to
bear a sword; he removes Astraea, that is, Justice, out of her Orb: For in
the time of war force and might sway all, who rends from her bosom the
peaceable three leaved Flower, which is the Flower Delyce, with which he
Crowns the Lion King Henry, whom the Toad did scorn: (thus demonstrated) Some
write that the Arms of France were at First the three Toads, which after they
changed to the three Lillies, as they are now quartered, with the English
Arms, etc. But to continue the History, these former Articles being by the
consent of both the Princes and their peers ratified, king Henry with his new
Queen, were honorably received into Paris, where King Henry and his Queen
feasted in Paris.
when they had rested a season, He with the Duke of Burgoine laid siege to
diverse Towns which held with the Dolphin of Vien, as the strong City of
Meldane, or Melian, to Melden, and others, and took them, and having done all
his pleasure in France, he and the Queen took leave of Charles the French king,
and sailed into England, and at Westminster with great solemnity Q. Margaret
Crowned at Westminster.
she was Crowned.

In the beginning of his tenth year, was born at Windsor the sixth day of
December, Henry the sixth of that name: at Easter after the Queen The birth of
Henry the sixth.
took shipping at Southampton, and sailed into France, where she was royally
received of her father and mother; and King Henry being still busied in his
wars of France, and still gaining from them Cities and Towns, in the ninth
of August he fell grievously sick at Boys in Vincent, and dyed the last day of
the Month, when he had reigned nine years, five months and ten days, leaving
issue behind him only Henry, aged The death of Henry the fifth.
eight months and odd days: then the Kings body was imbalmed, and after
brought to Westminster, and there buried, verifying, Thus after many a famous
victory,
At length invested shall the Lion be
In a new Throne; to which his claim is fair,
As being matched unto the kingdoms heir.
Living this royal beast shall lose no time,
But be at length from earth snatched in his (prime.


CHAP. 27.
The Duke of Gloucester made Protector: The Duke of Bedford Regent of France, of
Joan de pasill a Sorceresse: Henry the sixth crowned in Paris: A prophecy of
his reign: the death of the Duke of Gloucester: The death of the Marquess of
Suffolk: The insurrection of the Commons under Jack Cade, His proceedings and
death: the Duke of Somerset gives up Normandy: The Duke of York takes Arms,
his person seized, against the Kings promise, and for fear set at liberty.

HEnry the sixth of that name, and the sole Henry the sixth made King.
son of Henry the fifth, and Queen Katherine, began his Reign over the
Realm of England the first day of September in the year of grace, one
thousand four hundred twenty two, who during his Minority was committed to the
guardianship of his two Uncles the Dukes of Gloucester and Bedford, the The Duke
of Gloucester protector, the Duke of Bedford regent.
Duke of Gloucester being protector of England, and the Duke of Bedford regent of
France: In the first year of this Kings reign dyed Charles the seventh King
of France, by whose death the Crown, and the Realm, with the rights of them,
fell to the young king Henry, the possession of which was by the Lords of
France in general, (excepting some few who took part with the Dolphin)
delivered to the duke of Bedford as Regent, during the nonage of the King, who
in the second year of his reign, won from the Dolphin more than four and
twenty strong holds and Castles, to the great Honor The Regents victories in
France.
of the English Nation, and with whom all attempts succeeded prosperously and
victoriously till the fifth year that the Earl of Salisbury, (who was called
the good Earl) with the Earl of Suffolk, the Lord Talbot, and others, laying
The death of the good Earl of Salisbury.
strong siege to the City of Orleance, the Earl was slain by a shot from the
Town, after whose death, the English still lost, rather than won, so that by
little and little they were compelled from all their possession in France, for
where they prevailed in any battle, in three they were discomfited.

In the eighth year of his reign, and upon the ninth of his age, King Henry
was Crowned King Henry's Coronation.
in St. Peter's Church at Westminster, where were made six and thirty knights
of the Bath: His Coronation with all honor and joy being finished, provision
was made for his journey into France, and upon Saint Georges day following,
being the twenty third of April, he took shipping, and landed at Callis, with
a great train of the English Nobility, during whose abode there, many battails
were fought in diverse parts of the kingdom betwixt the English and French, in
which the French for the most part prevailed, Ione de Pucil a sorceresse.
some said by the help of a woman called Joan de Pucil, whom they styled, The
Maiden of God, who was victorious in many conflicts, and at length came to a
Town called Compeine, with intent to remove the siege laid unto it by the Duke
of Burgoine and the English, but by the valor of a Burgonian knight, called
sir John Luxemburgh, her company was distressed, and she took alive, and after
carried to Roan, and there kept a season, because she seigned her self with
child, but the contrary being found, she was adjudged to She is burnt for a
witch.
death, and her body burnt to ashes.

In his tenth year, and upon the seventh of December, King Henry the sixth was
crowned Henry the sixth crowned at Paris.
King of France in Paris, by the Cardinal of Winchester, at whose Coronation
were present the Regent, The Duke of Burgoine with others of the French
Nobility; after the solemnity of which royal Feast ended, The King left Paris,
and kept his Christmasse in Roan, and thence returned into England, where he
was joyfully received, and of whom it was thus predicted. How comes the Sun to
rise where he should set?
Or how Lambs, Lions, Lions Lambs beget? The prophecy of King Henry's reign.

Yet so't must be. The Lamb though doubly crowned,
And thinking his large Empire has no bound,
Yet shall a Daulphin at a low ebb land,
And snatch one powerful scepter from his hand.
Thus it falls out twixt father and the son.
Windsore shall lose, what ever Monmouth
A Tigresse then, in title only proud, (won.
In the Lambs bosom seeks her self to shroud,
A seeming Saint: at first meek and devout,
But in small time her fierceness will break out,
Nor can her ravenous fury be withstood
Until, through sated, with best English blood,
But a young Lion he at length shall tame,
And send her empty back from whence she came.
Much trouble shall be made about ^he crown,
And Kings soon raised, and as soon put down, etc.
After sundry conflicts betwixt the English and the French, in which they
diversely sped, at length Charles the Dolphin, who took upon him to be King of
France, by the proffer of many Towns, Castles, Cities, Provinces, and Lordships
so Charles the Dolphin and Philip Duke of Burgoin reconciled.
wrought upon the Duke of Burgoine, that notwithstanding he had before slain
his Father, adhered to his party, and proclaimed himself utter enemy to the
English, which was in the thirteenth of Henry, in which year dyed the noble
and valorous John Duke of Bedford, and Regent of France, and was buried with
great solemnity at Roan, in the Church of our Lady, after whose death
notwithstanding the incomparable valor of the Lord Talbot, whose name was so
The death of the D. of Bedford, regent.
terrible in France, that (with it women frighted their children to still and
quiet them) the Earl of Arundell and others, yet fortune for the most part was
averse to the English etc. and though there were many Treaties of peace to be
made betwixt the two Kingdoms, yet they came to no effect, and thus for diverse
years it continued.

During which passages diverse murmurs and grudgings began to break out
betwixt the Duke of Gloucester Lord Portectour and Uncle to the King, and diverse
persons near about the Court, amongst which was chief the Earl of Suffolk,
which in the end was the confusion Suffolk seeks to suppla^t the Duke of
Gloucester.
of them both. For in the one and twentieth year, the said Earl of Suffolk
who had broke off a Marriage concluded by the English Ambassadors, betwixt King
Henry and the daughter to Earl Arminacke went over into France, and made a
match betwixt him and the Kings daughter of Jerusalem and Cicily, who had the
bare titles thereof, and was indeed a king Suffolks proceedings.
without a Country: to compass which marriage, he delivered to the said king,
the Duchy of Anjou, and Earldome of Maine, which were called the keys of
Normandy, to the great prejudice and dishonor of the English Nation: For which
service done he was created Marquess of Suffolk, and soon after with his
wife and others pompously accommodated brought her into England, where she was
espoused to the King, at a place called Southwick in Hampshire: The King
marries the Lady Margaret.
whence after she was convayed to London, and thence to Westminster, and
thereupon the 30 of May, being Trinity Sunday, solemnly crowned.

With which match it seems God was not well pleased: for after that day
fortune began to forsake the King, who lost his Friends in England, and his
revenues in France, for soon after, Q. Margaret causes many miseries.
the whole State was swayed by the Queen and her Counsel, to the dishonor of
the king, the Realms detriment, and her own disgrace, for thereby fell the
loss of Normandy, the division of the Lords, the rebellion of the Commons. The
king deposed, her son slain (...) and she banished the Land for ever, all
which ^iseries fell (as some have conjectured) for the breach of that lawful
contract, first made betwixt the king and the daughter to the Earl of
Arminacke.

In his five and twentieth year was a Parliament called at Saint Edmondsbury
in Suffolk, which was no sooner begun, and the Lords assembled, but Humphrey
Duke of Gloucester was The Protector arreste^ and after murdered in his bed.
arrested by Viscount Beaumond, then high Constable of England, the Duke of
Buckingham, and others, and the sixth day after found dead (some say murdered)
in his bed of whose death the Marquess of Suffolk was most suspected, whose
body after it was publicly shown, was conveyed to Saint Albons, and
therehonourably interred, and soon after five of the principal of his Household
hanged and drawn, but by the kings mercy not quartered.

In his eight and twentieth year, was called The Marquess of Suffolk
arrested.
another Parliament, in which the Marquess of Suffolk was arrested and sent
to the Tower, where he lived a month at his pleasure, and was after set at
large, to the discontent of some Lords, but all the Commons. For he was charged
with the delivery of Amiens and Maine, and the murder of Duke Humphrey, called
the good Duke of Gloucester, upon which ensued a rebellion of the commons, of
which one Blew-beard Blew-beard
called himself Captain, but they were soon suppressed, and the chief of them put
to death, the Parliament was then adjourned to Leicester, whither ca^e the
King, and with him the Queens great Favorite, the Duke of Suffolk. Then the
Commons made petition to the king, that all such as had hand in the delivery of
Anjou and Maine, and the death of the Protector might be severely punished, of
which they accused as guilty, the Marquess of Suffolk, the Lord Say, The
Marquess of Suffolk banished for five years.
the Bishop of Salisbury, one Damiall a Gentleman, and one Trivillian with
others, to appease whom, Suffolk was exiled for five years, and the Lord Say
Treasurer of England, with the rest were put a part for a while, and promised
that they should be imprisoned: and Suffolk taking shipping in Norfolk, to
have sailed into France, was met by a ship of War, called the Nicholas of the
Tower, and being known by the Captain, he took him into his own Vessel and
brought him back to the port of Dover, where on the side of the Boat he caused
his head to be struck off, and cast it with the body on the The death of
Suffolk.
sands, and so went again to sea.

In this year also being the Iubilee, the commons of Kent assembled themselves
in great multitudes, under a Captain called Jack Cade, The insu^rection of
^ck Cade.
who named himself Mortimer, and Cousin to the Duke of York: against him the
King raised a strong Host, and sent Sir Humphrey Stafford and William his
brother, with certain forces to subdue them, but the Rebels prevailed against
them, and left the two Noble brothers dead in the field: after which victory
the Captain put on him Knights apparel, with Briganders set with gilt nayls,
and Helmet, with gilt Spurs. To The Captains pride.
whom was sent the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Duke of Buckingham, who
had conference with him, and found him very discreet in his answers, but not to
be won to lay by his arms; and to blind the eyes of the people the more,
he used great justice in his Camp, at length he came to Southwarke, (at which
time the commons of Essex lay with an army at Mile-end) and when he approached
the drawbridge, he hewed the ropes and chains asunder with his Jack Cade
enters London.
sword, and so entered London, where he made proclam^tions in the Kings name,
that no man on pain of death, should rob, spoil, or take from any man, but to
pay for whatsoever he called for, which drew unto him the hearts of many of the
Citizens: and when he came to London stone, His cunning to delude the people.
he struck upon it with his sword, and said, Now is Mortimer Lord of this City:
after he caused the Lord Say to be fetched from the Tower, and without any
just process, at the Standard in Cheap, commanded his head to be His Justice.
cut off, and another called Cromer, who had bin high Sheriff of Kent, he also
commanded to be beheaded, then pitched their heads upon two poles, and as they
passed the streets in diverse places caused the poles to join, so that the dead
mouths kissed each other.

Thus he had free recourse into the City by day, and at night returned to
lodge with his Host in Southwarke, but at length his malicious purpose broke
out. For dining one day with Philip Malpas Draper and Alderman, he robbed His
robbery.
and spoiled his house, and took thence a great quantity of plate or money,
which had he not done, it was supposed he might have attained to his own ends
(for so he served another in the same kind) therefore the Major his brethren
and commons, consulted amongst themselves (having The Rebels shut out of the
City.
the assistance of the Tower) the next day to shut their gates against him, and
keep him out of the City, which they did: then the Captain assaulted the
Bridge, which was valiantly defended, and many slain on both sides. But at the
length they were enforced to keep still in Southwarke, whither the Archbishop
of Canterbury sent a general pardon from the King, so they would disband
themselves, of which the multitude took the advantage, and every one sped
himself home into his Country: Then proclamation was made, that he who could
take the Captain alive or dead should have a thousand Marks: at length a
Gentleman of Kent, called Alexander Iden, found him in a Garden in Sussex, and
in taking slew him, whose body was brought through the high streets of the City
to Newgate, there headed and quartered, his head set upon the bridge, and
quarters sent to 4 sundry The death of lack Cade.
Towns in Kent, to the terror of like offenders.

In the 29 year, by reason of the Duke of Somersets giving up the Dukedom of
Normandy, displeasure grew from some of the Lords against The Duke of York
opposes the Queen and her counsel.
the Queen, and her counsel, so that the Duke of York father to K. Edward the
fourth, with many Lords to him allide, opposed themselves against her, and in
the 30 year the king with the D. of Somerset, with other Nobles, journied
toward the Marches of Wales, because they were informed the Duke of York with
diverse of the Barons both of note and name, had gathered a great strength: who
hearing the King made toward them, swarved from the Kings Host, and took
their way toward London: but when they knew they could not be received there,
they past over Kingstone bridge, so into Kent, and pitched their field on
Brentheath: of which the king informed, followed them, and pitched his field on
Blackheath.

Both their Hoasts being thus embattailed, A mediation of peace.
mediation of peace was made betwixt the two Hoasts, and to the Duke were sent
the Bishops of Winchester and of Ely, with the Earls of Salisbury and
Warwick, who answered them that neither he nor any of his company intended
any hurt to the Kings person, or any of his own counsel: but his purpose was
to remove some evil disposed persons about the Queen, by whom the Land was
oppressed, and the Commons impoverished, of whom it was finally agreed that he
should be committed to prison, and to answer what the Duke of York should
object against him: upon which promise made by the King, the Duke, the first of
March, being Tuesday, disbanded his army, and came to the Kings Tent, where
contrary to the promise made, he found the Duke of Somerset, waiting next the
King, and the Duke of York was sent (like a prisoner) to London, and now
straightly The Duke of York, seized as prisoner.
had been kept, but that news was brought that Sir Edward his son Earl of
March was coming thither with a strong power of Welshmen, and Marchmen, which
so affrighted the Queen and her counsel, that the Duke was set at liberty to
go whither it pleased him, and so peace for a while, with feigned love was
dissembled. Thus hitherto the prediction has not failed in And set at liberty.
any particular, which says, -- The Lamb though doubly crowned,
And thinking his large Empire has no bound,
Yet shall a Daulphin at a low ebb land,
And snatch one powerful scepter from his hand.
Thus it falls out twixt father and the son.
Windsore shall lose, what ever Monmouth won.


Henry for his meekness was compared to a Lamb, being doubly crowned in
London and The prophecy explained.
Paris: The Dolphin of Vien being at the lowest ebb of State, yet in time by
the perfidiousnesse of the Duke of Burgoine, after recovered the whole Realm
of France, with the Dukedom of Normandy, so that he snatched one Scepter from
his hand, so that Henry the sixth borne in Windsore, no may participating the
Noble and Heroic spirit of his father, lost all by his pusillanimity, that
Henry the fifth borne in Monmouth had achieved, by his unmatchable prowess.

CHAP. 28.
The ambition of Queen Margaret: The battle at Saint Albons, York made
Protector: The Queens practice against the Lords: The battle at Northampton:
York proclaimed heir to the Crown. York slain in the battle at
Wakefield: Henry deposed and Edward Earl of March made King: A prophecy of
his Reign. The battle at Exham: King Henry taken and sent to the Tower: The
Marriage of Edward: He flies the Land: Henry again made King.

IProceed with the History: in his one and thirtieth year the King held a
solemn Feast at Westminster upon the twelfth day in Christmasse, where he
created two Earls, who were his brothers by the mothers side: Queen Katherine
Two Earls created by the King.
who after the death of Henry the fifth, was married to a Knight of Wales called
Owen, who had by her two sons, the eldest named Edmond, who was made Earl of
Richmond, the younger Jasper Earl of Pembroke, who was after by Henry the
seventh made Duke of Bedford, and so dyed, and in the year thirty two, the
thirteenth of October, Queen Margaret was delivered at Westminster, of a
Princely son named Edward, who after grew to be of fair personage and great
hope, but was after slain by Edward the Fourth, when he had won the
battle fought at Tewxbury, whom the people for the great hate they bore to
his mother, would not acknowledge to be the natural son The birth of Prince
Edward.
of King Henry, but rather a bastard or changeling, to her great sorrow and
dishonor.

During these passages great dissension grew betwixt the King and diverse of his
Lords, but especially betwixt the Queens Counsel and the Duke of York: and his
bloody, and main cause was because the Duke of Somerset, (now her The Queen
and her counsellsway all.
prime favorite) lived at large, was made Captain of Calice, and was in
greater power about the Queen then before (for the Queen governed all, and the
King was only so in name, but no more then a Cipher to fill up the number, for
which both the Nobles and commons much grudged: at length the Duke of York
being in the Marches of Wales, called to him the Earls of Warwick and
Salisbury, with other Knights and Gentlemen; and in the month of April
gathered a strong Host and marched toward London, where the King, Queen, and
sundry of the Nobility then made their residence, who hearing thereof,
assembled also a sufficient Army and sped toward Saint Albons, of which the
Duke of York being advertised, he also made thither, and was at one end of
the Town whilst the King and his people were at the other, and this was on the
three and twentieth day of May, the Thursday before Whitsonday. Now whilst a
Treaty of peace was communed upon the one part, the Earl of Warwick with the
Marchmen The battle at S. Albons.
entered the Town, upon the other end, and fought eagerly against the Kings
people, so that both the battails joined and continued the fight for many
hours, but in the end the victory fell to the Duke of York, and of the Kings
side were slain, the Duke of Somerset, the Earl of The King taken.
Northumberland, and the Lord Clifford with many honorable Knights and
Gentlemen.

The morrow after, the Duke with great honor and reverence conveyed the King
back to London, and lodged him in the Bishops Palace, then called a parliament
at Westminster, by authority whereof, the Duke of York was York made
Protector.
made protector of the Realm, the Earl of Salisbury Chancelour, and the Earl
of Warwick Captain of Callis, and all such as were in authority about the king
removed, and the Queeene and her Counsel who before swayed all, vilified and
set at naught: But she out of her great policy insinuated with diverse Lords,
who were of her faction, and disdaining the rule the Duke bore in the Realm,
by the name of protector, as if the King were insufficient to govern A sudden
change.
the state, which as she thought was great dishonor to him, and disparagement
to her, she made such friends of the Lords both spiritual and temporal, that
the Duke was shortly discharged of his protectorship, and the Earl of
Salisbury of his Chancellourship: which was the cause of much combustion after.
So that it appears. A Tigresse then, in title only proud,
In the Lambs bosom seeks her self to shroud;
A seeming Saint, at first meek and devout,
But in small time her fierceness will break out:
Nor can her ravenous fury be withstood,
Until through sated with best English blood.


Which will manifestly appear in the sequel, for she causing the king to
remove from The Queens practice against the Lords.
London to Coventry, the Duke of York was sent for thither by a privy Seal,
with the Earls of Warwick and Salisbury, whose lives were ambusht in the way,
of which they having notice escaped the danger: After a day of meeting was
appointed at London, whither the Lords came with great trains at their heels,
and the Earl of Warwick with a strong band of men from Callis, in red
Iackets, and white ragged sleeves upon them; but by reason of the strength the
Lords had, nothing was attempted against them, but a dissembled peace was made
betwixt the two factions, which being tied with Against the Earl of Warwick.
a small and slender thread, it happened that in a private quarrel a servant of
the Earl of Warwicks hurt one of the kings servants, upon which the Earl
coming from the Counsel to take his barge, the kings family rudely set upon
him, and the black guard assaulted him with their spits, where diverse of his
followers were sore hurt, and he himself dangerously wounded, with great
difficulty escaped, but he got into London, and from thence sailed to Callis:
He thus secured, the Queen then aimed at the life of his Father, the Earl of
Salisbury, who set upon him the Lord Audley with a Against the Earl of
Salisbury.
strong Company to way-lay him in his coming toward the City, who mending his
train, kept on his journey, and upon Bloreheath they met both, and after a
bloody conflict the Lord Audley with many of his followers were slain, and two
of the Earls sons wounded, who in their way home were surprised by some of
the Queens faction, and sent prisoners to Chester.

Upon which the Duke with the Lords assembled themselves for their own
security, and the Earl of Warwick came with a band of men Andrew Trollop
persidious to the Lords.
from Callis, of which he made one Andrew Trollop Captain, against whom the
King gathered a strong host, and came to Ludlow, where the Lords were incampt;
but the night before the battle, this Andrew with his Callis soldiers, left
the Lords, and joined with the Kings Army: At which the Lords were much
discouraged, because he was privy to all their purposes, wherefore they left
their Tents standing and fled: The Duke of York took The Lords fly and leave
the King Master of the field.
shipping for Ireland, the rest escaped into Gernsay, by the means of one John
Dinham, an Esquire, who brought them a ship; which Dinham was after made
Treasurer of England, so that the King was made Master of the field, the
Duchess of York with her Children taken prisoners in Ludlow, and sent to her
sister the Duchess of Buckingham, where she remained long after, and the
Lords proclaimed Traitors, and their goods and Lands forfeited, and seized into
the Kings hands, but at length the tide turned.

For the Lords (being favored by the Commons, who much murmured at the
proceeding of the Q. and her counsel) again entered the land, and upon the
ninth of July encountered the Kings host at Northampton, where after long
fight, the victory fell to the Earl of Salisbury, and the Lords of his party,
where the Kings Host was discomfitted, and he taken in the field, after The
battle at Northampton.
many of his Nobility were slain, amongst whom were the Duke of Buckingham,
the Earl of Shrewsbury, the Vicount Beaumont, the Lord Tiremond, etc. After
which victory they returned to London, and brought with them the King, keeping
his estate, then sent for the Duke of York out of Ireland: In the mean time
they called a parliament: during which, the Duke of York came to Westminster,
and lodged in the Kings palace, upon which grew a rumor, that Henry should be
deposed, and the Duke of York made King: one day the Duke came into the
parliament Chamber, and in the presence of all the Lords sat him down in the
kings seat, and claimed the Crown as his rightful inheritance: The pride of
the Duke of York.
at which there was great murmuring amongst the Lords: but after diverse
Counsels held, it was concluded, that Henry should continue king, during his
natural life, and after his death his son Prince Edward to be set apart,
and the Duke of York and his Heirs to be kings: and he to be admitted
protector of the king, and Regent of the Realm: and upon saturday following
being the ninth of November, and thirty ninth of king Henry, the Duke was The
Duke proclaimed heir apparent to the Crown.
proclaimed through the City Heir apparent to the Crown, and his Progeny
after him.

And because Queen Margaret with her Son Prince Edward, with the Dukes of
Somerset and Exeter were in the North, and would not come up at the kings
sending: it was agreed by the Lords, that the Duke of York and Earl of
Salisbury, should raise an Army and fetch them up by force, and to that purpose
sped them Northward: of which the Queen with her people having notice, with a
great power of Northern men met with them upon the thirtieth of December at a
Town called Wake-field, betwixt whom was fought a bloody Battle, in The
battle of Wakefield.
which was slain the Duke of York with his son the earl of Rutland, Thomas
Nevill son to The Duke of York slain.
the earl of Salisbury, and the earl himself took prisoner, whom she caused
to be with others, soon after beheaded at Pomphret; then she made haste
toward London, and the earl of Warwick with the Duke of Norfolk, who were
appointed by York to attend the king, gathered an Army, and upon a
Shrove-tuesday in the The Queen again victorious.
morning, gave her battle at Saint Albons, in which Warwick and Norfolk
were chaced, and the king again taken, and presented to the Queen: then He the
same afternoon made his son Edward knight, (who was eight years of age)
with thirty persons more.

The Queen having thus gotten the upper hand of her Enemies, thought all
things safe, expressing more pride than she before had done; in the height of
which, news was brought her, that Edward earl of March, eldest son to the
Duke of York, with the earl of Warwick, and others, with a great strength of
March men were met at Cottiswald in their way to London; wherefore the King and
Queen returned with their Host Northward, but before her departing from Saint
Albons, she caused the Lord Bonsfield and others to be beheaded, who had
been taken in the former field: Then came the Earls of March and Warwick to
London, to whom resorted all the Gentlemen of the East and South parts of
England: Then was a Counsel called of the Lords spiritual and temporal, by
whom after much debating of the matter it was concluded, that forasmuch as King
Henry contrary to his honor and oath at the last parliament had done, and also
that he was reputed unable and insufficient to govern the Realm, he was by
their assents discharged of all kingly honor and Royalty, and Henry deposed
and Edward Earl of March made King.
by the authority of the said Counsel, and agreement of the Commons, Edward
eldest son to the Duke of York, was elected King, who presently with his
Army followed Henry, and met with his Host at a place called Towton, or
Shyrbourne, and upon Palm Sunday gave them The battle at Shyrbourne.
battle, which was so cruelly fought, that there were slain thirty thousand,
besides those of note and quality, as the Earl of Northumberland, the Earl of
Westmerland, the Lord Clifford, Sir Andrew Trollop, and others: In the Henry
and Qu. Margaret fly into Scotland.
same Field was taken the Earl of Devonshiere, and sent to York and there
beheaded: But Henry, the Queen, prince Edward, the Duke of Somerset, the Lord
Rosse, and others fled into Scotland, and King Edward entered York, and there
kept his Easter.

Thus Henry lost the Crown after he had reigned full thirty eight years,
six Months, and odd days, and the factious and ambitious Queen forfeited
all her right in the kingdom; verifying what was predicted, But a young Lion
he at length shall tame,
And send her empty back from whence she came.
Much trouble shall be made about the Crown,
And Kings soon raised, and as soon put down.


This Edward the fourth of that name, and son to Richard Duke of York,
began His The Coronation of Edward the fourth.
Reign over the Realm of England, the fourth of March, in the year of grace,
(to reckon after the English computation) one thousand four hundred and forty,
and upon Sunday, being the feast day of Saint Peter's day was solemnly crowned
at Westminster: before which time, He made six and thirty Knights of the
Bathe, and soon after he created his brother George Duke of Clarence, and his
brother Richard Duke of Gloucester: Of this Kings reign thus runs the Prophecy.
The fiercest Bear, who by his power alone A prophecy of his reign.

Had planted the young Lion in his throne,
Is sent abroad a Lioness to find,
To be his phear: who having changed his mind,
Doats on a Badger, whom some term a Gray,
And that shall cause much blood on Easter day.
The Bear, who th'exil'd Tygresse meets in France,
Vows the suppressed Lamb again to advance.
And from the Coop where he has long bin pent,
To raise him to his former government.
The Lion the Land flying, with a small
And slender train, the ragged staff swayes all.
But the Bears fierceness shall be soon allaid,
As one that is half conquered, half betrayed:
Then shall the Lamb, whom he did late restore,
(Again coopt up) be slaughtered by the Boar.


After the King had visited the greatest part of the best Towns and Cities in
the Kingdom, Queen Margaret invadeth England.
in the second year of his reign, Margaret late Queen of England, with an
army of French and Scotch invaded the North part of England, which King Edward
hearing, sped him thither: at whose approach the Queen with the rest
affrighted she disbanded her troops, and in a Carick would have sailed into
France; but such a Tempest fell that she was forced to take a Fisher-boat, and
landed at Barwicke, and road thence to the Scotch King, where news was
brought her, that the Carveil in which the greatest of her treasure was, was
swallowed up in the Sea. And in his third year the Lord John of Montacute,
brother to the Earl of Warwick, having chief command in the North, was
warned of King Henry's coming with a great power out of Scotland, against whom
he assembled the Northern men, and met with him about Exham, who routed the
Scotch Army, The battle at Exham.
and chaced Henry so near, that he took certain of his Train apparrelled
in blue velvet, garnished with two Crowns, and fret with pearl and rich
stones: He took also the Duke of Somerset, the Lord Hungerford, the Lord Rosse,
and others: which Duke with the rest were soon after beheaded, some at Exham,
others at New Castle: And the same year was King King Henry taken and sent to
the Tower.
Henry taken in a Wood, in the North Country, by one Cantlow, and presented
unto King Edward, who forthwith sent him to the Tower, where he remained for a
long time after.

Now Richard of Warwick, who for his many Victoryes and potency in the Realm
was called Warwick the great, was employed by the king into France, to treat
a marriage The King married to the Lady Elizabeth Gray.
betwixt him and the Lady Bona; which whilst he was earnestly soliciting, the
first of May the king espoused Elizabeth, late wife to Sir John Gray, who was
slain at Towton, in the great Battle fought against Henry: which espousalls
were solemnized early in the morning at Grasten, near Stony Stratford, where
were present none but the Spouse, the Spousesse, the Duchess of Bedford Her
Elizabeth Crowned Queen.
Mother, the Priest, two Gentlewomen, and a young man who helped the Priest at
Mass. which marriage was for a time kept secret, but after she was with great
solemnity Crowned Queen at Westminster; which the earl of Warwick taking
as a great affront, as being fooled in his Embassy; and Queen Margaret being
then with her son Edward in the Warwick voweth to remove King Edward.
Court of France, he with the earl of Oxford, who had stood always against
the Yorkists, secretly made promise to the Queen to wait their time to remove
king Edward, and place the Diadem upon the Head of King Henry: which makes
good: The Forest Bear, who by his power alone,
Had planted the young Lion in his Throne,
Is sent abroad a Lioness to find,
To be his phere, who having changed his mind,
Doats on a Badger, whom some do term a Gray, etc.


By the Bear is figured Warwick, who gave the Bear and the ragged staff, who
supported the cause of Edward Earl of March, till he had Crowned him King,
who being sent into France to negotiate a Match betwixt him and the Lady Bona,
whom he calls the Lioness: In the interim he married with a Badger, or Gray,
by which is intimated Elizabeth, the Lady Gray, etc.

And now about the eighth year broke out the long dissembled hate betwixt the
King, and the Earl of Warwick, who confedered unto him the Duke of Clarence,
who had before married his Daughter: In which season, by their instigations
were diverse Rebellions, in Lincolnshire; likewise in the North, by a Captain,
who called himself, Robin of Ridisdale; in Lincolnshire by the Lord Wels,
etc. Robin of Ridisdale.
Mean time the Duke of Clarence, with the Earl of Warwick and other,
solicited Lewis the eleventh king of France, to assist them, in the restoring
of king Henry to his rightful inheritance; who gladly granted their request:
which Lords after their departure from England, were proclaimed Rebels and
Traitors, who in September the tenth year of the king, landed at Dertmouth,
making their proclamations in the name of Henry the sixth, to whom multitudes
from all parts resorted, so that the Edward flies the land.
king being in the North, with great danger passed the Washes in Lincolneshire,
and fled into Flanders: and Warwick brought the king Henry again made King.
from the Tower, and conducted him in all state through London to Westminster,
and once more set the Crown upon his head.

CHAP. 29.
King Edward proclaimed usurper of the Crown, and Gloucester Traitor: his landing
at Ravensport: the Battle at Barnet: the battle at Teuxbury: King Henry
murdered in the Tower, and after him the Duke of Clarence: the death of Edward
the fourth: Gloucester takes upon him to be Protector of the young King: his
tyranny being Protector: he is proclaimed King: the murder of the two Princes
in the Tower: A prophecy of them before their deaths.

KIng Henry being thus re-instated, there was daily waiting on the Seacoast for
the landing of Queen Margaret, and her son Prince Edward, and provision made
against the re-entring of the kingdom by King Edward and his company: then was
called a Parliament, in which King Edward was proclaimed usurper of King Edward
proclaimed Usurper, and his brother Glost. traitor.
the Crown, and his brother Duke of Gloucester Traitor, and both attainted by
virtue of the said parliament: then the Earl of Warwick road into Kent,
thinking to have met the Queen at Dover; but the winds were so averse to her,
that she lay from November to April, and all that while could not put to sea,
by reason of which, the Earl of Warwicks journey was disappoynted.

In the beginning of April, Edward landed King Edward landeth at Ravensport.
at Ravenspurne, with a small company of Flemmings, who in all could not make
up the number of a thousand: and so drew toward York, making proclamation in
the name of King Henry, that his coming was to no other intent, than to claim
the inheritance of the Dukedom of York, where the Citizens kept him out till
he had taken a solemn oath, that King Henry's oath to York.
he purposed no more then he spoke, where having refresht him and his
followers, he departed thence, and held his way toward London; and having paked
by favor and fairwords, the lord Marquess Montacute who lay with an army to
stop his way, and finding his strength hourly to The co^nivence of the
Marquess after his ruin.
increase, he then made proclamation in his own name as king of England: and
so held on his journey till he came to London: where he was gladly received
into the City, and so made to Paul's, and offered at the Altar, and thence to
the Bishops palace where he found the King almost alone, for all his servants
and others had left him: and having put him under safe custody, King Henry
again made prisoner.
he there rested him till Easter Eve.

When hearing of his brother Clarence, with the other Lords coming with a
strong host to Saint Albons, he hasted thitherward, and lay that night in
Barnet, in which season the Duke of Clarence, contrary to his oath made to the
French Clarence revolteth from the Lords.
King, renounced the title of King Henry, and came that night with his whole
strength to his brother, at whose revolt the Lords were somewhat abashed, but
by the Earl of Oxford they were again comforted: by whose persuasion, they
marched forward to Barnet, whither he came leading the Vaward, and on a plain
near unto the Town pitched his field: upon the morrow being Easter day both
Hoasts met: upon the one party were two Kings present, Edward and Henry; upon
the other the Duke of Exeter, Edward brought Henry to the field.
the Lord Marquess Montacute, the Earls of Warwick and of Oxford, with other
men of name.

In their first encounter the Earl of Oxford so manfully demeaned himself,
that he bore The valor of the Earl of Oxford.
over that part of the field, which he set upon, in so much that news came to
London, that Edwards Host was discomfited, and it might have happened, if his
men had kept their army, and not presently disordered themselves by falling to
rifle and pillage, but after long and cruel fight King Edward obtained the
victory, in which battle of the Lords party were slain Marquess King Edward
obtains the victory.
Mountacute, and his brother the Earl of Warwick: on the Kings party the Lord
Barons, and of the Commons on both sides one thousand five hundred: The death
of the Earl of Warwick and Marquess Montacute.
the same day in the afternoon came King Edward to London, and first offered at
Paul's, and road thence to his lodging at Westminster, and soon after was King
Henry brought riding in a long gown of Blue Velvet, and conveyed through Cheap
unto Westminster, and thence to King Henry again committed to the tower.
the Tower, where he remained all his life time after: thus we find by the
premises, The Bear, who th'exil'd Tigresse meets in France,
Vows the suppressed Lamb again to advance:
And from the Coop where he has long bin pent
To raise him to his former government.


All which happened according to the former prediction, as also the sequel. The
Lion the land flying with a small
And slender train, the ragged Staff sways all:
But the Bears fiereenesse shall be soon all aid,
As one that is half conquered, half betrayed.
That is, half conquered, by the prowess of King Edward, and betrayed by his
perfidious brother the D. of Clarence: Edward thus having repossest the
Kingdom, provided against the landing of Queen Margaret and her son, who
notwithstanding with an army of Frenchmen entered the Land as far as Teuxbury;
where the King met her, and chaced her house, and slew The battle at Teuxbury.
many of them, in which battle was taken her son Edward, and brought to the
King, who demanding some questions, and he not answering him to his mind, the
King struck him over the face with his Gauntlet, upon which he was dragged into
a withdrawing room, and there slain by the Duke of Gloucester. In the same The
murder of P. Edward.
year upon Ascension eve was the corpse of Henry the sixth late King, brought
unreverently from the Tower through the high streets of the City unto Paul's,
and there left for that night: and on the morrow, conveyed with bills and
staves, and King Henry stabd to death in the tower.
the like weapons unto Chelsey, and there without any solemn ceremony
enterred, who was stabd with a Dagger in the Tower, by the hands of the
foresaid Richard Duke of Gloucester. So that, the Lamb, the Bear did late
restore,
(Again coopt up) was murdered by a Bore.
For the Bore was the Cognizance belonging to the said Duke: when King Edward
had thus subdued his enemies, He sent over the miserable and distressed Queen
Margaret into her own Country whence she never returned into this Kingdom
after. In the seventeenth year of the King, the Duke of Clarence his second
brother, The murder of the Duke of Clarence.
was for some displeasure taken against him, committed to the Tower where he
not remained long, but he was secretly drowned in a But of Malmsey, as it was
commonly voic'd by the instigation of the Duke of Gloucester: I let pass the
rest of this Kings Reign, in which happened no great matter of remarke or
consequence, so that after his many victories (for he was never The death of
K. Edward the Fourth.
conquered in any battle) he governed the Realm in great tranquillity and
quietness; and expired the eleventh of April in the year of the Incarnation
of our Lord, one thousand four hundred fourscore and three, after he had
reigned full two and twenty years, and as much as from the fourth of March to
the eleventh of April, whose corpse was conveyed to Windsor, and there with
all due and solemn Ceremony interred, leaving two sons, Prince Edward the
eldest, and Richard Duke of York the younger, with three Daughters, Elizabeth
after Queen, Sicily and Katharine:

Edward the fifth of that name, and son to Edward the Fourth at eleven years
of age began his Reign, the eleventh of April, in the beginning of the year
of our Lord God, one thousand four hundred fourscore, and then of whom and
his Uncle Richard Duke of Gloucester, the prediction follows. The Prophecy.
From the Herculean Lion lately sphear'd,
And in his Orb, to Jove himself indear'd,
Shall shine two stars, without eclipse or cloud,
But they, as to some sacred offering vowed
Shall perish on the Altar, ere they grow,
To that full splendour, which the world they owe
A bunch-back'd monster, who with teeth is born,
The mockery of art, and natures scorn:
Who from the womb, preposterously is hurld,
And with feet forward, thrust into the world,
Shall from the lower earth on which he stood,
Wade every step he mounts here deep in blood,
He shall to th'height of all his hopes aspire,
And clothed in state his ugly shape admire:
But when he thinks himself most safe to stand,
From foreign parts, a native Whelpshal land,
Who shall the long divided blood unite,
By joining of the Red Rose with the white.


Edward the Fourth yielding his due to nature, Hatred betwixt the King and
Queens kindred.
the long concealed grudge betwixt the King and the Queens Allies began to
vent it self, for the Marquess Dorset brother to the widowed Queen, with
others of her proximity had then the Guardianship of the young King, who being
in the Marches of Wales, conveyed him toward London, to make provision for
his Coronation, but the Duke of Gloucester who intended otherwise, attended with
a company of Northern Gentlemen all in mourning, met with the King at
Stony-stratford, and after a dissembled greeting betwixt him and the Marquess,
dischardged him of his Office, and Marquess Dorset discharged of his
Guardianship.
took upon himself the government of the king, and thence accompanied with
the Duke of Buckingham who was in great favor with the people, brought him
with all honor toward London; whereof hearing Queen Elizabeth mother to the
King, and fearing the sequel, she with her younger son the Duke of York, and
her daughter Elisabeth took Sanctuary at Westminster: mean time the king was
royally met by the Citizens of London, and through The Queen takes Sanctuary.
the City brought to the Bishop of Londons palace and there lodged.

Then the Duke of Gloucester so wrought with Bouchier Archbishop of Canterbury,
that he went with him to the Queen, who upon the Archbishops faith, and
promise of his safety delivered The young Duke of York delivered to the
Archbishop and Duke of Gloucester.
to them the D. of York: then the Duke caused the king and his brother to be
removed to the Tower, and the Duke lodged himself in Crosby House in
Bishopsgate street, and great preparation was made for the young kings
Coronation: in which time the Duke of Gloucester, being made Protector, caused
Sir Anthony VVoodvile, Lord Scales the Queens brother, the Lord Richard the
Queens son, Sir Richard Hawt, and Sir Thomas to be beheaded at Pomfret, more
out of his own tyranny, then any The protectors tyranny.
trespass by them committed: next to further his aspiring purpose, He
covertly sounded the hearts of the Nobility how they stood affected, and to
that end cold many counsels, and amongst others he found the Lord Hastings
then Lord Chamberlain constant to the supporture of king Edward the Fourths
Issue.

Upon the thirteenth of June, being in the Counsel Chamber at the Tower with
the Duke of Buckingham, the Earl of Derby, the Lord A counsel held at the
Tower.
Hastings and others. He caused an outcry of Treason to be made in the next
room, at which the Lords were amerc'd: and he himself went to the door, and
received such persons in, as he had before appointed, who laid hand upon the
Lord Hastings, in which stirring the Earl of The death of the Lord Hastings.
Derby was hurt in the face, and for a while committed to safe custody, but the
Lord Chamberlain in all haste was led to the Hill within the Tower, and
without judgment or long confession his head laid upon a log, and cut off by
the Executioner: after which cruelty thus done, all such as he suspected would
oppose him in his claim to the Crown he put in hold, whereof the Archbishop
of York, and the Bishop of Ely were two, but the Earl of Derby for fear his
son Lord Strange should have raised the Cheshire and Lancashire men, he set
at liberty to go where he pleased.

Upon the sunday following himself and the Duke of Buckingham being present
with others of the Nobility, Doctor Ralph Shaa, in the time of his Sermon,
labored to prove the children The effect of D. Shaa^ Sermon at Paul's ^osse.
of Edward the Fourth illegitimate, and not right beires to the Crown,
preferring the title of the Protector, at whom was flung a dagger which stuck
in the post close by his face, but none knew or at the least would acknowledge
from whence it came, which Doctor who before had a great opinion of learning,
having by this Sermon lost all his reputation dyed, (as some say distracted)
not many days after.

Upon the Tuesday following, the Commons of the City were assembled at
Guild Hall, whither The Duke of Buckinghams oration in the Guild hall.
was sent by the Protector, the Duke of Buckingham, with other Lords, by whom
was rehearsed to the Major and the rest, what title the Lord Protector had to
the Crown before his Nephews, which in an excellent Oration was delivered by
the Duke of Buckingham, whom they applauded for the manner, but no way approved
the matter of his speech, for it took no effect amongst them, all departing
silent and keeping their thoughts to themselves: then the Tuesday succeeding,
being the twentieth day of June, the Protector of himself took upon him as
King and Governor of the Realm, and rode The Protector takes upon him to be
King.
in great state to Westminster, and in the great Hall placing himself in the
seat Royal, with the Duke of Norfolk, who was before Lord Howard, on the
right hand, and the Duke of Suffolk on the left, after the royal Oath taken,
he called before him the Judges, and giving them a long exhortation for the
executing of his Laws, administering justice, with other Ceremonies being done,
he was conveyed to the kings palace and there lodged, and upon friday The
protector proclaimed King by the name of Richard the third.
being the two and twentieth of June, throughout the City of London, he was
proclaimed king of England, by the name of Richard the Third.

Yet thought he himself in no security, whilst his two Nephews in the Tower
were living, concerning whose death (as some have reported) he tasted the Duke
of Buckingham, but finding him averse to his purpose (as in his noble
Buckingham not accessory to the Princes deaths.
spirit abhorring an act so unnatural and execrable) he after sought all
advantages how to insidiate his life, though he had been the only means to
raise him to that height of Sovereignty, and knowing that it was in vain to
work any noble or generous minds to such a bloody and inhumane purpose, he
at length had observed a melancholy and discontented Gentleman called James
Tirrell, to whom some have given the title of a knight, and him he molded to
his own ends, who having the keys of the Princes lodgings delivered unto him,
he hired two bloody Ruffians, who when they were fast asleep, fell upon them
and smothered them in their beds. But in what place their bodies were buried it
is uncertain, and thus The murder of the two princes in the tower.
From the Herculean Lion lately sphear'd,
And in his Orb, to Jove himself indear'd,
Two luminous stars without eclipse or cloud,
As had they been unto some offering vowed
Are perished on the Altar, ere they grow,
To that full splendour, which the world they owe.


By the Herculean or Cleomaean Lion is figured the victorious and invincible
King Edward the Fourth lately spheared, that is, by death lately translated
above the Spheres, to the Celestial Orb Heaven, and by two shining stars,
Edward the sift and Richard Duke of York, etc. the rest needs no comment.

CHAP. 30.
Dissension betwixt the King and the Duke of Buckingham: Richard insidiateth
the life of Richmond: Buckingham takes arms against the King, and is beheaded.
Banister perfidious to his Lord: Queen Annes policy and tyranny: His Laws:
Richmond landeth at Milford Haven: The battle at Bosworth: The death of
Richard: Richmond made King: A prophecy of his Reign, etc.

RIchard the Third of that name, son to Richard Duke of York, and youngest
brother to Edward the Fourth late King, began his Dominion over the Realm of
England, the twentieth day of June, in the year of the Incarnation of our
Lord, one thousand four hundred fourscore and three, with whose Reign I
proceed: Some say the Noble Duke of Buckingham Difference betwixt the King and
the Duke of Buckingham.
came to demand of him the Earl of Herefords Land promised him before he was
King, which he not only denied him, but gave him rough and harsh language
which the Duke in regard of his former courtesies done unto him: and not only
knowing his ingratitude, but with all his malicious spleen against any that
should in the least oppose him in his bloody and most cruel designs, he
therefore retired himself from Court, and after some discourse held with
Bishop Morton who was the Kings prisoner, and in his custody, he was brought to
have intelligence from the Queen and the Countess of Derby, by whose
instigation he after labored to bring in Henry Richmond then a banished man in
the Court of the Duke of Britain, but from Buckinghams plots against the King.
the house of Lancaster, the next heir to the Crown.

Whilst these things were in secret agitation, the King labored by all means
possible, of friends, gifts, promises, and the like, to take away the life of
the Earl, whose projects and Richard labors to supplant Richmon.
pursuits (too long here to rehearse) he miraculously escaped, only comforted
by some Noble Englishmen, some compulsively banished, others voluntarily exiling
themselves, all partners in one and the same calamity: in which interim the
Duke of Buckinghams intent of innovation (some think by his perfidious servant
Banister) was discovered to the King, therefore for his Buckingham takes arms.
own security he was forced to take arms: but many of his friends failing,
and the indisposition of the weather warring against him (for by reason of the
Land slouds he could not join his forces together) he therefore was compeld
to dissolve his Army, and suffer every man to shift for his best safety:
himself retyring to the house of his Secretary and servant Banister, who in
hope of a thousand pounds reward to him that could bring forth the Duke
(promised only, but never paid) betrayde him to the King, who caused him to be
had to Salisbury, and on a scaffold in the Market place to have his head The
death of the Duke of Buckingham.
cut off, and such was the tragical end of that honorable person.

Of this Banister, and how his falsnesse to his Banisters persidiousnesse
punished.
Lord was punished in him and his posterity, much has been spoken, as that his
wife died distracted, his son was found strangled with a cord, his daughter
found drowned in a shallow puddle of water, and he suffered on the gallows for
a robbery, and that since that day even to this age, none of that House and
Family, but have some orother of the name been troubled with the falling
sickness: a good caveat for all corrupt and perfidious servants.

King Richard though he had removed all or most of his potent enemies,
Buckingham, the Queens Kindred and others: yet knowing he was hated for his
many murders, especially for the two Princes in the Tower, and that he was
moreover suspected for causing Queen Anne his wife to be poisoned (who dyed
suddenly) in hope to have married the Lady Elizabeth, daughter to the Queen
Dowager, who after the death of her two brothers was immediate heir Q. Anne
poisoned.
to the Crown; he to stop the mouths of the multitude, and as far as might
be to insinuate himself into the hearts of the Commons: made many good and
profitable Laws to the benefit ^ing Richards policy.
of the Commonwealth, which are yet called the wholesome Laws of the Kingdom:
but this he did, not that he so much loved their good, but that he so well
affected his own safety, and because he was loath to leave the World without
some worthy character behind him: he strived to be reputed the best of Kings,
though he knew himself to be the worst of men.

Amongst other pieces of his justice, it was laid to the charge of one William
Collingborne a Gentleman, that he was author of a libell, the effect whereof
was this. The Cat, the Rat, and Lovell the Dog, Collingborns Libell.

Rule all England under an Hog.


By the Cat, meaning Catesby; by the Rat, Ratcliffe; and by Lovell the Dog, the
Lord Lovell, all which were Court Favorites, and ruled the Land under the
King, who bore the white Bore for his Cognizance: for which Rhyme and other
matters pretended against him, he was arraigned, convicted and condemned, and
after suffered on a new pair of Gallows on the Tower Hill, where he was no
sooner cast off the ladder, but cut down, and his bowels ripped out of his belly,
The tyrannous death of M. Collingborne.
and thrown into the fire, and lived till the bloody Hangman thrust his hand
into the bulk of his body to grope for his heart, and even then he was heard
to say aloud, O Lord Jesus, yet more trouble, and so died, to the great
compassion of much people.

During which passages, Henry Earl of Richmond, the Lord Marquess Dorset
brother to Henry Earl of Richmond.
the Queen, and Sir James Blont then Keeper of the Castle of Guines, who
brought with him John the brave and valiant Earl of Oxford, who had been kept
prisoner in that Castle ever since the field fought at Barnet: These with other
of their noble friends, with a small company of English, French, and Britains,
landed in Milford His landing in Milford Haven.
Haven, in the month of August: which Earl no sooner sat his feet on shore,
but he incontinently kneeling upon the earth, with a sober and devout
countenance, began the Psalm, Indica me Domine, and discern causam meam, etc
which when he had finished and kissed the ground, he rose up and commanded
such as were about him, boldly and in the name of God to set forward: of whose
landing the King hearing, he set it light, making no haste to oppose them, as
despising them in regard of their small number.

But when the arrival and return of this Prince was rumoured abroad through
the land, many drew unto him, as well Sanctuary men as others, so that his Army
greatly increased, which the King hearing, he then gathered a strong Host,
and so sped him, that upon the two and twentieth day of the same month August,
and The Kings Host.
the beginning of the third year of his Reign, He met with Prince Henry near
unto a Village called Bosworth, besides Leicester, where betwixt them was
fought a sharp and cruel battle for The battle at Bosworth.
the time, which more bloody had been, if the Kings party had been fast and
constant to him: for some left him, and fled to his enemy; and others stood
hovering as Neuters, to see unto whom the victory would fall, of which the Lord
Stanley Father in law to the Earl of Richmond, with a strong band of Cheshire
and Lancashiremen was chief.

Some were of opinion, that the King lost the battle by his own
foole-hardinesse, and The Kings rashness in the field.
headstrong spleen: for when the fight was begun, and he mounted on a white
Steed, was in the center of his Army to give directions for the field upon any
occasion; upon the sudden he called to know what part of the adverse ground
Richmond then maintained? who being poynted to the place, suddenly without any
directions left, or any substitute to command in his place, sprung out of his
host, and made thither, and calling aloud for Richmond, was known by his
Guard: who seeking to press through them, wounding some, and killing others,
was himself, with his horse, broached upon their Halberds. The news of the
Kings death being blown abroad, his army stood The death of King Richard.
at a stand, only defending themselves, but not offending any: insomuch, that
the glory of the day fell to the Earl of Richmond, and his partisans: upon the
Kings party were slain John Duke of Norfolk (before his late creation Lord
Howard) with Brakenbury, Lieutenant of the Tower, but no other of name or
quality; where was taken the Earl of Surrey, son to the Duke of Norfolk who
was sent to the Tower, The Earl of Surrey taken.
and there remained prisoner a long time after.

Then was the body of King Richard despoyled of his Arms, and stripped naked,
and then disgracefully cast behind a man riding upon a lean Jade (the body
being almost wholly covered with mire and dirt) and so unreverently carried to
the Friars at Leicester, where after a season he had lain openly that all men
might behold him, with little reverence, and less mourning, he was cast aside
in an obscure grave, The manner of King Richards burial.
and there buried; when he had reigned, or rather usurped the Kingdom by the
space of two years, two months, and two days.

It is said of this Prince that he came into the world with his feet forward,
which being taunted with (being a youth) by a young Noble man, and one of his
Peers, he made answer, it is true, and was it not time for me to make haste
into the world, there being such a bustling and trouble in the Land? which he
seemed to allude unto those times, when his Father laid claim to the Crown:
He was borne also with teeth in his Head, which was somewhat prodigious too,
and crook backed he was, but whether so borne, or that it came to him by any
sinister accident I am altogether ignorant: King Richards character.
only of this I am sure, that all these with the process of his bloody
practices, punctually comply with the prophecy, which says: A bunch-back'd
monster, who with teeth is born,
The mockery of art, and natures scorn:
Who from the womb, preposterously is hurld,
And with feet forward, thrust into the world,
Shall from the lower earth on which he stood,
Wade every step he mounts knee deep in blood,
He shall to th'height of all his hopes aspire,
And clothed in state his ugly shape admire:
But when he thinks himself most safe to stand,
From foreign parts, a native Whelp shall land, etc.


After the Battle thus won, prince Henry was received as King, and there
instantly so proclaimed, Prince Henry victor.
who thence hasted to London, so that upon the twenty eighth day of August; he
was by the Major and Citizens met in good array, at Harnsie park, and thence
conveyed through the City, and lodged in the Bishop of Londons palace for a
time, and then he removed to Westminster.

This Henry the seventh of that name, son to the Earl of Richmond, began his
dominion Prince Henry's Coronation.
over the Realm of England the two and twentieth of August; in the year of
grace one thousand four hundred fourscore and five; and the thirtieth day of
October following at Westminster was crowned; and in the second year of his
reign he espoused Elizabeth, the eldest daughter to King Edward the fourth,
who the year after upon St. Katherines day was crowned The Coronation of the
Queen.
at Westminster: And this Henry is that native Lions whelpe before spoken of:
Who shall the long divided blood unite,
By joining of the Red Rose with the white.


For by this marriage the long divided houses of York who gave the white, and
Lancaster who gave the red Rose were happily combined, and from that, even to
this present day never disparted, or sundred: of him it was also thus
predicted. The spirit that was merely Saturnine, The prophecy of his reign.

Being suppressed upon the landshall shine.
Planets of a more glad aspect, and make
Peace from their Orbs, sixth in the Zodiac:
Yet from the cold Septentrion Mars shall threat
And war me their frigid pulses with his heat.
And Mercury shall (though it may seem rare)
Consult with Cassiopeia in her Chair,
To fashion strange impostures: but wars god
By sword, nor Hermes with his charming rod
Shall ought prevail: where power with Princes meet,
And when Religion shall Devotion greet.
Where all these four at once predominant are,
Vain are the attempts of stratagem or war;
But he who of the former is possessed,
Shall be abroad renowned, and at home blessed.
Fame afar off his glorious name shall tell,
And Plutus (near hand) make his Coffers swell.


By the Saturnine Spirit is intended the bloody and malicious condition of
Richard the third, which was now suppressed by death: for as Saturn was said to
devour his own Children, so he hungered and thirsted after the blood of his
own brother and Nephews, and therefore not altogether unproperly alluded, the
rest you shall find made apparent in the sequel.

This religious and wise King being thus The Duchess of Burgundy an enemy to
the King.
peaceably instated in the Throne: his old inveterate enemy the Duchess of
Burgundy raised a new Impostor, whom she called Richard Duke of York, the
younger brother to Edward the fifth: but hearing the King intended to make away
young Warwick, who was son to the Duke of Clarence, and then prisoner in the
Tower, they changed his name from York to Warwick (who was no other than the
son of a Baker: this youth she put to the tutoring of A new Conspiracy.
a Priest, who so well improved him, that he could now to the life personate a
Prince; and for no less he was received first into Ireland, to whom the Earl
of Lincoln came, who also made a pretended right to the Crown: To whose aid
the Duchess sent two thousand Almaines, under the command of one Martin
Swart, an old Soldier, and of approved Discipline; these, with the Lord Lovel
and Kildare, landed in Lancashire, and made toward York, with whom the King
met at a place called Stoak: in which fight the army of the Rebels Stoak field.
was routed, Swart and Lincoln slain, and the Lord Lovell thinking to swim the
Trent, was drowned, and Simnel the mock King taken, whom the King would not
put to death, but made him a Turn-broach in his Kitchen, where he continued
long after.

CAP. 31.
The Earl of Northumberland slain by the Commons: The Matchevilian plots of
the Duchess of Burgundy, to disturb the peace of King Henry: Perkin Warbeck
her Creature: He is nobly married in Scotland, and taken for the Duke of York:
the death of the Lord Standley, and others: Diverse insurrections about Perkin:
his death, with the young Earl of Warwick: The death of the King: A prophecy
of the reign of Henry the eighth.

IN the fourth year of this Kings Reign, the Earl of Northumberland sent to
gather some Taxes, which were to be levied in the North, was slain by the
commons, The Earl of Northumberland slain by the Commons.
who still favored the party of the Yorkists: And further, to countenance the
act, they made an insurrection, and chused for the Captains one Chambers, and
another Egremond; to suppress whom, was sent the Noble and valiant Earl of
Surrey, who having discomfited their Army, and took Chambers, with diverse
others of the chief Rebels, who were led to York The Rebels slain and
taken.
and there executed as Traitors: But Egremond fled the field, and escaped to
the Duchess of Burgundy, whose Court was a Sanctuary for all Malcontents
and Fugitives. (threat,
Thus from the cold Septentrion Mars did
And warm their frigid pulses with his heat.


This subtle Mercurialist knowing how wisely and politickly the King had borne
him betwixt the Emperor and the King of France (who had been at mortal
enmity about the marriage of the young Duchess of Britain, she being first
contracted by a Proxy to the old Emperor, but from him divorced before
enjoyed, and married to the youthful French King) she I say, observing his
provident and cautelous proceeding in all things, for the security of his
State, and Kingdom, with a false stamp coined a new Duke of York, a
stripling called Perkin Warbeck, who being Christened by Edward the Perkin
Warbeck a new impostor.
4th, it might be suspected that (being as he was warlike, so also much
addicted to the love of women) by too much familiarity with the mother, the
child might have some of the Yorkists blood in him, Edward being both Father
and Godfather: But so or no, most sure it was, Edward the fourth Godfather to
Perkin.
that the Duchess exposed him to the world for the young Duke of York, who
was spared from death, which his brother suffered in the Tower, (for so it was
given out.)

But after she had fully tutored and instructed him to take upon him the
Majesty and deportment of a Prince, least he should be found to be her
creature, she cunningly sent him from her The subtilty of the Duchess of
Burgundy.
Court over into Ireland, where he was received for no less then he named
himself. Thence King Charles sent for him into France, where he had Princely
entertainment, and service, suiting with his style; but a peace being concluded
betwixt England and France, finding no safety there, he came as a distressed
stranger to shelter himself under the wings of the Duchess of Burgundy, whom
she (cunningly) at first looked upon as strangely, till she had questioned him
about all things, in which she had before instructed him: and then, as a
Prince whose injuries were much to be pitied, she received him to her
protection.

The news of a surviving Duke of York was greedily swallowed by the
discontented Commons of England: The chief of note A new conspiracy against
the King.
who were drawn to this belief, were the Lord Fitzwater, Mountfort, and
Thwaytes, with the Lord Standley, who was Father in law to the King, and then
Lord Chamberlain, Ratcliffe, and others: But Henry then understanding the
danger likely to ensue, first made it manifest to the world, how both the
Princes were together murdered, with the manner of their deaths, by which he
did infallibly evince that he could not be York: then the politic King
thought there was no surer way to disable the Impostors claim, then by taking
away his abettours; and whilst these things were thus in agitation, Sir Robert
Clifford, who had undermined all the Duchess proceedings, came over to the
King Sir Robert Clifford chalengeth the L. Standly of treason
and disclosed them unto him; who challenged the Lord Standley of Treason, as
to be a prime incourager of Perkins Faction: for which the King
notwithstanding the near affinity, as the name of Father and Son
interchanged betwixt them; and forgetting also that he was the prime man who
set the Crown upon his head, he caused him the fifteenth of February
following to be beheaded on a Scaffold upon the Tower Hill, not without a
great aspersion The L. Standly beheaded.
of ingratitude; which severity of Justice, was also executed upon Mountford
and Stafford.

Then Perkin who had wintered with the Duchess, in the spring made an attempt
for England, his forces subsisting merely of malcontents, banquerupts, and
fugitives, and hearing the King was in the North, landed to the number of
sixescore and odd in Kent, thinking Perkin landeth in Kent.
they would have adhered to his Faction, but he himself kept a ship board: But
the Kentish apprehending the danger of a Rebellion, seeing no more would come a
shore, set upon them whom they found, slew some, and took the rest prisoners;
all which were put to death, and not one amongst them spared: Thence he sailed
to Flanders to fetch more aid, and from thence to Ireland, where he found small
comfort, after to Scotland, (whose arrival there being by commendatory
Letters, prepared by Charles the The French K. an abetter of Perkin.
French King) he was royally entertained: and to the Scotch King and his
Nobility he delivered so smooth and passionate a Tale (before dictated by the
Duchess) that they took not only great commiseration of his former
disasters, but promised withal not only to raise him, but to establish him in
the height at which he aimed: causing him to be espoused to a beautiful
Virgin the Lady Gordon, and after with a potent Army entered Northumberland,
Perkin married to the Lady Gordon.
making Proclamation in the name of Richard Duke of York, with sugered
promises of several enfranchisements, and immunities to the Commons, if they
would acknowledge him their King and Sovereign; all which nothing prevailed
with the people; so that King James hearing of Henry's marching toward him
with a puissant Host, he retreated his Army into his own Country.

After which, there was a marriag^ concluded A match concluded betwixt James of
Scotland, and the Lady Margaret
betwixt King James and the Lady Margaret, the eldest daughter to King Henry,
from whom our King James of blessed memory descended, as immediate and
undoubted Heir to the Crown of England: which match, was consummate in the
seventh year of King Henry, and in the same year landed at Plimmouth,
Katherine daughter to the King of Spain, who upon St. Erkenwalds day was
espoused to Prince Arthur, eldest son to the King, who in April following
Prince Arthur married to Katherine of Spain. The death of Prince Arthur.
expired in the Town of Ludlow: The year after began the famous and most
glorious work of the Kings Chappell' at Westminster: and upon the eleventh of
February dyed Queen Elizabeth, wife to King Henry, in the Tower, The death of
Queen Elizab.
lying then in Child bed, etc.

There was also a commotion in Devonshire, and Cornwall, about the collection
of sixescore A commotion in Devonshire and Cornwall
thousand pound, which the King had demanded in parliament: the first raisers
thereof were a Lawyer and a Blacke-smith, who coming as far as Wells, the
Lord Audley took upon him to be their General; who passing through Kent, came
as far as Black Heath, in the sight of London, but were then encountered by
the Kings forces; the Lord Audley was taken and The chief of the Rebels
executed.
beheaded, the Lawyer and Smith drawn, hanged, and quartered, the rest by the
King' pardoned.

But after that fortunate match betwixt the Scotch King and the Lady Margaret,
there was no longer residence there for Perkin, who exposed him to his further
fortune; yet would not his fair Bride Katherine Gordon leave him, though he
were forced to forsake the Land, but associated him into Ireland; from whence
he was presently sent for by a new company of Cornish and Devonshire Rebels,
who began first to assemble themselves at a Town called Bodwin in Cornwall: To
whom Perkin was no sooner come, but they made him their Captain and Prince, who
called him self no more Richard Duke of York, but Richard King of England,
Perkin proclaims himself K. of England.
under which title they marched as far as Exeter, and laid siege to the City,
making against it many violent assaults: to rescue which, and to remove the
siege, the King came with a strong Army, at whose approach the multitude
submitted themselves, for their Captain Perkin had forsook them and took
Sanctuary at Bewdley, and of the Kings free grace were pardoned. King Henry
loath to violate the privilege of Sanctuary, would not take him thence
perforce, but upon promise of life he yielded Perkin taken by the K.
himself to the king, who after he had confessed unto him all the manner of
his juggling; and from whence it came, he brought him up with him toward
London, where by the way he was made a scorn and mockery of the people: upon
the eight and twentieth of November he was committed to the Tower, and after
set at large, and was at free liberty in the Court: From Again sent to the
Tower.
whence he made a second escape, and being again taken, his life was again
pardoned, and he sent to the Tower.

But for that delicate Lady Katherine Gordon, the wife of this counterfeit, his
Majesty much The Kings bounty to the Lady.
commiserating that the nobleness of her blood should be so much abused,
heega^e unto her the means of a Marchioness, a yearly revenue answerable to
so noble a birth and rare a beauty.

Whilst the Duchess of Burgundies creature was thus in the Tower, he
plotted with the young Earl of Warwick, who had been there a prisoner from
his infancy, who had so far prevailed with the Lievtenants servants, that
upon promise of reward, they had plotted by killing of their Master, to make
themselves keepers of the keys, and set the two prisoners at liberty: which
plot being discovered before it came to proof, upon the sixteenth of November,
in White Hall at West minster for the former predictory practice were arraigned
Perkin Warbeck, and three others; and being convicted of capital Treason,
Perkin and one John Awater were soon after hanged at Tyburne; and Perkin
hanged at Tyburne.
soon after the young Earl of Warwick, son to the Duke of Clarence was
beheaded at Tower Hill; and the same day one Blewet, and another The young
Earl of Warwick beheaded on Tower-hil.
Astwood executed at Tyburne.

Thus you see how the Duchess of Burgundies plots were confounded in the
death of this Perkin: Concerning whom it was thus long before predicted, That
Mercury should (though it might seem rare)
Consult with Cassiopeia in her Chair,
To fashion new impostures, etc.


And (then the former discoursed of) never were any that carried such
countenance to the deluding of so many foreign Princes: the Prophet in
Cassiopeia (with whom Mercury consulted) meaning the factious Duchess, who by
all her endeavors, studied to disturb the peace of that prudent prince King
Henry, who was able to over-match her in policy, and therefore Merlin fore
seeing her future juggling by impostures and adulteration (yet seeming) Heirs
to the Crown, as also his sundry Troubles in the North raised by Scots, and
qualified again by the valor of the noble Earl of Surrey, the Kings
Lieutenant and others: the sequel is verified. -- But wars god,
By sword: nor Hermes by his charming rod
Shall ought prevail, where power and prudence
And when Religion shall devotion greet. (meet,
Where all these four at once predominant are
Vain are th'attempts of stratagem or war,
But he who of the former is possessed,
Shall be abroad renowm'd, and at home blessed.


This Cassiopeia was the daughter of Aeolus, the Cassiopeia, and where the
allusion grew.
wife of Cepheus, and mother of Andromeda, who in her pride of beauty,
comparing with the Nereides, was after translated amongst the Stars, in whom
the prophet allegorically compreheuds the Burgundian Duchess, I am loath to
enter into a further discourse of the passages in this Kings Reign, being
excellently and judicially expressed by Sir Francis Bacon, Lord Chancellor in
prose, and in an accurate and ingenious poem, by Master Charles Allein.
Briefly this worthy and wise Prince expired the Saturday before Saint Georges
day, being the one and twentieth of April, at his Manor of Richmond, The
death of Henry the seventh.
when he had reigned three and twenty years, and eight months wanting but
one day, in whose praise no pen can be too prodigal, who studied rather to
end his wars by policy, then the profuse effusion of Christian blood. In so
much that all his Neighbor Princes labored to have with him peace and
alliance, and because in all Temporal policies, he far exceeded all the
Christian Princes in his time, reigning: Three sundry Popes, Alexander the
sixth, Pius the Third, and Julius the second, every of them during the time,
they held their Ecclesiastical Sovereignty, by the unanimous consent of their
spiritual Counsels, admitted him for a chief K. Henry much favored by the
Bishops of Rome.
Defender of the Church above all others: and for a confirmation of the same,
sent unto him by three several famous Ambassadors, three rich Swords, and
three Caps of Maintenance, who notwithstanding his many costly buildings, and
infinite expenses as well in foreign parts, as to pacify the domestic
Tumults and Seditions in his own Kingdom, left behind him a mighty His great
riches at his death.
magazin of Treasure, with riches innum^rable, complying with the prophecy:
Fame afar off his glorious acts shall tell,
And Plutus (near hand) make his coffers swell.


Him succeeded his sole son (after the decease of Prince Arthur) Henry the
Eighth of that name, the true and rightful inheritour to the two Crowns of
England and France. Who began his Sovereignty of this Realm, the two and
twentieth day of April, in the year of the Incarnation of our blessed Lord
and Savior, one thousand five hundred and nine: and was crowned at
Westminster, on the day of the Feast of Saint John Baptist, or Decollations:
This Royal Prince, was joyfully received as the successor The Coronation of
K. Henry the eighth.
to so worthy a Prince as his Father; who was both famous and fortunate, from
the beginning to the end of his Reign, of whom it was thus predicted: Rouse
him shall this fierce Lion in his den, The prophesic of Henry the Eighth.

Be favored of the gods, and feared of men.
Gallia shall quake, Albania stand in aw,
And Caesar's stoop, when he but shows his paw.
To league with him, Hesperia shall take pride,
Those, whom the Afric Moors half black had did,
He, by his art, shall fashion Musical grounds
From th'untun'd Harp, that discords only sou^ds
And further, from the sceptarchy of Hills,
That Europe aws, and triple-crown, that fills
The Christian world with terror: take the power
And bring it home unto his British bower:
Blunting the horns of all the Bashan Bulls,
And rooting from the Land the razord skuls:
Over Glastenbury, for the eye that's dim,
May at that day behold a Whiting swim.
But none without their faults, since Adams fall:
He shall have many virtues, but not all.
Who never spares, (for who can fraeilty trust?)
Man in his rage, or woman in his lust.


CHAP. 32.
Prince Henry married to his brothers wife: He wins Turwin and Turney in
France: Floden-Field, with the famous victory against the Scots. Charles
Brandon Duke of Suffolk, marries the French Queen the Kings sister. The
Emperor Charles the fifth made Knight of the Garter: Peace with France: Both
Kings defy the Emperor: The death of Cardinal Wolsey: Henry divorced from
his first wife, Marries the Lady Anne Bulloigne: Her death: He marries the
Lady Jane Seimour: He revolteth from Rome. The Earl of Hartfords victories in
Scotland: Bulloigne besieged and won.

HEnry the Seventh who was loath to part with the Dower of the Spanish
princess, wrought so by a Dispensation from the pope, that his son prince
Henry was married to the late Widow of his own brother prince Arthur deceased,
who coming to the Crown (some say by the counsel of his Father on his
deathbed) put to death Empson and Dudley, who had gathered a great mass of
money into the Kings treasury, by exacting, and extorting from the Commons, of
whom they were extremely hated, for which piece of justice he won the hearts
of the people, and soon after was borne at Richmond, upon New years The birth
and death of prince Henry.
day prince Henry the Kings son, who died upon S. Matthews day the year
following: and soon after was the Lord Dacres sent into Spain to aid the King
against the Moors, and Sir Edward Poynings into Gelderland, to aid the prince
of Castile: And in his fourth year the King in person invaded France, and
took Turwin and Turney, having discomfited the French King Henry aydeth
Spain, invadeth France. Floden Field in which the K. of Scots was slain.
Host at a place called Blewmy, during which time the Scotch King raised
against England, an hundred thousand men, whom the Earl of Surry, the Kings
Lieutenant encountered at a place called Flodden, in which battle the King
himself was slain with eight Bishops, and eleven Earls, besides of the
common soldiers innumerable: for which service by him done, King Henry created
him Duke of Norfolk, and his son Earl of Surrey.

In his sixth year, a peace was concluded betwixt England and France, and in
the seventh Peace betwixt England and France.
year, the French King espoused the Lady Mary, the Kings sister in the month
of June, and died upon New years day next ensuing, wherefore The birth of the
Lady Mary. Charles Brandon married to the French Queen Mary the kings sister
the King sent for her again by Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolk: In February
was borne the Lady Mary the Kings Daughter at Greenwich, and in April the
French Queen came over into England, and was married to the foresaid Duke of
Suffolk, in which year also Margaret Queen of Scots the Kings sister fled
into England, and lay at a place called Hare-bottle, where she was delivered of
a daughter called Margaret, and came to London in May, and tarried here a whole
year, and upon the eighth of May following, returned again into her Country.

In October, the tenth year of the King, the Admiral An ente^ view betwixt the
Kings of England and France.
of France came into England, and Tournay was delivered again to the French
King, whom after Henry met between Arde and Guiens, where were great Triumphs:
after there was a solemn meeting betwixt the Emperor and Charles the fifth and
the King of England, who went with him to Graveling, and after he went to
Calice with the King, where he was royally entertained and feasted, who in the
thirteenth of the King, the sixth of June was honorably received Charles the
fifth Emperor made Knight of the Garter.
into the City of London, by the Lord Major, the Aldermen, and the Communalty,
who from London went to meet the King at Windsore, where he was made Knight of
the Garter, which was done with great solemnity, and then from Southampton he
sailed into Spain: soon after Christian King of Denmark, came into England,
and had Royal entertainment from the King.

During these passages, the Earl of Surrey Lord Admiral, who before had
appeased the tumults and manifold combustions stirred up in Britain, Picardy
and France invaded by the English.
Ireland, burnt diverse Towns in Britain and Picardy, and the Duke of Suffolk
invaded France with 10000 men. and passing the River of Some, spoiled many
Towns and Villages, and returned without opposition, and the Duke of Albany in
Scotland, who before had made a vain e attempr against England, besieged the
Castle of Wark, but hearing of the Earl of Surreys marching toward him, he
fled into his Country.

In the eighteenth year of the King, Cardinal Cardinal Wolsey Ambassador
into France.
Wolsey went over into France pompously attended, where he concluded a league
betwixt the King of England and the French King, who both defied the Emperor,
and sent an Army into Italy to make war against him, and upon the nineteenth of
October, the great Master of England and France defied the Emperor.
France came over to England, to ratify the League made betwixt the two Kings,
all which verify that part of the prediction. Rouse him shall this fierce Lion
in his den,
Be favored of the gods, and feared of men.
Gallia shall quake, Albania stand in awe,
And Caesar's stoop, when he but shows his paw.
To league with him, Hesperia shall take pride,
Those, whom the Afric Moors half black have did.


By Albania is meant Seotland, so called from Albanactus, the second son of
Brute, the first King thereof, and by Hesperia Spain, who after the African
Moors had long possessed the greatest part of the Land by enterchangable
merceage betwixt them and the Natives, the Spaniards are black and tawny even
to this day.

In the one and twentieth year, the King having cast his eye upon a new
Mistress, pretending A divorce sought by the King betwixt him and Queen
Katherine.
a matter of conscience, he began to consider with himself, that he had long
incestucusly lived with his brothers wife, for which cause the Legates of Rome
met with the King at Black Friars, about the lawfulness or unlawfulness of
that marriage. Amongst the rest Cardinal Wolsey standing stiff against a
Divorce, in October following was discharged of his Chancellourship, and
presently after was a peace concluded betwixt the Emperor and the King, and in
the year after the great Cardinal, who had been arrested of high Treason, and
by that means forfeited his infinite estate to the The death of Card. Wolsey.
King, died on Saint Andrews in a poor Fryery, not without suspicion of poison.

After by a legal course, and due process of Law, the king was divorced from
the Lady Katherine his brothers wife, and soon after married to the Lady Anne
Bulloigne, who upon The King married to the Lady Anne Bolloigne.
Whitsunday, was crowned Queen, and on Midsommer day following dyed the French
Queen Mary the kings sister and wife to Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolk. And
on the Eve of the Nativity of the blessed Virgin, following, was born the Lady
Elizabeth at Greenwich, in which The birth of the Lady Elizabe^h.
year, (as an happy presage of her future love unto the Gospel) it was
enacted that no man should sue any appeal to Rome.

In January, the seven and twentieth of the King, died the Lady Katherine
princess Dowager, The death of Q. Katherine.
late wife to the King, and in the 28 of his Reign, Queen Anne Bolloigne,
with her brother the Lord Rochford, Noris, Weston, Breerton, and Marks were
attainted of high Treason, and The King married to the Lady Jane Seymour.
beheaded, and soon after the King married the Lady Jane Seymour, in the year
one thousand five hundred thirty seven: on Saint Edwards eve in June, Prince
Edward was borne at Hampton The birth of Pr. Edward.
Court, and the three and twentieth of October following died Queen Jane, and
lies buried at Windsore: then was the Bishop of Rome with all his usurped
power quite abolished out of the Realm, and the King assumed to himself the
supremacy over the Church in England and Ireland, to whom were granted the
first fruits, (before The death of Sir Thomas Moore, etc.
paid to the pope) with the Tenths of all spiritual possessions.

For denying of whose Supremacy, that famous and learned Gentleman Sir Thomas
Moore Lord Chancellor of England, with the Bishop of Rochester, were beheaded,
and presently after, three Monks of the Charterhouse for the some offense. Then
followed the dissolution of all the Abbeys, Fryeries and Nunneries through the
whole Realm, when the Mass and all Romish Superstitions were forbidden, and
diverse Images that had Engines to make their eyes open and shut, and their
other limbs to move and stir, were broken to pieces and defaced, and all
Friars, Monks, Canons, and Nuns were forced to change their Habits, and forsake
their Cloisters. A proclamation also was made, which has been since
established as a Law, that the English Bible should be read in every Church The
English Bible commanded to be read in Churches.
throughout the Realm, and that no Holidays should be solemnized and
observed, except our Ladydayes, the Apostles, the Evangelists, Saint George,
and Saint Mary Magdalen, and that Saint Marks Eve, and Saint Lawrence Eve
should not be kept as fasting days. And that children should not go decked and
garnished (as they do on Feasting days) upon Saint Nicholas, Saint Katherine,
Saint Clements, and the holy Innocents, and the like, all which comply with the
prophecy. -- He from the sceptarchy of Hills,
That Europe aws, and triple-crown, that fills
The Christian world with terror, takes the power
And brings it home unto his British bower:
Blunting the horns of all the Bashan Bulls,
And rooting from the Land the razord skuls:


By the Sceptarchy of Hills, meaning the seven Hills on which the City Rome
stands, and further The prophefie explained.
taking on himself to be the supreme Head of the Church within his own
Dominions, he takes away that power from the Popes Triplecrowne, to which all
the Christian Kingdoms else were in vassallage: By blunting the horns of the
Bashan Bulls meaning the Popes Writs of Excommunications, Interdictions,
Anathemaes, or Cursings, which are called his Bulls, the terror whereof he now
vilifies and sets at naught: by rooting the rozard sculs from the Land, is
meant the suppression of Friars Diverse who suffered for denying the Kings
Supremacy.
and Monks, who had the upper part of their heads always shaven, etc. Many
were those who suffered for denying the Supremacy, as Friar Forest, who was
hanged and burnt in Smith-field, with the Image of Darvell Gathren in Wales:
and for the same offense suffered the Abbots of Reading, of Colchester, and the
great rich Abbot of Glastenbury, whose name was Whiting, whom the King
commanded to be hanged upon the top of the Tower, an eminent place, and visibly
afar, for which way soever a man travels toward that Town, it may be seen
twenty miles distant, now it seemed a thing impossible, that the Sea with his
greatest inundation should swell so high, that any Fish should float over or
upon it, yet so says the prophecy, and all such are mystically delivered,
parabolically, or in allegorical figures. Over Glastenbury, for the eye that's
dim,
May at that day behold a Whiting swim.
The place being so conspicuous and apparent, that one with half an eye, might
see his body waving betwixt the two Elements of Earth and Air.

After diverse rebellions in Ireland, for which Rebellions in Ireland.
the Earl of Kildare was committed, and died a natural death during his
imprisonment in the Tower, and that his son made a new insurrection, and slew
the Bishop of Develin, and that for another Rebellion, Thomas Fitzgarret with
five of his Uncles were drawn, hanged, and quartered, and that the Lord
Leonard Gray was beheaded on the Tower Hill, for diverse Treasons done in
Ireland, during the time he was there Deputy for the King: yet the King so
wisely and discreetly demeaned himself toward that Nation, that in the
thirtieth third year of his reign the Earl of Desmond, and the great Oneile
submitted themselves to his mercy and grace: after which the great Oneile The
great Oneile made Earl of Tyron.
was created Earl of Tyron, and his son Baron of Doncannon. Thus you see He by
his Art could fashion Musical grounds
From th'untun'd harp, that discords only sounds


By the Harp, which is the Arms of the kingdom, meaning Ireland it self,
etc. For Treason also were beheaded at the Tower Hill Thomas Cromwell Earl of
Essex, and Vicar general The death of Cromwell Earl of Essex
of England, (who had been once a faithful servant to Cardinal Woolsey, and
after entertained, and raised by the King: who (as it is commonly voyc't) put
it first into the kings head to pull down the Abbyes, and make a dissolution
of the Monasteries:) and with him dyed the Lord Hungerford.

In the thirty fifth year of the king, the Earl of Hartford being made
Livetenant General for his wars in Scotland, in regard of diverse affronts
given him: the fourth of May he landed at Leith, burning and destroying the
Country, sparing neither Castle, Town, Pile, nor The Earl of Hartfords voy
age into Scotland.
village, for he ransacked and laid waste the Borrough and town of
Edenborrow, with the Abbey called Holy rood house, and the Kings Palace near
adjoining, the Town of Leith also with the Haven and Pire: the Castle and
Village of Cragmiller, the Abbey of New Bottell, with part of Muskelborrough
Town, the Chapel of the Lady of Lauret, Preston Town, and the Castle of
Harinton Town, with the Friars and Nunnery: a Castle of Oliver Sanckers, the
Town of Dundbarre, Laureston, with the Grange, Vrilaw, Westcrag, Enderlaw, the
Pile and the Town Broughton, Chester Fell's, Crawned, Dudistone, Stanhouse,
the Fiker, Beverton, Franent, Shenstone, Marcle, Farpren, Kirklandhill,
Katherwyke, Belton, Eastbarnes, Howland, Butterden, Quickwoe, Blackbourne,
Raunton, Bildi, and the Tower, with many other Towns and Villages by the Fleet
on the Seaside, as Kincorne, Saint Miuers, the Queens Ferry, part of
Petinwaines, etc. Which done, for their brave and notable service there done,
he made Forty five Knights made at Leith.
at Leith forty five knights. And thus was the king victorious over Scotland.

In this interim Wars were proclaimed against France, so that the king gave
free liberty and license to all his subjects, to use the French king, and all
that depend upon him to their best advantage and commodity: and the same year
he prepared an Army to invade King Henry in person invadeth France.
France, and himself in person the fourteenth of July departed from Dover
toward Callais, and the next day removed to Morgisen: upon the twenty sixth of
the same month the Camp removed to high Bulloine, and there camped on The
siege of Bulloine.
the north-east part of the Town: two days after the Watch Tower, called the
old man, was taken, and the day after base Bulloine was won: and upon the
thirteenth of September. the Town Bulloine taken by the K.
was victoriously conquered by Henry the eight king of England, France, and
Ireland, defendor of the faith, who upon humble petition made by the French,
suffered them to depart the Town with bag and baggage: and this year were
taken by the English fleet 300 and odd ships of the French, to the great
enriching of this nation, and the great impoverishing of theirs.

CAP. 33.
The death of Henry the eighth: Edward the sixth crowned: a calculation of his
reign: Musselborow field won by the Lord Protector: The death of the two
brothers, the Lord High Admiral, and Lord protector: a Character of the Duke
of Somerset: the death of King Edward, not without suspicion of poison: His
Character, etc.

THe year following being the thirty seventh of the kings reign, upon the
thirteenth of June, being Whitsunday, Peace concluded betwixt England and
France.
in London was proclaimed a general peace betwixt the two kingdoms of England
and France, with a solemn procession at the time of the proclamation, and that
night were great Bone-fires made in the City and Suburbs for the celebration of
the said union: and upon the one and twentieth of August came over from the
French king Monsieur Denebalt, high Admiral of France, and brought Monsieur
Denebalt Ambassador fom the French King.
with him the Sacre of Deep, with twelve Gallyes bravely accommodated, who
landed at the Tower, where all the great Ordinance were shot off, and he
received by many peers of the Realm, conveyed to the Bishop of Londons
palace, where he rested two nights; and on Monday, the twenty third of the
same month, he rode toward Hampton Court, where the king then lay: whom the
young prince Edward met with a royal train, to the number of five hundred and
forty in velvet Coats, and the His entertainment by Prince Edward.
princes Livery were with sleeves of cloth of gold, and half the Coats
embroydered, where were eight hundred Horses richly caparison'd, and riders
suiting to the state, who brought him to the Manor of Hampton Court: The next
morning the KING and he received the Sacrament together in confirmation of the
late concluded peace. After that were many Masks and Shows, in which the
very Torch Magnificent Shows.
bearers were apparrelled in gold, with costly feasts and banquets, during the
space of six days: after, with many great gifts given to him, and his chief
followers, he returned to his country.

The next year, being the thirty eighth of the King, upon the ninth of
January; by the The death of the noble Earl of Surrey.
Kings express command was beheaded on the Tower Hill that noble and valorous
gentleman the Earl of Surrey, who had engaged his person in Picardy, Normandy,
Ireland, Scotland, etc. from whence he never came, but crowned with victory:
and the twenty eighth of the same Month, the King himself departed the world,
in the year one thousand five hundred forty The death of Henry the eighth.
seven, whose body was most Royally intombed at Windsor the sixteenth of
February following.

King Edward the sixth began his dominion The inauguration of Edward the sixth.
over the Realm of England, the one and thirtieth of January, in the year of
grace one thousand five hundredth forty seven; and upon the nineteenth of
February ensuing he rode with his Uncle Sir Edward Seymour, Lord governor and
Protector, and Duke of Somerset, with the Nobility of the Land, from the Tower
through the City of London, and so to Westminster, and was anointed and
Crowned by Doctor Thomas Cranmer, Archbishop of Canterbury, who after
ministered unto him the Sacraments, with other divine Ceremonies, according to
the Protestant reformed Church. Of this Kings Birth and Reign it was thus
calculated. By birth a Caesar, and in hopes as great,
Shall next ascend unto the Imperial seat.
Who, 'ere mature, (cropped in his tender bloome)
Shall more against, then Caesar could for Rome.
He, the Aristocracy Monarchall makes:
This from the triple Crown the Scepter takes.
Upright he shall between two Bases stand,
One in the sea fixed, the other on the land.
These shall his pupillage strongly maintain,
Secure the continent and scour the maine.
But these supporters will be taken away
By a Northumbers Wolf, and Suffolks Gray.
Then fall must this fair structure built on high,
And the English, like the Roman Caesar dye.


In his first year, Sir Thomas Seimour, the Kings uncle, brother to the Duke
of Somerset, being Lord high Admiral, by the Viz-Admirall, called Sir Andrew
Dudley, having no other Vessels but the Paunce and the Heart; and these singly
manned, there was a great conflict at Sea with three tall Scottish ships (in
the narrow Victory by sea.
Seas) doubly manned and trimmed with great Ordinance: notwithstanding which,
he took them, and brought them into Orwell Haven, where he had good booty,
and store of prisoners.

And the same year in August, the Lord Protector, the Duke of Somerset, with
the Earl of Warwick, and others, marched with a noble Army into Scotland, and
not far from Edenborrough, at a place called Mosselborrough, Musselborough
field.
the English and Scotch Hoasts met, where between them was fought a sharp and
cruel battle: in which in the end the English were victors, and in which
were slain of the Scots fourteen thousand, and prisoners taken of Lords,
Knights, and Gentlemen, to the number of fifteen hundred: This year also was
ordained that the Communion should be received in both kinds; and at that time
Stephen Gardner, Bishop of Winchester, for opposing the same, was commanded to
the Tower: Commandment Gardner committed to the Tower.
also was given, to all the Curats of every parish Church throughout England,
that no Coarse should be buried before six a Clock in the morning, nor after
six at night: and that when any dyed the Bell should ring three quarter of an
hour at least.

In this Interim, the two great Dukes of Northumberland and Suffolk, Dudly and
Gray, privately murmuring, and openly maligning, that The two Dukes of
Northumberland and Suffolk.
the Kings two Uncles should bear such great authority in the Kingdom: by
which, their glories seemed not only eclipsed, but quite darkened, the elder
brother commanding the Land, the younger the Sea; the one Lord Protector, the
other Lord High Admiral; so that the whole Dominion and Sovereignty of the
kingdom (the kings name excepted) was divided betwixt them: And further
considering, that it was in vain for them to attain to their own ambitious
ends, but by sundring this fraternall tie, and unloosing this Gordian knot
Their plots against the Protector, and Admiral.
of Consanguinity, which had been so long inseparably continued betwixt them:
they therefore projected betwixt themselves, how this (almost impossible thing)
might be brought to pass, and doubting the event, if they should attempt to
work by their servants, as to corrupt them with Bribes, or the like: they
therefore took a nearer and more safe course to practice it by their Wives,
and to draw their balas from out of their own bosoms: and The Wives made
themcans to betray the Husbands.
most successively to their purpose, thus it happened.

Sir Thomas Seimer Lord High Admiral, having married the Queen Dowager,
(whose good Fortune it was of all the rest of the kings wives to survive her
Husband) contested with her sister in law for precedence and priority of place:
to which the Protectors wife standing upon her prerogative, could by no means
be won to give way: This emulation betwixt the two sisters, fitly sorting to
the Dukes purposes, (for the one challenged the right hand, as once being
Queen, and the other claimed it, as wise to the present Protector:) To this
new kindled fire, the two Dukes bring fuel, Dudly incourageth the one
secretly, Gray the other privately, so that the Wives set the Husbands at odds
by taking their parts; so that by the instigation of those emulous and incensed
Ladies, a mortal hatred grew betwixt the two brothers: insomuch, that in the
third year of the King, the Admiral was questioned for the ill managing his
Office, and sundry Articles preferred in Court against him: so that he was
condemned in Parliament, and his head The death of the Lord high Admiral.
struck off, the Protector his brother signing the Warrant for his death.

The one being thus removed, there was the less difficulty to supplant the
other; for in the same Month of February, in which the Admiral lost his head,
was the Protector committed to the Tower, by the Lords of the Counsel, of
which the two Dukes were chief, and many Articles of Treason and ill government
of the state commenced against him: but about a year after his confinement, by
his submission to the Lords, and intercession made for him by the K. upon the
sixth of February he was released, and enjoyed his former offices and honors:
but all this was but a lightning before death, for his two great and potent
adversaries still prosecute their malice against him: insomuch that not long
after, calling him to a second account, when he had nobly acquit himself at the
Bar of all treason objected against him, he was in the Guild Hall of London
(not by a Jury of his peers) by The Lord Protector put to death for felony.
twelve men convicted and condemned of Felony: for which, on a Scaffold on
Tower Hill, he suffered death: verifying what was before spoken of the young
King. Upright he shall between two Bases stand,
One in the sea fixed, the other on the land.
These shall his pupillage strongly maintain,
Secure the continent, and scour the maine.
But these supporters will be taken away
By a Northumbers Wolf, and Suffolks Gray.


It is so manifest it needs no Comment.

This Edward Seimour was (the son of Sir A Character of the L. Protector
Edward Seimour) knighted by Henry the eight, who had married the Lady Jane,
his natural sister: He after created him Viscount Beauchamp, in the year one
thousand five hundred thirty six, and the year following Earl of Hereford:
after that he was installed Knight of the Garter, His honors and offices.
made Lord great Chamberlain of England, and one of the honorable privy
Counsel, much favored of the eighth Henry, who in his last Testament,
instituted him one of the chief of his sixteen Executors: after this King
Edward created him Baron de sancto Mauro, then Duke of Somerset: He was next by
a general voice of parliament, made Protector over the Kings person, and of
all his Kingdoms and Dominions Governor, and Lord General of all the Kings
forces by Land and Sea: He was moreover Lord high Treasurer, and Earl Martial
of England, Captain of the two Islands of Gernsie and Iersie, and Chancellor
of the University of Cambridge: In all which Offices and Dignities he demeaned
himself The Duke of Somerset catalogu'd amongst the English Martyrs.
with such Honorable bounty, and singular piety, that some have not doubted to
Catalogue him amongst our English Martyrs.

But to return to the History; by this protectors means who was a constant
Protestant, Images were pulled down through all Churches of England: Marriage of
priests made lawful The suppressing of the Romish Religion.
by parliament, and Doctor Bonner with other Romish Prelates, deposed from
their Bishoprics, and other of the Reformed Church supplied their places;
making good what was before calculated of the young King. By birth a Caesar,
and in hopes as great,
Shall next ascend unto the Imperial seat.
Who, 'ere mature, (cropped in his tender bloome)
Shall more against, then Caesar could for Rome.
He, the Aristocracy Monarchall makes:
This from the triple Crown the Scepter takes.


This needs some explication: He is called young Caesar, as being produced
into the world, The prophecy explained.
by the cutting or ripping up of his mothers womb, from which the great Roman
Julius, (borne after the same manner) had added to him, the name of Caesar,
which Title he left as Hereditary to all the succeeding Emperors after him:
who as he reduced the Aristocracie, which was the government of the Senate and
Optimates into one entire monarchall Diadem placing the Empire in Rome, so of
the contrary this young King, from the great Pontifex of Rome, who in time
wearing a Triple Diadem, and thereby challenging power in Heaven potently upon
earth, regency and predominance over Hell, and moreover, making earthly Kings
and Emperors to acknowledge unto him a pre-eminence and supremacy, making
them to kiss his feet, with other servil office^; ^e by opposing this
Sovereignty, and shrinking his head out of so extreme a servitude, may be
truly said to have done more against Rome in his pious devotion, then Roman
Julius did for Rome in his great magnanimity and prowess.

Now to prove that King Edward was a Caesar: To prove King Edward a Caesar.
the young Lady Jane Seymour, being at Hampton Court, when the time of her
teeming came, and there was small hope of her delivery, news was brought to the
King that her throes were violent upon her, and that the Infant could not be
brought into the world, but by the death of the mother: For by preserving the
one, the other must needs perish. When that his pleasure was demanded what was
to be done in so strict an exigent, He commanded that the child should be cut
from the womb, saying, Sure I am that I can have more wives, but uncertain I
am whether I can have more children, etc.

Upon the sixth day of July, in the year one thousand five hundred fifty three,
John Barnes The death of Edward the sixth.
Mercer, being Lord Major, and William Garret, and John Mainard Sheriffs, at
Greenwich departed out of this world King Edward of that name the sixth, in the
sixteenth of his age, and the seventh of his Reign, whom some say, that he
died of a pleurisy, others that he was poisoned by a Nosegay: For it was
generally murmured by the people, that the Uncles being removed, the Nephew
could not long remain after, which best complyes with the former calculation,
which says, Then fall must this fair structure built on hie,
And the English like the Roman Caesar die.


The first made away in the Court, the other murdered in the Capitol: of which
hopeful and toward Prince, this character is left to future memory.

He was careful for the establishing of the Protestant Religion, to have it
flourish through His Character. His zeal to the propagation of true Religion.
all his Dominions. The Mass he abolished, and Images demolished, the learned
men of his time he greatly encouraged, moving them to interpret the Scriptures
to the capacities of the vulgar, and commanded the Liturgy and Common Prayers
to be read in the English tongue.

In his minority, he had maturity of judgment, and was literated in all the
Arts liberal: of a retentive memory: He knew all the Ports and Havens in
England, France, Scotland, and Ireland: being as well acquainted with their
scites as their names. In the Greek, Latin, French, Italian, and Spanish
Tongues extraordinarily verst, in Logic, Moral Philosophy and the
Mathematics conversant; in Cicero, Livy, Tacitus, and Salust, frequent, Hesiod
and Sophocles, His knowledge in all kinds of literature.
he understood, and was able to interpret Isocrates from the original. He was
wisely witty, even to wonder, his body featured, and his mind modelled almost
to miracles: religiously he lived, devoutly he did: that he breathed his last,
it is certain, but where his body lies buried, to us most uncertain.

CHAP. 34.
The Lady Jane proclaimed Queen. Northumberlands Commission to suppress the
Lady Mary: He is arrested of high Treason: The Coronation of Queen Mary: A
prediction of her Reign: The Romish Religion restored: The death of
Northumberland: Of Suffolk: Of Guilford Dudley: Of the Lady Jane Gray: Her
character: The death of Cranmer, Ridley, and Latimer: The life of Cardinal
Poole, twice elected Pope: His coming into England, and made Archbishop of
Canterbury: His death.

THe two ambitious Dukes of Northumberland and Suffolk, thinking to disable,
the two sisters Mary and The ambition of the two Dukes.
Elizabeth, the daughters of King Henry the Eighth, from any lawful claim to
the Crown, as reputing them no better then bastards, had made a matched betwixt
Guilford Dudley, the fourth son to Northumberland, and the Lady Jane Gray
sole daughter to the Duke of Suffolk, and pretending that King Edward in his
last will nominated her Heir apparent to the Crown after his death, they
caused the said Lady Jane presently upon the Kings death, June the tenth, to be
proclaimed Queen, and true and immediate Heir to the Kingdom, The Lady Jane
Gray proclaimed Queen.
in sundry places of the City of London, which proved to her utter ruin.

The Lady Mary being at that time at Framingham The Suffolk men adhere to the
Lady Mary.
in Suffolk, was much troubled at the report of such disastrous news, which
the more perplexed her, because she had intelligence, that it was done by the
Nobility, and the whole body of the Council, to whom the Suffolk men
assembling (as not liking such shuffling in state) proffered her their
voluntary assistance, to possess her in her lawful and indubitate
inheritance: Before which time, The great Duke of Northumberland, having a
large Commission granted him by the Lords of the Council, and Northumberlands
Commission to fetch in the Lady Mary
signed with the great Seal of England, had raised an army with intent both to
suppress and surprise the Lady Mary, which was no sooner advanced, and the
rising of the Suffolk men bruited at Court, but the Lords in general, either
for fear of the Commons, or repenting them of the injury done unto the
rightful Inheritrix, they sent a countermand after the Duke to lay by his
Arms, who when he thought himself in his greatest power, being abandoned by
the Nobility, he was also forsaken of the Commons, so that at Cambridge, he
with his sons and some few servants were left alone: who thinking thereby to
make his peace in the open market place, proclaimed the Lady Mary Queen of
England, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc. notwithstanding
which, in Kings College he was arrested of high Treason, and Northumberland
arrested of high treason
from thence brought up to London, and committed to the Tower.

Then was the Lady Mary generally received as Queen, and so proclaimed through
the Kingdom, the twentieth of July, and the third of August The Lady Mary
received for Queen.
following, she took possession of the Tower, and during her abode there,
released all the Romish Bishops there imprisoned. From thence she road in great
state through London toward her palace of Westminster, where she was
solemnly crowned by Stephen Gardener, Bishop of Winchester, her sister the
Lady Elizabeth being present at her Coronation: Of this Queen and her Reign,
it is thus predicted. Then shall the masculine Scepter cease to sway, A
prediction of her and her Reign.

And to a Spinster, the whole Land obey,
Who to the Papal Monarchy shall restore
All that the Phoenix had fetched thence before,
Then shall come in the faggot and the stake,
And they, of Convert bodies bonefires make:
Match shall this Lioness with Caesar's son
From the Pontifick sea a pool shall run
That wide shall spread it is waters, and to a flood
In time shall grow: made red with martyrs blood.
Men shall her short unprosperous Reign deplore
By loss at sea, and damage on the shore:
Whose heart being dissected, you in it
May in large characters find Calice writ.


Now ceased the Heir Male to Reign, and the Scepter was disposed to the
Female, which was not seen nor known, since long before the Conquest: when
Bouduca, or as some call her Boadicia soveraignized. In the time of Nero
Caesar: and Spinster was an ancient British Title given to the Feminine sex
before King Edgars Reign, by which name, even princesses being convented, or
summoned into any Court are called unto this day: but to proceed with the
History, in the tenth day of the month after her Coronation, A Parliament in
which Romish Religion is restored.
began a Parliament, in which besides the supplanting of the protestant
Religion, which began to be established in the days of King Edward; were
convicted and attainted of high Treason, John Duke of Northumberland, Thomas
Cranmer late Archbishop of Canterbury, Sir Ambrose Dudley Knight, Guilford
Dudley Esquire, and Husband to the Lady Gray, Sir Andrew Dudley Knight with
others: as William Marquess of Northampton, John Earl of Warwick, etc. and
the twelfth of August, was beheaded on the The death of the Duke of
Northumberland.
Tower Hill John Dudley, Duke of Northumberland, Sir John Gates, and Sir Thomas
Palmer.

Thus you see the end of Northumberland: if any be desirous to know also what
became of Suffolk, I can parallel him to none more genuinely than to the Duke
of Buckingham: He Underwood a second Banister.
had a Banister, this an Underwood, a servant raised by him, to a fair
revenue, and to whose safeguard he had committed his person, who in a spacious
hollow Tree, for some few months concealed him, whether he brought him meat
and drink with millions of oaths engaged, for his truth and fidelity, but
being easily corrupted with some small quantity of gold, and many large and
liberal promises, he Iudas-like betrayde his Master, and delivered him up to
the Noble Earl of Huntington, who with a strong guard brought him through
London, to the Tower: He was after arraigned in the great Hall The death of the
Duke of Suffolk.
at Westminster, and soon after on the Tower Hill lost his head.

Yet probable it was, that the Queen had pardoned that offense, had he not
seconded it with another, by confedering with Sir Thomas Wiat of Kent, to
interpose her marriage with Philip of Spain, son to the Emperor, and to that
purpose departed secretly into Warwick and Leicestershire, where he knew
himself best affected, and made their open Proclamation to keep all strangers
from the Land, for which he fell into the Queens irreconciliable displeasure,
which not only hasted his own end, but the deaths of Guilford and the Lady
Jane, for the Statists at that time, especially those that were devoted to the
Romish faction, held it no policy to suffer any of the contrary Religion to
live, especially if they could entrap them in any quiddits of Law which might
be stretched to be made Capital, therefore upon the twelfth of February, in the
year one thousand five hundred fifty four, it being the first day of the week
Guildford Dudley was brought to the Scaffold upon the Tower hill, where when
he The death of Guilford Dudley.
had with all Christian devotion made his peace with Heaven: he with a settled
and unmoved constancy submitted himself to the stroke of death, which was
given in the sight of his excellent Spouse, who to that purpose was placed in a
window within the Tower, the object strikeing more cold to her heart, then the
sight of that fatal axe, by which she was presently to The death of the Lady
Jane Gray.
suffer, which she most patiently endured.

Never was sweet Ladies death more passionately bewailed, being remarkable in
Judge Morgan, who pronounced the sentence against her, who presently after fell
mad, and in all his distracted ravings, Cried, Take away the Lady The death of
Judge Morgan.
Jane, take her from me; and in that extreme distemperature with these words
in his mouth ended his life: some report that she was young with child at the
time of her suffering, but though her Romish opposites were many, and the times
bloody, Christian charity may persuade they would not use such inhumanity,
especially against a person of her Royal blood and Lineage: she was an
excellent Lady, endued with more virtues and extraordinary endowments then is
frequently found in that sex: being a pattern to others for true Religion and
Piety, of which her godly Oration to the people, and holy prayer at her death,
extant in Mr. The Lady Ianes character Her age at her death.
Fox his Martyrologie abundantly witness: she exceeded not sixteen years of
age, of an excellent feature, and amiable aspect, of Learning incredible, in
wit incomparable, of enforced Honors so unambitious, that she never attyred
her self in any Regal ornaments, but constrainedly and with tears. Diverse of
her Latin Verses have been spread to posterity, and of her Works in the
English Tongue, an Epistle to a learned man fallen off from the Truth, and turned
Apostate, another Epistle to her sister, with a Colloquy or reasoning with one
Freckman a Romist about Faith and the Sacraments, etc.

Soon after followed the deaths of Doctor Cranmer, Archbishop of Canterbury,
(acquit of The deat^s of Cranmer, Latimer and Ridley.
Treason, and condemed of Heresy) Nicholas Ridley late Bishop of London, and
Hugh Latimer: with infinite others, insomuch that scarce any City or Market
Town through the whole Kingdom in which some pious professor or other, had not
felt the scorching of the fire and faggot, I should fill whole pages to reckon
up particulars: only thus in brief, it is observed, that Queen Mary's Reign
was the shortest of any Prince since the Conquest, that wore the Crown (Richard
the Thirds only excepted) and that more Christian blood was spilt in her few
years (concerning Religion and matter of The great tyranny used in her time.
conscience) then had been shed in any one Kings Reign, since the time of King
Lucius, the first establisher of Christianity in this his Realm of England,
which recollects the memory of the former prophecy, where he speaks of the
Spinster. Who to the Papal Monarch shall restore
All that the Phaenix had fetched thence before.
Then shall come in the Faggot and the Stake,
And they of convert bodies bonefires make, etc.


By the Phaenix meaning King Edward, so termed by Hieronymus Cardanus, because
he was unparalleld in his time: and by the Convert bodies, those who where
converted to the reformed and protestant Religion: for which cause thousands in
sundry places of the Kingdom suffered. Now why Queen Mary was so zealous to
propagate the popish faith, it follows next to enquire, she was brought up
Why Queen Mary was so forward to prefer the Romish Religion.
under her Mothers wing; a Spaniard, who being of the Spanish blood, persisted
in the Spanish belief: but when her mother, after three years divorce from
the King expired, she was committed to the guardianship of Margaret, Countess
of Salisbury, and daughter to George Duke of Clarence, brother to Edward the
fourth, who dyed in the Tower. This Countess Of Cardinal Pool from his
minority.
had one only son, called Reignold Pool, who was of great familiarity with
the Lady Mary in their minority, and devoting himself wholly to the study of
the Arts, was initiated in Maudline College in Oxford: but being a very young
man left the University, and having a great desire to travail crossed the seas,
and went into Italy: seven years he spent in the Academy of Padua, where
entering into great familiarity with Peter Bent, (chief Secretary to the pope,
then reigning) he brought him into such reputation with his holiness, that in
the year one thousand five hundred thirty eight, he was made His imploiment to
the Emperor and French K.
Cardinal, and employed in Embassy both to the Emperor and French King: in
which negotiations he is said to have dealt perfidiously with his own. Liege
Lord and Sovereign King Henry the eighth: (For dangerous is an English man
being once Italionated.)

The incensed King not able to reach the Son, who was the Actor, yet used his
power against the mother as an accessory; who being questioned for sending her
son daily supplies of money from England into Italy, was for that convicted
The Countess of Salisbury his Mother beheaded.
of Treason, and being fourscore years ofage, was beheaded: This Cardinal
Poole was of the Royal blood, as lineally descended from George Duke of
Clarence, of singular learning, and approved modesty: insomuch, that in the
twice vacancy of the Sea of Rome, he was in either selected and nominated as
pope: but refusing it as too great a charge (for such was Cardinal Pool twice
elected Pope.
his apology) he rather chused a solitaty and sequestered life, and so retired
himself into a Monastery near Verona, of which (according to rumor) he was
first Founder and Patron: in which, he spent a great part of his age; as a man
extermin'd from his native Country, so continuing the later part of Henry the
eight, and the entire Sovereignty of Edward the sixth: But Queen Mary, his
first acquaintance, being invested into the English Throne, having the
sovereign power in her own dispose, she sent to call him home, with purpose
(as it was then rumourd, having the p^pes authority Queen Mary is purposed to
marry with Car dinal Poole.
to dispense with all his Ecclesiastical dignities) to have made him her
husband.

Of which Charles the Emperor having notice, partly by his power, and partly
by his policy, wrought so by his Engineeres, that Spanish policy.
he was detained in Italy, till a match was fully concluded betwixt his son
Prince Philip, and the Queen: which being perfected, and then past prevention;
the Cardinal was at liberty to dispose of himself; and for his greater Honor
was sent over by the pope with the title of Legatus alatere: at which time, as
Doctor Thomas Cranmer was not only suspended, but Cardinal Pool made
Archbishop of Canterbury.
dispossessed of the Archbishopric of Canterbury, in stead of whom Cardinal
Poole was installed into that See: where having been three years Archbishop,
when news was brought him of the death of his Cosen Queen, he the same
hour expired, the fifty eight of his age, His death.
and lies buried within Saint Thomas Chapel in Canterbury Church: with this
short Inscription only, Depositum Cardinalis Poli.
The prophecy aiming at him, where it says, From the Pontificke Sea a Poole
shall run,
That wide shall spread its waters; and to a stood
In time shall grow, made red with Martyrs blood


The next Chapter leads me to the entrance of prince Philip, son to the
Emperor Charles, into the Land, and his marriage with Queen Mary, etc.

CAP. 36.
King Philips entertainment into the Land, presented with the Garter: He is
made King of Naples, and Jerusalem: the great solemnity of the King and
Queens marriage at Winchester: Their Titles, their riding through London: The
Queen rumourd to be with Child, King Philips cautelous proceedings: he
favors the Lady Elizabeth: He leaves the Land: Queen Mary's discontent at
his departure: The loss of Callis: The death of Queen Mary: The Inauguration
of the Lady Elizabeth: A prophecy of her birth and reign.

TO omit all the Insurrections (in Her time) of the discontented Commons, as
that of Sir Thomas Wiat in Kent, to keep King Philip out of the Land; in which
the Duke of Suffolk was Insurrections in the time of Queen Mary.
a partisan; with another commotion in Devonshire, by Gowen, and Peter Carow,
Giles Champernham, and others: with a third about Woodhurst in Sussex, which was
soon appeased: a fourth by Vdall, Throgmorton, Daniel, Pecham, Stanton, etc. A
fifth, by Henry Stafford, who took Scarborough Castle in the North. I come now
to Prince Philip, who after all those that interposed his landing were cut off:
in the year of grace one thousand five hundred fifty four, the twentieth of
July made his safe arrival at Southhampton, where he was honorably received
by Prince Philip landeth at Southampton.
the greatest part of the Nobility, and was presented with the Order of Saint
George, and the Garter set with rich stones, fastened about his Leg: who
before he would enter any house, Prince Philip presented with the George and
Garter.
went first into Holy Rood Church, which stands just opposite to the
Towne-Hall, where he gave thanks to God for his safe and prosperous arrival:
and having spent some half an hour in his devotion, he mounted upon a goodly
I^nnet, richly caparisoned (which was that morning sent him by the Queen) and
so rode back toward his lodging, which was near unto the Watergate.

The monday following he left Southampton, and attended by the Lords and
Gentlemen of England, rode toward Winchester; but by the reason of great store
of Rain that fell the same day, the journey seemed something unpleasant, but
there about seven of Clock toward night he was magnificently received, and
rode to the Church before he would see his lodging; loud Music entertained
him at his alighting, and the bishop of that Sea, with Stephen Gardener.
four other met him at the Church door, attended with Priests, Singing men
and Quiristers, all in rich Coaps, who had three fair Crosses or Crucifixe s
born before them: In the first entrance of the Church, the Priest kneeled down
to pray: which done, he arose, and went under an Imbroydered Canopy, from the
west door up to the Quire, who when he saw the Host, put off his Hat to do
it reverence, and then entered into a goodly Traverse, hung with costly Arras,
and there kneeled again, till Winchester the Chancellor began Te Deum, whom
all the whole Quire seconded: that done, he was brought thence by Torch-light,
and went on foot through the Cloisters to his lodging, whither the Queens
Guard attended him, to a fair House belonging to the Dean.

He was at that time apparrelled in a Coat, or Mantle curiously imbroydered
with gold, his Prince Philips demeanor to the people.
Hat suitable, and a white Feather in it, with a rich Orient Jewel: all the way
as he passed, he turned himself to the people on both sides, with a pleasant
Countenance; and after supper, which was about ten of Clock, certain of the
Counsel by a private way brought him to the Queen, who entertained him
graciously His first meeting with the Queen.
and lovingly: they had conference together abouthalfean hour in the Spanish
tongue, which ended, he took his leave, and was conducted back to his lodging:
Upon the Tuesday following, about three of clock in the afternoon he came from
his lodging on foot, attended by the Lord Steward, the Earl of Darby, the
Earl of Pembrook, and other Lords and Gentlemen, as well strangers as English:
and that day he was attired in a cloak of black Spanish cloth, imbroydered
about with Silver, a pair of white silk stockings, and the Garter of the
Order about his leg, where he showed himself His apparel.
freely and openly to all men: at his entrance into the Court loud Music was
heard, and in the great Hall the Queen met and kissed him before all the
people: then (she taking the right hand) they went together in the presence
Chamber, and talked under the cloth of state about a quarter of an hour: He
then took leave of her Majesty, and coming into the open Court, the
Pensioners, and Yeomen of the Guard stood on both sides as far as the Gate:
from whence the Lords conducted him to the Cathedral, where he heard
Evensong, which ended, they brought Him back to His lodging with Torch-light,
and so left him.

The same night the Emperor sent a Message to the Queen, to give her to
understand, that P. Philip made K. of Naples and Jerusalem.
his son was not a Prince only, but a King, of Jerusalem and Naples, with
other dominions, after mentioned in his style. Upon Saint James his day, being
the five and twentieth of July, about eleven of clock in the morning, the King
and Queen came from their lodgings, toward the Church on foot, both richly
attyred in Gowns of cloth of Gold, set with pearl, stones and jemmes: he
with his Guard, and the with hers, either having a Sword born before them:
before her by the Earl of The Ceremonies before the marriage.
Darby, before him by the Earl of Pembrooke: being come unto the Church, he
went to one Altar, and she to another, hanged with Curtains of Cloth of gold,
which being after drawn, it was imagined, that they were there shriven; after
they came from their places, and meeting, they very lovingly saluted each
other, he also being at that time bareheaded.

Then six Bishops went to the place prepared for the Nuptial Ceremony, the
King standing on the left hand, and she on the right. Then the Lord Chancellor
asked the Banes betwixt them, first in Latin, and then in English. The Ring was
a plain hoope of gold, without any The solemnization of the marriage betwixt
king Philip, and Queen Mary.
stone: For she desired to be married as Maids used to be of old: the
Nuptials being ended, the King and Queen went hand in hand under a sumptuous
Canopy, by six Knights borne over them, and two swords carried before them:
coming before the Altar, they kneeled down, with either of them a lighted
Tapor in their hands, then they arose and withdrew, she into a Traverse on the
right side, He into another on the left: After the Gospel read, they again
appeared, and kneeled before the Altar, all the time of Mass; which being
ended, the King of Heralds openly proclaimed their Majesty's King and Queen,
with these Titles following.

Philip and Mary, by the Grace of God, King Their Royal titles.
and Queen of England, France, Naples, Jerusalem, and Ireland, defenders of
the Faith, King and Queen of Spain, Sicilia, Leon, and Arragon, Archdukes of
Austria, Dukes of Millaine, Burgundy, and Brabant, Counties of Husburgh,
Flanders, and Tyroll, Lords of the Islands of Sardinia, Majorcha, Minorcha, of
the Firm land, and the great Ocean Sea, Palatines of Henault, and the holy
Empire. Lords of Freezeland, and of the Isles, and governors of all Asia and
Africa.

The Trumpets ceasing, the King and Queen came forth hand in hand, royally
attended, and so went on foot to the Court, and dyned together openly in the
Hall at one Table. Thus you see, The Lioness has matched with Caesar's son.


I have been the longer in this Relation, to show the magnificent solemnities
of Princely Nuptials in those times used. The eighteenth of August, the King
and Queen went to Suffolk place in Southwarke, and there dyned: after Dinner
they rode together over London Bridge, and so past through the City, the
streets Their entertainment into the City of London.
being hanged sumptuously, and diverse pageants and Shows presented unto them,
having relation to their persons, and the great joy of the people conceived at
their Royal Marriage, and unity of the Nations, being after received by the
Bishop of London into the Cathedral Church of St. Paul, with Procession; where
having done their devotion, they rode on in great state toward their palace at
Westminster. Then came diverse Ambassadors from several Countries, from
Russia, Poland, Denmark, Hungary, Naples, etc. to gratulate the Nuptials of
these two potent princes.

After it was bruited that the Queen was with Child, for which there was great
thanksgiving, The Queen rumoured to be with child.
and prayers through all the Churches of London for her safe delivery to come,
and King Philip chosen to be protector of the Infant, Male or female, (by a
decree in parliament) in case the Queen should miscarry in Childebirth: But
some having whispered in his head, that he should be deluded by a
supposititious infant, prepared for that purpose, and loath that a conterfeit
should be heir to all his Realms and dominions, he would not depart the
Chamber at the time of her delivery; by which the plot took no effect, and
bred some distaste betwixt the King and the Queen: Again, to King Philip
favored the Lady Elizab.
second this, the King greatly favored the Lady Elizabeth; and observing what
Tyranny was used against the dejected princess, he began to be somewhat
jealous of the English Nation, and their proceeding in state, apprehending,
that if they insidiated the life of a Native, being their Queen and
Sovereigns sister, with what small scruple of Conscience, might they aim to
supplant him, or any of his followers, who were aliens and strangers? which
made him so suddenly to forsake the Queen and the Land; his excuse being, to
visit his Father the King Philip leaves the Land.
Emperor, and to take possession of the Low Countries, to the great sorrow of
her Majesty, of whom he took his leave the fourth day of September.

In her days Calais was lost by the English, Callis lost by the English.
and taken by the French, by the ill management of the State, especially the
Clergy, who in her days swayd all, and were so busied in the butchery, and
burning of Martyrs at home, that the honor and state of the Kingdom was much
neglected abroad, which Town had two hundred and odd years belonged to the
Crown of England. It was first won by Edward the third, the eleventh King from
William the Conqueror, after the siege of eight Months, and was lost by Mary,
the eleventh from the said Edward, in eight days. Who when she heard the
Town was taken, in a great passion uttered these words: The loss of Callais
is written in Queen Mary's sorrow for the less of Callis.
my heart, and may be there read when my body is dissected. Besides
Martyrdom, in her time was great Mortality of people, much harm done by
lightning and Thunder, a great part of her Fleet suddenly fired, King Philips
second returning into the Land, and his short sojourne here ere he left it
again. These with other discontents so wrought upon her princely Nature: that
verifying the former prediction, which says, Men shall her short unprosperous
reign deplore,
By loss at Sea, and damage on the shore:
Her heart when it is dissected, you in it
May in large Characters read Callis writ.


These cogitable remembrances brought her into a Consumption, or (as some say)
into a Some say of a Dropsy or impostume.
burning Fever, so that in the forty second year and sixth day of her age, she
departed the world at the Manor of St. James, near Westminster, the
seventeenth of November, in the year of our blessed Saviors Incarnation, one
thousand The death of Queen Mary.
five hundred fifty eight, after she had reigned five years, four months,
and eleven days: whose body lies buried in a Chapel in the Cathedral of
Saint Peter's Church in Westminster, in a bare grave without either Tomb or any
Inscription: either of which might have She lies buried without a Monument.
been some memorable decorement to adorn her Hearse.

The same day of her death was proclaimed The Lady Elizabeth proclaimed Queen.
Queen the Lady Elizabeth, sister to Queen Mary, and daughter to Henry the
eight, and the Lady Anne Bulloine, who was appointed by parliament to succeed
her sister, dying without Issue, who shortly came to London, where she was
joyfully received by all ages, sexes, and degrees, (the Romists only excepted)
and passing through the City to the Tower, she showed to all her people and
subjects the deportment of so sweet and a gracious Lady, and they so mutual and
alternate a joy for her happy and prosperous Inauguration, that it almost
wanted president, and of whom it was thus predicted. From the others ashes shall
a Phoenix rise,
Whose birth is thus predicted by the wise, The prophecy of her birth and
reign.

Her chief predominant star is Mercury,
Jove shall with Venus in conjunction be.
And Sol with them, shine in his best aspect:
With Ariadnes Crown, Astraea decked,
Shall then descend upon this terrene stage:
(Not seen before, since the first golden age)
Against whom all the Latian Bulls shall rore,
But at Jove's awful summons shall give ore.
Through many forges shall this met all glide
Like gold, by fire repur'd, and seven times tryde
Her bright and glorious Sunbeams shall expel
The vain clouds of the Candle, Book, and Bell.
Domestic plots, and stratagems abroad,
French machins, and the Italianated god,
The Spanish Engine, Porteguized Jew:
The Iesuitick mine, and politic crew
Of homebred Vipers, let their menaces come
By private pistol, or by hostile Drum,
Though all these Dogs chase her with open cry,
Live shall she loved, and feared, then Sainted die.
Concerning the Astrologicall calculation of her A calculation at her birth.
birth, in her it proved most infallibly true, for where Mercuries Star is
predominant, it portends a rare acuteness and sharpness of wit, a volubility
in speech, and retentivenes of memory, with a natural inclination to acquire
Learning and knowledge. Jupiters star infuseth honor, state, power, and Majesty:
and Venus, feature, beauty, affability, and clemency: both which being at that
time in conjunction, conserd their general gifts upon her in particular, and
Sol shining at the same hour with a favorable aspect ratified the former, of
which part of the prophecy there needs no further explanation.

To write largely of her troubles being, a princess, or of her rare and
remarkable Reign An apology of the Author.
after she was Queen, I should but feast you with diet twice dressed: Having my
self published a discourse of the first: from her cradle to her crown: and in
another bearing Title of the nine worthy Women: she being the last of the rest
in time and place, though equal to any of the former both in religious virtue,
and all masculine magnanimity: and yet because the present occasion enforces
it, I will give you only a capitulation in brief, of those passages which were
at large related in the former, which I refer to the following Chapter.

CHAP. 37.
A brief nomination of her troubles, wrought by the Popish Clergy: Her
passage through London, to her Coronation with the Speeches spoke in the
pageants: A short remembrance of the prime passages in her Reign: The former
prediction fulfild, her death: other predictions fathered upon Merlin
explained, etc.

She was borne the seventh of September, A brief catalogue of her troubles.
and baptized the third day following, in the Friars Church in Greenwich, her
Godfather was Thomas Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury, her Godmothers, the
Duchess of Norfolk, and Marchioness of Pembroke, both widows. At her birth,
Mary the elder Daughter to the King, by Queen Katherine, was disabled of any
claim to the Crown, and his Heirs by Queen Anne of Bulloigne admitted,
during her childhood, she came not near her sister, but was brought up in the
Protestant Faith, and to her brother Edward much endeared. Her Uncle the
Protector brought her Suitors of Honorable quality in her minority, whom she
refused with great modesty. At Queen Mary's Coronation, she graced her with
her company, but soon after confined her at the instigation of the Clergy, no
insurrection in her sisters time, to which they would not have made her
accessory, Who were her greatest adversaries.
as that of Wiats in Kent, the Carowes in Devonshire, Throgmortons, etc. for
which she was by them maliciously questioned, but by the power of Heaven
miraculously acquitted: from Ashredge sent for to London, from thence committed
to the Tower, her barge grating on the arches by the way, her landing at the
Traitors stairs, her close imprisonment there: her dangers in being conveyed
thence: Her train untutored Soldiers, Her bondage under Benningfield, His fury
at Woodstocke, and the firing of her Lodgings, a private Warrant for her death
accidentally discovered, and by King Philip prevented. By these with infinite
others appears, That against her the Latian Bulls did rore,
But by Jove's awful power at length give over.
This has not only reference to her pupillage, By Latium is meant Italy, etc.
but the time of her principality, in which the Latian Bulls, meaning the Bulls
of Pope Pius Quintus, so raged in the Land, that they deposed her from the
Crown as an Heretic, and released her Subjects from their allegiance: all
which by the power of God, her chief and only supporter, proved no other then
flashing false fires, and words vainly uttered against the wind. But now Astrea
decked in Ariadnes crown, Discends again upon this terrene stage,
Not seen before since the first golden age.


Astraea in whom is figured Justice (and here Queen Elizabeth personated)
borrowing Ariadnes Astraea otherwise called Virgo, Justice, etc.
Crown, which is one of the Celestial Constellations, who left the world in
Saturnus Reign, called the Golden Age, when the seven deadly sins began first
to peep into the world, and claim chief predominance on earth: who now at
this restoration of true Religion, is said to descend from her place in the
Zodiac, where she sat constell'd by the name of Virgo, and be tarrassed over
this blessed Queens Tribunal, in which all justice (with mercy mixed) was
continually exercised.

I come now to her passing through the City, Her passage through the City to
her Coronation.
at her first coming forth from her lodgings in the Tower, before she would
suffer her self to be mounted in her chariot, she devoutly lifted up her eyes
and hands toward Heaven, speaking these words: My God I thank thee, who have
been so merciful, as to spare me to see this joyful and blessed day; and I
confess, that thou have dealt as mercifully and miraculously with me, as thou
did with thy faithful servant Daniel, whom thou savedst from the Lions den.
For so was I distressed, and by thee so delivered to thee therefore, and thee
only be thanks, honor and praise for evermore, Amen.

The first pageant to entertain her was at Fanchurch, near unto which was
placed a stately The first pageant at Fanchurch.
scaffold, with a curious consort of sweet sounding Instruments, upon which
stood a young man of good aspect, and gorgeously apparelled, ready with a speech
in Latin, in the Cities behalf, to give her welcome, who seeing him preparing
for that purpose, commanded her Chariot to stay, and beckning with her hand to
the people for silence, he spoke to her in Latin as follows. Vrbs tua, quae
ingressu dederit tibi munera
O Regina, etc. (prima.
Which for the more general understanding, I deliver you thus interpreted into
our vulgar All these speeches made in Latin, I have given the English.
Tongue. Behold, o Queen, what to thy great renown,
Thy City does present thee, two things are
In stead of gifts, to guide thee to thy Crown:
Loud tongues, and loyal hearts without compare.
Their tongues thy welcome in loud Tones proclaim,
Their hearts rejoice when they but hear thy name.
Then welcome gracious Sovereigne: happy we,
And above hope blessed to behold this day, (gree,
As our tongues speak, our hearts with them a-
And what save welcome, can we think or say?
Rich, poor, young, old, who all these places fill,
Have both in tongue and heart, your welcome still.


At the conclusion of this Speech the people made a loud acclamation, Every one
crying, God save Queen Elizabeth, with other zealous wishes as their fancies
led them. Here was observed Her deportme^t at the speech.
her constant attention to what was delivered, with a change of countenance,
when any phrase reflected upon her private person, and thereby her great
courtesy and clemency, in giving the people public thanks for their so
hearty votes and wishes.

Thence she moved forward to Gracious The pageant in Gracious street.
street, where was erected a very sumptuous structure, extended from the on
side of the street to the other, curiously vaulted below, and decored with
battlements above, it had 3 ports, over the middlemost were advanced 3 several
stages, one degree above another: on the lowest was a Seat Royal, in which
were placed two persons in rich Robes of State. The one representing The
uniting of the white Rose and the Red.
Henry the Seventh, the other the Lady Elizabeth his wife: He (being of the
House of Lancaster) environed with a branch of red Roses, and she of the house
of York, enclosed with a branch of white Roses: out of these two being of
diverse colors, sprung two branches of Damask or White intermingled with Red,
which were directed upward to the second stage, where sat environed one with a
Diadem upon his head, presenting King Henry the Eighth (her Father) and a
second personating Queen Anne of Bolloigne (her mother) in a third degree
surmounting their heads, to which the former branch reached, sat one
resembling Her Majesty's person. The Motto inscribed was: The uniting of the
two Houses of Lancaster and York. The Speech directed to her, being to this
purpose, Hii quos jungit idem solium, quos annulus idem
Haec albente nitens, ille rubente rosa, etc.
Those Princes that upon this State are seen
One with the red Rose, the other with the white,
Are the seventh Henry and his royal Queen,
One marriage Ring, one throne does them unite.
Heir to the House of Lancaster, the King:
The Queen to York: both in one blood combind.
From these King Henry (styled the Eighth) did spring,
The Seat aloft is to your place assigned,
(O royal Queen) and as all civil wars
Long reigning, did in their uniting cease,
So may you live free from domestic jars,
Amongst us styled the Queen of prosperous peace.


There were moreover diverse Latin sentences inscribed upon several labels,
persuading to unity and concord, which for brevities sake I here omit.

Thence she past to Cornhill, where stood another pageant composed with three
open gates, The pageant in Cornhill.
over the middle part thereof sat one magnificently inthroned, figuring her
Royal person. In the frontispice was written in a large character, The seat of
worthy Government: which seat was The seat of worthy government.
so artificially framed, that it seemed to have no prop or stay on which to
subsist: In four several comportments, stood four reverent persons, one,
figuring true Religion, treading upon ignorance and superstition, the second
stood for the love of subjects to their Prince, spurning at insolence and
rebellion: the third wisdom, tyrannizing over folly and vainglory: the fourth
Justice, having dominion over flattery and bribery: Diverse other ingenious
fancies there were, of virtues and vices, with moral sentences inserted and
interlaced to adorn the Fabric. Her Royal Arms being richly garnished, and
set in the Apex or top thereof, supported by a Lion and a Dragon: the speech
being to this effect, Quae subnixa alti solio regina superba est,
Effigiem sanctae principis Alma refert.
Behold, O Queen, thy picture in this frame,
Richly enthroned to celebrate thy Name.
Whilst true Religion in thy Reign, shall tread
On ignorance and superstition's head,
Whilst subjects love, rebellion shall distress,
And overtumourd insolence make less,
Whilst Justice keeps an incorrupted place.
To have all flattery and bribes in chase.
Whilst wisdom, armed with vows devout and
Shall have a power above ostent and folly, (holy
Whilst these continue (which we much desire)
So long thy people shall thy Reign admire.


To this she answered, that she had took notice of their good meaning toward
her, and The Queens gracious construction.
most graciously promised her best endeavor, for the continuance and
encouragement of those virtues, and suppressing of the said vices. Passing from
thence to Soper lane end, where stood another sumptuous and goodly pageant,
spreading from one side of the street to the other, being raised three degrees
or stories high, in the upper sat one Child, in the second three, in the third
and lowest four, representing the eight Beatitudes. The Speech follows,
delivered The pageant at Soperlane end.
to her in Latin. We that thy great afflictions late have seen,
Acknowledge thou art blessed 8 times (o Queen)
Blessed have thou been, because so poor in spirit,
And therefore thou a kingdom do inherit.
Blessed, for thou mourned have, and therefore see
Great comforts are prepared now for thee.
Blessed, for thy meekness next, with thoughts divine. (thine.
Therefore this earth from henceforth shall be
Hunger and thirst, for godliness, thou have
Suffered, now all good things shall please thy taste.
Blessed, since to all thou art merciful and kind,
Therefore thou mercy shall hereafter find.
Blessed, because pure in heart, therefore thy grace
Shall be to look thy Maker in the face.
Blessed, as contentions having reconciled.
All peacemakers, Gods children shall be styled.
Blessed art thou, since for righteousnesses sake
Thou persecution suffered have: to make
Thy patience greater, thy reward more strong,
For to all such salvation does belong.


At the conclusion of this speech, the people The votes of the people.
wished all together with one general vote these blessings abundantly to fall
upon her, whom she much thanked, and past on to the Standard in Cheap, which
was garnished with The Standard in Cheap.
diverse Banners, penons and Streamers, and upon it placed a noise of Trumpets,
the Cross being very beautifully trimmed, upon the porch of Saint Peter's
Church door, stood the Wayts of the City, with Cornets and Hoboyes, and played
loud Music, moving onward she espide another pageant erected at the little
Conduit, The pageant at the little Conduit.
in the upper end of Cheap, and demanded what it might signify? One told her
Majesty that there was placed Time: Time replied she? and Time I thank my God
has brought me hither, and being further informed that the English Bible was
there to be delivered unto her by Truth the daughter of Time, she answered,
she was beholding to the City, for that Her love to the English Bible.
present above all other, which she would mayntaine with the best blood that
ran in her Royal veins, and commanded Sir John Parrot, one of the Knights that
held the Canopy to fetched it from the child. But understanding that it was to
be let down by a silken string, she caused him to stay: and proceed no further,
then met her the Lord Major, and the Aldermen.

There the Recorder made a learned speech, She is met by the L. Major and
Aldermen.
and delivered unto her withal a purse of Crimson Satin richly embroydered,
and in it a thousand Marks in gold: which she received with her own hand, and
to his speech she made present answer as follows.

I thank my Lord Major, his brethren, and you all: where your request is that
I should continue your good Lady and Queen, be assured I will be as good and
gracious unto you as ever Princess was to her people, no will in me can want,
and I persuade my self, no power shall be deficient to provide for the safety
and security of you all, for which I shall not spare my best blood: God thank
you all. The Bible being presented unto her, and all the pertinences of that
Show being past, coming over against Paul's School, one of the Scholars
delivered her a Latin Oration, with diverse Latin Verses: The Oration began,
Philosophus ille divinus Her coming to Ludgate.
Plato, etc. and the Verses, Anglia nunc tandem plaudas, laetare, resulta, etc.


It would ask too long time to interpret them: she past thence through
Ludgate, which was gorgeously beautified and adorned, where were Trumpets,
Cornets, Shalmes and Hoboyes, and thence into Fleetstreet, where at the Conduit
she was received by the fifth and last pageant, in The pageant in Fleetstreet.
which was expressed Debora the Iudgesse, and Restorer of the House of Israel.
At Saint Dunstans Church stood the Children of the Hospital, and by one of
them a speech delivered unto her, to which she attentively listened, and
promised to be their future Benefactour: upon Temple Bar were placed, the two
Giantlike figures of The show at Temple bar.
Corinaeus and Gogmagog, holding a Table wherein the effects of all the former
pageants were in Latin inscribed. Thence she departed toward Westminster,
where she was the next day being the fifteenth of January, with all Royal
solemnity crowned. Her coronation
Thus Sol shines on her with his best aspect,
With Ariadnes Crown, Astraea decked,
Does now descend upon this terrene stage,
Not seen before, since the first golden age.
Through many forges did this metal glide,
Like gold by fire repur'd, and seven times tryde.


In regard that her inimitable Reign and Government has so often, and amply, so
largely and learnedly both in the Latin and English tongue, been voluminously
discoursed, I will only present you with a Table of their Tractates and
Treatises, as a brief Register, to prompt the Readers remembrance: As first by
refusing a Marriage with her brother in law Philip King of Foreign and
domestic attempts against ^er Majesty after she was Queen.
Spain, she made him her public and professed enemy: that the French animated
by the Guisians, in the right of Mary Queen of France and Scotland would have
invaded her Kingdom, that Spain, France, and Scotland, all, and at once
combined against her: the thundering Bull of Pius Quintus, which quitted all her
subjects from their allegiance: Rebellions in the North, Duke Dalva's attempts
in the Low countries, Pools and Dacres Conspiracies: John of Austria from
Spain, Stukeley in Ireland, Saunders and Sam. Josephus: Desmond, and
Fitzmorris: Paget, Throgmorton, and Arondel, Bernardine, Mendoza, and Cardinal
Allan, the Spanish Armado styled Invincible. The fourteen Traitors, Englefield
and Rosse Hispanified, Parry with his pistol Italianated, Aubespinaeus and
Trappius his Secretary Frenchified, Walpoole the Jesuit, Lopez the Jew, and
Squire, who would have poisoned her Saddles pummell, etc. these prove what was
before by the Prophet predicted. Her bright aad glorious Sunbeams shall expel
These are so plain they need no exposition.

The vain clouds of the candle, book and bell,
Domestic plots and stratagems abroad,
French machins and the Italianated god,
The Spanish Engines, Porteguized Jew.
The Iesuitick mines, and politic crew
Of homebred Traitors, let their menaces come
By private pistol, or by hostile Drum, etc.


Yet notwithstanding over these and many others (strengthened and protected by
the hand of the Almighty) she was miraculously victorious, whose fame can
never fail, or Her memory perish, and therefore I draw my present conclusion
from the premises. Though all these Dogs chase her with open cry;
Live shall she feared and loved, then Sainted die.


Many other prophesies have been dispersed abroad under the name of Merlin: of
which I will give you the taste of one only, and that is this: When Hemp is ripe
and ready to pull, A prophecy conferd on Merlin.

Then Englishman beware thy scull.


In this word Hemp be five Letters H. E. M. P. E. now by reckoning the
successive Princes from Henry the Eighth, this Prophecy is easily explaned,
H. signifies Henry before named, E. Edward his son, the sixth of that name,
M. Mary who succeeded him, P Philip of Spain who by marrying Queen Mary during
the time of her life participated with her in the English Diadem: lastly by E.
Qu. Elizabeth, after whose death there was great fear that some troubles might
have rose about the Crown, or that King James her successor of like blessed
memory might have come in after an hostile manner, and so to have made that
good. Then Englishman beware thy scull.
Yet proved this augury true, though not according to the former expectation or
imagination: for after his happy and peaceable proclamation and Inauguration,
there was great mortality, not in London only, but through the whole Kingdom,
from which the Nation was not quite clean in seven years after.

CHAP. 38.
The title of K. James to the Crown. His coming into England: A prophecy of
his Reign: The first treason attempted against him: The gunpowder treason,
and what the conspirators were: The K. of Denmark twice comes into England:
An Epitaph upon Prince Henry: One of the Duke of Richmond and Lenox: Another of
Q. Anne: An Epitaph upon K. James: K. Charles proclaimed King: his Fathers
Funerals, etc.

UPon Thursday, being the twenty fourth of March, about two of the clock in the
morning, deceased Queen Elizabeth of blessed memory, at her palace of Richmond,
being aged three score and ten years, and having reigned forty four years,
five months and King James his lineall title to the Crown of England, etc.
odd days, and the same day about eleven of clock in the forenoone was
proclaimed James the sixth King of Scotland, King of England, Scotland. France,
and Ireland, at the high Cross in Cheapside, with the Title of Defonder of the
Faith, being lineally descended from Margaret eldest daughter to King Henry the
seventh, by Elizabeth his wife, who was the eldest daughter to King Henry the
fourth: the same Margaret was married to King James, the fourth of that name
King of Scotland, in the year of Grace, one thousand five hundred and three,
who had issue James the fifth, who was Father to Mary Queen of Scotland,
Mother to James the sixth, Monarch of great Britain, and King of France and
Ireland: of whom ere I further proceed to speak any more, let me acquaint you
with one thing most remarkable, A thing worthy to be observed.
namely how ominous the Thursday has been to King Henry the Eighth, and to
all his posterity, for he himself died upon Thursday the eight and twentieth
of January, his son King Edward the sixth, on Thursday the sixth of July,
Queen Mary, on Thursday the seventeenth of November, and Queen Elizabeth on
Thursday, the twenty fourth of March: but I return to King James, and the
prediction made of him and his prosperous Reign. On Boreas wings then hither
shall be borne,
Through Week, over Tweed a Princely Unicorn The prophecy of K. James.

Who brought into the world, his own fair. crest,
A rampant Lion figured on his breast,
And to his Arms six Lions more shall quarter
With six French Flowers environed with the
Joining (by fates unchangable dispose) (Garter,
The Northern Thistle to the Southern Rose,
He shall the true Apostolic Faith mayntain,
With pious zeal: During the blessed Reign
Of this fair sprig derived from Richmonds stock,
No Noble head shall stoop unto the block.
Yet shall from the old Lupanar Wolves be sent
To undermine both Crown and Government,
Striving in Hell to register their names,
By blowing up the State in powder flames,
Ah (woe the while, Rebellion, and prestigion,
Should masque themselves in visors of religion.
All which the holy book merely gain-says,
But man's corrupt, God, Just in all his ways.
Witness their wretched ends, but happy they
Who keep for that, an annual holiday
That King shall be a second Solomon,
Whom all Kings else with wonder gaze upon:
Who, as to an Oracle to him shall come,
And when he speaks, be silent all and dumb,
Peace shall he keep within him and without him,
Whilst all lands else combustions are about him.
Him shall a second issue male succeed,
Gracious in word, victorious in his deed.
Though diverse adulterate copies something alluding to this purpose, have been
frequent in the mouths of many, yet this best agreeing with the Authors
meaning, ought to be first received, which though it need no explanation at
all, yet thus much briefly, for the satisfaction of the vulgar. By Boreas is
meant the North Wind, upon whose wings the Unicorn is borne, is implide King
James, who gives the Unicorne in The Unicorn part of the Scottish Arms.
Heraldry. Through Week over Tweed, that is, he came through Barwick, over the
River Tweed, which parts England and Scotland: He King James born with a
Lion on his breast.
was also borne with the exact portraiture of a Lion upon his breast, presaging,
that the white Lion of Scotland should have a proximity and alliance, with the
three red Lions of England quartered, with the three Flower delyces of France,
(the noble remembrance of Edward, surnamed the Black Prince, son to Edward
the Third, who by taking the King prisoner in battle, added them to the Arms
of England,) which are incompast by the Garter, an Order first made, by the
aforesaid Edward the Third. The^e came into the peaceable possession of King
James, who also brought the Thistle (part of the Arms of Scotland,) to join
The Thistl^ joined with the Rose.
with the two united Roses, (the White and Red, figuring of the two divided
Houses York and Lancaster, to make one perfect Damask.

I omit the manner of his Majesty's coming out of Scotland, and his Royal
entertainment into this Kingdom with joyful acclamations of the people, and
the unanimous suffrage of the whole Nation, with his Inauguration, Coronation,
and solemn and pompous passing from the Tower through the City of London to
Westminster, with the several pageants and shows, his Creating of Barons
Viscounts and Earls, and making of Knights and Knight Baronets in great
number, etc. The several Ambassadors that came from all parts of
Christendom, to congratulate his coming to the Crown, His peace established
with all Christian Princes, especially with Spain, consisting of seven and
thirty Articles: The calling of his first Parliament, and his excellent delivery
of his mind therein, etc. which would ask long Circumstance, I come to the
first Treason attempted against him, for which were arraigned at The first
treason attempted against King James.
Winchester, the fifteenth of November, George Brook, brother to the Lord
Cobham, Sir Griffin Markham, and Sir Edward Parham, Knights; Watson and Clarke,
Romish priests, Bartholmew Brooksby Esquire, and one Anthony Copley Gentleman
indicted. To conspire to kill the King,
To raise Rebellion,
To alter Religion,
To subvert the State,
To procure invasion by strangers.


And this was in the first year of his Majesty's Reign, for which were after
also arraigned and convicted Henry Brook, Lord Cobham, late Lord Warden of the
Cinque Ports, Thomas Lord Gray of Wilton, and Sir Walter Raleigh, late Lord
Warden of the Stanneries: For which the two priests Watson and Clerk were
executed at Winchester, the twenty ninth of November, and George Brook was
beheaded the fifth of December, but all the rest by the Kings gracious clemency
had their lives pardoned, though some of them brought to the block, expecting
no other mercy but what the sharp axe of Justice could afford them.

The second treason (of the like to which was never president) was the attempt
to blow The powder Treason.
up the Parliament house, in which because it was so long predicted, I could
desire to be the larger, but that it is of such late memory, and new in the
mouths of all men, and so shall (no doubt) continue to all posterity: the
fatal day appointed for that horrid and most execrable fact was the fifth of
November, in the third year of his Majesty's Reign. The names of the
Conspirators were Henry Garnet, a principal Jesuit resident in England,
Robert Catesby Gentleman, Francis Tresham Esquire, Thomas Winter Gentleman, The
names of the Conspirators.
Thomas Percy, John Wright, Guido Vaux, who went by the name of John Johnson,
Master Percy's man, John Grant, Ambrose Rookwood, Sir Everard Digby, etc. The
discovery thereof was as follows. About ten days before the Parliament should
begin, the Lord Mounteagle son and Heir to the Lord Morley, lying in the
Strand, a stranger met his man in the street, and delivered him a Letter to
give to his Lord, the contents were as follows.

MY Lord, Out of the love I have to some of A Letter sent to the Lord
Mounteagle.
your Friends, I have care of your preservation: therefore I would advise you,
as you tender your life, to devise some excuse to shift off your attendance on
the Parliament, for God and man have conspired to punish the wickedness of
this time, and think not slight of this advertisement, but retire your self
into your Country, where you may expect the event in safety, for though there
be no appearance of any stir: yet I say, they shall receive a terrible blow
this Parliament, and yet they shall not see who hurt them: this counsel is not
to be contemned, and can do you no harm. For the danger is past, so soon as
you have burnt the Letter, and I hope God will give you grace to make good use
of it, to whose holy protection I commend you.

And this came unto him without date or name, in a counterfeit and unperfect
hand, which Letter coming to the Kings hand, when none of the Counsel could
sound the depth thereof, (though they were men of great wisdom and experience)
His Majesty was the first that took notice of these words in this Letter, They
shall The Kings wisdom first discovered this treason.
receive a terrible blow, which he conjectured to be by a blast of powder, and
therefore commanded all the places under the Parliament House to be searched the
night before their first sitting: which charge was given to Sir Thomas Knivet,
Gentleman of the Kings privy Chamber, who attended with a small number came to
the place at midnight, where at the entry he found Fawks (Percies pretended
servant) booted and spurred, and apprehended him, and having removed certain
billets and coals laid their under a color, he first discovered one small
barrel of powder, and after all the rest, being in number, thirty six with
other Engines fit for that bloody purpose, there was also found in Fauxes
pockets, a piece of touchwood, and a Tinderbox Guido Faux apprehended.
to light it, and a Match which Percie and he had bought the day before, to try
conclusions for the long or short burning of the tuchwood, prepared to give
fire to the train of powder: then they carried him bound to be examined before
An obstinate Traitor.
the Council: who would acknowledge no other name but John Johnson Percy's
man, stiffly denying that he knew any complotters in that horrible Treason,
justifying the act good and warrantable by Religion, denying the King to be his
Liege Lord, or Gods Anointed, because he held him for an Heretic, only
repenting him that the deed was not done, saying, that good would have
concealed it, but the Devil himself only discovered it.

This Treason after broke into a practice of Rebellion, of which the
circumstances are too large to stand upon: Diverse of them being besieged in an
House together, as they were drying of wet powder, a blunt Miller let a coal
fall amongst it, by which most of them were cruelly scorched, tasting
themselves in some measure of that fire-plot prepared for others: Catesby and
Percy issuing out of the House were shot to death, and their heads set after
upon the parliament House, and their quarters upon the gates of Warwick: after
them issued both the Wrights who were slain also, Thomas Winter hoping the
Those that were arraigned at Westminster.
like fate was taken alive, these following were by an honorable Trial
arraigned at Westminster, Thomas Winter, late of Hardington in Warwickeshire
Gentleman, Guido Faux late of London Gentleman, Robert Keys late of London
Gentleman, Thomas Bates late of London Yeoman, these were first called to the
bar: and alleged against them for plotting to blow up the Parliament House
with Gunpowder, for taking oath and sacrament for secrecy, for hyring an House
near unto it, for digging a mine, and finding the mine faulty, hyring a Celler
for lodging of powder, match, and touchwood into the Celler to effect their
Treason.

Robert Winter late of Hardington Esquire, elder brother to the aforesaid
Thomas: John Grant late of Yarthbrooke in Warwickeshire Esquire, Robert
Rookwood late of Sunningfield in Suffolk Esquire, these were indicted for being
acquainted with the Treason after, for giving their full consents thereto, for
taking the Sacrament for secrecy: Sir Everard Digby, late of Galhurst in
Buckinghamshire Knight, for being acquainted with the Treason, for giving
assent, for taking an oath: all which were convicted, condemned, drawn, hanged
and quartered: also upon Friday the twenty eight of March in the fourth year
of the King, Henry Garnet the Henry Garnet provincial of the Jesuits executed.
provincial or principal of the English Jesuits, was arraigned at Guild Hall
in London, upon the same Treason, and condemned, and after drawn from the Tower
to the West end of Paul's, was executed like the former Traitors: Thus we see:
That from the old Lupanar Wolves were sent,
To undermine both crown and government:
Striving in Hell to register their names,
By blowing up the State in powder flames, etc.


The word Lupanar comes from Lupa, a she Wolf or Prostitute, so was the wife
of Fanstulus the Nurse to the two Infants Romulus and Lupanar, she was also
called Acca Laneratia.
Remus (the first erectors of Rome) called, from Lupa comes also Lupanar, that
is, a brothelhouse, and Idolatry is called fornication almost through the whole
Scripture, and from Rome, had these Arch-traytors, their Incendiary, etc.

Amongst other Royal Visitants Christianus, the fourth of that name King of
Denmark, came into England, royally attended to see his The King of Denmark
comes into England.
brother in law King James, and his natural sister Queen Anne, whom the King
in person met a shipboord with Prince Henry, The Duke of Lenox, and diverse of
the Nobility, and dined with him in his Cabin, the two Kings afterward rode
triumphantly through the City of London, the Ambassadors of France, Spain, and
Venice, being spectatours of the solemnity: Here He was royally and
magnificently entertained and feasted till his return, etc. who liked his
welcome so well, that he came hither the second time. And in all the passages
of His Majesty's Reign, where was nothing seen but peace, tranquillity and
quietness, there is no subject to write on, but of sundry Plantations during
his Reign, as in Virginia, Bermudas, or the Summer Islands, etc. Of men raised
to Office and Honor, of his several Embassies into Foreign Countries, to
make peace and atonement betwixt divided Kingdoms, and his enterchangeable
entertayning of their Ambassadors: of the marriage of the Lady Elizabeth, to
the prince Palatine: of the death of that most hopeful plant of Honor and
Royalty Prince Henry, of whom I have read this Epitaph. In Natures law, it is a
plain case to die;
No cunning Lawyer can demurre on that, An Epitaph upon Prince Henry.

For cruel death and fat all destiny,
Serve all men with a final Latitat: (tryde,
So brave Prince Henry, when his cause was
Confessed the action, paid the debt and did.


I may also put you in remembrance of the new erecting of the Artillery Garden,
of the New River brought to London, of the building of the New Exchange in the
Strand, and Hicks Hall, of Censures in the Star Chamber, in the High Commission
Court, the burning of the Banquetinghouse, etc. of Sir W. Raleigh's execution
at Westminster, etc. the creating of George Villiers Gentleman Duke, and his
Mother Countess of Buckingham; with infinite other peaceable passages, but
these are now out of my road. In the year one thousand six hundred and
eighteen, upon Wednesday the eighteenth of November, ablazing Star appeared,
and upon Tuesday the second of March following, at Hampton Court dyed Queen
Anne, of whom was made this Epitaph. The death of Queen Anne.
Her to invite, the great God sent his star,
Whose friends and kindred mighty Princes are,
Who though they run the race of men and die,
Death seems but to refine their majesty:
So did this Queen, from hence her Court remove,
And left the earth to be enthroned above:
Then she is changed, not dead, no good Prince dies,
But like the day star, only set to rise.


Upon Monday, the sixteenth of February, one thousand six hundred twenty three,
the King with the Nobility prepared to go to the Parliament House, but that
morning dyed Lodowick Duke of Richmond and Lenox, at Upon the death of the Duke
of Richmond and Lenox.
his lodging at the Court in White Hall, who is worthily remembered in this
Epitaph following. Are all diseases dead? or will death say,
She could not kill this prince another way?
Yes, it was so: for time and death conspired,
To make his death (as was his life) admired,
The Commons were not summond (now I see)
Merely to move laws, but to mourn for thee.
No less then all the Bishops could suffice
To wait upon so great a sacrifice.
The Court, the Altar was; the Waiters, peers.
The mirrh and frankineense, great Cosins tears.
A braver offering with more pomp and state,
Nor time, nor death, could ever celebrate.
Of King James his wisdom, integrity, bounty, his study of peace, which he
made good in his Motto, Beati Pacifici, and for all his other singular virtues;
He with a superarrogative overplus made good, what was before, for many years
predicted of him: all which may be included in this one Epitaph made upon him.
Can Christendomes great Champion sink away
Thus silently, into a bed of clay?
Can such a Monarch die? and not to have
An Earthquake (at the least) to open his grave?
Did there no Meteors fright the Universe,
Nor Comet hold a torch to light his Hearse?
Was there no clap of thunder heard to tell
All Christendom their loss? and ring his knell?
Impartial Fates: I see all princes then (men:
Though they lived Gods, yet they must die like
And the same passing bell, may toll for them
Which rung but now the beggars requiem.
When such a soul is from the earth bereaven,
Me thinks, there should be triumph made in Heaven;
The stars should run at tilt, at his decease,
To welcome him into the place of peace:
Who whilst he lived, in peace lived, and did
Being in peace, to keep peace still alive: (strive,
No widows curses, and no Orphants cries,
Shall interrupt his hallowed obsequies:
For their slain husbands, or their fathers lost
In bloody war: to wake thy peaceful ghost.
Let thy great predecessors boast the pryse
Of glorious (and yet bloody) victories.
Let them upon their sepulchers expose,
Triumphs of war; and spoil of foreign foes,
And glory to have turned the harvest field:
To a pitched Camp: and ploughshare to a shield,
So that on bloody furrows there were born
As many blades of steel, as now of corn
Yet shall thy praise be greater, since thy joy
Was to plant nations rather then destroy,
And though no mortal trophy speak thy praise,
Because no drop of blood has staind thy days:
Yet this sure truth, their greatest fame controls
They subdued bodies, thou have conquered souls.
Truth was thy banner, the thrice sacred word,
Thy target and thy pen a two edged sword.
But lo, when Spanish coast, Romes canon shot,
False Gowries treason, Cateshy's powder plot,
Could not destroy (all these thy fate did brave.)
A Fever would needs bring thee to thy grave.
For (being mortal) fate could not invent
His passage by a nobler instrument
Then his own blood: which made him compre-
Within himself the glory of his end. (hena
Like to a circle, this rich Diamond must
Be cut by no means else then it is own dust.
Thus is our Sun set, never to return.
Pay therefore tri^ute to his funeral urn,
All peaceful souls; and with true sorrows sense:
Give unto him your hearts benevolence.
Of pious tears, then turn you from the West,
To see the new Sun rising in the East.


King Charles the first of that name King of Prince Charles proclaimed King.
England, began his Reign on Sunday the twenty seventh of March, one thousand
six hundred twenty five, and the next day after commanded by proclamation, that
all Officers and Magistrates of what degree or quality soever through out his
whole Dominions should sti^l use and exercise all such power and authority as
they held from his Father (of blessed memory) until his pleasure were further
known: and on Saturday the seventh of May next ensuing, were performed the
Funeral rites of his Father King The Funeral of King James
James, and his corpse with all magnificence and state carried from Denmark
house in the Strand, to Westminster Abbey Church, King Charles being the
chief and principal Mourner, artended with all the Nobility, Clergy, and
Judges, with sundry Ambassadors, and all his officers and domesticke servants
in mourning habits. His Hearse being more royally adorned and attended then any
of his predecessor Kings, in which magnificent solemnity his corpse was
interred in the Chapel Royal, etc.

I should now pr^ceed to the Reign of the high, mighty and invincible Prince
Charles, concerning whose sacred person (my rude pen dare not be so bold, nor
with any of his just and Of Prince Charles.
royal proceedings, but am rather content to leave them to those of more
knowing and bet ter approved judgments, and more frequently verst in state
business, and the laws and limits that belong to History and Chronology then
my self: yet thus far according to my weak Talent and crassa Minerva, let
me borrow leave to confer on him (though far short of his great meed and merit)
a brief character: He is a Prince wise and just, crowned with all the
especial gifts of nature and fortune, but (which far transcends the rest)
plenteously endowed with all heavenly graces: Blessed in a Royal, chaste and
beautiful Consort, blessed with a most hopeful and numerous Issue, conspicuous
in the four Cardinal virtues, Justice, Prudence, Temperance, and Fortitude,
grounded in the three Theological Graces, Faith, Hope, and Charity,
illustrious in all other Virtues which generally adorn men, but make a Prince
greatly admired and gloriously eminent: whom with his incomparable Queen, the
unparalleld Prince his son, with the rest of his Royal Issue, God Almighty
in his great providence, and infinite mercy, continue in long life, health,
prosperity and happiness, etc.

FINIS.

