HOGS CARACTER OF A PROJECTOR.

WHEREIN IS DISCIPHERED The manner and shape of that Vermin.

With some other witty conceits unhappily falling out in these distracted
times, in the Kingdom of England, and Ireland.

And in Relation to a Book lately Printed, Entitled PIGS CORANTOE, or News
from the North, being near Alliance the one to the other; and therefore thought
good to join them together for the better satisfaction of diverse.



LONDON, Printed for G. Tomlinson, July 15. 1642.

HOGS CARACTER OF A PROIECTOR.
HE is a Mongrill by birth, his father was an Hittite, his mother was an
Amorite; his education in his youth was with a Poer, and by him infected with
strange raptures and whimsees, which he strives to put in practice, and calls
them Projectors. His riper years were corrupted with the abominable terms of
Lawyers latin, and Pedlers french; His actions at the first spoke him honest
and politic, but the ends he ayms at, proves himself the clean contrary way.
He is in his discourse a Gimnosophist, by religion a Bannion, and in his faith
an Alcumist.

He is a maker of News, as well as of new invention, and for the most part
happy in his proceedings; for which one and the same devise, he can both tickle
the ears of the King, and the purses of the Commons; he fears not the Devil so
much, as a reference to them that love their Country; nor God so well as a
good certificate from a Time-observer.

His eye, observes Master Attorney, as Banks his Horse does his Master, and
after long waiting like a Spaniell, with expense both of money and brains, he
is rewarded as they feed Apes, with a bit and a knock.

He is like the winter foul that knows their seasons; and you shall find as
many Projectors in Parliament (...) Woodcocks in Summer: And of all profesions,
a (...), a Pimpe, a Cobbler, and a Projector, hate to be called by their proper
names, though they love their trades.

He is the only Corn-cutter of the times, his greatest fault only is the
unsteadinesse of his hand, which makes incision into the quick, when it should
but pair away the deadflesh: His wit is to search out the abuses of the rimes
an^ laugh to at them that simply thinks he intends to amennd them. His
Masterpiece is to propose the (...) of Reformation, caught in such terms, as
might take the ignorant with applause, for all his pretenses are preten^ed to
the benefit of the King, the good of the Commonwealth, and the employment of
1000 of poor people; but ^ood man Never, thinks of any benefit for himself.

He is one that always has more money in his mouth then in his purfe, and
feeds as heartily upon his Aerie hopes, as the News-mongers in Paul's upon Duke
Humphreys Cates

He is one that is wiser in his own conceit then the Privie-Councell, and can
refine a Commonwealth, better then a Parliament: You may read all the Poenall
Statutes, if his tongue do but chance to peep out of his mouth, only he makes
a quere, and demurrs upon primo Henry the eighth: where his Predecessors,
Empson, and Dudley were both honored with a hempton galland, and concludes
that Session to be Apocrapha; yet makes his brags to the vulgar, that they died
for the good of the Commonwealth, and deserve to be styled Martyrs. He is made
all of Cringes and Complements, as though he dropped out of the docke of a
Courtier; he can change himself into as many shapes, as Protaeus can do
colors, either a decayed Merchant, a broken Citizen, a silent Minister,
afore-judgd Attorney, a busy Solliciter, a cropeard Informer, pickthank
Pettifogger, or a Northren Tick that has more wit then honesty, and these are
your onlyest men that makes your bravest Projectors, who in short time may be
dignified with the Title of the Pest, or Canker general of the Commonwealth.

He is the onlyest executioner of summum sui, and so consequently must be the
maintainer of ^uma funiria: He is one of the chief undertakers of
improbabilities, or rather of impossibilities in this age.

He will puinguifie all manner of Pullen, with Parsnips and Turnips, fatten all
manner of four footed beasts without. either grass, hay, or any kind of
grain* make bread of Pumpions and Cowcumbers, and will find the guard Beef
and Brewis, till their bellies crack for God-amercy, and will victual the King
an Army without meat, and take all the Irish in a pu^se-ne^ that rebel.

He is an excellent Architector he will pull down White Hall, and build the
King a a Palace to which the Banqetting-house shall be but half the Porrters
Lodge, and all at his own cost and charges if the King will but give him leave.

He will turn an ^^spitall Courtand (...)he Savoy to Sommerset-house if the
Duchy were not between, and then the poor people may be admitted in forma
pauperis, to seek their lodgings without a certificate from their parish.

He is the only immitator of Guido Faux and his dark lantern, and by it has
made a device to convey people above ground that see every body and none see
them, with the help of two-footed beasts, and has jugled it into credit with a
strange name called a Sedan.

He will turn all Wagons, Carts, and Coaches, into the manner of Wind-mills, to
sail to their stages for the benefit of the Kingdom, in sparing Horseflesh
for the Wars and to that intent has got a Patent to make wooden horses fit
for Brewers, Butchers, Maulsters, and Carriers, that shall do as good service
as if they were alive, carry greater burdens, and fast much longer.

He was borne under the sign of Aquarius, and has an Art to convey himself
like a Dive-dopper, from Gravesend, to Amsterdam, to reconcile all Religions
there, and make them of one opinion. But Hog had rather he would go into
Ireland, and appeal them there; for it is no true Religion to rebel against
their Prince.

He can sail against wind and tide through Londonbridge, clear the thames of
shelves and sands, weigh up all wracks though in the bottom of the Sea, and
fifty fathom under water, blow up the enemy with fire.

If you seem to mis-doubt these, he hugs himself with conceit of your
ignorance, and his own wit. If you question him, his answer is, this Age is a
cherisher of Arts and new inventions, the former dull and heavy. That these
times are active, as appears by the Drayning of the Fenns, building of Towns
and Churches, repairing of Paul's, His Majesty's expedition into the North, and
concludes Nihil est quod (...) solecta vincat. He is a buie^^ody that gets
small thanks for his labor; yet to say truth, he is a man has very great
knowledge in knavery, and knows the mystery of all Trades.

He knows how to dye silk to make it weigh heavy, he knows that diverse
sorts of Wool mixed together, will never cotton well to make good Demicasters.

He knows those Maulsters are knaves, that make eight bushels of Barley, yield
above nine in Malt; and I protest in good earnest, he does deserve well, if he
could pluck out the beam of his eye, that he might see the clearer to make them
honest men.

He is neither Fool nor Physician, yet undertakes to reform all abuses in the
body Politic, with these 3. words Carolus Dei gracia, etc. like Scotto the
Montebanke, that cures all diseases with one powder; he is a great traveller in
England and Wales, but dares not go into Ireland with his projects.

He is or would be a man of great government, for he desires all things might
go according to his will, which he suspects (...) be reasons: He discourses
much of the dangers, and fortefi^^ his reasons with old wives tales, which he
believes to be Prophesies, as Lincoln was, London is, and York shall be, and
one of the deep (...) affair, he frighted a company of silly Citizens out of
their House and Estates here at London to York, hoping to be rich, and will
make them a Corporation there free of the Suburbs.

He is a rare extractor of Quintissences, he will draw from the dregs and
essence of Bear, Ale, Wine, Tobacco, Brick, Tyles, Soap, Starch, Allome, Cards,
Dice, and Lobsters, Cum multis aliis, the pure spirit of gold, by imposing a
fine and an Annual rent upon those that take Pattents to sell them, and suffer
others to sell for nothing.

He is one whose Arse makes buttons by bushells at the noise of a Parliament,
more then the Irish do at the sound of English drumes.

^ be taken in the first battle, but dares not go himself, but stays behind
for to ingrose all the Parsnips and Carrets that comes to London to make
Dildoes for Citizens wives, old maddams, and poor whores that are left behind.

Now you have heard the progress of his life; pray listen to his death: He
fell sick of a scouring, at a Reference, founded at a Certificate, lay in a
Trance at Master Atturneys, and recovering, fell into a relaspe, where he
dreampt of Angels ascending and descending, but waking found not his Patent
sealed, he died of an obstructional stopping (...) the Great Seal, and made no
Will as his Predecesso^^^ did.

Only you shall hear his Funeral.
He was buried in Pomp, the Companies of London going before, and the
Corporations he had made, and the Country and Suburbs behind. He was carried
from the Temple-walks without Heralds to the Devil and St. Dunstons, where he
lies Interred, hoping to be saved by Apollo.

FINIS.

