Three Sermons preache^ at the Collegiate Church in MANCHESTER.

The first, on Psalm. 122. ver. 6. July 8. 1640. the public Fast day: Showing
the misery of War, with our fears and hopes and means of Prevention.

The second, on 2 These. 2.15. November 5. 1638. Discovering the Man of sin,
with his delusions, abominations and desolations.

The third, on Genesis 49. ver. 5.6, 7. November 5. 1639. Laying open the
Perjuries, Treacheries, Treasons, the Murders, Massacres, Cruelties, of
Rome-Christian.

By Richard Heyricke, Warden of the said COLLEGE.

LONDON, Printed by T. B. for L. Fawn, and are to be sold at the sign of the
Parat, in Paul's Churchyard 1641.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable, the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the Commons
House of Parliament, now ASSEMBLED.
VEspatian the Emperor, sent to ELVIDIUS PRISCUS, a Senator of ROME, charging
him not to appear in the Senate; If he did to speak no otherwise then what
he would have him, to whom he returned; As a Senator, it was fit he should be
there, and being there, he would freely speak his conscience; The Emperor
replied, if he did, he should dye for it: He answered, he never said he was
immortal; do what you will, J will do what J ought. It is in your power
unjustly to put me to death: It is in my power to dye constantly.

It is your Royal privilege, Your persons are under his Majesty's sacred
protection, your liberty of speaking, granted to be without interruption,
Awake, Psalm. 108 1.
your glory, do ye your selves awake right early; Let your hearts be fixed,
fixed in the Lord, as the Poles of Heaven, and the center of the earth, Let
Righteousness, be your Parliament Robes, let Judgment be your Crown and
Diadem, Job 29.14.
let causes at your great Tribunal he heard to speak, not persons; That the
blessing of three perishing Kingdoms may come upon you.

I was but lately Removed into these parts, and one of special note forewarnd
me, I should be Crucified, as CHRIST was betwixt two Thieves; The Papist, the
Puritan. The Papist, like the Railing and Blaspheming Thief, soon discovered
himself. They swarm, and are terrible, the show of their countenance
witnesses against them; Psalm. 91.6.
Like destruction, they show themselves at Noonday: The Puritan (if it be
not only a name, without an existence) is worthy your wisdom, to tell us who
he is; It may be, for fear of crucifying, with the good Thief he is stolen
into Paradise; the name is of Vast, and amongst many of Odious signification:
Papists do charge the Church of England with the heresy of Puritanisme: King
James, by Bellarmine, metamorphosed into his Chaplain, was said to be a
Puritan; The English Parliament is called a Puritanicall Parliament. The
University of Oxford, the strength of Puritanisme. Bristow speaks out. All
Protestants in ENGLAND are Puritans, Protestants at large, such as are
Ambitious of the credit, not of the truth of their holy profession; Heathens in
lives, Christians in faith; They reproach civil moral Jnfidels with that
name: They Pharisaicall Professors; They powerful CHRISTIANS.

Yea, of late I have also heard them much branded with the name, that would not
yield up their Souls, and their Consciences, to the Chair of Bishops, with
their estates, Liberties, and Lives, to the will of their Superiors. The name
is very large and very reproachful: A Bishop affirmed he could as easily fetch
one off from the guilt of Felony, as from the imputation of Puritanisme; My
humble motion is, make us all Puritans, or to leave no Puritan amongst us.

There are walls of partition, (when those that were of GODS Institution, became
enmity, Ephesians. 2.14. CHRIST laid them as flat, as the Walls of Jericho, with
Iericho's curse upon them.) Be pleased to batter down these Walls, lay the
Canons in the face of them, and JERVSALEMS curse upon them; Let not one stone
be left upon another: At the first of the Reformation they were, though not
necessary, yet, lawful, our Reformers were modest and moderate; They would not
unnecessarily offend the weak Romanist, GOD had a People amongst them, the
waters of BABYLON were ebbing: But now since the Sea of ROME, like the waters
of JORDAN, begin to swell, and overflow the Banks, since the great River TIBER
flows apace, since the Papists are emboldned, and hardened in their Idolatry
and Superstition, since the strong, as well as the weak Protestant, are
grieved and vexed with them, and there are indeed too many false Apostles, that
earnestly contend for them, and with a strong and mighty hand obtrude them
upon us. Take unto your selves the Zeal of Our LORD and SAVIOR; The
Evangelist records, he twice purged the Temple: The multitude of offenders,
the might and malice of the observers, the danger of the action, nor the peril
of the consequence stays his hand. The King of Scythia slew Anacharsis the
Philosopher, for the worshipping the mother of the GODS, after the Athenian
manner; If the Plague of Leprosy could not be cleansed, by taking away a few
stones out of the house, but the Leprosy would return again, then the house,
the Timber, Lev. 14.43, 45.
the Mortar must down: when Ceremonies become scandalous, they are to be
abolished.

These Sermons suit well with two of the greatest works, the Kingdom expects
from you; They breath enmity to Rome, Peace amongst our selves, Preached when
the times ran Counter to both; The man of sin of late years has revived
amongst us, (it may be a lightening before death,) Popery has multiplied
abundantly. In Lancashire it has superabounded above an Hyperbole: The Mass
has outfaced our Christian meetings, Jesuits have jeered our Ministers,
confronted and abused authority.

MANCHESTER, the Goshen (accounted) in this Egypt, is of late years, darkened
with the blackness of it, some of our prime men in dignity, authority, power,
have revolted to them; Their example commands many, Great men have their
followers, of their Vices, as of their persons, and when they please to be
Idolatrous, their children, servants, tenants, their poor kindred, and
Jdolizing Neighbors, will to the Mass with them. One special cause of this
increase of Popery, is the vastness, and the greatness of many Parishes,
preferred to the trust of such, that add Church unto Church, themselves
residing at neither, or if they are with their people, they are non resident in
the midst of them, yea too often when they are in the Pulpit; These
Mother-Churches have many daughters, seven, eight, nine CHAPELS, subject to
them, to which belongs no certain, or no competent maintenance; Hence
ignorance and profaneness, desolate places, full of doleful Creatures, Ziim
and Ochim: Isa. 13.21
King James in his piety and wisdom, appointed 4. Lancashire Preachers, to
perfect his work: Let every Golden Candlestick have his Lamp burning and
shining in it: devils could not stand before the Gospel; therefore Popery
shall be consumed by it. 2 These. 2.8.


J had served in these parts, the same time that PAUL did at Athens, and my
spirit was troubled to hear and see, the superstition; Hence, I ventred (with
danger enough) to preach these Sermons; may they strengthen your hands in that
great work you are about; Ezra 6.14.
It would be the glory of this latter age, could there such a sheet be let
down to the Church, Acts 10.11.
as there was in vision to Peter, that the difference of clean and unclean
may be taken away, such a golden Scepter reached out that all may be subdued
unto it, and embrace it; O what an honor would it be to the present, and a
blessing to the future age, that a consent of Doctrine and discipline might be
confirmed by you, that we that profess one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one
GOD and Father of all under one King, may be one Church; That a Trinity of
Kingdoms, may be a Church in Unity. Pardon my presumption if my zeal for the
public peace, points at the means; A Royal Convocation, rightly constituted
unto which all the Kingdoms may send their Clarks would facilitate the
business, (It would add much to the glory of it, and be a Crown unto his
Crown who accounts it the most glorious in all his Crown to be worthy of that
Title, Defender of the Faith, if from all the reformed CHVRCHES, some may be
invited, if not to vote, yet at least to assist.

The reason wherefore General, National, Provincial Counsels, have in this
last Century been so fatal, and therefore by some of singular eminency been
disclaimed, as a meet means for the settling of peace, is because the
greatest part have their standing Votes, who will ever maintain a strong
party for themselves; Is it equal that Archbishops, Bishops, Deanes,
Archdeacons, Chapter men, should of course, and by reason of their dignities
have their places and their suffrages, when but two Clerks are elected by the
choice of the Clergy; May the Election of the Clarks for the Convocation be as
free as yours for the Parliament, and in some proportion unto it, J doubt not
but we should be as happy in our Canons, as we are in your Statutes.

There has been strange batteries made upon our Religion, the thirty nine
Articles are challenged by the Harlot, Papists and Arminians claim them as
theirs, the Book of Homilies are disclaimed, unheard of violation has bin
offered to the second, to the fourth Commandments, Preaching is cried down,
Preachers discountenanced. The Sacraments have been defiled, the people of the
Lord have been made to abhor the offering of the Lord, Press and Pulpit
have vomited forth corrupt and undigested matters. Augustus made a Bonefire of
all such books, that corrupted the Roman Ethnic Religion, it would be your
wisdom to make a diligent search for all Apocryphal books, Heretical,
Popish, Semi-pelagian Pamphlets, slanderous Libels, and impertinent writings,
and to sacrifice them to Vulcan. We pray for great things to be done by you, we
have open our mouths wide to the Lord we have heard of great things of you:
Ps. 81.10
the Lord prosper you to an happy, and blessed conclusion, for a glorious
reformation of Church and Commonwealth; The Counselor, The mighty God, the
everlasting Father, the Prince of peace, he upon whose shoulder the government
lies; Isa. 9.6, 7
increase your government and peace, order you and stablish you with judgment,
and justice, henceforth for ever: the Zeal of the Lord of HOSTS, perform this.

Your Honors in all sincerity service and duty, Richard Heyricke.

The first SERMON.
PSALM. 122. ver. 6. Pray for the peace of Jerusalem.


NOne can speak more punctually in the commendation of peace, then they that
have been long harrowed with War, David, a man of War, in his younger
days, he slew a Lion, he killed a Bear, he overcame Goliath, that
uncircumcised Philistim, that defied the Host of Israel, in his riper years he
conquered the Canaanites, the Amorites, the rest of those heathenish Nations,
he had seven years war with the house of Saul, War with his rebellious
subjects, with his treacherous, ^ Chro. 22.8.
traitorous son, God witnesses that he had shed blood abundantly, that he
had made great wars, in his latter days he had a breathing time of peace, in
which respite and Interim, he prepares to build God an house, he rejoices in
his preparation, and prays for the prosperity of it, and encourages others to
pray,

Pray for the peace of Jerusalem. Jerusalem, either the City Jerusalem, the
Metropolis, the chief City, the Royal City, the City of the great King, the
London of the kingdom of Israel, wherein the Thrones of Judgment, the Courts
of Justice, Westminster Hall was, wherein the thrones of the house of David his
Court, his Palace, his house, his Mansion, White Hall was, Or Jerusalem, taken
for the Temple in Jerusalem, the house of the Lord, the place whither the
Tribes went up, the Tribes of the Lord, to give thanks unto the name of the
Lord. And so by a figure for the Church of God, the Temple in Jerusalem was a
type of it, Or Jerusalem, taken for the whole kingdom, it being the chief
member of the kingdom, the Chamber of the kingdom, the stomach of that body
politic, which receives all the nourishment, the foreign Merchandise, and
disperseth them abroad to every member, take Jerusalem in the first sense, in
the strict and literal acception of the word, for the City Jerusalem, for the
London of that kingdom, Then pray for the peace of Jerusalem, for the City
London, that there may be no destroying plague, no evil disease, no infectious
sickness, no dissentions, no divisions, no commotions, no rising of lawless
Creatures, no rebellions, no Treasons, Pray that the forreiners and strangers
that are in the City, the Malcontent, and desperate heard, the Cananites
that dwell among them, the French, the Papists may not disturb their peace,
and prosperity, pray that David and Jerusalem, the King and the City, may
accord together, that the Thrones of Judgment, and the Thrones of the house of
David, Westminster Hall, and Whitehall, may be Thrones of Justice, of honor
and glory, take Jerusalem in the second acception, in a sense not so
restrained, for the Temple in Jerusalem, for the house of the Lord, for the
Church of God, and then pray for the peace of Jerusalem, for peace in the
Church, pray that there may be no heresy, no heretical doctrine, no
erroneous Articles of Religion, no Trent determinations, no Socinian
blasphemies, no Arminian quiddities, no Antinomian wickednesses, pray that
there may be no Schism, no separation, no wall of partition, no heathenish
customs, no Samaritan rites, no Idolatrous superstitions, no Popish
ceremonies, no Canons to Batter and terrify the consciences of Gods people,
pray that the whole Clergy may be of one spirit, not divided, not distracted
not torn in pieces, that one part may not speak prosperity in the ears of
the King, to send him to Ramoth-Gilead to dye there, and that the other part
may not humor and flatter the people to stubbornness and disobedience, pray
that the Church may be as Jerusalem, a City compact together to which the
people of the Lord may go up without offense, without trouble.

The Temple in Jerusalem was built by Solomon a King of peace, in a time of
peace, there was no instrument of Iron, no tool of the workman heard in the
rearing of it, Christ the Prince of peace, his Disciples the children of peace,
quiet fishermen, not hollowing hunters, and whooping Faulkoners: may the Church
be as the Temple Jerusalem, as the School of Christ, a City, a house of
peace: take Jerusalem in in the third sense, in the largest acception of the
word, for the whole kingdom of Israel, of which Jerusalem was the head City;
and then pray for the peace of Jerusalem, for peace in the kingdom, pray that
there may be no homebred conspiracies, none left of the house of Saul, to wage
war with the house of David, no discontented Sheba to blow the Trumpet of
sedition and rebellion, no flattering Absalom to steal away the hearts of the
Kings people, no gallant Adonijah, to make a strong party against Solomon, no
Achitophel Politician to give pernicious counsel against David, pray that
there may be no revolting in the kingdom that neither Edom nor Libnah, 2
Chro. 21.10.
no kingdom nor Country, no City, nor Town, nor person may fall from their
allegiance to the King, Pray that there may be no foreign enemy, no Syrian,
no Assyrian, no Egyptian, no Roman, no Turk, no Saracen, no Italian, no
Spaniard, no Dutch, no French, Pray for the peace of Jerusalem, for all the
kingdoms that pertain to the King of Jerusalem, for all the Countries, Cities
and Towns in these kingdoms, for the Church in the kingdom, Pray for the
peace of Jerusalem, the City, the Church, the kingdom, Peace is taken in as
large a sense as prosperity, it comprehends all blessings, in the womb of it,
I shall principally take it, in the strictest sense, and Jerusalem in the
largest, and then the duty is, Pray for the peace of Jerusalem, that there may
be no war in the kingdom, War is only sweet to them that are ignorant of
it, Our kingdom has enjoyed a longer time of peace, then some kingdoms have,
of being, Our age has not been rowsed with the barking of uncouth-Wolves, the
midnight drum has not frighted our sleeps, the sounding trumpet has not
deaft our ears, our beacons have not been fired, our ships arrested, our
walls manned, our Towns have not been ransacked, our houses ruined, our women
ravished, our infants dashed against the stones, we have not sowed and the
stranger reaped, we have not built, and the enemy possessed, we have not been
confounded with strange languages, but peace has been within our walls, and
plenteousnesse within our dwellings, Peace, the daughter of the Gospel of
peace, Plenty, the daughter of Peace, Peace the glory of Heaven, the joy of
the whole world.

Pray for the peace of Jerusalem. IN the prosecution of which, I will show you
the misery of War, the great danger that we are in of having war, the
hopes that remain to escape it, I begin with the first.

First, consider the misery of war, The sword is one of Gods four sore
Judgments, whereby he lays waste and makes desolate the greatest kingdoms,
Ier. 15.3.
And I will appoint over them four kinds (says the Lord) the sword to slay,
and the dogs to tear, and the fowls of the Heaven, and the beasts of the
earth, to devour and destroy. For thus says the Lord, Ezekiel. 14.21.
how much more when I send my four sore Judgments upon Jerusalem, the sword,
and the famine, and the noisome Beast, and the Pestilence, to cut off from it
man and Beast? Where you may be pleased to observe, the sword is not only one
of the four, but the first of the four; the most devouring, the most
destroying, God usually sends none of these judgments, but when his patience
is much wounded, when his Royal Indignation is kindled, when his Justice is
forced, when his mercy has no more to say. God has a store house, a rich
treasury, a Magazen of judgments, there are all Instruments of death, and
blood, sickness to death, and sicknesses not to death, Agues and Feavours and
consumptions, and these God usually sends before the destroying Pestilence, God
has his Staff, and his Rod, his Bow and his Arrows, with these he corrects
the sons of men, before he draws his sword, his sword furbished and
glittering, to make a sore destruction, Jupiter throws not at first his
dreadful Thunderbolts, The heavens usually grow dark and black, the clouds
gather together, the rain falls, the lightning breaks forth, the sword, the
famine, the noisome beast, and the Pestilence, they are in the darkest, in the
most inward room of the Castle and Tower, which God never opens till he be
hard put to it, till his lesser judgments are despised: see the method of Gods
proceedings, Lev. 26.18, 28.
he will proceed from few to many, from less to greater, he will punish us
seven times more for our sins, when the four winds break loose, when any
of these four judgments come, then God is angry indeed; of these four
judgments, the sword; the famine, the pestilence, and noisome beasts, the sword
is the worst of the four, that which God reserveth till the last, as the
greatest witness of his displeasure, and the swiftest messenger for our
destruction: any one of these four, brings fear and trembling, horror and
terror, palenesse and death: if the pestilence, which is but Gods Arrow, if
that be let off of the string, though in any part of the kingdom, the Arrow
that flies in the dark, that usually poisons most in the dark corners of the
land, amongst the poorest sort of people, yet what a fear it strikes into the
body of the whole kingdom; if but one City be infected, what flying out of
the City, what watch and ward, what strict examination and doings of all that
come from that City, every one being like Cain, afraid of every one that meet
them least they should kill them, runnagates upon the face of the earth,
Remember the fear that surprised you, when GOD shot this Arrow but into one
house of this Town, when it fetched the heart-bloud but from a few, what
flying, what posting away, your selves, your households? my Brethren, if the
plague be so terrible, what will the sword be, that comes after the plague,
more fierce, more terrible, by how much the mercies of man, are less then the
mercies of God, yea when the sword comes the rest of these four Judgments
attend on it, The plague may come alone, and the famine may come alone, and
noisome beasts may come alone, these oftentimes come before the sword, if
possible, to prevent it, but when they cannot do the work, the sword will then
contemn the rod, Eze 21.10
set at naught what ever the former judgments have done, it will come furbished
and sharpened, and this black guard of pestilence, famine, noisome beasts,
will be at the heels of it, The sword lays men dead in the fields, it ruins
Towns and houses, it leaves the fields unplowed, unharrowed, unsowed, hence
famine grows grievous, that kills whom the sword escapes, the noisome stinch
of the dead begets plagues, that and the famine together poisonous beasts,
travel over those parts of Germany where the sword has raged, and tell me if
the plague, the famine and the pestilence, if one of these plagues be so
terrible, what will they all be, when they are confederate and joined in one,
when the sword comes there will be no escape, for he that flies the one shall
be overtaken with the other, The sword is one of Gods four last judgments,
the last of the four, that which has the rest attending on it.

Secondly the misery that war brings is of that nature, that the spirit of
ingenuous and free borne men (of which we are, if any nation under heaven be)
can the least brook it, of any judgment, Go (says God to Gad, 2 Samuel 24.12.
David's seer) and say unto David, thus says the Lord, I offer thee three
things, choose thee one of them, that I may do it unto thee: It was a favor
that God vouchsafed unto David, that he never did (as I read of) to any beside,
that he should choose the rod, David had offended, there was some rank blood
in his veins, GOD must let him blood, or he must dye, and better he must
loose his corruption, then GOD lose him; purge him God will, but whether with
Pills, or with Potions, or with some Chymicall preparations, David has the
choice, choose thee one of them: there was three evils proposed unto him, three
of the greatest evils, three of those four evils which God usually reserves to
the last, to extremity, David must choose one, and by this he was sure, he
should not be afflicted with all, I am in a great strait, He was much
troubled, terrified, affrighted, Verse 14.
wherever he should make his choice, misery would follow his election; the
least of the three judgments was plague enough, yet he resolves, Let us fall
now into the hand of the Lord, (for his mercies are great) and let me not fall
into the hand of man, It is uncertain what Judgment DAVID made choice of,
whether the plague or the famine, it is certain he would not have the sword,
he had rather have any Judgment then to fly before his enemies, Indeed of
all judgments it is the judgment of judgments, I may call it the plague of
plagues, which an ingenuous people can least stoop to. Job the mirror, the
miracle of patience, Job 30 1, 8.
showed as much impatience in this temptation as in any, I am in derision with
them that are younger then I, whose fathers I would have disdained to have set
with the dogs of my flock, yea whereto might the strength of their hands
profit me, etc. they were children of fools, children of base men, they were
viler then the earth, they made me their song: peruse Habacuk the first, from
the fifth verse to the eleaventh, Behold ye among the heathen, and regard and
wonder marveilously, for I will work a work in your days, which you will not
believe though it be told you. For lo I raise up the Caldeans that bitter and
hasty. Nation, which shall march through the breadth of the land, to possess
the dwelling places that are not theirs, they are terrible and dreadful, their
judgment and their dignity shall proceed of themselves Their horses also are
swifter then the Leopards, and are more fierce then the evening Wolves, and
their horsemen shall spread themselves, and their horsemen shall come from
far, and shall flee as the Eagle that hastes to eat, They shall come all
for violence, their faces shall sup up as the East wind, and they shall gather
the captivity as the sand, And they shall scoff at the Kings, and the Princes
shall be a scorn unto them, they shall deride every strong hold, for they
shall heap dust and take it. Bring these home to your own doors, suppose
that Nation of the Spaniard, which the English have had cause to have had in
the greatest detestation, and abomination, that insolent and proud Nation, that
they were at this present marching into the Town, with their Colors flying,
their drums beating, their Trumpets sounding, suppose their Soldiers, the
rubbish, the scum, the filth of the Nation, were to ransacke and rifle your
houses, or at least to be but billetted among you, how could your spirits brook
it, to see them sit and command whilst you wait and attend, to see them embrace
your wives, kill your servants, beat your children, break open your Chists,
take away what ever is precious in your eyes; you that are now so high and
lofty, so tender, and impatient of the least injury, that cannot pass by any
offense, of your neighbors, of your equals, of your superiors, what if your
servants, your prentices, your drudges, should rise against you, yea what if
they, that your servants, your Prentices, your drudges would hate to have any
service from, those that are pressed out of your streets, whom your charity
formerly releeved, those whom your moneys clothed, who while they were amongst
you, would have been glad, with your dogs to have gathered the crumbs that
fell from your Table, if they should return, and rule and command among you,
if they should with Briers and Thorns whip you every morning, if they should
take your clothes from your backs, and tear your skin from your flesh, if
they should lie with your daughters before your faces, and commit all villainy,
and after all should fire your Town, should lead you captive away, should make
you horses for their carriages, o the miseries of war! what nature could stoop
unto it?

Thirdly, this judgment, of all judgments, God is the most backwards, the most
unwilling to bring upon his people, this shows the greatness of it,
Physicians will try all means, before they will cut off, they will let blood,
prescribe Pills and Potions, Sed si convaluerit malum, and ignis adhibetur and
ferrum. The sword is the last thing that God will use, yea God seems to be
afraid to use it, and therefore he deferres it from day to day, from year to
year. They that are troubled with the Stone, they will hardly be brought to
be cut for it, they will endure much first, they will try several Physicians,
several experiments, they will send for the Surgeon, and they will reason with
him, they will see his knife, they will enlarge their discourses, they will
send them away again and again, and they will send for them again, and for
other Surgeons, they are scarce drawn to it, Deuteronomy. 32.26, 27.
see the same of God. I said I would scatter them into corners, I would make
the remembrance of them to cease from among men, Were it not that I feared the
wrath of the enemy, least their adversaries should behave themselves strangely,
and least they should say, our hand is high, and the Lord has not done all
this, God loves not to afflict any, he afflicts none willingly from the heart,
affliction is a strange work to him, If necessity urges, he does it with
the Rods of men for their amendment, he will but correct them, not destroy
them, he is not hasty to cut off a member, it is the last, that which he is the
loathest to use, yea God seldom or never uses this plague, this judgment,
but he presently repents him of it, and avengeth the blood shed upon them that
shed it, Read at your leisure, 2 Chronicles. 28. ver. 9. Isay 10. verse 12. Rev. 6.
ver. 6.

Lastly, see some aggravating circumstances of this judgment, men are ever made
the instruments of war, and therefore this judgment is greater then that
immediately comes from GOD, those instruments of cruelty, the less they have
of reason, the more unreasonable, the more fierce in their cruelties, hence the
mercies of man are cruelty in respect of God, the cruelties of beasts far
worse than the rage of man, the war of Inanimate creatures, more raging then
that of the beast, The Lion, the Tiger know their bounds better then the fire,
the water, yet the depravation of the more eminent and excellent, is worse then
the mere negation in the other: when patience is abused in GOD it turns into
the heaviest fury, the least spark of his hell, is greater than the greatest
fire on earth: when men lose their reason, they are more mad then the beast
that never had it; bloody minded men are the Instruments of this punishment,
and of them, the most strong and stout and lusty, the most irreligious,
licentious, and violent persons, the most base, sordid and dunghill people;
Again in war no man can be master of his own, where ever the Soldiers
pass, their hands are bird-lyme, like the griping Griffin they seize upon all,
The Danites rob Micah, Judges 18.16.
and Micahs voice must not be heard, least when he cries for his goods, he
loses his life, war exhausts the Treasures of the Land, there will be many
borrowers that never will pay again, Thieves and Robbers, The Kings Exchequer
shall want money, the Chamber of the Kingdom shall be without supply, then
the Subject shall be made poor, no trading, much spending, Subsidies,
Fifteenes, Taxes, Privy seals, Shipmoneys, provision moneys, Conduct money, a
thousand ways to empty private purses, In war men dye many deaths, here
lies one without an Arm, a Leg, Trampled under the Horses feet, none
regards their cries, their lamentations, The Drums, the Trumpets drown their
voices: In war multitudes are led Captive, tortured and tormented, made
vassals and slaves; By war strangers and enemies invade our possessions,
possess our houses and lands, deprive us of our rights, liberties and
inheritances, by war unnatural slaughters are committed, oftentimes the
father fights against the son, and the son against the father, more blood
is shed in war than any other way: when GOD intends to destroy a stock, a
Country, a Kingdom, he sends war: by war might often prevails against
right, the worser part, the stronger, the ruins and desolations of war last
long, after a few months, the next year, may supply the defacings of the
plague, of famine; but many years, many ages to repair the loss by war.
You see the misery of War; As you would escape the fury of it, pray for the
continuance of our peace,

Pray for the peace of Jerusalem. Secondly, consider the great danger we are
in, of loosing our peace, of falling into the misery of war; GOD deals
fairly in the administration and execution of his justice, Surely the Lord
will do nothing but he will reveal his secret to his servants the Prophets,
Amos 3.7.
seldom or never does God bring general judgments upon a people but he gives
fair warning, he strikes not unawares; You have heard of late sad presages,
signs and forerunners of destructions, I will not tread that path again; The
sword is the plague we now fear, God has given us some warning, the sword
hangs over our heads, God has been long whetting his sword, he has blown
his Trumpet to the Battle, he has discharged his warning pieces, he has
charged his murdering pieces.

First, lay to heart that God has already visited us with all other plagues
and judgments, yea he has gone them over again and again: how often has
the Land groaned under the plague; what dearths and scarcities have we had:
what secret and wasting judgments have been consuming of us? GOD has run
through his Armory, his Treasury, Castles, Towers, Magazens, he has tried all
the rest of his judgments to see if they will bring us to Repentance, so that
none remains but the sword: has not GOD visited us with the plague, with
plague after plague, with dearth and famine, has he not made the heavens
brass, and the earth Iron? has he not let loose the four winds of the
earth, which have overthrown Ships and houses? has there not been
fearful earthquakes, thundering and lightning, strange divisions,
dissentions, mutinies, fearful sad things amongst us? What remains for God
yet to do? if all this will not do the work, but that he sends the sword,
the last, the worst of all, See Amos 4. verse 6. and so on.

I have given you cleanness of teeth in all your Cities, Verse 6.
yet have ye not returned unto me says the Lord.

I have withholden the Rain from you, Verse 7.
yet have ye not returned unto me says the Lord.

Verse 9.
I have smitten you with blasting and mil-dew, yet have ye not returned unto
me says the Lord.

Verse 10.
I have sent among you the Pestilence, yet have ye not returned unto me says
the Lord.

Verse 11.
I have overthrown some of you, as God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah, yet have
ye not returned unto me says the Lord.

He speaks after the manner of men in whom just indignation stoppes the
passage of further speech, The greatness of his wrath wants words to express
it self.

Verse 12.
And because I will come, prepare to meet thy God, O Israel, God will come
like a man of war, prepare to meet the Lord; See if thou be able to stand
against him with his sword drawn, furbished and sharpened, ready to make a
sore destruction, God has gone over other Judgments again and again,
therefore we may well fear the sword is now coming.

Secondly, God has sent the sword amongst other nations, we hitherto (like
Gideons fleece) have been dry, when all the earth about us has been drencht
with blood; the sword has been in Bohemia, in the Palatinate, in Denmark; in
Germany, in France, in Holland. The Cloud hitherto has bin violently carried
from us, and has emptyed it self in other parts; The sword has been filled
with blood and has been made fat with fatness, drunk with blood: when the
Angel of the Lord with his drawn sword had visited other places of the
kingdom, at last he came and stood over Jerusalem: when God has gone through
other Lands, and Countries, through other kingdoms and Churches, he will then
sheath his sword upon us. The Judges they are now in their Circuit, they have
their Commission from the King, to go from one County to another, the Judges
before they have done they will come in their Circuit to us, we must have our
Assizes, God has given his sword a Commission, it has been many years in
the Circuit, it is now come near unto us: The sword cannot be quiet, See
Jeremy 47.6, 7. O thou sword of the Lord, how long will it be ere thou be
quiet? put up thy self into thy scabberd, rest and be still; How can it be
quiet, seeing the LORD has given it a charge against ASKELON, and against the
Seashore? there has he appointed it.

The sword has been long unsheathed, and has gone in triumph over all the
world, besides, how can it be quiet, till it come among us? See what danger we
are in, the sword has been in other parts.

Thirdly, consider war has been at our very doors, we have not only heard
of it with our ears, but our eyes have seen the smoke, the fire of it has
touched our bodies, the enemy has been as near us as David to Saul when he
cut off the lap of his garment. The last year was not the enemy strong upon
our coast, a Potent, a powerful, a malicious enemy? I question not the end of
their coming, God and they know it, but was not the war at our gates, did
not the States, and the Spaniards, fight before our eyes when we stood still
and looked on? God might have joined them together against England. But he made
their sword drunk in the blood one of another, as the Lacedaemonians made their
servants, and slaves drunk, that we might see it, and fear. Again was not
the Trumpet the last year blown, was not a General made choice of,
Leivtenants, Coronels, Captains, and all officers, were there not many horse
and foot, they that went voluntary, and they that were pressed? did not the
King go himself, in person, set up his Royal standerds, lie in the eye, in
the sight of the enemy, surely the sword was then drawn, the knife was at the
throat, the men of war were prepared for the fight, there was great expense
of men, time and money, yet then the Lord delivered us, he returned the King
back again, and we had peace, David was in great danger when Saul and his men
of war encompassed him about, yet then GOD brought Saul back again,
Jerusalem was straightly besieged by the Caldeans, Ier. 37.5.
yet God hasted them away, war was at the back-doore.

Lastly, consider the war is now begun, the sword has begun to eat and
drink our flesh and blood, now is the time that Kings go forth unto war, Our
preparations are far greater, our hope of preservation far less, relapse
is the most dangerous; The second wrath is seldom appeased, God is now engaged
in the war, the means of deliverance became vain and empty, there has
been rysings and rebellions in the chief City of the Kingdom, the
Ordinances of war are in print amongst us, the men of war are gathered
together, we wait daily to hear of some bloody encounter, of some fearful
Stratagem, of some devilish damnable Massacre, some horrid and dreadful
Tragedy; Mat. 16.3.
The Pharisees were weather-wise, it will be foul weather to day, the sky is
red and lowering, they could discern the face of the sky, but they could not
discern the signs of the times, cast up your eyes and you shall see a Cloud
coming from the Sea, black and dreadful, covering the face of the heaven;
hearken a little, and you shall hear a sound of abundance of Rain, yea the
drops begin to fall upon your faces, stand still and be quiet, and you may
behold the approach of the enemy, the horror, the terror they bring with it,
certainly he that sees not that there is but one step betwixt him and death,
that we are all but dead men, he is either blind or stark mad; for the
Sword is drawn, War is fully prepared, War is ready.

Thirdly, consider what possibility there is yet of escape, what probability,
what hope, what comfort remains; Is there no balm in Gilead? Is there no
Physician there? Jacob was almost desperate, the famine was sore in the Land;
Joseph was not, Simeon was not, they were taking away Benjamin also. The Chief
Governor of Egypt, he spoke roughly to them, he imprisoned them as spies, he
conjures them that they should not see his face without their brother Benjamin,
Jacob was resolved he should not go, his sons would not go without him,
the famine increased upon them, something therefore Jacob must do, Genesis 43.11
If it must be so now (says he) do thus, take of the best fruits of the
Land in your vessels, and bring the man a present, a little Rosen, and a little
honey, spices, and Myrrh, Nutts and Almonds, and take double money in your
hand, and the money that was brought again in your sackes mouths, carry it
again in your hands, lest it were some oversight, Take also your Brother and
arise, and go again to the man; And God Almighty give you mercy in the sight
of the man, that he may deliver you your other Brother and Benjamin, etc.
There is the same beam of light and comfort left to us as was to Jacob, there
lies a necessity upon us, it must be so, we must down into Egypt, there is
yet a little Balm in Gilead, we must take double money, increase our prayers
to God, we must pray, God Almighty give us mercy, etc. David was exceedingly
distressed when the Amalekites burnt Ziklag, and had carried their wives and all that they had, captive, when all his people were disheartened and discouraged,
when they lift up their voices and wept, when they mutined against David, and
spoke of Stoning of him, yet then David encouraged himself in the Lord, there
is yet this left, 1 Samuel 30.8.
how ever we are sore distressed, yet we may encourage our selves in the Lord,
we may enquire of the Lord; Consider therefore (to encourage you to this duty)
this leading mercy that God has vouchsafed unto us, this liberty and
opportunity, that God has given unto us, this price that God has put into
our hands, that the whole kingdom may yet appear before God, and cry unto
GOD: my Brethren, this is not a little mercy. In the Prophet Malachy's time,
when the state of Gods Church and people was as desperate as now, both in
respect of sin, and in respect of judgment, Mal. 3.16.
they that feared the Lord spoke often one to another; It was a privilege,
they might have such free access, such communion, such fellowship together,
the times have been, when the people of God have fled into the wilderness,
into the deserts, into dens and caves, when they could not meet to fast and
pray, without great danger of distraction, of discovering, of presenting, of
imprisoning. The last year I heard it often whispered in the ear, and
secretly muttered, that the kingdom should prepare to war, and that God
should not be called in to the war, that there was no prayer, no fast
enjoined, this made some to fear, least God would join against us; See (my
brethren) the King, to whom alone it belongs to proclaim public Fasts, has
in his piety to GOD proclaimed a day of humbling our souls, and of
reconciling our selves to God, this promises some good unto us, it is an
argument, that we are prisoners of hope, when the enemy does parley with us:
there is some sign of yielding, when there is liberty of parley: God does
never reason with them for whom he has no mercy; He reasoned with Adam and
Eve, he did not with the Serpent. God cannot be angry with the prayers of his
people, he is then angry indeed when he forbids his people to pray, when he
takes away their hearts from prayer, when he denies them liberty to pray, when
they are restrained from prayer, but when GOD calls them to pray, when he
commands them to pray, when he stirs up a whole kingdom to pray, when he
makes those men, that have prayers in abomination, and the people of God for
their praying in abomination also, to countenance prayer, to join with the
people of GOD in prayer, to be of one heart with them, O what a glimpse of
mercy is this, certainly there is hope, whilst there is but one praying
Christian, amongst us, whilst any one that has a public spirit, whilst Moses
prays, the enemy cannot prevail, whilst Luther lived, the Duke of Saxony
could not be conquered, yea there is hope, if there were not one praying
Christian in the midst of us, if there be any of another kingdom, that pray
for us. Abraham, that was a very stranger to Sodom and Gomorrah, prevailed
far with God, for them, his prayer saved his nephew Lot, his Wife and
daughters: we have a multitude of prayerfull Christians, that pray daily for
us, that are not amongst us: all the reformed Churches abroad, especially our
friends and kindred, that are lately separated from us in Holland, in New
England: Yea let me appeal unto your selves, have not most of you, as Daniel
did, in your Chambers fasted and prayed? have you not in your families, have
not the men fasted apart, and the women apart? has there not been private
notice given, as Esther to Mordecai, Mordecai to the Jews in Shusan? Yea that
which Crowns all, is there not now a Proclamation gone forth, through all
Countries, to command every one, Church and Chapel, to fast? my brethren, a
little encourage your selves in the Lord; The God of Israel is a merciful God,
we cannot come with halters about our necks, but he will have mercy on us. The
Lion of the Tribe of Judah will not trample upon the yielding pray. The
Comforter will comfort whom he has convinced, of sin, of righteousness, and
of judgment: Let me speak comfortably unto you then, in the words of Manoa's
wife unto him, when he was much afflicted; Surely we shall dye (says he)
because we have seen God, No (says she Judges 13.23. Judge 13.23
) if the LORD were pleased to kill us, he would not have received a burnt
offering and a meat offering at our hands, neither would he have showed us
all these things, nor would now have told us any such.

Again consider what great things, fasting and praying have done, the prayers
of one man, of one family, of one City, of one Kingdom, God is the same GOD
as ever, the father of mercy, the God of compassion: we are not confirmed,
because he changes not: fasting and prayer have prevailed, why not still?
Call to mind the memorable things recorded in the book of God, especially
that of Mordecai, and the City of Shushan, of Ezra and his company, look into
the book of God, and tell me if you can find one good or bad, that ever
fasted and prayed, and God had not respect unto it, Iehosaphat when the
Moabites and Ammonites a great host came against them, ready to swallow them
up, yet he prevailed; call to mind Ecclesiastical History, in Marcus Aurelius
time, and Theodosius time, that thundering Legion, when the Christians prayer
obtained an admirable victory; That of Luther and the Church, when the devil
brought in the covenants, call to mind what you your selves have obtained by
fasting and prayer, I could tell you of some singular things that have fallen
within mine own knowledge, wonderful things has the public fasting-prayers
of our Church obtained of God. Nay more to encourage you, look into your own
Town, when God sent that infectious disease of the small Pox, when scarce
there was one house (as in Egypt) wherein there was not one dead, when you
fasted and prayed, how soon did the Lord remove that plague, an Army of men
cannot stand against a man of prayer, much less against an Army of prayers;
Surely (my Brethren) it is the prayers of the Church that has kept off
judgments to this day, we have had many Ionah's sent amongst us, crying, yet
forty days and England shall be destroyed: We have had days and months and
years, past over our heads, yet no sword, when (says the scoffing worldling)
is the promise of his coming, the Prophets prophecy wind, yea Jonah was angry
with himself, what is the matter, God has threatened so much, and we have felt
so little; did Jonah preach a lie in the name of the Lord? No Niniveh repented,
and GOD repented, Nineveh fasted and prayed, and God was entreated; They have
been the repentings, the fastings, the prayers of the people, that have kept
off the sword to this day, God is the same God; his compassions never fail: If
we pray, God will hear; See how Solomon consecrated his Temple, he prayed, 1
Kings 8.44, 45.
that when the people should go out to battle against their enemy, and should
pray unto the Lord toward the way of the City, and toward the house which he
had built; That then God would hear in Heaven their prayer and their
supplication, and judge their cause, the turning toward the Temple was a
turning to God, Christ was the Temple; turn to Christ in prayer, and the
enemy shall not prevail.

Secondly, consider (as a further encouragement to pray for peace) the enemies
whom we expect will engage us with War, and they are either foreign
enemies, of other kingdoms, of other language, of another Religion, or they
that are under the same King with us, of the same faith and Religion; Be they
Spaniard, or French, or any of the Romish Religion, they are not more our
enemies then Gods, and the war is not ours, but Gods, God has said it, they
shall fall before us, and he will avenge the blood they have shed. The Saints
under the Altar have a long time cried, how long? the time cannot be far of,
but that the Kings of the earth shall gather themselves together, they shall
hate the whore, and shall make her desolate and naked, Rev. 17.16
and shall eat her flesh, and shall burn her with fire.

Babylon must fall, Babylon must fall, yet I cannot say, but for a time they
may prevail, they may stand, though we in our persons fall, yet this I say
confidently, though we should fall, our cause shall stand: And God will raise
up them after us that will avenge all the blood shed by them; Hannibal, when he
was but nine years old, vowed himself a perpetual enemy to the Empire of
Rome; The war of Rome Christian runs Retrograde to the war of Rome
Ethnicke: though they had often the worst in the present battles, yet they
were ever conquerers at last; when as Rome Christian, though they sometimes
pevaile for the present, yet they shall never conquer, our wars with them,
are as the wars with the Children of Israel, when they traveled into the
land of Canaan, sometimes they turned their backs before the enemy, but they
were sure to conquer at last; Our Ship may by storms and Tempests, be beaten
and torn, be as the Ship in which Christ and his Disciples were tossed and
in danger, but it is sure at last to arrive safe at the haven: my brethren, God
may make the Papists whippes and scourges, he may make them as thorns in our
eyes, as pricks in our sides, Joshua and Israel may turn their backs before
the enemies, the Papists may have their long-waited for day, which may for the
present be to us as that day we read of in Joel; Joel 2.2.
A day of darkness and of gloominesse, as days of clouds and of thick
darkness, a day fearful, as our day of doom, as our day of judgment: yet
it shall not be our day of doom, nor our day of judgment, the sun shall not
go down in a Cloud, when our day is over, their night shall begin, blackness
of darkness shall cover them, the Sun shall never rise again, they shall
have an eternal night, they are greater sinners then we, and when God begins
he will make an end, my brethren, we need not over much fear what Atheists and
Papists can do; Isay 10.12.
what hell or Rome, what the Devil or Spaniard, there may come an hour of
temptation, an hour of darkness; Satan may cast some of us into prison, we
may have Tribulation ten days, but he that shall come, will come and will
not tarry: Our deliverer, our Savior will raise up a mighty salvation for us;
Pharaoh may oppress for a time, but we shall after a while see the Egyptians
drowned in the red Sea; They are Gods enemies, and we shall see the salvation of
the Lord.

Are they against whom we must fight, under the same King, of the same
religion, they cannot but be as desirous of peace as we our selves, we cannot
fight against them as against enemies, nor can they fight against us; The King
solemnly protests and declares to the world, be wageth not war against them,
his Arms are open to embrace them: What ever blood he draws from them, he
counts it as blood from his own veins, the kingdom is not forward for war,
God is called to Vmpire the cause, Therefore,

Pray, Pray for the peace of Jerusalem. You have seen the misery of war, the
probability of a present war, the possibility of escaping of it, O then pray
for peace, which brings me to a use of exhortation further to press this duty
upon you.

First, be seriously affected with it, before you pray, lay the war to your
heart, think of it when you rise in the morning, and when you go to bed at
night; Let the Trumpet that sounds to this war, be as the Trumpet that
sounded in the ear of Saint Jerome, that where ever he went, or what ever he
did, he heard the sound of it; It is recorded of Ignatius, that when he was
dead, the name of Jesus was found engraven in his heart in letters of Gold; Of
Saint Francis, that the marks and prints of Christ crucified were upon his
hands and feet. Queen Mary said when she was dead, they should find Callis
writ on her heart; And it is said when Sardis was lost, that every dinner one
cried, Remember they have taken Sardis, have deep thoughts (my Brethren)
concerning this war, because of the Divisions of Reuben, there are great
thoughts of heart.

O lay it near to your hearts, sleep with it, wake with it, eat and drink
with it, set it ever before your eyes, Unless you are truly affected with it,
you can never pray effectually for it: Remember the affection of David, Psalm.
137.5.
If I forget thee 0 Jerusalem, let my right hand forget her cunning; Take to
heart what Hezekiah did, when war was threatened, he rent his clothes, he
covered himself with Sackcloth; Isai. 37.1, 3.
This day is a day of trouble, and of Rebuke and Blasphemy, call to
remembrance what Uriah did, a Soldier, he would not go to his house; nor lie
with his wife, nor eat of the Kings provision, whilst the Arc, and Israel,
and Judah dwelt in Tents, Nebuchadnezzar, that heathenish King, 2 Samuel 11.11.
when he set his heart to deliver Daniel and could not, he returned sad to his
palace, he passed away the night fasting he would have no Instrument of music
brought before him, his sleep went away from him, he arose early in the
morning, and hasted to the den of Lions, Dan. 6.18.
O ye Priests of the Lord, remember old Eli, when war was at the gates, his
heart trembled, for the Ark of GOD, he watched at the door, the Lamp did
not go out all night, the news that the Arc was taken, struck him to the
heart, Phinea's wife felt the loss of the Arc, more then the travel of her
child, certainly (my brethren) they are neither faithful to God their King nor
Country, that are not affected with this war, that do not pray for the peace
of Jerusalem. Isay 22.12.
This day God calls to weeping and mourning, to baldness, and to girding with
sackcloath; They that will not this day fight the battles of the Lord with
their prayers, they shall be cursed of the Lord; Judge. 5.23.
Curse ye Meroz, because they came not to help the Lord against the mighty;
If the enemy should break in upon us, then you would weep and mourn; cry and
howl, a grievous shrike should be heard among you. Then, o my son Isaac!
and o my Father Abraham! weep and mourn, that the enemy may not come, do as
Iehoshaphat did.

Secondly, be not afflicted nor affected for a day only, though you begin
your sorrow to day, do not end it to day, a woman is not long conceiving, she
is long breeding, she is not long bringing forth, she is long training up; Sow
the seed of sorrows to day, and watch over it, and water it every day, weep
day after day for Jerusalem: Isay 58.5.
Is it such a fast that I have chosen, that a manshould afflict his soul for a
day, and to bow down his head, as a Bull-Rush, and to lie down in
sacke-cloath ashes? Will thou call this a fasting, or an acceptable day to the
LORD? O (my Brethren) Let this day be but the beginning of your sorrows; Let
GOD and the whole World see that you are become sorrowful mourners indeed:
ESTHER fasted three days, DANIEL three weeks, the people of ISRAEL in their
Captivity seventie years, abate while the Pestilence, the war lasts,
somewhat of your pleasures, of your profits, you know what God said of Miriam,
Numb. 12.14.
if her father had but spit in her face, should she not have been ashamed
seven days; If God was never so little Angry with us, we should fast seven
days, much more now he has plagued us with his greatest plagues; Mephibosheth
neither dressed his feet, nor trimmed his beard, nor washed his clothes, from
the day the King departed, until he came again in peace; till God and the
King return in peace, 2 Samuel 19.24.
do as Mephibosheth did, set one hour apart every day for prayer, one day
more in the week, eat less, drink, less, sleep less, put on your mourning
apparel, lay by your feasting, your banqueting, let your laughter be turned
into weeping, your joy into mourning, water your Couch with tears.

Encite, and exhort, and encourage one another to pray. David does not only
pray himself, but he commands others to pray.

Pray for the peace of Jerusalem. The word is in the plural number, Then they
that feared the Lord spoke often one to another. The more prayers, the more
power: we have at this day a great gale of prayers at our back; Noah Daniel,
and Job: The prayers of Noah alone preserved himself and his family, Daniel
returned the captivity, Job prevailed for his friends; if these severally could
do so much with God, what can they all do joined together? If one favorite
can prevail with the King, how can he be denied, when all the Court, when the
Counsel, when the Kings Children, when the Queen joins with him? get what
stock of prayers you can, pray your selves, call in others to pray; Let the
Husband pray with the wife, the wife with her maids; The Parent with the
Children, let one neighbor provoke another. An Army of men cannot stand
against an Army of prayers: One praying Town can overcome a fighting Kingdom,
make your party strong by prayers.

Fourthly, in this your day of prayer vow reformation to God: if any thing will
prevail with God, prayer and reformation will do; Indeed you should have
reformed the evil of your ways before this day of prayer; Reformation should
go before Humiliation: The King of Nineveh when he sent forth the
Proclamation for the fast, he sent it forth for reformation also: the times
have been when reformation would not serve the turn; There may so much guilt
lie upon a kingdom that no reformation shall privilege the kingdom. 2 Kings
23.26, 27.


There can be no preservation without Reformation, though reformation will not
always do the work, yet the work can never be done without it; It is the
condition that GOD ever requires, that which his servants covenant for with
GOD, that which encourages them to pray; This ever leaves a possibility, a
hope, a may be: Therefore now (says the Prophet Joel, Turn ye to me with
all your heart, Joel 2.14.
who knows if he will return and repent? break off your sins says Daniel,
by, righteousness it may be a lengthning of thy tranquillity. Reformation
must go along with prayer, Dan. 4.27.
Wash you, make you clean, take away the evil of your doings, Isay 1.16.
cease to do evil; Reform the abuses, the sins of the place, the
drunkenness, the idleness, the whoring, the swearing, reform the sins of
your houses, the want of Prayer, of Catechizing, your personal sins, your
covetousness, your pride, your oppression, break off your sins, God may
have mercy.

Lastly, pray and rest comforted in your prayer, quiet your spirits what you
can, fear not their fear, show that you can do what the wicked cannot do,
you can Anchor your souls upon God. Admirable was the deportment and carriage
of poor afflicted Hannah, when she had powered forth her soul unto God, she
went home and did eat, and looked no more sad; 1 Samuel 1.18.
It was a good resolution of a wicked man, yet a good General in the field. Be
of good courage and let us behave our selves valiantly, for our people and the
Cities of our God, and let the Lord do that which is good in his sight, 1 Chro.
19.13.
Jacob was resolved, after he had used the means; If it must be so, If I am
bereaved, I am bereaved. Esther was at a point, go I will, if I perish, I
perish, I cannot foretell you of certainety what this day may bring forth; what
answer we shall have of our prayers, but I can say this confidently, and
promise you in the name of the Lord, they that pray for the peace of Jerusalem,
they shall prosper, either in the public prosperity of Jerusalem, or in their
own particular person, or in the prosperity of their posterity. The Children
that are not yet borne may bless you for this day. Pray then, O pray, Pray for
the peace of Jerusalem, for the City, for the Church, for the Kingdom.

The second SERMON.
2 Thessalonians. 2.15. Therefore (Brethren) stand fast:


GReat deliverances ought to be celebrated with solemn remembrances, National
deliverances with National remembrances. When God delivered the Nation of the
Jews from that intended Parisian Massacre, Mordecai proclaimed the foureteenth
and fifteenth days of the month Adar to be kept holy, that they should make
them days of feasting and joy. It is recorded of the Jews, Hest 9.20.
that on these days, when they read the book of Esther, as often as mention
is made of their enemy and adversary wicked Haman, so often they express their
inward indignation by some external angry passion, they stamp with their
feet upon the ground, they knock their hands, they threaten with their
frown, they thunder with their words.

This day, this fifth day of November, a day for ever to be remembered by the
English Nation, GOD delivered, God immediately and miraculously delivered, our
Religion, our King, our Queen, our Prince and Princess, the Senate and
Council of this Kingdom, the Judges, the Knights, the Burgesses, the whole
house of Convocation, the monuments of our forefathers, the records of the
Kingdom, in a word, the whole kingdom, from that diabolical, monstrous,
unparalleled Gunpowder Treason; This day our High Court of Parliament has
enacted, (and may that Act be as the Act of the Medes and Persians that alters
not, may it stand as the Sun and Moon for ever) that this day should be kept
holy, that we celebrate this day with a joyful triumph, with new Cantica
Canticorum: with whole new sets of songs, with preaching, with feasting, and
sending gifts one unto another, with ringing of Bells, with making of Bonefires,
with sounding Trumpets, with thundering of Ordnances, with all outward
expressions of joy: That so God may see our thankfulness, that people from the
Pulpit may hear of their deliverance, that children in the streets may
understand the salvation of the Lord: that strangers abroad may know the
barbarousnesse of the Plot, the Religion of the Traitors, the
bloud-thirstinesse of Papists; Horret animus, believe me I cannot think on the
horror of the Treason, but my spirit is moved within me, my indignation is
stirred, as often as the very mention of the name Papist is made, of such
Papists that adhere to the Pope of Rome as to their head, Italian, Spanish,
Iesuited, Gunpowder Papists; I could be angry and sin not, I could stamp,
knock, bend my brow, and thunder (were it lawful) I could take up the
execration of David, let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth, and my
right hand forget her cunning, when I forget the deliverance of this Day.

That therefore you may for ever remember, and stand fast to the Gospel
received, and not be tempted to that damning Religion, I have made choice to
speak in the words of the Apostle,

Therefore (Brethren) stand fast. IN which words you have a duty enjoined,
Stand, fast.

Secondly, the reason enforcing, in the illative word; Therefore.

The Apostle, the Doctor of the Gentiles exhorted the believing Thessalonians
to stand fast, and the more to move them calls them, Brethren, (...), a
brother, is derived of (...), uterus, a womb, brethren being properly, uterus,
the fruit of one womb; The Apostle and the Thessalonians were not brethren in
nature, but brethren in grace, and sanctior est copula cordium, quam corporum:
This compellation carries much affection with it, and imports thus much, that
he tendered the believing Thessalonians as his mothers womb, or his own
bowels, even as his brethren, therefore he gives them this necessary
exhortation in all brotherly love and earnestness,

Stand fast: The reasons that enforce it, are employed in this word, Therefore,
Therefore? Wherefore? Two Reasons may be gathered from the coherence of these
words.

First, the Apostle tells them, there will be an Apostasy, a falling away;
Therefore stand fast. Of which Apostasy you may read from the third verse to
the thirteenth verse.

Secondly, he remembers them of Gods mercy to them in bringing them to the
knowledge of the Gospel, from the thirteenth verse to the fifteenth;

Therefore (Brethren) stand fast. These are the Reasons to enforce this duty,
and of these in their order plainly.

Reas. 1.
And first, Therefore stand fast; because there will be an Apostasy, and a
falling away; That there will be an Apostasy and a falling away, all must, all
do confess, our times and the times of our forefathers are sad witnesses of
the accomplishment of this Prophecy. The Apostle speaks it in express terms,
there must be an Apostasy and a falling away first; That this Captain Apostate
(whom the Apostle v. 3. calls the man of sin, and does so exactly describe) is
the same with the Antichrist of whom Saint John writes in his Epistle, and the
false Prophet you read of in the Revelation, for ought I know we have
unanimous consent. But who this man of sin is, the Antichrist, the false
Prophet, there is the difference; Not to spend much time in the searching out
thereof, or in answering to this quaere; The Fathers are not competent Judges
in this particular: The Papists themselves, those pretended adorers of them,
yet in this leave them and refuse them, Dan. 12.9.
Daniel tells us that the Prophecy is sealed to the end, Saint Austen says
ingenuously, that concerning this chapter he could not understand the meaning
of it; To the Fathers these Prophecies were riddles and dark sayings, yet by
that glimering light they had, the mystery of iniquity beginning in the
Apostles time, they could, they did point out the time, the place, and some the
person. The Fathers could not tell who this man of sin was; Our adversaries
of the Church of Rome will not tell us, they labor to free the Pope from it
rather then to fasten it upon any other; And while they labor to build new
Babel, Lord how are they confounded! The Rhemists confess that Rome is the
place, yea Bellarmine, Ribera, and others say, certainly Rome is the seat;
The Sun shines clear as at nooneday, they can, but will not see; I could
muster whole Armies of the reformed Churches, produce a cloud of witnesses,
empannell many grand-Iuries, of our own learned men, that readily will answer
to this quaere: the Papacy is this Apostasy, the Pope this man of sin, the
Antichrist the false Prophet: the time would fail me to bring forth King David
and all his worthies, King James, the Bishops, and Professors and learned men
of that learned age, all which plainly and freely confess and answer that the
Papacy is this Apostacy, the Pope this man of sin, the Antichrist, the false
Prophet; In this particular I may truly say of that King of Scholars, what the
servants of King David said, he is worth ten thousand: how plainly has he
published to the whole world, and sent it abroad to the Emperor, to Christian
Kings and Princes, wherein he has declared his opinion concerning this thing,
how plainly in his paraphrase upon the Revelation in his meditation upon the
twentieth Chapter; in his Apology to Kings and Princes; For my part I will
walk under the protection of this great King, and follow the steps of those
learned men, backed with the authority of the book of Homilies, and take it for
granted indeed which cannot reasonably be denied, it may easily be made good
that the Papacy is this Apostasy, the Pope this man of sin, the Antichrist
the false Prophet; Then my exhortation to you, is the same with Paul to his
Thessalonians. Therefore (Brethren) stand fast, that you be not entangled and
drawn away to Popery. If Saint Paul thought it necessary in his time, when the
mystery of iniquity began to work, and the man of sin was not revealed, when
the Cockatrice Eggs were not hatched, and the Pope had no being in the world,
to exhort the believing Thessalonians to stand fast, that they might not be
drawn away with that falling away, how necessary is it for us, and at this
time seasonable for me to exhort you (beloved) now that the mystery of
Iniquity is strongly working and the man of sin clearly revealed now that the
Pope is regnant in full power and strength, to exhort you in the words of the
Apostle.

Therefore (Brethren) stand fast. First, consider if you stand not fast indeed,
you may be drawn away to Popery.

Secondly consider, It Is a dangerous thing to be drawn away to Popery.

First, you may easily be drawn away: The Papacy is an alluring, enticing,
tempting, bewitching Religion. Sir Walter Rawleigh knew what he said, and he
spoke truth when he said it, that were he to choose a Religion for licentious
liberty and lasciviousness, he would choose the Popish Religion; No Religion
under Heaven so consonant, so congruous, so suitable, so agreeable to corrupted
nature, to flesh and blood, as the Religion of the Church of Rome; see I
beseech you what the spirit of God faith of it in the seaventeenth of the
Revelations and the first, and so forth to the sixth verse, you must have
patience that I may read the words to you.

And there came one of the seven Angels which had the seven Vials, and talked
with me, saying, come hither I will show unto thee the judgment of the great
whore that sits upon many waters, with whom the Kings of the earth have
committed fornication, and the Inhabiters of the earth have been made drunk
with the wine of her fornication, so he carried me away in the spirit into the
wilderness, And I saw a woman sit upon a scarlet colored beast, full of names
of Blasphemy, having seven heads and ten horns, and the woman was arrayed in
purple and scarlet color, and decked with gold and precious stones and pearls
having a golden cup in her handful of Abominations and filthiness of her
fornication, and upon her forehead was a name written, Mystery, Babylon the
great, the mother of harlots, and the abominations of the Earth, and I saw the
woman drunken with the blood of the saints and with the blood of the Martyrs of
Jesus, and when I saw her I wondered with great admiration.

That by the great whore, that by Babylon here spoken of, Rome is understood,
the Romanists themselves do freely confess, the Rhemists do not peremptorily
but faintly deny it, they distinguish indeed of Babylon in Rome, and the Church
in Rome, they tell us Saint Ambrose, Tertullian, Jerome, these confess it, I
could add some more ancient, Bellarmine freely acknowledges it; Indeed they
say Saint John speaks of Rome Ethnic, not of Rome Christian; Rome under the
persecuting Emperor, not of Rome under the Christian Pope: It is enough, they
confess that Babylon is Rome, and Rome the seat of Antichrist, and we all
know Saint John writes a Prophecy, not a History; He tell us what should be,
not what then was, and if Saint John spoke of Rome, it must necessarily follow,
that he spoke of Rome as now it is, not of Rome as then it was; of Rome
Christian, not Rome Ethnicke; of Rome under the Pope, not under the Emperor.

Thus you see Rome is compared to a Whore, to a great whore that sits upon many
waters, rules many nations, who made the Kings of the earth drunk with the
wine of her fornication, that is clothed in Scarlet, Purple, Gold, Silver,
precious stones and the like, and now mark how easy a thing it is to be
seduced, enticed, bewitched by the Church of Rome, what an alluring, enticing,
tempting Religion it is, you see it is compared to a Whore, to a great Whore,
to the chiefest of whores, to the mother of Harlots, she has in her hand a
Violl of Gould full of abominations; You that are not acquainted with the Arts
and Crafts and subtilties of Whores, read what Solomon says, Pro. 7.10.
who was the wisest of men, yet shamefully befooled by them; A thousand women
took hold of him, and of them all he professed he found not one good: he spoke
much of them because he was much abused by them, and knew much by them, as in
other places, so in the seventh of the Proverbs: The Whore there spoken of
makes Religion her pretext, uses much art, flattery, and impudency; This great
Whore, that bewitcheth the souls of men, she pretends Religion, Saint John
says, She had in her hand a golden Cup, though in that Cup was abundance of
abomination, yet the Cup was of Gold. There are in the Church of Rome many
singular, excellent, and admirable truths and things which as a golden cup she
holds forth; She has the Scripture, the Sacraments, the Articles of the Creed,
the Lords Prayer, the Ten Commandments, many excellent things, whatsoever
the Church of Rome holds with the Church of England is pure silver and pure
gold: All that she adores besides, is at the best hay and stubble, yea much
poison, and abominations, Saint Paul says, verse the fourth, the man of sin
sits in the Temple of God, not in that material Temple, which was at
Jerusalem, (a fond conceit of some of the Ancients) The Papists themselves how
willing soever they are to embrace any thing that may take it from Rome, yet
they themselves refuse it, Dan. 9. and the last.
that Temple ( Daniel says) shall never be restored; Christ says, not one
stone shall be left upon another, and History reports, that when they went
about to build that Temple again, GOD from heaven by fire destroyed it; But in
the Temple of God, that is the man of sin, that sits in the Church of God, the
most eminent of all the Churches of God, where God had a great people, and
whence God gathered his people; Antichrist though he be an Adversary and the
adversary Saint Paul speaks of, the greatest adversary that ever the Church
had, yet notwithstanding is no open professed adversary, as the Turk and Jew,
but a secret, close, mysterious adversary, that sits in the Temple of God.

In that Temple, see what bewty and glory to dazzle the eye, and to charm the
mind of the beholder; This great Whore is not only arrayed in gold and silver,
Scarlet, Purple, and precious stones, as a woman may be, and therefore is
called a woman also, but has the attire of an Harlot, wanton, lascivious
attire, a superstitious and Idolatrous dress; look into their Churches and
see, not only the bewty and glory of them, as a woman may have, but a
superstitious, Idolatrous dress, as their Images, Crucifixes, Altars, Crosses,
and burning Tapers, all set forth lively to sight; Look into their service and
see what Pomp and glory and outward state, What rich Robes, what Mucsicke,
what singing, what sweet and burning Incense, and the like. The Temple in
Jerusalem was not more glorious in outward Pomp, more gloriously arrayed,
there were not more sacrifices and ceremonies, then there are in the Church of
Rome at this day; It was necessary to be so at Jerusalem, God would have it
so, the people were a carnal people, mere children in understanding, God led
them as a Nurse by the hand, pleased them with carnal objects, with glorious
buildings, with multitude of significant Ceremonies, with terrene and earthly
delights, God did it to this end, that he might woo and invite them to his
service. The Church was then in its Infancy; but now the Church is grown near
unto perfection, in it is last age, therefore they are not now necessary, Gods
people how are a spiritual people; The Church of Rome uses now, what
Jerusalem did then, what then God commanded now he forbids, what then he
blessed now he curses; To draw them to superstition and Idolatry, both which
are ever beutifull and specious, full of pomp and ceremony.

Secondly, in the Papacy there is nothing hard nor difficult, nothing which a
mere Carnal man, which a voluptuous person, a very Epicure and Libertine
cannot easily digest; All the Religion of the Church of Rome is like the
Religion of the Scribes and Pharisees, the true fathers of them, a very outward
Religion, an empty Casket, a dead and naked Carkas, what is Popery but a
painted outside: Their Church prayers they do not understand, their private
prayers they measure by weight, their Repentance and confession, it is in some
small penance, their faith is the faith of the Church, they live not by their
own faith; Their Obedience is to the Pope, not to God; They have their
pardons, their indulgences, their Purgatory, their supererogations; and I know
not what, no sin that they can commit, but the Pope will pardon, no sin
that they would commit, but the Pope can dispense withal, no matter how long
they have lived in sin, in any sin, though the sin against the HOLY GHOST;
yet extreme unction at the last will salve all: I know they make a great cry,
and clamor; and tell us, as the Priests of Baal* they cut themselves with
Knives and Launcers till the blood gush out, they tell us of their frequent
fastings, of their often watchings, of their bloody whippings, of their long
Pilgrimages, their Rigorous discipline, their voluntary poverty, their simple
obedience, their Massacring the body, their lying in the dust, and endangering
of their lives, and a great deal more and could answer all these with the
first of Isay: Who has required these things at your hand, what are these
their sacrifices? trifles, nothing in comparison of that great work God does
require: were all these true, real and not fained, did they the same things
indeed which they seem to do, were there no Iugling nor no delusion, nor
mitigation, nor dispensation, yet all these and more in the extremity and
height, were nothing to the crucifying of the flesh with the affections of it,
to the mortifying of earthly members, sins as dear as the bodily members, to
the killing of the old man, to the breaking of the heart, to the wounding of
the soul, to the spiritual observation of the Law, and to the belief in
Christ Jesus; what is it for a man to give the first borne of his body for the
sin of his soul? to give his goods to the poor, and his body to be burned
to save his soul? Yea what is it to lie in their Inquisition, their Purgatory,
in hell a thousand years, and to purchase Christ by this? all this were
nothing, what the servants of Naaman said, My Father, If the Prophet had
commanded thee a greater thing, would thou not have done it? how much more,
when he says, Wash and be clean; If the Pope command greater things to
purchase Heaven, would they not do it, how much more these small things?
There Is nothing hard in the Church of Rome, which a mere Carnal man, a
voluptuous Epicure, a Libertine cannot easily digest.

Thirdly, in the Papacy there are many Arts, and Crafts, and subtilties and
devises to deceive and entice people withal; Saint Paul says, verse 9. that
the man of sin his coming is after the working of Satan, with all power and
signs, and lying miracles, and the like; Antichrist has his hooks, his
snares, his ginnes, his temptations and delusions, suitable to every complexion
and condition of man or woman; If he sees any Ambitious, he tempts them, as
his father did our Savior Christ, when he showed him all the kingdoms of the
world, and the glory of them, great preferments and dignities there are in the
Church of Rome, more preferments and greater than are in the true Church of
God: nor are they sparing to promise to give them: Adams sin cleaves to all
Adams sons, we would be above, this is a pestilent bait, and by this they
draw many Scholars from us; If they meet with any covetous, they have their
silver and golden Balls, the golden wedge and Babylonish garment, they will
shower gold into their lappes, and by this they draw Merchants and Tradesmen
from us; If they meet with any credulous and superstitious, they have their
signs and wonders and lying miracles. I know no Religion extant in the world,
that challenges wonders and miracles but the Religion of the Church of Rome:
they object against us, and upbraid us with it, that we have no wonders and
miracles, they have, much good may it do them. Antichrist comes in all
deceiveablenes of unrighteousness with signs and lying wonders to deceive
them that perish; If they meet with any fearful by nature, and scrupulous of
hell, they have their apparitions and visions, make them hear scriekings and
howlings, preach nothing but horror and terror, hell, death and damnation; If
they meet with any sick, they exercise their charms and spells, and can and
do cast out devils through the power of the devil. If they meet with any
constant in Religion, they have their torments, their tortures, their
purgatories, their hell, their Inquisition; Satan (says one) does not always
appear in one and the same fashion, but has as many several changes, as
Proteus among the Poets: At Listra he appears like a Comoedian, as if a scene
of Plautus were to be presented upon the Stage, at Antioch like a Jesuit with
traditions in his mouth. At Athens he fallies out like a Philosopher; At
Ephesus like an Artificer in his Apron: And as Satan, so the eldest son of
Satan, so in the manner, with signs and lying wonders, he has his profound
Plots, his lying and subtle devises, his wiles and stratagems, to deceive them
that are steadfast: It Is easy to be drawn away, then

Stand fast: Lastly, in the Papacy, consider the agents the instruments, Romes
factors, the great Whores Pandors are crafty to inveagle and betray me to their
Religion, they are crafty, subtle, base and impudent. Read how the spirit of
God describes them in the ninth of the Revelations and the first verse, and so
forward.

And the fifth Angel sounded, and I saw a Star fall from Heaven unto the
earth, and to him was given the key of the bottomless pit, and there arose the
smoke of the pit, as the smoke of a great furnace, and the Sun and the air
were darkened by the smoke of the Pit, and there came out of the smoke,
Locusts upon the Earth, and unto them was given power, as the Scorpions of the
earth have power, and it was commanded them that they should not hurt the
grass of the earth, neither any green thing, neither any tree, but only
those men which have not the seal of God in their foreheads, and to them was
commanded that they should not kill them, but that they should be vexed five
months, and that their pain should be as the pain that comes of a
Scorpion when he has stang a man: therefore in those days shall men seek
death and shall not find it, and shall desire to dye, and death shall fly from
them: and the form of the Locusts was like unto horses prepared to battle,
and on their heads were as it were Crowns like unto gold, and their faces were
like the faces of men, and they had hair as the hair of women, and their
teeth were as the teeth of Lions, and they had Habergeons as the Habergeons of
Iron.

The Papists themselves confess, that there by the Star fallen from Heaven
is meant the master of some great error and heresy, and by the Locusts that
arise out of the earth, the reachers of those heresies, that go about to
infect the people of God. The Rhemists say, this Star fallen from Heaven is
such as Arius, Luther and Calvin was; The Star that shall lead me to the light
of this Star that is fallen from Heaven, shall be that fixed Star now in
Heaven, KING James. Kings have a special interest in the book of the
Revelation; And God has made them of great use there to bring down the man of
sin: Then it may well stand with the wisdom of God to reveal the meaning to
them: And of all Kings, I hear of none that has taken that pains in the
Revelation as King James; This Star (says he) is the Pope who was once in
the kingdom of Heaven, as a glorious bright Star in Heaven above, who had an
eminent place in an eminent Church of God; The Locusts that infect the air,
are that innumerable multitude and diverse orders of Ecclesiastical persons,
as Friars, Monks, Priests, Cardinals, Jesuits, and I know not whom, who
bring as much destruction upon all sorts of men, as Locusts to the grass, and
tender herb; As Locusts come by swarms, and overspread the whole earth, so
these fill the whole earth with their Insinuations; The shape of them is like
unto Horses, prepared to battle, to signify that their form of practice and
policy shall be so worldly wise, that they shall want nothing pertaining to
the setting forth of their intents, no more than a horse of service, which is
curiously barbed, fitted and prepared for the fight; They had on their heads,
Crowns of Gold, they pretend great holiness, none more then that
Ecclesiastical order, even as the Elders, because of their true holiness, had
Crowns of Gold, so they, because of their pretended holiness, have Crowns of
Gold also. They have the faces of men, they come with the faces, and Reasonings
of men; Sophistical Arguments, subtle Philosophy, which Saint Paul calls vain
Philosophy; The hair of women: As the hair of women is a special part of
their bewty to deceive men, so they have Arts and Crafts, to draw men to their
Religion; They have habergeons of Iron: to show they are backed with authority,
and the like. I could go on further, they are many and crafty, full of power,
have Crowns of Gold, the heads and faces of men, the hair of women, all
alluring, tempting, enticing and bewitching: those that in this place are
called Locusts, in the sixteenth of the Revelation and the 13. are called
frogs: Frogs indeed, like those frogs that came into the houses and
bed-chambers of Pharaoh King of Egypt, and of his servants, and all his people,
no place nor person free: they are the sublimate, and the transcendent
Instruments of deceit, they come out of the mouth of the Dragon, out of the
mouth of the beast, and out of the mouth of the false Prophet; The very spirit
of the Devil, active, powerful, strong and stirring, full of delusion to
deceive men.

Brethren, you see what reason you have to stand fast, that you be not by any
drawn back again to Popery.

Secondly, consider, it is a dangerous thing to be drawn away to Popery. I say,
consider the danger that attends all them, that are drawn away. All Papists, in
that sense that I speak of Papists, for I do not speak of all that may be
Popishly affected, or incline to some Popish opinions, but such Papists as
derive their name from Papa, the Pope, that hold him to be the head of the
Church, that subscribe to the Counsel of Trent, all Italianated, Iesuited
Papists, they are Traitors to the King under whom they live, Heretics,
Infidels and Atheists, in continual danger of temporal destruction, and at
last sure of eternal damnation.

First, all sorts of Papists are Traitors to the King under whom they live; Not
to prove this by an Induction of particulars from those many Treasons that have
been committed in this Land, when was there any Treason, since the beginning
of Reformation, or scarce before, but they were the Contrivers, Plotters,
Actors, at least the favorers and Abettors of it? Was not Sumervile, Parrey,
Babington and his accomplices Papists? was not Lopez and his Abettors Papists?
was not Campion and Parsons Papists? were not the Gunpowder Traitors Papists;
was not Catesby, Winter and Persey, was not Digby, Rooke-wood and Tresham, was
not that Incarnate Devil Guido Fawkes, were they not all Papists? Nor yet to
prove them Traitors, because the Law of the Land makes them Traitors, which
has enacted, that all those Priests and Jesuits that come into the Land are
Traitors, all that bring Agnus Dei, that maintain the Popes supremacy above
the Kings, and labor to draw obedience from the King, and persuade to Rome,
are Traitors. But I will prove it from the principles and maxims of their own
Religion, that show necessarily all such Papists must be Traitors in that
kingdom where they live; All Religions may perhaps have some that are Traitors
in it, but no Religion under Heaven (set aside the Religion of the Church of
Rome) does necessitate and compel men to be Traitors; They have a maxim among
them, I find it in Bellarmine, that Kings have not their immediate power from
God, but from the people, yet so that the people transfer their power into
the person of the King, yet keep habitually in themselves, which they may make
a principle for Traitors: It Is said of all that the Pope may excommunicate
Kings, and Kings standing so may be deposed, and those that go about to infect
the people, the people ought to rise up against them, and that it is not only a
lawful, but a necessary and a meritorious work; The English Papists (says a
Iesuited English Priest) are well to be excused for not rising against their
King, because they want power; had they power to their will, the King should
either obey the Pope, or else they would not obey the King.

Papists are Traitors.

Secondly, Papists are Heretics, Infidels and Atheists, not to speak of
their innumerable multitude of lesser errors, called Venial sins, yet
notwithstanding the number of them may help to drown the Ship of Rome, nor
yet to speak of their grosser Tenants, not yet confirmed in the Church of
Rome, but disputed in their Schools, there are some heretical errors
maintained among some, so grossly heretical, that whosoever holds them, must
necessarily be an Heretic, Infidel and Atheist; Such is their Image worship,
their Altar worship; their Cross worship, their Saint worship, their Angel
worship, their Relicke worship and the like, such is Justification by works,
works of super-arrogation, but above all, the transcendent heresy, the head of
heresies, that the Pope is the head of the Church, above the Scriptures, above
Synods, above Counsels, that he cannot err, is so heretical, that whosoever
holds it in Radice, in fundamento, denies all the Articles of the faith, denies
the book of God, and by necessary consequence denies GOD himself: for
whosoever they are that build any thing on a false foundation, if the
foundation falls, all the building falls with it. Saint Paul tells us, that the
man of sin, sits in the Temple of God as God, and exalts himself above all
that is called God, above all Kings and Princes, to whom God imparts some part
of his power and name, above all Synods and Counsels, yea he shows himself
as God, for he advances himself above God, he will dispense with the moral
Law, bless where GOD does curse, and curse where God does bless, no Law,
nothing shall bind him, this wicked one, (called so verse the eight, the
Greek word signifies properly this lawless one, for so indeed the Pope is a
lawless person whom no law of God nor man is able to bind,) he dispenses with
solemn oaths, the surest tie betwixt man and man: that exact and well
composed oath of Allegiance, they make it a Sampsons Cord; To hold the Pope to
be the head of the Church, is more incongruous and improper, more blasphemous
and derogatory against Christ, then if a man should make an excellent Image of
exquisite and exact form, delineated in all the points to the life, with neck
and shoulders, with arms and hands, with thighs and legs, and should place
thereon a Gorgons head of an hideous and monstrous shape. That Image in Daniel
was more uniforme that had a head of gould, breast and arms of silver, belly
and thighs of brass legs, of Iron, and feet part of Iron, and part of
Clay, then to have the legs and thighs of Gold, and the head of Clay; This
is so heretical and damnable, that whosoever holds it must necessarily be a
Heretic, Infidel and Atheist.

Thirdly, Papists are in continual danger of temporal destruction. The Popes
Parasites, Romes builders, give the same glorious titles, Attributes and
Eulogium, to the City of Rome, that once the Prophets of God did to Jerusalem,
calling it the Holy City, the City of the great King, the joy of the whole
earth, the Queen of Nations, the everlasting, the eternal City, and yet Rome
must down, Babylon shall fall, the spirit of God speaks plain enough, read
the whole eighteenth of the Revelations at your leisure, he that reads it may
understand, for the Text you see is plain enough, it must down.

Rome must down by the sword, Popery must down by the word; Rome first,
Popery after; Those ten Kings that cleave unto her shall at the last make War
against her, Rome shall down, Popery shall loose it is strength, though not it is
being, till the coming of Christ; I will not determine the set time when Rome
shall down, I have read the Conjectures of many, yet all agree, the time
cannot be long, but Rome must down; At the first coming of our Savior Christ
when there was a general expectation of him, the Jews did not know the
particular time, the year, the month, the day, there is at this day in the
Church of God a general expectation of some change, though we cannot
particularly tell the time, the year, the month the day, it may be the time is
now at hand, the Trumpet is sounding to battle; it may be present with our
selves, of uncertain things we can speak but uncertainly, I subscribe to
them rather that conceive the year to be one thousand six hundred sixty and
six though upon other grounds; it is plain, Satan shall be tied up a 1000
years, six hundred sixty six years is the number of the Beast, Antichrist
shall so long reign, these two together make the just number, besides look
into the Latin Alphabet, the tongue that Rome uses, and the numerall letters
make up this number: But this we can certainly say, Rome must down, Rome
shall fall, Rome in the Revelation is set down by the name of Sodom, Gomorrah
and spiritual Jerusalem, Rome equals their sins, and shall bear their
plagues, God calls his people to come out of her, that they be not partakers
of her sins, and of her plagues: Rome must fall, and Papists are in
continual danger of temporal destruction.

Lastly, all Papists (in that sense that I say Papists) are sure of eternal
damnation, I may not speak peace, where God speaks no Peace: When Iehoram
said to Iehu, what peace Iehu? he answered, what peace as long as the
witchcrafts and whoredoms of thy mother Iesabell remain? What peace can I
speak to Rome, while the spiritual whoredoms and witchcrafts of the Church
of Rome remain among them? Saul lost his kingdom for sparing Agag: And God
may damme me, for ought I know, if I refuse to damn them. They are but false
Prophets Balaam-like, that bless where God does curse; God preaches damnation
to them, I may not preach salvation. In the third verse of this Chapter,
Antichrist the man of sin is called the son of perdition, and he is so
indeed, both actively and passively: he is damned himself, and is the cause of
the damnation of others. The spirit is plain in the 10, 11, and 12. verses,
he shall work in them that perish, and for this cause God gave them up to
strong delusions to believe lies, that all that receive not the truth in the
love of the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness, might be damned: See
in the twentieth of the Revelations and the tenth verse, what the end of them
is, where all they must go, into the lake that burns with Fire and Brimstone:
They that write professedly of this question, whether a Papist can be saved or
no, distinguish of times, places and persons, first of times, since the
Reformation, and before the Reformation: at those times of ignorance God did
connive; Then men would have seen and could not, the Sun did not then shine,
our forefathers might be saved in that Ignorance; But God commands every one
to seek after knowledge, the Sun shines clear enough, Papists may see and
will not, God gives them over to affected ignorance: he that will be ignorant,
let him be ignorant. Again they distinguish of places, where the light of the
Gospel has shined, and where it has not shined: in some places the Gospel
shines very bright and very clear, as in some parts of France and Germany, and
(blessed be God) in England; In some places is darkness, they have the word
rarely preached to them, God will not be merciful to those Papists where the
light of the Gospel shines as clear as may be, and yet they remain in
darkness.

Lastly, they distinguish of persons. It Is confessed of all, that a learned
English Apostate Papist, cannot be saved. God has preached damnation to them,
so must we; Now you see the danger of being Papists, they are Traitors to the
King under whom they live, Heretics, Infidels, and Atheists, in continual
danger of temporal destruction, and at last sure of eternal damnation.

And you see the first Reason why we should stand fast, because there will be an
Apostasy, a falling away to Popery, the second follows more briefly.

Secondly, Therefore stand fast, Reas. 2.
because of Gods great mercy in bringing the Gospel among you, as the Apostle
inferres this exhortation from the thirteen and fourteen verses, those
immediately before the Text. Consider (beloved) what a blessing it is, that God
has brought the Gospel into this Land, and miraculously preserved this
Gospel.

First, consider what a blessing God has brought among us, this glorious
Gospel, the greatest blessing that ever God brought into any nation under
heaven. Were the Land as the Land of Sodom and Gomorrah was before its
destruction, were it as Eden before the curse, as the Garden of God, as
Paradise, were all our Merchants as Nobles, our Nobles as Princes, our Princes
as Emperors, were Silver and Gold as it was in the days of Solomon, were our
houses like Salomons house, our Churches like his Temple, were the foundations
of our Cities, the Gates, the Walls, all of Pearls and precious stones, as
we read of the new Jerusalem, yet (beloved) what were all this, if we had no
Sun to enlighten us and shine upon us? What good would all this do us? Light
is sweet, and it is a pleasant thing to see the Sun, that sweetens all, the
want of it embitters all, Deuteronomy. 4.7, 8. For what nation is there so great that
has Statutes and Judgments so righteous, as this I set before you this day?
What Nation is so great as this Nation, that has such righteous Judgments?
Mark, the righteousness of GOD to a people makes a Nation great, and God is
ever near the people where the Gospel is, Righteous Judgments and righteous
Statutes makes a Nation great, and we have righteous Judgments and righteous
Statutes, therefore a great Nation.

See the curse of that people from whom God takes the Gospel, and then tell
me what a blessing it is to have the Gospel; It Is necessary (says the
Apostle) that the Gospel should be first preached to you: but since you have
refused life and salvation; lo henceforth we turn to the Gentiles;
Everlasting life and the Gospel go together: Salvation is of the Gentiles:
Salvation and the Gospel go together: the Kingdom of GOD shall be taken
from you, and given to a Nation that will bring forth better fruits. Mark, the
kingdom of GOD and the Gospel go together; and if that Kingdom be once
taken away, then all the kingdoms of the world, Crowns and Scepters heapt
together cannot comfort that people. Beloved, God has brought the Gospel
among you, the greatest blessing:

Therefore Stand fast: Secondly, consider how and when God brought the Gospel
to us, England was a Land of darkness: Popery, Superstition and Idolatry
mightily prevailed among us, what nation almost under Heaven more Barbarous,
Idolatrous, heathenish, superstitious, then the English Nation: Insomuch that
one calls it the Popes Ass, because of those Antichristian taxations and
burdens laid on us, and for those many Rebellions, Treasons and seditions, our
King was proverbially called the King of devils, yet in the time of the
greatest darkness of Popery and Ignorance God brought this Gospel, though not
as the Sun at noone day, yet as the Sun in the morning, that shines more and
more to the perfect day.

Lastly, consider God has preserved this Gospel among us in great peace and
in great plenty by weak means.

I must begin (because the time is past) with that blessed Queen of ever
blessed memory, Queen Elizabeth, who though she was of the weaker Sex, and
daughter to a great King, in the Reign of her sister Queen Mary, a poor
prisoner shut fast in the Tower, tossed from place to place, in continual
danger of her life, attended with bloody disposed men, often destined to death,
yet God bound up her soul in the bundle of life, and set her in the Throne,
and great things God did by her: through her, Religion was restored to its
Primitive purity; She refined the corrupt Coin, restored the Royal Navy,
succored the Scots against the French, the French Protestants against the
Papists, and both of them against Spain; She defended Belgium against the
whole Armies of Spain, She commanded the whole Ocean, kept continual war
with the Beast; The roaring Bulls and damned Treasons that came from Rome, were
but as Arrows of Reed thrown against a Brazen wall; She brought Spain low,
conquered his invincible Armado, escaped thousands of Treasons, after a long
and blessed Reign dyed in her bed in peace; She left her Religion and her
kingdom in peace, and purity to her successor.

What Clouds of blood hung in the air, what threatenings and denunciations of
War, what dismal days did the Papists prophecy of, when the Oriental
Star did set in the West; Yet God brought a Star from the North, KING James
came to the Crown, and no dog did open his mouth to bark against it: he
continued what she had begun, perfected what she did leave, he newly
translated the Bible, a great and glorious work, perfected our Liturgy, gave
the greatest blow to the man of sin of all that went before him; GOD
preserved his days very long, like Salomons: this day speaks Articulately
enough, and with a loud voice concerning his and our preservation, from the
Gunpowder-Treason: never treason so bloudily intended; so secretly and closely
carried so near to be executed, so damnably undertaken, so admirably defeated,
as the Gunpowder Treason; Not unto us, not unto us, but to thy Name be praise,
O Lord: Brethren, you see what Reason you have to stand fast: because of the
Gospel, the greatest blessing, which God has brought in by weak means, and
preserved in great power: This for the Reasons enforcing this duty, I must
speak a word of the duty, which that you may do, briefly,

Stand fast: First, do not foster nor nourish any secret hid sin, or
corruption in your bosom; 2 Timothy 3.6
It Is prophesied of the last times, that they that are led away with error will
first be led away with their own lusts, none but such whom God hates (says
Solomon) will God suffer to fall into the hands of a whorish woman, and God
hates none but them that love their sin: Let me tell you, one lust nourished
in the soul, will bring a man to hell, to the devil; One lust maintained,
will bring a man to Rome, to the Pope; It was a good advice that one gives
young Christians, that they should begin at the latter end of Saint Paul's
Epistles, a corrupt life can never have a sound judgment, beware of nourishing
the least sin, beware of covetousness, beware of pride, beware of
lukewarmnesse, beware of every sin. The Pope is called the man of sin in this
Chapter, and whosoever allow themselves in any sin, are in danger (being hard
put to it) to adhere to the man of sin.

Secondly, have no converse, no acquaintance, no familiarity, no friendship,
have nothing to do with Papists, depart from them, that ye be not partakers
in their sins, they are of an infectious nature, and a man cannot touch pitch
and not be defiled by it. See what a special charge God gives the people in
the 7. of Deuteronomie from the first verse to the sixth; Have nothing to do
with the Nations among whom ye come, have no acquaintance, make no league, no
covenants, no marriages with them, and there is a moral Reason annexed that
concerns us as much as them; for they will turn you away from following me:
And there you see what GOD charges them, To cut down their groves, break
down their Images and the like; I cannot but commend herein the policy of our
Adversaries of the Church of Rome: That will not suffer one Lutheran, nor
Calvinist, nor any of the reformed Religion to be within their power, but upon
the least suspicion, he must into the Inquisition. What Is the reason that the
Pope will not dispense in Spain or Italy if a Papist marry a Protestant, and
yet here they will dispense with them; I pity those that have Papists lying in
their bosoms, those Children that have popish Parents, those servants that
have popish Masters, those Tenants that have Popish Landlords, those poor
neighbors that have great Popish friends, Beloved, stand fast, have nothing to
do with Popery in any kind whatsoever.

Thirdly, read none of their books, trust none of their miracles, believe none
of their Legend, preserve none of their Relickes, keep none of their Images.

You may see what a strict charge God gives the Nazarites, he forbids them
wine, that they should drink nothing that comes of the Vine; Number 6.3. and 4.
The best of the Kings of Judah are branded for leaving the groves: in the
beginning of Reformation, when the King seized upon the Abbeys and Monasteries,
it was both policy and wisdom in time not only to seize upon their goods, but
to demolish their houses, to ruin their buildings, to lay desolate their
places, for Ziim and Ohim, had they continued, those Locusts and Frogs would
have filled their places again.

In Italy and Spain there is not one Book of Protestant writers suffered
among them, they have their Index Expurgatorius to wipe out what ever may
savor of true Religion, Nay as a wise and learned Traveller says, the books
of Bellarmine are very rare to be found among them, because he quotes the
Arguments of the Protestants in them, learn wisdom from them, have nothing
to do with what they have.

Fourthly, pray mightily to GOD that God will uphold and strengthen you with
the right hand of his power, that you may stand fast, CHRIST tells Peter he
prayed for him, that his faith might not at all fail; If CHRIST prayed for
Peter, Lord what great need have we to pray for our selves, that our faith may
not fail? you may (Beloved) be tempted yet above your strength, there may yet
come a time of trial, and an hour of temptation, you have not yet resisted
unto blood, yet you have lived in a land of peace and safety, you have not
been scared with the barking of Uncouth Wolves, Priests and Jesuits have been
banished from among us, and long may they be banished, once they were banished
from France, thither they returned again, the times may come about so, that
they may return to us again; O you that would stand fast, pray, pray mightily
to God, Barnabas was drawn away, for ought I know the temptation may be so
great, that we may be drawn away; Then do as IEHOSAPHAT did, when that great
Army came against him, cry mightily to GOD that you may stand fast.

Lastly, would you stand fast? Receive the truth in the Love of it. Because
they would not receive the truth in the love of it, God gave them up to strong
delusions; I say, receive the truth in the love of it. You hear many Sermons,
you have the book of God in your hand, much peaching; It is not enough to have
the word of God in your heads, but you must have it in your hearts. Heb. 11.
We read of the Fathers, that they received the promise afar of, the word is
emphaticall, they leapt at the promise, received it with great Joy; O let the
word sink deep into your hearts, be well grounded in Religion: It is better
there, then swimming in the brain, many poor ignorant men, by this have kept
close to the truth, when many great Scholars have proved Apostates, receive
the truth in the love of it; Thus much for the duty, have patience for one word
of exhortation.

Must we stand fast to the Gospel, Use of Exhortation.
that we be not drawn away to Popepery? suffer (men and Brethren) a word of
Exhortation: You that are Magistrates of the Land, you that are Ministers, yea
all the people of God. Among other Reasons, some give this Reason for one; why
Samuel went throughout the Land every year in circuit, to see if he could find
out any Idols of the Gentiles, that they had hid, or any graven Image or carved
work; Our Judges in their Courts, and Bishops in their Visitations give in
charge, for diligent inquiry, what Recusant Papists, or popishly affected there
are; We have singular, excellent, good laws, for the preservation of the
purity of Religion, and to keep under Popery; whence then is it (men and
brethren) that Popery so far prevails this day, that Popery so much increases
among us; I beseech you that are armed with Authority, go to the utmost of your
authority, you that have power to punish, punish; to indict, indict; to
present, present: let not Papists rest in peace, in safety, in security by you;
If the chiefest and greatest men of a Parish be Papists, their children, their
servants, their attendants, their Tenants, their poor neighbors, their rich
kindred and friends, are all in danger by them. My Lord, will have his followers
as well of his vices, as of his person; If he leaves his friend at the
Churchdoore, he turns not back without his Attendants: If his honor please
to be Idolatrous, they will wait on him to Mass; You that keep back the
sword from doing justice, when God calls for it, you may your selves dye by the
sword of God, and the blood of all that Parish through your neglect, shall lie
upon your heads, Crudelitas pro Christo, pietas est; cruelty for Christ is
godliness. You to whom the sword of the spirit is committed, draw forth that
sword; Lift up your voice like a Trumpet, Cry aloud and spare not; Tell the
Papists of their transgressions, and the Church of Rome of her Abominations:
Warn the People of God to fly from them, least they be partakers of their
sins, and of their plagues, Exhort them to stand fast, to the Gospel already
received, discover the nakedness of the one, and show the beauty of the other:
The Angel of the Church of Ephesus is commended for his labor and patience,
and for that he could not bear with them that were evil, but tried them that
said, they were Apostles, and were not, and hated the Nicolaitans, which GOD
also hates; Let this be our Crown and our Glory, that if any perish, they
perish not through our default; O let not false Shepherds, thieves and wolves
be more painful; Let not Jesuits compass Sea and Land, to make one
Proselyte, of their own Religion, which when they have done, they make him
seavenfold more the child of the Devil then themselves; Let them not come with
their lives in their hands, with the hazard of their blood, to pervert them
committed to our charge, and our selves sit silent, but let us lift up our
voices in season, and out of season: And let them know, there are Prophets
among them, and if the people will not be charmed, send them to God with this
Inscription on their foreheads; Noluerunt incantari: They will not be charmed;
Let us to our power save our own souls and them that hear us.

Lastly, you the people of God, stand fast, to the Gospel, if an Angel from
Heaven preach any other Doctine, let him be accursed; O search the Scripture
thoroughly: It was the speech of a dying Archbishop of this Province, one of the
last that ever he spoke to his Chaplein, I have said much, and writ much, and
read much, and preached much; Yet in all the book of God, I do not find the
least ground for Popery. Saint Paul withstood Peter to his face, and gave him
no place, no not for an hour; O withstand Peter of Rome, who can challenge
nothing of Peter's, but that title which Christ once gave him, Satan, and that
fact, in denying his Master; I say, withstand him to his face and give him not
place, no not for an hour. I can never sufficiently admire and wonder at the
speech of blessed Luther, who (though he was very earnest to have the Communion
administered in both kinds, contrary to the Doctrine and custom of the Church
of Rome,) yet he professes, if the Pope (as Pope) commanded him to receive in
both kinds, he would but receive in one kind: Its a general rule among the
best, that what the Pope commands as Pope, though it be good or indifferent,
as to pray, to read, to lift up an eye, a hand, to wear black or white, a
lace, a model, to drop a Bead, as the Pope commanding it; It is a receiving
the mark of the beast, a yielding our selves the Vassalls of Satan, and an
Implicit denying the faith of Christ; So extremely venomous is the poison that
lies at the root of that fundamental heresy, which they have laid at the
very Rock and foundation of their faith, so dangerous and pernicious it is to
hearken to the Pope.

The renowned Martyrs in Queen Mary's days, would show no reverence to the
commissioners from the Pope, and let me tell you there are many things in the
Church of Rome that may be, that are decent to be used in the Church of God,
some things there are at this day in practice in the Church of Rome, that were
in use in that Church when it was not Antichristian, in the times of the
Primitive Bishops and blessed Martyrs; Some things used, that are not yet
commanded by the Pope as Pope: what ever we use with the Church of Rome, we use
it, as commanded by another power, not because commanded by the Pope, so that
what we do, is to be accounted an Act of obedience, what they do is to be
condemned, because commanded by the Pope; be wise as Serpents, Innocent as
Doves, rightly distinguish of times, places, and persons, so shall you not
endanger your own souls, nor disobey them that are over you, nor scandal them
that live with you.

Lastly, must we stand fast? Let us give thanks to our Lord God, that we stood
fast to this day; It is very meet, and our duty, that we should at all times
and in all places give thanks to thee, o Lord, holy father, but chiefly for
the deliverance of this day, from that unparalleled matchless, damnable
Gunpowder Treason. Therefore with Angels and Archangels, and all the glorious
company of heaven, we laud and magnify the name of God and say,

Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Sabbath, glory be to God on high.

O all ye works of the Lord, praise ye the Lord, bless him and magnify him
for ever.

O all ye Angels of the Lord, bless ye the Lord, praise him and magnify him
for ever.

O all ye Children of men, bless ye the Lord, praise him and magnify him
for ever.

O all ye Priests of the Lord, bless ye the Lord, praise him and magnify him
for ever.

O all ye servants of the Lord, bless ye the Lord, praise him and magnify
him for ever.

O all ye Kings and Emperors, all people and Princes, all Judges, young men
and maids, old men and babes, praise ye the name of the Lord, for his name is
only excellent, his glory is above the Earth and Heaven, he has exalted the
Horn of his people, the praise of all his Saints, even the people of England,
a people near unto him, praise the Lord; Happy are we, who are like unto us?
saved by the Lord, the shield of our help, and the sword of our excellency.
The eternal God is our Refuge, and underneath him, are the everlasting Arms,
he has saved us, and if we trust in him, he will save us, from this time
forth and for evermore, blessed be the God of our salvation, and let all the
People say, Amen.

FINIS.
The third SERMON.
GENESIS 49. 5, 6. and 7. verses. Simeon and Levi are Brethren, Instruments of
cruelty are in their habitations. O my soul come not thou into their secret,
into their assembly mine honor be not thou united, for in their anger they
slew a man, and in their self will, they dug a wall, cursed be their anger
for it was fierce, and their wrath for it was cruel: I will divide them in
Jacob, and scatter them in Israel.


THis Chapter contains the last Will and Testament of the Patriarch Jacob,
made on his death bed, and it consists of two parts.

First, the Legacy and portion that he bequeathes to his children.

Secondly, his care concerning his burial, together with the manner of his
death.

My Text is part of the first part, and contains that part and portion that
appertains to Simeon and Levi, wherein be pleased to consider with me two
generals.

First, their sin.

Secondly, their censure.

Their sin in the fifth and part of the sixth verses.

Their censure in part of the sixth and seventh verses.

Their sin was murder, amplified and aggravated,

First, by their mutual consent and agreement in sin, Simeon and Levi are
brethren. Iunius says on the Text, Jacob does not call them brethren, because
they were so in nature, but because they were brethren in the murder.

Secondly, their sin is aggravated and amplified, from the manner of their
acting and perpetrating it, they did it wilfully, revengefully, in their anger
they slew a man, in their self-will they dug a wall.

Thirdly, from the extension the measure and degree, their anger was fierce,
their wrath was cruel.

Their censure, that also is aggravated,

First, by the person that adjudgeth them, it was their father.

Secondly, from the circumstance of time when he did it, when he was on his
death bed.

Thirdly, from the manner how, he did it,

First, with indignation and detestation, denying any further protection to
them; O my soul come not into their secret, unto their assembly mine honor be
not thou united.

Secondly, with malediction, and execration, cursed be their anger, it was
fierce, and their wrath, for it was cruel.

Lastly, with a Prophetical prediction, what should become of them, I will
divide them in Jacob, and scatter them in Israel, Of these in their order
briefly.

Revenge is a base and cowardly passion, proceeding from a weak, effeminate
abject mind, unworthy the breast of men, much more of men of God: thunder,
hail and tempest, and the rest of those fearful motions that we have in the
air here below neither trouble nor hurt celestial bodies, anger rests in the
bosom of fools; but revenge to kill, argues wicked weakness, and savage
cruelty, murdering revenge indeed ends the quarrel, but wounds the reputation:
he strikes safely, but villanously and dishonourably that strikes and kills: And
this was the sin of Simeon and Levi. The story is well known: if any be
ignorant of it, read it at better leisure in Genesis 34.25.

Their bloody massacre will appear more horrid, if you be pleased to consider
with me these aggravating circumstances, some are in the text, the rest in the
story. I must make choice of some, I cannot travel through all.

First, in their anger they slew a man, Thargum Jerusalem reads it, Kings and
Rulers, Hamor and Sechem, the chief of them murdered, was the King and Prince
of the Country; He that kills a man, strikes at Gods Image, he that kills a
King strikes at his Sovereignty. Kings are Gods, though not by participation of
nature, yet of name and power; They that conspire against Kings, they fight
against God; Thou shall not (says the God of these Gods) revile the Gods of
thy people. God imparts his own name to them, that they might have his own
safety. Kings are living and breathing Images of God: it is against the Law of
nations, against the Law of nature, against the Royal Law of God, to kill, to
smite, to touch a King, yea to revile him, or in our secret Chambers to think
evil against him; The greater was the sin of Simeon and Levi; In their Anger
they slew a man, a King; This is the first aggravation.

Secondly, Innocents are not to be punished with the guilty, Ezekiel. 18.3
As I live (says God) this Proverb shall be used no more in Israel, The
fathers have eaten sour grapes, and the childrens teeth are set on edge.

Genesis 18 25
Far be it from thee (says Abraham) to destroy the righteous with the
wicked: even heathen Abimelech could plead, Genesis 20.4.
will thou destroy a Righteous Nation? shall one man sin, and the whole City
perish? I have sinned, but these sheep, 2 Samuel 24.17.
what have they done? If Hamor and Sechem had been worthy of death, what had
the rest of the City done? what had their wives, their children, their
servants, their horses, their cattle, their oxen done? The Greek, Beza, and
many others read it, in the plural number, slew men, and dug down walls,
overthrew their house, or (as in the Margin) houghed the Oxen in pieces. This
is the second Aggravation.

Thirdly, there ought to be a proportion betwixt the punishment and the
offense: though all sins are mortal, yet all are not equal: we are so
far Catholic, that we are not Stoicall: lesser sins are not to be punished
with the great censures of the law, anger in heart is not so evil as Raca in
the frown, or fool in the mouth: the person against whom, as well as the
person that offends, aggravates the sin; That word which is spoken against a
private man will but bear an action, against a Lord of the Council is
Scandalum magnatum, against the King, Treason, against God, blasphemy: sin
and judgment have their Climaxes: simple fornication was not to be punished
with death, but with marriage or a Dowry, Sechem was guilty of no more, yet they
killed him; This was the third aggravation.

Fourthly, Ministers of justice ought not rashly to proceed in judgment. God
has proclaimed himself; and would have the Gods of the earth to take notice
of it, that he is slow to wrath, ready to forgive; Our Law forbids all men
trading in blood to bear the sword of Government, Vespasian sighed and
groaned, at just execution: Nero wished he could not write, when he was to
sign a condemnation, Queen Elizabeth (next to the holy Scriptures) prefers
(as the best piece) Seneca his book of Clemency; Our Gracious King (you have
often heard it,) proclaimed how backward he is to unsheath the sword, even as
to draw blood from his own veins; If punishment must follow, revenge may not;
a member may not be cut off without sighs and tears; softly, deliberately
must men execute judgment: the greater was the sin of Simeon and Levi, that in
their anger slew a man, and in their self will dug down a wall, this is
the fourth aggravation.

Fifthly, to do as we would be done unto is the standing Law of God and
Emperors, oaths and covenants are to be sacred and inviolably kept: Shall he
prosper (says God) shall he break the covenant and be delivered? Ezec. 17.15
Thou Jesus (says Amurath the great Turk) if thou be a God, as they say thou
art, Revenge the treachery of thy servants. Covenants and agreements ought to
be most simple and most naked; Hamor and Sechem were at Truce with Israel, at
Peace: not only in covenant with them, but in covenant with God, they were
proselytes in Religion, they dealt sincerely and truly, the greater was the sin
of Simeon and Levi, that dealt treacherously and falsely. This was the fifth
Aggravation.

Lastly, Religion ought to be the surest bond: men that profess Religion,
that countenance their doings by Religion, ought (especially to them that are
without) to be most Religious, just and exact, that the name of God be not
blasphemed, that the holy profession be not evil spoken of. Simeon and Levi
were visible members of the Church militant, they themselves professed
Religion, and undertook all the Treaty in the way of Religion, the more
Irreligious their treachery, and perfidious their cruelty, this is the sixth
and last aggravation.

Collect these all together (my brethren) Their sin was murder, they shed the
sacred blood of Kings, they murdered Innocents, they deemed them above their
offense, they delight in punishing, they break oaths and covenants, and they
did all this under a pretense of Religion; Laborat Annalium fides. After ages
would never have believed this, if Gods sacred Annals, the History of this book
had not recorded it: you have seen the sin of Simeon and Levi, more briefly
see their censure.

The second General.
Cursed be their Anger: sometimes we shall have the holy man David, cursing,
not only men's passions, (as Jacob his sons here) but also their persons, but
then his curses are Indefinite, or conditional, or prophetical: either he
names not the man, or intends it if God intend it so; or his curses are rather
predictions, than male-dictions: Non tam vota, quam vaticinia. God appointed
six Tribes to curse, as well as six to bless, Moses the meekest man in all
the earth was mediator of the condemning Law, Saint Paul that was compounded of
affection, yet pronounced the greatest curse in the Book of God; men's persons
ought not so to be had in admiration, that their wickedness pass without
condemnation: In Courts of Justice men's causes (not their persons) should
speak. Jacob looks not on his sons cruelty with a fathers indulgent lenity,
but with a frowning Austerity: whom GOD curses, Jacob will not bless, cursed
be their anger.

This censure will aggravate their sin, if you consider these circumstances.

First, The Parents curse (says the wiseman) roots out the foundation of a
child: Gods curse usually goes along with theirs. Noah cursed Cham, and the
Canaanites were cursed of God. Saint Austen tells us of a Mother cursing her
ten Children, that immediately from Heaven they were shattered in pieces;
Camerarius relates of one cursed by his father, that presently by a miracle he
was fastened to the ground, of a second devoured by Serpents, of a third torn
by devils; sad and dreadful examples, a fearful document to Parents to take
heed how they rashly curse their children, and for children how they provoke
their Parents. Parents are not easily moved to curse their children, especially
if they be religious parents, men fearing God, and yet Jacob (Simeon and Levi's
father, holy Jacob) curses, but it is their anger, not them; their passions,
not their persons, cursed be their anger: this is the first aggravation.

Secondly, the words of dying men, are living oracles, then men speak most
affectionately, and their words pierce most deeply. Jacob at this time was on
his death bed, his sons crave his blessing, he loves them, but hates their
sins; as his soul at first gave no consent, so his tongue now shall give no
approbation to it: at first he reproves them, but having more liberty he
detests it; He was presently to appear, before Gods Tribunal, so he calls
them to his.

Thirdly, an honest heart does not only not act wickedness, but abhors it: Jacob
as he was no Counselor to the offense, so he would be no Patron to the
offenders, O my soul come not into their secret, unto their assembly mine
honor be not thou united: Jacob as before he protested against it, so now he
disclaimes it.

Fourthly, it is the curse that follows the Jews to this day, to be a
scattered people on the face of the earth: division will follow unity in sin:
Simeon and Levi brethren in evil, therefore Jacob makes them strangers in
dwelling, I will divide them in Jacob, and scatter them in Israel: Simeon had no
entire inheritance, Levi no certain. Thus you have seen their sin, and their
censure.

But what is this to us, (will you say) or what is this to the business of this
day; Have patience and this shall give more light, and be more welcome to you,
considering that Jacob in thus speaking is our spokesman. Brightman speaking of
the seven Churches says, they were Typical of the Churches of the Gentiles,
to the coming of Christ. I should be too singular if I did say, this history
were Typical, and did set forth the tragedy for this day. I will not undertake
to give an interpretation, but I will promise, and your selves shall see an
exact application in all the particulars, be pleased therefore once more to
have recourse to the words of the Text, and with a little variation of names
and time, read it thus, Jesuits and Iesuited Papists, are Brethren,
Instruments of cruelty are in their habitations. O my soul come not thou into
their secret, unto their assembly mine Honor be not thou united, for in their
Anger they slew a man, and in their self will they dug down a wall, cursed
be their Anger for it was fierce, and their wrath for it was cruel. God
divide them from the son of our Jacob, and scatter them from our English
Israel.

I will follow the same method that I did before, I will show you the sin of
these and their censure, and that, aggravated with the same circumstances as
that of Simeon and Levi.

First then Simeon and Levi in their anger they slew a man, a King; The lives
of Kings are sacred, therefore those doctrines, the most remote consequences
whereof will maintain killing of Kings are to be abhorred among us. But as for
the doctrine of Jesuits, and Iesuited Papists, their Tenets and and principles
stick point blancke to this killing of Kings, and in this, their cruelty is
far worse, than that of Simeon and Levi. Simeon and Levi did once kill a
King: though, de facto, they did it, yet they did it but once, and their
Religion condemned it, and their father Jacob cursed it: But it is the Religion
of the Church of Rome, and the constant practice of the Jesuits to do it not
only once, but often, yea their Religion maintains it, and in some cases makes
it meritorious; yea the Pope their father allows it, countenances and blesses
it; you were once taught to say on the service of this day, that their Religion
is Rebellion, and their faith faction, it is now altered; And I have reason
enough to believe there is sufficient Reason of State for it, though I see none;
I hope I shall make it easily appear to you, that the Religion of the Church
of Rome maintains killing of Kings. Bellarmine in his Letter to Blackwell the
Archpriest of England makes this Rhetorical flourish, did ever any Pope from
the Infancy of the Church at any time command any King (though heathenish) to
be killed, or approve the Act, after it was done; Therefore (says he) why
shall the King of England fear that, that never any Christian King in the
Christian world did ever, or has cause to fear? boldly spoken, and as a
Cardinal Jesuit: Let Bellarmine answer Bellarmine, and throw blushing in his
own face. I have the rather made choice of him, because he is their Coripheus,
and few of them (I believe) deny what he affirms, yea I have him to show, if
any denies what I say to you, in his fifth book De Roman. Pontific. 7. cap. he
says plainly, Non licet Christianis, etc. It is not lawful for Christians to
tolerate a Heathenish, Infidel, Heretical King, yea (says he) it pertaines
to the Pope alone to judge if the King be so or no, he says also in the same
place, if any sheep become a Wolf, any Christian Prince become a Heretic, and
labors to withdraw his subjects, then the Pope ought to expel them,
excommunicate them, drive them away from their kingdom, and discharge their
subjects of obedience; And he gives this Reason (and I beseech you mark it)
why the Christians in the Primitive times did not thus proceed against Nero,
Caligula, Dioclesian, Julian the Apostate, Valerian, and the rest of those
monsters (Gods plagues to the Church) because they wanted force, So that by the
doctrine of Bellarmine, if Christian Kings are once Heretics, by the Pope they
may be excommunicated, deposed and deprived, and experience shows, it
necessarily follows they must be murdered. The same Bellarmine in his fifth
book sixth chapter speaks out; The Pope may change kingdoms, and take them
from one, and give them to another, and gives this Reason, else (says he)
Kings may pervert their people, experience showing, that as the King is, so is
the kingdom, Instancing in Jeroboam, Constantine, Constance, Julian, King
Henry the eight, King Edward the sixth, Queen Mary, Queen Elizabeth; All whose
kingdoms changed with their Kings; He affirms this to be a Catholic
Doctrine, and to prove it, brings in the Verdict, of Twenty Italians,
fourteen French, nine Germans, seven English and Scots, nineteen Spaniards,
all these prime Authors, yea the Priests and Jesuits the great fomentors of
those damnable Treasons against Queen Elizabeth, give up father Bellarmine for
their chiefest authority, for their Oracle: you see Bellarmine speaks plain,
he says enough, yet not all, I must tell you, Bellarmine is modest to others
that come after him, though he says somewhat, yet they much more; He
maintained indeed against Aquinas, that Kings are not to be murdered, though
they are Heretics, except they labor to make their people so too, and
maintains against others that except the Pope have excommunicated and accursed
them, subjects are not to rise against their King. But others, Mariana, and the
rest of that black Guard speak out, people are to rise against their King,
and though the Pope neglects his duty, they are not to neglect theirs, he
advises rather to poison their chair, Incarnate devils! yea the very vow that
the Jesuits take will necessarily infer this consequence, therefore it is not
the opinion of a few alone, but the whole order must avouch it, I will not say
every Jesuit and Papist ( de facto) is not loyal and dutiful to their
Prince, I will say, all their Loyalty depends on the Popes pleasure; And what a
rotten thread this is to hang so sharp a pointed sword in, over the head of
Kings, what loyal heart does not tremble to think of it? After a solemn
profession that they believe the Popes absolute authority over all, as the
Vicar of Christ, they make this vow to do whatsoever the Pope or the General
of the order shall command them, immediately without any Tergiversation,
disputation, or excuse at all, and to go wheresoever he shall command them,
whether to the Turks, Infidels, and Indians, or Heretics and Schismatics
among the Christians; yea they are bound to believe that no error, impiety,
injustice can come from the Pope, but that all is Religion, Zeal, Devotion,
Equity and Truth; My Brethren, do not these men commit themselves soul and
body to the Pope, do not they give themselves not to believe their own
senses, their own Reason, Judgment and understanding; And do they not vow to
go, to come, to do, to say, to execute upon all persons, and against all
persons, whatsoever he shall command them and if this be true, what hope, what
safety, what means of refuge have Christian Kings and Princes but the Popes
pleasure, when these, the slaves of the Pope, (for so the Jesuits call
themselves) which care not for their own lives, be masters of the Kings; And
yet (says Bellarmine) was it ever heard, or read, or did the Pope approve the
fact after it was done, if the Pope does not allow of the killing of Kings and
Princes, wherefore (I pray you) does he not set some severe Censure, and with a
fearful frown cry down those Jesuitical books of Mariana and the rest,
that not only approves, but commends King-killing service; Wherefore does his
holiness suffer at Rome even under his nose, those Jesuits that had the
chiefest hand in Treasons, to be pictured in Books like Martyrs, and
superstitious worship by the common people to be done to them: And those two
Kings in France (both murdered by Jesuits) why did not his holiness testify
to the Christian world his apprehension of so great misfortune, which all
Europe had cause to lament, why has not his holiness made a Law, and a decree
against killing of Kings and Princes, whereby they may enjoy more safety; Let
not words be credited when deeds speak so loud, King James in his answer to
this fla^^ting lie, brings a full Jury of witnesses; And Bellarmine himself in
his eight Chapter, twelve several examples to prove the lawfulness, that
Kings may be deposed by the people. I will keep at home, and only tell you how
the Pope proceeded against our King John, Queen Elizabeth, King James:
Innocentius the first, he first interdicted the kingdom, excommunicated the
King, cursed his person, animated his subjects against him, gave his kingdom
to the King of France, at last when the King somewhat relented and submitted to
him, he forced him to resign his Crown and kingdom to Pandolphus his Legate,
who kept it three days, and after gave it him, and made him tributary for his
own kingdom.

That Bull of Pope Clement sent out against Queen Elizabeth is infamously and
notoriously known, whereby after much railing and blaspheming of her sacred
person, he curses all that adhere unto her; This Bull he sends into England,
fastened it on one of Saint Paul's Gates, Saunders in his writings maintained
it. Bristow in his Motives, approved it, some of the Nobility and many of the
Gentry were said to execute it: From this fountain all those bitter streams
of cursed water flowed out, damnable Treasons against her person. But to pass
all other, the Treason intended this day, speaks loud enough, occasioned by
Popish Religion, attempted by Popish Catholics, encouraged by Popish Doctors,
maintained and blessed by the Pope himself; I say, the Pope himself, for when
father Garnet desired to know the Popes Resolution concerning the bloody
Tragedy, Catesby presently resolved him; The Pope (says he) that commanded
our endeavors to hinder his coming in, is willing enough we should throw him
out.

I know this Anniversary remembrance of this great deliverance, troubles the
hearts of tender Jesuits and Papists, some in Print condemn it, and say that
the treason of the Powder Traitors, ought to be buried in the grave of the
offenders, and not to be imputed to their Religion, some impudently now begin
to deny it, and some with black mouths labor to fasten it on the Puritans,
God rebuke them; It Is no new thing (my brethren) to disavow that which took no
effect: But had this damnable Treason been executed, it would not have wanted
Patrons highly to have maintained it. When that Parricide killed Henry the
third King of France, did not the Pope in full consistory of his Cardinals
make a glorious relation of it, comparing the Asacinat to Eleazar and Iudeth,
forbidding all Masses and dirges to be said for the soul of the King? Is not
his picture compleately set up in the Jesuits College: over the Altar, with
Angels protecting and crowning him? I could at large relate the manner of the
Jesuits proceedings, how they raise the spirits, and steel the resolutions of
others, whom they set apart to this King-killing service. I am sorry for the
Christian Name, that such damnable positions should be published among heathen
nations, to the disgrace of Christendom; The Apocryphal book of Iudeth the
Pope receives into the Canon, it may be for this reason, because it commends
this Act of Simeon and Levi which Jacob curses: There wants not Jesuits to
Apologize for, and justify the powder Treason. Saint Paul calls the Pope (for
on him I fastened it this day Twelve month) the man of sin, that exalts
himself above all that is called God: some there are that exalt his holiness
above God himself, but he himself and all that adhere to him, exalt him
above all that is called God, above Kings and Emperors. The Pope makes
himself good sport with the Crowns of Kings, Kings and Emperors are his
servants and Vassals, they hold his Stirrup, lead his horse, go before him in
a kind of procession; The Pope at his pleasure tramples upon their necks, he
crowns and uncrownes them with his foot, he makes them wait bare foot at
his gate, he excommunicates them, Arms their subjects against them, gives
their kingdoms to others, discharges their subjects of obedience to them, they
poison them at the Sacrament, stabbe them in their Coaches, murder them in
their Courts, they make themselves fat with the blood of Kings. O might those
Kings, those ten Kings spoken of in the Revelations 17.16. (amongst whom some
there are that name the King of England, and the King of France to be there
spoken of,) O may they hate the whore, make her naked and desolate, eat her
flesh and burn her with fire! Simeon and Levi killed a KING, that is the first
thing.

Secondly, Simeon and Levi, Massacred Innocents, it is a ruled case among the
Jesuits, where the Catholic cause may be advanced, there the murdering of a
few Innocents, though hundreds and thousands is not to be stood upon. When
Garnet was questioned by Catesby, whether with a safe conscience they might
proceed with the Powder project, because in blowing up the Parliament house
they should kill some of their own Religion, he quickly replied, such as this
was not to be stood upon; And this Eudemon with great earnestness defends,
and it has been the constant practice of the Jesuits, to this day; I must
now lead you into Golgotha, a field of dead men's bones, a field very ample and
large, as that to which God brought Ezechiel, Eze. 37.
I am bold to affirm unto you, that the ten persecutions of the Heathen
Emperors of Rome, never put to death so many nor with that cruelty as the power
of the Bishop of Rome, Instruments of Cruelty indeed are in their habitations.
In their anger they kill men, ruin Cities, Countries, nations full of men; The
heathenish persecution was long and bitter, but as for Catholic persecution,
it is more tedious, more bitter, more cruel. Pope Theodorus, Bishop of Rome,
when the second time he excommunicated Pyrrhus Patriarch of Constantinople, he
mixed some of the consecrated Cup with Ink, wherewith he wrote the sentence
of the curse, a new unusual form of cursing, not heard of before. Something
the Jesuits have added to former persecutions to make them more bitter and
fierce: this man of sin Saint Paul calls the son of perdition, and so he is,
both Active and Passive. Genitives, put for Adjectives, add to their
signification, son of perdition, because he destroys most, Saint John calls
him Apollyon, a destroyer; He says they make themselves druncke with the blood
of the Saints: To speak of the Murders, Massacres, Treacheries, Cruelties of
the Papists, it is so large a field, that entering into it, I know not where to
begin, nor where to end. I could (my Brethren) show you a Sea of blood, flowing
from the Sea of Rome, like to the Sea Ezechiel speaks of, Eze. 47.3.
which was at the first to the Anckles, then to the knees, then to the loins
deeper, and deeper; If I should race them by the blood, I should soon tire my
self, and your Attention. I spure to relate their horrible cruelties and
treacheries, against the Albigenses, and Waldenses, the Cities of Merindoll and
Cabriers; The History is in English, and worth your reading, I will not tell
you what cruelty they have done in Germany, nor speak of that damnable Massacre
in France, I will not be your Pilot to want you unto the Indians, where the
Christian Romans have killed more Pagans, then ever Pagans killed Christians;
Only take notice of one speech, the Duke of Alba said, who confessed in cold
blood, that in six years government of the Nether-Lands he had put to death
of the reformed Christians merely in the cause of Religion, eighteen
thousand; in thirty years after the Jesuits rose, I find nine hundred
thousand Protestants, murdered in Christendom, in a short time one hundred
thousand in France, I could desire to enlarge my self in declaring of the
monstrous cruelty of the Inquisition, It Is a matchless, Intolerable,
unsufferable persecution, an invention found in hell, and used still by hellish
furies; Give me leave I beseech you, to recite one example of our own fellow
subjects, by that Judge of the rest. Lithgow a Scot having attained King James
his Letters for his commendation, for his safe travel through the world, he
passes through the greatest parts of the known world, amongst Turks, Pagans,
Infidels, Jews; He traveled through Forests, Wildernesses, and deserts, he
met with thieves and murderers, Lions, Bears, and Tigers, yet came off safe:
But as he passed through Spain in the City of Maligo, on a sudden he was
surprised by nine Sergeants, who fast grapled him about the throat that he
could not speak, violently snatched him away, carried him before the
Governor, who first offered to him (as he called it) that tyrannical oath, to
answer to whatsoever they should ask Him, they strip him naked of his
clothes, Robbed him of his money, put him into a Dungeon without any light at
all, with great fetters and shakles on his legs, fed him many days with a
little musty bread and cold water, they starved him, wounded him; In ten
hours he received seaventy several torments, at last all the Lords
Inquisitors commanded him to receave Eleaven strangling torments at midnight,
and to be burnt body and bones to ashes, though they had nothing against him
but suspicion of Religion, contrary to the peace then agreed upon, that none
should come into the Inquisition: And yet after this, God wonderfully delivered
him, he was brought on his bed to our King, wounded and broken, who made this
relation to the face of Gundimor the Spanish Ambassador.

My Brethren, if the monster of this day, which was brought to the birth, could
the Devil have forced it forth; O what massacring, murdering and butchering of
Innocents would there have been, besides the Massacre and murder of the day,
wherein the King, and Queen, the Prince, the sacred house of Parliament, and
all that dwelt thereabouts, had been destroyed: who can conceive the sad and
bloody consequences of it; The sword would not only have passed through
Westminster, London and the Regions about, but all the Country and Kingdom
should have felt the fury of it, yea Children unborne should have been
smothered with the smoke of it; When the Sicilians Massacred the French, their
fury was so great, that they did not only not leave one French man among them,
but ripped up all their own women that were with child by the French, that not
one drop of French blood might remain among them.

When that great dissension in Italy, and those factious names of Gibilines and
Guelphs came up, one adhering to the Emperor, the other to the Pope; When the
Gibilines called in a third to assist them, promissing their goods, they having
obtained the victory fell a Rifling of both without distinction, being charged
with breach of promise, they replied, your selves are Gibilines and shall be
safe, but your goods are Guelphs. I make no question but the English Papists
that now complain of Salomons yoke, if ever the French, Spanish or Italian
should come victoriously among us (which God forbid) they would find Rehoboams
burden, all their goods should be English, if not they themselves; Archbishop
Cranmer, was not he burnt though he recanted? My sword (says the Duke of
Parma) knows no difference; In the troublesome Reign of King John, when the
traitorous and rebellious Nobles called in the French, and joined with them
against their King; You may remember what Vicount Melun (troubled in Conscience
upon his death bed) told the Lords, affirming it upon his salvation, that Jews
and sixteen Lords, had taken an oath, that if ever the Crown were set on his
head he would condemn to perpetual exile and utterly extirpate all their
kindred that adhered to him, as Traitors to their own Sovereign; when the
proud Spaniards exercised those Tyrannies in the Netherlands, they first
pretended the maintenance of the Romish Religion, yet they spared not to
deprive very many Catholics and Ecclesiastical persons of their Liberties and
privileges, and the chiefest that was executed of the Nobility, was that
valiant Count Egmund, that most zealously was effected to their Religion, yet
most cruelly tormented: examples are infinite, but I hasten to the third
aggravation.

Thirdly, Simeon and Levi punished them above their offense, nothing is more
ordinary in the writings of the Jesuits, then this, that Heretics can never
be enough punished; One complains of that bloody duke of Alva, that he made
the Netherlands worse by showing too much mercy, from Spanish mercy, Lord
deliver us. Arist. says; There ought to be a Geometrical proportion betwixt
the punishment and the offense, lesser offenses are not to be punished with
the great censures of the Law. Doctor Burges preaching before King James,
relates a story of Pollio's Wife, that commanded her Butler to be hanged for
breaking of a Glass; The Emperor passing by, stayed the execution, and said
the sight of the Gallows was enough for such an offense, and to prevent the
like, commanded all glasses to be broken; It Is Tyranny, bloody cruelty to
punish every sinwith death. When men exercise great censures for small
offenses; It is (as one said) to kill a fly upon a man's forehead with a great
Beetle: The Papists will allow venial sins against God, but all are mortal
against their Pope; There Is no command of the moral Law, but they can dispense
with it, but none of their Ceremonial Law, disobedience to Parents, Murders,
Treasons, Treachery, Adultery, Incest, Theft, Sacrilege, Lying, Perjury, are
all pardoned, but nothing against him. Let God say they, look to the breach of
his own Law, we will look to ours.

Austin put to death 1200. Monks of Bangor because they differed something from
him in the Liturgy and service; Its a sign of a trifling Age, when the
fathers of the Church trouble the peace of the Church for trifles, when they
excommunicate one another for Tything Mint and Comin; As the Eastern and
Western Churches about the keeping of Easter; What great offense did
Alexander, Bishop of Jerusalem, and the Bishop of Cesarea commit, when they
laid their hands upon Origin, so highly to offend the Bishop of Alexandria? it
argues usually bloody times when easy offenses are punished with death. Pope
Innocentius in words thundered out against Grosted that good Bishop of
Lincoln, because he denied to prefer an Italian Boy commended to him by his
Holiness, he swore he would hurl him to such confusion, as to make him a
fable, a gazing stock and a wonder to the world; But he thundered indeed that
casheered one of his Officers, because he kept not the leg of a Peacocke,
blasphemously saying, God banished Adam out of Paradise for an Apple, and may
not I his Vicar for a Peacocks leg. To excommunicate Kings and Princes, to
interdict kingdoms, to raise motions and commotions, to send out Crosado's
against Christians as against Turks, because in every thing they conform not
to the Pope, what greater injustice, tyranny and oppression; To raise one
kingdom against another, to give one to another, what greater tyranny and
cruelty: What had our King and State deserved of the Gunpowder-Traitors that
they should reward it with so great cruelty? They were not put to death, as we
were in Queen Mary's days: our State had not erected an Inquisition like that
of Spain. It has been the constant attestation of our Princes and States,
that not one Papist has suffered in the cause of Religion; They enjoyed their
possessions, their liberties, their titles of honor, they were admitted near
to the Kings person, had the protection of our Laws, no violence was offered
to them, English Papists (says one) are more pontificiall then the Spanish or
French: That is, more false, treacherous, traitorous, bloody and cruel. So
that when the Romish Religion was in place among us, there were more invasions
and Rebellions then ever since, that it became proverbiall of our King and
kingdom, that our King was the King of devils; Now since the purity of the
Gospel among us, all Rebellions and Commotions have been of the Popish
faction, I am sure the conspirators of this day were bloody Papists. One said
to Q. Elizabeth, commending Seneca's book of Clemency, and saying it had done
her much good, yea (says he) but it has done your subjects much hurt. You
know not what Powder Treason, may be hatching in Rome, nor what Invincible
Armado preparing in Spain, nor what Incarnate Devil, and desperately resolved
Jesuit, with murder in his heart, may be lurking in some secret corner of the
kingdom. I know while the Devil is in hell, and the Pope in Rome, and the
King of Spain aspiring to be universal King as the Pope universal Bishop,
while the Jesuits are suffered in England, and the English are reformed, there
will not want Plots to confound us all; O they are active spirits, fiery
Gunpowder Traitors: A French Papist made this Apostrophe to Henry the fourth
King of France; Great Prince (says he) Your Majesty need not fear the
treason of the Jesuits, for you are protected by the particular care and
extraordinary favor of GOD, which over-shadowes you, and makes you redoubtable
to all your enemies. But Sir (says he) what hopes or means of safety or
refuge to posterity, when the Rat is in the Bag, when the Serpent is in the
bosom, the powder in the Pistol, Jesuits (says he) that are sworn servants
to the Pope, can never be true subjects to their Prince, they exempt
themselves, from obedience, and avouch the same of all Clergy men, to make
their party the more strong, yet poor Prince, after a little while had the
Jesuits knife in his heart. God preserve our King, and he that brought him
from Spain to the admiration of many, that he might preserve him a blessing to
this age, preserve him from the power and cruelty of Spain: yet as a Privy
Counselor spoke of Q. Elizabeth concerning the Papists, he never went to bed
but awaked with fear, least he should hear of her death by Treason, nor never
Rose in the morning but expected the same ere night; So we may be sure of
this where ever occasion is offered, how ever for the present they may strive
to appear good subjects, traitors will be ever traitors, ready to vent their
Treason, the least occasion shall be enough to kill Kings and blow up
Parliaments; This is the third Aggravation.

Fourthly, Simeon and Levi, in their anger they slew a man, in their self will
they dug down a wall; Their anger was fierce, their wrath was cruel
Salvian asks, What? so great wickedness in the Christian Religion? that for
this cause Parents curse their children, and children their Parents? No anger
so fierce, nor rage so cruel, as that against sincere professors, I cannot but
admire at the divelish rage of the Church of Rome, against us, they esteem all
the reformed Churches no better then Turks, Jews and Infidels, nay worse, for
they admit these to dwell in the midst of them.

Blasphemers, murderers, witches, perjured persons, traitors, they can dispense
with, they account us dogs, worthy nothing but rackes, torture, torment, worthy
cruel death, and beastly burial, they will not allow us a place in their
purgatory, but send us to Hell, yea those damned Hypocrites, the Lords
Inquisitors (the very Nero's and Caligula's of the Age) say, they show too much
lenity to such dogs as we are. Theodosius in his hot Rage caused 7000. of
Thessalonica cruelly to be put to death; for which cause Ambrose excommunicated
him, and he relenting made this Law, that execution should not soon follow
sentence, but thirty days should pass between them; They have not the
reason of men, but the rage of Lions, the Venym of Serpents and devils, that
are hasty to shed blood. It was a cruel wish of Caligula, that wished all Rome
had but one neck, that he might cut it off at one blow, and the King of Spain
that wished all the Netherlands a Sea; My brethren, there is no rage, wrath nor
malice, like to the wrath of Rome, I cannot enlarge my self in every
particular; No piety to God, no justice to Innocents, no pity to their
friends, no loyalty to their Sovereign, nothing is able to keep them in, Romes
Babylonicall furnace is seven times hotter, their rage and superstition (like
two impetuous torrents,) bear down all respects before them, but that rage is
most hellish, which in peace storms and thunders, which brings me to the fifth
Aggravation.

The fifth circumstance that aggravated the sin is that they falsified their
words, they broke their covenants. The Papists teach that no faith is to be
kept with Infidels, Heretics, Oaths and agreements, ought to be sacred, and
kept among all nations, Heathens will not infringe their oaths, when once the
name of their God is upon them, for the terror of that God; Therefore the
Heathen Ambassadors of Rome, chose rather voluntarily to return and be
tortured to death then perjured: When one of them equivocated to save his life,
the Senate put him to death. But the Rome Christian not only practice, but
teach that men may, men must break, and the Pope can dispense with the
breaking of the oath. The Council of Constance determined this in the case of
John Hus and Ierom of Prague, whom they illegally burnt though they had
promised safety, saying, no faith was to be kept with Heretics. This made the
friends of Luther so unwilling to let him go to Worms, though his resolution
was unalterable, I go (says he) in the name of God and of Jesus Christ, though
as many Devils were in Worms as there be tyles on the houses, I would go. And
indeed it was the same Jesus Christ preserved him, for Baals Priests there
would have him put to death, and had not the plain opposition of Jews Elector
Palatine prevailed with the noble disposition of Charles the ninth, they had
burnt him also.

Good God! that they that have the faces of men, the Intellect of Angels, the
profession of Christians, the Repute of learning, so great a name through the
whole world, yet notwithstanding maintain such divelish, Atheistical and
damnable positions, contrary to all humane society, to the shame of Christians,
to the ignominy and reproach of Christ Jesus, Saint Paul in the 2
Thessalonians 2. calls him the lawless man, no law can bind him, no covenants,
no agreements; When the Cardinals meet to choose a Pope in the Conclave, they
make a vow, whosoever is chosen Pope he shall swear to such Articles as they
make, And Sleydan says the Pope is no sooner chosen, but he breaks them all,
and checks their Insolences, as if they went about to limit his power to whom
al power is given in heaven and in earth; The Christian Religion never suffered
so great a scandal and loss, as when Julian the Legate dispensed with the
oath which Vladislaus made to Amurath the Turk. The cause (says Sir Walter
Rawleigh) of the cruel war forty years betwixt the Netherlands and the King
of Spain, which cost one hundred Millions of money, and the lives of four
hundred thousand of men, is dispensing with the oath the King of Spain took;
I Will instance in one to which a second cannot be added, Henry the second,
Emperor, and Paschall the Pope, made an agreement, for further testimony of
their Reconciliation, and for more security the Pope does administer the
Sacrament with these words; Take this pledge of my true love and our unfeigned
reconciliation, let him be divided from Jesus Christ, and have no part in his
kingdom who first breaks covenant, yet the very next year with the consent
of his Cardinals he broke this oath, when oaths and Covenants are like
Sampsons cords, not able to bind, what safety can there be in the world? Some
Jesuits laugh at the Zeal of our King and State, in making the oath of
Allegiance, and say it is to bind silly Foxes, and is easily broken, and say the
Pope can dispense with the oath, one says the oath is void, and holds it sin
for a Papist, to perform his word to a Protestant, I make no wonder that some
Papists take the oath, I wonder that any refuse it, when the Pope can dispense
with it, and deal with them as he did with the French King, give him leave to
take an oath, and then promised to dispense with the breaking of it; what
certainty or security can Kings have, when such damnable Tenants are broached
in the world, that oaths are not to be kept with Heretics, and they are
Heretics whom the Pope will have so; This is the fifth Aggravation.

Sixthly, Simeon and Levi colored their revenge and cruelty, under a cloak and
mask of religion: Religion ought not to be a Bond of Iniquity, yet under
Religion in the Church of Rome all iniquity (especially Rebellions, treasons,
Perjury,) Iustifies it self, They make the cause of Religion to descend to the
execrable Acts of the murdering of Princes, Butchering of Innocents, firing of
States, no men more pretend and boast of perfection, and the holiness of their
meditations, then the Jesuits do, yet this Platform is heathenish,
Tyrannical, and able to set Aretine, Lucian, Machiavell and the Devil
himself to School. I want words to express that pestilent project of the
Popes, colored under a pretense of Religion, for the recovery of the holy
Land; For two hundred years together they made the flower and Chivalrie of
Christendom to fall by Millions in the foolish Conquest of Jerusalem; They
sent Christian Princes far from their own kingdoms, to invest themselves into
them: never any Nation so heathenish, and barbarous and divelish, whose
Religion maintained Murder, Treason, Treacheries, Perjuries. In every Religion
and State have been some such found, but none whose Religion has maintained
them as the Religion of Rome does. Fawkes had nothing to charge the State
withal, but that Religion prompted him to this Treason; When Ravilliac
murdered Henry the fourth King of France, being tortured to know his
incouragers to it, he sent them to the Sermons made by the Jesuits in Lent.
They that read Bellarmine, Suarez, Eudeman, Becanus, Emanuell Say, shall easily
perceive their Religion teaches Rebellion, Treason; That Act of Iehu in
proclaiming a solemn service to Baal, and then murdering of them, and that of
Constantine, commanding all his chief officers to worship the Idol, and then
casheering them, wants more subtle Patrons to maintain it, then either my
Religion, or my reason can reach to: Religion needs not to be shrouded under
the Cloak of policy. That great Diana of Rome they have lifted up to so high a
strain that they equal him to God, and say there is no appeal from him to
God, God and he are of one and the same Consistory; He can determine against
the Law of Nations, against the Law of nature, against the Law of God. Yea that
his power and actions are no way to be disputed of; That is the cause of
causes, and the just cause of all: O, I am weary of the Blasphemy and cruelty
of the Church of Rome, their Blasphemies are so innumerable, their tyranny so
execrable, their cruelty so unsupportable, their delusions so heathenish, their
perjuries so divelish, that the like was never in any state: Murders,
Treacheries, Treasons are there in their proper place, they are no sins in
Rome, or at least but Venial sins, easily dispensed with by the Pope,
rebellions and Treasons, Massacring, and butchering of Innocents, Draco's laws
and Spanish inquisitors, insupportable wrath and inveterate rage, perjuries and
breaking Covenants, these are the Religion of the Church of Rome; It was once
in the English Liturgy (King Henry the eighth put it in, Queen Mary put it
out,) That we should pray that our Kingdom should be delivered from sedition,
tyranny, and conspiracy of the Pope, we may do it still, (at least in private
prayers,) from the treasons, treachery, perjury of the Church of Rome, from the
rage, malice and cruelty, from the Religion of the Church of Rome, from
Jesuits and Iesuited Papists, Good Lord deliver us.

And thus I have done with the first General, the sin of Jesuits and
Iesuited Papists; It now only remains to speak of the second, their censure.

Their censure, shall I smite them (my Brethren?) Jacob you hear would not
spare his own sons though in the same house with him, though they ate the same
bread, drank of the same Cup, were of the same faith, though what they did,
they did it in revenge of the wrong done to their sister, shall we then spare
them? No, I must follow Jacob still, O my soul, come not thou into their
secret, unto their assembly mine honor be not thou united: cursed be their
anger for it was cruel, and their wrath for it was fierce: God divide them
from the son of our Jacob, and scatter them from our English Israel.

O my soul, come not into their secret: we must neither with heart nor tongue,
affection nor action, neither in word nor deed, no (my Brethren) not so much as
in thought nor look, show any countenance to Popish Cruelty, their treasons,
murders, perjuries, and the rest of that Heathenish cruelty; It has been the
desire of many, the endeavor of some, to work a reconciliation betwixt the
Church of Rome and us, Franciscus de sancta clara, whose book of
reconciliation has been 23. times printed, I have read it, and I will say of
it, that the discourse does more confirm me, that it is impossible to make a
reconciliation betwixt them, indeed there may be such a form of confession
drawn up in terms that both sides may subscribe to, but then the terms shall
be so Ambiguous, that at the next opening of the sore (the skin being but
healed over before) the breach will be more deadly; A Botch is never cured as
long as the core remains, excrements will grow on a dead body while the humor
lasts: Arius presented the Emperor Constantine, with such a form of
confession, that when the Orthodox read it, they conceived it for their side,
and the Arians for theirs. The quarrel betwixt Rome and us is not like Caesar
and Pompey, which should be chief, but like that betwixt Rome and Carthage
which should not be: if Rome prevail we shall not stand; and if we prevail,
they should not stay long, Bellar. says plainly, the controversy betwixt them
and us is whether the Church of God consist or no, or be shattered in pieces. A
learned man of our Church, yet very moderate too, conceives it impossible that
ever there should be reconciliation betwixt them. Therefore (says he) if these
reconcilers were the wisest men under heaven and should live to the worlds end,
they would be brought to their wits end, before they could accomplish this
works end, to make a reconciliation, betwixt Rome and us: you know who printed
it long ago, no peace with Rome, that King of Preachers, so called by the King
of Scholars, said plainly, The Northern and Southern Poles may sooner meet
in one, then a Reconciliation betwixt the Church of Rome and us. I could bring
in the testimony of many Reverend men of our Clergy: if nothing else, yet, this
is enough to free them from being limbs of Antichrist, in regard that a
reconciliation is impossible, and if there can be no reconciliation, I trust
the reformed Churches will ever scorn to accept a dispensation, and the piety
and policy of our Christian state to admit a tolleration among us.

Come out of Babylon, is the voice from Heaven, come out in affection, come out
in person, separate far from them, say with Jacob, o my soul, come not into
their secret: unto their assembly, mine honor be thou not united; But what?
is this enough to abhor future agreement with them, to deny them approbation
to their deeds? Jacob goes further, and we must follow him, cursed be their
anger for it was fierce, and their wrath for it was cruel; One says, Babylons
brats, must not be dandled on the lap, but dashed against the Stones: Another,
painted Iezabel the whore of Rome, must be thrown out at the windows, to be
trodden under foot of horses; Another, Rome is like a Nettle, stings them that
handle it softly; A fourth says, they are like unto bells, never well tuned,
till they be well hanged; Only I say, as Jacob says, Simeon and Levi made
themselves stink among the Nations, and one day the Nations will consume them
and their house. I would not (my brethren) blow the Trumpet to this War; Let
Rome founded in blood, propagate her Religion in blood: I have otherwise
learned Christ Jesus, the King of peace.

I hate the person of no Papist under heaven, I know God has a great people
among them, else he would never say, come out of Babylon, yea Countries,
Nations and kingdoms that now adhere to the beast shall hate the Whore; I see
Jesuits themselves may be converted, I dare not hate them, nor so love their
persons as to spare their wickedness: cursed be their anger for it was fierce,
and their wrath for it was cruel: cursed be the Religion that causes
rebellion, Treason, murdering of Innocents, treachery, perjury; The worst I
will do against them, is to pray, God divide them from the son of Jacob, and
scatter them from our English Israel.

This was the last part of the censure, Jacob powered on his sons, and it was
not to be accomplished til they came into the land of Canaan: my brethren, we
have a certain prophecy, God will divide them from his Church, but we must
wait till we come near the land of Canaan: what ever fair face Rome has,
yet her eyes are sparkling Basilisks: that whore of Babylon, her breath is the
breath of Vipers, her voice is as the voice of the Hyena, that cries, as the
Crocodile to deceive and destroy us: They are the best that are furthest
separate both in affection and person; we must come out of Babylon: would God
we could send them into Babylon, Bellarmine tells us out of Theodoret: That the
boys of Samosatenea (playing at Tenis-ball in the midst of the market) did
solemnly cast it into the fire, because it had but touched the foot of the Ass
whereon Lucius the Heretical Bishop rod; And we read in the Spanish History of
the zealously superstitious Biscans, who were busied many days in scraping up
the dust, trod upon by the horse, whereupon a certain Bishop rode, that
accompanied the Emperor Ferdinando, and threw it (as a thing infected) into the
Sea; The Jews once every year burnt all the Leaven, that was in their houses,
they swept the house clean, and searched every corner, and cursed what was
left. Moses says to the people of Israel, coming into the land, take heed
that you make no covenant with the people of the land, no, cut down their
groves, and stamp their Images in pieces. Esaias and Jeremy are very earnest
with Gods people to come out of Babylon. S. Paul would not have believers to
bear the Yoke with unbeleevers, nor Saint John, to say good night to an
obstinate Heretic. Bellarmine says; The Catholics will not suffer any that
seem to favor Lutherans in the least degree, they have their flies and
familiars, Priests oaths and Inquisitions to discover good Protestants. O then
that our Pursevants, Paritors, Churchwardens, Constables, Judges, Justices,
Consistories, High Commission, Courts of Justice, that they would discover all
these bloody Papists and send them to Rome again. I am no enemy of theirs to
wish them where they would be, there they are in soul, I would they were
there in body; there they are in Affection, I would they were there in person.

I have now done with my Text and with the Application also, and yet remains
some little of my Sermon behind: you have heard (my Brethren) Simeon and Levi
fit parallells of Jesuits and Iesuited Papists: as face answers face in a
glass, so the cruelty of the one, answers the cruelty of the other; Simeon and
Levi in cruelty against Hamor and Shechem and the rest of the City, will be
Typical for the Tragedy of this day; I see little difference, but now in one
thing, in the last thing, in the conclusion of all, (with which I will conclude
my Sermon) O they differ altogether; They as their resolution was fierce, so
their execution was cruel: they did not only mere and consult, plot, and
contrive, and combine themselves in one, but they did accomplish, and finish,
and perfect their intention. The last Act was Tragical and bloody; But as for
ours, God frustrated all their preparations, and that, when it was but late,
there was not many sands to run in the glass, not many strokes to strike at
the Clock, not one Tide to pass the Bridge, it was late last night, that God
discovered it, and this morning it should have been executed; The knife was at
the Throat, the dagger at the breast, the powder in the Barrel, the Match
burning in the hand, there was the villain ready to give fire: But God
delivered us, and they perished in their Treason, and let their memories perish
with them.

But behold the servants of the Lord, the King, the Queen, and that sacred
Senate walking loose in the midst of the fire, on whose bodies the fire had no
power, their raiment was not changed, nor was the smell or touch of fire upon
them at all; o tell it in Gath publish it in the Streets of Ascalon, that the
enemies of the English Nation, may be ashamed and confounded at their cruelty;
Let Popish Factors, Spanish Merchants blunder out blasphemously and say, GOD is
the GOD of England: Tell it to your Children, and to your Childrens Children;
Let the fifth of NOVEMBER be for ever kept holy in the English Nation: O let
the heavens Echo out praises to God, let there be all outward signs of Joy;
Let our Bells ring, to drown the noise of the thundering skies: Let fires
flame to darken the light of the Sun; Let our Organs and Singers lift up
their voices, that it may be heard and Ecchoed by Angels and Saints: Let all
that has a tongue and breath praise the Lord.

I conclude with Paul, 2 Cor. 1.9, 10. But we had the sentence of death in our
selves, that we should not trust in our selves, but in GOD which raises the
dead, who delivered us from so great a death, and does deliver, in whom also we
trust, that he will yet deliver us. *

FINIS.

