THE NEW ATLANTIS. A POEM,

IN THREE BOOKS.

With some Reflections upon the HIND and the PANTHER.

Semper Ego Auditor tantum?
Printed for the Author. 1687.

To the Reader.
WHEN the Pamphlet of the Hind and the Panther came out under so celebrated a
Name, and was blown about by some interessed little Fellows; I read it with as
much eager desire as Curiosity could possibly create, reasonably supposing, the
utmost could be said for the Cause of the Hind was there, and if Troy was to be
defended, it would be by the Hand of such an Hero. But it cannot be imagined
what a surprise I was in to find, that all the seemingly dreadful Host proved
no more than that ridiculous Army drawn up upon the Mountains, which once made
even Alexander stand, but was afterward with laughter found to be but Troops
of Apes. It was very surprising at first sight, as Ostriches in the Deserts are
said to be to the Caravans of Merchants, appearing a far off like Horsemen, yet
are discerned upon a nearer approach to be the most stupid and senceless of all
Fowls. Indeed for its bulk it imitated one of the mock Elephants Semiramis made
use of in her Indian Expedition, all Straw within, and covered with Beasts
Hides without.

The Author (whatever he may otherwise have attained) has got sure little
credit by it, except he intended it religiously as a piece of mortification, or
politickly designed to annex the Fame of a Prophet to that of a Poet, by making
out what he so long since foretold, his fumbling Age of Poetry.

The Cause he pretends to vindicate, he has much reviled by defending it so
ill, and it has made not a few think he played booty, or at least took his
measures from that Grecian Orator and Politician, who intending in a great
danger to persuade his Countrymen to Arms, made his Declamation for Peace, but
he brought such weak Arguments, that according to his design they proved the
greatest Incitements to a War. The Person that vindicates the Hind and the
manner of it, makes men naturally reflect upon the Religion of Ancient Rome,
whose chief Propagators and Defenders were their Poets. This is sure whether
the Religion of Ancient and Modern Times differ or no, the Policy and
Discipline does, for the Ancient Romans never reserved their Velites to the
last.

To the following Poem I shall say little, such as it is you have it, it is my
comfort the Justice of my Cause supplies my Defects. Yet I am bold to say, that
there is not the least part said against the Cause of the Hind of what might
have been; and was ready, and even those things which are said are softened over
and over; many things left out in point of Prudence, but many more out of good
Manners. I have been as cool and moderate as Truth would let me; and if there
remains any bitterness, I had it from the Author of the Hind and Panther in his
Preface and Poem of Religio Laici, which indeed is a Confutation of his Hind
and Panther before hand. I have took no Poetical License in any of my
Allegations, they may abundantly be proved out of the Writings of the Hinds own
Party. So that there is this difference between the Task of my Adversary and
me, That what I assert is truth, and ready proved to my hand, and what my
Adversary accuses the Panther of is perfect Invention and Calumny, which he
drudg'd hard for; and therein I give him the better: I have done as good
Sportsmen do, who will not destroy all the Game, but reserve them for their
future Recreation and Sport.

THE NEW ATLANTIS.
THE FIRST PART.
WHEN Great Columbus a discovery made
Of a New World in distant Climates spread
Behind a Scene of Seas, beneath a shade:
Unknown to Ages that did uselessly,
(He half creates that does a Coast descry.)
The News with doubtful wonder was received,
Men list'ned out for what they scarce believed;
Would hear, though at the cost of being deceived.
But when each day did with new Wonders swell,
And fresh discoveries did the truth reveal,
Men's Minds did rove to each far distant shore,
IN the widened World their Souls extended more,
Confined within too narrow bounds before.
Yet for so great Attempts Columbus found
But some dark Stories, an uncertain Ground,
Some scattered Papers of a Seaman, tossed
By chance or Tempest on an unknown Coast.
Brave daring Soul! and sharp judicious Eye,
That at such distance could new Worlds descry!
And from such Hints the great Attempt durst try.
To thee the old World does her chief Treasures owe,
Whether the new one is obliged or no,
'Twould be too daring hopes to pleasure two.
Thy great Example may brave Spirits bind,
The same desire of knowledge swells the Mind,
And Curiosity is unconfined.
News is as welcome, and does fly as fast,
As various too, as 't did in Ages past.
Nature has left for each succeeding Age,
Something that may their warm pursuit engage.
Something yet undiscovered, that may be
Reward to Art, and Spur to Industry.
A new Discovery of a World is made,
Grounds of Belief more than Columbus had.
Ignoble Souls may sleep at home, the brave
And those that dare the expected prize may have;
The yet concealed Treasures wide may open,
And stretch their Conquests beyond bounds of hope.
In farthest Climes (for so my Charts advise)
But where not known, the New Atlantis lies,
The Pride of Earth, and Favorite of the Skies.
Secure as India lies the blessed Isle,
E're cursed Spaniard pressed the Virgin Soil,
And did the unstained Earth with gore defile.
E're he with arrogant Rage insulting stood,
Trampling upon the unpittied suppliant Crowd,
And Romes Foundation once more laid in Blood.
Safe and untouched she prides in Native Joys,
Blessed in her self does foreign help despise,
Her self a World, that World a Paradise.
Fruitfulness crowns her bosom, Peace her head,
Elizean fields below, and Heaven above is spread.
Sweetly she sleeps, nor does dread angry Fate,
She knows no fear, and so she knows no hate:
Her Virgin Breast no Strangers Love admits,
At once deaf to their Courtship and their Threats.
Often do they storm, and often do undermine,
Unwearied Valor do with cunning join;
Now show rank Malice, now pretended Love,
But guarded by an unseen Power above,
Like her own Cliffs she does the Seas command;
Fixed as the Rocks on which the World does stand,
Undaunted does the dreadful Prospect take,
And smiles upon the Waves that on her Basis break.
Her Wondrous Situation's yet unknown,
Whether in the torrid or the temperate Zone,
Whether in the unknown Southern Coasts she is laid,
Or in the Pacifick Sea her bosome's spread;
Whether she be the floting Isle of old,
Or Solomon's Ophir whence he fetched his Gold:
Or whether she in the middle Regions lies,
An Intercourse between the Earth and Skies,
Where some wild Heads do place the seat of Paradise*
Or whether she be situate in the Star
That late appeared in Cassiopeia's chair.
Few are the Charts of the Mysterious Land,
Few the Discoveries of the Antic strand:
Some few blessed Chance has cast upon the shore,
Few with design the hidden Coast explore.
Rude stories of the Mystic Land are made,
No Sea-marks seen, no guiding Isles are spread,
No certain Blasts or Trade-winds thither lead.
Wondrous the site, more wondrous yet the Soil,
The Creatures, Customs, and the Fruits oth' Isle;
Strange as Chimaeras, and surprising more
Than did the Rarities oth' Indian shore
When first admiring Europe saw the store.
Strange as the Earth did to new made Adam look,
Or Heaven to' a Soul just into Glory took.
The fruitful Soil with living Palms is set,
Which grow by storms, flourish beneath the weight:
The more they are depressed the more they rise,
And lift their laboring Branches to the Skies,
Over which a Pelican yet bleeding flies.
She and her Brood in holy Incense flame,
Love and are loved, and ever are the same,
A Love and tenderness that wants a Name.
A Warlike Offspring fills the Region round,
For Loyal Courage and Devotion crowned.
No need that Cadmus Serpents teeth should sow,
For armed men in every Furrow grow.
Her Offsprings bosoms her defense do boast,
Not Citadels and Forts, or foreign Host,
Even wooden Castles do secure her Coast*
Her sailing Ships the Oceans Breast do plow,
And fruitful Harvests from the Labor grow,
Each swelling Tide the vast increase does show.
A fairer Prospect than the watery Field,
Spread with Sargossa, to the Eye does yield,
When flowery Plants thick set bedeck the Main,
And the deluded Eye believed a Plain.
Perpetual Light does over her borders shine,
Not borrowed, but Ethereal and Divine.
While other Nations grope in shades of Night,
This Blessed Goshen ever has a Light.
Wonders and Rarities the Land do bless,
Her Truths outdo the fabulous Lies of Greece,
Without are golden Mines, within the Golden Fleece.
Here, if the Annals of the Place be true,
Which faithful Eyes with Care did lately view;
Down the dark Roads of long Antiquity,
Even from Times Cradle and first Infancy,
While other Nations under Rubbish lay,
No leading Clue to guide the untrack'd way,
Successive Kings this glorious Realm did sway.
A God-like Race, whose Line extends so high
They seem the Partners of Eternity.
And as the Sons of God, an heavenly Line
Once with men's Daughters did in marriage Join,
And so a Warlike Valiant Issue made,
That over the World with boundless Empire swayed:
The true Heroic stamp in the Composition laid.
So these to Neighbor Earthly Kings allied,
(As Heathen Gods often chose a Mortal Bride)
Begot a Race in ancient Ages known
Gigantick Heroes, Men of high Renown,
The Pride of Earth and Heaven in the mixture thrown.
Through Times Abyss the uninterrupted Line
With sparkling Steps and Characters does shine
Brighter in every Age the luster grows,
Accession of new Rays new Light compose.
So when the Sun breaks from the Abyss of Night,
Each moment gives a more resplendent Light:
Brighter and brighter still the shades do clear,
Till the Sun's beauteous Chariot does appear.
Each nearer Age new growth of Fame does get,
Until in one Time's dispersed Wonders met,
Do crown that Glorious Prince now fills the Throne,
As Stars united make a Constellation.
So spacious Nile whose secret Head's unknown,
Lost in vast Lakes, or Mountains of the Moon,
Great in his Extract, yet does greater grow
By Tributary Screams that to him flow:
As by vast Realms his fruitful Waters glide,
The humbler Rivers all with comely pride
Mix with his mighty waves, and in the same
Do willingly lose their ignoble name;
Till swelled too great for his vast Banks to hold,
With new supplies grown vigorous and hold,
Over the wide Land his rolling Waves are tossed,
Which with Prolifick heat enrich the barren Coast.
Nor came the Glorys of his Line alone,
Him do all the united Virtues crown,
E're scattered did his Mighty Predecessors own.
One famed for Arts of Peace, and this for War,
Valor did this and Justice that prefer;
A single Virtue could a Monarch's Glory rear.
All things below an Infinite are poor,
And despicable is confined store.
Compared to him, alas, how low they fall,
They Are prized for single Virtues, He for all.
So the weak scattered Rays of doubtful Light,
While over the Chaos hung black shades of Night,
Mixed with the Mass only the Abyss could show,
As Lightning makes the Night more dreadful grow;
Till rallying their united Rays in one,
The distant parts into one Center run,
Did make that glorious Light we call the Sun.
Beneath this mighty Monarch's Princely shade
(The greatest Trust that e're on Man was laid)
An highborn Native Princess safely lies,
Caesar is her Defender, Heaven is His.
Humbly on Earth she makes her low abode,
Heaven is her Right, there married to a God:
Pure is her Mind, and Beauteous is her Face,
Her look bespeaks an high Ethereal Race:
Ancient, yet Youth and Beauty still in the Prime,
As Seraphims that know not the decays of Time.
A charming Modesty dwells in her Eye,
Eternal Truth from her blessed Lips does fly,
And her extended Arms show boundless Charity.
Plain, and yet rich, her comely Garments flow,
Rich in Intrinsic value, not in show,
Grave and severe, as modest Matrons use,
Not such as Strumpets to their Lust abuse:
No tawdry Gallantry, the effects of Pride,
(Affected Garbs and Motions set aside)
No Paint nor Patches which lost Beauty hide.
Order and Symmetry each part does show,
No Spots upon her Milk-white Face do grow,
Only what bold-fac'd Lies and Envy throw.
Lies that even Greece outdo, whose fruitful Brain
The Beauteous Heaven with monstrous Shapes did stain,
And filled with Beasts and Snakes the Ethereal Plain.
Unshaken Loyalty her Breast does fill,
No Jealousies can move 't, nor Injury kill.
Reviled and contemned, yet She Is true,
And Virtue does for Virtues sake pursue.
Rewards mean Souls may unto Actions train,
They Are truly generous, that great Deeds maintain,
No prospect laid of Interest and Gain.
When Rebels force at Majesty did aim,
And spurious Blood Inheritance did claim:
With Loyal Rage and Fury up She rose,
Exposed her beauteous Bosom to her Foes:
Beauteous as Truth She rose, whose awful sight
Dispels the Mists of Error, Shades and Night,
And makes the Fiends betake themselves to flight.
Powerful as Heaven she rose, when all around
The Orbs with Martial Noises did rebound,
And the Music of the Spears no more did sound.
When hostile Troops through frighted Spears did haste,
And the road to Heavens high Empyraeum past,
When Michael over the conquered Rebels stood,
And Lucifer and all his Train sunk in the fiery flood.
Alone she rose, no friendly help was nigh,
Alone she did the doubtful Battle try,
And bore the Wounds were struck at Majesty.
Her Martial Sons stopped Hells impetuous Course,
And her devout ones took even Heaven by force,
Brought humane help, and heavenly Aid called down,
Dispelled the Foe, and doubly fixed the Crown.
Loyalty is her Essence, Truth her Soul,
Fixed as the Center, Constant as the Pole:
Party, Interest, or Humor, others move,
She true as the Needle to the Pole does prove,
As Heaven to Justice, or, as Saints to Love.
On an Eternal Rock her Seat is placed,
A Rock no Storms can move, no Time can wast,
But will beyond the Worlds foundation last,
Olympus like, whose feet on Earth do tread,
But rears above the Clouds his lofty Head,
Fenced round by humane Laws, and Laws Divine,
(United Forces for her safety join)
Caesar with God does her Protection share;
Guarded by Heaven above, and his Vicegerent here,
Demons and Fiends, Heavens Armies do oppose,
And Caesar Men malicious as those.
Both wish her Ruin, at her Bliss repine,
Both forced with shame to quit the cursed Design,
Here under God's and his Vicegerent's wing
Safely she does her Makers praises sing.
Offers up holy Incence every day,
While Seraphims assist as she does pray,
And sweetly steal the spoken Word away:
And Raptured with the Prayers, thence notes do take
To sweeten the next Halelujahs they must make.
And sacred Silence and Delight put on,
To see themselves or equaled or outdone.
Legions of Angels on her Votes attend,
Ten thousand Legions do her Seat defend,
With flaming Swords keep off her Enemies,
As once a Cherubim defended Paradise.
Yet not her Beauty or her Innocence
Against malicious Foes could be defense,
The Butt of Envy still is Excellence.
For not Heavens height or ever-waking Eyes
Or glory can secur't from Enemies.
A Foreign Princess, whose malicious Spite
With lawless Claim does grasp at others Right;
Unhinges Kingdoms under Safety's name,
Throws wildly the contentious Ball of Fame,
And fires the World to warm her at the flame;
With blood-shot Eyes her greedy Jaws does open,
And her already has devoured in hope:
So to a remorsless Rock Andromeda
With rigid Chains was tied a Monster's prey.
With dreadful cries the hungry Beast drew nigh,
Bore foaming Seas before him to the Sky,
Stretched his wide Jaws the Beauteous prize to tear,
But Perseus and Medusas head was near.
Low her Design's, and yet from Heaven her Birth:
High Claim, and yet too near allied to Earth,
Once she in Heavens first Rank of Favor stood,
Pure as the Light, and as a Cherub good.
Heaven over her head Indulgent blessings strow'd,
A Guard of Angels for her Aid allowed,
But cursed Satan mixed with the Crowd.
They winged her Mind with high Ethereal Fires,
He sunk it with Terrestrial desires:
Too fatal are the Charms the World inspires.
Happy, thrice happy, had she never fell,
Or had been, what she vaunts, Infallible.
Ambition (if that name we may it call
Which does from high to low Employments fall)
First sunk her down: desire of humane Power
Blemished the right she had Divine before,
And every weight of that still sunk her lower:
Loaded with Vanity, the Scale that rose
The other from its Empire did depose.
Adam more nobly fell, his lofty Mind
At great Acts and Divinity designed.
She from sublime to sordid deeds declined.
Such Beings Philosophic heads relate
Of heavenly stamp; when weary of their state,
Tired with reiterated Joys they grow,
And long to prove untasted Bliss below.
The nearer their low Course to Earth does lead,
Farther they from their Pristine glory do recede,
Baser and baser grow The Ignoble Minds,
Till they degenerate into other kinds.
The Basis of her heavenly power sunk down,
And wanting ground for her new gotten one,
From Truth, the Fountain of great Deeds, she flies,
And basely sinks to Humane Policies.
Instead of that which casts a radiant Light,
She tricks Impostures up to please the sight.
God, once her Guard, secured her heavenly right,
Under his Banner safely she did fight,
And put her furious Enemies to flight.
Right has Heavens Warrant, but ill gotten Power
Arts, Policies, and Stratagems secure.
Truth needs no shapes nor helps, a Native awe
And Reverence it from open Foes does draw.
A genuine look and Beauty right imparts,
But Fraud and Falsehood need a thousand Arts.
Right wanting, she to Cruelty descends,
Her usurped Power by Hostile means defends,
And the erring World with Fire and Sword amends.
Guilt leaves an haggish fear that haunts the mind,
Fear trembling looks for what it would not find,
Fear goes before, and bloody Cruelty behind.
So Adam, while in Innocence he stood,
He lowly was adored by the gazing Crowd;
A Sacred awe each humble bosom swayed,
His God-like Miene with reverent fear was paid,
They loved and feared, and willingly obeyed.
But when Rebellion in his Mind did live,
And he for God's Prerogative did strive;
The cursed Venom through the World did fly,
Man did his Maker, Beasts did Man defy.
And the remnants of lost power that yet remain,
Man not by Nature but by Art does gain,
By Wit, by Industry, and cruel pain.
Wisdom to Truth and Honesty's allied,
Cunning to falsehood and deceit is tied,
Cunning, a left hand Wisdom, has lost power supplied.
Great States by open force make way, the small
Do to Alliances and Treaties fall;
Sly Policy, where Force does fail, can gain,
As wild Beasts are by Traps and Pitfalls taken.
Shame lost, base ways are used, so violent's grown
The scorching thirst of wide Dominion.
To every Passion there is Incentives laid,
Blandishments to each Humor are displayed,
And various Tunes on various strings are played.
Each Weakness, Imperfection, and Disease,
That on the Body or the Mind do seize,
Gratification find and pleasing ease.
From highest flights of the aspiring Mind,
To the low effects of hypocondriack Wind,
Unbridled Riot and tame abstinence,
Implicit folly and exalted sense;
The Extremes of every Passion, stretched as wide
As Lust or Rage can do it, are gratified.
As though the Faith of Heathen Rome remained,
And for each Vice in Heaven a Patron reigned.
High place and Dignities the Ambitious move,
The Melancholy may a Convent love;
High tow' ring Spirits are for business fit,
And Solitudes the creeping Souls delight;
Obedience with the humble Mind does suit,
And Peremptory Sway the Resolute:
Loud Miracles the credulous do call,
And Aerie Visions the Fantastical.
The Practick Minds may in State Matters dive,
In hidden knowledge the Contemplative;
Ostentous Pomp the simple mind does please,
Heavy and restive Bodies constant ease;
Nor endless shows and Ceremonies want
The Superstitious and Ignorant.
Lust gets Divorces at an easy rate,
And can Incestuous Broods legitimate:
Liars Equivocation may allow,
The Rash a Dispensation of their Vow:
Indulgences and Jubilees do suit
The Incorrigible and the Dissolute.
All that their Fame or their Content have lost,
Have in Ambition or in Love been crossed;
All whom Guilt dogs, or Nemesis pursues,
May shelters here and Sanctuaries choose.
Nor for Devotion to their Altars fly,
But undeserved Protection: as though she
That first at Romulus Asylum lived,
Has by the same Arts and Instruments survived,
And ever since by Malefactors thrived.
These and a thousand Mystic Rites beside,
Nor by Gymnosophist nor Brachman tried,
Found the Chymerical Dominion
That Is grounded in Opinion alone:
Remove Implicit Faith, the Structure all falls down.
Beauteous far off her gaudy Pageants seem,
For ostentation made, and vile esteem.
Rich at a distance, they their Plumes display,
But to near Eyes their Poverty betray,
Only with Paint, with Gilt and Varnish gay.
Distance her Friend, that Lies and Cheats does vent,
Can wild Impostures with Advantage paint,
But seldom Truth does fairly represent.
Does various Objects in one Mass confound,
(As all things at a distance do seem round)
Deformity and wrinkles does make fair,
And shows things as they seem, not as they are.
Ancient she is granted; but like Ovid's Dame,
That endless Life of the lustful God did claim:
But lasting Youth forgot to insert; too late,
Tired with old Age, bewayl'd her luckless Fate.
She does no blessing of old Age retain,
The Inconveniences alone remain.
Dotage, the Vice of ancient years, delights
In trifling Follies and in childish sights;
In outside Pomp and empty Pageantry,
In Paint and Varnish that attract the Eye.
Credulity each open Cheat does own,
And greedily Impostures does drink down,
Listens to' each Fabulous Legend, every story
Of Relics, Exorcisms, and Purgatory;
Of Fairy Elves and Goblins, wakeful Sprights
That rouse the drowsy Monks to Beads at Nights;
Of Beasts converted at an Abbot's Prayer,
And holy Nunns appearing in the Air;
Of Virgins Milk, and still renewing blood;
Wonder's of the Mass, and of the sacred Rood.
Of Images that speak, lament and weep:
Of Wounds by Angels given to Saints asleep.
Of Prophesies and Works of the holy Maid,
And all the Tricks were e're on Jetzer played.
The wildest Ravings are by her received,
And she would have all she does invent believed.
Laughed at and scorned she does her thread pursue.
(For Old Age to Tautology is true)
Baffled, contemned, a bold Face does put on,
And tires with Nauseous Repetition.
Forsook of Native Beauty, she by Art,
By Paint and Dress a forced one does impart.
Does loudly brag of what she long has lost,
And does of Fame in former Ages boast.
Her self to others Beauty but a foil,
She what she cannot equal does defile,
As old-cast Beauties young ones do revile.
Reason and Sense with Laughter she forsakes,
And, what she does not own, from others takes.
(The fate of Age) she robbed of her sight,
Persuades the rest of the World to love the Night;
Blindfolds the stumbling Crowds, and then replies
The way to see is to put out their Eyes.
The holy Precepts of her early Youth,
And shining Tracts and Paths of Sacred Truth
Untrod, in long successive Times are grown
The Seats of Monsters and of Desolation.
Forgot (for such Misfortunes Age does own,)
Or mixed with Childish Rites debased they are grown,
The Extremes of Age and Childhood met in one.
Yet much of Truth beneath the Rubbish lies,
And real Worth beneath the Fopperies.
Could she her Silver from her Dross refine,
The rust of Age and worldly Taint decline,
How glorious would the polished Diamond shine.
Too good for Hell, and yet too base for Glory,
Not purely Truth, and yet not all a Story,
A mixed Religion fitting Purgatory.
Beside these two, to neither yet allied,
Not real Friends or Foes to either side;
But who do by success of each their Actions guide,
A mungrel Race does dwell, such Africa sees,
When the mixed Herd from burning Deserts flies
To cool their Thirst at shady Fountains; grown
From a Promiscuous Copulation.
From different mixtures different Natures rise,
A double heart, a changeable disguise.
Now they the Wolf, and now the Boar put on,
And now the cunning of the Fox is shown.
The true Samaritans, who when the Fame
Of Sion did exalt Judaea's Name,
Did kindred claim, did in the Alliance pride,
But when her Glory found an ebbing tide,
Did with the invading conquering Heathen side.
Discord their various Nature does put on,
As mixtures make a Fermentation.
Restless they move, their own and others curse,
Cadmaean race, that endless quarrels nurse:
Ignorant of their Extraction, all they hate,
With the same Fury Friends and Foes do bait:
With bloody Rage their Brethren they pursue,
And in their Parents blood their hands imbrue.
So Janissaries do unnatural grow,
To their own Parents the most mischief do;
So the Lycisca is the Wolfs worst Foe.
These, and a numerous Spawn of lesser fame,
To which Heavens Nomenclator never gave name,
Beneath great Caesar's Princely shadow stood,
Caesar renowned, beneficent and good.
All do the common good his Favor share,
Fenced by his Word, and bulwark'd by his Care;
As Insects in the Sunbeams sing and play,
And obscene Beasts are bred from Phoebus golden Ray.
Beasts have Heavens general Protection,
Enjoy the common use of Light and Sun,
But Men and Angels are admitted near his Throne.
The Native Princess in her genuine right,
Envying none, but ravished in delight
In Joys not to be blasted by malicious sight,
From Rapine free, ignorant of Martial Art,
Was ever upon the Defensive part.
The Foreign Princess with an envious Eye
Blessed Canaan viewed, and fain would Battle try,
But Caesar had forbad Hostility.
From open violence barred by great command
She kept the Peace, but yet with Arms in Hand.
So does the hungry Wolf behold his Prey,
Bounds, and with eager haste devours the way,
But the Lion seen makes an astonished stay,
Summons her Troops, hoping e're long she might
Have some pretense to ease her ranker'd spite:
That Time, which she had by Experience known
To have removed her own Foundation,
Her Enemies Forts might undermine or batter down.
At least she hoped, when open force did fail,
To win by fraud what she durst not assail.
They all approach and yet unseen draw nigh,
Invisible to every common Eye,
Till mystic Charms and many a secret rite
Has cleared the scales, and purified the sight.
Now deep in shades below the Moles do lurk,
In secret Caves forge out the destined work:
So low, they by the Counsel may be led,
If of no other Beings, yet of the dead.
Sometimes they are hid beneath a specious Flower,
And while they do attract the Snakes devour;
With gaudy looks and pleasing baits betray,
And dart from far upon the cheated prey.
From secret Holts and Cells the Javelins fly
Ignobly still in Ambushments they ly,
And dare not bravely face the Enemy.
Behind they stab, or else surprise in the Night,
For as Truth loves, so falsehood hates the Light.
Strange and amazing is their Form and Mien,
Their Orders, Rites, Habits and Discipline.
'Twas thought an host of wild Barbarians rose
Purposely horrid, to affright their Foes:
Or that Cambyses brought his shattered Host,
Picked straggling up from every distant Coast,
And from a thousand Realms and Lands ingrost.
Or Hannibal's confused Troops were come,
Of various hues and shapes to change the doom,
Not to demolish, but to set up Rome.
Some from their various Mimick actions thought
They were a Race of Apes and Monkeys got:
As once the Spaniards did the Indians blot.
Some thought that conquered India sent her store,
And by oppressive Spain of Treasure poor,
Ransacked the Andes and Vales, had robbed each Coast,
And from the different Monsters made the Host;
Sent each dire Savage that e're wildly ran
Twixt farthest Northern Frith and Straights of Megallan.
Some thin and meager upon Air do dine:
Others full fed, like the plump God of Wine.
Some in deep Cells horrid and meager grow,
Like luckless Demons of the Mines below,
Whose dire appearance does the damp foreshow.
Some like the God of Youth are fresh and gay,
Dance in the Sun beams, frolic all the Day,
And their swelled necks and pampered sides display.
So wide their Lives, distant their Looks do show,
They seem besides themselves to need no Foe.
Hard Fate! no shelter from their Fury's found
That walk in mists, and burrow under ground.
No Shibboleth their Treachery can defeat
That have their Salvo to Equivocate:
Nor Spies from those the Avenues can keep,
That in such various Names and Shapes do creep.
The World before never such an Empire saw,
Or to the Field did such an Army draw;
That claims a Right to every Prince's State,
And Monarch's can depose, or can create:
With secret Chains their Subjects Conscience binds,
And lays enchanted Fetters on their Minds.
A Monarchs Throne can without fighting shake,
By private scrues the firm foundation break;
As hidden Vapors do the Earthquakes make.
Grows rich; yet without watching, care, or pain:
Fights, yet with Hosts that others do maintain;
Makes Paper shields and Pens the Sword control,
And makes Geese once more save the Capitol.
Amply rewards; yet does not poorer grow;
For others Wealth who freely will not bestow?
Unwearied Bees, who from each flower do drain,
From others Follies from their Sins do gain,
And Honey from each poisonous Simple strain.
Numerous from far the growing Troops appear,
And where the Sight is terminated, there
Still swelling numbers rise; so could we see
The Cave whence the race of Infant Time does fly;
The Scheme of Hatching Days; how all along
The endless Offspring to the Birthplace throng:
Unlike in Color, Habit, Face, and Miene;
Monstrous and strange that little seem a kin.
Some days would foul appear with Clouds o'recast,
Some smiling fair the storms all overpast:
Some with Misfortunes checkered over, and some
A monstrous Mass of all deformed would come.
Such Troops, but more alike does Africa breed,
When Caterpillars do the Ground o'respread,
And upon every thing that is green do feed.
With unrestrained Fury all devour,
And Desert leave what was a Paradise before.
Dreadful their Numbers, nor less resolute,
Prompt to Obedience, swift to execute.
Desperate in all Attempts, devoid of fear,
They leap over Rocks, and through dread Tempests steer.
Outdo- Romes Ancient Heroes, who their Line
Did sacrifice unto their Discipline.
Witness it the two Henry's, whose dear Life
Fell Victims to their consecrated Knife.
Witness it the blessed Souls late trampled down
Doomed by their Rage or their Ambition.
The foreign Princess overlooked the show,
But something sullen sat upon her Brow.
Whether hopes long deferred had made her sick,
Or disappointments touched her to the quick;
Or that her presence awed, and she did fear
They Would not so freely speak if she was there;
Or that she with the long Fatigue was tired,
She called a Council, and in state retired.
The summons soon were noised, the Members met,
And the heads of every Order in the Junto set.
The President (such 'twas his right to be
When desperate Ills must desperate Counsels try
His Order formed to uphold the tottering See)
Was writ in bloody Characters of Fame,
Yet had his Title from the holiest Name.
Fierce in his Look, and savage in his Mind,
To Wars, to Cruelty and Rage inclined:
With fiery Eye Balls on the Prey did look,
Vented his Spleen, and thus the silence broke.
THE NEW ATLANTIS.
THE SECOND PART.
OUR Golden Age and happy Times are gone;
When undisputed All our Power did own.
And suppliant Monarchs at our feet fell down.
When flowing Tides of Wealth came rolling in,
The sale of Vice, and easy price of Sin.
When blindfold Ignorance did Devotion give,
The less men knew the more they did believe,
The Blind and Credulous will all receive.
When Croisades for an holy War did come,
And Princes in far distant Coasts did roam,
While our Great Queen usurped upon their Rights at home.
When every one on what She said relied,
Closed up her Eyes and took her for their guide,
Nor sneering Heretic the Consequence denied.
When with full Power the World did her invest
Implicitly subscribing to her Test,
That She alone is Christ's Immaculate Bride,
Harlots and Sorceresses all beside.
That her Communion all the Elect does hold;
Heaven, though it is Infinite confined to her fold.
That the Sun rises only in the West,
Forgets his Bridal Chamber in the East,
And black Damnation shades over all the rest.
That she does hold Eternal Truth alone,
And what she does is Truth, because by her it is done,
That she the powerful Keys of Heaven does hold,
The Wards unchanged, and what she has enrolled
In Books below, in those above are writ,
And Heaven to' her grant of Saintship does submit.
And whom by fatal Sentence she does doom
Heaven must exclude, and Hell for them make room,
That the charge of Souls is Hers, and therefore she
Has over all a boundless Sovereignty:
As great Precedence over earthly Kings,
As have Immortal over Mortal things.
And since the End the Mediums must command,
And Heaven the Butt of all our Aims must stand;
She the great Guide of the Eternal state,
Must act, must alter, counsel and debate
All things Supreme, and all Subordinate.
May plant, root out, establish and depose,
May alter and dispense, may bind and loose
All that may fix the Churches sure defense,
At least all that may merit that pretense.
That all that her unbridled Power withstand
Are stigmatized with an Heretic Brand:
Not Cain's for safety, but a mark for Death.
(Happy the Saint that can the blow bequeath)
That all the World by Conscience bound must bring
Their help to' extirpate the accursed thing:
To stab the hated Race, and to root out
With Fire and Sword the Pestilential Rout.
These the Precarious grounds are we have laid,
And the Superstructure's equal to them made.
Our claim of heavenly right, the ground of all,
With which the gaudy Edifice will fall,
Is proved or wholly forged, or much debased,
And in the Room a Prior Title's placed.
Our shattered Evidence our Foes deride,
Expose the blots and falsehoods we would hide,
And bring Authentic Witness on their side.
Our narrow Thoughts of Heaven experience finds
The fault of purblind Eyes and narrow Minds;
To whom as to men in Vales it does befall,
They see some part of Heaven, and think it is all.
Heavens Mercy and his Goodness these restore
The Privilege we had robbed him of before.
Our claim to' Infallibility they laughing own,
As they do Constantine's Donation.
Show the Eccentrick Dances it has moved,
The various Epicycles through which 't has roved:
How it has followed every foolish Fire
That Lust, or Pride, or Interest did inspire:
And when a Golden Ball was dropped in the way,
It stooped like Atalanta to the Prey.
Our Apotheosis and Gift of Heaven,
To Traitors and to perjured Villains given,
All scorn, nor will with such a Consort dwell,
But, like the Indian, rather venture Hell.
Ensigns of Honor when become the Meed
Of Persons of low worth and servile breed,
The offended Nobles all, with needful pride,
The tainted badge of Honor lay aside.
Our Thunder that did once the World appall,
Breaks unregarded and contemned does fall,
And like Salmoneu's Thunder's scorned by all.
The Magic Charms that fettered Kings are broke,
And fearless they throw off the galling Yoke:
Grow jealous of their State, secure their Throne,
And from usurping Power do fence their Crown.
These are the least of the numerous Ills they do,
The prying Heretics our Secrets know;
Have searched the Stream up to the Eternal Spring,
And tracts of Truth down through all Ages bring;
Have with much Diligence and Justice shown
The various change of our Foundation:
The admittance of Impostures, and the Times
When we made Love to meretricious Crimes;
The Errors of our Doctrine have exposed,
But, what does deepest strike, our Lives disclosed.
The head of these our Emulous Neighbor stands,
The frustrate hopes of all our Heads and Hands,
And with Angelick Face o'relooks her Native Lands.
(Our shame) her Virtues every where we spy,
Her decent Rites, her warming Charity,
Her Truth and her Angelick Piety.
Her steady Loyalty, nor are less known
Her Learning, Wisdom, Moderation.
Propitious Stars, if I guess right, appear,
And dawns of our long wished for Day draw near:
Much in this Critical Juncture's to be done,
Give speedy Counsel, when this Moment's gone,
Bid long farewell, for it is for ever flown.
A sullen murmur followed, when there rose
A meager shape, a shape that Envy chose,
And spoke; With studied Malice we have tried
Our Enemies Rites, Lives, Learning to deride,
But the cast Darts down on our heads did glide.
It Is now too late worn Methods to recall,
They Are flat and dull, the most refined of all
Will by their Virtue be to make them fall.
Loyalty is their glory, pride and crown,
Make but that totter and all tumbles down.
Load them with vile reproaches; Truth and Lies
When once on Wing do curious search despise,
The swiftness of the Motion does delude our Eyes.
With low designs their lofty Honor blot,
Say Interest has their Loyalty begot,
And hopes of tasted power the Increase has brought:
And what beyond Hells Malice has a strain,
Lay to their Charge a Martyred Sovereign.
Blot their Allegiance, touch that tender place,
They will their God and King revile unto their Face.
Vex them with wrongs, and work them up with Fears,
Threaten the Issue of succeeding years;
Disgrace the great, and trample on the small,
With undeserved Reproaches taint them all.
Make them but Malcontents the work is done,
A soft descent leads to Sedition;
None do the ferment of high Passions know,
What generous Souls loaded with wrongs may do;
Patience long tired does unto Fury grow.
Incense them, push them on, the step we'd choose
Is that they would Caesar's Protection lose;
Stir up the mutinous Rabble, if they flame,
The fatal Fire to all shall lay a claim.
The Counsel was embraced with joyful cries,
When one did from among the crowd arise
And thus replied; The advice is deep and wise:
But we never yet upon one string relied,
But various Draughts have wove, new Arts have tried;
Mines under Mines; if one discovered fail,
That the other yet may hit and blow up all:
We Have other Tasks to do. Wise Kings when they
With their Ambitious Neighbors war for Sway,
With wary Eyes survey the Enemies state,
And the Motions of the Malcontents do wait,
Foment Divisions, widen still the breach,
And their Foes Arms do to their Ruin stretch.
A Viperous brood lies in our Enemies Breast
That tear her Bowels, and her Peace molest:
At best half Friends and Jealous, it is our parts
To make them open Foes by private Arts;
Revile their Mother, draw a monstrous shape,
Fill it with Cruelty, Oppression, Rape,
And with remorsless Fury fill the Map;
And hanged out as her Picture, 'bove the rest,
Write the Author and Abettor of the Test.
Spot her with Dirt from our own Malice wrought,
Insinuate into the Crowd the thought
That it is her genuine look and Natural Draught.
Till they with Phantoms scared, and Horrors driven
Mistake the Road, and fly to Hell from Heaven.
Smile on the cheated Slaves, their hopes increase,
(For whom you cannot love yet you may please)
And draw them to the wrack with hopes of ease.
Invite, and like a treacherous Sea beguile;
Embrace, and kill, and while you ruin smile.
Divide, set them their Tasks, and when that is done,
The just Reward of Traitors is well known.
With deep Attention the Discourse was heard,
And every one for the Attempt prepared,
To which by Natural Bent his Temper steered;
Till from below a Spectre did ascend,
And seemed half a Man and half a Fiend.
His baleful Eyes like direful Comets showed,
Diffusing Mischief and ill Fate abroad:
His Mouth like Aetna belched out Smoke and Fire,
And thus he spoke, or bellowed out his Ire.
Mean Souls low Arts and Policies do try,
The great at lofty noble Actions fly,
Worms crawl upon the Ground, but Eagles brush the Sky.
Such dilatory Arts do blast our Fame,
Such proling is unworthy our great Name.
Could we secure our Empire by such ways,
The very means the Victory would debase.
Act like your selves, your former Fame restore;
Strike through at once and need to strike no more.
I with a Firebrand over the Piedmont Vale
The many headed Hydra did assail.
Lovely in dust and gore my Legions stood,
Wading in Streams of cursed Heretic Blood.
Down fell the glorious Harvest, and not one
Was left to future Times to give Relation.
With state I the Parisian Feasts maintained,
When Hecatombs the crowded Altars stained:
When pious Massacres did fill each Street,
When Death did Death, and Ruin Ruin meet.
I filled the Irish Shambles, and did call
From Boggs, from Loughs and Woods each bloody Cannibal.
When dying groans through every Soul did fly,
Echoed through Earth, and pierced the astonished Sky;
To every barbarous Ear sweet Melody.
Why should I mention things of lesser Note,
Or Bonner's Smithfield-Fires, or Powder Plot:
Oh! 'twas a brave Attempt, tho 't did not hit,
Although Hell wanted Fire the Match to light,
Brave, as was Satan's, that with Heaven did fight.
The Path is easy where one went before;
I Have told you what I did, and need no more. --
This said, his Speech and he at once did end,
With Sulphurous stench he downward did descend,
And by's departure truly showed the Fiend.
A sudden horror on each mind did light,
Or from the Counsel bred, or from the sight;
But the Advice out-lasted the affright.
Some liked the Counsel, but the Times displeased:
And some the want of Agents did molest:
Some, or in Truth, or in Appearance good,
Mislik'd Foundations laid on slippery blood;
Nor had they quite forgot the due of Gratitude:
Some Piety, some Policy did sway;
But that on which the greatest stress yet lay
Was Caesar's Word, and that they must obey.
But 'twas with gnashing Teeth and flaming Eyes.
When one with jolly Miene and look did rise
And speak: the Counsel with the Times should hit,
The late Advice don't with the Juncture fit:
We in Atlantis never by force could gain,
We Have bravely dared indeed, but dared in vain,
Our Bulwarks are beat down, and what is left
Is little more than Policy and shift.
In vain we to Antiquity do fly,
No footsteps of Infallibility,
Or of our Universal Claim there ly.
We Have bribed her often to speak upon our side:
But when our Gifts and Presents were denied,
With Wracks and Tortures her consent we have claimed,
And by our purging Indices have maimed,
Lopped and cut off what our Impostures named.
Our Cobweb Frame of new Divinity,
Made to uphold our Pageant Hierarchy,
By dint of Argument is tumbled down,
That had built upon Smoke its weak Foundation.
Our Miracles for pleasing Chat make way,
Our Exorcisms in Laughter spend the Day.
The Scene is open, if we would be wise,
We with new paint must clothe our Fopperies.
The World with nauseous Syllogisms is tired,
Major and Minor now no more admired;
Nor have we ought by that dull War acquired.
Wise Heads do know too much, and search too deep,
The looser minds we must in Ignorance keep.
Since then our Cause we most on Fiction build,
It must by what it is composed be' upheld;
By Poetry; whose ravishing Art does tell
Not what is true, but what is plausible.
This will young heads with pleasing Notions fill,
Not thorny Questions, but fair Schemes instill:
And unseen Fetters cast upon the Will.
'Twill every temper, every Genius suit,
But most the Ignorant and Dissolute.
Weak reasons Gorgeous Metaphors array,
And chiming Verse the Sense will bear away.
This Counsel roused the President, who replied
The Advice upon firm Principles relied,
And what might give most hopes 'twas yet untried.
But though the noblest flights for Poetry,
Things that even the very Art outvy,
Do in our heaps of fabulous Legends ly:
Such is our rigid Fate, in vain l've sought
Among our Train to find a Man of Note.
The Lists are ready, nor Rewards we want,
At hand are all things but the Combatant.
The Adviser reassumed his Post, and cried,
We Have late come over to the Royal side
A Proselite, whose servile Pen can write
For fear, reward, for mischief, or for spite:
With as much ease can praise, and then revile
As with the Romans 'twas to change the Style.
His Nature to his Calling laid a Claim
As due, for Verse from turning has its Name.
It Is true of late fearing the effects of chance,
He Horoscop'd about for Maintenance:
Proffered his Venal Pen to serve our Foes,
To plead the Panthers Cause, and ours expose.
And had they been in their Subscriptions kind,
He' had vowed to write the Panther and the Hind.
But they with scorn his proffered Pains did slite,
(An Act of generous Courage, not of Wit)
Nor's Mercenary Pen would bribe to write,
Which once did Cromwell's odious Fame recite;
A Poet fit for such an Hypocrite.
He may be useful, and we have him sure,
No matter why he did his Faith abjure;
Such Proselytes the greatest Bigots be,
And while their warmth does last no danger see;
Strive an assurance of their Zeal to give,
And former faults by' obsequiousness retrieve.
He for our turn is fit, by Nature bred
He rails at all before him, and is fed
Hyaena like, by tearing up the dead.
The unluckiest Satyrist alive, that still
Writes his own Character in all that is ill.
Of all the World most fit a Vice to expose,
That all its Cause, Effects and Motions knows,
Stranger to none, can no advantage lose.
Big with Conceit, the empty shape looks great,
His own dear self obligingly does treat;
In melting accents his own praises glide,
In keen Iambicks all mankind's beside.
Rewards his Soul in any garb will lap,
His ductile Soul will put on any shape;
Vice has his Patronage, and there is no fear
But Hell in time may his Protection share,
The rather cause the God of Gold is there.
He courts loud Rumor, but lets Truth alone,
Conscious of Guilt he shuns being justly known,
And by's often changing flies a Definition.
Learned, but in Ill: Ingenious, but in spite:
Virtuous, from Impotence: from Need a Wit:
Modest, when beat: in suffering Valiant:
Honest, when forced: And moderate, when in want.
True, but for Interest; Civil, but for dread;
Devout, for Alms; and Loyal, but for Bread.
The Person pleased, and so did the Design,
And soon the Proselite was called in.
Trembling he stood; while thus the President cried,
We various ways for our defense have tried,
Our careful Sons their secret Methods take,
That were not falsehood naturally weak,
So hidden are the Plots and Mines we have laid,
We the whole World long since had Captive made.
All that is left, is that with show and paint,
We hide what does in real value want.
The Basis fails, the Building though it is fair,
And high in Clouds its lofty Head does rear,
Yet sinks, and greater still its Ruins are.
This be thy Province, trick the Mormo fine;
Rich in appearance though there is naught within.
That Art thy empty Metaphors dispense,
The rather cause there is no need of sense.
But shun a near Inspection, prying Eyes
(And Heretics are mischievously wise)
May break the spell, and see through the disguise.
Think out a Fable of some Bird or Beast,
Matter not Reason if it be well dressed.
What though the borrowed Feathers others own,
Few will detect the cheat, few tell when known.
Aesop, did first on the Invention hit,
Aesop thy like in every thing but Wit.
By this time Bavius had composed his fear,
And something thought in his own Praise to' infer,
When an unlucky Accident did reign
That stopped his Praise, and raised his Fear again.
The utmost Scouts had a strange Monster took,
Cruel in action, and a Fiend in look,
Drew him by force through the amazed throng,
Which with wild outcrys ushered him along:
Such shapes before Atlantis never arrayed,
Such Pliny never, or Gezner found or made,
Nor e're such Schemes in Travelers Brains were laid.
From every Creature he a portion stole,
And seemed an Epitome of the whole.
The Paws of the Bear, and Fangs of the Wolf he wore,
The Tail of the Fox, and Bristles of the Boar:
The Tricks of the Ape, and Eyes of the quaking Hare,
Still backward cast, to see if the Foe was near:
A Limb of every Species did he wear.
And some (for Fancy, or cold fear will do it)
Affirmed they saw the Devils cloven foot. --
Some thought he was a piece of the Chaos, made
E're Order, Form, or Simmetry was laid,
E're similar parts their Troops into one Mass conveyed.
Some thought a Wretch from Native shape estranged
By Circes Cups into a Monster changed,
Some thought a living wild Chymaera ranged.
The Opinions various as his shapes were dressed,
But most concluded that he was possessed.
This Rumor took, strait all their Heads attend
With mystic Charms to dispossess the Fiend,
Vain rites were used, and to as vain an end.
He knew them all, but was to them unknown,
Strangers even to their own disguises grown,
Till thus with trembling Tongue the Monster said
I Am an Atlantian born, a Roman bred,
With high Commissions to Atlantis sped.
Among the various Sects to' insinuate
The secret seeds of Enmity and Hate;
Of endless Quarrels, and as endless Woe,
And have with Joy beheld the Harvest grow.
Much have I done, no certain shape or place
Could limits set to my unbounded race.
Where e're was mischief hatching there was I
Through unseen Paths, and through dark Roads I fly,
I light the Fire, no matter how or why.
Wher'ever discontented Humors rise,
Bred of self-pride, nourished with Jealousies,
My useful Presence never missed the prize.
Tumult in State, and Schism in Church was mine,
I stretched the breach, marked out the parting Line,
And set the Bars that they could never join.
Thick flew my poisoned Arrows in the dark,
When matter was Combustible I brought the Spark.
Disguised I hearded with the Wolfish Crew,
With Cant and Tone my gaping Hearers drew;
Chose pleasing Topics, such as might invite
(What makes their Crowd) the Female Proselite:
Did Heaven by Gods Decrees to them divide,
I sainted them, and damned all beside.
New Lights and wild Enthusiastic Fire
Into the bristled Herd I did inspire,
Their Rage too fierce and hot I worked up higher.
Cried Monarchy and all Church Order down,
Kings I called Tyrants, Laws Oppression:
Till down steep Rocks the headlong Rabble pressed,
As though the Devil once more had the Swine possessed.
I in each Faction stubborness did breed,
Did bitter hatred toward all others feed,
But chiefly Poison over the established Church did shed.
Nor did I only to great Actions tend,
To mean Employments I could condescend,
Foming on Bulks I could loud Nonsense rear,
And plead the Cause of our sure Friend the Hare.
In Woods and Groves to Conventicles creep,
Such as in the German Forests Witches keep,
And naked to the Feasts of Adamites could slip.
These, and the Sects, like Sins without a Name,
That never a distinctive mark could claim,
My willing Aid and speedy Help implored,
Deluding all, and yet by all adored.
Long time I reigned, but whether too secure,
Depending much on my ill gotten Power,
I had too loosely put on my disguise,
Or whether Heretics are grown more wise,
Or 'twas my Fate: some of the long-nos'd rout
Saw through the Cloud, and found the Imposture out.
I saw their Visage change, but gave no Ground,
When in a Moment 'twas all whispered round.
The enraged Crowds do up in Tumult rise,
Arms filled their Hands, and sparkling Fire their Eyes,
All that is wanting furious rage supplies.
Not more the Neighboring Dorps to Vengeance crowd,
When the sly Fox, the common Foes pursued,
Men call to Men, and Towns to Towns aloud.
In vain 'twas to resist or to entreat,
Rocks hear as much when angry Surges beat*
Debarred of Force to Policy I fly,
Thought I might hid in my Disguises ly;
But every shape and garb that I put on
Some one or other of the Crowd had known,
Bootless it was to stay, hard to be gone:
The Avenues all ways the Crowd did keep,
Till I beneath a Zealot's Cloak did creep,
And in the form of Sanctity away did slip:
Yet not so clearly but I was pursued
With Batts and Stones, and Curses still renewed.
No place to hide my loathed head I spied,
In vain I for a Sanctuary cried.
Accursed Land, where there is no sacred place
That may a Malefactor's Crimes embrace!
I invocated every Saint in vain,
They all were deafned with the shouting train.
At last, loaded with Injuries and Blows,
Twice down I sunk and fell, and twice arose:
A third time beaten down, I there had staid,
Had not the listening Saint to whom I prayed,
Or the horror that my trembling Soul put on,
(Strange things by Phantasy and fear are done)
My Body in this monstrous Habit shaped,
As Man I suffered, as a Monster escaped.
I found the change, felt the wild Members bred,
Was glad by any means to hide my Head,
And saw my furious Persecutors fled.
Under this shelter I securely past,
The Guards still looking horrid and aghast.
But fear, insulting fear does hag my Mind,
They still pursue me whom I left behind.
My Fellows that the same Commission bear,
Live a cursed Life, racked with eternal fear.
Some do them Sphynxes, some Chamelions call,
But Trimmer is the currant'st Name of all.
This said; mixed Passions did in the Council rise,
Some joy'd in's 'scape, some grieved in's miseries;
All variously the Tumult did revile,
Traduced the State, and cursed the unlucky Soil.
The murmur ceased, and Bavius that was fled,
Driven by his usual fear, recovered.
After Advice that Courage might renew,
The President thus did his Discourse pursue.
THE NEW ATLANTIS.
THE THIRD PART.
MUch hopes (our Son) does from thy Province flow,
Great may be the Harvest, if we wisely sow.
Kind Aspects on the great Attempt do smile,
Fit for the Task to blacken and revile,
Malice thy blood does into poison boil.
So venomous in what is false, it leaves a stain,
And will not with easy pains be cleans'd again.
Thou damn'st all Writings to set up thy own,
We all Truth's ancient Monuments cry down,
Sure way to usher in Tradition.
But yet be cautious, we our Arts must try,
And with false shows debauch the Adulterous Eye.
Some things best at half Lights affect the sight,
Some must like hollow shadows take their flight,
Show and begone; few will endure the Light.
Darkness and distance our Advantage gives,
The Mind by the Eye the pleasing Cheat receives,
And the Error is admired while it deceives.
Beware of sincere dealing, 't may betray,
Counterfeit Jewels are descried in the Day.
Shun steady Looks, they may too deeply pry,
Hint and away, the motion cheats the Eye.
Conceal the worse, still show the better side,
It Is as much Art Deformities to hide,
As to deck Beauty up in all its Pride.
Draw Zeuxis Grapes so' attractive and so fair,
That all the Feathered Race may there repair;
Securely on the tempting Fruit may feed,
Nor e're the dreadful shape that bears them heed.
Jealous of too deep Sense amuse the Mind,
Fill the Eye with shows, and swell the Soul with Wind.
Traverse the Ground, flourish, but never close,
We nothing yet could get by downright blows,
We gain by Treachery, by fair Battles lose.
Mak't all a Bantar, it the most will please,
Few will search deep, for most men love their Ease:
Some Topics are for dawbing Flattery fit,
Some Eloquence require, and some do Wit,
None with deep Arguing, or true Sense admit.
Some may be faintly urged, some loudly famed,
Some may be hinted at, and some not named.
Name not Indulgences, what tho we know
That none but the Poor and Fools to Hell do go;
That Heaven at easy Rates may purchased be,
And God and Mammon can in one agree:
Though we Times past, and present Times can clear,
For Crimes not acted a remission bear,
Beyond the Revolution of great Plato's year;
More than the World can stretch our Pardons wide,
And in small Time for endless years provide;
That bottomless the Treasures are we hold,
Low as the Abyss, and deep as Mines of Gold:
That the inexhausted Spring can never be dry
While Supererrogation does new Streams supply.
Safe let the Philosophic Secret sleep,
Like wakeful Dragons let us the Treasure keep.
The subtle Spirit if it gets vent is flown,
Like Fairy Treasure, if disclosed, it is gone.
Little we once believed, the World grown wise,
Should at a Friars cry lift up their Eyes,
And Prostituted Pardons should despise.
Heaven to its genuine Liberty restore
And set that free was basely sold before,
From Usury the Aetherial Plains should keep,
And Money Changers from the Temple sweep;
That all the World awak'ned at the cry,
As Slaves at the Joyful Noise of Liberty,
Should break the Yoke that did their Bodies bind,
Nor laid less servile Fetters on the Mind.
Like Waves on Waves the Noise should loudly roar,
And echo to the Worlds remotest Shore.
Curse on the Day, loud Curses on the Name,
Never may it be enrol'd in the Book of Fame,
Lap'd in Oblivion, or if it be,
Like Herostratus, but for Infamy.
Our King-deposing-Doctrine we with heed
Must hide, it may unkind Suspicions breed,
And in wise Princes Bosoms Jealousies may feed.
The Effects are too apparent, Neighbor Kings
Have warmed the Snakes, and felt the deadly Stings.
Name't not; the Confutation in the Mind,
Though strongly urged, does leave some doubts behind;
Does shake Allegiance, does the Bands unty,
The Monarchs Peace, and our Security:
Disturbed he lives, uneasy, unsecure,
Among half Subjects that do own a foreign Power.
It is enough we it in private own,
Though we in public cry the Tenet down,
It Is but to lull the World asleep, and then
When Interest sways the Scale, resum't again.
Pressed with apparent Proofs, to fraud we fly,
A private Doctor's Tenet we decry,
On Mariana the whole load we set,
Though Troops the barbarous Tenet do abet.
But what is hence gathered, let in silence die,
That Princes when deposed may murdered be.
In secret VVhispers don't the Crime display,
Even Ovid's Reeds the Treason may betray.
A blasting Air does every Accent fill,
Each Loyal Breast, and Christian Soul does chill,
Strangers to Treachery, and unused to kill.
Conceal't, or if need be, the Fact deny,
It Is lawful for our Interest to ly,
In this the very Wolf and Hind agree.
Bring some Distinction that may heal the sore,
Deny to kill a King we give a Power,
For when they are deposed they are King's no more.
It Is much the same; precarious Kings must by
A Logical Distinction live or die.
Not that the Tenet we are ashamed to own,
Not Conscience, but our Interest cries it down.
The sound is hateful, and we have lately found
To our Repute 't has given a deadly wound:
The Experiment our boldest Champions made,
And were from Neighboring Nations banished.
We Are feeble yet, but when we stronger grow,
Nature returns, and with it the Poison too.
Name not our wavering Faith and broken Vows,
The barbarous Indians will the Fact expose:
The Faith of Ancient Rome may ours upbraid,
That kept their Sacred Oaths with Pirates made.
Unknown in Ancient Times the Tenet slept,
That Vows with Heretics need not be kept.
Unpunished, Heavens great Name invoked may be,
And Holy Saints to Patronize a Ly:
Heaven Perjury allows to root out Heresy.
Antiquity could never a Weapon find
To cut the Tie that does the Juror bind,
Nor dur'st the Affront lay on the eternal Mind.
Yet it is of use to flatter and cajole,
And to the Pitfal draw the easy Fool.
The Credulous do upon our Oaths rely,
We fetter others, and our selves are free.
Saint Barthol'mew the secret understood,
Saint Barthol'mew once more baptized in Blood.
Conceal (as that does Truth) Aequivocation,
Our useful Trick, and mental Reservation;
They Have an ill Aspect, and too far may reach,
And contradict the very Ends of Speech;
Do to the Death of Faith and Justice tend,
Do all Society and Converse end,
And make a Man to Man become a Fiend.
The Dye may be turned on's, and justly we,
That others have deceived, deceived may be.
Name not the Power that Marriage Bonds can break,
The Sacred Tie that Gods own hand did make;
The Laws of Nature, Heaven and Men can force,
And loose where naught but Death should make Divorce.
Legitimate Incestuous Marriages,
And can the accursed brood to Title raise;
Much Policy does in the Practice ly,
They Are bound to us in an Eternal Tie,
Whose Right and Title from our Mouths does fly.
Name not the Crowned Heads that Homage pay,
Whose Right to Thrones depends upon our See,
Name not the Incestuous House of Austria.
These and more which our Doctrine does impart,
At which even trembling Nature seems to start;
We color and make plausible by Art:
For each Objection we a Salvo find,
And with smooth Words stroke the affrighted Mind;
Till what at first a dreadful shape did show,
By Art and Custom does familiar grow.
But this requires the highest strain of Wit,
A Turn of Soul for which thou art not fit;
A Scheme never bred in a dull Northern Mind,
Italian all, exalted and refined.
Pass these with cautious Prudence; others yet
Remain, that Fraud and Sophistry admit:
Infallibility, Hind and Panth. p. 5. p. 37.
our darling Friend,
The mighty Judge that all Disputes does end,
And does her reign over Heaven and Earth extend;
Uphold the tottering Basis, if that is gone
The gaudy Edifice will tumble down,
The Castle yields if once this Fort be won.
Not that we an Authentic proof can bring
From whence first this unerring Source did spring;
Or can point out the spot of holy ground
Where the retired Lady's to be found;
Retired, lest she by common view profaned,
With earthly Taint should have her Beauty stained;
Wisely retired, as Indian Monarchs do,
That rarely their Majestic presence show,
And by their Absence their Esteem renew.
Not that we yet the Secret can descry,
Whether in one, or She in more does ly;
Or whether she has got Ubiquity.
Whether in some far distant Coast she is found,
With headlong Cliffs and Rocks encompassed round.
Whether in the Region that from Smoke is named,
Or in the Coast that is for Parrots famed;
Or hid in Bacon's Northern Magic Coast,
Whose first Discovery Sorcery does boast:
Her Mansion placed beneath the Polar Star,
The rather 'cause it is fixed, and cannot err.
These petty Quarrels are not worth our pains,
The existence of the thing in doubt remains;
But though no Argument the Being prove,
If we believe it is so it is enough.
If but the deed is done, no matter how,
Faith makes all up when we no Sense allow.
What though the prying Heretics do find
The specious Fabric is but built on VVind;
The Aereal Phantome no Foundation gains
But in unsettled Heads and giddy Brains,
A Frenzy that in Feverish Tempers reigns.
That so Chymaeras live and all the Race
That raving Minds and wandering Tempers trace,
That so the Monsters live, old Times in Heaven did place.
With this that Ptolomy's Epicycles join,
Their Life and Interest do in one entwine;
Both live, and for their usefulness do sway,
Forged to solve the wild Phenomenon.
These Sarcasms value not, uphold its Fame,
Much Aid we from its needful Interest claim*
Some Tempers are so sharp, so deep, so strong,
They follow but where Reason goes along;
Are refractory, nor the Cause will yield,
Till ground is given on which belief to build.
But these are few, and for our Turn not fit,
Others of easy Minds and shallow wit,
Can easily to what others say submit.
Unable to search deep, the Wise believe,
Say as they say, receive as they receive:
This suits their Temper, eases them of pains,
And is a safe retreat for shallow Brains.
Pleased with the Fraud, they on the Guide rely,
(For here the Ignorant and Idle fly)
Nor can mistrust Infallibility.
These are the greatest Part of the World, and these
The Insinuating Tenet's sure to please.
What though the Atlantians ask where 't did remain
When three Infallibilities did reign;
When empty Thunders in the Air did fly,
And each his emulous Rival did defy.
Each did his Foe with Usurpation load,
Anathemas and Curses flew abroad;
Did Heresy unto each other lay,
And all the Abettors of their Lawless sway.
Did damn each others Edicts, and what one
Condemned or absolved by the other was undone.
Sure while the restless Ball was wildly tossed,
Infallibility in the Crowd was lost.
And what misfortunes did the Souls betide,
That did mean while want an unerring Guide?
When such Convulsions did the Church molest,
Where could the doubtful Soul take up her rest?
The Answer's easy, the Event we see,
The Victor owned Infallibility;
The End the Act with holiness impowers,
A Turkish Tenet it is, and may be ours.
Leave that to me, says Bavius, I will find
Some simile that will in the case be kind,
And cheat with superficial Wit the Mind.
If they the Existence of the thing require,
Sense left, I Will to my Metaphors retire.
And tho we proof of the Being first should make,
Lest we Chymaeras for our Subjects take,
With airy Notions of the Schoolmen war,
Dispute of things that never were nor are;
Vainly like wilder'd men should wander round,
Be lost in senceless shapes on Fairy-Ground,
Knight Errant like, our devious Journey steer
To seek a Prize, we know not what or where,
And fill our empty Heads and Arms with Air.
It is enough I tell them that I see,
Although the manner still disputed be; p. 37.

And thence conclude Infallibility.
We Are guided though the way we cannot prove,
We Are led although we don't perceive we move;
Our Faith to this sure Ankor must be tied,
Although it cannot be proved there is such a Guide.
The Evasion pleased, and most believed twould do,
For senceless Heretics no Fraud do know;
When thus the President did Discourse renew.
Great Bulwark, whence our chiefest strength does flow,
With Thee Invulnerable to our Foe,
Infallibility our God below!
Thou Life and Vigor do to all impart,
Sit'st brooding upon every Child of Art.
Each Tenet does upon thy Aid rely,
Twin Brothers that at once do live and die.
On what thou set'st thy Universal Seal
Must be believed, from thence lies no Appeal.
What e're thy Stamp for Sterling does admit
Is current Coin, and for belief is fit.
Thy Pasport given there is no need of more,
The World thy Sacred Truth must all adore.
The bane of Wit and arguing thou do come,
Nor do thou leave for Skepticism a room,
Reason and Sense at thy approach are dumb.
If thou a Virtue for a Vice do show,
Or say a Vice a Virtue is, it is so;
Obeyed by all above and all below.
On Thee our mighty Champion we rely,
Nor can we fear while thou stand'st safe, our Troy.
Cry up Traditions, it is a gaudy sale, p. 41.

And where there is Reason wanting sways the Scale.
Urged with the Witness of Antiquity,
And the unerring Scriptures Verity,
To these our never-failing Friends we fly.
Unable to behold Truths glaring Light,
We seek these Mists, and hide our selves in Night;
We make the Story the Relation show,
Tell the Tradition, and the Truth avow,
Our self the Party, Judge, and Witness too.
Brought to the Trial, we all Power cry down,
No Touchstone is admitted but our own,
Even Scripture by Tradition must be shown.
Scripture no longer must a Rule prefer,
But Heaven stoop down unto the Humane Bar.
Victorious State where Rumor Conquest gains,
And Stories from our own not others Brains!
Who of his Cause would a decision fear,
Were he allowed in his own right to swear,
Not what for Truth he did believe, but hear.
Gain but this Point our greatest Work is done,
One strain at this and every thing goes down;
All that wild Heads, or raving Fancies find
Flow from hard Spleens, or Hypocondriack Wind.
What ever Error, Folly, Policy,
Or Malice dictate, entertained shall be.
Mountains to Mole-hills shrink, and the Pygmy show
To a Gigantick Monstrous shape shall grow.
Lead to Tradition's gloomy Land, and there
Expose to endless mists the Wanderer.
It Is a dark Coast, and full of monstrous shows,
And deadly Pit-falls do the Borders close.
Once in, in vain for guiding Clues men pray,
The winding Labyrinth does force a stay,
No Light does cheer the shades, or gild the way.
Here all Religions meet, a public Scene
That the Errors does of every Faith contain;
All that besotted wandering Jews receive;
All the American Zelots do believe,
With which their Pagods do the Crowd deceive;
All was by Ancient Heathenism approved,
Or is by present Paganism beloved;
All Ovid's fruitful Brain could e're put on,
All Follies of the stupid Alcaron
Met in this Rendezvous, the place where all
Embrace, agree, and into Concord fall,
Tradition them into one Mass does call.
Debase the Honor of the Sacred Book, p. 43.

A glass in which we do not care to look. p. 44.

Too true and faithful, and unused to ly,
It plainly shows us our Deformity.
That Sacred Light the horrid Shades does clear,
Makes Error fly, and Holy Truth appear,
And shows things as they be, the only Ill we fear.
That Touchstone all false Metals will descry,
And where else outside gilt would cheat the Eye,
Does the Intrinsic Worth and Value try.
What though the skulking Heretic does find
Therein a Scheme of his great Master's Mind;
Brags it is his dying Savior's Legacy,
The Treasury of Truth, of Peace, and Joy.
That Orient Jewels in each Line beam forth,
And shine with genuine, not with borrowed Worth.
That starry Characters their Light display,
Through Mists and Errors point the Sacred way,
And midst of Night and Darkness force a Day.
Truths that Philosophy did seek in vain
With devious Travail, and with anxious Pain,
But never the Heavenly Secrets could attain.
Knowledge so lofty, so sublime and high,
The Angelick Forms do in the Mysteries pry,
The Pattern and Idaea of the Deity.
That Faith unto this standard must repair,
And all our Deeds we by this Rule must square,
And what exceeds or does come short does err.
It is enough it is not for our use,
And therefore wisely we must keep it close.
The Bible, Bavius cried, it is confessed
I Have read so much of I can break a Jest,
Have learned to profane it, but that said
For more I never did disturb my Head.
I never had kindness for it, and have less now,
I Will take the Counsel and improve it too.
It Is well resolved, the Adviser cried, and then
Thus did pursue his Argument again.
Lap't in Obscurity from prying Eyes,
The common Crowd by this may grow too wise;
And too much Knowledge learns them to despise.
Called a dumb rule that no disputes can end,
Though it is the Message Heaven himself did send. p. 44.

Say Heretics from hence do claim their right, p. 41.

And 'cause they see amiss, condemn the Light.
Because the Text by them's misunderstood,
Arraign the whole, deny the Rule is good.
Grant it is a dying Testament, p. 53.
yet we
Must not on what is there laid down rely,
That may bring Error: nor must be received
What Is writ, but what by others is believed.
The express words must all in Vapors end,
And upon doubtful Heresy all depend.
Object the doubts have risen of Moses Law; p. 50.

But hide the Follies that Traditions draw.
How when the Jews the written Law did leave,
And Planet-struck to Oral fiction cleave,
Ridiculous Follys did for Truths appear;
Absurd and raving Stories filled each Ear;
Upon Truths Basis monstrous shapes were bred,
And senceless Talmuds in the Bibles stead.
That did not Truth from Holy Writ prevail,
(So fatal it is without this Star to sail)
Religion soon would dwindle to a Tale.
Fly from that Test that will no Errors hide,
Shun that as guilty men the Law avoid.
Assert the Real Presence, though there lies
A numerous Army of Absurdities
Marshaled in the Tenet; though it does oppose
All clearest sense, or guiding Reason knows,
Or all that Philosophic depths disclose.
Though endless War with Truth it does commence,
Not above only, but against all sense.
Though 't make a Body take a Spirits right,
To every part of the World extends its might;
A fair way to make matter infinite.
Though beyond Ovid's strain the Notion's raised,
Who made his Gods, and made them what he pleased:
Their hungry Maws with high Ambrosia fed,
Turned them to Birds and Beasts, but never to Bread.
Though the wise Arabian would not eat his God,
But with Philosophers would make's abode,
Rather than tread in that inhumane road;
Yet it is of use for Show, for Pomp and State
Will awful Reverence and Respect create.
But yet too gross to be Ethereal,
No doubt when India first to Rome did fall,
Embraced with greedy Joy by the hungry Cannibal.
Tell them it is safe and easy to rely
Upon what others think, what others see.
That would we truly see, or feel, or taste, p. 6.

Our erring Senses first must be displaced.
And if the ready way to Truth be sought,
We must not by our Sense be ruled, but Thought.
But if the stubborn Heretic denis
To lose his Taste, or to put out his Eyes,
And urges still Impossibilities;
If he from Sense or Reason want's a proof, p. 8.

Say but that God can do it and it is enough. p. 6.

Rail at the hated Test, load it with all
The Invectives can from Rage or Envy fall.
It Is a cursed Bar that we must first remove
Before our Projects can successful prove.
Lay to its charge unnat'ral Cruelty,
Draw horrid Landskips that may fright the Eye,
And turn't from Christian Society.
All answers for the Test with Clamor drown,
But do not name our Inquisition.
'Twill put the Test in Countenance, and be
For what we hate the great'st Apology.
The Racks, the Tortures, and the languishing pain
That in her secret Vaults and Caverns reign,
The loud Convulsive Groans and Sighs that never
From their dark Prisons reach a pitying Ear,
The shrilling Cries that none but Heaven does hear.
The dreadful Scene and worse Tormentors, who
Strangers to pity, no Compassion know,
Seems to out do the horrid Shades below.
The baleful look that every thing does wear
Will make the Test seem innocent and fair;
'Twas first designed against the Moors and Jews,
But now against Christians has its fatal use.
Revile the established Church, pull down its pride,
It Is Meritorious, Bolzac be thy guide.
Bolzac, that all thy Faculties did own,
For Impudence and scurrilous falsehood known,
For Pride, for Want, and Irreligion.
Bolzac will Thee with virulent spleen inspire,
That banished twice, and thrice Apostate Friar.
The way to Calumny's a beaten road,
With villainous Aretine make thy abode,
Who blasted the Repute of all but God,
And he was missed because he knevv him not.
Her beauteous Face with envious Sarcasms blot,
Seen through thy Glasses she will change her hieu,
The Object, as the Medium is, we view.
A secret Envy Beauties do attend,
All Love maliciously their Faults to' extend,
A celebrated Beauty seldom has a Friend.
Allow she is Beauteous, but her Honor taint,
And draw a Fiend-like Visage over the Saint.
Say she is not modest, as old Sinners use,
Who those fair ones they cannot corrupt, abuse.
And since she to our Party cannot be brought,
Object the Wolf into her Heart is got. p. 19.

There Is danger lest that Sect should grow too wise,
Unite their Strength when they have opened their Eyes.
Close with their Mother whom they have long defied,
Own their Obedience, and abate their Pride,
Our Wisdom it is to keep the breaches wide.
Debase the Glory of her Race, though she
Does draw her sparkling Genealogy p. 20.

In a long Series from the Deity.
Yet if we can but Clouds and Darkness raise,
And hide from common view her Line of Praise;
(Night renders all things like) we soon may find
A way to stab the Glory of her kind:
And since her firm Faith to an injured Prince,
The World does of her Loyalty convince:
Her Loyalty in Honors Book enrolled,
That 'twould be an Attempt too high and bold,
E're Time had the Memory of things eras'd,
To have the Glory of her deeds debased.
Confess she is Loyal, but some Quaeres put,
And stab her Praises with an Envious But -- p. 122.

And though there lys no reason for it, p. 134.
yet cry
She now repents of her late Loyalty.
Nor let her Sons escape from Censure free,
Invention can the room of Truth supply.
And if naught else a Calumny will bear, p. 127.

At least lay Luxury unto their share:
Rail and outface them; but what e're befalls,
Name not the Riots of our Cardinals;
Nor e're the Lazy Gluttony reveal,
With which our stupid Monasteries swell.
Thoughtful and dull, according to his use,
Stood Bavius, proling for his barren Muse;
Hoording what others prodigally spend,
When mention of the Clergy did his silence end.
And thus he raved; that Task my Mind does fit,
My Foes shall feel the lashes of my Wit.
A Phlegmatic dull Gown-man is a Theme
Does Rage and Malice over my Fancy stream;
Uneasy at the sight of the loathed brood,
Their Coat I hare as Elephants do Blood.
It Is true l once, ('it is an unwelcome thought,
But what their odious Race has dearly bought,)
Such is the fate of Poets, pressed with want,
Did seek among their Train my Sent to plant,
And would you think the Gourmands the request would grant?
I that among the Stars my Head did place,
Familiar grew with Gods, and all the God-like Race,
And scorned down-ward on the Crowd to gaze.
Did op'e the Graves of all before me tear,
Insulted over each Inferior,
Could no Superior, nor an Equal bear.
Curse on my rigid Fate! at last that I
By the dull Clergy should affronted be,
That breathed and grasped at Immortality.
No Reverence paid to my exalted Name;
No deep Attention to my Trump of Fame.
That they my Life should into question call,
Rip up my Morals, my Employment gall,
Till I below the Contempt of those I scorned did fall:
Deeply the Wound does bleed, nor can be cured
Till I Have returned the Wrongs I have endured.
Let Conscience, Honesty, Religion go,
Rather then not be' avenged of my Foe;
I Will call them Smell feasts that attend for fare;
I, that like Flies, to' every Board repair, p. 127.

And vex the weary Thresholds, find them there*
The Sense of Vultures is but dull to mine,
At farthest distance I know where they dine.
I Have robbed them of their Fame, and if I could,
Such is my hate, I would substract their Food:
Nor shall their Marriage escape, it is a state
That I for Reasons too well known do hate. p. 21.

I have been bit, that which experience knows
Is the best Satyr, and can best expose,
I Will tax their Constancy, and say it is gain,
Not Conscience, their buoyed Spirits does sustain, p. 86.

And he that bids the highest sways the Train.
Though we to our Confusion have found
Not all our Arts or force could make them quit their Ground,
Truth is a narrow bound, the daring Mind
Does hidden Coasts and unknown Regions find.
New Rarities do in Impostures ly,
Affect the Mind, and cheer the drooping Eye,
It Is tiresome still to walk in the road of Verity.
What is most fit, not what is most true, I Will use,
(The only way of bashfulness I choose,)
And naked Truth will modestly refuse.
Much more Advice was ready to be spoke,
And Bavius more of his Design had broke;
When one with great surprise brought the report
Of an unusual Joy in the Atlantian Court,
Imperfect Rumors all about did fly,
Some did affirm what others did decry:
Some with design to' amuse did falsehood tell,
And some even Truth did into falsehood swell:
But that which listening Bavius most did chill,
Was the News that every Tongue and Ear did fill,
Of an old Law was reinforced of late,
By Plato made for the Atlantian State:
By which that Coast must never Poets hide,
But severe Mulcts and Sanctions do provide,
None of the chiming Tribe do there abide.
Various the Rumors as the Men, nor coo'd
By the wisest Heads the Truth be understood;
Till a swift Courier, brought into the Court,
With low Obeisance thus made his Report.
Last Night while the devout Atlantians prayed,
And high Devotions at their Altars paid,
With earnest and redoubled Cries implored
The mighty Aid of their Indulgent Lord,
An unknown Music ravished every Ear,
Inspired blessed Joy, and did dispell all Fear,
No Mists could stay when the Sun of Righteousness was near.
Each Note tuned up the Soul, calcined the Mind,
Commenced them something more than humane kind;
Their very Bodies into Souls refined.
Not quite in Heaven, yet then the Earth more high,
Above the Earth, and but below the Sky;
Half Men, half Saints, 'twixt Heaven and Earth, they try
The very Line 'twixt Men and Immortality.
Scarce more exalted Joy does Saints possess
When they by Angels borne to Heaven do press:
Ravished with Halelujahs so they ly
Embalmed in Bliss and swallowed up in Joy.
Long was the Rapture, till their wondering Eyes
Saw a new glorious Light adorn the Skies,
As tho among the shades another Sun would rise.
But greater was the Light, more bright the Rays,
Than ever yet adorned the best of Days
Since the World did her head above the Chaos raise;
Did other common Days as far exceed
As the first Infant-Light the Chaos did:
Till opening Heaven her strict embraces loosed,
And the vast Treasure to the World disclosed.
A numerous Host their Banners did display,
Myriads of Angels decked the sparkling way,
Each brighter than the Sun, who blushing fled,
And in the briny Depths did hide his head.
Such luster their united Rays displayed,
You Would think the Earth a part of Heaven was made.
Glorious the Rays, but so benign and kind,
While other common ones do only blind,
They fill the Eyes with wonder, and with Joy the Mind.
Before them all, but brighter far than they,
From which each did reflect his borrowed Ray,
And with veiled Faces did low Adoration pay;
An heavenly Form appeared, in whom there strove
A mixed War of Majesty and Love;
In whose pure Essence wonders do intwine,
Finite and Infinite in one do join,
Short Time and long Eternity combine.
His Body (for he is to Earth allied)
The lower World and honored Mankinds Pride,
Pure as unmixed Light was glorified.
Through which the brightness of the God: head shone,
And all with Glory' Ineffable did Crown:
Matter did not the Deity annoy,
Nor yet the Man the Godhead did destroy.
Mercy and Pity graced his Look and Mind,
Tender and to Compassion inclined,
And his Embraces ever soft and kind.
Wide Arms to cherish, and a listening Ear,
That bows to hear and grant a Wretches prayer;
With double Glory were his VVounds beset,
(If Heaven degrees of Glory does admit)
Wounds he did for his Enemies safety get.
Crowned Attendants did Obeisance pay,
Martyrs and Confessors led on the way,
And Robes of Glory did for future Conquerors stay.
When on a sudden e're the fixed Eye,
That viewed with Sacred earnestness the Sky,
Could move; the glorious heavenly Guest drew nigh.
Moved not as Men that by gradation go,
But swift as Sunbeams through their progress flow,
He came, and all the Court with Glory filled,
And balmy Ivy on every Soul instilled,
No shades of Grief remain where Heaven does gild.
But who can tell the Glorys of the Day,
What his Immaculate Spouses rich array;
How she did with redoubled glory shine,
Spotless without and Beauteous all within;
What zealous haste inspired her joyful feet;
When her beloved She went out to meet,
What eager Love did sparkle in her Eye,
What passionate Zeal, what decent Majesty;
What chaste Embraces given and what returned,
In equal flames how both the Lovers burned;
Though more of Majesty in him did dwell,
And she the more of tenderness did feel;
What charming Talk the glorious meeting graced,
What tender words and sighs for dangers past:
What mutual Vows of everlasting Love;
What promise of Protection from Above;
How the great Brides-groom's glory through her shone,
Met like two joined Stars that seemed but one;
What a Seraphick Love all bosoms moved
That savv the sight, even Angels savv and loved.
How show'ring Joys did on Atlantis fall,
The Canopy of Heaven did shade it all,
In Blessings Heaven dissolved did it a Goshen call:
How a new Edict was proclaimed there,
That under Heaven's displeasure none should dare
Against her settled endless Peace to war.
No Mortal the great Task can undertake,
It only fits a Cherubim to speak.
Fly, fly the fatal Land, my Eyes beheld
The mountains all with heavenly Armies filled:
Not greater the Judean Regions swelled
When the great Prophet opened faithless eyes,
And showed the Ethereal Guard against their Enemies.
The Advice was weighty; but it was not took,
For malice cannot upon Concord look,
Nor can Ambition Peace and Quiet brook,
Restless (for Rage and Envy's such) they stood,
While blessed Atlantis guarded by a God
Safe underneath his Wing made her abode.
FINIS.
The Author living remote from the Press, some few Errata's have passed in the
Printing these Sheets; but being most Literals, the Reader is desired to mend
them with his Pen.


