A VIEW OF THE Proceedings of the WESTERN-COUNTIES FOR THE PACIFICATION Of
their present troubles: AS ALSO OF THE PLOTS AND PURPOSE to Disturb the same.

Psalm. CXX. verse. V. My soul has long dwelt amongst those that be Enemies
unto Peace.

Printed in the Year, 1642.

A VIEW OF THE PROCEEDINGS OF THE Western Counties for the Pacification of
their present Troubles etc.
IT has been long the mischievous design of those, who have embroyled this
Kingdom in a Civil War, not only to maintain an Army of discontented and
seditious persons, for the destruction of their Sovereign, but to engage the
greatest and most populous Counties in an unnatural dissension amongst
themselves. In prosecution of which wicked Counsels, as they have spared no
subtle Artifices, to infatuate and seduce the people to their own destruction,
and the undoing of their wives and families: so when they find them sensible of
those afflictions which they have pulled upon themselves, and willing return
into more peaceable courses; they have not failed to animate them to their
former surie, and interrupt all Consultations and Agreements which might
conduce unto their Peace. The first example of this kind was that of Yorkshire,
the Gentry and Commonalty of the which, having played too long a part in this
woeful Tragedy, had mutually agreed upon such equal terms of Pacification, as
might restore that Country to its ancient quiet; and this they had confirmed by
the subscription of the hands of the most eminent and able men of either party.
But this was presently disallowed by those factious spirits, who have too great
a power in the two Houses of Parliament, as being utterly destructive of their
ends and hopes: and upon that dislike commanded not to be observed, and so by
consequence annulled. How miserable a Theater of blood, death, and rapine, that
wretched County has been made ever since that time, as we see now not without
grief and Lamentation, so shall Posterity, being less interessed in the
quarrels which are now on foot, peruse the story of it with a greater sorrow.
Cheshire as not far off in situation, was next unto this people in example
also. They on the sense of those calamities under which they suffered, by
nourishing an intestine war in their own bowels, had fallen upon the like
atonement: and for the keeping of the same, the Principal Agents of each side
had promised one another severally in the word of a Gentleman, and as they did
desire to prosper, that both themselves, their Tenants, friends and servants
would most strictly keep it. But yet this promise made in so solemn manner,
and bound with such an imprecation to observe the same, was not found
sufficient, for the preventing of all further acts of enmity and desolation,
there following on the neck thereof, a Declaration of the Lords and Commons
assembled in Parliament, wherein was signified and declared, That the said
Pacification and agreement, was very prejudicial to the whole Kingdom,
derogatory to the power and Privilege of Parliament; and therefore that not
only the inhabitants thereof, but that the Gentlemen themselves who were the
parties to the Articles were not bound unto them; and finally all the
inhabitants thereof, commanded and required to pursue their former Resolutions,
for the assistance of the Parliament in the Common cause.

Though these examples might have terrified the most moderate men, such as were
most inclinable to their Countries peace, from ventring on the like
conclusions, which they perceived would not be left unto their power to observe
or not: yet war and discord are such troublesome and unwelcome guests, that
notwithstanding these discouragements, the Western Counties have embraced the
same Counsels also, and entertained some Propositions, conducing to the
introduction of a blessed peace. And first the Gentlemen and other intelligent
persons of the County of Dorset, having felt some of the effects of War in
the action of Sherborne, and seeing how great a flame was raised in Devonshire,
bordering next upon them, endeavored to preserve themselves from that
combustion which had laid wast so many of their neighbors houses. And to that
end agreed amongst themselves upon such Articles, as the necessity of their
affairs, and the sad spectacles before their eyes, did invite them to: whereof
Sir Thomas Trenchard Knight, and John Brown Esquire, two of the Deputy
Lieutenants for exercising of the Militia, according to the Ordinance of the
two Houses of Parliament, were as the first movers so ^he most effectual
promoters too. And yet this Pacification so agreed upon, and at a time, when
the whole County so distasted the proceedings of the two Houses of Parliament,
that there was ten against them for every one that would adventure in their
cause, (as the said Gentlemen did signify by letters to diverse of their
friends in the Lower House) was not held convenient. And thereupon Sir William
Waller must be hastened to the Western parts, that by the power and reputation
of his Arms the said Agreement might be broken; and all that had consented to
the common Peace might either be compelled to advance the War, or fly the
Country.

In the mean time, whilst Waller was upon his March, and the affairs of
Dorset-shire in so good condition, that it was hoped they would be able to make
good their own Conclusions: the Devon-shire and the Cornish Armies, who had so
often imbrued their hands in each others blood, though still with loss of men
and reputation on the Devon-shire side, began to hearken to such counsels, as
God had put into the hearts of some honest Gentlemen, (though otherwise of
different opinions) to propose unto them. And it pleased him who makes two to
be of one mind in an house, so to incline the hearts both of the greater and
the better part of those several Counties, as first to hearken to a trnce, and
on the expiration of that Truce (which was expired the seventh of this present
March) to yield to a Cessation for twenty days, that so the Treaty might
advance with the more apparent hopes of an happy issue. Which being mutually
agreed on for the common good, their next care was to choose Commissioners for
each side, men of integrity and honor, on whom they might confer a
concluding power to bind all parties; and unto whose determinations they might
with safety and assurance submit themselves. This done, and the Commissioners
assembled at Mount-Edgecomb a place in Cornwall, on the fourth of March, to
give assurance each to other, and to all the world, of their integrity, and of
the real intentions which they had to peace (secluded from all sinister and
particular ends) they took a solemn Protestation, and afterward received the
blessed Sacrament, for ratification of the same. The Protestation is as
follows, which I have here transcribed verbatim, that all the World may see,
(if they be not blind,) with what syncerity and candor they purpose to proceed
in so great a business.

I. A.B. do solemnly vow and pretest in the presence of Almighty God, that I
do not only come a Commissioner to this treaty, with an hearty and fervent
desire of concluding an honorable and firm Peace between the two Counties of
Cornwall and Devon, but also will to the utmost of my power prosecute and
really endeavor to accomplish and effect the same, by all lawful ways and
means I possibly can, First by maintaining the Protestant Religion established
by Law in the Church of England, The just rights and prerogative of our
Sovereign Lord the King, The just privileges and freedom of Parliaments,
together with the just rights and the liberty of the Subject; and that I am
without any intention (by fomenting this unnatural War) to gain or hope to
advantage my self with the real or personal estate of any person whatsoever,
or obtaining any Office, Command, title of Honor, benefit or reward, either
from the Kings Majesty, or either or both houses of Parliament now assembled.
And this I take in the presence of Almighty God, and as I shall answer the same
at his Tribunal, according to the literal sense and meaning of the foregoing
words, without any Equivocation, Mental Reservation, or other Evasion
whatsoever, So help me God. Which Protestation being thus taken, was subscribed
also by the hands of all the Commissioners, being eighteen in number, for each
County nine.

This preparation being made, and the syncerity of their intentions so fully
manifested, the Commissioners authorized for Cornwall (considering that they
stood on the higher ground) did first propound their Articles to those of
Devon: Articles of so even a temper, and so agreeable to the Laws established,
that those of Devonshire had been bound to admit the same, if all things had
succeeded answerably to their former expectations and endeavors. The most
material of them were to this effect. 1. That the book of Common Prayer, the
Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of England formerly established by
lawful authority, for the true and sincere worship of God, be duly and truly
observed in all the parishes of both Counties, until the Discipline be altered
by such authority as it was established by; and that all the infringers and
depravers of the same either of the Clergy or Laity, be duly proceeded against
according to the known Laws of the land. 2. That the Common and statute laws
of this Realm of England be truly and really put in execution against all
offenders and violaters of the same laws in either County, according to the
usual legal course, and as has been anciently accustomed. 3. That all trade,
traffic, and free Commerce be open in and between both Counties, as
heretofore in the most peacable and best times. 4. That no man in his person,
estate, or goods, be arrested imprisoned, detayned, outed, dispossessed, or any
ways molested, by any power or authority, whatsoever, without due process of
the Laws of the Land. And 5. That all new erected fortifications and set
guards within the City and County of Exeter, and in and upon all towns Castles,
Bridges and passages within the Counties of Devon and Cornwall be removed and
flighted at the cost and charges of the Erectors of the same, and that his
Majesty's Forts, Castles, and other ancient and usual places of command within
both Counties, be put into the same hands and custody as they were in before
these unhappy differences; and assurance given for the maintaining of the same
without any addition or alteration: and that all Arms and Ammunition, of all
and every person and persons whatsoever, be restored again to the right
owners. Tho other Articles there were, but these the principal. And these
together with the Protestation, the said Commissioners desired might be
published in all the Market-Townes and Parochial Churches of the said two
Counties, without any alteration either in the writing, reading, or publishing
thereof: to the intent it might appear unto all the world, who were the
faithful observers of the said Protestation, first sworn to on the holy
Evangelists, and afterward confirmed by the receiving of the blessed
Sacrament; and who the violaters of the same.

These Propositions being so equal, and so agreeable to the known Laws of the
Land, were like to find but little opposition from the Commissioners for the
other County, if they met with any. But whilst they were in consultation how
to transact and settle their affairs, in such a way as might be permanent and
secure* it pleased God to put into their minds the offering of a communication
of the same precious benefit to the adjoining Counties of Somerset and Dorset;
who as they had participated somewhat in the Calamities of the War, so could
they not but be as sensible of the blessings and effects of their neighbors
Peace. Which being taken by them into consideration, it was agreed upon of all
sides, that letters should be written to the principal persons of those
several Counties respectively, to invite them to join with them in so good a
work, conducing so apparently to their common happiness. And this accordingly
was done, letters being written and subscribed by the hands of twelve of the
Commissioners, Sir Ralph Hopton subscribing in the first place: which letters
were dated from Mount-Edgecomb on the sixth of March, being the very next day
save one, that they were assembled. So soon did they agree on that weighty
point, that there may seem to be, some superior power, which did so readily
induce and incline them to it. The place appointed for the meeting, was the New
Inn in Exeter; the day the fourteenth of this Month, which was Tuesday last,
being the seventh of the Cessation. And that they might attend the service with
the greater safety and more assurance of their lives and persons: there was a
safe Conduct granted by the chief Factors of the two Houses of Parliament, for
every one of the Commissioners of the said four Counties, with two men a piece
for their retinue, to come, remain, and return (I speak out of the words of
the Original) to and from the said place or any other places which shall be
appointed for the treaty by the said Commissioners. Which letters of safe
Conduct do hear their date at Plymmouth, the seventh of March, subscribed in
the first place, by the Earl of Stamford, after by Sir George Chudleigh,
Northeote, Martyn, and others the chief sticklers in the former troubles.

One would not think, that an Accommodation so just and necessary, tending so
visibly to the ease and benefit of all His Majesty's Subjects in those
Counties, so evidently conservative of their lives and fortunes, which had
before been made a prey to the sharpest sword; so sensibly conducing to the
advancement of Gods glory and the Kings Honor, should meet with opposition in
that place, and amongst those persons, who hitherto have given out (and
certainly would take it ill not to be believed) that they endeavor nothing
more, then the establishment of all these on the surest grounds. Yet so it
happened, that when this news was brought to the House of Commons, which was on
Saturday March the eleventh in the afternoon: it was received with great heat
and passion, as finding their authority to be thereby lessened, and that
unlimited and arbitrary power which they had exercised before on the Subjects
there, to be restrained very much, if not quite destroyed. For now they saw
that all those Counties would be freed from all those Tyrannical constraints
and impositions, which had been forced upon them by their Committees; that
those in whom they most confided had betrayed the cause, and were no longer
willing to advance their ends in the oppression of their neighbors; that the
people would again return to the Kings obedience, and submit themselves to no
other rule, then the known Laws of the Realm; and who could tell whether the
contagion of so dangerous an example might not infect the neighboring
Counties, and so prevail at last over all the Kingdom. Besides there was
another circumstance, which added much to their vexation and disquiet; which
was that here they met not with a bare subscription of men's names; as in that
of Yorkshire; or only with a promise made in the word of a Gentleman, though
bound and made up with an imprecation, as in that of Cheshire: but with
subscription of the names of the Commissioners, the taking of a solemn Oath,
and the receiving of the Sacrament to confirm the same. And such a threefold
cord (in case the Wise man's note be of any credit) is not easily broken.

And yet well fare a gallant confidence. They were resolved upon the question
to Break all these bonds, to dissolve the Treaty, to reduce matters there to
the same confusion which they had brought them to before, and make those
neigh(...) like the sons of Cadmus, employed upon no other service then to
kill one another. Why should not two whole Counties perish, nay to say truth,
why should not a whole Kingdom be exposed unto spoil and ruin, rather then
some suspected Malefactors be brought to yield themselves to a Legal trial?
Were not the Tribunes of the People in the State of Rome, held to be
inviolable; exempt for whatsoever they committed, from all Law and punishment?
Rather then to give up the power, with so much art and industry acquired; let
us adventure once on a point of Popery, and dispense with them for their
Oaths; which being taken by them without our consent, have no power to bind
them. This last insisted on so cordially, by some that do pretend most hatred
to Popish errors, (as is advertised from London by letters of the 11. of
March) that at the last it was concluded to dispatch Prideaux and Nicols two of
their Members in all have to Exeter, to signify their mislike of the whole
business to the several Counties, and by all means to break in pieces the
Agreement, from which they feared such mischiefs would redound unto them. But
it is hoped, that notwithstanding their endeavors to subvert this Treaty, and
the Gentlemen and others of those Counties whom it most concerns, will not so
easily be altered from their resolutions: beginning at the last (though long
first) to reassume the use of their own senses; to trust no farther to the
insnaring arts of others, then they see cause for; to find in what a
comfortable state they lived, when they could feel no power above them, but
the mild Scepter of a merciful and gracious King; and finally to perceive what
irremediable calamities the Yorkshire and the Cheshire men have drawn upon
themselves and their several Countries, by breaking those Agreements, on the
like temptation, which were so faithfully condescended to for their common
good. However we may see even by these endeavors, what hopes of ease, what
inclination to (...) expected from the hands of those cruel Surgeons; who
are so far from binding up the wounds of this bleeding body, that they
enlarge the Orifice and increase the number, and take delight in torturing the
poor Patient, whom they have in Cure: how little sense there is in them of our
deadly miseries, who sitting safely in the Senate, wrapped in warm furs, and
guarded by full troops of their own Auxiliaries, hear not the groans of
slaughtered men, nor the cries of Orphans, nor the lamentation of the Widows,
nor see that spoil and devastation, which they have made of late in this
flourishing Kingdom, under pretense of rectifying some few slips and errors in
the former Government. From which unmercifull kind of men, no less then from
the Plague and Pestilence, Good Lord deliver us.

FINIS.

