THE SURE MERCIES OF DAVID: Or, a Second Part of HEART-TREASURE.

Wherein is contained the supreme and substance of Gospel-mercies purchased by
Christ, and Promised in the Covenant of Grace, together with the several ways
how they are made sure to all the Heirs of Promise, and how they are to be
improved for the Saints Fort and Defense, Settlement and Encouragement in
shaking and backsliding times.

Being the fruit of some Meditations upon Isa. 55.3.

By O. Heywood an unprofitable Minister of the Gospel.

Zech. 9.11. As for thee also, by the blood of thy Covenant, I have sent forth
thy Prisoners out of the pit wherein is no water.
Evangelium est, ceu vehiculum quoddam per quod ad nos defertur Christus cum
justitia sua and omnibus donis:
Luth. tom. 3. f. 428. a. LONDON, Printed by R. W. for Tho. Parkhurst, and are
to be sold at his Shop at the Bible and three Crowns in Cheapside near Mercers
Chapel.

To all the Heirs of Promise, the Saints of the most high God, the Sons and
Daughters of Abraham, whom God has betrothed to himself in the sweet
Gospel Covenant, and who live in hopes of their nuptial day, preparing in grace
to enter into the chambers of glory at death and the general Resurrection,
grace, mercy and peace.
TWo things (my Dearly beloved in the Lord,) are absolutely necessary to make
souls happy, 1. That the thing possessed be fully adaequate to the nature of
the soul, 2. That ^t be made over to it legally and everlastingly: for if
either any thing be defective at present to give content, or there be danger of
losing it, it is not commensurate to the souls state or need; for as this
immortal spark infused into man, whereby he is a rational creature, is vast and
capacious in its desires and dimensions; so it is very lasting, yea everlasting
in its continuance and duration; therefore its riches that must make it happy
must be both suitable and durable: But all the creatures fall short in both:
the soul of man traveling through this spacious universe upon the feet of its
affections, and following the guidance of the intellectual faculties the souls
ear and eye, can get no satisfying sight or report in answer to that curious
inquest, who will show me any good? to fix upon the creature is to set our eyes
upon that which is not, for its vanity; yea, to place our hopes on that which
has a lie in its right hand, and so becomes vexation of spirit in an
astonishing disappointment: woe were to man if there were no hopes for him but
in this life, and great were his infelicity if what Atheists say and think,
that there is no God, were true, how poorly should this Princely thing in man
be served with the sordid husks of creatures? how base and brutish would its
life be? how well becoming man would that Epitaph be of the Epicure? which
Cicero says was fitter to be writ on an Oxes grave than man's -- Haec habeo
quae edi, quaeque exsaturata libido -- hausit: the things my greedy appetite
has devoured are mine, as they cry. But let such Brutified Sots, that
understand nothing of the worth or proper food of immortal souls, feed on
husks, let the Heaven-born Saints aspire to other nourishment, if the mixed
multitude of common professors linger after the Egyptian food of Cucumbers,
Numb. 11.4, 5. Qui mundo adhaeserunt ut marinis petris alga, contemnunt
immortalitatem sicut Senex Ithacensts, qui non veritatem and coel stem patriam,
eam quae vere est lucem, sed fumum optabat. Clem. Alexand. adm ad genesis
Melons, Leeks, Onions and Garlic -- the real Saints feed on Heavenly Manna;
the flesh and blood of Christ is the proper pabulum animae, or nourishment of
the soul: the soul has a more tender appetite, which requires answerable food;
it cannot feed on such course stuff as worldly delights: hear David begging as
for an alms, but what alms begs he? mercies; but what mercies? tender mercies,
Psalm. 40.11. withhold not thy tender mercies from me, O Lord -- q. d. there are
common mercies, that fill the bellies, and cloth the bodies of good and bad,
but these will not serve my turn, nor save my soul; the mercies that will do me
good for ever are tender things of another stamp, that come streaming through
the blood of a Mediator, that are dipped in Covenant love, and such as can fill,
and feed, and feast my soul for ever.

These are the mercies that God has dropped into your bosoms; oh the heirs of
promise, and these are the mercies described and deciphered in this Treatise, I
have gone out to measure the Land of Promise, and according to grace received,
I have viewed it in the length and breadth thereof, and I have no reason to
bring up an evil report on it; it is a Land flowing with Milk and Honey, a
blessed and beautiful Land, which God cares for, and if the Lord delight in
you, he will bring you into it, what though there be Giants and Anakims of
opposition in Heavens way, fear them not, for they are bread for us, shall turn
to the Saints nourishment, and their defense is departed from them; the Lord is
with us, Let not our hearts faint, God will carry us as upon Eagles Wings, he
will give us a pillar of Cloud by day, and a pillar of fire by night; sure
mercies in the way, and everlasting mercies in the end: this is the true Arabia
felix, yet far beyond that, which though it abounded with spices and gold,
profits and pleasures, yet stupifies the senses of the inhabitants with its
suffocating sweetness; but there is no nauseous disgusting of heavenly delights
by those that partake thereof: the longer you enjoy them, the more you long
after them, and the fuller draught you take, the sweeter relish they have: Oh
the pleasure a soul may have in divine things! other things will stink in
comparison of these ravishing delights: no pleasures like those that come from
above: but that which adds an Emphasis to these is, that they are sure as well
as sweet, abiding as well as abounding pleasures: God the Author and object of
them is immutable, the spring of them, the love of God, the meritorious cause,
Christ's blood, the way of conveyance, precious promises, all these are settled
and the same, as long as the soul needs mercies it enjoys them, for we have
grace to help in time of need: God will not, men cannot pluck away these
mercies from you, you that have a well-grounded title thereunto: God will not;
for the gifts and callings of God are without repentance; and whom he loves
once he loves to the end: men cannot for they are above and beyond their reach:
Sole and sale omnia conservantur.
these mercies are made sure to you by a Covenant of Salt, which is a symbol
of incorruption: they wear not away with length of time, nor are they snatched
away by humane violence: the Tyrants rage cannot pluck sure mercies out of your
hearts and hands: this consideration is of singular use in a losing time; men
may take away our estates, liberties, privileges, but they cannot take away
our mercies: they may degrade us and remove us from our functions and offices,
but cannot dissettle our souls from relation to Christ, or state of grace, or
blessed influences of grace. Fox. Mart. Vol. 1. p. ^20.
When Popish Bishops took from John Husse the Chalice, saying. Oh cursed Judas
we take away from thee this Chalice of thy salvation, he answered, but I trust
unto God the Father omnipotent, and my Lord Jesus Christ, for whose sake I
suffer these things, that he will not take away the Chalice of his redemption,
but have a steadfast and firm hope, that this day I shall drink thereof in his
Kingdom: Yea, men may take away the members of the body, but not the graces and
comforts of the soul: Notable is the story of Agatha the primitive Martyr,
Quintiliano dixisse ferunt ex cujus jussu praecisae sunt ipsi mammillae, ann^n
te pudet, Tyrone membrum illud in me amputare, quod in matre suxisti? verum,
age saevi quantum poteris: duae tamen supersunt mammillae, quas nequis
attingere, fidei una, spei altera, hae mihi vel in mediis tormentis solamen and
tutamen suppeditant and earum alimento sustinendi virtus in me reparatur -- Dr.
Arrows. Tact. sac. p. 195.
who when Quintilian had commanded her breasts to be cut off, art thou not
ashamed, O Tyrant, said she, to cut off that member in me, which thou suckedst
in thy mother? but ^o to, rage as much as thou can, yet two breasts are left,
which thou can ^ot touch, the one of faith, the other of ^ope, these supply
me with comfort and safety in the midst of torments and abundant strength is
repaired in me by the nourishment I have by them to endure. Alas, it were a sad
state of an immortal soul to have nothing but what supplys corporal wants; how
soon will worm, or moth, or fire, or thieves or tyrants, make a prey of visible
riches? the good things of Saints are invisible: happy are you whose mercies
are divine, you need not fear plundring or spoiling of your best goods; these
are the true riches, Omnia ^^m aliis communia habent tanquam ci^s, omnia
patiuntur tanquam p^egriai: omnis p^regrina regio patris est eor^m, and omnis
patria est peregrina. Just. Mart. e^^d Di^g. vid. plura.
though you be poor in this world, yet if you be^ rich in faith, you are heirs
of a Kingdom; you live as strangers and Pilgrims, for your estates lye^ in
another Country: and indeed a Christian is a Paradox in this, as Justin Martyr
observes of the ancient Christians, that they inhabit their own Country but as
strangers, the^ have all things common with others a^ Citizens, yet suffer all
things as Pilgrims, every strange Region is their Country, and every Country
a strange Region: a Christians politics are seemingly contradictory, and truly
mysterious: they make a common table, yet not polluted: they are in the flesh,
but live not after the flesh: they live on earth, but have their conversation
in Heaven: they obey Laws established, yet by their way of living go beyond
laws: they love all and are persecuted by all: they are not known, yet
condemned: they are killed, yet made alive: they are poor, yet enrich many:
they want all things, yet abound in all things: they are disgraced, yet thereby
honored, etc. Thus he proceeds, showing the state of Christians; which is the
same now: oh what a mystery, yet felicity, it is to be a Saint! all things are
yours, though nothing were yours; a Saint by Covenant has right to all, and
shall have actual possession of what is for his good: the Saints rule the
earth, themselves being trampled on by all: they pass through the world as
Conquerours, and carry the spoils along with them as Trophies to death, and
when death is swallowed up in victory, these blessed Champions arise triumphant
in glory: Oh Christians, study your state, know your privileges, be always
triumphing in Christ: live at the rate of these mercies, make no reckoning of
the world but as a footstool to raise you higher God-wards, or as a
stepping-stone to pass forward through this dirty world Heaven-wards, thereby:
bless God for the least outward mercy, but be not put off with the greatest; a
little with God is enough, all things without God are nothing: suppose you be
below the higher part of the dust of the earth in riches, power, and glory, yet
you are above them in grace, true riches, and favor with the God of Heaven:
therein he makes amends, as the Jews have a Fable that the Waters Terrestrial,
in the beginning, took it ill they must be divided from the Celestial by the
Firmament; he pacifies them by promising a Sacred use of them below in the
Tabernacle of the Covenant: so although you are set below others in other
things, yet in this you have pre-eminence above them, that you are interested
in, and employed about these Covenant-mercies: this is abundant compensation:
be not discouraged, whatever you suffer here, it is not Hell, whatever you lose
for God, Heaven will make amends; faithful is he that has promised, who also
will do it; God is yet able to pay his debts, as able and willing, as to the
first man that ever sued for performance of a promise: never any went away
grumbling or charging God (as some men are too justly accused) that he minds
not what he says: when David through weakness of faith began to stagger, and
expostulate, saying, does his promise fail for evermore? he quickly checks
himself with that reflection, And I said, this is my infirmity, Psalm. 77.8, 10.
--

It were a blessed thing (which Luther wishes for) that our faith were as
certain and firm as the thing it self believed, Optarim fid^^tam certa^ and
firmam ^sse qu^m and ^es ipsa, verwn peccatum in car^e r^sistit sp^ritui^ut non
possitam firmiter credere, Luth.
but alas, sin in the flesh does resist the spirit, so as we cannot so firmly
believe, as he complains: the way to stability is acting of faith, believe and
ye shall be established; as long as we consult with reason, we shall still be
fluctuating persons expedient for establishment, after many temptations of
doubt concerning a main article of faith was, an hearty humiliation and
captivating his understanding to the obedience of faith: which brought such
clear light of truth and certitude into his soul, that there remained no
relics at all of dubitation: we may all cry out with the Disciples, Lord
increase our faith; alas, the want of faith is the root of all actual sins and
insensibleness; yea, the want of a through persuasion of the reality of divine
things, undoth the world; most men do but read the Gospel as a fine fiction, or
a well-composed Romance, but work not their hearts to credit these things: a
may be, or may not be, in a conjectural uncertainty is all they arrive unto;
however they do not follow home the light and persuasions they have; alas, did
souls seriously think of this, that as sure as they are men or women, as
certainly as they eat and drink, work and sleep, so certainly there is a God, a
Christ, grace, pardon, guilt, Heaven, Hell, which they must very shortly feel,
this could not but have a strange influence upon their hearts and lives, their
affections and conversations: oh what persons should Saints be, if they lived
under the through impressions and convictions of the certainty of divine
revelations.

It were a blessed effect if all the Treatises that have of late been writ,
might convince this profane and Atheistical world of the certainty of
Christianity, many have traveled much in this with good success; several
ancient writers as Clemens, Polycarpus, Vid. Scultit. med. patrum --
Justinus Martyr, Tatianus, Iraeneus, Athenagoras, Tertullian -- have proved by
demonstrative arguments the truth of Christian Religion against Jews, Heathens,
etc. and Grotius, Morney -- of late: and at this day Baxter, Stillingfleet,
etc. have put their sickle into this Harvest, from whom the Church has reaped
precious fruit: I pretend neither to the Learning or Authority of those famous
Worthies, but insist only upon the Sure Mercies of the Covenant as a poor
Superstructure upon those Solid Foundations: it was the design of Luke the
Evangelist, in Writing his Gospel to the noble and excellent Theophilus, that
he might be assured of the certainty of those things wherein he had been
instructed, Luke 1.4. such a design have I in this small piece. Oh that some
might stand out and say, as the Disciples, now we are sure that thou know
all things -- by this we believe that thou come forth from God, Joh. 16.30.
oh sirs, stick not in an uncertain conjecture, arrive at a full assurance of
understanding to the acknowledging of the mystery of God, Col. 2.2. pray for
the spirit of Revelation, that you may both know the certainty of
Gospel-mysteries and mercies, and your own interest therein, that you may both
be strong in faith and full of comfort: advance higher daily in embracing
unseen things, rest not in a skeptical (...) or Philosophical dubitation, but
strive to arrive at an (...) or firm demonstration; rest your souls upon Divine
Testimonies, as to the object of faith, and commit your souls to him in
believing and well-doing for evidence of your state: Remember that choice word,
Hos. 6.3. then shall we know if we follow on to know the Lord, his going forth
is prepared as the morning, and he shall come unto us as the rain, as the
latter and former rain unto the earth: that this and all other soul-helps may
accomplish this great end of your edification, consolation, and salvation,
shall be the earnest Prayer of

Your Soul-friend and Servant in Christ.
June 3. 1670.
The Contents of the Book.
CHAP. I.
THe Context and exposition of the words. 1 Several Doctrines raised, one
insisted on. 6
CHAP. II.
What are the mercies of the Covenant. 9 1. The parties covenanting 11 2. The
consideration paid. 12 3. The conditions required, which are four. 14 4. The
grant, that is God himself. 15 1. What God is to the soul in four things. 19 2.
What God graunts to it. 20
CHAP. III.
In what respects these mercies are sure. 26 1. Infallibility. 28 2.
Immutability. 30
CHAP. IV.
What ways God takes to make them sure. 33 1. Passing his word. ib. 2. Putting
it into writing. 34 3. Calling in witnesses. ib. 4. Setting to his seal. 35 5.
A solemn oath. 36 6. Giving a pledge. 37 7. Doing a great part of the work. 38
8. Confirmation by miracles. 40 9. Singular ways of reporting them. 41 10.
Marriage knot made from Hos. 2.19.43
CHAP. V.
How these mercies are made sure in and by Christ. viz. by 47 1. His
hypostatical union. ib. 2. His spiritual Unction. 49 3. The Covenant of
redemption. 50 4. The execution of his offices. 53 As Prophet, Priest, King. 54
In his state of Humiliation. 55 Exaltation. 56 Resurrection. ib. Ascension. 57
Session. ib. Intercession. 59
CHAP. VI.
1 Use of Confutation 63 1. Atheists. ib. 2. Papists, as to 1. Merit. 67 2.
Assurance. 70 2. Arminians as to 1. Universal Redemption. 72 2. Final
Apostasy. 75 4. Socinians, concerning Christ's satisfaction. 76
CHAP. VII.
2. Use of instruction. 1. In the difference betwixt the two Covenants. 79 In
this see, 1. Gods grace and mercy. ib. 2. His infinite wisdom. 82 2. The
difference betwixt Covenant and Common mercys. 85 1. In the Fountain. 86 2. In
the dimensions. ib. 3. In the operations. 88 4. In the duration. Of both 90 3.
In the difference betwixt gifts and graces. 93 1. In their Original. 94 2. In
their Nature. 95 3. In their Retinue. ib. 4. In their Ends and Effects. 96 4.
See the Truth of Christian Religion. 98
CHAP. VIII.
3 Use, Of Examination. 104 1. Whether we have accepted God as our God. 106 2.
Whether we have given up our selves to him. 109 1. Really. 110 2. Readily. 112
3. Resolvedly. 114 4. Vnreservedly. 116 i. e. Totally. Finally. 3. Whether we
have new covenant dispositions, which are such as these, viz. 1. Saving
illumination. 120 2. Law writ in our hearts. 122 3. One heart, one way. 123 4.
The fear of God. 125 5. Sanctification. 126 6. A new Heart, Spirit. 128 7. A
soft Heart. 129 8. Spiritual Obedience. 131
4. Try by the nature of these sure mercies, which are, 1. Transforming.
Mercies. 133 2. Comforting. Mercies. 134 3. Raising. Mercies. 135 4. Enlarging
Mercies. 136

CHAP. IX.
4. Use of Conviction, 1. Of Sinners. 1. They are under a sure sentence of
wrath. 138 2. Not sure to be a moment out of Hell. 142 3. Their mistake will
aggravate their state. 144 4. The nature of these mercies Tormenting. 145 2
Conviction is of Saints. 1. They indent with God. 149 2. They compound about
these mercies. 150 3. They live not upon them. 152 4. They live not up to them.
155
Walking, 1. Vnholily. 156 2. Vnsteadily. 157 3. Uncomfortably. 159 4.
Unfruitfully. 162
Bringing forth small and sour fruits. ib.
CHAP. X.
5 Use of Exhortation, Look after interest in these sure mercies, pressed by
Motives. 166 1. Nothing else can be made sure. 167 2. Else common mercies are
accursed. 168 3. Else choicest duties are not accepted. 169 4. Else you can
have no solid ground of peace. 171 5. These render every state safe. 173 6.
These mercies influence our spirits. 174 7. These bring the soul to Heaven. 175
Children of godly Parents exhorted to embrace Covenant-mercies by two
Arguments. 177
CHAP. XI.
6 Use is of Direction, referring to four heads. 1. What is a soul to do to get
interest in these mercies? 1. Make a strict enquiry into your state. 185 2.
Work on your hearts the mystery of merciless state. 186 3. Be thankful for,
not content with common mercies. 188 4. Cast out and cashier all sin. 190 5.
Renounce your own righteousness. 191 6. Close in with Jesus Christ. 192 7.
Enter into a solemn Covenant with God. 194

CHAP. XII.
2. Head, How a doubtful soul may be assured of its title to these sure
mercies? 197 1. Study Sciptures and promises. 198 2. Attend on a quickening
ministry. 199 3. Improve the states of the Covenant. 200 4. Ply the throne of
grace. 201 5. Walk close with God. 202 6. Be much in self-observation. 204 7.
Recollect former experiences. 205 8. Strengthen every grace of the spirit. 206
9. Lay all the stress on Gods free grace. 207 10. Exercise your selves in thank
fullness. 209 Four Motives to labor for assurance. 211

CHAP. XIII.
3 Head, In what cases may a Covenanted soul make use of these sure mercies? 1.
In case of dissetiling suggestions to Atheism. 218 2. In case of guilt upon the
conscience. 220 3. In case of afflictions persecutions. 223 4. In case of
spiritual famine. 224 5. In back slidings, and fears of apostasy. 227 6. In
desertions, as to quickening comfort. 229 7. In the hour and power of death. 234

CHAP. XIV.
Head, How a Covenanted soul must behave himself with reference to these
mercies? 1. Believe and receive them readily. 239 2. Improve them in particular
needs. 240 3. Be content with these mercies. ib. 4. Walk worthy of them. 241 5.
Be active and passive for them. 242 6. Plead these mercies for posterity. ib.
7. Breath after a full possession of them. 243

CHAP. XV.
Use of thank fullness for these Covenant-mercies. 1. Free. 246 2. Dear. 247 3.
Deep. ib. 4. Designed. ib. 5. Dignifying. 248 6. Sanctifying. ib. 7.
Separating. 249 8. Sealing. ib. 9. Extensive. ib. 10. Comprehensive. 250

ERRATA.
PAge 25. line 16. read good, p. 93. l. 21. add which, p. 112. marg. r.
discitur, p. 132. l. 8 add in, p. 135. l. 11. add are, p. 141. l. 30. r.
himself, p. 151. l. 26. add him, p. 182. l. 8. r. Children of the Kingdom, p.
231. l. 30 r. necessary, blot out un --

THE SURE MERCIES OF DAVID.
Isaiah 55.3. -- Even the sure mercies of David.


CHAP. I.
THis Evangelical Prophet acts the part of an Apostolical Preacher, deciphering
our dear Savior as lively as if he Writ an History not a Prophecy, as if he
saw him in the Flesh and ^ot in the Type only: This Chapter contains (...)
sweet relation or revelation of the Myste^ies of Gospel Grace, an high-sounding
^roclamation, and pathetical Exhortation to the sons of men to embrace the
saving benefits purchased by our Lord Jesus Christ.

This Exhortation is pressed upon consciences with four Arguments, which are
(as it were) a satisfying Answer to as many tacit Objections which may be made
by unbelieving soul^ these arguments are drawn from the 1. Freeness, ver. 1. of
Gospel Grace. 2. Fullness, ver. 2. of Gospel Grace. 3. Firmness, ver. 3. of
Gospel Grace. 4. Largness, ver. 5. of Gospel Grace.


1. A soul may say, Alas, I am an unworthy wretch, I have nothing that can
commend me to God, I have neither penny, nor pennyworth, money, nor price to
give, neither grace nor good work to bring to God, may I have a share in it^
Yes, its free, come buy, for just nothing, ver. 1.

2. But may the soul say, if it be so cheap, it may be its of as little worth,
too dear of taking gratis, things of light price are often of as light use, and
answer their rate, by being unprofitable, will it do me any good? O yes, its of
vast advantage; if you take pains for any thing else, you do but spend money
for that which is no Bread, but if you obtain Gospel Grace, you eat that which
is good, and your soul shall delight it self in fatness, ver. 2.

3. But may I have a share in these Mercies, shall I not miss of them, and when
I once have them shall I not lose them again? I am but tantalized if I see such
sweet morsels and cannot reach them, and I shall be more miserable if I taste
such pleasant dainties, and have them snatched away: he answers to the first,
all shall be made over to you by a Covenant, and to the second they are the
sure mercies of David, ver. 3.

4. But, alas may a poor soul say, this is Childrens meat, what have dogs to
do with these dainties, I am a sinner of the Gentiles, salvation is of the
Jews, and for the Jews; is there any hope for such strangers to the
Commonwealth of Israel? Yes, Jesus Christ is given for a witness to the
people, to all people, i. e. Gentiles, Isa. 49.6.
a Nation that thou know not, and Nations that knew not thee, shall run unto
thee, ver. 4, 5.

The Text falls under the third Argument, and contains,

1. A double duty, hear, come, i. e. believe, obey.

2. A double promise, of life, and Covenant.

1. Your soul shall live; life is the flower and foundation of all outward
mercies, but spiritual life transcends a corporal temporal life, which is but a
dying life, or living death; Grace is the life of the soul. Spiritual life is
the seed-plot of eternal life in Glory: mankind lost life by hearing the
charming temptations of the subtle Serpent: life is recovered by hearing the
gracious words of life from Jesus Christ, Hear, and your souls shall live.

2. I will make an everlasting Covenant with you, the words are in Hebrew, I
will cut a Covenant with you, (...) Percutiam vobiscum foedus, q.d. dividantur
ejus me^bra qui juramentum violaverit.
the expression has allusion to the ancient practice of entering Covenants,
which was by cutting a Beast in two parts, and the parties Covenanting going
betwixt those parts, to note that after that manner shall that man's members be
divided that shall violate that solemn Covenant: See the practice, in Genesis
15.17, 18. Jer. 34.18.

Now the great Contents of this Covenant are expressed in these words which I
have picked out, and pitched upon to speak fully to, Even the sure mercies of
David: which contain,

1. The sum of the Covenant, i. e. mercies.

2. The nature of those mercies, i. e. sure.

3. The subject of the mercies, David.

There is not much difficulty in the words, only it is disputed what is meant by
David here. Now in Scripture David is taken, 1. For literal David. 2. For
mystical David, Jesus Christ: it may be applicable very properly both ways
here.

1. It may be taken for the person of David the Son of Jesse, King of Israel;
and then the mercies of David are the choice promises that God made with his
servant David, described in 2 Samuel 7.13-17. and in Psalm. 89. Some make the
first words of that Psalm to be the title of it, and render it thus, I will
sing of the mercies of David, because Gods Covenant with David is abundantly
held forth in that Psalm. But this phrase does rather allude to 2 Chronicles. 6.42.
where Solomon thus prays, Remember the mercies of David thy Servant.

2. By David is meant Jesus Christ who is of the seed of David according to the
flesh, Romans 1.3. Act. 13.23.
and called by this name of David frequently in the Old Testament, as in Ezekiel.
34.23, 34. chapter 37.24, 25. Hos. 3.5. and I do rather conceive this to be the
meaning of the words, than the former, for these two reasons. 1. Because in the
New Testament, where these words are quoted, the Holy Ghost applies it to Jesus
Christ, Act. 13.34. I will give you the sure mercies of David; indeed the Greek
renders it different from the Original of the Old Testament, for thus they read
it, (...), according to the Septuagint: in English, the faithful holy things of
David, but all comes unto one, for the mercies of the Covenant are holy things;
But observe the scope of that quotation in the Acts, which is to prove Christ's
Resurrection, for if Christ had not risen from the dead, the promises had not
been made good, so that still it relates to Christ. 2. Another consideration
that moves me to conceive that by David here is meant Jesus Christ, is what
follows in the fourth verse, I have given him, (i.e. David before mentioned or
Christ) for a witness to the people, (i.e. a witness to testify Gods veracity
in performing all his promises;) so then the words may be thus read, I will
make an everlasting Covenant with you, according to the sure mercies of David,
i. e. the Messiah, who is to come, the mercies before promised, and to be
exhibited in and by him in the fullness of time: the words are but few, (...)
being but three, yet they are full of sense and significancy, and are
big-bellyed, traveling with the precious mysteries of Gospel Grace.

I shall only name some Doctrinal observations by the way from the Text, and
pitch upon one.

Doct. 1. The Covenant of Grace is made up of mercies, its a compound of
mercies, the root, the branches, the top, the bottom of this Chariot is love,
grace, grace, all free grace.

2. Covenant-mercies are sure mercies, they are not like the uncertain riches
of this world, the true treasure is a sure treasure, the better part that
cannot be taken away.

3. The sure mercies of the Covenant are David's portion: take David here
literally and Saints in him, so it signifies beloved: all Gods David's or
beloved ones have right to Covenant-mercies.

4. Jesus Christ alone does make sure all the mercies of the Covenant: so take
it in the latter acceptance, as David imports the Messiah.

I shall rather give you the substance of the Text, and the forementioned
Doctrines in this one Proposition.

Doct. That Covenant-mercies made in Christ, are made sure by Christ to all the
heirs of promise.

The mercies which the Messiah procures and applies are sure mercies.

That the Covenant of Grace is made in Christ see, Isa. 49.8. I will preserve
thee, Isa. 49.8.
and give thee for a Covenant of the people, i. e. the Mediator of the
Covenant; so the Apostle expounds it, calling Jesus Christ, Heb 7 22. Heb. 8 6.
Heb 9.15.
a surety of a better Testament, or Covenant, and again, he calls him the
Mediator of the New Testament; And as the promises are made good in Christ, so
they are, made good by Christ. 2 Cor. 1. 20. for all the promises of God in him
are yea, and in him Amen, unto the glory of God by us, i. e. they are ratified,
confirmed, and applied by virtue of Christ's own meritorious undertakings: a
full Text we have in Romans 15.8. Now I say, that Jesus Christ was a Minister of
the Circumcision for the truth of God to confirm the promises made unto the
Fathers; hence it is that he has sealed the Covenant, both by his person,
actings, and sufferings, (as afterward I shall particularly demonstrate) so
that the mercies must needs be sure; David the subject of these mercies does
acknowledge the sureness of them, even in the Old Testament, in that famous
Text, 2 Samuel 23.5. Although my house be not so with God, ^i. e. for outward
splendor, according to the description of a magnificent family, ver. 4.) yet
^e has made with me an everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things and sure;
as if he should say, It Is true indeed, God has performed his good word to me
in making me King, ^ut alas still my heart is full of corruptions, and my house
of distractions; though the Sun be risen upon me, yet I cannot say its a
morning without clouds; it is sadly eclipsed and overcast with the obscuring
clouds of temptations upon me; I have committed grievous sins which darken my
glory, damp my comfort: Ammon commits Incest with his Sister, Absalon Rebels
against his Father: I am driven from my Throne and City, my whole Family is
woefully broken, shattered and discomposed; well, but I have a well-ordered
Covenant, in the midst of all my disorder. When I am driven from mine own
house, I am not sure that ever I shall return to it, but this Covenant is sure;
my outward condition is uncertain, but the best mercies of this blessed
Covenant are so solid and substantial, that I am satisfied therewith; if he
deny me the temporal mercies therein contained, yet if I have the spiritual
mercies thereof, that is enough for me, for it is all my salvation and all my
desire, although he make it not to grow, i. e. though his blessing upon my
house be not as the tender grass, springing out of the earth by clear shining
after the Rain, and so multiply my family, in making it either numerous or
wealthy, potent or magnificent, I have all that I look for, and that which
gives me content, I have these sweet and sure mercies of this blessed Covenant:

For the more distinct and profitable handling of this choice subject, I shall
in the Doctrinal part open these four particulars or principal points, and
endeavor to show,

1. What are the mercies of the Covenant?

2. In what respects they are said to be made sure?

3. By what ways and means they are insured to us?

4. How they are said to be made sure in Christ.

CHAP. II.
1. FOR the first point, What are the mercies of the Covenant: and here I might
prepare the way by declaring what a Covenant is, and give some description of
this New Covenant, and distinctions about it; but I shall rather wave that,
because it is so abundantly done already by so many able hands. Only for our
present purpose, take notice, that in all Contracts or Covenants, Mr. Herle his
Christian Wisdom, chap^ 4. p. 227.
yea in any ordinary Conveyance, there are four things very considerable, yea
and essentially requisite. 1. There is the parties Covenanting. 2. The
Consideration paid, or laid down. 3. The conditions required and performed. 4.
The tenor and grant in which it runs, or the privilege to be enjoyed, upon
the conditions, and consideration, called in our writings the habendum, or the
thing that we must have and hold:

Now all these are either expressly or implicitly held forth in one Scripture,
which is Heb. 8.10.1. Heb. 8.10.
There is the parties Covenanting, I and the house of Israel, [this is the
Covenant that I will make with the house of Israel.] 2. Here is the
consideration evidently employed in these words, [after those days] i.e. after
those days of Types, Shadows, and Prophecies, in the fullness of time, the
Messiah shall come, who is the substance, and will satisfy divine justice, and
make an Atonement. 3. Here is the condition of the Covenant, plainly expressed
in these words, [I will put my Laws into their mind, and write them in their
hearts] i. e. I will give that which I require, I will put within them a
principle of Grace that they may love me, believe in me, repent for sin, and
obey the Gospel: that is the third. 4. Here Is the grant, or good to be enjoyed,
which is the end and result of all the former, viz. [I will be to them a God,
and they shall be to me a people,] i.e. whatsoever I am, or have, or can do,
who am omnipotent, shall be employed for their good; or whatsoever they would
choose a God for, or desire to be in a God, that will I be to them, with whom I
contract this Covenant, and I will own them as my peculiar people. Now the
mercies of the Covenant consist in these four particulars, especially in the
last.

I shall a little open these, that we may the better find out the mercies wrapped
in the Covenant of Grace.

1. The parties that enter this Covenant, are God, and man; Oh the infinite
distance and vast disproportion! quantus quantillo? Heaven makes a match with
earth, the great Creator with a mortal creature, the glorious King with a silly
beggar! is not this a rich mercy? shall the Cedar in Lebanon contract a League
not only with the contemptible shrub, but with the pricking offensive thistle?
shall the Sun of Righteousness convey beams of love to such worthless worms,
yea to such stinking dung-hills? shall the beauty of holiness be confederate
with sorry man who is but a lump of vanity or mass of impurity? Yet thus it is,
and this is transcendent mercy; there is mercy in a Covenant, God might have
dealt with man in a way of absolute sovereignty, and done with man even as he
pleased, without giving us account of his matters; but he treats with man in a
rational way, above the capacity of other creatures: God takes man up to parley
and treat with him, as though he were his equal, Psalm. 8.4.
what is man that thou art thus mindful of him? or the Son of man that thou
visitest him? this mutual stipulation is infinite condescension on Gods part,
and advancement on man's: man, only man of all the Creatures is the subject of
this Covenant, Angels had no need of it, Devils had no hope by it, bruit
Creatures were not capable of it, only man, and fallen man has interest in it,
and benefit by it. Oh the mercy there is in a Covenant of reconciliation! even
after man had turned bankrupt, spent a fair estate, broken Covenant, and
brought himself into a desperate case, that yet God should forget what was
past, enter into a new and better Covenant, betrust him with a new stock, and
yet lay help (not upon foolish man's weak shoulders, but) upon one that is mighty
to save? Oh rich, O transcendent Love! this leads us to the second thing in
this Covenant.

2. The consideration paid, that is Jesus Christ, Joh. 4.10.
and he is eminently the gift of God, such a gift as never came out of the
hands of God, and was never received by the hands of mortal man, a rich and
enriching gift, a gift proceeding from love, so God loved the world, that he
gave his Son, Joh. 3.16. Christ is several ways a gift, 1. Nobis, to us, 1
Cor. 1.30. who of God is made unto us wisdom. 2. Pro nobis, for us, Gal. 2.20.
Who loved me, and gave himself for me. 3. Prae nobis, before us, as an example,
copy and pattern, as he suffered for us, so he left us an example, 1 Pet.
2.21.4. In nobis, in us, so Christ is said to dwell in our hearts by faith,
Ephesians. 3.17. thus Christ is given to believers by sanctification, and
inhabitation of his spirit. Now, it is the second way principally whereby Christ
is the consideration or price paid in this new Covenant, viz. as he is given
for us, a valuable consideration to pacify wrath and satisfy justice: thus is
Jesus Christ the Lutron or price of our Redemption, we are bought with a price,
1 Cor. 6.20. such a price as never was paid, men pay money to purchase great
possessions, but we were not redeemed with corruptible things as Silver and
Gold -- but with blood, yea with the precious blood of Christ, 1 Pet. 1.18, 19.
without shedding of blood there could be no remission, yet the blood of Bulls
or Goats could never take away sin; Heb. 9.22, 12.
nay the blood of all the men upon earth could never wash away the guilt of the
least sin; no no, it must be the blood of the immaculate Lamb, the blood of
God; so called from the union of the two natures, and communication of idioms
or properties: and this is the price paid, the Father found out a ransom, 1 Timothy 2.6.
and our dear Savior gave himself a ransom; certainly this is a transcendent
mercy of the New Covenant. I dispute not those nice Controversies, whether God
could not have pardoned and saved man without the consideration of Christ's
undertakings; or how God in justice can charge guilt and torment upon an
innocent person; this I am sure is Gods way of saving souls, and we must not
dispute but believe, that Jesus Christ is the Mediator of the Covenant, and
the price of our Redemption, as God-man; and this is the Marrow of the rich
mercy and deep mystery contained in the Gospel.

3. In a Covenant is contained the couditions thereof; what God requires of us,
without which we can have no benefit by the Covenant; these also are to be
reckoned as mercies of the Covenant on Gods part, as well as duties on our
part, for they are secured and effected in us, as well as commanded and
required by God. Luther makes this to be the main difference betwixt the two
Covenants; the Covenant of works requires obedience but gives no strength; but
the Covenant of Grace ingageth the Grace of God for the Elects performance of
the conditions; hence it is, that what the Law commands, Quod lex imperat,
gratia impetrat: Evangelium dat quod lex exigit: Aug. de spir. and littera --
the Gospel promises; what God requires, Christ procures; what justice
demands, our dear savior purchases and works by his spirit in the heart:
faith is the great Gospel-condition, whereby Christ with all his benefits
become ours, but faith is the gift of God, and none can come to Christ, except
the Father draw him, Joh. 6.44. Alas it is as impossible to believe in Christ
as to keep the Moral Law from principles of corrupted nature; our state had
been sad, and forlorn still, if God had not undertaken to work the faith which
he requires; Duce D^o venitur ad deum.
it is only the arm of omnipotency that can draw the soul to Christ, Jesus is
the only Author and finisher of our faith, Heb. 12.2. Ephesians. 1.19.
there is an exceeding greatness of his power to all them that believe put
forth to create an act of saving faith; all they that have felt it, can
testify that this is a rich mercy, and this is one of the mercies of the
Covenant.

More particularly there are four choice dispositions promised in the Covenant
of Grace, which are Covenant-mercies.

1. Saving illumination, Jer. 31.34. they shall all know me says the Lord; by
nature we are blind and blockish creatures, but the new Covenant brings light
and sight to the ignorant and erring sinner; and Oh what a mercy is it to know
God and Christ, and sin and misery, and duty and felicity, to know
Scripturetruths and Gospel-mysteries, our own hearts and the sweetness of
Grace; heaven and the way thither? certainly such saving knowledge is worth a
world: truly such light is sweet, and a pleasant thing it is for the eye of the
soul to behold the Sun of Righteousness; and the beauty of Heaven: what blind
Bartimeus would not own it as a rich mercy to have his eyes opened? and is it
not a blessed thing to be translated out of Egyptian darkness into this
marvelous light? Oh happy are the eyes that are anointed with the new covenant
eye salve, and behold Celestial objects through this Divine optic of faith,
and become faithful guides to the feet of an holy life!

2. Sound humiliation, this is another Covenant-mercy, Ezekiel. 11.19. -- I will
take the stony heart out of their flesh, and will give them an heart of flesh:
a broken heart is instead of many Sacrifices; an hard heart is the greatest
judgment, and a soft heart the greatest mercy; repentance is Gods gift bound
up in the Covenant of Grace: our sweet and blessed Redeemer is exalted as well
to be a Prince that he may give Repentance, as to be a Savior to give unto us
remission of sins: Oh what a mercy is the spirit of Repentance? they that have
this Godly sorrow shall never need to sorrow for it; such a Repentance needs
not to be repented of: blessed are they that mourn for sin, for they shall
rejoice; happy such as sow in tears, for they shall ^eap in joy! certainly a
Converted sinner looks upon a repenting heart as a rich mercy: one penitent
tear is an orient pearl, of more worth than the whole Creation, a bleeding soul
is a blessed sight in the eyes of God and man, it lays the Christian under the
promise of the Covenant, and qualifies it for remission and the sweetest
consolation.

3. Another Covenant-mercy with respect to the condition is
heart-sanctification, Ezekiel. 36.25. I will sprinkle clean water upon you, and
you shall be clean; this is the mercy that David is so importunate for, create
in me a clean heart, no less than creation will effect it; a putting off the
old man, and putting on the new in a sound Regeneration, is a miraculous mercy.
Oh what would a poor soul give for dominion over some special corruptions, and
power to resist temptations; why here it is, this mercy of mortification (which
is also a Christians duty) is infolded in this blessed Gospel Covenant, so that
sin shall not have Dominion over them that are under this Covenant of Grace: a
Christian can do more to mortify sin, and Crucify the flesh than another man;
every word of God has a cleansing virtue, now you are clean, says Christ,
through the word that I have spoken to you; but the promises of the Covenant
have a direct and immediate tendency to cleansing, 2 Cor. 7.1. having these
promises, ( i. e. the forementioned Covenant) let us cleanse our selves from
all filthiness, both of flesh and spirit: it is only the Gospel Covenant that
can make Evangelically holy: and holiness is the image of God, the beauty of a
soul, the duty of a Christian, and the mercy of the Covenant.

4. A spiritual conversation; this is also included in the Covenant, Ezekiel.
36.27. I will put my spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my statutes,
and ye shall keep my Commandments and do them: Oh what a blessed thing is it to
have a heart to love, and fear, and serve the Lord? Oh what a mercy to be
enabled to perform holy duties; to walk with God in all ways of well-pleasing!
Jer. 31.33.
to have the Law of God written in the heart, and transcribed in the life! yea
to keep Gods commands with ease, alacrity, and complacency, not to have them
grievous but pleasant to the soul; and thus it is when the Christian acts from
an innate principle of Grace and Holiness: well, this is the promised and
purchased condition of the New Covenant; God undertakes to put a new habit into
the soul, his fear which is the beginning of Wisdom, and principle of
obedience: God gives the spirit of prayer, the spirit of power, love, and of a
sound mind; 2 Timothy 1.9.
he promises to give them one heart and one way, that they may fear him for
ever: Jer. 32.39.
Oh what rich mercies of the New Covenant are these?

4. Yet the great mercies of the Covenant are behind, under the next head, for
a Covenant, contract, conveyance contains the Habendum or grant, reflecting
advantage to the party Covenanting, and that in these words, I will be thy God,
this is repeated fifteen or sixteen times in the Scriptures: this, this is the
mercy of the New Covenant, the mercy of mercies, the flower, cream and
quintescence of all mercies, God gives himself to the soul by Covenant, and
what greater or better gift can he bestow? if he should give us all the world
and deny himself, we are miserable beggars; if he give himself and nothing of
the world we are truly rich; if we have God we have all things, if we want God
we want all things: Deus m^us est omnia. Ben scripsisti Thoma q^id pet. Resp.
nil nisi ^ipsum Domine.
my God is my All, says one, it is recorded of Thomas Aquinas (the great
School-man) that a voice from Heaven spoke thus to him, thou have well written
Thomas, what desire thou, and that he answer thus, nothing O Lord, but thy
self; this certainly is the Language of a gracious soul, Lord put me not off
with any thing below or besides thy self: what mortal Creature durst have
presumed to beg of God such a boon, if God had not graciously promised himself
in the New Covenant? what can the creature desire more? what can it now want
when it has an infinite God? all that God is, has, or does is now employed
for the souls good, all his attributes and the good of them are laid out for
the Covenanted soul: this word, my Lord and my God, ecchoing to the other
relative, I will be thy God, are wonderful sweet, as they use to say of the
pronoun my, Relativa sant minimae eatitatis, maximae vero essicaciae.
or mine, that though it be of the least entity, yet it is of the greatest
efficacy, suppose a man could with one cast of his eye take a view of the
perfections of the whole Creation; what were all these things to him if he have
no interest in them? a clear title to a good thing compleats the comfort we
have therein; if God were not our God we could have no comfort from thoughts of
him, Quid est Deus, si non sit meus?
what is God (says one) if he be not my God? if he be not our friend, he will
be our enemy, and we had better have the whole Creation against us, than one
God against us: and if God be for us, who can be against us? Now in the
Covenant of Grace God undertakes to be our God, and this is properly that which
this Text intends, called the sure mercies of David, not in the singular but
the plural number, as I conceive, for these two reasons; 1. Because God is the
fountain, spring, and original of all mercies, Psalm. 86.5, 15.
all my springs are in thee; says David, hence God is said to be plenteous in
mercy, and he is the Father of mercies: all mercies are vertually, eminently,
and transcendently in God, Habet omnia qui habet habentem omnia.
and he that has him that has all things, has all things himself. 2. Because
the Covenant is big-bellyed, it contains all mercies in it, when any one is
entered into Covenant behold a Gad, a Troop, a Train of Mercies wait upon him;
the Covenant is a blessed constellation, and all the Stars of Gospel-promises
do lend their aid to beautify the Covenanted soul.

Take a taste of the mercies of the Covenant in both these respects; as

1. What God is to the soul, and so what mercies are bound up in the Covenant;
in that respect, this take in four particulars:

1. God is all sweet relations to the soul interested in; Psalm. 103.13. Mat.
3.17.
he is a Father to them, 2 Cor. 6.18. an Husband, thy maker is thine Husband,
Isa. 54.5. a near and bosom friend, Jam. 2.23. Abraham was called the friend
of God, so consequently God was his friend; for this Covenant begets and
contracts the most endeared bond of intimate friendship betwixt God and the
soul, and if there can be any relation, yet that holds forth more tenderness
of affection; that and much more is God to the gracious soul, Co^sult Isa.
49.15, 16. Jer. 31.20.
as one whom his mother comfort, so will I comfort you, Isa. 66.13. nay the
Scripture does testify more affectionate workings in Gods heart toward his
people than can be found in the most indulgent Parents to their Natural
offspring: the sweetness of all relations proceed from God, therefore to be
found in God: our relative affection is but a drop to this Fountain, and our
content in relations is no otherwise sweet than as flowing from him, or with
relation to him: that is the first, God in Covenant is the quintescence of all
relations.

2. God is all things, pleasant, desirable and honorable; hence we are bidden
to taste and see how good the Lord is, Psalm. 34.8. Psalm. 37.4. Psalm. 16.11.
and to delight our selves in the Lord, and at his right hand there are
everlasting pleasures; he, he alone is the center and settlement of our
desires, he alone is the rock and rest of the fluctuating soul, Psalm. 116.7.
therefore David does charge his soul to return to God as his rest: God only is
the Sabbath and solace of the Christians soul: the Heaven of that Heaven of
Heavens is Communion with God: no desires so insatiable but may be satisfied
with an^ infinite God; if regularly carried out toward him, Oh what a blessed
thing is it to have God to be the object of our delight! and he alone is our
glory and honor, Psalm. 3.3. Psalm. 24.10.
the God of Heaven is the King of Glory, and he alone is the Glory of a people
or person, the only Ornament to have a God in Covenant, Isa. 28.5. when the
glorious beauty shall be as a fading flower -- then shall the Lord of Hosts be
for a Crown of Glory (instead of their Crown of pride, ver. 3.) and for a
Diadem of beauty to the residue of his people: Oh blessed and beautiful
Ornament!

3. God is all things for safety and defense to his covenanted people, Psalm.
84.9, 11.
he is a Sun and a Shield; a Sun to direct in times of darkness, a Shield to
protect in times of danger: there are seven words in Psalm. 18.2. that set forth
this self-same thing what a Protection God is to his Children. 1. A Rock. 2. A
Fortress. 3. A Deliverer. 4. A Strength. 5. A Buckler. 6. The Horn of his
Salvation. 7. His HighTower: every one of these has its peculiar Emphasis and
Significancy; I cannot take notice of them all, only hint at the first and
last, a Rock (you know) is a natural defense, a Tower is an artificial defense,
God is both (in a sort) by way of Covenant, in the first respect as our God and
Creator, in the second as God-man, Mediator, appointed to be the only succor
and shelter of fallen mankind; here we may be safe and free from the roaring
Lion, the ravening Bear and uncircumcised Philistin: he alone is an hiding
place from the wind, a covert from the tempest -- and as the shadow of a great
rock in a weary land, Isa. 32.2. An admirable place you have in Jer. 17.2. a
throne, a glorious Throne, and a glorious high Throne; and this from the
beginning is the place (not only of our defense, but) of our sanctuary: every
word has its proper weight, who dare presume to meddle with a Throne or to
surprise a Sanctuary? the Glory whereof will affright and appal them; it is an
high Throne, how can they reach it? it is from the beginning, the ancient of
days, and so to everlasting, and what mortal man can lay siege to this so
impregnable a Tower? Deuteronomy. 33.27.
the eternal God is the Saints refuge, and underneath them are everlasting
arms, therefore are they safe from total falling, and fear of desperate evils:
that is the third.

4. God is all things for profit, advantage and usefulness to the Saints, it is
said, money answers all things, but God is better than money, and answers all
things, as a precious Saint used to say, God's good, when gold's gone: no gain
in the world like that that God is to the soul, God is our riches, treasure,
portion, inheritance, and our all in all, David says, Psalm. 73.25, 26. whom
have I in Heaven but thee? and then says, my flesh and my heart fails, but
God is the strength of my heart, and my portion for ever: God is fitly called
the Saints portion, for he is so one Saints portion, as if no ones else, and
yet entirely every ones, as if wholly theirs, as indeed he is, yet without
division, partition, or diminution. That Is a notable passage in that
Gospel Covenant, (at least one part of it, the mercy in it we are speaking of)
Genesis 15.1. fear not Abram, I am thy Shield, and thy exceeding great reward: 1.
Thy reward, as if it were (as indeed it is) reward enough to have God, if we
have nothing else. 2. A great reward worth speaking of; Christus and Coelum non
patiuntu^ hyperbole^.
not an inconsiderable trifle but a great reward. 3. An exceeding great reward,
no hyperbole can reach it, much less exceed it, none can express the goodness
of God, but those that experience it, nor can they sufficiently declare it, but
is he mine? Psalm. 144.15.
Yes. 4. By this Covenant he is thy exceeding great reward; Blessed are they
that are in such a case, Happy is that people whose God is the Lord.

Thus I have showed what God is.

2. I shall a little show what God gives and grants to the covenanted soul;
there are many rich benefits, and advantages, which are indeed rich
Covenant-mercies.

1. Pardon of sin, Jer. 31.34. -- for I will forgive their iniquity, and I will
remember their sin no more: and oh what a mercy is pardon of sin? ask David
when he is roaring under his broken bones, and disquiet spirit, whether pardon
of sin be a mercy, he will answer yes, O yes, I know it, and could even envy
the happiness of a pardoned sinner; blessed is he whose transgression is
forgiven, Psalm. 32.1, 2.
yea many times blessed is he to whom the Lord imputes not iniquity: this is a
mercy that cost a great rate, even the blood of the immaculate Lamb of God,
it is a mercy that God shows for his own sake; a mercy that eases the guilty
soul of an heavy burden, a mercy that has sweet and satisfying concomitants:
Oh the riches of this mercy.

2. Gods favor, love and tender compassion, Jer. 32.40, 41. I will make an
everlasting Covenant with them, that I will not turn away from them to do them
good -- Yea I will rejoice over them to do them good, q. d. now I am in
Covenant with them I will seek and study by all means to promote their
spiritual and eternal advantage; yea and their temporal good also; I will be a
fast and faithful friend to them; all my attributes shall contribute their
assistance to help on the design of mercy toward them: and what God does for
them is with his whole heart and with his whole soul, he will in the relation
of a Father take care of his Children: and is not that a mercy?

3. Gospel Ordinances; Ezekiel. 37.26, 27. I will make a Covenant of peace with
them -- and will set my Sanctuary in the midst of them for evermore -- my
Tabernacle also shall be with them: i. e. they shall have the means of Grace,
the visible tokens of Gods presence; ways of Communion with God, and is not
this a rich mercy; David looked upon it as so in his banishment from Gods house,
and every Child of God prizeth it at a very high rate, this is one of the
mercies of the Covenant.

4. Seasonable afflictions, with a sanctified use of them: Psalm. 89.30, 32, 33.
if his Children forsake my Law -- then will I visit their transgressions with
the rod: it is infinite mercy that God will take the pains to whip the offending
Children: it is faithfulness to the great ends of the Covenant that God will
fetch in his wandering sheep by sharpest means: it is (as it were) a cruel mercy
to let men alone in sin to hasten their ruin: it is the Fathers care and
kindness to chide and correct his son, and it is as needful as food and raiment;
a Child of God would rather be scourged to God, than allured from God in the
paths of honey and butter: this Covenant-mercy does change the nature of the
affliction, and makes every thing to work for the souls best God: this bitter
potion is an useful healing medicine; this stinging Serpent is turned into an
harmless, nay helpful Rod, with which the Lord works wonders of mercy upon and
for the Covenanted soul.

But time would fail me to enumerate the large Catalogue of Covenant-mercies:
from this fountain stream, those choice mercies of reconciliation with God,
filiation, the spirit of adoption, free admission to the Throne of Grace,
acceptance of their persons, audience of their Prayers, assurance of Gods love,
peace of Conscience, communion of Saints, the benefits of Christ's Passion,
Resurrection, Ascension, Intercession, an interest in all the Promises, Christ's
purchases, the spirits motions and comforts, freedom from the wrath of God, the
curse of the Law, and eternal death, and lastly, an interest in, and at death a
full possession of the inheritance of the Saints in light: these and such like
are the mercies of the Covenant; in a word, all the goodness that is in God,
and all the good things of the world, that are communicable to the elect, are
to be accounted as the sure mercies of David: That Is for the first general head.

CHAP. III.
2. IN what respects these mercies of the Covenant are made sure: for this
observe, that there are some things absolutely and unchangeably sure, as to
their own nature by an intrinsecal necessity; thus God immutable essence is
fixed; with him there is no variableness nor shadow of change: thus though the
Heavens perish yet God endures, he is still the same and his years have no end,
Psalm. 102.24-27. thus God alone is the certain and unmovable center of the
whole Creation; he is the Roc^ of Ages, originally, infinitely, and
independently sure, and so is nothing besides: other things are sure jure
positivo, not of themselves, but by virtue of Gods appointmen^ and designation,
invariable, irrevocable so as it shall not be altered, otherwise ordered, no
new way contrived to save los^ man; thus the Scriptures are sure for ever O
Lord thy Word is settled in Heaven, Psalm. 119.89. Mat. 5.18.
and our Savior says, till heaven and earth pass, one jot or one tittle shall
in no wise pass from the Law, till all be fulfilled; and this way is the
Covenant of Grace, sure not of any intrinsecal necessity, resulting from its
nature, but free to be or not to be as the infinite God sees good; as a
Covenant it depends merely on Gods free grace for making it, God might have
forborne re-entring this New Covenant, but have dealt with man as with the
lapsed Angels; or he might have reserved to himself a power of revocation, to
have called in his patent, and shut up his Office of mercy, but now God has
fixed this as the only and everlasting way of Salvation: thus this Covenant is
as sure as that the World shall no more be totally drowned with Water, yea as
sure as the standing of the lasting Mountains and Hills; yet further, as sure
as the Ordinances of Sun by day, Moon and Stars by night, nay once more it is
as possible that the Heavens should be measured by the short span of a mortal
man, or the foundations of the earth searched out, as for the great and
unchangeable God to violate this Gospel Covenant with his dear Israel of elect
souls: Read this fully in Isa. 54.9, 10. Jer. 31.35, 36, 37.

But yet more particularly, this Covenant and these mercies of it, may be made
sure two ways to believers; viz.

1. Infallibly, so as not to miss of,

2. Immutably, so as never to lose these mercies.

1. These mercies of the Covenant are sure infallibly, i. e. there is a certain
number of elect selected souls set apart by the sovereign Lord of Heaven and
Earth to eternal happiness by our Lord Jesus Christ, and these shall have
interest in and possession of the forementioned mercies of David: that God has
chosen some to life as the end, and through Christ as the way of attaining that
end is clear in Scripture; Ephesians. 1.4. According as he has chosen us in him --
and ver. 5. having predestined us unto the adoption of Children by Jesus
Christ to himself: and 1 These. 5.9. for God has not appointed us unto wrath,
but to obtain salvation by our Lord Jesus Christ: electing and redeeming love
are of the same latitude and extent; whom God the Father had in his Council,
God the Son bore upon the bitter Cross: and those that are ordained to eternal
life shall believe, Act. 13.48. Which Text, says Calvin, teaches, that saving
faith depends upon Gods eternal election; hence also faith is called the faith
of Gods Elect, Tit. 1.1. because all the Elect, and none but the Elect obtain
it; for all men have not faith, it is peculiar to these selected persons.
Besides, God has laid the plot and platform of man's salvation upon the sure
foundation of his own free grace, on purpose to make these things firm and sure
to elect souls, so that their unworthiness shall not hinder the certain
execution of his eternal Decrees, Romans 4.16. therefore it is of faith that it
might be by Grace, to the end the promise might be sure to all the seed, i. e.
that the Covenant with all the mercies of it might be made good to all the
heirs of promise: the election, (or elect souls) has obtained it, but the rest
are blinded, Romans 11.7. hence, says the Apostle, 2 Timothy 2.19. Dico, novit
Domiaus qui sunt ejus, ipsae oves aliquando seipsas nesciunt, sed pastor novit
cas, secundum electionem ovium ante constitutionem mundi. Aug. in Joh. 10.
the foundation of God stands sure, the Lord knows them that are his: he
knows these sheep even before they know themselves, according to his sure
election before the foundation of the world: hence also, God would not have the
enjoyment of these mercies to depend upon man's sorry, mutable, and inconstant
will, nor upon any works wrought by man, as the whole strain and tenor of the
Gospel holds forth: and indeed if the whole stress lay on man's free will, it
would bring us back to a Covenant of Works; and if it were possible for any to
attain these, that man were the casting cause of his own salvation, and then
what need of any Redeemer? besides, it might so fall out, (yea and would
certainly) that these mercies might be applied to none, for (conditio nihil
ponit in esse) that which is not effectual without a contingent condition upon
which it depends, the particular motion of this man's will, and so of another
toward God, and closing with promises (being in his own choice) is doubtful
and uncertain, and so must needs be the privileges which depend upon that
condition: therefore they that make these mercies possibly every ones, make
them certainly no ones: the truth is, God has not left the enjoyment of these
Covenant-mercies to the choice or refusal of the fickle or inconstant will of
the creature at his pleasure, but (though he does not violence to the will, but
of unwilling makes it willing) God himself and Jesus Christ by the holy Spirit
has engaged himself to bring souls home by converting grace certainly and
infallibly, though sweetly and suitably to the nature of a rational creature:
hence effectual calling and instating the elect in these mercies is not left at
rovers, may-bees, or hap-hazard, but it is put beyond all peradventure; so that
there is a Must, and Shall annexed to it, Joh. 10.16. other sheep I have -- them
also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice -- Joh. 6.37. All that the
father gives me, (i. e. by election) shall come to me, (i. e. by faith and
repentance:) the God of Heaven has engaged himself for it, and he is a God of
truth to make good his word, and of infinite power, and he works and who can
let it: Videsis Ames Coron. ad Coll. Hag. adv^rsus Remens. Artic. prim. de
electione. Cap. 4. -- p. 15. etc.
he works all things according to the council of his own will, Ephesians. 1.11. All
that God the Father has given to Christ in the free election, the Son has
undertaken to bring to glory by his mediatory administration: this is the
first, these mercies are sure infallibly, the heir of glory shall partake of
them.

2. They are sure immutably, not any that do partake of these mercies shall
ever lose them: they shall always have them and shall ^ever be deprived of
them: there are in^eed some common gifts of the spirit that God may revoke and
take away, as the gifts that Saul had; but these gifts of Grace and ^his
effectual calling are without repentance, Romans 11.29. he will never repent of,
or retract ^hese precious donations, Mary's better part shall never be taken
from her; worldly riches ^ay be lost, but spiritual mercies are durable ^iches:
God the Author of these mercies is ^mmutable, with him there is no variableness
^or shadow of change: he receives no varia^ion from the contingent events of
second ^auses: the Lord will not forsake his people for ^is great names sake,
because it has pleased ^he Lord to make them his people, 1 Samuel ^2.22. he
hates putting away, he will not ^is-inherit his Children for misdemeanors, ^e
knows their frame, sees and pitties their ^eaknesses, raises them out of
falls, and ^eals their backslidings: Christ Jesus the ^urchaser of these
mercies is the Amen, Rev. 3.14. Heb. 13.8. Isa. 63.1. Joh. 10.28, 29. Joh. 17.
the ^aithful and true witness, the same yesterday, ^o day, and for ever:
mighty to save, a merci^ul and faithful High Priest: none can pluck them out of
his hands: he will lose none of ^hese that his father has given him: he will
^ave to the uttermost: This our Joshua will ^ring the elect souls to the Canaan
of eternal ^est: The principle of Grace, and these mer^ies themselves are of a
durable nature; Grace ^s an immortal seed, a never-dying root, ^rincipium
continuativum, Joh. 7.38. He that ^elieveth in me, as the Scripture has said,
out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water: though Grace is loseable in
its own nature, yet not in event, because God upholds it: the house built on
the rock shall stand immovable, Prove. 10.25. 1 J^h. 2.17.
the righteous is an everlasting foundation: he that does the will of God
abides for ever: yea he has eternal life abiding in him: But may not they
depart from God? no not totally and finally, for God has put his fear in their
hearts that they shall not depart from him, Jer. 32.40. they may sin and
provoke God to withdraw the sense of his love, they may lose their standing,
comforts, and some degrees of Grace, but never be stripped naked wholly of
these sure mercies of David; God has secret hold of them, and they have more
hold of him than others have; they are restless and dissatisfied till they
enjoy God, and these mercies be clear to them: this Golden Chain stretches it
self from everlasting, it begins in free Election, and ends in final salvation,
whom he predestinates them he calls, justifies, glorifies, Romans 8.29, 30. it is
horrid sacrilege to pluck one link from this golden Chain; God is the finisher
as well as the Author of faith: it is not within the compass of any finite
being to rob a gracious soul of the love of God, or stop the channel of his
Free Grace to the Covenanted soul: Paul can make a bold and brave challenge^
Romans 8.35, 38, 39. Who shall separate us from the love of God? and he makes a
sufficient enumeration of all things that were likely to conquer the believing
soul, and yet concludes, that in all these things we are more than conquerours
through Christ; there are in the word sweet promises that may answer all
Arminian Cavils and unbelieving fears concerning perseverance, which many
choice champions have produced and managed with dexterity and success: See Mr.
Prins Treat of Perseverance; Dr. Pride. Lect. 7. De persevsanct. Dr. Ames Coron.
Artic. 5. De perseverantia.

CHAP. IV.
3. THE third Head to be opened is more particularly to show what is the way of
making sure these Covenant-mercies, how God does it; Now there are several
steps of making a thing sure amongst men, and God has used the same means (and
some degrees more) to make these mercies sure to the Children of men.

1. Men are wont to pass their word; When they promise any thing upon the word
of an honest man, they expect credit; and among men this is current, and the
God of Heaven is worthy to be believed upon his bare word (if I may so speak)
for he is a God that cannot lie nor deny himself, yea let God be true and every
man a liar; even a Balaam is convinced of it, and must profess it, Numb. 23.19.
God is not a man that he should ly -- has he said, and shall he not do it? or
has he spoken and shall he not make it good? the unchangeable God has engaged
his Word in the New Covenant: the Patriarchs of old gave credit to all that God
spoke by dreams, visions and revelations, as Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.

2. Hence Ne^. 9 38. We make a sure Covenant, and write it.
Men use to give greater evidence by subscribing their hand, and putting their
mind and promise into Writing; hence the expression and practice of giving
Letters of credence, and we use to say men are mortal, give it me under your
hand, that will abide, (for litera scripta manet:) well, our gracious God has
condescended to subscribe his promises under his own hand, the hand of his
blessed Spirit; the word of God is upon record, therefore whatsoever was
written, it is for our learning (I may add satisfaction) that we through
patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope, Romans 15.4. he has
given assurance to us of these things in the word of truth, for this cause was
the Gospel written, that we may know the certainty of these things, Luke 1.4.
and that we might believe, Joh. 20.31. who dare now dispute or doubt of the
truth and sureness of Gospel-promises? since Heaven and Earth may pass away,
but one jot or one tittle shall in no wise pass from the Law till all be
fulfilled, Mat. 5.18.

3. Men use to call in Witnesses for further confirmation; some important
businesses require several witnesses, Deuteronomy. 19.15.
its a standing rule, at the mouth of two or three witnesses shall the matter
be established; well, the God of Heaven has confirmed his Gospel to us by
three and three witnesses, there is three in Heaven, the glorious persons of the
Blessed Trinity, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, and these three are
one, one in essence, though three persons, 1 Job. 5.7. these bear Record of
Christ's Godhead; and there are three that bear witness in earth, ver. 8. these
testify of Christ's manhood, the Spirit, i. e. say some, his breathing out his
soul and spirit in his giving up the Ghost, and water, and blood, that came out
of his side when it was pierced with a spear, that show he was real man, and
that he did really dye; Hanc sequor sententiam hoc loco, nec puto aliam posse
adduci veriorem. Aretius in loc. See Mar'orate in loc.
Aretius interprets these three latter of the spirit in the Ministry of the
Word, the Water of Baptism, and the Blood of the Lords Supper representing
Christ's meritorious Bloodshed, and still this interpretation further confirms
the Gospel Covenant, and consequently the mercies of it.

4. Men use to give assurance to others by setting to their seal; hence the
practice amongst us of setting a seal to bills, bonds, leases, purchases,
letters patents, and this seal has usually persons cognizance or Coat of
Arms, or some impression upon it, and leaves the impression upon the Wax; the
God of Heaven adds his seal, there is the broad seal of the new Covenant,
Baptism and the Lords Supper, given and appointed purposely for the
confirmation of our faith, and as^uring of our hearts of the truth of the
pro^mises: as Circumcision is called a seal of the Righteousness of faith, Romans
4.11. for by ^ese seals both the Grace of God is confirmed to us, and holy
impressions wrought in the hearts of the elect: there are also privy seals the
seal of this blessed spirit in our hearts Ephesians. Ephesians. 4.30.2 Cor. 1 22.
1.13. -- sealed with that holy spir^ of promise; hereby Gods Children are
disti^guished from wicked men, and confirmed i^ the truth of the Gospel; yea it
bears witness with their spirit that they are the Chi^dren of God Romans 8.16
this is an elegant sim^litude, for all civil Charters and Testamen^ become
authentic by the addition of a sea^ and the seal in ^ormer times was the note
i^ Letters by which the Author was known, an^ a seal is the mark whereby
genuine things a^ discerned from counterfeit; all these are the uses of the
spirits sealing, to confirm o^^ hearts in the truth of God in his promise^
against all the temptations of Satan; the blessed sealing is more prevalent for
our confirmation than all philosophical reasons o^ demonstrations.

5. Another way to beget assurance amo^^ men is a solemn Oath, and we know an
Oa^ for confirmation is to them an end of all stris^ Heb. 6.16. and thus God
willing more abu^dantly to show unto the heirs of promise, the immutability of
his Council confirmed it b^ an Oath, (...). Inv^tat praemio salutem jurans,
etiam vivo dicens, c^pit credi sibi: O beatos nos que^ causa deus jurat! O
mis^rrimos sinec juranti domino credimus. Tert^ de poen.
or interposed himself by an Oath^ it is very observable to consider the form
(...) the Oath, God swears by himself, who (...) the living and true God, he
could swear by ^o greater, and it is observed, that two things make a thing
more credible; 1. the quali^y of the person speaking. 2. The manner of the
speech. Now the form of the Oath ^n Genesis 22.16. is exceeding emphatical to
Abraham; partly because of the asseveration surely, Genesis 22.16, 17. (...) Est
particula ca^salis and coaditionalis.
partly because of the duplication in blessing I will bless thee, if I speak
^t, it shall be done; moreover the form of the expression in Genesis is
strange, for it is thus, Quid tibi prodest si Deus se juram^nto o^st^ing^t, si
tu haec quasi commun^m audi^ns fabulam transeas? -- Jurare di^it^r deus, ut tu
audiens paveas and intre^iscas and metu consternatus inquiras quid illud tantum
est, pro ^o deus jurare dicitur: Or^g. Homil. 9. super Genesis 22.
if I bless thee, thou shall be blessed, or because I bless thee, or if I do
not bless thee (which is the form of an Oath, Heb. ^4.3.) as if he should say,
then let me not be true, just, yea let me not be God; God pawns his
faithfulness upon it, and may he not then be believed? but for what end is
this? it is to confirm his promises, and assure the hearts of all the heirs of
promise that he intends to do, and will accomplish what he has spoken, that
they might have strong consolation, and that he might take away all doubts and
haesitation; and all this he does for the heirs of promise, he would not have
done thus for others, but he does this and much more to satisfy his doubting
Children.

6. Yet further, men use to give a pawn, a pledge to assure others of their
real purpose to make good the bargain, and this is part of the payment; this
also does our gracious God, 2 Cor. 1.22. Cap 5.5.
Ephesians. 1.14. his spirit is the earnest of our inheritance, until the
redemption of the purchased possession: an earnest is used in purchasing Land,
in hiring of Servants, and in contracting Marriage, and when ever the Lord puts
his Holy Spirit into the heart, its as a pledge of all the mercies of the
Covenant and of our eternal inheritance: and though some men may be unfaithful,
so far as rather to lose their earnest, than make good their bargain, yet we
may be assured God will not do so, for it is as impossible that any saving
grace of the Spirit should be cast into hell, as it is for any sin to enter
into Heaven: God will not lose his pledge, but fetch the soul to Heaven when he
has fetched the heart to himself; Grace is the Prologue and Praeludium to
Glory, the first Resurrection leads the van to the second; a gracious change
prepares for a glorious change, Romans 8.11. if the spirit of him that raised up
Jesus from the dead dwell in you, he that raised up Christ from the dead shall
also quicken your mortal bodies by his spirit that dwells in you: the spirit
confirms the promises, and we need not fear any danger of retractation, not but
that the promises are firm enough, but he would establish our hearts, in the
faith thereof and acquiescence therein, lest any question it.

7. Another way whereby men testify their cordial resolution to make good
promises is, by doing a great part of the work, which gives real evidence they
will do the rest; he that promises to give another a thousand pounds, Should a
King promise to erect some College, and give liberal maintenance to Students
in it, we are certain by an humane faith, that he will do such a thing th^ugh
it be not begun; but if the foundations be in laying, we see its execution in
part, and are assured it will be finished. Ba^us on E^h. c. 1. v. 17. p. 144.
and has already given him nine hundred, may he not rationally trust him for
the rest? or suppose there were but one pound, or a penny behind, there is
great reason to conside in him for what is wanting: why truly the Lord has
performed the greatest part of the promises of the Covenant; the great promise
of the Covenant was, that the seed of the Woman should break the Serpents head;
that the Son of God should be incarnate, be in man's stead in life and death to
satisfy justice, fulfill the Law, and by his death bring in everlasting
rightcousness, and he has already done it: now says the Apostle, Romans 8.32.
He that spared not his own Son, See Romans 4.8, 9, 10. Qui misit unigen^tum
immisit spiritum, p^omisit vultum; quid tandem tibi negaturus ost? Bern.
but delivered him up for us all, how shall be not with him also freely give us
all things? God is beforehand with us; yea, if we be indeed heirs of promise,
he has made good good another grand branch of the New Covenant in giving the
conditions of the Covenant, faith, repentance, and new obedience; so that the
main business is already done, the writings are made, sealed, signed and
delivered, there wants nothing but actual possession; nay there is a Seisin and
delivery of part of the inheritance, and dare we not trust God for the
remainder? certainly we have good reason so to do: the contrary is unreasonable.

8. God has gone another step, which is, to work many Miracles for the
confirmation of these sure mercies, this is a degree further than man can reach
to make any thing sure; hence says our sweet Savior; Joh. 5.36. I have
greater witness than that of John, for the works which the Father has given me
to finish, the same works that I do, bear witness of me, that the father has
sent me: this Text shows the true and proper end and efficacy of Christ's
miracles; Ig^tur non s^^^ muta s^d vo^ahssira, ideo; non simpliciter intuenda,
sed and intellig^nter audienda. Marl. in loc.
they are not dumb shows, but have a voice, and cry aloud for faith in the
intelligent observer; yea and they were wont to beget faith in the spectatours,
as Nathaniel believed upon Christ's telling him of his conference at a distance,
Joh. 1.48, 49. the beginning of his miracles manifested his glory, and his
Disciples believed in him, Joh. 2.11. and others comparing the doctrine of John
with Christ's Miracles believed on him, Joh. 10.41. and indeed the Argument of
Miracles is a cogent convincing Argument, for no man can do these real Miracles
except God be with him, Joh. 3.2. Certainly, the strange things wrought by
Christ ought to assure our hearts of the truth of the Gospel, and consequently
of the sureness of these Covenant-mercies. But upon this subject you have
evident and abundant demonstrations from the pen of Reverend Mr. Baxter, in his
Saints Rest, Part 2. in the Preface, and in page 215. to 234. to which I referr
you: the truth is, God has graciously condescended to confirm the Gospel by
many infallible miracles which none can question, and all this to make sure to
the elect these Covenant-mercies, therefore they are inexcusable that slight
this way of the Gospels confirmation; See Heb. 2.3, 4.

9. Another step that God has gone is the various ways that God has taken to
make us know these sure mercies, and thereby to assure us thereof; As, Mat.
3.17. Cap. 17.5.
1. An audible intelligible voice from Heaven, at Christ's Baptism, and in his
Transfiguration, this is my beloved Son in whom I am well-pleased, and this
voice the Apostle Peter says he heard in the Holy Mount, 2 Pet. 1.17, 18. so
that these Gospel mercies are not devised Fables, but divine Oracles of
undoubted truth. 2. The constant preachings of honest and unbiassed men, that
were eyewitnesses of his glory; they give clear evidence of their hatred of
evil, love of truth and goodness: and they could not be perverted by any
selfish ends of profit, pleasure, or honor; for these were not proposed,
promised or attained: Nay affliction and persecution was their known portion,
and therefore certainly could not, would not cousen the world with lies to get
that which was not attainable in that way. 3. God has adorned men with
admirable gifts to enable them to demonstrate the certainty and excellency of
these Covenant-mercies; extraordinary gifts in the Apostles days, as
extemporary prophesying, 1 Cor. 12.8, 9, 10.
singing, healing diseases, working miracles, discerning spirits, diverse kinds
of tongues: so that all Nations might hear these [ magnalia dei] in their own
dialect; Act. 2.6. Ephesians. 4.8.
and now they are translated into all languages: and God has continued to
distribute ministerial gifts for the Churches satisfaction and edification. 4.
Yea, he sent his own Son to be the Preacher as well as Purchaser of these sure
mercies; he spoke at sundry times, and in diverse manners in times past by the
Prophets, but in these last days he has spoken to us by his Son, Heb. 1.12.
the more to conciliate in us reverence and credence; for he says, surely they
will reverence my Son: certainly he will declare to us the whole counsel of
God, for he was in the bosom of the Father, and came from thence for that very
end to declare Gods mind, Joh. 1.18.5 Yea he has raised Jesus Christ from the
dead; so that we have a Preacher sent from the grave to assure us of the truth
of these high mysteries and sweet mercies; so the rich man could say in hell,
if one went to them from the dead, they will repent, and believe, Romans 16.30.
now our dear Savior himself was dead and is alive, and as he is declared to be
the Son of God by his Resurrection from the dead, Romans 1.4.
so after his Resurrection he declared the great things of God, confirming his
Disciples in the truth of things formerly delivered, and giving further
testimonies and instructions, Luke 24.44-49.6. Still another way of
manifestation is clear and crystal Ordinances, in which as in a fair glass we
may behold both the face of God, and the choicest mercies of the Covenant; here
you may not only hear the voice of God, but see Jesus Christ evidently set
forth, crucified before your eyes, Gal. 3.1. in the Sacrament of his blessed
body and blood are obvious Gods Grace in giving Christ, Christ's love in giving
himself, his body broken for our food, his blood shed for the remission of our
sins, and all the benefits of this new Covenant. 7. Another way more yet of the
Lords manifesting these mercies, and so making them sure is the sanctifying and
satisfying illumination of souls by his holy spirit, by this holy unction they
know all things, 1 John 2.20. God has revealed them unto us by his spirit, in
1 Cor. 2.10, 12. now the spirit comes with conviction and demonstration,
answers all the souls doubts and cavils, and leaves it without dispute and
haesitancy: so that the believing soul cannot but say, they are sure mercies;
he dare not deny this for a world.

10. Yet there is one other way whereby God does make sure these mercies of the
Covenant, and that is, marriage-knot, a mutual and matrimonial engagement in
the perpetual and inviolable bond of the Covenant, whereby Christ and the soul
are inseparably linked together, and this relates to the particular application
of these Covenant-mercies, and compleats all the former; for says the poor
soul, I do not question but these mercies are sure in themselves, in their own
nature, and sure to some, but are they so to me? what ways may I be assured of
my title thereunto and interest therein? now this the Lord does make good by
entering into that sweet and familiar relation with his people of marriage, Isa.
54.5. Jer. 3.14. Romans 7.4.
thy maker is thy husband, and I am married to you, says the Lord, a believing
soul is dead to the Law, that he may be married to Christ, and our heavenly
husband hates putting away, Mal. 2.16.
once married to Christ and for ever married to him, death it selt breaks not
this marriage-knot, nay it fastens and heightens it; here Christ and the soul
are but as it were contracted, there the marriage is solemnized with the
acclamations of glorious Angels, and glorified Saints, for, says the Apostle,
2 Cor. 11.2. I have espoused you to one husband, that I may present you as a
chaste Virgin to Christ: now souls are fitting for that great solemnity, when
the marriage of the Lamb shall come that the bride is made ready; Rev. 19.7.
she is making her self ready in this world, she is married at the illustrious
day of Christ's second appearing: so then this marriage-knot cannot be broken
since it is completed in glory. But yet more particularly, consider that
remarkable Text in Hosea 2.19, 20. wherein the mercies of the Covenant are made
over in a way of matrimonial relation; And I will betroth thee unto me for
ever, etc. in which Scripture there are four things that may assure the heart
of the firmness of these Covenant-mercies, 1. The Author and Husband I, the
great Jehovah, the infinite God, the Creator of Heaven and Earth, who speaks
and it is done, who works, and who can let it? it is he that says, I will
betroth thee, and who can forbid the banes of Matrimony? who is able to hinder
this conjunction? 2. Here is the doubling of the phrase for greater certainty
and security, I will betroth thee, yea I will betroth thee; fear not it shall
be done: nay the third time it is repreated, v. 20. I will even betroth thee,
what can any say more to assure a suspicious bride of a firm contract and
marriage, q. d. I will have thee, thou shall have me, do not distrust me, we
will be married; all this God says to meet with the incredulity of a guilty
soul, that through fear desponds, and dare scarce look upon it as possible, or
credible: Yet, 3. Here is the term and date of the Marriage, it was not for a
week, month, year, seven years, no nor an hundred years only; nay it is not
only during life, as other Marriages are made, but it is for ever, unto all
eternity, it never fails, it lasts as long as the soul lasts; that is a long
day, other marriages are temporary, terminable, faileable, Romans 7.2.
and death loses a Woman from the Law of her Husband; but this is marriage
confirmed, and completed at death, and endures for evermore. And then 4. The
terms, conditions, and the manner of Marriage speak the sureness of this
Covenant, and the mercies thereof, observe it; Loving Kindness is the motive to
it, and mercies are the souls jointure, righteousness, judgment, faithfulness
are the Writings (as it were) and evidences, to assure these forementioned
conditions: many persons marry such as they ought not to marry, as such as are
too near of kin, and contrary to consent of friends, etc. and so are divorced,
but my marrying thee shall be in righteousness; many marry in a sudden passion
of affection, and repent when they have done, but I will marry thee in
judgment; many marry fraudulenty cheating the persons whom they marry, lead
them into a snare and then leave them; but I will marry thee in faithfulness,
integrity and fidelity, we will never part, and though thou be unworthy now and
may transgress, yet i will fetch thee home, pardon thee, and maintain this
marriage-knot with invariable constancy and fidelity; What can more be said to
assure the believing soul of the sureness of Covenant-mercies? Besides
consider, loving kindness is the beginning, middle, and end of the match, he
fetches arguments out of his own bosom to enter into this parlee, and after
he has contracted this friendship, and intimate relation, the same
loving kindness will persuade him to maintain it; nay now his truth and
faithfulness is engaged, and he will be faithful in performing all his
promises: Consider that notable Text, Mic. 7.20. thou will perform the truth to
Jacob, and the mercy to Abraham which thou have sworn unto our fathers from the
days of old: mark, it is mercy to Abraham because made with him, but its truth
to Jacob, and now is a kind of debt and must be paid, and made good. God is a
free agent, yet he binds himself by promise, Reddis debita nulli debens.
and so becomes a debtor to his Creature, or rather to himself on the behalf of
his Creature: thus does God assure to his Saints and spouse the dowry and
jointure of mercies that he promises to them at this contracting of a marriage
betwixt himself and souls: See Zech. 8.8.

Thus I have dispatched the ways that God takes to make these mercies of the
Covenant sure to all the heirs of promise.

CHAP. V.
4. THE last head in the doctrinal part by way of illustration is, to show how
these Covenant-mercies are made sure, in or by or through Jesus Christ.

Now for clearing of this, observe these four things with reference to Jesus
Christ, whereby these mercies are made sure. 1. His Hypostatical union. 2. His
spiritual Unction. 3. The Covenant of Redemption. 4. The execution of Christ's
office in the work of man's Redemption.

1. Consider the mysterious and stupendous union of the two natures in Jesus
Christ, whereby he is both God and Man united together in one person; by the
former he has ability, by the latter a capacity to make the Covenant sure to
the elect; so that now it is impossible the work should miscarry, as God he is
omnipotent and cannot fail or fa^ short of his end, as man he is suitable to
hi^ work, and fitted with a body both for activ^ and passive obedience; so that
there is nothing required of man's nature, but Chri^ (being in our stead) did
effectually manag^ it, for the Apostle says, Col. 2.9. that i^ him dwells
all the fullness of the Godhead bodily, [(...) i.e. (...)] i. e. naturally,
personally, in such a way as he is in no other Creature, in him we live, move,
an^ have our being as Creatures, but God is said to dwell in the Saints in a
higher manner, as his Children; In aliis sanctis habitat Deus ut in templo, and
Organo, effective, operative, in Christo substantialiter. Aret. in loc.
but the Godhead is not said to dwell in any man except Jesus Christ, God and
man: God dwells in the Saints by his spirit as in a Temple or Organ
effectively, operatively, in Christ essentially, substantially: the word was
made flesh, and sometimes there were sparklings forth of his glory and majesty,
so that the Disciples beheld his glory as that of the only begotten of the
Father, Joh. 1.14. well then, since this is an undeniable mystery, that God
was manifested in the flesh, and has undertaken to manage the work of our
Redemption in both natures, certainly he will make sure work in what concerns
him, for so says the Prophet, Isa. 42.4. he shall not fail nor be discouraged,
till he have set judgment in the earth -- he has the powerful Hand of an
infinite God, therefore he is mighty to save, and he has the innocent Nature
of a finite man, therefore he is fit to suffer: that is the first.

2. Consider the complete and abundant unction of Jesus Christ, whereby he has
both sufficiency and efficiency to go through his work, and authority for it
also, the Scripture tells us that Jesus Christ was anointed with oil, and
that above his fellows, Heb. 1.9. Christ was not only qualified with gifts and
ornaments fit for office, but also to furnish the souls of all the elect, and
that both for sanctification and edification, Jesus Christ has the spirit but
not as others have it, for the Saints have but a scantling and small measure
thereof, but God gives not the spirit by measure unto him, Ephesians. 4.7.
Joh. 3.34. to every one of us is given grace according to the measure of the
gift of Christ, but Christ has it above all measure; for he has the whole
spirit substantially, he is and has the treasury of Grace, a storehouse of
riches to supply indigent Creatures, in him are hid all the treasures of wisdom
and knowledge, Col. 2.3. therefore of his fullness do we receive grace for
grace, Joh. 1.16. it pleased the Father that in him should all fullness dwell,
Col. 1.19. and this is laid up on purpose for the supply of his members, that
from the head may be conveyed influences through the whole body, Ephesians. 4.13,
14, 15, 16. besides he is anointed with authority for these supplies, Ephesians.
1.22, 23. he has put all things under his feet, and gave him to be the head
over all things to the Church, which is his body, the fullness of him that
fills all in all: hence he tells his Disciples, that all power is given to
him in Heaven and Earth, Mat. 28.18. add to all this his fidelity, that as
Moses was faithful as a steward, much more is Christ as a Son faithful to him
that appointed him, Heb. 3.2-6. Well now, lay all these together, and surely we
need not question the certainty of Covenant-mercies. Since Christ has
sufficiency, authority, and fidelity, and is thus abundantly qualified for
carrying on this Gospel-design, he both can and will make good the mercies of
the Covenant to the heirs of the promise; especially considering,

3. The Covenant of Redemption, which is an admirable insuring act of
free grace, engaging all the persons of the Sacred Trinity to carry on this
work, especially God the Son of whom we are now speaking, this Covenant of
Redemption is that mutual compact betwixt God the Father and the Son concerning
the saving of lost man, wherein each did undertake to act his part in this
great affair, as thus, God the father does elect a certain number whom Christ
was to Redeem, he was to part with his beloved Son out of his bosom whiles he
came to the earth to do this great work, Isa 42.1, 4, 6.
he was to uphold him, encourage him, put his spirit into him, call him in
rightousness, hold his hand, keep him, and give him for a Covenant of the
people, give him to see his seed; Isa. 53.10, 11. Cap. 49.5.
and though they be but few in comparison of the World, yet he will make him
glorious, and in time he will satisfy him in giving him the Heathen for his
inheritance and the uttermost parts of the earth for his possession: Psalm. 2.8.
this is the engagement on the Fathers part, and then the Lord Jesus, the Son
of God promised the Father that he would assume the humane nature, and so
become man, putting himself into the sinners stead, becoming his surety,
fulfill all righteousness, by obeying the Moral Law, suffering for our breach
of it, be betrayed, imprisoned, accused, condemned, crucified, buried, that he
should rise from the dead, ascend into Heaven, sit at Gods right hand,
intercede for Saints, etc. this part that Christ acted is fully laid down in
Isa. 53. throughout: this was the great transaction betwixt the Father and the
Son from all Eternity: that there was such a mutual agreement; See Titus 1.2.
That this is no singular Doctrine, but opened before, See Mr. Bulkly
Gospel Covenant. part. 1. chapter 4. p. 31. to p. 46 where it is fully opened -- A
so Mr. David Dickson in his Therapentica sac. Book 1. chap. 4. p. 23. to page
71.
in hope of eternal life which God that cannot lie promised before the world
began, to whom did God promise any thing before man was Created? certainly he
promised something to Jesus Christ concerning man's Redemption as
beforementioned; such a gracious plot was laid, and compact made betwixt the
Father and the Son, and he cannot lie nor deny himself: So 2 Timothy 1.9. who has
saved us -- according to his own purpose and grace which was given us in Christ
Jesus before the world began, i. e. as Christ was a common person, as head,
instead of the elect, so we were given to him by this Covenant, and that from
all eternity, but how come we to know this, that are but of Yesterday; and so
dim-sighted that we cannot see afar off? Why ver. 10. it is now made manifest
by the appearing of our Savior Jesus Christ, who has abolished death, and
has brought life and immortality to light through the Gospel: for Christ
reveals all the secrets that were locked up in the bosom of the Father. Well
then, if this was the mutual stipulation betwixt the Father and the Son, there
is no question but they will be faithful to each other; in the Old Testament
God the Father trusted God the Son upon his promise to lay down his life, and
so brought thousands of souls to Heaven before ever Christ was incarnate or
suffered; and now when Christ has gone through the greatest part of his task,
he trusts God the Father to make good his part, that he may fully see his
seed, prolong his days, and that the pleasure of the Lord may prosper in his
hand; and certainly there cannot be any failing on either part. Now this
Covenant of Redemption is the Platform and foundation of the Covenant of Grace
betwixt God and the Elect, there is the same number, and the like terms
proportionably in both; hence it is that although a believer find an
unfaithful, treacherous and unbelieving heart in himself daily departing from
the living God, yet this Covenant is built upon an higher and firmer Covenant
betwixt God the Father and God the Son, which cannot be broken and disanulled;
the Father and Son cannot deceive or be unfaithful to each other; hence then it
comes to pass that the Covenant and the mercies thereof are so sure: I shall
conclude this head with that notable passage of Christ's to his Father upon this
very account, Joh. 17.4. I have finished the work which thou gave me to do,
i. e. I have hitherto made good and performed the conditions of the agreement
on my part, ver. 5. and now, O Father, glorify me with thine own self, i. e.
make good thy part, in my exaltation: this with reference to Christ's persen,
then for his seed and members, he tells the Father that he had performed his
part to them, in manifesting his name to them, praying for them, preserving of
them, and now when he was to leave them, he desires the Father to do his part
of the work in keeping those whom he had given him, ver. 11. in sanctifying and
saving them, 17.24. and can we imagine but that God, will be faithful to his
Son on the behalf of his Saints, certainly he will; for as they were Redeemed
by the Son, so they were Elected by the Father, and as God the Father gave them
to Jesus Christ by election, ver. 6. and Jesus Christ dyed for them, and so
Redeemed them, so God the Son resignes them up again to the Father, who will
certainly keep them by his power through faith unto salvation.

4. Another thing considerable concerning the insuring of Covenant-mercies by
and through Jesus Christ is, that these are most fully assured to us by the
execution of Christ's Mediatory Offices, both in his estate of humiliation and
exaltation: Let us here consider, 1. Christ's Offices. 2. His States.

1. Christ's Offices are of three sorts, as 1. Sacerdotal. 2. Prophetical. 3.
Regal.

1. As Priest, Christ insures to us many Covenant mercies, for he has put
himself in our stead, offered himself as a propitiatory Sacrifice to satisfy
divine justice, which is a sweet smelling savor, Ephesians. 5.2.
and of infinite value: hence it is that Christ is called a merciful and
faithful High Priest in things pertaining to God, to make reconciliation for
the sins of the people, Heb. 2.17. certainly remission of sins is one of the
grand mercies of the New Covenant, and this Christ assures as Priest.

2. As Prophet he reveals to us the will of his Father, opens to us the sealed
Book, annoints our eyes by his blessed spirit, the spirit of Christ inspired
the Prophets of the Old Testament, 1 Pet. 1.10, 11.
and the Apostles of the new in writing Scripture, and Ministers in Preaching
the Gospel, and believers in discerning the meaning of the Word, and beauty of
Christ: it is Christ as Prophet that writes his Law in Believers hearts which
is one of the great mercies of the new Covenant: that inlightens dark minds,
and unlocks to us Divine Mysteries, and brings us from darkness to light.

3. As King. Christ Jesus does what he pleases for the good of his Church,
converting and subduing souls to himself, granting to them the spirit of power,
love and of a sound mind, softening their hard and stony hearts mastering their
high and sturdy Wills, awing, ordering, and centring their unruly, roving and
raging affections, subduing their strong corruptions, regulating their
conversations, begetting and increasing their Graces, supporting them under and
sanctifying their afflictions, -- all which Jesus Christ as King works for his
Covenanted ones.

Yet more particularly in the second place, let us consider how our
Covenant-mercies are assured to us by Jesus Christ with reference to his two
estates of humiliation and exaltation.

1. In his estate of exinanition, and humiliation, here I might run through the
instances of his contemptible birth, his despicable life ( i. e. to a carnal
eye) his being in the form of a servant, having no form nor comeliness, his
hunger, thirst, wanderings, revilings of men, wrath of God, rage of Devils, all
these confirm the Covenant, if we believe the history of the Gospel; but
there is one thing more that put all out of doubt, and that is his real, ready
and voluntary death, for as he had a power, so he had a will to lay down his
life, and he dyed for the confirmation of this Covenant, and all the mercies
thereof, a pregnant proof of this you have in Heb. 9.15. the sum of which Text
is, that Jesus Christ the great Mediator of this new Covenant has suffered
death for the sins of the elect that were committed against the first Covenant,
whereby all true believers might have the benefits of the new Covenant more
surely and immutably made over to them, and this he further comfirmes by the
parallel case of a Testament and the Testatour even amongst men, ver. 16, 17.
where a Testament is, there must also of necessity be the death of the Testator
-- no man can challenge a Legacy till he prove the death of him that left it,
Thus the Apostle argues, Gal. 3.15 Erethren I sp^ak after the manner of men:
though it be but a man's Co^e^ant; yet if it be co^^irmed, to man disanulleth or
adds thereto.
for while he is alive he may alter his Will at his pleasure, or as reason
requires, but when the Testator is dead, the heirs may look after their
Legacies: Jesus Christ is the Testator, Saints are the heirs, the Legacies are
these mercies of the Covenant; now the Testator is dead, the Legacies come
clear, and the heirs of promise may claim their interest therein, there is no
alteration of the Will when the Testator is dead, there is no reversing, true
Christians now come to enjoy their estates; Christ emptied himself that we
might be filled, he lost his life that we might live, he became poor that we
through his poverty might be rich, 2 Cor. 8.9.

2. Christ's exaltation does much more assure to us Covenant-mercies which
consists in, 1. His Resurrection. 2. His Ascension; and both these do
abundantly confirm this to us.

1. Christ's rising again from the Grave assures us of the certainty of these
mercies; for though he was dead, yet he is alive, and so lives to be his own
Executor, if Christ had been detained Prisoner by the King of Terrors, we
might groundedly suspect that justice were not satisfied, nor mercies fully
purchased; but he was delivered for our offenses, and raised again for our
justification, Romans 4.25. and now he has conquered death, and through death he
has destroyed him that had the power of death, that is the devil, and so has
delivered the heirs of promise from the fear of death, Heb. 2.14, 15. nay and
by his resurrection he raises us to a new life of holiness here, and a blessed
life of happiness hereafter, Romans 6.4. with cap. 8.11. 2 Cor. 4.14.
Christ's Resurrection abundantly clears the Saints from all accusations and
condemnation, Romans 8.33, 34. in this therefore we may rejoice and triumph as
the foundtain of our consolation; See Act. 2.24, 25, 26.

2. Christ's Ascension into Heaven insures and secures Covenant-mercies to us,
both as it sets him in the holy of holies, far above the reach of men and
Devils, and as he went before to prepare a place for us, Joh. 14 2.
he bids Mary to tell the Disciples, Joh. 20.17. go to my Brethren and say unto
them, I ascend to my Father and your Father, to my God and your God, q. d. now
you may be assured of your interest in God in a Covenant-way, for now I have
done that work on earth that obstructed your fellowship and obscured your
interest; so that now you may call him your God, and come unto him as your
Father, without misgivings within or challenges from without. There are two
things in Christ's Ascension that assure these mercies to us. 1. His session at
Gods right hand. 2. His Intercession.

1. Jesus Christ is set at Gods right hand in heavenly places, Ephesians. 1.20. and
the two following verses afford us two choice considerations that tend further
to assure us, 1. That he is far above all principality and power, might,
dominion, and every name in this world and that to come, ver. 21. i. e. Christ
as man is advanced not only above all States and Potentates on earth, but above
all Angels and Archangels in Heaven, therefore far above the Devils, none can
hinder, all are his servants to help forward his design for the good of souls:
oh what a sweet consideration is this, that our nature is advanced thus high?
yea in the person of the Redeemer there is both sympathy, ability, and
authority, and therefore he will effectually manage his glorious undertaking:
yet that is not all, for 2. In the 22 ver. it is said, that he gave him to be the
head over all things to the Church, i. e. not only to be the head of the
Church, but to be Head and Governor over all things for the good of the
Church; so that now the whole world is subordinate to him for the advantage of
elect souls, and now every thing shall help them forward toward Heaven: yet
further there is something more in the phrase and that is, that as the head is
gone before to Heaven, so the members shall undoubtedly follow after, and so
salvation shall be sure, and this is very clear in that admirable Text, Ephesians.
2.6. and has raised us up together, and made us sit together in heavenly
places in Christ Jesus: i. e. thus, it is as sure as if were there already, or
we are set there in our representative, Jesus Christ, or these holy places and
privileges on earth are an earnest of glory, but indeed the saints are already
saved, so says Paul, ver. Romans 8.24.
5. by grace ye are saved, and elsewhere, we are saved by hope, so that we have
(as it were) taken up our rooms (as one says) in Heaven aforehand, whereunto
we have just right upon earth by virtue of union which is the ground of
communion, for he that has the Son has life, Quia nondum haec quae
commemorat, in membris apparent -- propter arcanam tamen unitatem ad mimbra
certo pertinent. -- Calvin. in loc.
i. e. he has possession of it as by Turf or Twig, he has, in a sort, Seisin
and delivery: our head is in Heaven, and although these things yet appear not
in the members, yet because of the hidden union betwixt the head and members,
that which is peculiar to the one is appropriated to the other; hence says the
Apostle again, Col. 3.3, 4. Your life is hid with Christ in God, -- when Christ
who is our life shall appear, then shall ye also appear with him in glory, --
when the dull shell of our mortal bodies shall be broken, then shall the pearl
of Grace shine forth in its luster and glory: Yea he will also change our vile
body, that it may be fashioned like unto the glorious body of Jesus Christ,
Phil. 3.21.

2. Yet further, Christ's intercession now he is in Heaven assures us of the
certainty of Covenant-mercies, for he is Mediator, 1 Timothy 2 5.
a middle person, and so fit to negotiate the business with God for poor man,
and he intercedes effectually for guilty souls, by virtue of the worthiness of
his own person and merits, and as an advocate in a legal and judicial way he
sollicits for them and pleads their cause, and he appears in Heaven for them
vindicating them from all accusations, and will not all this satisfy? further,
Christ's intercession is of large extent, and of as powerful efficacy, for he
can refuse no cause put on him, but must and will intercede, being employed; so
he cannot but be heard always; and his promise is as full, whatsoever ye ask
in my name, it shall be done unto you, Joh. 14.13, 14. nay, I will do it: the
Intercessour is the Executour. See this Doctrine of Christ's intercession
pithily and profitably opened in Mr. Durhams Expos. of Revel. 8.1. Lect. 1.
page 407. to 414.
But I shall not be large in this sweet point of Christ's Intercession, because
many have Writ much about it, only take notice of that well-known Text in Heb.
7.25. (for a close of this head) Wherefore he is able also to save them to the
uttermost that come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to make Intercession
for them: this Text is a notable demonstration of the excellency of Christ's
Priestly Office, tending to the confirmation of this point and consolation of
believers, wherein are these seven things. 1. The end of it, and that is to
save souls, and the Infinite God will certainly accomplish his end, men may
fall short, but God cannot miscarry, I work, says he, and who shall let it. 2.
The universality of it, he saves all, i. e. all believers, rich and poor,
whether they have more or less worthiness, for they are not saved for their own
but for Christ's merits. 3. The efficacy thereof, he saves to the uttermost,
((...)) i. e. to the uttermost point or term of life, even to death and beyond
it, or so as none can mend his work, for as he is the author, so he is the
finisher of our faith and hope, consolation and salvation, none can come after
him to finish what he has begun: and he saves to the uttermost from all kinds
of enemies, none can challenge an interest in souls after he has done his
work, and he saves to the uttermost, i. e. he leaves them not till he have
brought them into the highest happiness that Creatures are capable to enjoy:
there is all manner of perfection in this salvation. 4. Here is the subjects or
persons saved, those that come to God, or the condition, coming to God by
Christ; now this is such a disposition as he himself does work, for the power
of his spirit does effectually draw souls to God, Joh. 6.44, 45. the condition
is believing and he works the condition: Christ is that sure Ladder of Jacob by
which souls may ascend to God, and into Heaven, never any fell off this Ladder,
or miscarryed that came to God by Christ. 5. Christ's ability to carry on that
work, in the first words, be is able, this we cleared in the first head
concerning the union of the two natures; he is omnipotent, therefore he is said
to be mighty to save, and if he can do any thing in this soul saving work, he
will not fail those that lay the whole stress of their souls upon him. 6.
Here Is his capacity to save, for the Text says, he ever lives, a living
Savior can revive dying, dead souls: if Christ were not alive, there would be
no hope of life by him, in vain should we seek for living enjoyments among the
dead: but our Savior is revived and lives for ever: he is the living Bread
that came down from Heaven, Joh. 6.5. and is again risen and ascended up into
Heaven, and because he lives, we live also. 7. There Is his complete execution
of his present office: he ever lives to make intercession for them, says the
Text, therefore must needs complete the work he has begun on earth, as the
High Priest under the Law, Levit. 16.14. Heb. 9.11.12.
our Mediator sprinkles the virtue of his meritorious Offering here on earth
upon the mercy-seat now in Heaven, and continually bears the names of his
Saints upon his breast, and appears in the presence of God for us, Heb. 9.24. so
that we have a friend in our nature to own us in open Court, yea God the Father
bade him welcome into Heaven, and as a token thereof, sets him upon his right
hand: which is an evidence of honor, as Solomon dealt with his Mother, and
then bids him ask, and he would give him all that was in his heart; certainly,
then the mercies of the Covenant must needs be sure, and that in Christ the
Mediator, since his Intercession is so prevailing that he said in the days of
his flesh, when praying over Lazarus's Grave, Father, I knew that thou hear
me always, Joh. 11.42.

Thus I have dispatched the Doctrinal part of this subject wherein I have
endeavored to clear up what the mercies of the Covenant are, in what respects
they are said to be sure, by what means and ways they are made sure, and how
they are made sure in and by Jesus Christ, the great Mediator of the Covenant.

CHAP. VI.
NOW for the Application of this point, I shall make use of it several ways 1.
For confutation of, 1. Atheists. 2. Papists. 3. Arminians. 4. Socinians.

1. It confutes the vain conceits of Atheists who call in question the great
things of Religion, they are first Scepticks and Disputants, then by degrees
they grow Atheists and deny God; as one says, in the Academy of Athesin, a
sinning soul takes these sad degrees; 1. To doubting whether there be a God or
no. 2. To living as though there were indeed no God. 3. To wishing that there
were none; and 4. To disputing against a Deity, and then he commenceth Doctor
in positive Conclusions, Mr. Herle in Policy, p. 52.
with the fool that there is no God, Psalm. 14.1. many are ready to say, that
Religion in the power of it is but a fiery Meteor, which the influence of those
hot Dog-starrs of the times (Ministers) have drawn up and kindled in the
grosser Region of some sick and melancholy brains, and so like fire is apt to
catch in thatcht and low-built houses, not Palaces, and Castles, i. e. ^arge
and high-built souls: But the truth is, some Atheists do find in this life the
certainty of our Religion, all shall find it to their cost hereafter by an
irrecoverable loss of these sure mercies, and by intolerable sustaining of
^verlasting miseries: As Atheism has been much propagated in these latter
days, so God has afforded some remarkable convictions by several modern
examples. Cardinal Richlieu, who after he had given Law to all Europe many
years, confessed to P. Du Moulin, that being forced to many irregularities in
his life time, by that which they call Reason of state, and not being able to
satisfy his Conscience, thence had temptations to dis-believe a God, another
World, the immortality of the soul, and by that distrust to relieve his aching
heart, but could not; so strong, said he, was the notion of God on his soul, so
clear the impression of him upon the frame of the world, so unanimous the
consent of mankind -- that he could not but taste the powers of the World to
come, and so live as one that must dye, and so dye as one that must live for
ever: and being asked one day why he was so sad, he answered, Monsier, Monsier,
the soul is a serious thing, it must be either sad here for a moment, or sad
for ever: and though Cardinal Mazareen was an Atheist the greatest part of his
time, yet he has left behind him clear convictions of the immortality of the
soul, and certainty of another state after this life, professing that if he
were to live again, he would be a Capuchin rather than a Courtier, i. e. of a
Popish religious Order, to serve God in their way, rather than choose worldly
preferments: it is recorded of Sir John Mason Councellor to Hen. 8. Edw. 6. that
he called his Clark and Steward to him, and said I have seen five Princes, been
Privy Counselor to four, seen the most remarkable observables in foreign
parts, been at most State-transactions for thirty years, and have learned, that
seriousness is the greatest wisdom, temperance the best physic, and a good
conscience is the fairest estate, and were I to live again I would change the
Court-life for a Cloister, my privy Counselors bustles for an Hermits
retirement, and my whole life in the Palace for one hours enjoyment of God, in
the Chapel; all things else forsake me, besides my God, my Duty, my Prayer:
thus he: It is also recorded of Charles 5. Emperor of Germany, King of Spain,
Lord of the Netherlands, that after 23. pitched Fields, 6. Triumphs, 8. Kingdoms
won, -- after all this success reigned all these, retired to his Devotion, had
his Funeral celebrated before his face, left this testimony behind him, that
the sincere profession of Religion has its sweets and joys that Courts were
strangers to: and we know from Holy Writ that Solomon, after his vast
experiments and exact disquisitions left this Maxim as the total sum of his
large accounts, Eccles. 12 13 -- fear God and keep his Commandments, for this
is the whole duty of man: Atheists never yet tasted the sweetness of Religion,
they never fully studied the Word or Works of God, both which would satisfy
them; it is recorded of Francis Junius, that reading Tully, de Legibus, Nihil
curare deum, nec sui nec alieni.
he fell into a persuasion that God cared for nothing, neither his own nor
others affairs, but in a tumult in Lions, the Lord convinced him of a Divine
Providence by delivering him strangely from eminent death, and also being put
by his Father upon reading the first Chapter of John's Gospel, he was
abundantly convinced by the Divinity of the Argument, Majesty and Authority of
the style, in such a manner as his body trembled, his mind was astonished, and
his his soul savingly Converted: Yea, the works of God are sufficient to leave
a Conviction of a Deity upon Conscience. Lord Bacon used to say, that a little
smattering in Philosophy might tempt a man, to be an Atheist, but a through
study of it would bring him back to be Religious, for it would reduce him to a
first cause and a last end: But I must not enlarge on these Atheists, see them
described and confuted in Weems Treatise of four degenerate Sons of Adam. All I
shall add, is the words of Lord Chancellor Egerton, to be Profane is the
simplest thing in the World, for the Atheist lays a wager against the serious
man, that there is no God, but upon wosul odds, he ventures his everlasting
state, the other only hazards the loss of his Lusts; if there were no God, yet
the latter does as well as the Atheist at last, and lives better at present,
but if there be a God, (as undoubtedly there is) Oh the vast disproportion at
the great day, if the Arguments for or against the verity of the Gospel were
equal, yet the gain or hazard is infinitely unequal: therefore every wise man
will take the safest side: Lord what an Age do we live in? when the choicest
truths, duties, mercies from a principle of opinionativeness or licentiousness
are questioned or denied. Well, God has his way and day to convince these
wretched Atheists by real and unanswerable demonstrations: so that all men
shall say, Verily there is a reward for the righteous, verily he is a God that
judges in the earth, Psalm. 58.11.

2. It notably confutes the Papists, because all these good things of the
Covenant are mercy, not merit, we are under a Covenant of Grace not of Works,
Dei miscricordia, merita nostra.
the mercies of God are our merits. We have cause to renounce our own
righteousness, alas what are our best works to obtain favor at the hands of
God, those before Conversion, which they call meritorious [ de congruo] are not
truly good works wanting a Principle, and those after Conversion, which they
call works of condignity, these are not exactly good, without the stain of
imperfection; and therefore cannot merit: they hold two justifications
according to these preparatories, They acknowledged Christ's Righteousness to be
the only meritorious cause of this first justification: i. e. he procures the
infusion of this grace -- all Papists assert roundly that man is justified, per
solum gratiam inhaerentem, tanquam per formam integram sine imputatione
externae justitiae Christi. Suarez l. 7. c. 7. p. 83.
the first is, when a sinner of an evil man, is made a good man, which is done
by pardon of sin, and infusion of inward righteousness, i. e. the habit of Hope
and Charity: the second is, when a man of a good man is made better, and this
say they may proceed from works of Grace, because he which is righteous by the
first justification can bring forth good works, by merit whereof he is able to
make himself more just and righteous, but we assert that the very thing by
which we are justified and accepted is only the mercy of God and the merits of
Christ's active and passive obedience; which are imputed to us and received by
faith alone; and our obedience, or performances cannot be satisfaction to Gods
justice, because they are imperfect and defective, Isa. 64.6.
filthy rags, a rag and cannot cover us, and filthy, therefore will rather
defile than justify us: at the great day we must have something that can
countervail the justice of God, but Paul durst not appear in his own
Righteousness, but in Christ's, Phil, 3.9. and how dare we? Certainly Paul's
Doctrine is an infallible truth of God, Romans 3.20. -- by the deeds of the Law
there shall no flesh be justified in his sight. -- And ver. 24. being justified
freely by his grace, through the redemption that is in Jesus Christ: and though
Papists deride imputed righteousness. Yet it is mentioned ten times in Romans 4.
and frequently asserted and proved through Paul's Epistles. So 2 Cor. 5.21. as
Christ was made sin for us, so are we made the Righteousness of God in him; now
Christ was made sin for us no otherwise than by God's imputing our sins to
him: for it is Blasphemy to say Christ was sin by infusion of sin into him, or
inherency of sin in him. Besides our justification comes to us as our
condemnation, which was not only by propagation, but by the imputation of
Adam's disobedience, Romans 5.19. all the mercies of the Covenant are to
believers made over by a deed of gift, indeed the wages of sin is death, but
eternal life is only the gift of God, with all that leads thereunto, Romans 6.23.
But however Papists may dispute in the Schools, yet when they come to lie upon
sick and deathbeds, they are glad to come off with Bellarmines, tutissimum est,
it is safest to rely only on the mercy of God and merits of Christ for
justification: let us still hold the safe way and leave them to their uncertain
imperfect Righteousness. Dr. Prideaux Lect. 5. De just. fol. 64.
But it is easily discernable what is the reason of the Papists opposing free
justification by grace only, because it would demolish their Purgatory, Masses
for quick and dead, Invocation of Saints, Worshipping of Images, Indulgences,
and their Treasures of Merits; See this Doctrine stated and cleared in Durham
on Rev. fol. 585 etc, Vid. fol. 590. to 594. Ipsa gloria Secundum totum suum
esse, and ut ita dicam s^cundum substantiam tan ^^a^ merces meritorum
^^mittitur: Suarez lib. 12. cap. 28. page 222, 223.
hence a modern Divine has laid down the grounds that render the Salvation of
a Papist in a sort impossible, and clears it in this about Justification; and
proves undeniably, that their contrivance of the way of Justification does
overturn most, if not all the truths of the Gospel, and is utterly inconsistent
with Gods way of saving sinners; for it is the same for matter and form with
the Covenant of works, which they say Christ has merited, and strength anew to
keep the same, as Adam in innocence, and now sinners are to stand and fall in
the obtaining of life promised according to their own performing of the
condition of works, in the use of that first grace, and by this they merit
perseverance and Heaven; and lest in-dwelling corruptions and defects in duties
mar this, they say concupiscence is not a sin against the Moral Law, and there
are many sins Venial and not Mortal, which therefore do not hinder merit and
acceptance: alas what a new and Anti-evangelical way is this, which confounds
Justification and Sanctification, derogates from the Nature of Grace,
enervateth the merit of Christ, alters the nature of the Gospel Covenant, --
etc. But I must not enlarge, let us study this important subject, and take heed
of corrupting this Fountain, or building on any other foundation besides
Christ's sole righteousness.

2. There Is another uncomfortable Doctrine of the Papists which is a denial
that a Christian can be assured of his interest in the Covenant, and his
eternal salvation. We hold that a Christian may attain to assurance of faith
without extraordinary Revelation, they say a man may indeed attain to a
conjectural certainty which only arises from hope, in regard of God which
promises, but in regard of our selves and our indisposition so, we are to be
at uncertainties: certainly a Child of God may not only be assured of Gods
fidelity but his own sincerity; these Mercies are Sure in respect of the
Subject as well as the Object, for the promises run in general and indefinite
terms, whosoever believes shall be saved: but I, says the soul, truly
believe, therefore I shall be saved, and this particular application and
reflection is as much as if he said, if thou John, Thomas, Peter do believe,
thou shall be saved; now though the heart be deceitful, yet the Scripture has
laid down such Characters by which a man may try and discern the sincerity of
his own act in closing with Christ; for true believing is a receiving of him as
he is offered to us in the Gospel, Joh. 1.12. Besides the Saints receive the
Spirit of Adoption, which bears witness with their spirits, that they are the
Children of God, Ephesians. 1.14.4.30.
Romans 8.15, 16. and this is an earnest of their inheritance which assures them
of the whole possession; it is a seal, and takes away all occasion of doubting:
Paul says of all believers, 1 Cor. 2.12. we have not received the spirit of
the world, but the spirit which is of God, that we might know the things that
are given us of God; i.e. these mercies of the Covenant, Adoption, pardon,
sanctification, salvation: God has laid it upon us as a duty to make our
calling and election sure, not in it self 2 Pet. 1.10.
but to our selves, therefore it is attainable, for God does not command us
impossibilities; 2 C^r. 13.5.
he that bids us try our selves whether we be in the faith supposes we may
come to know upon an exact trial: Besides, many of the Saints have been assused
of their sincerity, and salvation by ordinary ways, which all the Saints may
use, and have a like success in a like full assurance of faith: Mark. 11.24.1
Joh. 5.14, 15.
and God has bid us ask that we may receive, that our joy may be full: now we
are to ask in faith that he will grant what we ask, and we have a promise to be
heard, yea he therefore sets us on asking that he may give: But I need not
stand long to prove the possibility of a Child of Gods attaining assurance, for
experience does abundantly confirm it, and blessed be God that in this we can
groundedly say the Papists are Liars.

3. Another sort whom this Text and Doctrine confutes is the Arminians, and
this in two respect, 1. In the business of universal Redemption, 2. In the
falling away from Grace.

1. The Text says these are the sure mercies of David, God's David's or beloved
ones have only an interest in them, not all men; and in the Doctrine, I say,
that Covenant-mercies promised in Christ are purchased and insured by Christ to
all the Heirs of promise, and I must add only to these, and to none besides,
and therefore Christ dyed not for all, and I shall only use these two
Arguments, which immediately relate to the present subject: 1. Christ's
mediatory undertakings are not intended as a price for any but such as were
proposed by God to the Mediator in the Covenant of Redemption, to be Redeemed
by him, but all and every one were not so proposed, therefore not redeemed. I
have before opened that great transaction betwixt the Father and the Son, now
it is most certain that the Mediators death and sufferings are to be looked upon
as regulated and qualified in respect of their effects, according to what was
proposed by the Father, and consented to by the Son; hence Christ says that he
came not to do his own will, but the will of him that sent him, and to finish
his work, and to give eternal life to as many as God had given to him:
therefore Christ must by his undertakings ensure these mercies to all those,
and none but those that the Father proposed to him in this everlasting bargain;
as for that conditional giving of some to Christ, which some speak of, that
would derogate from his glory, for he must needs know the event, and that such
a conditional giving would not effect it; and to say he would what should not
come to pass, or to apply such means as he knew would not be effectual to the
end, cannot be imagined: besides those that are given to Christ are
contra-distinguished from others that are not given to him; therefore these
only are assigned peculiarly to be redeemed and not others.

Arg. 2. All those and only those whom Christ Redeemed, have all the mercies of
the Covenant insured to them, but all have not all the mercies of the Covenant
ensured to them and conferred on them, therefore all are not Redeemed by
Christ. Christ is the surety and Mediator of the New Covenant; and he gives
Faith, Repentance, Pardon, Heaven to them for whom he is engaged as a Surety,
they shall not fail of all the Covenant-mercies, that are absolutely necessary
to Salvation, for he is faithful in the Execution of all his Offices; now we
know all men have not saving Faith, nor Repentance; it cannot be conceived but
that his satisfaction must be equally effectual for the procuring of these
saving mercies to those whose room he sustained; and indeed God promises as a
recompense to him, that he shall see of the travel of his soul and be
satisfied; yea he shall justify many, i. e. as many as he undertook for, Isa.
53.11. if Christ has born their iniquities, they must be justified, else he
missed of his end; there is an inseparable connection betwixt Christ's
undertaking for them, and his bestowing Covenant-mercies on them: all that are
Redeemed by Christ's Blood are made Kings and Priests to God, Rev. 5, 9, 10.
they are purchased to be a peculiar people to God, they are washed from their
sins in his blood, redeemed from their vain Conversation, delivered from
spiritual enemies to serve God in holiness all their days, and to be received
to Heaven when they dye; these are the mercies of the Covenant which the
Mediator purchases, and applies to all the elect, and to none but elect
souls; therefore none else are Redeemed: for there is no saving nor eternal
mercy procured to any reprobate by Christ's death, for the proper and native
fruits of Christ's death are not divided, therefore he prays for them that were
given to him, and for whose sake he did sanctify himself, Joh. 17.
and excludes the reprobate World, for whom he purchased not these
Covenant-mercies, therefore he dyed not for them: that is the former.

2. This point confutes Arminians in their sad opinion of the Saints Apostasy;
some hold a total, as Lutherans, others a final as Arminius, others maintain a
total and final Apostasy of Saints; we hold that believing, regenerate
justified persons, that are endowed with the divine nature and a lively hope
shall not lose that principle and fall from that state of grace, and be utterly
deprived of the favor of God, and indeed we need no other Arguments but this,
that these mercies of the Covenant are sure mercies, which they would not be if
they might be lost; there is the immutability of Gods Promise in the New
Covenant, the intercession of Jesus Christ for the Elect, the Omnipotency of
the Shepherd of Israel who will not lose one of his Sheep, the efficacy of the
spirit, supporting and renewing the seed of God, and life of Grace in
believers, 1 John 3.9.
and this seed of God keeps a believer from sinning in two respects: 1. He
hates and ^ills in part the evil which he wills and works. 2. If by humane
frailty he fall, Rom 7.19.
he makes not a trade of sin, or keeps a course in it, but the seed of Grace
makes him restless till he return to God, and be entertained into favor and
fellowship with him: thus though good David sometimes goes astray like a lost
sheep, yet then he cannot forget God or his commandments, Psalm. 119.176. his
heart was dissatisfied till his God and his soul were at peace again; this
gracious Principle inclines him God-wards and Heaven-wards, i^ is a well of
water springing up into everlasting life, Joh. 4.14. it is an increasing grain
of mustard seed, Mat. 13.31. 1 Pet. 1.23. 1 John 2.27. Jam 1.21.
it is an incorruptible seed that lives and abides for ever, an abiding
unction, an ingraffed word, an indwelling Spirit, etc. therefore cannot be
lost. Blessed be God for this comfortable point, which does no^ beget
licentiousness as our Adversaries belly it, but diligence in the ways of God, as
the genuine product of it, as the experience o^ the Saints testifies. But I
shall say the less of this, because I have hinted at it before in the Doctrinal
part, and others have said so much of it.

4. And the last sort that are confuted by this point of the Sure Mercies of
David i^ the Socinian error, that Christ's death is no^ a satisfaction for sin,
the Socinians hold tha^ Christ's sufferings were only for the confirmation of
his Doctrine, or for the imitation o^ Saints, or at most, only to purchase to
himself the prerogative to forgive sins freely these ends are framed mainly as
an engine to destroy Christ's Godhead and personality i^ the glorious Trinity;
and it is recorded o^ Socinus the patron of this blasphemy that h^ held the
world was not made of nothing, ie^ he should be forced to acknowledge the
infiniteness of Gods power, which he denied, Heb. 1.2.
and of Christ's divine nature, by whom he made the Worlds. But we on the
contrary do confidently believe, that when the Majesty of God was wronged by
the sin of man, and when it behoved man to make satisfaction to justice, or
never be freed from the sentence of condemnation, or obtain reconciliation, and
this being beyond the power of a finite creature: Christ God-man did interpose
himself in our stead to be a sacrifice for the elect to satisfy justice, and
bring in everlasting righteousness, which satisfaction is accepted of God the
Father and imputed to the sincere believer: and this is the sum of the Gospel,
and clearly held forth therein to all that are not wilfully blind, in Isa.
53.6. it is said the Lord said on him the iniquities of us all, and says the
Apostle, he became sin for us, 2 Cor. 5 21. Heb. 7.22. Job 33.24. Gal. 3.13,
14. Rev. 15. Act. 20 28.
i.e. in our ^oom or stead, hence is he called a Surety in paying our debt, and
a ransom, and his death ^s called a propitiation, an expiatory Sacrifice, ^e
enduring the curse for us, and washing us from our sins in his own blood, and
purchased his Church with his own blood, i. e. the blood of God-man. But the
Scripture is full of ^estimonies, and the subject I have been so ^argely
insisting upon in the doctrinal part ^bundantly clears it, that Jesus Christ as
Me^iator of the new Covenant does insure the mercies of it to all the Heirs of
Promise by ^is meritorious undertakings, which I have ^bundantly cleared, and
the Socinians denying this, do also deny the merit and excellency of Christ's
obedience and death, and his divine nature, and so deserve not to be ranked
among the number of Christians; the Lord preserve us from these black and
destructive ways of Error and Heresy, and drench our hearts in the through
sense and experience of these Sure Mercies of David; for all Dagons will fall
before this Ark of the Covenant, and the clear understanding of this Doctrine
will rectify many mistakes; the right conceiving, and solid embracing of these
New Covenant-mercies, is the greatest help to a sound mind, and sincere heart
which are great preservatives against error and apostasy.

But thus much for the first Use.

CHAP. VII.
II. THE second Use is of Instruction, which may inform us in sundry very
necessary truths, and direct us in several duties from the consideration of
these Sure Mercies of David, and the aforesaid way of making them Sure.

1. It instructs concerning the great difference betwixt the Covenant of Works
and the Covenant of Grace. Divines use to give several differences betwixt
them. But indeed this is the main, that the former was consisting in an
inherent righteousness, the other in imputed; in the first man was to perform
personal, perfect, and perpetual Righteousness, in this second our surety and
great Mediator undertakes it for us, and it is applied to us by faith, which is
now become the Evangelical condition, in the room of that legal condition of
complete obedience; so that was struck betwixt God and man immediately, this
through an interposing Mediator, Gal. 3.19. the former was soon broken, because
though man was upright, yet he was mutable and that we feel to our cost; but
Jesus Christ the great Mediator of this new Covenant is the Lord Jehovah, the
mighty God, the everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace, able to save to the
uttermost; he is God and changes not, therefore are not we consumed, and
therefore are souls saved: hence says the Apostle, Heb. 8.6. He (i.e. Jesus
Christ) has obtained a more excellent Ministry, by how much also he is the
Mediator of a better Covenant which was established upon a better promise:
indeed the excellency of the Covenant does chiefly arise from the excellency of
the Mediator of it, and the manner of its confirmation, Heb. 7.22. 9.15. 12.24.
1 Timothy 2.5. Verum haec Apostoli comparatio ad formam potius quam admateriam
referenda est. Calv. in loc.
which is Christ, Godman by his active and passive obedience, who is frequently
called our Mediator. Although that place in the Hebrews does rather respect the
form of administering the Covenant than the matter, and it is a comparison
betwixt the dispensation to the Fathers under the Law; and this in
Gospel Times, for they had the same Covenant, of Grace, though under Shadows
and Types, that we enjoy in the substance and performance, yet by consequence
it holds forth the precedence of our Gospel Covenant above, and beyond the
Legal, which was made with Adam.

That I may a little further open this, there are two things illustriously
shining in this Gospel Covenant. 1. The Grace and Love of God. 2. The Wisdom of
God, 1. Consider the infinite Mercy, Favor and Compassion, the Tenderness,
Love and Condescension of the great God in renewing the Covenant which man had
broken; I confess there are many curious Questions asked concerning these two
Covenants, as these: Could not God as well have secured the conditions of the
first Covenant by assisting Adam with Grace to perform them, and persevere
therein? and again, Why might not the first Covenant have been spared, and this
second have served the turn for both? But what is man that he should find fault
with Gods pleasure? Yet we might answer all these with the assertion and
admiration of Gods infinite wisdom, and mercy. Gods glorious attributes are all
seconds one to another, mercy imploys power, power backs truth, truth seconds
justice, and they do all employ wisdom, and wisdom does order all to his glory;
if there had not been a first Covenant, there had not been a trial of man's
obedience, if it had been kept Gods wisdom had not appeared, in repairing the
breach, nor his love in sending his Son, nor his justice and power in
triumphing over Satan's malice, or making advantage thereby: besides if there
had been no first Covenant violated, there could not have been such a glorious
displaying of Free Grace in the reconciliation betwixt God and man, which
implies both a Covenant and a breach. Oh the mercy of God in Christ! it is
wonderful, stupendous mercy that God was willing to hold any correspondence
with man in a Covenant-way that had broken with him before. Yet free grace
would not trust sorry man with a stock any more in his own hands that had been
a bankrupt: Yea God stayed not till man sought out for this surety, but
prevented him with Free Grace: we read that when Augustus made a Proclamation,
that whoever would bring him the head of Carocotta the Spanish Pirate should
have a rich reward; Carocotta hearing of it came and presented his head to the
Emperor, and challenges the reward; but when man had fallen he runs away,
endeavors to hide himself, love pursues and overtakes him, and contracts with
guilty Adam, a better, and unthought of, unsought for Covenant. Parmenio's
large Letter to Alexander against Olimpia, was all answered with one tear of a
Mother: but where is any one tear to bewail or make amends for man's horrid
crime? no not a word to procure this favor; Free Grace did all to bring
Traitors into a League: God's heart was full; he could not hold but call he
must, and seek and run to fetch home apostate man, that profligate Rebel, that
durst not show his face, or ask forgiveness: but the Lord of life and glory,
the King of Heaven is ready to forgive, and to give the glorious things of
Heaven to them that enquired not after them.

2. Here behold such a piece of wisdom, as never eye beheld, ear heard, or
heart conceived; the Apostle calls it the manifold wisdom of God; I cannot here
stand to open all the parts thereof that fall within the reach of a finite
view; I shall only endeavor to unfold one branch thereof, by clearing this
strange Paradox, viz. How it could be possible, since God himself is immutable;
the Moral Law irrevocable, which is an obligation of the Creature to obedience,
and man having now broken it, and death and wrath threatened thereupon; I say,
whence it comes to pass that the malediction and condemnation is not executed?
no nor perfect obedience exacted, as the nature of the Law requires? the direct
and proper force of the Law is obedience, the secondary and conditional effect
of it, is a binding over to the curse upon supposition of disobedience; yet we
see the Law does neither, and yet the Scripture testifies of the Word, Psalm.
119.89. Psalm. 111.78. Luke 16, 17.
that it is settled for ever in Heaven, the comforts are sure and stand fast for
ever and ever, that one tittle of the Law cannot fade: How comes it to pass
then, that the Law is neither thoroughly obeyed nor executed? obeyed it is not,
Romans 3.20, 23. Romans 8.1. Gal. 3.13.
for all have sinned, and by the deeds of the Law is no flesh justified:
executed it is not, for there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ,
and they are delivered from the curse of the Law: abrogated or extinguished it
is not, for then there were no sin nor duty, reward or punishment: no nor it is
not moderated nor favorably interpreted, by rules of equity to abate the
rigor of it, for it is inflexible, and the Text says, Gal. 3.10.
cursed is every one that continues not in all things which are written, in
the Book of the Law to do them: therefore there is no way but one, that is,
that the Law should so far be dispensed with, as that a surety be accepted
instead of the malefactor, this is the blessed design of the Gospel; God is
willing to allow, and accept a surety, Jesus Christ is willing to undertake and
perform this office; and the believer is willing to embrace this blessed
Mediator, and thus the match is made, and the Covenant is renewed, and the Law
is established: yea by this Gospel-way of saving souls, he does magnify the
Law, and make it honorable; the obligations of the Law are reconciled in
Christ by the second Covenant, our surety has fulfilled its duties by his
active, undergone its curses by his passive obedience, and both better by
Christ then ever it was possible for man to satisfy. Adam in innocence and the
Angelical nature could not have obeyed the Law so perfectly, (at least so
meritoriously) as our surety has done, and if we had lain for ever in Hell we
could not have satisfied justice so as our Savior did by his short, yet
infinite sufferings satisfy for our woeful breach of divine commands: Rom
3.31.8.2, 3, 4.
thus (it is often said) is the Law established, Christ was delivered to the
Law, and we are delivered from it, and now believing souls are married to
Christ, Romans 7.4, 6.
and are no more under the malediction of it: God's grace numbreth the Saints
as Christ's seed, binds all in the same lump, and accepts Man and Wife as
one in a Law-sence, Uxor sulget radiis mariti.
so that the Wife shines in the rays of her Husbands beauty: Divines
illustrate it by the similitude of a Wall that is green either by the color
inhaerent, or else by the same color in some diaphanous transparent body, as
glass, through which the Sun shining does affect it with that color, so
Christ's righteousness presents us in his own color to the Father, so that word
is to be understood, Mat. 3.17. this is my beloved Son, in whom (not in whom,
as with his person only) but in whom I am well-pleased: that is, through his
Merits and Mediation I accept of, delight in all that believe and come unto me
by him. Oh stupendous contrivance of Free Grace! we cannot well conceive, nor
sufficiently admire the wisdom of God in laying this blessed plot and platform
of our Redemption; rich Grace, and profound Wisdom, seem to outvye each other
in this glorious fabric: if every man, says one, were as wise as an Angel,
and every Angel, a Seraphim (a flame of Celestial light of knowledge, and heat
of love) they could never have found out such an expedient to reconcile God and
Man, the Law and it self; 1 Pet. 1.12. Ephesians. 3.10.
the very Angels themselves admire it, and would willingly become Scholars to
the Church to understand more of the height and depth of this glorious
Mystery: but this shall never be rightly understood till souls see him face to
face, who devised and effected this work, and their faculties shall be enlarged
to take in more of Gods grace and Wisdom. That Is the first instruction.

2. Another consequence is this, if the mercies of the Covenant be made sure in
Christ, it lets us see the great difference betwixt Covenant-mercies and common
mercies, temporal and spiritual mercies. Readiness mercies that God takes away,
and the sure Mercies of David founded upon the Covenant of Grace, 1 Chronicles,
17.13. take the difference principally in these four particulars.

1. They differ in the Fountain, Original, and rise thereof, or in the
affection of the giver, outward mercies proceed from common bounty, these
Gospel-mercies from special grace; the former from general munificence, the
other from peculiar benevolence, the former are but crumbs for dogs, these are
bread for Babes, all things come alike to all, See Eccles. 9.1, 2, 3.
so that none can know love or hatred by the want or abundance of
Creature Comforts, but the mercies of the Covenant are always tokens of
special affection; Luther calls the whole Turkish Empire but a morsel east to
dogs, but one dram of Grace is a Child's Patrimony; God hates the wicked though
he give them the World; he loves the Godly, Deus saepedat i^atus quod negat
propitius.
though he deny them worldly enjoyments; he may give that to his enemies in
anger that he denies his Children in love: he gives to many wicked, giftless
gifts, as some call them; but he gives his grace, his heart, himself, to his
Saints with Covenant-mercies: these are always clear evidences of special love:
they are Bracelets and Jewels that are sent as love tokens to the espoused
Saint from his Heavenly Husband.

2. They differ in the dimensions of the gifts, their Natures, Properties, and
Proportionables to the precious and immortal soul: Temporal mercies may indeed
supply the outward man, the clothes cover nakedness; fire may warm, meat may
fill, and drink may quench thirst, but all these serve but to supply corporal
necessities, they do not reach the soul, he was a fool that said, soul, Luke
12.19, 20.
thou have much goods laid up for many years, take thine ease, eat, drink and
be merry; and well might he be called a fool, for alas, what were these goods
to the soul? it was a sensual brutish soul that could be satisfied with these
things; they bear no proportion to the nature of the immortal Heaven-born soul,
it is above them, and when it acts it self, scorns to feed on such dung or
wind; it is recorded of Pasotes who called his friends to a banquet, where they
should see a Table furnished with variety and plenty, but when the guests went
to eat, it vanished away into nothing, and truly so will worldly enjoyments,
they promise fair and perform nothing; not but that these are useful mercies in
their kind, and do attain their end, which was to accommodate the outward man,
but they were never designed to satisfy souls: but Covenant-mercies fill and
feast the soul, pardon of sin, sense of Gods love, Jesus Christ and the
benefits flowing from him, these are adaequate to the nature and faculties of
precious souls: these satiate the souls both of Priests and people with fatness
and goodness; Jer. 31.14. Psalm. 36.8.
yea they are abundantly satisefid with the fatness of his house; this living
Bread and Water nourishes immortal souls to eternal life; hence it is that
holy David prays, Psalm. 40.11. -- withold not thy tender mercies from me, O
Lord, q. d. Lord my soul is a fine delicate thing, it cannot down with this
course fare of common mercies, these Husks are for the Swine of the World; I
must have Bread at my Fathers Table, my soul must have Angels food; or it will
not like nor live, Lord let me have tender mercies, for my tender soul,
otherwise I shall famish and dye, therefore he prays again, Let thy tender
mercies come unto me that I may live, Psalm. 119.77. and again, ver. 132. Look
upon me and be merciful, as thou usest to do to those that love thy name, David
will not be content with any mercies but Saints peculiar privileges, and such
as accompany salvation: these, these only fit and fill, suit and satisfy the
gaping desires of the immortal soul, but other things cannot; for you may as
soon fill a sack with wit, as a soul with wealth: Covenant-mercies are only
proper for immortal souls; that is the second difference.

3. They differ in their efficacy and operation, in the effects and impressions
they leave upon hearts, common mercies never make any better, but many worse;
Covenant-mercies always make the subject where they lodge abundance better,
common mercies can no more sanctify, than they can satisfy; a large share of
the World has been a snare to many souls; these things are apt to puff up with
pride, to steal the heart from God, to beget carnal confidence and security;
which prove the bane of grace, Difficile est esse in honor sine tumore. Bern.
and a bait to sin: they that have tried it, find that it is ^ard to have
worldly honor without vainglory, to have great estates without a covetous
desire, and to swim in worldly pleasures without too much sensual delight: Oh
the sad demonstrations we have had of the truth of this! how may the souls of
thousands sadly say the world has undone them? it is Syren-songs have bewitched
the credulous, and unwary soul; the world oftentimes proves a stumbling block
of iniquity that obstructs souls in their journey to Heaven, and blinds their
eyes that they cannot make divine discoveries: even good souls have found this
sad experiment, that outward enjoyments have had a malignant influence upon
their spirits; they were in a better frame when they are poor, then they are
since raised in the World: according to that Distich.

Pellitus nunc es, fueras sine vestibulante,
Nudus eras purus, crimen amicius habes.
Well this is the too too common effect of common mercies, but Covenant-mercies
always make the soul better; certainly sanctifying knowledge, softening Grace,
the spirit of faith, and holiness leave the soul in a gracious frame, and the
privileges of the Covenant, reconciliation with God, Adoption, Justification,
Assurance, Communion with God, always work kindly and Evangelically upon the
heart; these are so many Silver and Silken Cords of Love to draw and join the
soul to God, these mercies are as Coals of fire to melt the heart, and make the
conscience supple and pliable to the will of God; Dives qui multa possid^t,
au^o sordidum marsupium, at qui justus est, bone compositus est and de orus --
C^em. Alex. paedag.
that cannot be a wicked soul that has these Mercies, and he that has most of
these mercies is the best; our perfection consists in possession and
participation of these Sure Mercies of David: outward mercies are occasions of
ripening wicked men's sins, to fit them for Hell; but Covenant-mercies ripen
Saints for glory, by filling their souls with Grace and filling them for Gods
use both here and hereafter.

4. Common-mercies and Covenant-mercies differ in their duration and
continuance; and this is the discriminating note in this Text, they are called
Sure Mercies, in opposition to those uncertain riches, that take to themselves
wings and fly away; 1 Timothy 6.18.
alas the fashion of the world passes away; earthly enjoyments are but of a
short continuance, at death they and we must part, but many times they leave us
before we leave them, the dreadful example of many thousands in London in the
late astonishing burning confirms this, that were very rich and very poor in a
few hours; many worth thousands in the Morning, but before Night had not an
House to put their head in: our eyes have seen and ears have heard how suddenly
vast estates have been plucked out of the hands of the securest possessours;
Nemo dives est, qui quod habit, secum hinc auserre non potest. Ambros.
a night may put an end to the rich fools confident boasting; no man is rich
who cannot carry away with him that which he has, what we must leave behind us
is not ours, but some others; and this is the certain end of these uncertain
enjoyments; that lose them we must; and we know not when or how; and what a
condition will a poor worldling be in, when his God and he must be parted? But
now these mercies of the Covenant are lasting, yea everlasting mercies, they
continue even beyond this transitory life, and run parallel with the life of
God, and line of Eternity, eternal life is in the rear of spiritual life; Grace
ends in Glory; yea an immortal Crown is one of the mercies of this sure
Covenant: these are a treasure that is neither subject to inward decays nor
outward violence, no Moth can corrupt it, nor Thief steal it, Mat, 6.19, 20.

Well then, since this be the vast difference betwixt common and Covenant
mercies; why should we make so great account of the former, and so little of
the latter? what need have we to advance our hearts and eyes to things that are
not seen with bodily eyes, and not dote upon things that are seen? 2 Cor. 4.18.
Valde protestatus sum (...) istis non satia^.
our souls must resolve with brave Luther, I earnestly protested I would not be
put off with these things; alas, what poor things are outward enjoyments?
consider the differences mentioned; God may hate you though you abound with
worldly comforts, but Covenant-mercies are infallible tokens of God's love:
these gifts are not suitable and satisfying to the soul, the other are; outward
mercies will make you no better in the eyes of God or good men, but spiritual
will render you truly good; the world will take its sudden farewell of you and
fail you at your greatest need, Covenant-mercies will stick by you while you
live, and bring you blameless before his Throne in Eternal glory: here will
come in that usual distinction of Bona throni, and Bona scabelli, it is these
Covenant-mercies that are the good things of the Throne; outward mercies are
but the good things of the footstool; let Heavenborn souls mount up to the
mercies of the Throne, but let the Moon and all sublunary enjoyments be under
their feet; the whole World is too little for the godly man's soul, not but
that we should be thankful for the least common mercy; but we should not be put
off with the greatest; a little of the World should content a Christian with
God, all the World should not content him without God; Oh how sweet are
common-mercies when they come to us in a Covenantway? a morsel sprinkled with
Christ's blood has a delicate relish, this only takes away the poison, venom,
and malignity that guilt has brought upon the Creature, and reduces all
things to their pristine usefulness, and primitive perfection. Oh the happiness
of the Saints! they have all they do enjoy as so many tokens of love; as its
said that Cyrus his kiss to Chrysantas was better Gold than the costly Cup of
Gold that he gave to Artabarus. So common mercies perfumed with Covenant-love
are trancendently better than the richest Treasures of wretched Worldlings:
that is the second instruction.

3. Another inference is this, if Covenantmercies be thus sure, then it
instructs us in the precedence of Grace above gifts, Gifts come upon other
terms than Grace, God gives grace as a freehold, it has the promise of this
and another World, but gifts come upon liking: though a father will not cast
off his Child, yet he may take away his fine Coat, and ornaments, if he be
proud of them. Mr. Gurnal. Christ. armor. Mat. 25.29. Luke 8.18.
there are gifts of illumination, conviction, interpretation, elocution,
Prayer, Prophecy, which are given for the Churches edification; the main
difference betwixt gifts and grace is that the former may languish, vanish and
utterly perish, but Grace never totally and finally decays; God may give Saul a
spirit of Government, Judas a gift of Preaching and Miracles, Simon Magus a
temporary faith, and yet repent him of these and pluck them quite away: he may
and often does dry up the right arm of an Idol idle shepherd, and darkens his
right eye of knowledge, Zach. 11.17. so that he improves not Talents of gifts,
from him shall be taken away that which he has, even real gifts and shows of
Grace, persons eminently gifted may be firebrarnds of Hell: men may fall from
the clearest intellectuals to brutish sensuality; but these gifts and callings
of saving grace are without repentance; God loves his own to the end, gracious
habits shall not be lost; the Apostle elegantly expresses the difference to my
hand, in 1 Cor. 13.8. Charity (i. e. saving grace) never fails but whether
there be Prophecies, they shall fail, whether there be Tongues, they shall
cease; whether there be knowledge it shall vanish away: I know the main intent
of the place is to commend love above other saving graces from the duration and
perpetuity of it, that it shall continue and be of use in Heaven; yet here it is
opposed to such gifts as may also be lost in this life; and however by
consequence it will follow, that the one is separable from its subject the
other not: natural men may make a fair show and flourish with fine gifts, which
are, as it were, the trimming and ornament of Grace, which yet may through
negligence or old age decay and wither, true grace may be accompanied with the
guildings and varnish of gifts, which may in time wear off, whilst a sound
principle continues fresh and lively. Besides this, give me leave to add other
four differentes betwixt common gifts and saving graces.

1. They differ in respect of their Fountain and spring, the original from
whence they flow, Ephesians. 16.7.
gifts (as one says) come from Gods treasury of bounty, Grace proceeds from
the choice Cabinet of his Love, Grace flows to the elect, through the blood of
Christ from Gods bowels of tender love; gifts proceed from the hand of God as
an act of munificence upon his sons glorious ascension and complete
inauguration; and it is one thing to eat meat at the Kings table, and another
thing to gather the fruits of Royal Grace upon some solemn day, as that was of
David's, 2 Samuel 6.19. Saints only have the Covenantgraces, hypocrites may have a
large share in these gifts, nay a larger portion then some Saints themselves:
Saul, Balaam, Caiaphas may have the gift of Prophecy; Judas, he may Preach,
Praestat credere quam miracula edere.
but Thomas and the elect only can believe, and it is a greater work, says
Luther, to believe, than to work miracles: that is the first.

2. They differ in their nature and manner of operation; Covenant-grace stamps
on the elect-soul the image of our Heavenly Father, it is the divine nature;
God's most curious workmanship, the idea and pourtraicture, the representation
and exemplar of God blessed for ever; grace is Gods picture (if I may so speak)
drawn to the life; it is a forming of Christ in the soul, now gifts are no such
thing; the devil himself has great gifts, yet has razed out the image of God;
gifts are but the works of Gods power and wisdom, such as the Sun and Stars;
yea even the flies and atoms, they are in a sort dead, and we may call them
Gods lumber; some have noted that gifts are only the effects, 1 Cor. 12.3. Gal.
5.22.
but graces are called the fruits of the spirit: the one is the husk of a
common profession, at least the shell of some rare endowments; but the other is
the kernel of sincerity, and fruit of a Gospel-conversion.

3. They differ in their train and retinue, as to gifts none have all, either
of all sorts, or any great eminency in all, hence it is said, 1 Cor. 12.8, 9 --
to one is given the word of wisdom, to another knowledge, etc. Moses had a gift
of Government, not of Eloquence; Paul had a gift of Planting, Apollos of
Watering; some of the Apostles were sons of Thunder, others of consolation;
some Ministers are fitter for opening Scriptures, clearing Controversies,
others are more for exhortation and conviction of the Conscience; some think
that Pastors and Teachers differ with respect to their different gifts. But
these Covenant-graces and mercies are linked together; they dance their round
in the believing soul, (...).
hand in hand, as the word signifies, 2 Pet. 1.5. one grace strengthens
another, as stones do in an arch; yea all graces are radically in faith; for
some have said, that every grace is but faith exercised; however, all graces
are infused at once into the soul, though some got the leading as to exercise,
the new man is perfect with a perfection of parts, though not of degrees, as it
is with a newborn Child.

4. Gifts and Grace differ in their several designs, ends, and effects, gifts,
offices; privileges are but for others advantage, and edification; they are
given to profit withal, 1 Cor. 12.7. When Christ ascended, he gave gifts to
men, -- for what end? the Apostle tells us for the perfecting of the Saints,
for the Work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ, Ephesians.
4.8, -- 12: But now the end of Grace is the souls spiritual advantage, that by
them Christ might take possession of the heart, that the soul may have some
life and principle of opposition to beloved corruptions, and thereby be better
helped to perform religious duties, walk with God, improve privileges, and be
made meet for Heaven: these and such like are the ends of the Graces of the
Covenants a man may have rare gifts, yet have a base heart, singular
endowments, and yet not be helped thereby to mortify one lust, perform one
duty spiritually, get one step nearer God; but Covenant-grace is profitable for
these great ends and uses: gifts and Grace may be said to differ as the Sun and
Moon; the Moon casts a light indeed but no heat, but the Sun casts its
quickening rays into this lower World, and quickens many things, and makes all
things verdant and fruitful: so does Covenant-mercy bring forth many precious
things, and divine graces have a lively influence whereby a man shall both save
himself, and those that hear him, 1 Timothy 4.16. but a man may have gifts like an
Angel, and be never the nearer to Heaven, he may direct others in the way to
Heaven, and yet not walk a step therein, See fully in Romans 2.17, to 24. 1 Cor.
9 27.
teach others what he has not learned himself; Preach to others and be a
castaway; it is one thing to have the form of knowledge, another to have the
power of grace; it is one thing to have Angelical gifts, and another thing to
have Evangelical graces: all gifted persons are not gracious persons, never was
any man saved by his gifts, and rarely have they been instruments to save
others, that have only gifts: I dare not say, that it is impossible that a
graceless, yet gifted, Minister should be a mean of Conversion, (for God is not
to be limited) but it is not ordinary, as common experience testifies.

The fourth Inference is, if Covenant-mercies be thus sure, then it lets us see
the truth of our Religion; if the mercies thereof be thus sure (as I have
demonstrated) then let us be established in our persuasions of the verity,
certainty and infallibility of Christianity, if these be sure mercies, who can
doubt of the reality thereof? every thing in the Gospel is made sure; you may
venture your souls upon it, since God has confirmed these things as a sacred
Oracle from Heaven, Divino praecepto intonante obediendum est non disputandum.
Aug.
who dare dispute them? the God of truth cannot lie nor deny himself; he is so
good that he cannot deceive, and so wise that he cannot be deceived: there is
in him neither imprudence in promising nor impotency in performing: Heaven and
Earth may pass away, but not one iota of his word shall fail: You are to
believe these things without haesitation, and give your full assent to them; as
the mystery of Godliness is great, so it is without Controversy; Grotius
observes that our Christian Religion does transcend all the Religions in the
World in three things, 1. In the certainty of Maxims. 2. In the spirituality of
its Precepts. 3. In the transcendency of its rewards: We have the un-erring
testimony of Heaven, for what we believe, which is surer than any Logical
Conclusions, Philosophical Speculations; yea or Mathematical Demonstrations;
and I may add, than their Old Testament Dreams and Visions; so the Apostle
seems to extol Gods speaking to us by his Son above the diverse manners of his
speaking to the Fathers, Heb. 1.1, 2. Nay the Apostle Peter asserts that we
have in the Scriptures a more sure word of Prophecy, Aut haec admittenda
religio, non tantum ob factorum testimonia, de quibus jam egimus, verum etiam
ab eo quae religio^i s^nt intrinseca cum nulla ex omnibus soeculis ac
nationibus proferri potest; aut praemio excellentior, praeceptis perfectior,
aut modo propagari jussa est admirabilior. -- Hug. Grot. de veritat. Relig.
Christ. lib. 2. cap. 9. p. 52. Joh. 9.29. Act. 26.22, 23. Act. 17.11.
than that voice which came to Christ in the Holy Mount, from the excellent
glory, 2 Pet. 1.18, 19. not that any thing can be more sure than the very
undoubted words of Jehovah, who is truth it self; but a more sure, i. e. most
sure, a comparative for a superlative, for the former visions being from God
also, as the Prophesies were, was in it self as sure as they; but the meaning
is that the Scripture-testimony is more sure than that vision argumentatively,
as to others, or secundum nos, for the authority of the Scriptures is beyond
the Testimony of Angels; nay above the credit that any will give to men, for
men might suspect Peter and the other Apostles, as though this apparition were
but a fiction of their own brains, therefore he appeals to the undoubted
Prophecies of the Old Testament, which were by long use settled in the hearts
of the Godly Jews, who believed all that the Prophets spoke as coming from God:
therefore our Savior makes account that they that believe not Moses's
Writings, will not believe his words, Job. 5.45, 47. and hence it was that they
examined Doctrines by the Prophets; nay our Savior himself affirms, that if
they will not hear Moses and the Prophets, neither will they be persuaded
though one rise from the dead, Luke 16.31. Habebant Apostoli prophetas tanquam
patronos ^^ctrinae suae; fidales quoque inde petebant Evangelii confirmationem:
Calv. in loc. Videsi. Mart. Aret. etc. in Locum.
therefore the Apostles had the Prophets as patrons of their Doctrine, and
thence did the faithful fetch a confirmation of the Gospel: the sum of this
Text is then, to demonstrate the verity and certainty of the Gospel by
evidencing the consent of Prophetical and Apostolical Testimony for its fuller
confirmation; q. d. if you distrust me in commending the Evangelical Doctrine,
I send you back to the Prophets, whom without all exception, you account Holy
and Faithful; these testify of the truth of the Gospel, therefore this consent
is to be evincing and satisfying. Hence it is that the disciples of Christ have
professed such a plerophory, and abundant acquiescence in their persuasions of
Christ's being the Messiah and Savior of mankind; so Joh. 6.69. We believe and
are sure that thou art that Christ, the Son of the living God; and Simon Peter
acknowledged it, Mat. 16.16. Yea unbelieving Thomas at last cried out, my Lord
and my God, Joh. 20.28. as being overcome with the clearness of that
stupendous condescending demonstration: the Apostle John testifies 1 Ep. 1.1.
concerning Christ, saying, We have heard, seen with our eyes, looked upon, yea
our hands have handled of the Word of life: and this does he declare to us from
experience of several senses: Oh what a blessed thing were it to have an
undoubted assurance of the certainty of divine things! Oh what life would it
put into our graces, (...) comforts? what an Antidote would it be against
temptations, corruptions, persecutions? could we as really believe the reality
of the things of God as Corporeal objects, what beauty should we discern
therein? what comfort should we receive therefrom? what would we not do and
endure for them? did we see the reality, necessity and excellency of
Covenant-mercies as we do of common mercies, how should our hearts be enamoured
therewith? they that have the most prevailing persuasions of the certainty and
transcendency of heavenly mercies, are the most exact and eminent Christians;
but a faint belief of these things is the cause of sloth; all irreligion and
profaneness proceeds from a want of an effectual assent to
Gospel-revelations; alas, there is more Atheism and Insidelity in the World
than we are aware of: did men as certainly believe there is an Heaven and Hell,
as they see and know there is Stones and Trees, Earth and Water, would not this
have strange influence upon their practices? would they not be other manner of
persons than they are? especially if they did faithfully work upon their hearts
the reality of the things of God: Paul and the Saints in his days looked not on
the things seen, but on things not seen, i. e. eternal things, 2 Cor. 4.18.
Moses saw him that was invisible, that made him to endure any thing, Heb.
11.27. O Christians, rest not satisfied with a bare conjecture, but press
forward till you arrive at a full assurance, you cannot be too sure in these
cases; the Apostle has a mighty full expression, Col. 2.2. to this purpose,
ver. 1. he tells of a conflict that he had for them, and the Laodiceans, i. e.
a care, fear, desire; good man, he was in a heart-rending conflict, and agony:
Why, what is the matter? why, it is that their hearts might be comforted, being
knit together in love, and to all riches of the full assurance of understanding
to the acknowledgement of the mystery of God, and of the Father, and of
Christ; observe the Climax here is 1. Assurance he desires for them; then 2.
Full assurance; further, 3. Riches of full assurance; Yet again, 4. All Riches
of full Assurance; yea, not a rash and ignorant, but such an assurance, 5. Of
understanding, i. e. with a settled judgment, and not only to have such
assurance, and keep it to themselves, but all this 6. To the acknowledgement of
the mystery of God that they may make an open profession of it. But why was he
so earnest for all this, ver. 4 this I say (or pray for you) lest any man
beguile you with enticing words; Q. d. You Will find all this little enough when a
subtle disputer shall set upon you with cunning artifice to draw you from the
truth; you will perhaps feel that you have need of the fullest persuasion that
creatures can arrive unto, that you may keep your hold, and not be driven away
from the hope of the Gospel; you little know what storms may assault your faith
of the truth of the Gospel; Peter made a glorious profession, yet his faith was
staggered in a temptation: and Santan is a cunning Sophister, he desires to
have you that he may fifth you, and toss you so as to shake away the purest
grain of Gospel Truth; he will do what he can to cheat you of your Religion;
hence is it, that Paul was so jealous over the Corinthians with Godly jealousy
-- lest by any means (and he has store of devices) as the Serpent beguiled Eve
through his subtilty; so their minds should be corrupted from the simplicity
that is in Christ, 2 Cor. 11.1-3. hence is it that teachers have always been
so careful to settle and ground their hearers in the certainty of the things
they taught, as Luke his Theophilus, Luke 1.3, 4.2 Tim. 3.14.
and Paul his Timothy. Oh sirs, get well assured of these things, let your
faith and persuasion have its full dimensions; let it be deeply rooted, and
high built, take not things upon trust, let every truth have its full emphasis
and efficacy upon your hearts, and Consciences, especially the main momentous
Gospel Truths, that you must venture your souls upon, and live and dye by: you
had need consider what ground you stand upon, and be fully persuaded in your
own minds.

But so much for the second Use.

CHAP. VIII.
III. THe third Use is, of Examination, to try us whether we have a real
interest in these sure mercies of the Covenant, it is one of the greatest
questions that we can be asked, whether we have a right title to
Covenant-mercies? alas we have forfeited our title to God, or to any good thing
from him, by our breach of the Old Covenant, and now we have nothing to do with
God, except only to endure the severe strokes of his sin-revenging justice. Oh
what need have we to try our selves by an impartial scrutiny? For our better
assistance in this great and weighty business, I shall a little open what it is
to enter into Covenant in general, and then enquire what conditions of the new
Covenant we can find in our hearts, and then show a little of the nature and
effects of these Covenant-mercies where they are.

For the first, to enter into Covenant with God is to own God as our God, and
to give up our selves wholly to him as his; expressed in these words in
Scripture, I will be thy God and thou shall be my people, this, this is the
Marrow of the Covenant, for God to be our God, it is a comprehensive word, it
is [ substantia faederis] as Funius calls it, [ anima faederis] as Pareus calls
it, [ eaput foederis] as Musail; the substance-soul, and head of the Covenant,
the life of Religion is in this, as one says sweetly, the goodness of duties
lies in Adverbs, and the sweetness of the Covenant lies in possessives.

Well then, the contracting of this Covenant betwixt God and a soul consists
chiefly in a mutual reddition, or giving up themselves each to other, expressed
in Scripture by a Matrimonial contract, when God gives up himself to the soul,
and accepts of him, and the soul accepts of God as his God, and gives up
himself to him, now we are not to enquire after the act of God, for it is fully
expressed in the Scriptures, and it is certainly supposed God accepts the
sinner, when the sinner accepts of God, for these are relatives, nor is this
any change in God, the change is only in the sinner, who is now put into a new
state and relation; it is certain by the free offers of the Gospel, that God
does consent, and the main thing to be enquired into is whether the soul do
consent or no; for if it cordially do, the match is made, God and the soul are
married, which is a thing of the greatest importance in the whole World; I
shall purposely wave controversies in this business wherein this consent lies,
whether it be only an assent, See Mr. Baxt. Saints Rest. Part 1. p. 177, 178.
an act of the understanding, or it be a choice, an act of the Will, etc. I
conceive it is an act of the whole soul, whereby a poor troubled sinner
discovering its forlorn estate by its breach of the Old Covenant, and sad
consequences thereof, and discerning a possibility of a recovery and the way of
reconciliation by a new Covenant contrived and contracted betwixt God and
fallen man, sealed and confirmed, by the blood of a Mediator, Godman, does
freely, cordially, and constantly accept of God as his chiefest good, and
ultimate end, and give up himself to him resolvedly, unreservedly, and
universally, to be the Lords; to be and do what the Lord pleases, to obey
divine commands, be at God's dispose in life and death, and thus to continue
even to the end of his days.

This is for a soul to enter into Covenant with the Lord, the trial will lie in
these two things; 1. Whether we have accepted of God as our God: 2. Whether we
have given up our selves to him, to be at his dispose, yea or no? a little of
both these.

1. Whether have you taken the Lord to be yours, or no. We are all naturally
Idolaters and have our hearts glued to the Creature or something else besides
God; we are of those many, that cry out, who will show us any good? and trace
the whole Creation to find satisfaction, till we are weary, and sit down
despairing of obtaining what we seek, for all the creatures are forced to echo
this unanimous vote, happiness is not in me; thus (like Hagar) we wander in
this howling wilderness, Genesis 21.15, 16, 17, 18, 19.
till the Water of hope be spent in the bottle, and our souls (like Ishmael) be
ready to perish under the shrubs of guilt and wrath, and then we sit down in
sorrow, ready to pine away in our iniquities, loath to see or think of our own
damnation, lifting up our voice with bitter weeping, and despair. God hears and
asks the troubled soul what it ailes, and under these confusions he creates a
blessed spring of hope in this desert-state; opens the eyes, ravisheth the
heart with the glory of Gospelgrace, draws Water of life out of the well of
salvation, and satisfies the hungry soul with good things, makes the ransomed
sinner own that God that thus owns him in a time of need, and to cry out as
repenting Israel: once; O Lord our God, other Lords besides thee have had
dominion over us, but by thee only will we make mention of thy name, Isa.
26.13. or as David, Psalm. 73.25. whom have I in Heaven but thee, and there is
none upon earth that I desire besides thee, my flesh and my heart fails, but
God is the strength of my heart and my portion for ever, ver. 26. as if the
poor soul should say, I have been long seeking contentment here below, but I
see by sad experience, all things fail, there is vanity and vexation writ upon
the sweetest comforts under the Moon; I have laid out much labor for that
which profits not; I am weary with my disappointments, I will return to my
first Husband; return unto thy rest, O my soul. God alone is the most, (yea,
the only) suitable and satisfying rest of my wandering and bewildred soul; let
others go a whoring from God to creature-props, it is good for me to draw nigh
to God. I am undone without him, I am sick of love for him, woe is me, what
shall I do? if my soul get not an interest in God I faint, I dye, I am damned;
Lord put me not off without thy self, let nothing take up my heart besides
thee; let all the pleasures, profits, honors of the World go whither they will
so I may have my God, I can set one God against them all, if God be the portion
of mine inheritance, I can say truly the lines are fallen to me in pleasant
places, Psalm. 16.5, 6.
I have a goodly heritage, I can bid defiance to all the world to make me
miserable, when all the World looks black about me, and all my comforts forsake
me, when seeming friends scorn me, and real enemies pursue me with cruel
hatred; I can then encourage my self in the Lord my God. Yea rejoice in the
Lord; yea, when the whole Creation cracks about my ears, and the Earth
trembles, the Heavens are rolled together as a scroll; I know that my Redeemer
lives and I shall live with him in bliss and blessedness for ever -- these or
the like are the musings of the Covenanted soul, and though it cannot say the
Lord is his, yet he can say, through grace, that it is the desire of his soul
to have the Lord for his God, he looks upon that as the happiest estate that a
Creature is capable of, and if God should say this House or Land, or Goods, or
this Kingdom, or this world is thine, except he say withal, I am thine, the
soul goes away disconsolate, and looks on all those as nothing worth.

Christians, try your selves, has it been thus with you, or has it not? what
settled, prevailing account has the God of Heaven in your hearts? do you look
upon all the bravery and delights of the World but as straw and dirt under your
feet in comparison of your God? do your hearts pant after the living God? do
your souls desire him in the night? can you boast of your God, and challenge
all the world; and say, there is none like unto our God? can you depend upon
him, and cast all your care on him: do you in all things give him the
pre-eminence? are your hearts endeared to, and inamoured with this glorious
gracious God?

2. But I proceed, whether have you given up your selves to him? 1 Cor. 6.19.
for if you be the Lords, you are not your own, you have wholly resigned up
your selves to him; you have given him the Keys of your hearts, and delivered
him possession of your souls, as the only rightful owner thereof: just as the
Wife gives up her all to her husband; 1 Cor. 7.4.
so that she has not power of her own body, but her Husband; so does the soul
surrender it self unto its spiritual Husband, so that now it has nothing to
dispose of without its husbands leave; house, land, money, estates, relations,
name, time, gifts of mind, members of body: faculties of soul, life it self,
and all things he is, has, does, are at Gods dispose, and he lays them all at
his Husbands feet, and dare not dispose of one penny in his purse, or minute of
his time, or cast of his eye, or thought of his heart (by his good will)
without his Husbands leave; hence you shall hear a Covenanted soul inquiring
after sin and duty, and making Conscience of compliance with the Lords will and
pleasure: the Scripture calls this a giving our selves to the Lord, 2 Cor. 8.5.
yea, there are several outward symbols to evidence it, Isa. 44.5. one shall say
I am the Lords, and another shall call himself by the name of Jacob, and
another shall subscribe with his hand to the Lord, and surname himself by the
name of Israel; Profession, Subscription, Denomination; nay though it be to
endure the scorn of a reproachful nickname, any thing would he do, so he might
be ranked amongst real Saints, and be indeed the Lords.

And there are four properties of the souls self-delivery to God. A Covenanting
soul gives up it self to God these four ways, viz.

1. Really. 2. Readily. 3. Resolvedly. 4. Unreservedly.
1. Really, Truly, Sincerely, without the ordinary, counterfeiting and
complementing that is in the World; it is as easy as it is common for men to
Court others with that empty Ceremony; Your servant, Sir, when they never think
as they speak, this (by the way) is to be ranked (at least) among idle words,
of which (I fear) many have a sad account to give, let professors learn better
manners and language, than to conform herein to the world; well, but a Saints
giving up himself to the Lord, is not complemental but real, here holy David,
you shall find him in good earnest, Psalm. 116.16. O Lord, truly I am thy
servant, I am thy servant, and the Son of thine handmaid, thou have loosed my
bonds: Here Is 1. An Asseveration, truly. 2. An affirmation, I am thine. 3. A
duplication, I am, and I am thy servant. 4. A confirmation by two Arguments, 1.
He was his servant by his birth, being born in his house, for if a Woman was
servant in an house, all the Children she bore there were servants to the
master of that house; hence says David, the son of thy handmaid. 2. David was
God's by Redemption, thou have loosed my bonds, for such as delivered any from
captivity had them to be their servants for ever: thus every gracious soul
really professes himself to be the Lords, See Exodus 21.4, 5, 6.
he is God's bought and bored Servant, he does (as the servant of old) plainly
say, I love my master, I will not go out, and so is brought to the door-post,
and has his ear bored through with an Aule, he receives an ear-mark, being
board by the blessed spirit of God, and so made willing and obedient to the
Lord's calls, this ingageth him to be much in desiring to know the Lord's will
with a resolution to do it; he stops not his ear, hides not his eyes from his
Master's commands, but prays as David, Psalm. 119.125. I am thy servant, give me
understanding, that I may know thy testimonies,; a good soul would not be
ignorant of any part of its work, because he is a real servant, and makes
Conscience of upright obedience: Ah sirs, what say your hearts to this? are you
in good earnest? do you indeed speak as you think, and will you do accordingly?
it is no jesting, trifling matter? Israel gave God good words; so that God
says, they have well spoken, when they promised to be the Lords and to obey
him, but God adds, O that there were such an heart in them that they would fear
me, etc. Deuteronomy. 5.28, 29. Alas persons may say fair in a flush of affection, but
enquire you into the frame of your spirits and actions whether you be real.

2. This self-delivery to God is ready, free, willing, and cheerful, not with
grumbling, and by compulsion; when persons do it because they cannot help it,
when they see they must dye, and can serve the Devil no longer, or under the
rod, only they will be for a fit and start religious; but it is full fore
against their wills, for they would rather choose to be slaves to lust, but
they are taken off by violence or constraint, or else they lie under such
terrors and convictions, that for present they are overawed, and dare not but
profess to be the Lords, it is strangers that yield feigned or forced obedience
to our David. Psalm. 18.44. See Marg.
But the Lord's true hearted subjects shall be a willing people in the day of
his power, Psalm. 110.3. voluntarinesses or liberalities; so the word signifies,
they are all volunteers, and look upon it as their privilege, honor and
happiness to be the Lord's servants, as the good Emperor Theodosius, that
accounted it greater honor to be the subject of Christ, than to be Emperor of
the World. Judge. 5.9.
Real Christians are like the Governors of Israel, that offered themselves
willingly among the People; these have God's heart, since the Lord has their
heart: those in Act. 2.41. gladly received the Word, and so were Baptized;
every Child of God is a free will offering, Romans 12.1.
and presents his soul and body as a living sacrifice (or Holocaust) and this
is acceptable to God. Oh the account that God makes of these! they are called
Princes of the people, Psalm. 47.9. the Marg. has it, (...)
the voluntary of the people, volunteers are Princes, (as indeed all Gods
Saints are Kings, Psalm. 45.16.
and the Church has her Princes in all the Earth) because they have power over
their base stubborn wills, which is more than to rule over millions of men;
these are persons of most noble, generous, and ingenuous spirits, others are of
a low, base, sordid, degenerate spirit, that have not subjected themselves to
God, but are slaves to their lusts. Well sirs, how is it with you; do you
voluntarily, and cheerfully surrender your selves to the Lord, as a Maid does
in Marriage to the person she loves? are your hearts so gone after the Lord, as
to look upon it as your greatest preferment, to be joined to so sweet an
Husband? have you seriously deliberated things in your breasts; and upon mature
thoughts concluded that this is the best match you can make? Cant. 6.12.
does your soul make you like the Chariots of Amminadab, or a willing people?
and the longer you serve this Master, the better do you like this service: You
do not repent that you gave up your names to him, if it were to do again, you
would do it, though you knew of ten thousand times more troubles in your way
than yet you have met with; nay you thank God heartily that he will accept of
your persons and services: and you look upon his service as perfect freedom: is
it thus with you, bless God, he has brought you into Covenant.

3. The Covenanted soul delivers up it self to God resolvedly; there are some
that halt between two opinions, that are off and on; one while they will be for
God, another while they are staggering, like the Samaritans: when the Jews were
in prosperity, they would profess to be of their stock, when in adversity they
disowned relation to them, these are a Cake half-baked, the one side baked for
God, the other side dough; so that one cannot tell what to make of them; God
likes not these unfixt unresolved spirits: but a real Saint will have God
whatever it cost him; like a Woman, that will have such a Man, though she beg
with him; friends may set their hearts at rest, there is no dissuading her, for
her affections are placed, all bonds cannot hold her; just thus is it with a
poor soul, Act. 11.23 Psalm. 119.
it cleaves to the Lord with full purpose of heart, it has devoted it self to
God's fear, there is no revocation; carnal friends, say nothing, that go about
to hinder the souls match, he will strike this blessed bargain in spite of all
opposition; all the Devils in Hell, and Men on Earth, shall not obstruct his
course and motion to the Lord, if my Father hanged about my neck, (says an
Ancient) my Wife and Children stood in my way to my dearly beloved, I would
fling off my Father, throw down my Wife, trample on my Children that I may
enjoy my Lord God: offer a resolved soul, House, Lands, Pleasures, Treasures,
they all signify nothing if they be to hire him from Christ; let their money
perish with them (said that noble Marquess) that esteem all the money in the
World worth one hours Communion with Jesus Christ: consider Moses and Paul, the
first forsook the pleasures of Pharaohs Court for Christ, Heb. 11.24, 25. Act.
20.24.
the latter accounted not his life dear in the cause of Christ: and indeed this
is the great condition upon which we can only have an interest in him, Luke
14.26. if any man come to me, and hate not his father, mother, wife, children,
brethren, sisters, yea and his own life also, he cannot be my disciple, i. e.
when these stand in competition with Christ; or when he cannot keep both; if he
will not be willing to part with these rather than want Christ, he is not
worthy of him, Mat. 10.37.
as another Evangelist has it: Ah sirs, how is it with you? are you at a
point? do you hang no longer in suspense? will you have Christ upon his own
proposed terms? and will you have him now? and not delay a moment longer; do
you say that upon due considering your ways, Psalm. 119.59, 60. Ephesians. 6.15.
you make haste and will not delay, to give up your selves to the Lord? are
your feet shod with the preparation of the Gospel of peace, i. e. with an holy
resolution to go through sharpest paths to your beloved? you care not what
befalls you; so that this dreadful evil do not befall you to be without God in
the World, and many waters of opposition cannot quench this flaming love to
your dearest Lord: try your selves by this note.

4. A gracious soul delivers up it self to God, unreservedly, entirely, and
universally, and that both with reference to the subject, and the season, the
whole soul, and that for ever, 1. Totally. 2. Finally,

1. The whole soul is given up to God in this Covenant-match; here do
hypocrites dodge, and article, and make reserves, and come not off fair, but
leave some sort of the heart for a lust, and are not willing to give up
themselves entirely; now God will have all the heart, or none at all, he will
not brook a corrival or competitour, my son give me thy heart, and indeed the
whole soul is a present little enough for the God of Heaven, it is a whorish
heart that is for dividing; a gracious soul faith, let him have all, as it
cannot be content with half a Savior, so it knows God will not be content with
half a soul, and therefore cries out Lord, here I am poor worm, I have polluted
my self with sin, and deserve not that ever thou should own such a wretch as
I am; yet such as I am, I here offer my self wholly to thee; alas I am but a
poor and sorry present for so great a King, yet I freely give my self to thee,
entreating thee to make me better; I cannot bestow my self on one that either
has more right to me, or can do more for me; here I am Lord, I am only thine
and wholly thine; take me as thine, and make me less mine own, and that will be
my happiness, and I shall be fitter for thy service; I dare not part stakes
betwixt thy self and any other, for I see, I cannot serve two contrary Masters;
I will not give my faculties or members any more as instruments of
unrighteousness; chain my soul to thee, unite my heart to fear (...) name. This
or such like is the language (...) a Covenanting-soul, and there can be no
Covenant without this intireness and complete resignation; hence are those
multitudes of expressions that call for a seeking God with the whole heart,
Deuteronomy. 4 29. c. 65.
and a loving God with all the heart, soul, etc. and serving God with all the
heart, yea this is the sum of all that God requires of us, Deuteronomy. 10.12. O try
then, has the spirit of God beat down every strong hold and vain imagination;
and brought over your hearts wholly to the Lord? what say you, is every nook
and creek of your hearts delivered up to this great and mighty Conqueror? is
there no Creature-comfort, or sensual pleasure that has stolen away your
hearts from your dearly beloved? deal faithfully with your souls on this
behalf, there is no dallying with the searcher of your hearts.

2, Have you given up your hearts and selves irrevocably, irreversibly,
finally? there is no playing fast and loose with the great God, you must not
give and take again, that is fools play: but you must be for ever the Lords, all
your days, devote your selves to keep his commandments unto the end, not like
some servants that will keep to their Masters, as long as they like, or while
they please them, but this is a boaring through the ear to be the Lord's
servants for ever; it is a marriage that lasts for term of life, I will call
upon him, says David, as long as I live, Psalm. 116.2. it is the hollow-hearted
Hypocrite that ends his Religion before he have ended his days, that puts his
hand to the Plow and looks back, that falls off when tribulation comes; but a
Covenanting spirit is a constant spirit; whose house are we, says the Apostle,
if we hold fast the confidence, and the rejoicing of the hope firmly unto the
end, Heb. 3.6. it is the end that crowns the action; Solomon says, the end of
a thing is better than the beginning: Christ says, if ye continue in my word,
then are ye my disciples indeed, Col. 1.23.1 Tim. 4.16. Jam. 1.25.
Joh. 8.31. and many Scriptures make this a condition without which no
salvation: and though the end is not yet come, yet is it the desire and design
of your souls to pray, and read and serve God all your days? you do not, you
dare not set bounds, limits to your obedience; but say as David, Psalm. 71.14. I
will hope continually, and will yet praise thee more and more, q. d. I am so
far from casting away my hope and faith that I will continue, yea and increase
in the exercises of Religion: do you resolve with David to keep Gods Law
continually, yea for ever and ever, Psalm. 119.44. and praying still for
supporting Grace, v. 117. using all the rest of God's appointed means for your
perseverance to the end.

Thus I have dispatched this part of the trial, which is general, to try whether
we be entered into Covenant with God by these reciprocal acts of giving and
receiving, whether you have taken God for your God, and given up your selves to
him, as Covenanted souls are wont to do: give me leave, for a close of this
head, to sum up the most that I have said in the Divine Poem of that
incomparable sweet Singer of our Israel, Mr. George Herbert, in the Clasping of
hands, page 151.

Lord thou art mine, and I am thine,
If mine I am; and thine much more,
Then I or ought, or can be mine,
Yet to be thine does me restore;
So that again I now am mine,
And with advantage mine the more:
Since this being mine, brings with it thine,
And thou with me do thee restore.
If I without thee would be mine,
I neither should be mine nor thine.
Lord, I am thine, and thou art mine:
So mine thou art, that something more
I may presume thee mine then thine,
For thou did suffer to restore
Not thee, but me, and to be mine:
And with advantage mine the more,
Since thou in death wast none of thine,
Yet thee as mine did me restore.
O be mine still, still make me thine;
Or rather make no Thine and Mine.
More particularly, I entreat you to enquire into the conditions of the new
Covenant, or the graces and dispositions promised therein, and lay your hand on
your heart, and enquire whether they be really in you, such as these.

1. I told you saving illumination is one great Covenant-condition; Jer. 31.33.
has the Lord discovered to you the great and good things of his Gospel?
opened to you his blessed treasury, and anointed your eyes to behold all
things in their lively colors; have you got a clear discovery of the nature of
sin, duty, misery, mercy, the creatures vanity, Christ's beauty, and
excellency? have you with an Eagle-eye pierced into deep Gospelmysteries? this
is not a brain-knowledge consisting in notion, but an experimental spiritual
acquaintance with the things of God, weighting the soul with the sense thereof,
and leading it into the life and soul of Scripture-truths; so that a Christian
now sees Divine things after another manner than ever before, and is led into
all truth by the blessed Spirit: God promises that all the Churches Children
shall be taught of God, Isa. 54.13. which Scripture our Savior does cite and
interpret, Joh. 6.45. of believing or coming to God, every one therefore that
has heard and learned of the Father, comes unto me. Ah Christians, have you
learned this choice Gospel-lesson of going out of your selves, and closing with
a naked Christ, upon pure Gospel-terms? this is the great lesson of the Gospel,
have you learned it? you are dunces, and deserve to be kicked out of Christ's
school, unless you have learned this great and sweet lesson; Besides God
teaches many other lessons, as to hate sin, love God, and holiness, and to
love God's Children; Hence says blessed Paul, 1 These. 4.9. as touching
brotherly love; ye need not that I write unto you, for ye your selves are
taught of God to love one another; this divine nature prompteth souls to this;
they cannot do otherwise except they put off their very nature; for a Christian
may find his heart secretly and sensibly carried out to all things and persons
that have the stamp and image of God, as the very name and the common nature of
a Brother is potent and prevalent to attract the affections: Cathedram habet in
Coelis qui corda docet. Quando deus est ma^ister q^am cito do itur, quod
do^itur. Aug.
the truth is, he has his Chair in Heaven that thus teaches hearts; and if
God be the teacher, he makes apt and able, nimble and notable Scholars. Oh
Christians, see and try your learning, enquire who is your master.

2. Another disposition like this, or indeed a fruit of the former is, God's
writing his Law in our hearts, Jer. 31.33. Heb. 8.10. 10.16.
he promises to put his Law into their inward parts, and write it in their
hearts; so that as Talley answers to Talley, Indenture to Indenture, Face to
Face, so the heart shall echo and answer to the Word of God; and feel
something within his own bosom, that joins issue with the word without; so
that a gracious soul can now say with Paul, Romans 7.12, 16.
I consent to the Law that it is good; whatever I be, the commandment is holy,
just, and good, a carnal heart rises up in Rebellion against the word, and
secretly loathes a spiritual command and could wish it even razed out of the
Bible, that it might sin more freely, but a gracious soul loves that word best,
that restrains corruption most, and binds it closest in new obedience; hence
says David, thy word is very pure, therefore thy servant loves it, Psalm.
119.140. Praest^a ^i cor tuum molle tractabile and custodi figuram quae te
figuravit Artifex, habens in semetipso humorem, ne induratus -- amittas
vestigia digitorum ejus. Iraen. advers. Haer. lib. 4. prop. fin.
the stricter the Word is, the better I love it; I would have the Law of God
restrain the exorbitancies of my heart and life, it does me good to be kept in,
for I have a wild and wayward heart: Oh how glad am I of a word that searches,
curbeth, and cutteth off my extravagant branches, I willingly fall under it and
bless God for it, as one of the greatest mercies of my life: can you say thus?
when there is a controversy betwixt a pinching word and a repining lust,
whether do you vote for? which do you give your voice for, and plead on the
behalf of? can you not take God's part, and the words part against a naughty
deceitful heart? or do you pick quarrels with the statutes of Heaven when you
should obey it? Ah sirs, try your selves in this, and if you find that you have
a counterpane of Gods Word within you, a transcript of this blessed Copy in
your hearts, then are you within the Covenant.

3. God promises to give his people in Covenant with him, one heart and one
way, Jer. 32.39. this imports both an oneness of heart within it self, and also
an oneness of heart with other Saints; before Conversion the heart was divided
and distracted betwixt various objects; God must have part, Satan part, sin
part, and the world another part of the heart; but now the soul gives it self
wholly to God, as I have opened, hence David prays, unite my heart to fear thy
name, Psalm 86.11.
or make my heart one; a real Saint is fully entirely, universally given up to
God; but of this before; likewise the Covenant of Grace makes Christians
unanimous; hence it is that as soon as souls have given up themselves to God,
they essay to join themselves to their fraternity, Act. 9.26.
and unite with the Society of sincere believers; hence the primitive Saints
were together with one accord; Act. 2.46. cap. 4.32.
yea they were of one heart, and of one soul; as the Curtains of the Tabernacle
were coupled with loops, so were Christians with love; hence you hear so often
mention made of fellowship in the Gospel, Phil. 1.5. Ephesians. 2.21.
and Gods Children are compared to a building fitly framed together, by the
cement of the Spirit; yea to members of the body, with relation to the head,
Col. 2.19.
from whom ( i.e. Christ) the whole body fitly joined together, and compacted
-- Ephesians. 4.16. Well then, sirs, are you united and become one with the rest of
the Saints, though you cannot attain to a oneness in judgment in every lesser
truth about Discipline, etc. yet are you one with them in heart and affection?
Yea of one judgment and way with them, in main material points of doctrine and
practice, having one Lord, Ephesians. 4.3, 4, 5.
one faith, one Baptism, endeavoring to keep the unity of the spirit in the
bond of peace, cannot you say to others come, let us join our selves to the
Lord in a perpetual Covenant, Jer. 50.4, 5.
that shall not be forgotten? are not your hearts glad when you see any come
in, and Worship the Lord? how stand your ^earts affected toward such as fear
God? ^re you of one heart with them, can you ^heerfully walk in one way with
them as ^our sweetest companions? is your chief ^ontent in these truly
excellent ones? then ^ou are in Covenant.

4. The fear of God, is a gracious disposition promised to new covenant
Converts, Jer. 32.40, I will, says God, Job 28 28.
put my fear ^n their hearts that they shall not depart from ^e; this fear of
the Lord is the beginning of Wisdom; and it is often put for all Religion; it is
a holy reverential awefulness wrought in a believers heart, whereby through a
serious sense of Gods glorious Majesty and tender mercy the soul is afraid ^o
offend God, and careful to please him as ^ Child is his Father, by a
conscientious obedience to all Gods commands. I cannot stand to open this
fully, but bring you to the ^est; Christians, does the fear of God pos^ess and
seize upon your spirits? does it make you men of truth, hating covetousness?
Exodus 28.21. Heb. 12.28.
does it engage your souls to serve him with reverence and godly fear? does it
make you afraid of his threatenings, Prove. 3 7. Psa^. 5.7.
fearful to offend him, careful to please him? do you worship him in his fear?
Prove. 14.26. Prove. 23.17. Mat. 10 28. Phil. 2.12. Isa. 66.2. Isa. 50.11.
does it make you run to him as your hope and confidence? are your souls in the
fear of the Lord all the day long? does the fear of God cast out the slavish
fear of men? does it make you work out your salvation with fear and trembling?
does it make you tremble at his word, and willing to obey the voice of his
servants? does it keep you humble, self-denying, from being proud high-minded?
Romans 11.20. Rev. 14.7. Act 10.35. Prove. 14.16.
do you fear God and give glory to him in seeing his works: in a word do you
fear God and work righteousness, fear God and hate wickedness: is it thus with
your souls? lay your hand upon your heart, and seriously answer these
questions; I know you will all say you have the fear of God; but whether has it
these Prophecies? and one word more, whence springs this fear of God? does it
flow not only from the apprehension of God's Majesty and strict justice, but
from the sense of his free grace and goodness; so God says in Hos. 3.5. they
shall fear the Lord, and his goodness; so says David, Psalm. 130.4. there is
mercy with thee that thou may be feared; Oh this is kindly, when the sense of
Gods love awes the soul to obedience, and works upon it tenderness of
Conscience, that it can say, I dare not grieve so good a God, or offend so
loving a Father, who never did me hurt, who is always doing me good, shall I
render evil for good? God forbid: this is Childlike and ingenuous, and does
demonstrate a Covenant Relation.

5. Sanctification is another Covenant-promise, Ezekiel. 36.25. then will I
sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye shall be clean from all your filthiness,
and from all your Idol^ will I cleanse you: this is a sweet disposition, what
can you say to it? not that the soul in this life can be free from the
remainders of corruption; for what is man that ^e should be clean? but the
power, Job 15.14.
strength and Dominion of sin is crushed in a Covenanted soul; so that it may
be truly said of the Regenerate, that he has a clean heart, Psalm. 24.4. Joh.
13.10.
and clean hands; and Christ says his Disciples were clean, all, except Judas;
Well then, ^hath the good Word of God made you holy, Joh. 15.3.
and cleansed your hearts? do you desire to make clean the inside of the Cup,
as well as outside? I mean do you cleanse your selves from all filthiness of
flesh and spirit, resolving to perfect holiness in the fear of God? 2 Cor. 7.1.
Job 17.9.
are you growing stronger and stronger? he that ^hath clean hands does renew
his strength: are you washed from your idols, i. e. the sin to which you are
most addicted? Psalm. 18.23.
and keep your selves from your own iniquity? can you say you hate every false
way? can you cut off a right hand sin, pluck out a right-eye sin, though never
so dear and useful, pleasant and profitable: do you resist and conquer (in some
measure) your masterlusts? so that you can say, through grace, Romans 6.14.
sin has not Dominion over you, though you feel to your cost it has
possession in you: can you say you are prepared for duties and ordinances, 2 Chronicles. 30.19 -- Act. 15.9. Psalm. 119.9.
though you be not cleansed according to the purification of the sanctuary?
does faith in God's promises purify your hearts? do you cleanse your ways by
observing Scripture-precepts? Psalm. 51.10.
do you pray hard, for a clean heart as well as clear state? Oh sirs, try your
selves in these things, unless you be sanctified you are not justified, many
are undone through self-deceit, in this case, Solomon says, there is a
generation that are pure in their own eyes, yet is not cleansed from their
filthiness, Prove. 30.12. take heed of this, and labor to evidence your
justification by your sanctification.

6. Another gracious effect of the New Covenant is, A new heart, and a new
spirit, Ezekiel. 36.26. this is an holy disposition, an habit of grace, the image
of God, the Divine nature strangely changing, altering, metamorphosing the
soul, casting it into a new mold, and turning the stream and current of the
souls motions and affections into another channel, to a compliance with God's
will, and a tendency toward Heaven, and the things of Heaven: this is a
wonderful act and fruit of God's free grace, and sanctifying spirit: and oh
what a change does it, produce in the heart and life! not only a mental change
to have the mind adorned with some general truths in a notional way; so that
whereas before a man was an ignorant Sot, now he is grown a knowing person, and
learned discourser or disputant; nor yet is it only a moral change, whereby a
man formerly a notorious offender is grown an exact Civilian; nor yet a formal
change by which a careless neglecter is become a constant performer of
religious duties, which is good so far, yet no more than an hypocrite may do;
Simon Magus believes, Herod does many things, Ahab fasts, Judas can Pray and
Preach. But the new creature goes beyond them all, for it is a Cordial,
Spiritual, Evangelical change of the whole man, to what is good; so that now
the soul has new motions, actions, conversation, a new rule, a new principle,
a new end, new affections, new loves and delights, a new light and life, new
heat and strength, new companions and acquiescence, new griefs, fears, burdens,
back, hopes, hatred, desires, and expectations, old things are past away, and
behold, all things are become new; so that it may well be called a new
Creation, 2 Cor. 5.17. Christians, try your selves in this, what work of God
has passed upon your souls? have you a new heart? are you made holy as God is
holy? does this new heart hate and expel sin? does it close with real Saints as
Saints? does it breathe after Grace in the souls of relations, neighbors? does
it make you sensible of the smilings and hidings of God's face? does it raise
your hearts to heavenly objects and delights? does Grace in some measure g^^w,
thrive, increase and come on in your souls? do you Worship God in a spiritual
manner, and long for Communion with him here, and in Heaven?

7. A soft heart is promised in the new Covenant, Ezekiel. 36.26. I will take away
the stony heart out of your flesh, and give you an heart of flesh, i. e. a
soft, broken and tender heart, a flexible, plyant, and melting disposition; not
so much the eyes pouring floods of tears (for that may proceed from a natural
constitution) but a soul grieved for sin, as offense against God, which lies in
the sinners account and estimation, looking upon it as the greatest evil, and
worse than the worst affliction; and if it were to do again, he would rather be
torn to pieces, than willingly commit such a sin, he would give all the World,
(if in his power) that it were undone again: and therefore is it that the
Scripture rather expresses it by mourning than by weeping; for weeping is
rather a passionate act of the outward senses and irascible faculties, (though
it is desirable to give vent to inward sorrow by outward tears) but mourning is
an heart-contrition and hearty compunction for sin, as dishonouring God,
grieving his Spirit, Crucifying his Son, and violating his holy and righteous
Law: well then, have you soft and tender hearts? i. e. can you lay to heart
your sins as the greatest evils that ever befell you? can you justify God if
he should condemn you; can you condemn your selves, as worthy to be damned in
Hell for ever? do you loath your selves for all your abominations? can you wish
you had been upon the rack when you committed such sins? are you weary and
heavy laden with the intolerable burden of the guilt of sin? and what would you
give or leave to have it taken off? is your heart sensible of the absolute need
you have of Jesus Christ? are you soft and pliable to Gods holy will, attentive
to Divine motions, retentive of Divine impressions? does the least hint of
God's mind find in you an observant spirit? when God says, seek my face, does
your heart readily echo, thy face Lord will I seek? do your souls tremble
under sense of threatenings and judgments? do the apprehensions of Gods
loving kindness melt and attract your heart? does this strongly lead and draw
you to repentance? ask your own souls such questions as these, whereby you may
know whether you have this condition and disposition of the Gospel Covenant.

8. The last disposition that is promised in the New Covenant, as a singular
mercy, is holy practice, spiritual obedience, so Ezekiel. Si ergo talis fucrit
vita nostra, ita omnibus membris qua^rata and composita ut universi motus
nostri secundum Dei? Leges agantur vere testamentum Dei erit super carnem
nostram. Orig. Hom. 3. in cap. 17. genesis
36.27. I will put my spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my statutes,
and ye shall keep my judgments and do them -- this is an holy, watchful,
cheerful, faithful, fruitful obedience to Divine precepts and commands: so then
let me pose you thus, do you run the ways of Gods commandments, with enlarged
hearts; do you follow God fully, and walk with God uprightly? do you delight to
do Gods will, and in all things mind your rule? does the mind of God move you
more than the customs and traditions of men? though you cannot say you do
exactly keep, yet cannot you say you have respect to all Gods commandments? are
you like the Centurion's servants ready to go or come at Gods biding? does the
Authority of a divine command more awe your conscience to obedience, than the
examples of most or best of men? do you with Zechariah and Elizabeth walk in
all the ways of Gods commandments blameless? do you take heed to your ways that
you offend not with tongue or hand or foot? do you worship God in the beauty of
holiness? do you make it your business to engage your hearts in your approaches
to God? do you lift up your hearts in Gods ways, that God and you may meet? do
you worship God in the spirit, rejoice in Christ Jesus, not having any
confidence in the flesh? in a word, do you gladly follow Christ's example, study
conformity to him, and communion with him? is faith working by love? and does
that love engage you to keep Gods commands, and render them not grievous but
pleasant? do you account Christ's yoke easy, his burden light, and his service
perfect freedom? and are you constant and permanent in holy walking all your
days? and though you may stumble and fall, or turn aside, or stand still, or
turn back, yet you dare not quit and forsake Gods ways or choose the ways of
sin, to go aside with the workers of iniquity, but you lament your
miscarriages, are restless till you get into Gods ways again, plead hard for
pardon, are more jealous over your hearts, make more haste Godwards, and so
through grace, keep faithful to death that you may receive a Crown of life.

Thus I have gleaned up the conditions or dispositions of Gods Children which
are promised by God, purchased by Christ, and effectually wrought by the
blessed spirit in the hearts of the elect, and these are the mercies of the
Covenant, by which you may try whether you be interested in the Covenant; for
if you find these new-Covenant-mercies in you, you may conclude you have an
interest in new Covenant-priviledges.

Another way of trial (which I shall but briefly hint at) is to discover the
properties and effects of new Covenant-mercies, upon the souls of such as
partake of them; i. e. those benefits and privileges of the Covenant, as
Reconciliation, Adoption, Remission of sin, imputation of Christ's
Righteousness, and the rest beforementioned leave gracious effects upon the
hearts of such, as partake thereof -- Take a taste;

1. They are transforming conforming mercies, they change heart and life, as
before; yea, and they make the soul argue from mercy to duty; that soul that
partakes of these mercies, dare not sin, that Grace may abound, nor argue from
mercy to sinful liberty, much less make Christian liberty a cloak of
lasciviousness; oh no, that is the devils Logic, a Child of God thinks and thus
reasons, did Christ dye for me, and shall not I dye unto sin, and live unto him
that dyed for me? shall my dear Savior shed his blood for me; and shall I
think any thing too dear for him? shall he forgive much to me, and shall not I
give all I have to him? shall not I love him much? pray much, obey much? O my
soul, how can thou choose but live in new obedience? does not the love of
Christ constrain thee? has he reconciled thee to God, and God to thee; and
wilt not thou be reconciled to thy offending brother? has he forgiven thee ten
thousand Talents, gratis, and wilt not thou forgive such as offend thee a few
farthings for Christ's sake? has God given thee himself and do thou withhold
any part of thy poor, silly, sorry self from him? nay here I am, let him work
in me, and do with me as seems good in his eyes.

2. They are chearing, comforting, and refreshing mercies; these mercies of the
Covenant will answer all objections, clear all scores, and put the soul out of
doubt concerning its state. Let the Devil and an unbelieving heart conspire
together to torment the Conscience, yet one word of the blessed Covenant will
baffle all their arguings, and stop their mouths, and still the soul; let God
speak out and say, I am thy God in Covenant, who then can cause trouble? this
was all David's Salvation, Desire, and Consolation. One drop of this holy Oil
of the Covenant will sweeten a whole Fountain and Sea of the bitter Waters of
the sharpest afflictions; a taste of the Covenant will turn Water into Wine;
this is the Tree cast into the bitter Waters of Marah, Isa. 33.24.
that makes them sweet; sense of pardon takes away the sense of the pain: if a
particular promise can so comfort a soul, as it may be called a cordial. Oh
what comfort will the Covenant afford? which is a cluster and constellation of
Evangelical promises, the good things of the new Covenant keep head above
Water, and heart above terror in all conditions: these steel the soul with
courage in difficulties, comfort in Adversity, and an Antidote in prosperity.

3. These mercies of the Covenant are raising, reviving, elevating mercies,
they lift the heart above the World, and advance it to Divine Celestial
objects and Conceptions; Rev. 12.1. Col. 3.1. Phil. 3.8, 9.
a Christian thus clothed with the Sun, has the Moon under his feet, and all
Sublunary enjoyments at his heels; Christ and things above lie next his heart;
other things are dross and dung in comparison thereof; a Covenanted Christians
Treasure is in Heaven, and his heart is there; he preferrs a grain of Grace to
all the comforts of the World; common mercies will not content his heart, or
quiet his Conscience; he opens his Heaven-born soul to Heavenly influences; he
can easily wink all the bravery of this lower World into blackness and
deformity, and pity the sottish senseless sons of men that take up their rest
below, and neglect the main concernments of Eternity. Ah, thinks the gracious
soul, what fools are these that chase these gilded vanities, and pant after
the dust of the Earth? would to God they did but see with these enlightened eyes
that Gods spirit has helped me to. Oh that they did but taste the sweetness of
that Grace that my soul is enamoured with, they would thirst after the World no
more, but long for God, yea this living, loving God, and never be content till
they come to appear before God. How blessed are they that have their sins
pardoned, hearts purged, souls reconciled? that have God for their portion, and
Heaven for their inheritance and eternal mansion?

4. The mercies of the Covenant are enlarging and increasing mercies; the
Christian that has them is like the house of David, that grows stronger and
stronger; these are tending to perfection, and make the soul strive and thrive
in holiness; Prove. 4.18.
going from step to step, from strength to strength, pressing toward the mark,
rising as the Sun unto Noonday, or as the water to the spring; yea, this water
shall still be springing up to eternal life, Joh. 4.14. Grace makes the soul
long after means of growth, and so increase, with all increase of God, till it
be a perfect man in Christ; the soul is insatiable and never says it has
enough, till it have arrived to the measure of the stature of the fullness of
Christ, Ephesians. 4.13. yea, till it have attained to the resurrection of the
dead, Phil. 3.11. Oh sirs, examine your hearts herein, how do you come on and
increase in Religion? do you grow in grace, in knowledge, faith, love,
humility, repentance, selfdenyal, and heavenly-mindedness? where is your
proficiency? have you found grace like a grain of Mustard Seed? have these
mercies ripened into the blade and full ear of deliberate and proportionable
fruit-bearing? a right Christian will never say he is good enough while he
sojourns in this lower Region, nor yet happy enough till he be with God in
Heaven.

Thus much for the third Use, which was an Use of Examination.

CHAP. IX.
IV. THE fourth Use is of Conviction, Redargation and Reprehension, and this
falls heavy on the heads, 1. Of Sinners. 2. Of Saints.

1. If the mercies of the Covenant be sure mercies (as we have cleared fully)
Oh what folly are those souls guilty of that are Christless, graceless,
careless souls, that have no interest in these mercies, and never trouble
themselves about ensuring these Covenant-mercies to their own souls; how many
in the World are destitute of these mercies? there is a Generation of Men and
Women that live within the pale of the visible Church, that may be called
Lo-Ruhamah, for they have not yet obtained mercy; nay, in the state they are
in, there is no mercy for them, because they are not yet in Christ, through
whom these Covenant-mercies flow: unconverted souls are unconcerned persons in
these mercies; these dogs have nothing to do with this Childrens Bread; and yet
who so apt to catch and snatch these precious dainties? they love to hear the
glorious privileges of believers laid open, as Justification, Reconciliation,
Adoption, and eternal life; and yet we must sadly say they have nothing to do
with these: if they hear Discourses of Gods mercy, how are they pleased,
tickled, and even ravished? and they make no question but they shall be saved,
as well as others; and they think surely God that made them will not damn them,
but ask these poor souls whether they be savingly converted, renewed, ingrafted
into Christ by faith? alas they know not what this means; they never asked
their own souls the question; nay, they are ready, to think that is a very
needless enquiry, or impossible to know; however this never lay upon their
Hearts and Consciences, as necessary in order to clearing up this great case,
whether they have obtained mercy: But let all ignorant sots know that he that
made them will not have mercy on them, Isa. 27.11. let all profane Rebels
against the King of Heaven know that God will not be merciful to any wicked
Transgressor, Psalm. 59.5. Gods Attributes are all Analogal and Correspondent;
he will not cease to be just and holy that he may be merciful, he will be
merciful in his own way; Mercy and Covenant shall go hand in hand; it is a
ridiculous folly for men to conceit, they shall have the Mercies of the
Covenant that are not within the Covenant; this is that fallacy that Logicians
call (fallacia dividendi conjungenda) of dividing things to be conjoined; it is
most dangerous and damnable in Divinity, when souls dream of having peace
without grace, happiness without holiness; but let men know there is no mercy
but in the Covenant, where no ark of the Covenant no seat of mercy, where
there is no work of Grace, there is no Covenant of Grace; where Christ is a
Savior he will be a Sovereign, Act. 5.31. Act. 3.26.
where he gives remission of sins he will give repentance; his way of blessing
is a turning persons from their iniquities; God will not show mercy to any but
in his own way; such must obtain mercy in converting Grace, as obtain mercy in
the enjoyment of pardoning Grace; sanctification goes along with
Justification; Paul obtained mercy by forsaking his own old courses; 1 Timothy
1.13.
God saves us according to his mercy: how? why by the washing of Regeneration,
and renewing of the Holy Ghost, Titus 3.5. they are saved from sin, that are
saved from wrath and Hell: it is a self-deceiving soul-damning contradiction to
dream of pardoning, without purging grace; thousands in the World fancy a God
to themselves made up all of mercy, and let them do what they please, they can
bolster up themselves with this conceit, God is merciful; and so (as God
himself says) Psalm. 50.21. these things have thou done and I kept silence,
thou thoughtst that I was altogether such a one as thy self, but I will reprove
thee, and set thy sins in order before thee, q. d. think not to make me a
Patron of thy wickedness; it is true I spare thee and suffer thee to live
quietly, but forbearance is no acquittance; think not I love thee because I
afford thee outward mercies, which thou abusest to licentiousness, but I am
resolved to take vengeance on thee; I have justice, as well as mercy, and I
have a season wherein I shall pour out the Vials of any wrath upon Vessels of
wrath that are ^itted to destruction; a time is coming when ^ shall tear you in
pieces, and there shall be ^one to deliver. Oh sirs, the condition of graceless
unconverted souls is sad; for,

1. They are under a sure and sad sentence of condemnation; for as the mercies
^f the new Covenant are sure to believers, ^o the curses of the old Covenant
are as ^ure to all Unbelievers; as the second Adam conveys certain life; so the
first Adam conveys certain death to his seed: as he that believes on the Son
has everlasting life; so ^e that believes not shall not see life, but the
^rath of God abides on him, Joh. 3.36. as ^e that believes is acquitted, so he
that believes not is condemned already, ver. 18. all is other sins are bound
upon him by this ^f unblief; this is the condemnation; it is ^s impossible that
the Devils in Hell shall be saved as that Unconverted sinners (while such)
shall be saved; for Christ says again and again, except ye be Converted, Mat.
18. Joh. 3.35.
except a ^an be born again, he cannot see, he cannot ^nter into the Kingdom of
God, and binds it with strong asseverations, and dare any question the verity
of Gods positions or combinations, that pretends to believe his promise: yea,
God has bound him by oath ^n this case as well as in the other, Heb. ^.11.
it is spoken there concerning the rebellious murmuring Israelites; I swear in
any wrath, says God, they shall not enter into my rest; or if they shall
enter, then q. d. never trust me more; nay, let not me be God; but what is this
to us? Yes, the Apostle applies it to unbelievers in Gospel times, Gap. 4.1, 2,
3, 4, 5, etc. hence he repeats the Oath again referring to unbelieving
Gospellers; that they shall never enter into the Heavenly Canaan: and surely
unconverted sinners are in a woeful plight, of whom it may be truly said, that
God himself cannot save them while they continue in that state; for there is no
way but one of entering Heaven that is Jesus Christ; and how can they escape that
neglect so great salvation? Act. 4 12. Heb. 2.3.
there is no other way revealed, and do we think God will forsake his ordinary
Road, and quit this glorious design, to gratify a Generation of wilful
neglecters and rejecters of this blessed contrivance of saving sinners by
interest in Jesus Christ? it cannot be, you must either go to Heaven this way,
or down to Hell by your own way.

2. Their souls are not sure to be another moment out of Hell Torments; poor
graceless sinners cannot secure themselves upon any real Scripture-grounds,
that they shall enjoy that bastard peace of Conscience, in which they flatter
themselves another hour; for ought they know, their case may be like
Belshazzars, Dan. 5.5. while they are Drinking, Carousing, Ranting, Revelling,
some dreadful Handwriting or Testimony of Gods Indignation may break forth
against them which may mar all their mirth, appal their spirits, trouble their
thoughts, loose the joints of their Loins, and make their knees smite one
against another. Oh what terror and horror will the dreadful summons of death
strike into them? how will these foolhardy Warriers, against an infinite God,
call to the Rocks and Mountains to cover them? Oh what a sudden change, what a
sad Catastrophe will the cold hand of death make with them? what a fall will
these secure and senseless sinners have from the height of worldly preferment to
the depth of eternal torments? stand a little and look at that rich and
wretched miser ^n the Gospel, that had no room for his fruits and goods, that
sung a requiem to his soul for many years; Yet alas, had not one ^ight to take
his ease in, thou fool, See Luke 12.17, 18, 19, 20.
says God, this night shall thy soul be required ^f thee, or do they require
thy soul, i. e. the Devils who are waiting for a commission from God to catch
hold of graceless souls ^o hale them to torments as soon as they ^ave forsaken
their wretched bodies; so ^ome interpret it; however the rich man's ^oul was
suddenly snatched from a full Table and dainty Fare into eternal misery, without
drop of Water or hopes of mercy; for ^et him tear his heart with bitter
outcries; Father Abraham, have mercy on me, neither ^is Father Abraham, See
Luke 16.24, 25, 26.
nor the God of Abraham shall have any mercy for him; former offers of mercy
are now turned into flames of fury; they have wilfully forsaken their own
mercy, and now are woefully forsaken by the God of mercy. O consider this you
that are yet in your sins, dancing about the pit, and are ready every instant
to drop into eternal woe.

3. Their certain mistake will aggravate their woeful state. Oh what a dreadful
disappointment will this be, for persons that lived demurely in the World, and
passed for very civil neighbors; yea, for choice Saints, yet now to be set on
the left hand amongst the Goats at the great day; yea, persons that thought
themselves they were in the ready Road to Heaven; and as they are (as they
imagine) stepping into glory to miss their footing, and fall into Eternal
Torments; it is a dreadful sight to see soul and hopes giving up the Ghost
together, Job 11.20. c. 8.14.
and swept away as the Spiders Web into the fire of Hell. Oh for a soul that
has all his days been building Castles in the Air; the House of his fair
profession upon the sliding sand of Fancy and Imagination, to have all come
tottering down with one puff of death, will be a dreadful sight. Ministers told
them of this, but they would not believe, nor suspect their state, or spend one
hour in searching whether they were right or no; many a time were they warned
of the danger: but they pleased themselves in wilful self-delusion; and now
they are past recovery: they would not be brought to an holy despair in
themselves, that they might have sure footing in these sure mercies; and now
they shall and must despair of ever having part or portion in these sweet and
certain mercies: they would not be beaten from their carnal shifts and senseless
Pleas, and now they must and shall be for ever banished from them; and feel the
bitterness of them: Ministers could not deal with them, but God can; and it
will be an heart-confounding day, when the varnish shall be washed off, and all
rotten props shall be plucked up, that kept the soul from horror, and they
shall see themselves deceived by Satan, the World, and their own
self-flattering hearts into eternal misery.

4. But once more, many things in and about these sure mercies, will augment
their eternal misery. Alas, sirs, here there is no speaking to wicked men, they
will not abide a sober Treaty about their souls, they have not leisure or
patience to yield an observant Ear to Discourses about these sure mercies, but
a time is coming wherein they shall be forced to think of these lost mercies to
their cost; now they have other things to mind, the world does so fill their
ears and hearts, that they thrust these things from them, and judge themselves
unworthy of them: they are just like Jeremiah's wild Ass used to the
Wilderness, Jer. 2.24.
that snuffeth up the wind at her pleasure, in her occasion who can turn her
away? -- but in her month they shall find her. So there is no dealing with
wicked men in their jollity and frolic fits, but their month of sorrow is
approaching either here or hereafter; and oh the bitter pangs and travels that
shall then possess them? in this World they would not consider, but hereafter
they shall have an Eternity to consider of these Covenant-mercies, though in a
hopeless way: as 1. They shall think of the nature of these mercies they have
lost. Oh how free, how sweet, how suitable, how satisfying were they? how sure
would God have made them to them? and the better these mercies, the bitterer
their sorrow in the loss of them. 2. They shall think that once they might have
enjoyed them, and have been happy in that enjoyment; once they had a day of
grace, means of grace, ministers persuaded, spirit moved, mercies, afflictions,
word, rod, every thing spoke this language. Oh embrace these mercies, but I
refused; and now they are out of my reach. 3. They shall think, and think
again, how near they were to the embracing of these mercies; Oh what
convictions did God fasten on my heart by such and such a Sermon! I was once
half-perswaded to embrace them, how near was I to a full closure? I went home
with strong resolutions to be another man; but this deceitful heart beguiled
me, and so I put off repentance till now it be too late. 4. They shall think
what these mercies would have done for them; these mercies would have infolded
their souls in the arms of Gods love; these would have filled their souls with
Grace, fitted them for Gods use, and furnished them for glory, these mercies
would have rendered them profitable in life, comfortable in death, and happy for
ever; the possessours of these mercies are gracious Saints; Yet again, 5. They
shall think with sadness what they have exchanged these mercies for; they have
passed off these sweet and sure mercies for trash and trifles, for dung and
dirt, for a little stinking pleasure or stinging profit, which now they have
left behind them in the World, and only carry the guilt and shame along with
them, which must abide them, when sensual delights are vanished away. Oh what
gnashing of teeth and indignation at themselves will this beget for their
former madness? 6. They must think how many thousands of souls were made happy
by a gracious closure with and full enjoyment of these mercies; persons whom
they despised in the World, and thought not worthy to come in their company,
shall sit down with the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles in Heaven; but these
wretched souls are thrust out. Oh, will a damned wretch think, I might have
been happy as well as yonder shining Saint; he was a suffering Creature, I was
a rejoicing miscreant; now he is comforted, and I am tormented. Yet, once more,
7. The damned in Hell shall bethink themselves who was in the fault, and whence
it comes to pass that these mercies were not made sure to their souls; and they
can charge none herewith but themselves: they will then see that none was to be
blamed but their own wilful wills, whatever they may object here, and boast
that they are willing, yet God lays the blame there, and so shall they, will
they, nill they, they must be speechless, and only charge themselves as making
faggots to burn them in for ever. Oh, will the soul think, I may thank my self
for this; I wilfully forsook my own mercies by observing lying vanities; this
is the fruit of mine own doings, I would needs be damned; Ministers and Godly
friends persuaded, God stopped my way by his Providence, Ordinances, but I would
run into the pit, and here I am shut up in eternal darkness; woe be to me, that
ever I was born. Oh that I had either never heard of or embraced those mercies,
that I have rejected, and that will follow my soul with horror for ever.

Ah sirs, I beseech you consider, such a day will come, and then you will remember
these things, and they will lie heavy upon you, then you will feel what an evil
and bitter thing it is that you have forsaken God: then you will vomit up your
sweet morsels, and remember these sweet words that here you despised, Psalm.
141.6.
then you will remember the possibility and probability you were once in, of
obtaining these sweet mercies; now they are attainable; but if once you have
set a step upon the shore of Eternity, You are past hopes and remedy, for the
dead and damned do only hear the sound of wisdom with their ears, Job 28.22.
but are never likely to enjoy the benefit thereof. Oh put not off these things
with some slight and transient thoughts; but shame yourselves to an holy
diligence.

2. Another sort to be reproved, are Gods own children that are guilty of four
foul faults: 1. They are apt to indent. 2. Compound about these mercies. 3.
They do not live upon: Or 4. Not up to these mercies.

1. Gods Children would have the mercies of the Covenant; but then they have a
mind to indent with God to be secured from the crosses attending these mercies;
the flesh shrinks and is loath to suffer; we are like Orpah, we would follow
Christ a little way, but fain would we make our bargain so, as not to follow
him in foul way: But sirs, consider would you have the sweets and not the
bitter of Godliness? did you not take Christ (in a marriage-covenant) for
better and worse? will you pick and choose with him? do not right virgin-souls
follow the Lamb whither-soever he goes? Ah sirs, this Covenant Relation is an
express, voluntary, universal, unreserved self-resignation: the bearing of the
Cross was always supposed and employed; Mat. 10.37, 38. Mark 10.30.
and if you will not have him with it, you are to be without it; for the Cross
is [Evangelii genius] the very inseparable property, complexion, and companion
of the Gospel: and Christ would not have any cheated with imaginary hopes of
immunity from sufferings, Luke 14.28.
but tells them the worst, and bids them sit down and count the cost; and if
you did not so at first, you are not yet sincere, and if you did, and still
would have Christ; why do you now grumble at bearing of that which you freely
chose. Besides, know it, Crosses for Christ are special Gospel-mercies, for
afflictions are adopted to be real mercies of the Covenant, and therefore they
are promised as well as any other mercies, in Psalm. 89.31, 32. and David ownes
afflictions as an act and fruit of Covenant-faithfulness, Psalm. 119.75. ver.
67.71.
because it fetches him from his wanderings, instructs him in Gods statutes,
and therefore was good for him. Crosses for Christ never did any hurt, but have
been usually means of good, many Christians have blessed God for them; God sees
we cannot live or like well without them; Paul gloried in the Cross of Christ,
took pleasure in distresses for Christ, and why then are we afraid of them, or
would indent to be secured from them: be ashamed of your nice and delicate
spirits.

2. Some Christians are too too apt to compound with God about these
Covenant-mercies; In closing with offers of Grace, we must be uniform: earthly
things God is pleased to retail: all have some, none have all: but in the
Heavenly Treasure, he will not break the whole piece, and cut it into Remnants;
if God would cut off as much as would serve men's turn, he should have customers
enough. Mr. Gurnal Christ. armor -- page 310.
my meaning is, they do not look and make out for the whole chain, composition
and combination (as I may say) of Covenant-mercies, they are willing and
content to be put off with some, and do not sue for all: they can apply some
promises, not others; see a necessity of pardoning-mercy, but do not plead and
act-faith for purging, softening, quickening, enlightening mercies of the
Covenant. Consider, Christians, by this doing, 1. You prejudice your selves,
you need all these Covenant-mercies; there is not one of the forementioned
mercies, that a Christian can live and thrive without; all are of great use,
every one has its peculiar excellency, a gracious soul cannot spare any of
them; nay, it is a sin for it to be content with less than God has promised; he
that is not for all, is truly for none at all: the true owner will not divide:
in one part of your life or other, you will want all Covenant-mercies; it is base
unworthiness and ingratitude to slight any of them. 2. You dishonor God, and
disparage these mercies, as if God were not able to give you all, and pay the
whole debt of his free and full promise; as for example, suppose a rich
Tradesman owe you a sum of money, and you come to him and tell you are willing
to abate him so much, and compound with him, and take of him a shilling in the
pound, or a pound in the hundred for the whole debt, he looks upon himself as
disparaged, being a sufficient Chapman, he will not have his ability or honesty
questioned; but quickly answers, what do you think I am breaking? I will not be
abated any thing, here is your money, i will pay you all: so God would not be
compounded with; he looks upon it as a dishonor to his free grace and
faithfulness, and bids the soul open its mouth wide, and promises to fill it,
Psalm. 81.10. i. e. ask great things, many things, sp^^^ not, ask what thou
need, ask what I have promised, I am neither scant nor saint in giving,
stint not thy self in asking, I shall not send thee away empty; they that come
for most, speed best; and when thou have gone to the utmost extent of thy reach
in asking, I can, and will give thee abundantly more than thou art able to ask
or think, Ephesians. 3.20. Oh Christians, chide your selves for your sinful
mannerliness and modesty; and widen your contracted spirits for larger in-comes
of Grace and Mercy. Remember, these Covenant-supplyes are all of mercy, not
deserved, and they are mercies in the plural, containing large and liberal
revenues to be communicated to indigent wanting souls.

3. God's Children do not live upon these mercies of the Covenant; we blame
them that have good estates, and live besides them; and well we may, for it is a
base and a beggarly practice, when persons have enough, but want power to eat,
take their portion, and enjoy the good of all they have; Eccles. 5.18, 19.
this is a sore evil, and a sad curse, and the contrary is good, comely, a
sweet blessing, and the very gift of God: and Oh what a sad evil for the Saints
of God, heirs of Promise to live off their Estates, none so rich as real
Saints, they are heirs to a very vast inheritance; Psalm. 16.5.
God himself is their portion; yea, the portion of their inheritance, and of
their cup, he maintains their lot; they have enough, and they cannot lose what
they have. Oh at what high rates should such rich heirs live? and what an
unworthy degenerate spirit does it import to live so beggarly as most of us do?
As, 1. To live so much by sense, and so little by faith; Hab. 2.3. Romans 1.17. 2
Cor. 5.7. Heb. 11.
it is the Gospel-character of believers, to live by their faith; walk by faith
and not by sense, or ^ight, to see him that is invisible, to venture their all
upon unseen grounds: and Oh what a noble and generous, what a brave and blessed
life is the life of faith! and on the contrary, what a sorry and sordid, what
(...) beggarly and niggardly life is a life of ^ense! such a soul goes a
begging, and craves (...) crumb of one, a morsel of another to make (...) meal
of, and still the souls Stomach is hungry and craving, and at the best, how
quick^y are they gone? alas firs, objects of sense will not carry you through
the World; sense will sink with Peter where it cannot feel a (...) bottom; it is
faith only that will lift the ^ead above water, and heart above terror; when
you must pass through a sea of sor^ows in this tumultuous World: Christians,
where is your faith? you are distinguished from others by this precious grace:
the ^ant of this undoeth us: hence it is, 2. That Gods Children are so often at
a loss, and ^now not what to do; no wonder if they be at their wits end, when
they are at their faiths end: many conditions; yea, any affliction will throw a
Saint upon his back when he stands not upon the feet of faith, or leans not
upon Christ by faith: this is the reason why in temptation we cry out, God has
cast me off for ever, and he will be favorable no more; and we give up the
Buckler, and yield to Satan's assaults and demands, which becomes our enemies
sport, and our bane; yea any little loss or cross^ dismays us, as though we
were undone, or as though (with poor Jacob, once) our life were bound up in a
Ladd, or Bagg, or such like silly sorry things. Psalm. 37.4.1 Sam. 30.6.
Ah, dear sirs, where is your delight in God? where is your encouraging your
selves in God? Hab. 3.16, 17.
where is your rejoicing in the Lord with Habakkuk when (...) Cloud or Curtain
has covered all your worldly enjoyments? why do you not oppose one God to all
the Armies of evils that beset you round? why do you not take the more content
in God, when you have the less of the creature to take content in why do you
not boast in your God? and bear up your selves bigg with your hope in God and
expectations from him? do you not see young heirs to great Estates, ac^ and
spend accordingly? and why shall you being the King of Heaven's Sons be lea^
and ragged from day to day, as though you were not worth a Groat? Oh sirs, liv^
upon your portion, chide your selves for living besides what you have, there
are great and precious promises, rich enriching mercies, you may make use of
God's al-sufficiency; you can blame none but your selves if you be defective or
discouraged: a Woman truly Godly for the main, having buried a Child, and
sitting alone in sadness, did yet cheer up her heart with this expression, God
lives, and having parted with another, still she redoubled, Comforts dye, but
God lives, at last her dear Husband dies, and she sat oppressed and almost
overwhelmed with sorrow, a little Child she had yet surviving, having observed
what before she spoke to comfort her self, comes to her, and says, is God
dead? Mother, is God dead? this reached her heart, and by Gods blessing
recovered her former confidence in her God, who is a living God: thus do you
chide your selves, ask your fainting spirits under pressing, outward sorrows,
is not God alive? and why then does not thy soul revive? why does thy heart dye
within thee when comforts dye? cannot a living God support thy dying hopes?
thus Christians argue down your discouraged and disquieted spirits as David
did, Psalm. 42.5. But so much for that:

4. As Christians do not live upon, so they do not live up to these Sure
Mercies of David, and that in their Walking, so, 1. Unholily. 2. Unsteadily. 3.
Uncomfortably. 4. Unfruitfully.


1. Many of Gods Children walk unsuitably, i. e. unholily, unspiritually,
untenderly, not with that conscientiousness, exactness and closeness they ought
to do: if Gods Children lived up to their mercies and privileges: oh how holy
should they be, seeing that these things shall be dissolved and seeing we look
for such things, nay, seeing we see and feel such things mystically already,
even a new Heaven and new, Earth, after a sort, in this new
Covenant-dispensation, what manner of persons ought we to be, and oh how
diligent should we be that we may be found of him in peace, without spot and
blameless? 2 Pet. 3.11-13, 14. But Oh Christians, how short are we, yea how
inconsistent are our lives with our liberties! how incongruous are our duties
to our mercies! yea, how opposite are our spirits to our comforts! What sirs,
Heavenly mercies and carnal hearts, flat duties, earthly conversations! Oh
shame your selves before the Lord, blush, tremble to think of your
unsuitableness to Covenant-mercies. How far are you below these enjoyments!
does not your unanswerable walking give just ground of suspicion whether you
have interest in these, yea or no? what sirs, are you Saints and yet
muck-worms, are you partakers of an Heavenly calling, and yet walk so like the
men of the World? is it fit to see Eagles in a dirty dunghill, or Heaven-born
souls in acts of filthiness? either be better or quit your claim; you dishonor
God, and discredit religion more than others. Alas friends, God will not be
beholden to you for the mere title of being Religious unless you be really
such: mercies infer duty and licentiousness is inconsistent with the nature
and ends of Covenant-mercies. Qui b^onus est and justus, and mundus and
immaculatus, neque malum aliquid neque injustum neque abominand^^ in suo sponst
thalamo sustinebit. Iraen. adv. Heb. lib. 4:
You grieve Gods Spirit, cross his designs, wrong your own souls, sadden the
hearts of the righteous, and open the mouths of wicked men: you little know
what hurt you do by one act of sinning. Consider that as the privileges of the
Covenant bespeak holiness; so the conditions of the Covenant include holiness,
and how then came, heirs of promise to be so unlike their Heavenly Father? what
do the Children of light tampering with works of darkness?

2. Gods Children walk very unsteadily, i. e. they are off and on, inconstant,
have good moods, and motions, but they wear off, and decay, they quickly lose
their lively impressions, and are constant in inconstancy, they are zealous and
forward for God one while, at other times they are backward and froward. Ah
sirs, is this a living up to these Sure mercies of David? these constant,
unchangeable invariable mercies? this Covenant is ordered in all things and
sure, and so are the mercies of it; how comes it to pass then that Covenanters
are so often discomposed, disordered and unsettled? sometimes they are for God,
and sometimes not; they are halting betwixt two opinions, like drunken men,
they are leaning sometimes to the right hand, at other times to the left, like
Reuben, Genesis 49.4. Hos. 7.8. chap. 6.4.
they are unstable as water, and so shall not excel; like Ephraim, a Cake
half-baked, hot and hard on one side, cold and doughy on the other: or like the
same Ephraims goodness like a Morning-cloud, or early Dew that tarryes not
long, but is quickly scattered by the strong storms of persecutions, or dried
up by the warm beams of prosperity: James 1.6. Jud^ (...), 13. Ephesians. 4.14.
these unstable Christians are like James' waves of the Sea, like Jude's
wandering Stars, or flying clouds, carried about of Winds; or like Paul's
Children, tossed to and fro; they are like Locusts that move to and again; like
Grasshoppers that are still up and down, in variable motions; the hearts of
such are as a Cart-wheel, says one, and their thoughts as a rolling Axel-tree:
I know, the best of Gods Children are incident to liftings up and castings down
in point of quicknings and inlargements, and this may be the effect of Gods
affording or suspending the influences of his grace; but I speak this of a
Christians remissness, and his inconstancy through neglect and carelessness, and
want of stirring up in his soul the Graces of Gods spirit, and so losing the
liveliness his soul feels sometimes, and afterward is warmed, melted, but
returns into folly; this is the Christians round, and how unsuitable is this
for a sincere soul? these stars are to be fixed in the firmament of the Church,
and are not to be wandering Stars or Meteors: these Trees of the Lords planting
should be strongly rooted, and not like Reeds tossed with every wind; they
should be Pillars in the House of God, Non vacillantes, sed tetragonoi.
and not Feathers or Weather-cocks upon House-tops; these living stones should
not ^e round and rolling, but square and fixed, still settled upon the Center:
1 Cor. 1.6.
if the Testimony of Christ be confirmed in us, we should hold fast our
confidence firm unto the end, and pray hard for a more constant spirit, as
David did, Psalm. 51.10. that we may be like Jachin and Boaz, stability and
strength; for if we be stable, we shall be strong, and so answerable to these
Sure Mercies of David.

3. It is a sad thing to see the Heirs of this Covenant walk uncomfortably;
what are you partakers and possessours of Mercies, and yet sad? have you
interest in sweet and sure Mercies, and yet are you dejected? what will lift
you up, if mercy will not? and what can interrupt your peace, when mercy waits
on you to cheer you up? thou losest Estate, Health, Good-Name, Relations,
Liberty; yea, thy life is in continual hazard, but as long as these Mercies of
the Covenant are sure, thou have no reason to complain. Seneca compares a a
Christian that is disconsolate for outward ^osses or crosses, to a man that has
a fine Orchard, the Trees whereof are richly laden with store of precious
fruit, and because the wind blows off some leaves, the man sits down and takes
on heavily, he weeps and wailes, and cries out he is undone; why what is the
matter? why the wind has taken off some leaves, but the roots, and trees, and
fruits are safe: should not we judge that a fond and foolish man? just thus is
it with the Christian, God and Christ, promises and Gospel-mercies are sure and
steadfast by an inviolable Gospel Covenant; yet the sinful silly soul lies
whining and complaining for the loss of some leaves of Worldly comforts, which
he may live well without. Yea, says the poor soul, but these outward things
are not the chiefest cause of my trouble and discouragement; did I know that
these mercies were made sure to me, I should be comfortable, but, alas, I fear
I have no share therein. I shall answer this doubt afterward, at present I
only say, lay thy hand upon thy heart, and deal ingeniously, is this the ground
of thy trouble? is not this only pretended, is not something else the real
ground? the heart is deceitful; look again, see what comforted thee before this
outward trouble came, and what chears thee when thy present pressure is
removed? but suppose it be jealousies about thy interest; yet, why should
thou be uncomfortable? have not thou ventured thy soul on a sure foundation?
what reason have thou of discouragement? a faith of adherence brings some
settlement as well as a faith of evidence: every act of faith brings some
comfort; whom having not seen (says the Apostle, of a corporal sight; so may I
say of a kind of spiritual sense and assurance) ye love, in whom though now you
see him not, yet believing ye rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory, 1
Pet. 1.8. recumbency has a kind of complacency: it argues want of faith to
want joy, and unbelief is a shameful sin, considering the assurances given us
in the Gospel: but more of this hereafter. But oh, consider sirs, what wrong
you do to your selves by uncomfortable walking? you weaken and exhaust your
strength and spirits: what discredit you bring upon the ways of God, rendering
them sour and distastful in the account of others; what opposition it
expresses both to many positive precepts, and the spirit of comfort, and to
these sure mercies of David: methinks I hear the God of Heaven thus bespeaking
the gracious troubled heart; soul, what ailes thee? what is it thou would
have? I have given thee many glorious gifts, pardon, reconciliation, adoption,
ordinances, the benefit of all my works of Providence, a title to the good
things of Earth, whiles thou live, and a free admission into Heaven when thou
dyest; nay, I have given thee my self, my Son, my Spirit, and that by the
surest Marriage-Covenant: and will not all this revive thy fainting spirit?
what would thou have more? and what can thou desire to make it surer to
thee? speak but the word and it shall be done; but I have gone beyond thy
demands, and why then art thou thus drooping and disconsolate? is thy heart
revived when mortal lying man makes thee a promise of some outward good; and
can thou now faint, when the eternal God has taken all these pains to assure
thy troubled heart of thy interest in these sure mercies of David? Oh
Christians shame your selves for your uncomfortableness; are these consolations
of God small unto you? thank your selves for your discouragements; and let it
be matter of trouble that you have so many needless, useless troubles in your
souls.

4. Another fault in the Heirs of the promises whereby they are unsuitable to
these mercies is unfruitfulness; herein they do not live up to these mercies,
and are exceeding defective, and imperfect, especially in two respects; the
fruit they bring forth is, 1. Small. 2. Sour fruit.

1. It Is usually but small in quantity, short of that abundance and ripeness
that should come of so good a soil as mercy is, especially when mercy is the
Tillage; Gods Vineyard is in a very fruitful Hill; Isa. 5 1. (...)
so we read it, but in Heb. it is the Horn of the Son of Oil; I know the Son of
Oil, may import a very fat or rich soil, as Son of the Morning for exceeding
bright and illustrious; and so Gods people were planted in Canaan, which was an
exceeding fruitful Country, but may at least allusively affirm of real Saints,
that they are planted in the Horn of the Son of Oil even in the Son of God,
who was anointed with the Oil of gladness above his fellows, and in whom true
Believers are planted, and from whom they may suck and draw abundant juice and
fatness, as branches do from the root of the Olive Tree, Romans 11.17. moreover
what abundant pains does God the Father (the Husbandman) take, to make souls
very fruitful, he takes away such as bear no fruit at all, and every branch
that bears fruit, he purges it that it may bring forth more fruit, Joh.
15.2. Oh what mercies do the Saints partake of? Gospel-priviledges; Promises,
Providence, Ordinances, Experiences, Comforts, Corrections, every thing that
might make them fruitful in good works, in Praying, Reading, Meditating,
Conferring, exact Walking; does God distribute; and where is their answerable
fruitfulness? God expects more and riper fruit; alas, how short and defective
are we? how little glory do we bring to God? how little profit unto others, or
comfort to our own souls? Phil. 1.11.1 These. 3.12. Mat. 3.8. Col. 1.10.
we should be filled with the fruits of righteousness, we should abound more
and more, and bring forth fruits meet for sincere repentance, and truly
fruitful in every good work: but are we so yea or no? I much suspect it; and
what a shame is it that we should lie under the warm influences of the Sun of
Righteousness so long, and be so unfruitful? the God of Heaven humble us for
this.

2. I am afraid that the fruits we do bring forth are but sour and bitter, not
so sweet and kindly as may be the genuine fruits and products of these sure
mercies; my meaning is, that the obedience and performances of the Saints too
often flow from a spirit of bondage, fear and terror, and not from that filial
Child-like disposition, and the Evangelical spirit of Adoption that should be
the principle and impulsive cause of Saints spiritual actings. I know legal
fears and terrors are good in their kind, to drive the soul out of it self,
and unto Christ; but afterward a spirit of love best becomes a Child of God;
hence says the Apostle, Romans 8.15. 2 Timothy 1.7
ye have not received the spirit of bondage again to fear, but ye have received
the spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry Abba Father: a Child-like boldness best
befits a Son; it is more acceptable to God to see souls attracted to him by
silken cords of love, than scourged to him by severe flashes of wrath; Christ's
soldiers are not so much pressed for his service by compulsion, as they are
volunteers by a spontaneous motion: all our duties should be free will
offerings. But alas, sirs, how unwilling and forced, are many of our
performances? how grumbling are we in our actings for God? we go to God as
though it were our burden, not with that delight and cheerfulness we ought:
consider sirs, how readily God offers us mercy; how freely Christ laid down his
life for us; how acceptable a work it is to the blessed spirit to apply these
mercies to us; and be ashamed to be so sour and dull in your performance, yea,
consider the dispensation you are under; a Gospel Covenant, made up of mercy,
and this should ripen our fruits to more sweetness and maturity than the old
Testament-dispensation: as you know Apricocks and other fruit that are upon a
Wall under the direct influence or powerful reflection of the Sunbeams are
sooner ripe and sweeter when ripe than such as are in the shadow; so our fruits
in Gospel Times should be better than theirs under the Law: but alas, how far
do we fall short of David's warm spirit for God? or the holy acts put forth by
the Saints of God under types and shadows, when these sweet mercies were not so
clearly revealed to them, and the Sun of Righteousness beat not so hot upon
them! Ah Christians, if you would study mercies more, your spirits would be in
a better frame for duty: David says, I will come into thy house in the
multitude of thy mercy, and in thy fear will I worship toward thy holy Temple,
Psalm. 5.7. observe it; the sense of Gods mercy is an excellent ingredient in
the Worship of God; yea, it begets an holy awe of God; for these two are very
consistent; and indeed nothing is so prevalent a motive to duty, and disswasive
from iniquity, and persuasive to the exercise of repentance, as sense of mercy
is: this truth Scripture and experience will abundantly confirm. But I have
been too large on this subject: only let Gods Children be humbled for their too
too legal spirits; and breath after a more Evangelical Spirit by the studying
of these mercies, rather than poring upon guilt and wrath.

So much for the fourth Use.

CHAP. X.
V. THE fifth Use of Exhortation is to all sorts of persons to look after their
share in these sure mercies of David; and oh that I had a Tongue and Pen to
drive this nail home; Oh what a mercy now would it be if by these sure mercies
of David, and Discourses about them, some soul were enamoured therewith, and
set in good earnest to make them its own. But shall I need to use many
arguments to persuade any poor soul to accept of mercy? Yes certainly, the most
part of the World forsake their own mercies by observing lying vanities; and
they that can experimentally distinguish betwixt a gracious and graceless
heart, find that it is the hardest thing in the World to close in with mercies
in Gods way: it is an easy thing for a secure sinner to presume upon mercy, to
make mercy a pillow to sleep upon with ease, to build Castles in the Air, and
feed our selves with groundless conceits of the mercy of God, this any one can
do; but to be got of our own bottoms, to despair in our selves, to accept of
Jesus Christ; give up our selves to God in Covevant; venture a troubled heart
upon the promises of Free Grace; this is an high and hard work, an arduous and
difficult undertaking: but this is done by every converted sinner: and a soul
never obtains mercy till it be indeed savingly converted, 1 Timothy 1.13. if you
be Lo-ammi, Hos. 1.6, 9
not Gods people by way of Covenant, you are Lo-ruhamah, i. e. persons that
have not obtained mercy. Oh look after an interest in these sure mercies of
David: Consider,

1. Nothing else in the World can be made sure; we live in an inconstant World;
every thing is upon the wheel of change; sublunary comforts are like the Moon;
sometimes at the full, and sometimes in the wane, nothing continues in a fixed
station; a man may be rich to day, and poor to morrow, therefore the Apostle
calls them uncertain riches, or uncertainty of riches in the abstract; now then
says the Apostle, Christians must lay up in store for themselves a good
foundation against the time to come, Bavyer Emp. of Germany said, Hujusmodi
com^arand^e sunt op^s quae cum na^fragio simul enatent. Non est Paupertas
p^curiae paucitas, sed insatiabilitas; quae si re^^sserit, qui bonus est dives
quog^e fu^rit. Clem. Alexand. Strom. lib. 2.
1 Timothy 6.17, 18. Alas, riches were never true to any that trusted to them; the
things of the World are like smoke or sand, with which you cannot fill your
hand: who would be so fond of that which a man knows he cannot keep? it is the
part of a wise man to purchase such an estate as he may enjoy; friends, goods,
honors, health, pleasures have their periods, but these mercies are sure and
everlasting. Oh the vast difference; it is very considerable, that the things
that make us happy, can only be made sure; but the things of this World which
cannot make us happy cannot be made sure; and indeed whatever may be lost is
not capable of making any truly happy: now Heavenly things are durable as well
as suitable to the soul, therefore let us all take the counsel of our Lord
Jesus in Mat. 6.19.20. Lay not up for your selves treasures upon earth, where
moth and rust does corrupt, and where Thieves break through and steal -- But
lay up for your selves treasures in Heaven, where neither moth nor rust does
corrupt, and where thieves do not break through nor steal.

2. Except you have an interest in these sure mercies, common mercies are
accursed to you, nor indeed have you any real Covenant-title to any thing you
enjoy, whatever interest you have before men [in foro humano] yet [in foro Dei]
you are in the Court of Heaven (in a sort) usurpers, however you have forfeited
all by actual rebellion, and have but what you enjoy as condemned Prisoners or
Malefactors to keep you alive till execution of the righteous sentence of
condemnation. Oh the woeful condition of Unconverted sinners! they are accursed
with a Gospel-curse, 1 Cor. 16.22. Prove. 3.33.
and under a dreadful sentence of excommunication: there is a curse in their
houses, on their actions, on their relations, as to them; there is a curse upon
their very blessings, Mal. 2.2. there is a plague in their apparel, poison in
their meat; and we may say, death is in the Pot as to all their enjoyments; my
meaning is, nothing is truly sanctified or perfumed with Covenant-mercy; and if
God give it a commission, whatever they enjoy may be their bane: whithersoever
they go, a curse goes with them; whatever they partake of, a curse meets them
in it; whoever they are with, a curse attends them. Oh fearful state! it was
sad to be under the curse of a mortal man; Cham found his Father Noah's curse
heavy; but oh how heavy is the curse of Almighty God, who with a word can send
the soul into Hell; and follow his stroke into another World? dear friends, who
would live in this cursed state another hour? on the contrary, whosoever has
these mercies of the Covenant has all blessings blessed; yea, and also
crosses; and, in a sort, curses are turned into blessings: who would not be
covetous of such a state? But to hasten.

3. Without these Covenant-mercies the soul is not accepted in its choicest
duties: neither person nor performance is owned by God; it is only upon a
Covenant-account that any are accepted; indeed in the Covenant of works the
person was accepted for the works sake, but in the Covenant of Grace, God
accepts the person first, then the work; if the man be in Christ, then the
offering is taken in good part, though it be but a Turtle-dove or young Pigeon,
though but a sigh or groan; God takes a Posie of Flowers [of sweet smelling
Graces] though mixed with stinking Weeds, and pricking Briars of vanity and
corruption, gathered by a Child, and perfumed by Christ's Mediation, and is
better pleased therewith, than with the most odoriferous gifts of uncoverted
souls, where the heart is destitute of Covenant graces: Prove. 15.8.
alas, the prayer of the wicked is abomination to God, the great and jealous
God challenges the wicked man that has not Covenant-mercies in his heart, for
taking Covenant-promises into his mouth: Psalm. 50.16, 17.
What have thou to do? says God, q. d. thou poor graceless sinner, thou
profanest my holy name, and provokest the eyes of my glory in the works and
worship by which thou think thou do most honor and please me: in the
state wherein thou art, I cannot endure to look toward thee; I abhor thy
person and performance, thy costly incense is a smoke in my nose; I can see
through thy painted beauty, at thy rotten inside; thy gilded Eloquence and
Rhetorical Flourishes are no more to me than the roaring of Bears or howling of
Dogs; get out of my sight thou sorry whining hypocrite; all thy duties are as
Ciphers, and signify nothing except the Mediator as the principal and only
figure be set before them, and the spirit of God write and indite them, which
are two of the greatest mercies of the new Covenant. Ah sirs, God does despise
the most melodious Tunes of wicked men, Psalm. 51.17.
but a broken and contrite heart he despises not; that is sweet Music in his
blessed ^ears; for a broaken heart is a Covenant-mercy: these mercies are brave
Ornaments ^o believing souls, and render them lovely and amiable in the sight
of God: every penitent Tear is a rich Pearl; every Prayer pierces Heaven and
fetches down abundant incomes from the Throne of Grace. Oh what a difference
do these mercies make ^n persons, performances and acceptance with God?

4. Without these mercies you have no solid ground of peace, comfort, or
satisfaction: for without these you are not only under the sentence of
condemnation; but ^ou have no real ground to hope that the sentence shall not
be executed this very ^our; it is a wonder to think that graceless ^ouls should
be so merry that are hanging over the pit of Hell, but by the rotten ^read of a
mortal life: Oh how suddenly ^ay this brittle glass be broken, and they ^e gone
for ever! for ought they know ^hen they go to bed; God may say (as ^ce he did
to one as rich and secure as ^ese sensual sots) this night shall thy soul (...)
required from thee: it is a wonder to me ^ow souls can rest quietly that are
conscious to themselves or groundedly suspect they are not in Covenant with
God; and so know not that they shall be another moment out of Everlasting
torments: Red^e praevaricatores ad cor, and inhaerete ei qui sacit vos: state
cum to and stab^tis: requiescite in eo and q^ie^i eritis. Quo itis in aspectu
q^o itis? bonum quod amatis ab illo est: sed quantum est and illum bonom est ad
suave. -- Vid Aug. conf. lib. 4. c. 12.
but God leaves them to seared Consciences, and Satan and the World join with
their deceitful lusts to lull them asleep, till God awake them by true
repentance or eternal vengeance: but God has ^ time to shake the foundations
of this bastard-peace, and set the soul upon the sure bottom of
Covenant Relation, and interest in Jesus Christ, which only brings true content
and comfort, peace that passes understanding, joy in the Holy Ghost, and a
sweet Sabbath of refreshment to the tossed soul: here the noble soul may (as i^
were) terminate its desires, and expatiate its largest faculties upon its only
portion God in Covenant; and thence will resul^ continual ground of triumph and
exaltation for these mercies are suitable and adaequate to the immortal soul,
and will support i^ under greatest outward pressures, and i^ the hour of death;
therefore I may conclude this Exhortation with ver. 2. of this Chapter,
Wherefore do you spend your money for that which is not bread, and your labor
for that which satisfies not, hearken diligently unto me, and cat ye that
which is good, an^ let your soul delight it self in fatness.

5. These mercies of the Covenant will render your condition safe whatever
befalls you; we little know what may befall us betwixt this and the grave, who
knows what a day may bring forth? man is born to trouble, a Saint is born again
to more; bad news may come as Jobs Messengers, treading in each others steps;
losses and crosses may put us on sad discouragements: Oh but now to have a
Covenanted God, a Christ and all the forementioned Covenant-mercies to solace
the soul, what mercy will this be? when the true Christian can say, I am my
beloved's and my beloved is mine; my flesh and heart fail but God is the
strength of my heart and my portion for ever: let the Sea roar, Men rage,
Heavens look black, and Earth tremble, I lie at Anchor in a sure Port, I trust
in God, Psalm. 112.7. Psalm. 46.1, 2.
and fear no evil tidings from below; God is my refuge and help, yea my present
help in time of trouble; evils shall either miss me or mend me; all winds blow
my soul nearer my Haven, all dispensations hitch me a step nearer Heaven, for
all things work together for my good; my Covenanted God will teach me to profit
by Word, Rod, by Mercys, Crosses, Ordinances, Providence: God is my Sun and
Shield, to enlighten me in times of darkness, to protect me in times of danger,
he will command a guard of Angels to attend me; yea, his wings shall cover me,
his comforts shall refresh my soul; he will guide me here by his counsel, and
afterward receive me to glory. Oh happy soul that has the God of Jacob for
his God; and these Covenant-mercies his portion: who can hurt such a soul? But
oh the woeful state of one that has not the name of God as a Tower or Chamber
to run unto when evils are approaching? how dreadful was Saul's state, when the
Philistines were upon him and God had forsaken him? just such will be the
condition of a soul destitute of Covenant-mercies in the day of public or
personal calamity; alas all they bore up their carnal hearts with is gone, and
God is gone, and now they must either burst with grief, or through despair make
away themselves, as Judas and Achitophel. See Psalm. 52.7.
Oh forlorn state of such as took not God for their God; sirs think seriously
of these things.

6. These Covenant-mercies will have mighty influence upon your spirits in Gods
service; and in your conversation, an interest in the mercies of the Covenant
will make you fear God, and tremble to offend so good a God; there is
forgiveness with thee that thou may be feared, Psalm. 130.4. nay, fear to
offend God is one great mercy of the Covenant: these will melt your hearts into
tears of Evangelical repentance for offending God; as you may gather from Zech.
12.10. nay, brokenness of heart is one of the mercies of the Covenant: sense of
these mercies will make your souls love God clearly, Luke 7.47. nay, love to
God is one of the mercies of the Covenant; and so for the rest of the Graces;
there is not an useful disposition requisite to qualify us for Gods service,
but it is contained in the Covenant; hereby we shall know Gods will, be willing
to obey it; delight our selves in Gods service, as David, Psalm. 5.7. I will
come into thy house in the multitude of thy mercy, and in thy fear will I
worship toward thy holy Temple: we shall then sing in the ways of the Lord,
and in the height of Zion, and flow together for the goodness of the Lord --
Jerem. 31.12. i. e. the goodness of the Lord will engage the Saints to come
with cheerfulness into Gods presence, and thank God for an opportunity of
waiting on so good a God: holy hearts delight in holy works; grace fits the
soul for God; Covenant-mercies render a soul capable of and suitable to
Covenant-duties; and the more you partake of these mercies, the more delight
will you take in duty: the more like you are to God, the more delight will you
take in God; and God will delight more in you; and so there will be sweet
fellowship betwixt God and your souls: on the contrary, carnal spirits cannot
endure spiritual exercises; they come to duties as a Bear to the stake, and
when they are therein, they are upon a Rack; Lord be merciful to such a soul.

7. These Covenant-mercies will not leave the soul till they have brought it to
Heaven: Gods mercies are in the Heavens; that is their proper Element; and they
never cease moving and mounting the soul upwards till they have raised him up
into the highest Heavens: where they shall drink of the River of his pleasures,
Psalm. 36.5, 8. now Covenanted souls do but taste that the Lord is gracious, but
then they shall eat and drink abundantly, and shall be satisfied with marrow
and fatness; yea, bathe their souls in that fullness of joy and pleasures for
evermore, Psalm. 16.11. these mercies will make you rich toward God, and rich
with God to all Eternity: if you dye with Covenant-mercies in your hearts, you
depart like Old Simeon with Christ in your arms, and dye in peace, and rest
with God: these sure mercies lead the van to eternal glory, which comes in the
rear of a temporal life and spiritual graces: yea, eternal life is begun here,
as Scripture testifies; how is that? why no otherwise than by the possession of
these spiritual mercies, and Communion with God thereby: this is eternal life,
to know the only true God and Jesus Christ, Joh. 17.3. You lay hold on eternal
life here by laying hold on these best blessings and Covenant-mercies: 1 Timothy
6.12, 19.
he that has the Son has life, and by believing on the name of the Son of
God, he may know that he has eternal life; for he has the record in himself;
See 1 John 5.10-13. what is this witness? it is contained in some of these sure
mercies of David. Oh therefore, for a share and interest therein? on the other
hand he that has nothing to do with these sure mercies has nothing to do with
eternal glory: such as are strangers from the Covenants of promise, Ephesians. 2.12.
have no hope of a better life; as the Tree falls so shall it lie; and such as
are found without mercies in their hearts at death, shall be found destitute of
mercy at the great day.

There is one sort of persons, I would more particularly press to look after
their share in these sure mercies of David, and those are the Children of Godly
Parents; and hence Solomon prays, Remember the mercies of David thy Servant, 2 Chronicles. 6.42. so you that are the posterity of godly predecessors, cry out for
and apply the mercies of your Fathers; and there are two cogent arguments in
the quality of these mercies the Text mentions, for here they are said to be
sure; consider, 1. Your Parents found them sure to them. 2. The Promise will
make them sure to you.

1. Consider your Religious Ancestors found these Covenant-mercies sure to
their own souls: our Fathers trusted in thee, cried to thee, they were
delivered, were not ashamed, Psalm. 22.4, 5. Heathens did pertinaciously adhere
to the Religion of their Predecessors; and shall Children of Godly Parents
forsake their Fathers God? and such a God as never failed them; Moses in his
Song, says, he is my God and I will prepare him an habitation; my Fathers God
and I will exalt him, Exodus 15.2. enquire and search; you that are the seed of
his servants, had your fathers ever cause to complain of God? was he not as
good as his word to them? did he not punctually keep touch with them, and make
good all his promises to them? did not your Godly Parents breath their last
with good speeches of God? did they not affectionately commend his service to
you upon their deathbed? reflect upon their dying words; did they not proclaim
to all the World, that God was a faithful Covenant-keeping God to them? and did
they not assure you he would be as good to you if you embrace him and keep his
ways! yea, cannot you bear witness for them, that their last words were
speaking well of God; as Jacob and Joseph both did upon their deathbed? did
not they in the faith and sense thereof commend you into the hands of their
gracious God, as Jacob, Genesis 48.15, 16. the God which fed me all my life long
unto this day; the Angel which Redeemed me from all evil, bless the lads -- did
they not express particular persuasions of some mercy, as those blessed
Patriarchs, Genesis 48 21. chap 50.24.
Behold, I dye, but God shall be with you, and bring you again to the Land of
your Fathers? Yea, cannot you that are Children bear your Testimony for God
that he has been and done according to your Parents faith and hope? Solomon
could say, after David's death, thou have showed unto thy servant David my
Father, great mercy, or bounty -- but that is not all, and thou have kept, says
he, for him this great kindness, that thou have given him a Son to sit upon his
Throne, 1 King. 3.6. and I question not but many of you can say as much for
God, that God has had respect to you in Temporals because you were the seed of
such as were dear to him. Oh follow their steps and you shall fare as they
fared.

2. Yet further, you that are the Children of Godly Parents, Isa. 44.3.59.21.
Exodus 20.6. See 2 Samuel 23.1-5. Act. 3.25.
you lie directly under the influences of these sure mercies; the promise is
made to believers and to their seed, Genesis 17.7. Act. 2.38, 39. such promises
bear up the hearts of Gods poor expiring servants, concerning their surviving
Children: Well then, let Children claim their interest; plead this grant; none
of you will lose your inheritance for want of looking after it; if your
Landlord promise you a Lease of your Tenement after your Father's decease if
you sue to him for it, and pay the accustomed fine, will you be so mad as to be
turned out of your Farm, and the Heritage left by your Fathers, than own your
just and loving Landlord according to the Laws of the Land? no man is so fond
in Temporals, and why should you be so foolish in Spirituals? Ah Christians,
look after your Patrimony; despise not your Birthright; is it nothing to you
to be born of believing Parents? remember your Parents Prayers and Tears, their
Hopes and fears. Oh consider, how it comforted their hearts upon their
deathbed, that they left you under a good Covenant, and bequeathed to you a
goodly heritage; and why should your Parents be deceived in their hopes, and
meet you strangers at the great day to God and Christ, to be set with filthy
Goats upon the left hand for ever? why will you embezzle or sin away this fair
estate? why will you not sue out this blessed Charter for your own souls in the
Court of Heaven? God is as willing to make it over to you, as ever he was to
bestow it on your Parents; he is loath to cut off his kindness from their seed;
he looks after you in your soul-destroying practices; and says, as once to
Israel that did so woefully degenerate, Jer. 22.5. q. d. I remember the kindness
that in former times there was betwixt thy ancestors, and me. Oh their zeal in
running after me, the holy services they did perform to me? thy Father, or
Grandfather and some former Generations, maintained intercourse with me, and I
with them; there was love of espousals betwixt us; and I am sure I was not
wanting to them; I looked carefully to them; all that sought to devour them,
were my enemies, they did offend me; and I brought evil upon them; I pleaded
their cause while they lived, and I took them seasonably to Heaven, and if thou
that art their offspring, would have put me to it, I would have done as much
for thee; if thou had but laid hold of that Covenant; those very
Covenant-mercies should have been thine, but thou art gone back, thou will have
none of me, but walk after new upstart vanities; thou will not vouchsafe so
much as to enquire after the God of thy Fathers that was so faithful to them,
and did so much for them: but let me ask thee, A like Expostulation see in Mi^.
6.3, 4.
since thou will needs leave me, what iniquity have either thy Fathers or thou
found in me? produce thy reasons, testify against me, did I ever do thee any
wrong? have I not always done thee good? Oh soul, whithersoever thou go from
me, thou missest of such a God as thy Fathers served. God seems in that
Scripture to speak after this manner: Oh hearken to the eternal God, if you
will not heed the dying words of your mortal Parents, that dyed in the Lord;
though one would think those should move and melt your hearts into tears of
Gospel sorrow, why should your dear deceased Parents rise up in judgment
against you at the day of judgment? when it shall be enquired whether they did
their duty, they must needs answer according to truth, that they did instruct,
correct, counsel, admonish their wandering Prodigal Children, they brought them
to Ordinances, prayed for them, wept and traveled again for them, and yet
could not prevail; and now must come in to bear witness against them, and must
rejoice in Gods just vengeance upon them. Oh what a sad case will these
rebellious Children be in? it is no pleading privileges by means of believing
Parents at that day; the higher you were advanced therein, the lower will you
be cast down to Hell, Matthew. 11.23. oh how terrible will it be to see godly
Parents in Heaven, and themselves cast into utter darkness; yea, to see
strangers (or the Converted Children of Heathenish Parents) come from East, and
West, and sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the Kingdom of Heaven but
the Children of these Kingdoms (posterity of Covenanted Parents) cast out into
utter darkness -- See Mat. 8.11, 12.

Let me therefore persuade all graceless Children to look about them; do you
above all others take heed of miscarrying; greater expectations are from you
than others; the surviving friends of your Religious Ancestors look after you,
and enquire what you do; oh rejoice their hearts by walking in the steps of
your predecessors; I shall bespeak you, yea charge you, in the words of
Reverend Mr. Bolton upon his deathbed, that none of you will dare to meet us
at the great Tribunal in an unregenerate state: let every Child of Godly
Parents plead for Covenant-mercies, as once Solomon did, 2 Chronicles. 1.8, 9. thou
have showed great mercy unto David my Father -- now O Lord God, let thy promise
unto David my Father be established -- thus do you plead with God, and say,
Lord my Parents embraced the Covenant; it was thy free grace to choose them,
and set thy heart upon them; and is that Grace weary? can thou not own me
with Covenant-mercy? nay, do thou not call that mercy to Abraham by the surer
name of truth unto Jacob? am not I a Child of the promise; Lord cut not off the
entail of Covenant-mercies from me or mine for ever.

But I must hasten, let all souls seek after a share in Covenant-mercies, you
that are afar off, and you that are near, Children of the good and of the bad;
draw near hither, take hold of this Covenant; here is mercy for you all, these
mercies are attainable; let the wicked forsake his way and the unrighteous man
his thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon
him, and to our God for he will abundantly pardon, Isa. 55.7. they are mercies,
fear not being made welcome, they are sure mercies; fear not disappointment:
thou have a tender of mercies, that is mercy, yea such a mercy as the fallen
Angels never had, or ever shall have; and if thou refuse thou do not only
neglect a great salvation, but the Devils shall rise up in judgment against
thee: it is a wonder of mercies that thou art not past hopes of mercies, thou
have run a wild course, yet, there is hope if now thou come upon the call of
mercy? all the condition God requires is acceptance of Christ and Grace; it
sticks at your wills, and if you wilfully reject mercy what must save you? if
you will be damned who can hinder you? you must thank your selves for ever: the
God of mercy stands waiting at your door, the Prince of peace purchased mercy
at a dear rate; the spirit of grace knocks and put in his blessed finger at the
hole of the door, will not yet your bowels move toward him? he beseeches you
to be reconciled that might with a word command you into Hell; and will you
have no bowels of mercy toward your own souls? Ministers Entreat, 2 Cor. 5.20.
Romans 12.1.
Travel, Study, Weep, and earnestly beseech you for mercies sake, to come in:
and yet will you stand out? and must I after all this pains leave you short of
mercy, these sure and sweet mercies? God forbid, however remember you were
warned.

CHAP. XI.
VI. THE sixth Use is of Instruction and Direction, to sinners and Saints,
wherein I shall (as paper-room permits) ^ay before you four sorts of Directions.

1. What is a poor soul to do that he may obtain interest in these mercies? 2.
How a doubting soul may be assured of these Covenant-mercies? 3. In what cases
may a Christian improve Covenant-mercies? 4. How a good soul that has interest
in these mercies is to behave himself?
For the first, which concerns graceless ^uls; poor unregenerate Creatures, if
any ^ch enquire what they must do that they may have a part and portion in
these sure ^ercies of David, I shall briefly propound ^ese seven Directions;

1. Make a strict enquiry into your state; ^^ligently examine what title you
have to ^e Mercies of the Covenant, practice this ^eat and much neglected duty
of self-tryal, whether you have closed with the Covenant, whether Christ be in
you, 2 Cor. 13.5.
or you be (...) Christ; whether faith be in you, or you (...) in the faith;
self-knowledge is a good ^gree toward saving grace. Authology is ^e first step
to Theology; a man cannot, will not look after mercy till he know his own
misery; they that conceit themselves to be something, deceive themselves;
therefore let every man prove his own work, Gal. 6.3, 4. Oh how many thousands
with a^ vain hope do descend into everlasting burnings? how many presume they
have as good a title to mercy as any, and fall short of it mistakes in this
point are dangerous and damning, therefore soul, try thy title, be (...) a
point concerning thy state; some a^ Children of wrath, and have not obtained
mercy; yea, all are such by nature: that Grace that changes our title,
changes our spirits, therefore deal faithfully with your own hearts; ask them
whether they b^ renewed, changed, soundly converted? ask your selves whether
you be new Creatures be not put off with silence or a slight answer; remember
life and death depends on the resolution of this important question you must be
tried another day, you cannon evade Gods impartial search, only consider
there is no returning back to mend the matter, as you are found then at the great
day, so must you abide for ever; but here, (...) you find a flaw in your title,
you may have it well repaired; and this is the first step to mending what is
amiss, therefore g^ a distinct knowledge of your state.

2. Work on your hearts the misery of souls being destitute of these sure
mercies yea, if upon serious examination you (...) that your souls have no
interest therein, o^ consider what a dreadful, doleful state your souls are in;
you are indeed Lo-ruhamahs, bondslaves of Satan, enemies to God, destitute of
Christ, and have nothing to do with the good things of the Gospel; take your
state from the blessed Apostle, or rather from the infallible dictates of the
Holy Ghost, Ephesians. ^2.12. without Christ, (whatever confident claim you may lay
to him, however you may boast of him) Aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel,
(i. e. no members of the true Church, though you may presumptuously call and
account your selves the only Sons of the Church; you have nothing to do with
the spiritual privileges, and sweet Communion of Saints) you are strangers
from the Covenants of Promise, ( i. e. you are not in this new Covenant, but
under that of works, and have not right to any one promise, and so to no
Gospel-mercy) and therefore without hope, yea, without God in the World; it is
inexpressible, yea inconceivable misery that a graceless soul is in, it is
ready every moment to drop into Hell, must be shut out of Heaven; God is angry
with him every moment, Satan has him in a string, leads him whither he list;
and if he dye this moment he is gone for ever. Oh work on your hearts such sad
thoughts as these, awake Conscience, rouse up affections, then cry out with the
Publican, striking on your breast, God be merciful to me a sinner; Woe is me,
Luke 18.13.
wretched Creature that I am, what shall I do, I am undone, the guilt of sin is
upon me, mercy is far from me; I have despised free grace, and now I may fear
mercy is turned into sury; long forbearance will end in just vengeance. Oh is
there any hope for a forlorn wretch? have not I worn out my day of grace? is
there any hope for me? surely, a little mercy will not serve my turn; I am a
great sinner, yea, the chiefest of sinners, there must be a larger dole of
mercy to me than others: Oh what shall I do, men and brethren, what must I do
to be saved? thus, sirs, bemoan your state, it is not a saying all are sinners,
and God is merciful, that will serve the turn, but you must be sin-sick, then
you will desire a Physician, else you will slight and scorn both Christ and Covenant,
Mat. 9.12, 13.
and all the mercies thereof.

3. Be thankful for, but be not content with common mercies; they are good in
their kind, and for their use and ends, but these are not suitable to, or
sufficient for the soul; a Christian should be content with any thing in the
World, yet content with nothing in the World; the worst of the World does
please a Child of God with God, the best of it cannot, should not please him
without God; you must look on these things as good in the way for a staff or
bait, but not good as a Center or end, to terminate your thoughts upon;
Remember, the worst of men may have the best of these blessings, yet have them
with a curse, and may perish with them; therefore say as David, Psalm. 119.132.
look thou upon me, and be merciful unto me, as thou usest to do unto those that
love thy name; Psalm. 106.4.
and elsewhere he desires to be remembered with the favor of Gods people; as if
David should say. Lord there are common mercies which fill the belly, cloth
the back, supply outward wants, but these thou give to the bad as well as
good; and though these are more than I deserve, yet more than these I desire;
these will only serve me the day and date of my temporal life, and will take
their leave of me at death; but Lord, thou have better mercies to bestow than
these; even such as will stick by me in life and death; mercies that concern
the soul, such as thou bestowest on Children, and on heirs of promise: Oh let
me come in for my Child's part of those, and put me not off with any else; none
besides will fit or fill my precious soul, or serve my turn: Josh. 17.14.
I must say as once the Children of Joseph said to Joshua, why have thou given
me but one lot and one portion to inherit, seeing I am a great people; so must
I say, if I were a bruit Creature, one lot of provender for this Carcass would
serve my turn; but seeing (...) am blessed with a noble, never-dying soul, that
has large capacious faculties, (...) must have a double portion, a single
share ^s not enough; something that will live ^hen this body is laid in the
grave, and ^ing is so fit for this immortal soul, as (...) sure mercies of
David. Oh that I had my share thereof; more than these I cannot reasonably
desire, expect, enjoy, and less than these my soul is not content withal.

4. Cast out and Cashier all sin, break of^ thy sinful league with filthy
lusts, these sure mercies will not lodge in a foul breast: where Christ takes
up his habitation, sin has not Dominion; God and sin go contrary ways; mercies
mount the soul upwards, corruption pulls the soul downwards; you must be
separate, and touch no unclean thing, if you would be received, embraced as
Children, and have God for your Father, 2 Cor. 6.17, 18. be you sure the Throne
of iniquity has no fellowship with God, Psalm. 94.20.
and God will challenge such as hate instruction, and wilfully run into sin,
and say, Psalm. 50.16, 17, 18.
what have thou to do -- to take my Covenant in thy mouth; do not think to yoke
Christ and Belial; God will not be merciful to any wicked Transgressour: do not
think to divide mercies and faithfulness, make account to enjoy mercies only in
the way of truth, that you may be able to say as David, Psalm. 119 41. let thy
mercies come also unto me, O Lord, even thy salvation according to thy word, q.
d. O Lord thou have mercies to bestow, and thou have told me, how and to whom
thou will distribute these mercies, it is to such as fear, and love, and obey
thee, and devote themselves to thee; why here I am, I have served sin and Satan
too long, now I abhor the ways in which my soul has walked, I abandon works
of darkness, I cut off a right hand sin, and pluck out a right-eye lust, and
now I am in the road of mercy, not as though this merited thy favor, but as a
condition absolutely necessary in the souls of such as obtain mercy, Isa. 1.16,
18. Isa. 55.7.
according to the precepts and promises of the Word; and now though I cannot
challenge mercy, yet I humbly plead thy promise for mercy, even
Covenant-mercies; I have forsaken my sinful ways and wicked thoughts; Psalm.
119.58.
oh be merciful to me according to thy word; oh entertain me, and then ^ shall
not lose but change my pleasures, ^he sensual pleasures of the flesh, for
so^id, sacred, and soul-satisfying delights in Christ and Grace: thus renounce
sin, and you shall have what is infinitely better, but that is not all.

5. Renounce your own Righteousness, and look after these sure mercies only for
mercy sake; the wise merchant sold all, Mat. 13.46.
not only his worldly enjoyments, but self-conceited thoughts of his own
Righteousness, for this pearl of price; deny your selves, then enjoy God, mercy
is flighted when you dream of merit; the poor Jews that sought to establish
their own righteousness, would not submit to the Righteousness of God, Romans
10.3. they had something of their own to lean to, they ^corned Gods way of
saving sinners; they would not be beholding to Gods mercy, and so went without:
the poor Publican was justified, but the proud Pharisee condemned: come as
craving Beggars, not as rich Purchasers: say as David, save me for thy mercies
sake, Psalm. 6.4. q. d. Lord, I am a weak, worthless, wicked Creature, if thou
mark iniquity who can stand? I am not worthy of one crumb of kindness, most
worthy of thy fiercest displeasure; if thou condemn me thou art righteous, if
thou save me thou art infinitely gracious; Lord, when thy wrath is ready to wax
hot, and justice lifts up thy hand to strike the fatal blow, then reflect upon
thy working bowels of tender mercy, and stop thy hand from a righteous
executing of thy justly deserved sentence of condemnation, Remember thy tender
mercies and thy loving-kindnesses, for they have been ever of old -- Remember
not the sins of my youth, nor my transgressions, according to thy mercy
remember thou me, for thy goodness sake, O Lord: thus that good man pleads with
God, Psalm. 25.6, 7. and thus do thou, come empty handed, buy wine and milk
without money and without price; mercy were not mercy if it were bought at
valuable rates; but as that is not possible, so that soul that comes to purchase
shall be dealt without, for all the good things of the Gospel are of free and
undeserved gift.

6. Close with Jesus Christ the root and spring of these Covenant-mercies; I
told you in the doctrinal part, these mercies are made sure in and by Christ to
all the heirs of promise: would you then enjoy the benefit of these mercies,
accept of Jesus Christ by a sound and lively faith: you can expect no mercy but
through a Mediator, grace and truth comes by Jesus Christ: Joh. 1.16.
all mercy is laid up in Christ, as the great Storehouse, and is to be fetched
out by faith, those souls are under a dangerous and souldamning mistake that
imagine God to be any other ways merciful than in Christ: it is even horrible,
says Luther, to think of God out of Christ, this is the only Gospel-way of
obtaining mercy; Ephesians. 13.6.
God blesses us with these spiritual blessings in Christ, and we are accepted
in the beloved. Well then, how have poor souls interest in Christ? this is only
by faith, which is the souls accepting of him upon his own terms: Joh. 1.12.
here I must not digress into the large field of that useful subject of saving
faith, but must refer you to the large discourses upon this radical,
fundamental grace, and I beseech you be not mistaken in this; here lies the
hinge and vitals of Religion, even in an entire, affectionate, voluntary, and
universal accepting of Jesus Christ, as our King, Priest, Prophet, to be ruled,
guided, saved by him in his own way. Oh sirs, if you do not this you do
nothing; if you believe you shall be saved, Mark 16.16.
but if you believe not you shall be damned, that is plain English; and truly,
my friends, all men have not faith, this faith of Gods Elect, this precious
faith. Oh therefore look after it, long for it, come with a broken heart to a
bleeding Christ, come weary and heavy laden, and lay your load on the Son of
God; come with a troubled, humbled heart, wounded with a sense of sin, and look
up to this brazen Serpent for help and healing; reach out thy trembling hand
and get hold of the skirt of his garment, or rather with old Simeon embrace
Jesus Christ in the arms of thy faith, and then thou have these mercies of the
Covenant.

7. Enter into a solemn Covenant with the Lord; no way to be interested in the
mercies of the Covenant, but by entering into the Covenant; this, this is the
work I would persuade your souls unto, this indeed is the life of Religion,
which is so called [a relegando] from binding, because it binds, (as it were)
God and man together, and joins their interests in this blessed bond of the
Covenant: 2 Cor. 8.5. Isa. 44 5. 2 Chronicles. 30.8.
O therefore set your selves to enter a solemn engagement; give up your selves
to the Lord, openly profess that you are the Lords, or else subscribe with your
hand, and yield up your selves to the Lord, to whom of right you do belong, and
take God as your God, Josh. 24.24, 25.
say, the Lord our God will we serve, and his voice will we obey, as the people
of Israel once; and thus do you make a Covenant this day, lift up your hand to
the most high God, as once Jacob did, who made a vow, saying, if God will be
with me and keep me in this way that I go -- then shall the Lord be my God,
Genesis 28.20, 21. now consider, friends, has not God done as much or more for
you as Jacob here desires? and why should you not take God for your God? say
thus, I have heard of the Lords goodness, nay, I have felt and drunk a large
share of Gods kindness and compassion; he has done that for me, that none else
could, and has undertaken to do yet much more, and therefore God forbid, that
I should cleave to any other God all my days; as I will be wholly the Lords, so
I will have only the Lord, and as he is the God, so he shall be my God; this is
that which the Scripture calls avouching the Lord to be our God, and if we
avouch him to be our God, he will avouch us to be his people, Deuteronomy. 26.17, 18.
which imports the mutual conditions of this blessed Covenant, even a reciprocal
embracing and accepting each other, the Saints take God to be theirs by the
saving Grace of faith, and God entertains them by a gracious act of favor,
love and condescension; only be sure you remember that the Articles of
Agreement are of Gods own framing, and the soul must come up wholly unto his
terms, else no bargain; God will not abate any thing of his appointed
conditions, it must be sincere faith, though it be but weak, which empties the
soul of sin, and self, and turns wholly to God, and does resign up it self
universally, voluntarily, and perpetually to be the Lords; and in the same
manner takes God to be his: and looks upon this as his mercy, as well as his
duty; his highest preferment, as well as his greatest employment, and sweetest
enjoyment; Oh, thinks a good soul, that I could be more the Lords than I am; I
am too much mine own, Hos. 3.3.
but I will enter into the strictest Matrimonial bond to be only for God and
not for another, then he would be for me; and oh that I could take the Lord
wholly for mine, and only as mine, and join no other Lovers with him, I need
none but him, he is all sufficient, and my exceeding sweet and great reward:
and upon this condition God takes you, and you shall have advantage by him, and
the Gospel Covenant, and all the mercies of it; and if you be not willing to
forsake all for him, Mat. 10.37. Luke 14.28, 29.
you are not worthy of him: but I shall spend no more time about this, because
so many have writ of a souls Covenanting with God: See Mr. Baxter's Saints
Rest, par. 1. p. 176. to 182 -- and alibi passim. Mr. Guthrie, Mr. Allen, Mr.
Vincent have prescribed directions, and a form of words for a solemn
Covenanting with God. See also Reflect. 8. in the close of this Treatise. p. --

Thus much for the first Class or rank of Directions.

CHAP. XII.
2. HOW a poor doubting soul may assure to it self these Covenant-mercies? many
good souls may have an interest in these, yet not be assured of their interest,
which yet is of great consequence and concernment, though not to the being, yet
to the well-being of a Christian; therefore we are commanded to give diligence
to make our calling and election sure, 2 Pet. 1.10. Vit. A^et. in lo^.
not in respect of God say Interpreters, with whom all things are firm and
undoubted, but in respect of others, say some, that those with whom we live may
see the Tree is good, because the fruits are good; but I rather take it that we
must labor to clear these up to our own souls, that we may have some real
well-grounded assurance thereof in our hearts, and both these are mercies
included in the Gospel Covenant; only take notice that calling is before
election, and there we must begin, and so ascend from the work of Grace in our
hearts to the workings of Grace in Gods heart, for our love is a reflection of
his love to us: Grace is a fruit of Election: this then is a weighty case of
Conscience; suppose a gracious soul be dark and doubtful about his state, and
is full of questionings and disputings whether these sure mercies of the
Covenant do belong to him; what must such a soul do that it may be assured of
its interest therein, See this point handled solidly in a Treat. called, A
Believers duty toward the Spirit, etc. ^on Ephesians 4 30. Read 6. Direct. page
158. to 183. See Baxt. 32 Directions.
and that indeed they are sure to him? Now for answering this Question, I shall
propound these Directions:

1. Study the Precepts, Promises, and Presidents in the Scriptures, be diligent
in reading the Word of God: Oh of what use would this be; there you may find
what God commands, how Saints have obeyed, by what means they have cleared up
their integrity and interest in Christ; here you may find what are the
conditions of the Covenant, and upon what terms the mercies thereof may be
enjoyed, and what are the infallible Characters of such as have received
benefit thereby; here you may find Christ the main and choicest mercy of the
Covenant; yea, for this end was the Scripture written, that we might have
comfort in God, and by consequence also, assurance of our interest in him, Romans
15.4. for this cause did both Christ speak, Joh. 15.11.1 Joh. 1.4.
and John write Divine truths that are upon record, that his joy might be in
us, yea that our joy might be full: an express Text you have in 1 John 5.13.
these things have I written unto you, that believe in the name of the Son of
God, that ye may know ye have eternal life: the more you study the Scriptures,
the more clearly you may read your names in the Book of Life: your hearts, if
sincere, will echo to the word you read, because the Law of God is written in
your hearts therefore read and study this blessed Book; these words are
Charters of your heavenly inheritance; food for your hungry appetites, glasses
in which you may discern the face of your souls. Oh Christians, neglect not the
Scriptures, look up for a right understanding, and due application of every
passage therein, and then comfort your selves, and one another with these
words, 1 These. 4. ult.

2. Attend upon a quickening Ministry, here the terms of the Gospel are
propounded; the mercies of the Covenant are displayed, true believers
discovered and characterized; here you may meet with a Barnabas as well as with
a Boanerges; yea, it may be the hand that wounded may heal you: God usually
makes the fruit of the lips to be peace, Isa. 57.19.
and many times sends some choice Interpreter to declare unto a man his
righteousness, and clear up his integrity: Job 33.23.
and therefore is it that God directs all such as walk in darkness to obey the
voice of his servants, Isa. 50 10.
or rather gives this as their character that they do so; Isa 40.1, 2.2 Cor.
1.4.
and God gives Ministers a charge to comfort his people, and lays up comforts
in their Breasts to this end that they may comfort such as are cast down; Oh
the reviving words, you may hear in the Ministry of the Word? here you may hear
doubts resolved, cases of Conscience propounded, answered, and hearts opened,
anatomized; here the spirit of God is often conveyed which seals up the
believing soul to the day of redemption: Isa. 59.21. Gal. 3.2, 3. Mat. 28.^0.
the presence of God accompanies his institution; so that what the Minister
declares in the name and by the Authority of Christ, Isa. 44 26. Mat. 18.18.
according to the word he will ratify, back, and confirm it in Heaven: and how
many drooping heirs of promise has God erected, satisfied, encouraged about
their title to Covenant-mercies by this Ordinance? Oh the advantage that many
have got thereby; therefore wait on God in this Ordinance; Oh look not upon it
as weak and beggarly Elements as some ignorantly and blasphemously call all
Ordinances: make them not a matter of Ceremony and Formality, but prepare for
them and use them conscientiously, and you shall see the sweet effect thereof.

3. Improve the seals of the Covenant, both Baptism and the Lords Supper; Rom
4.11.
Circumcision is called the seal of the righteousness of faith, because that
sweet Evangelical privilege, or marrow of the Gospel Covenant is signified,
sealed and exhibited in that Ordinance; Oh Christians, understand and improve
that sweet Ordinance of Baptism, it would be a spring of sweetness and
satisfaction to your doubting, fainting spirits: 1 Cor. 10.16. c. 11.24.
and then for the Lords Supper; herein Christ's Body and Blood are particularly
applied to us, to become our own, yea, verily and really, (though not
corporally, but spiritually) exhibited to every worthy receiver, and hence
resulteth spiritual joy, solace and satisfaction, as in the Passover in
Hezekiahs days, 2 Chronicles. 30.21, 26.
they kept the feast with gladness and there was joy in Jerusalem. But be sure
you examine your selves, prepare your hearts, excite your Graces, understand
the Covenant, apply these blessed mysteries to your own souls, open your hearts
by Meditation that the King of glory may come in, stir up your souls to draw
near to God, and he will draw near to you; Gal. 3.1.
you will see Christ Crucified before you; you will enjoy a blessed feast of fat
things, that will nourish and comfort your pining souls; here you will feel
pleasant Apples and sweet flagons of the Wine of his special love to stay you
up and support your hearts in the day of your affliction, and sad desertion;
and if you cannot enjoy that refreshing Ordinance, yet reflect upon your former
enjoyments, and meditate upon your Crucified Redeemer, and represent his
bruised body and effused blood to your selves, and in due time you will cry out
with Thomas, my Lord and my God.

4. Ply the Throne of Grace in Prayer; say as David, Psalm. 35.3. O Lord, say
unto my soul, I am thy salvation: Isa. 56.7.
God has promised to make his people joyful in the house (or duty) of Prayer;
Saints have found by experience the sweet and satisfying fruit of a serious
wrestling with God; thus David, Psalm. 31.16. make thy face to shine upon thy
servant, and ver. 21. he breaks out in thankfulness for an answer, Blessed be
the Lord, for he has showed me his mavelous kindness in a strong City. Yea,
Christ himself commands us to ask that we may receive that our joy may be full,
Joh. 16.24. and is not a clear evidence of our interest in the Covenant, and
the mercies of it worth asking? therefore plead with God; tell him thou
preferrest Covenant-mercies above worldly enjoyments; and that thou would
rather have these mercies made sure to thee than to have a lease of thy life;
for his loving kindness is better than life: Psalm. 63.3.
tell him the joy of the Lord is thy strength, and how much it will tend to thy
furtherance in his service if he will lift up the light of his Countenance on
thy soul: tell him he has granted comfortable assurance to many souls, and
thou need it as well as they; thou art an humble suitor at the Gates of
mercy, and art resolved not to let him go, except he bless thee: yet once
again, tell him, it is no more then he has promised in his word, and Christ
has purchased by his blood; and therefore it is no arrogance for thee to crave
or expect, and when thou have been pleading, conclude with that poor man, Mark
9 24. Mat. 9.29.
Lord I believe, help thou my unbelief, and he will say, according to thy faith
be it unto thee.

5. Walk close with God, as that is one of the mercies of the Covenant, so it is
an evidence of our interest in the Covenant, and it is a notable means of
obtaining and maintaining assurance, Psalm. 50.23. to him that orders his
conversation aright will I show the salvation of God: close-walkers have many
choice discoveries; Psalm. 119.165.
Oh the peace that such have as keep Gods commandments! Oh the sweet
refreshment which results from a lively obedience! the work of righteousness is
peace, the effect of righteousness is quietness and assurance for ever, Isa.
32.17. Psalm. 25 14. Mat. 4.2. Joh. 14.15, 16. v. 21.
if you keep constantly in the ^ear of God, he will discover to you the secrets
of his Covenant, he will cause the Sun of righteousness to arise upon you; if
you keep his Commandments, you shall have a comforter, and he will manifest
himself to you. But if you grow careless, and remiss in your walking, and step
aside to any gross sin, no wonder if you have little assurance of these
Covenant-mercies; for these do separate betwixt you and your God, you and
comfort; this obscured David's interest in God, and his unsuitable Acts cost him
many a tear, and sad thoughts of heart, which made him cry out of broken bones,
and bitterly groan out his sad complaints for the want of the joy of Gods
salvation: yea, for one act of sloth and security, the Church lost the sweet
sense of divine love, Cant. 5.26. Oh take heed of sin, it is like a filthy
vapor rising out of the soul, that causes a mist, and a thick mist between
God and us, as will keep the light of his countenance from shining upon us, it
begets jealousies, suspicio^ and uncomfortable fears in the soul whether God be
ours or no, and therefore take heed of sin and walk humbly wit^ God.

6. Be much in self-observation: some have an interest in the Covenant, but
know it not for want of self-discovery; therefore it were a good work to
consider bo^ your hearts and ways; indeed the heart (...) deceitful, but you
should take the candle (...) the Word in the hand of Conscience, an^ deal
impartially with your hearts; seek into the obscure corners thereof, and it is
possible in some nook or other you will find a Covenant-mercy; can thou not say
as Peter i^ sincerity, Joh 21 17. Isa. 38.3.
thou know that I love thee? o^ with Hezekiah, that you have walked before
God in uprighteness; do thou not find i^ thy heart a care to please God fear
to offen^ him, desire to enjoy him, hatred of sin, love t^ the saints, poverty
of spirit, despising the World, and low thoughts of thy best duty well now a
sound search, and clear discovery of the frame of your spirits will be (...)
notable way to assure to your selves you^ interest in these Covenant-mercies,
and s^ proving your selves, Gal. 6.4. Prove. 14.14.
your rejoicing and satisfaction shall be from your selves: if thou can but
find one saving Grace in thy heart in truth, thou may gather some evidence
thence, and Gods Children have taken comfort in their sincere love to the
Brethren when they have have scarce discerned any other grace, and so have
assured their hearts before God that they were of ^he truth, see 1 John 3.18,
19. there is never a good work done, if it be right for principle, rule, and
end, but it will help us ^o a discovery of our state, that our work ^s wrought
in God, Joh. 3.21. therefore ^et's be willing to come to the light, and try our
hearts and acts; so may we attain assurance of our interest.

7. Reflect upon, and recollect your former experiences, this was David's usual
method, ^o assure his heart of the truth of Grace, Psalm. 77.6. Psalm. 143.5, 6.
Job 23.11, 12.
and his interest in God, Psalm. 77.10. I will remember the years of the right
hand of the most high; days of old; his songs in the night; this course took
Job and many other saints, and the Apostle bids the believing Hebrews call to
remembrance the former days, in which after they were illuminated, they endured
a great fight of afflictions, Heb. 10.32. and this was in order to the recovery
of Gods smiles, and the sense of his love: you will say; what am I better for
remembering what goodness was in me in time past, which I am now fallen from,
and have lost? I answer, much, every way, chiefly, because these mercies of the
Covenant are sure mercies, and though they may be obscured, yet never
abolished, where God loves once, he loves to the end, Joh. 13.1. Job 19.28. 1
Pet. 1.23.
the bud and blossom of comfort may be nipt, but the root of the matter and
incorruptible seed remains in the heart; a man in a swoun has life though
possibly it is not discernable to himself or others; grace may be hid, yet
alive, as the sap returns into the root in Winter; want of comfortable sense
and feeling is not a loss of Grace, in this case search your records, and see
if you cannot find some manifestations of God to your souls in former times: I
have heard of a godly Woman, who was wont to write down how God dealt with her
heart, and time, place, manner of her communion with God; a time of destruction
came, the comforts and counsels of Ministers, friends were in vain (...) a good
man gets her Book, shows it under her own hand, which she could no^ deny,
clears the immutable love of God, plyes her with it, drives the nail home and
thereby she recovered her assurance thus may you, therefore recollect
experiences.

8. Strengthen every grace; the greate^ any thing is, the more is is
discernable little Grace is not so soon discovered a^ much Grace; a greater
measure of the Graces of the spirit carries a beauty and luster along with it,
and has a self-evidencing testimony of the souls sincerity Christians, do you
add to your faith, virtue, knowledge, temperance, patience Godliness,
brotherly-kindness, charity; for if these things be in you and abound, yo^
shall both be fruitful, and they will help you to clear up your calling and
election, 2 Pet. 1.5-10. these resemble the soul to God, and the more God-like
a Chrstian grows, the more clear will he be in point of state; Saints of the
greatest magnitude are usually more free from doubtings, whiles sincere, (yet
weak believers) are much pestered with jealousies and misgivings; the more you
get of these sure mercies into your hearts, the more sure you are of your
interest in them; the faster hold you have of God, the surer you will be, you have
indeed hold of him; every step toward Zion will add new strength, stability
and satisfaction to the holy Pilgrim: increase Repentance, and you increase
assurance of the remission of sins, increase faith, and that brings on
assurance of faith; strengthen hope, and you settle your Anchor; grow in love
to God and his way, courage and zeal for God, humility and self-denial, and
hereby shall you clear up your own souls and others, that these mercies of the
Covenant belong to you, for so says the Apostle, the Lord make you to increase
and abound in love -- to the end he may stablish your hearts unblameable in
holiness before God, 1 These. 3.12, 13. if you have more Grace, you may probably
have more comfort.

9. Lay the stress of your souls upon free grace, the more you mix any conceits
of your own righteousness, the more you will stagger, and be disconsolate, let
free grace be your foundation, and build upon nothing in your selves, for your
best graces, duties, excellencies are imperfect and can afford you little solid
satisfaction. Let Jesus Christ be all in all to you, be you nothing at all in
your selves. Oh God loves to see a poor trembling soul despairing o^ any thing
in it self, accounting the World as loss and dross, flying into the
outstretched arms of free grace, casting it self down a^ his feet, and
resolving to venture all upon an all-sufficient Savior, and though at present
it walk in darkness, yet it will cas^ Anchor in the dark, Isa. 50.10.
and trust in the name of the Lord; you shall see in due time the mists shall
be dispelled, and the souls state cleared, and the troubled heart fully
satisfied (...) thus David made account to recover the light of Gods
countenance, See Psalm. 33.20, 22.
and banish disquieting thoughts, even by trusting in God Psalm. 45.5, 12. mercy
will answer all your doubts and scruples; mercy will suit your necessity, mercy
will revive and rejoice troubled spirits; therefore, poor doubting soul, though
thou can find no goodness in thy self, therefore look on thy self as
utterly unworthy, yea, incapable of interest in Covenant-mercies, yet hope in
Gods mercy; let no mud of thy duties mix with the pure stream of free,
undeserved mercy and as that will carry thy soul apace to the Ocean of glory;
so it will bring many sweet refreshing streams of joy and peace into thy heart:
we have instances of many in the word that judged themselves most unworthy of
good, as in themselves, yet expected and received, Mat. 8.8.15.27.
both mercy and assurance thereof for mercies sake; as Centurion, Woman of
Canaan, and others, because as mercy is free, so these Covenant-mercies are
purchased and ensured by Jesus Christ, the Mediator of the Covenant, and
therefore though there be no goodness in the poor soul, to procure these
mercies, yet there is enough in their surety, and as their sins are made over
to him, so what good is in Christ, is made over to the believing soul; 1 Cor.
1.30. here is the marrow of the Gospel. Yea farther, the less goodness an
humbled sinner finds in himself, the greater evidence has he that these
mercies belong to him, Isa. 55.1. Mat. 5.3. Romans 4.5.
because he finds even such very persons invited and received: yea humility,
self-denial and poverty of spirit are mercies of the Covenant, and do evidence
interest.

10. Be much in the duties of thankfulness and cheerfulness, give God praise,
and God will give you more grounds of praise, bury not his mercies in the grave
of forgetfulness, especially bless him for Covenant-mercies: Alas, says the
soul, if I were sure I had an interest in these Covenant-mercies, then I could
sing to Gods praise, and be very thankful; but how can I praise God for that
which I question whether it belong to me, yea or no: I Answer, thou must bless
God that there are such mercies in store for poor sinners, and that any poor
souls have obtained an interest therein, and are carried to Heaven thereby,
bless God that you are under a call and capacity to enjoy these
Covenant-mercies, that God has not excluded, but included you in the universal
tender of it; yea, consider if you have not cause to bless God that he has
been dealing with your hearts in such a manner as he is wont to do with such
souls as he brings into Covenant with himself; has he not humbled, broken,
brought your souls off your own bottoms; let you see a vanity in the World, the
excellency and necessity of Christ? caused longings and pantings in your souls
after these mercies? and does not all this deserve your thankfulness? but know
further, that thankfulness for what you have is a most effectual way to clear
up your title and to beget assurance, praise raises the souls faculties to an
high pitch of joy and comfort; it is like David's harp to banish away the evil
spirit of disquietness or discouragement: your praise should wait for God,
Psalm. 65.1. Isa. 30.18.
and you will find God waiting to be gracious to you; usually a thankful heart is
a cheerful heart: you may sing your selves out of your sorrows, as David did
frequently: he made a song of these mercies of the Covenant, even then when he
could find little comfort in, or benefit by, these Covenant-mercies in many
regards: See Psalm. 89.1. with ver. 38. ad finem: thus do you, Christians, sing
your selves into this blessed sleep, and soul tranquillity: it is the fault of
doubting souls, that they pore all upon their sins, and forget their mercies,
they think they can never be sufficiently bathed in the tears of repentance,
and torment their hearts with doubtful thoughts, but consider not that a
thankful commemoration of mercies is as well their duty as mourning and
humiliation; yea, it is a sweet, heart-chearing, God-pleasing duty; therefore
let Christians be much in this duty as a means of assurance: I shall add a word
or two to all of us to press after a particular assurance of our interest in
these mercies of the Covenant.

1. Christians may be assured of their interest; we are commanded to make it
sure, many good souls have arrived to a Plerophory or full assurance; 2 Pet.
1.10.
experience proves the truth of this, Joh. 16.24. Ephesians. 1.13. Romans 15 4. It Is
promised. See Isa. 60.16. Saints have attained to it. Job. 19.25. Psalm. 63.1.
Gal. 2.20. 1 John 3.14. 5.19. Cant. 2.16. Isa. 45.24, 25.
God himself has promised joy and comfort to such as ask it, it is the great
office of the spirit to seal up souls to the day of redemption; Yea the
Scriptures were written to promote our comfort and assurance, seals of the
Covenant instituted Ordinances and Ministers appointed for this very end? and
shall we slight this infinite Condescension of God who is so forward to help
us? shall we use no means or endeavors to ensure these mercies to our souls?
Oh ungrateful wretches! if it were a thing unattainable, we might be daunted;
but how many gracious souls do we see (...) hear of, that do walk in the light
of Gods Countenance, and triumph over all opposition in the sense of Gods love!
and one great Reason why many of us are so full of doubts is our neglect of
Gods appointed means for the obtaining of assurance, for if it be attainable in
the use of ordinary means, we sin exceedingly against God and our own souls in
neglecting those means of assurance.

2. You cannot evidence your truth of grace, or title to Covenant-mercies
unless you use Gods appointed means to obtain assurance; it is an ill sign of a
graceless heart to nourish doubtings and distrusts, and then to come in with
such pleas as these; true faith is accompanied with doubtings, he that doubts
not, does not believe; a doubting faith is a good faith; let me have doubts and
fears, I dare not be too confident, lest I presume. But I must tell thee soul,
a doubting faith is but a weak faith, and a Christian ought to be strong in
faith, Romans 4.20.
and make a progress to a full degree and proficiency in grace and endeavor to
arrive to a plerophory, and full assurance, for this is the nature of grace to
be pressing after perfection, Romans 1.17.
and go from faith to faith, even from a faith of adherence to a faith of
evidence and assurance; yea let such know this that slight means of assurance,
you live in a constant neglect of a known duty, in disobedience to a flat
command, Heb. 6.11. and we desire that every one of you do show the same
diligence to the full assurance of hope unto the end, q. d. if your faith and
hope be of the right stamp, as it may seem to be, it will be working off all
doubtings, anxious thoughts and distrusting fears, and move to a further degree
of confidence and assurance: else you may suspect the truth of it.

3. You cannot assure your selves of creature enjoyments a day to an end, nor
yet of immunity from crosses, and if you have not assurance of these sure
mercies, what have you to bear up your hearts in an evil day? we little know
what shaking times may come, that may pluck from you whatever you account dear;
and if you have not something above, oh the sad confusions that will seize upon
you! but assurance of an interest in the God of Heaven, and the good things of
the Covenant will be a guard to free your hearts from those numerous Armies of
tormenting fears that will beset you; this will be a cordial to drive away sick
and swooning qualmes from your troubled spirits; assurance of Gods love will
fortify your hearts against the fierce assaults of men and devils, Psalm. 27.1.
the Lord is my light and salvation, whom shall I fear? Exodus 12.23. Ezekiel. 9.6.
destroying Angels shall not come near any persons that are sprinkled with
Christ's blood, and have the mourners mark, a day of danger, horror, confusion
may overtake us in the Nation, in which we may be stripped naked of all our
enjoyments, surely then assurance of our interest in the best riches in the
World will stand us in stead, and when all things else fail these will abide
with us. But,

4. Consider the great advantages of assurance, I can but name them. 1. It will
assure us that we shall want nothing that is good for us, if he have given us
Christ, then will he give us all good things, Romans 8.32. 2. It gives a sweet
relish to every comfort of life, delight in Gods great goodness, Neh. 9.25.3.
It will sweeten the bitterest cup of affliction, Mat. 9.2. 4. It gives boldness
to the Throne of Grace, Heb. 10.22. (...), i. e. with a liberty to say what we
list, if according to his will, and he will hear us. 5. Assurance helps the
soul to despise the World; he that knows he is clothed with the Sun can
trample the Moon under his feet, 1 Pet. 4.14, 16.
see Heb. 10.34.6. It strengthens against the censures and reproaches of men,
no matter what men say when God acquits, Romans 8.33, 34. our Conscience tells us
we are not the men we are represented to be. 7. It sweetens the reading of the
Word, and receiving of the Sacraments, these promises, seals, blood of the
Covenant are mine; precepts, threatenings, all things his, 1 Cor. 3.21, 22.8. It
enlarges the soul in praise and thanksgiving; hence those Hallelujahs in
Heaven; the more assurance, the more thankfulness, Psalm. 103.1, 2, 3. 9. It
commends Religion to others, makes Gods ways lovely, Oh taste and see, come
and I will show you what he what he has done for my soul, ingageth many, Psalm.
142.7.10. It helps on repentance, makes Godly sorrow more kindly,
Evangelical; a love-look from Christ melts Peter's heart; this Sun dissolves
frozen souls, Ezekiel. 16.63.11. It engages a soul against sin; appearances of
God are cords of love, which are strongest to an ingenuous spirit, Romans 6.1,
2.12. Assurance animates our performances, and obedience; is any thing too much
to do for God? yea, my God deserves all I am, have, his command's are not
grievous, 1 John 3.5.13. It deadens the heart to needless disputes and
Controversies, it settles the heart in the truth, and fortifies it against the
subtilties of seducing spirits, for Gods Law is in their hearts, Heb. 13.9.14.
It represents the glory of Heaven, is some blessed emblem of a souls bathing
it self in these Rivers of pleasure that are at Gods right hand, divine
embraces, a corner of Heaven, a Pisgah-sight of Canaan. 15. It sweeteneth the
King of terrors, and plucks out the sting of death; so that a gracious soul
assured of Gods love can triumph with Paul over this conquered enemy, 1 Cor.
15.55. and indeed none but an assured Christian can look death in the face
without horror and amazement: ruffling gallants may be prodigal of their
lives, who are far from any capacity of obtaining assurance, but those are
liker Bruits than men, that are guided by sense, not by reason, and consider
not that their souls are immortal, and that they are entering into Eternity at
death, but these have drowned themselves in sensuality, and consider not what
they do, but it is only the Christian that is upon good grounds assured of his
good estate, that can in cold blood adventure upon death, yea be willing to
dye, yea desire to be dissolved and be with Christ.

I have but hinted at these things, because it is an ordinary subject wherein
many have done worthily to promote endeavors to obtain assurance.

Sirs, what say you to these things? is not assurance of interest in
Covenant-mercies worth laboring for? can you let these things lie without
clearing your title? does not the new creature breathe after it? does not a
rational soul desire it? do not all wicked men catch after a certainty, and
frame to themselves some kind of certainty? do not worldlings take care to
secure their Lands, Goods, Estates? shall they require Bonds, Seals, Oaths,
Sureties, and yet account all this too little, and shall we account any thing
too much to secure these sweet mercies whithout which we are undone for ever?
Oh let nothing hinder your endeavors this way; let no objections make you
delay or be discouraged; let not Satan deter you, or the Worlds conceits make
you slight it as unattainable, nor a slothful unbelieving heart obstruct your
diligence in this great and weighty case; who would live at such uncertainties
as the most do? who would have his life to hang in doubt in a mere conjecture?
especially when it is in this great case of Conscience, whether the soul must
live in Heaven or Hell? but most of all considering that our very lives are so
uncertain that the next moment we may step into Eternity; the God of Heaven
awake the Saints of God who have indeed an interest in these mercies to use all
means to know they have an interest therein, that they may know they are of the
truth, and assure their hearts before him, as the Apostle speaks, 1 John 3.19.

CHAP. XIII.
III. THE third head of Directions i^ this, In what cases may a Covenanted soul
make use of, or improve these sure mercies of David?

In answer to this I shall propound these seven cases wherein a gracious soul
may and must have recourse to these Covenant mercies.

1. In case of dissetling suggestions t^ Atheism or unbelief, when reason begin
to dispute the being of God, or the truth of Scriptures, and shakes our
confidence or strikes at the foundation, then study and improve these sure
undoubted mercies, and lean upon Divine Authority, if God speak it, the thing
is out of doubt, his [ips^ dixit] is beyond all demonstrations; Divines
distinguish of maxims in Divinity some whereof are mixtly Divine, other are
merely Divine; Primo credu^tur, and postea intelliguntur.
in truths of the former sort reason may serve in the second place; first they
are believed, then understood, as a man believes the immortality o^ the soul,
then he begins to take up the same from reason, Rations precedentes minuunt
fidem, sed rations subsequentes augent fid^m.
only reason must not her^ come before faith, but know her place for if she
should offer to go before a^ an Usher to make way for faith, w^ should never
believe; therefore Schoolmen say, Reasons going before Faith, weaken^ faith,
but reasons coming after faith strengthens it; so that reason makes not the
matter more sure [ex part veritatis dictantis] in respect of God the speaker,
See Weem's Pourtrait of Imag. Ep. to Read.
[sed ex part intellectus dissentientis] in respect of the weakness of our
understanding. But now in things that are merely Divine, and fall directly
under faith, as the Mystery of the Trinity of Incarnation, reason has nothing
to do but admire those hid mysteries that she can never reach unto. Oh take
heed of doubting or unbelief: Gospel-mysteries are without all Controversy;
here thy way is not to dispute but believe; Gods Word is more than all the
protestations, asseverations, bonds or obligations of all the men in the World;
Consider what is said in the Doctrinal part, and give your full assent to all
revealed truths: you may better believe God than your senses: Senses may
deceive us; God cannot, many men are brutish, will believe nothing but what is
within the reach of sense; they are mere Sadduces about spirits and spiritual
things; but sirs, will you belive nothing but what you see? then surely you will
not believe that there is such a City as Rome or London because you have not
seen them. But let me tell you that that tempting spirit who persuades you now
to doubt of the being of God, and the reality of Divine things, cannot doubt
thereof himself; for he to his cost feels the truth thereof, though without any
comfortable interest therein the Devil believes and trembles, Jam. 2.19. O
therefore, Non est disputatio a^t ^ubitatio post Evang^lium reve^^tum.
silence all unbelieving and disputing thoughts, doubt not after these clear
revelations and demonstrations: admit not this grand Gospel-sin of unbelief,
this damning infidelity, but cry out as the poor man, Lord I believe, help thou
my unbelief, Mark 9.24.

2. In case of guilt upon the Conscience and fears of acceptance, then have
recourse to these sure mercies of David, these are mercies, therefore mercy is
working toward a poor sinner in misery, they are made sure by Christ to all
Heirs of Promise, and though thou can not sensibly apprehend him by faith, at
some times, ye^ he can powerfully comprehend thee what though thy sins be many,
yet mercy answers all demerits; it is not only mercy, but mercies; multitudes of
tender mercies; he is plenteous in mercy, and will abundantly pardon; he does
not consult thy fitness, but his free grace; come then, poor guilty sinner,
venture thy weary soul upon these sure mercies; he i^ meeting thee half way (as
the Prodigal^ Father) and ready to fall upon thy neck his bowels are yerning
toward thy sinning soul, he is very free and liberal (...) distributing; be
not thou coy and shy in entertaining these sure mercies, h^ waits to be
gracious, do thou bid hi^ gracious tenders welcome. Yea, but says the troubled
soul, though there be mercies, yet I question whether they belong to me; I know
they are sure to some, but it is a great question whether I be of that number;
and I reply, why not to thee? what Scripture or reason have thou to suspect
that thou art excluded? the grant is in general terms, Jesus Christ came to
seek and save what was lost, and thou art lost, and feel thy self to be
lost, does not he bid weary souls come to him? if thou were righteous, thou
might justly fear thou might go without him, but thou say thou art a
sinner, and thou know he came not to call the righteous but sinners to
repentance; thou art a sinner, a great sinner: yea, chiefest of sinners, and
did not Paul look upon himself as such, and yet he obtained mercy; and consider
soul if thou have no interest in these mercies, whence ^hen are all those
fears, doubts, jealousies, complaints, enquiries? whence are these sad and
dreadful apprehensions of thy sin and misery? these convictions of the
nothingness of thy duties, and sufficiency of mercies only to relieve thy
perishing soul? whence are those meltings of heart for ^ffending bowels of
mercy? and strug^lings against sin from the sense of mercy? that mean those
prayers and tears, those ^ossings of thy soul betwixt hopes and ^ears about thy
interest in mercy? and yet thou who thus complainest, would not give up thy
title or quit thy claim to these Covenant-mercies for a full possession of all
the common mercies in the World; thou art not content without these, thy
enquiry is chiefly after these, thy expectation i^ most from, and dependence
most upon, these Covenant-mercies, these and these alone are thy salvation and
desire. But suppose the worst, that thy soul has no interest as yet in these,
why should thou despair of future interest? should thou not rather put it
out of doubt by a present application thereof by actual believing? stand out,
stand off no longer, take Christ upon his own terms, give up thy self to him,
give him the glory of believing, remember al^ the ways the Lord has taken to
assure thee of these mercies, so that unbelief is the most unreasonable sin in
the World; Joh. 3.19.
this is the great damning sin, say not with Cain, thy sins are greater than
can be forgiven, for thou lie in saying so; is not the mercy of an infinite
God beyond the demerits of a finite creature? nay further, thou give God the
lie who is truth it self, he says, there is life for dead condemned sinners in
his Son, 1 John 5.10, 11.
thou say no, but I have been to seek, and I want life, but there is none for
me; yes, yes, soul, there is life enough for thee, grace abounds, and you may
have this life in abundance, only shut not out your selves by unbelief, but
come to him and he will in no wise cast you off, for he is ready to forgive
your iniquities, and give you these sure mercies.

3. In case of persecutions, afflictions, temptation from Satan, the World, or
any other ways, you may then improve these Covenant-mercies, and find abundance
of sweetness, solace and satisfaction therein; were it not for these the soul
of a child of God would sink under his pressures; how often does David profess
that he had perished in his affliction, Psalm. 119.
did not Gods word of promise support him; a Covenant-word will lift up the
soul from the lowest depth, a Covenanted God will encourage a Saint in the
greatest straits; there is a Divine art in a Christians improving this ^tock to
his best advantage, and affliction ^s a proper season to make use thereof; as
suppose a man be in poverty there is enough ^n the Covenant to make him rich, if
in disgrace, Covenant-mercies make him honorable, if sick, one Covenant-mercy
(even pardon of sin) will make him sound, Isa. 33. Dei hominem and culto^em Dei
subnixum spei veritate and fidei stabilitate fundatum, ^gat mandi bu^us and
se^uli in testatio^ibus commoveri. vid. Cypr. tracta^. cont. Demetr. p. 273.
(...) in Prison, Covenant-mercies set him at ^iberty, if hungry or thirsty,
why, Covenant-mercies are meat and drink to him, if derived of relations, still
Covenant-mercy makes up that loss, and lets the soul see ^etter relations in
Heaven. Oh Christians, our case can never be forlorn, as long as ^u have such
rich mercies of the Covenant to support and supply you; let all the ^en of
earth set themselves against you, ^ey can but storm the outworks, they can
^ver surprise your main Fort, or rob you (...) your best goods; these mercies
of the Covenant which are made sure to you by a Covenant of salt; oh hug and
embrace these mercies in such a time as this, when trade decays, your stock is
safe; in a plundering time none can pluck away your treasure and estate; you
have something that all the Devils in Hell, and Men on Earth cannot deprive you
of, troubles will but knock these mercies into your breasts more firmly and
feelingly then deprive you of them, or render you suspicious of your interest
in them, for these are seasons wherein God communicates most of himself to the
soul; Genesis 28.13.
Jacob's sad and solitary journey was attended with the choicest heart-reviving
discoveries; Heaven was opened, and God shined upon blessed Stephen's soul
through a shower of Stones. Act. 7.55.
Oh Christians, it is worth a World to have interest in God in the day of
affliction; and it is your great work in such a day to bear up your hearts with
what you have in the Covenant of grace: take heed of discontented murmurings
under any trials, since you have a God that can and will be all in all to your
souls in the want of all comforts and overflowing of sorrows.

4. You may improve these Covenant mercies in a day of spiritual dearth, in the
famine of the Word, which is the sad des^ judgment, when Means, Ordinances
fail^ and the soul is in great danger of pining then it is both safe and sweet
to suck growt^ and strength from the springhead, eve^ from God in a
Covenant-way, these mercies nourish the languishing soul in a famishing season,
Isa. 41.17, 18. when the poor and needy seek water, and there is none, and
their tongue fails for thirst, I the Lord will hear them, I the God of Israel
will not forsake them, I will open Rivers in high places, and Fountains in the
midst of the Valleys, I will make the Wilderness a Pool of water, and streams
in the Desert, and dry Land springs of Water. Oh blessed are Covenanted souls,
they have meat to eat others know not of, hidden Manna, God has ways to convey
Marrow and Fatness into their souls when their ordinary provision is kept from
them. I Read of a man, that was condemned to starve to death in Prison, his
Daughter getting leave to visit him once a day, yet not permitted to bring
food, notwithstanding preserved his life a long time by the Milk which he
sucked out of her Breasts. Oh how does God preserve the souls of his Children
in Prisons, by that good nourishment they suck from God in the breasts of the
Promises! he keeps them alive in famine, bread shall be given them, their
waters shall be sure, Isa 33.16.
yea he makes affliction and adversity both bread and water, wholesome food,
therefore called in Scripture, Isa. 30.20.
the bread of adversity and water of affliction, because souls are bravely
nourished thereby; Ordinances may for a season be removed, but influences of
grace are still conveyed, grace is supported, the soul supplied, as long as the
spring remains free for a Christians access he shall be provided for, though
the Chanel be stopped, streams cut off, and outward means much obstructed:
therefore, Christians, when the word of the Lord is precious, and there is
little open vision, make your addresses immediately to God, see what he will
speak to your souls; own him in Covenant Relation, lay your souls at his feet,
and tell him that you are cast in a thirsty Wilderness, your graces are
withering, and hearts failing, tell him you can scarce meet with an instrument
to receive a word of council or comfort from, but ask him if he cannot supply
without as well as by the means; tell him, he sometimes stops the Conduit that
he may convince us where our refreshment lies, and whither we must have
recourse for fresh supplys; tell him when you enjoyed the means, they could not
work without him, and now you want them he can work without them, though he
has tied us to the means, yet he has not tied himself to them; tell him once
again that the more immediate his Conveyances are, the more evidential they
are, and the sweeter emblems of Heaven.

5. In your backslidings and fears of apostasy, then, oh then improve these
mercies of the new Covenant; you fall and miscarry and lose your hold of God,
but God has hold of you; you dare not venture to approach to him again, Jer.
3.12, 13.
but he calls and tells you he will heal your backsliding, will not cause his
anger to fall upon you, because he is married to you, and he hates putting
away; the mercies of the Covenant depend not on your mutable wills, but upon
everlasting love, your souls are carried to Heaven in the Chariot of the
Covenant which moves upon the solid Axle-tree of free grace, which as it was
not procured, so is it not continued by your merits, or goodness; it is true if
you had carried the matter so toward men as you have done to God, you might
expect an heavy sentence, but these are the sure mercies of an infinite God;
the Covenant is made in Christ, and made good by Christ, the Alpha and Omega,
the Amen, the faithful and true witness is the Surety and Mediator of this
blessed Covenant. Oh Christians, lay your stress here; there is help laid upon
one that is mighty to save, he can save to the uttermost pinch, he is good at
this soul-saving work; do not fear, he that begun this good work in your hearts
will perfect it, you may be confident of it; 1 Pet. 1.5. Romans 14 4. Jer. 32.
you shall be kept by the power of God through faith to salvation; though you
be very weak, yet he is able to make you stand; you shall not depart from him;
omnipotency is engaged for you; act faith therefore upon the numerous and
gracious promises of perseverance, though you have many fightings without and
fears within, though you feel averseness to good, and a tendency to sin, wants
and weaknesses, burdens and breaches, snares and sadness; yet lift up your
hearts, you stand upon better terms with God than Adam in innocence, or the
Angels in glory, who were not confirmed in their integrity, but are fallen by a
dreadful apostasy; it were sad for poor believers, if their happiness did
depend upon their mutable nature, or strongest resolutions; or if God should
revoke his mercies, as often as they provoke his justice, but blessed be God
for Jesus Christ, and the rest of the sure mercies of David; triumph in this, O
ye Children of the promise, the Covenant wherein your souls are wrapped, is
ordered in all things and sure; Heaven it self is engaged for you, the Gates of
Hell shall not prevail against you, none can pluck you out of his hands, who is
the rock of Ages, in whom is everlasting strength; you may confidently make
bold and blessed Paul's victorious challenge, who shall separate us from the
Love of God, Romans 8.35. ad finem, though your internal motions be often like
Ezekiel's wheel, (...) 16 (...).
intricate, confused and perplexed, as a wheel in a wheel, grace sweying one
way, and flesh another, yet if you be joined to the living Creatures, and
united to Christ in the bond of the Covenant, you shall go straight on with
constancy and uniformity till your souls arrive at glory: these mercies are not
for a day, or week, or month or year, but they run parallel with the life of
God and line of eternity, for with everlasting mercies, he will have compassion
on thee, Isa. 54.7, 8.

6. In case of desertions, and Gods withdrawings from him, the soul may and
must improve these sure mercies of David; now desertions are ordinarily
distinguished into Gods withdrawing. 1. His quickening. 2. His comforting
presence from the soul, in both these cases the soul may improve them.

1. In case God suspend the gracious influences of his spirit, and the heart be
shut up under deadness, hardness, unbelief, distractions, and the poor
Christian cannot feel those lively springings of the graces of the Covenant in
his heart, then let him have recourse to the promise wherein God has engaged
himself to give a soft heart, a new spirit, faith, love, repentance, the spirit
of prayer, etc. all habits of grace, the lively exercise of grace, assisting
grace, quickening, enlarging, moving melting manifestations are bound up in this
Gospel Covenant; hence it is, that when David ^inds his heart dull and out of
frame; he runs to God and cries out, my soul cleaves to the dust, ver. 107.
quicken me according to thy word, Psalm. 119.25. and he goes often over with
that phrase, which imports, that David lay under the sense of some promise;
that God had made for the quickening of his heart, when it was out of frame, and
accordingly he recounts the gracious influences of Gods spirit, and professes
that he will never forget his precepts, because by them he had quickened him,
ver. 93. thus let dead hearts lay themselves at Christ's feet, and plead in this
manner, Lord my heart is exceeding dull and distracted; I feel not those
enlarging, melting influences which thy Saints have met with, but are they not
main material mercies of the Covenant; do thou not promise a spirit of
illumination, conviction, humiliation? is not holiness of heart and life a main
branch of it? do thou not promise therein to write thy Law in my heart? to
give me oneness of heart, to put thy fear within me, to subdue my corruptions,
to help my infirmities in prayer? now Lord, these are the mercies my soul wants
and waits for, fill my soul with these warming influences, revive thy work of
grace in my soul, draw out my heart toward thee, enlarge my affections to
thee, repair thine image, draw out grace into lively exercise; does not that
sweet word intend such a mercy when thou say, Ezekiel. 36.26.
thou will not only give a new heart but put a new spirit within me, to make my
soul lively, active, and spiritual in duties and motions? dear Lord, am not I a
Covenanted soul? and are not these Covenant-mercies? why then, my God, do
thou thus harden my heart from thy fear? why do thou leave me in all this
deadness and distraction? remember thy word unto thy servant in which thou have
caused me to hope, and in which thou have helped me to plead; oh quicken my
dull heart, according to thy word: thus improve these mercies in case of
deadness.

2. In case of sadness and disconsolateness, and the hidings of Gods face from
a troubled drooping spirit; Oh then make much use of these Covenant-mercies,
both as they are mercies and as they are sure mercies, they are as free and as
firm as ever; if you see nothing but wickedness and wretchedness in your
selves, remember mercy prevents you; if you see nothing but justice and frowns
in Gods face, remember his faithfulness ingageth him; he is faithful, he cannot
deny himself, would he love thee so as to make thee his, and will he not now
love thee as his Child? consider, the Covenant is certain, though there be a
present suspension, thy union to Christ is secured, though actual Communion be
intercepted, yea real unnecessary Communion is continued, though sensible
manifestations be obscured: for observe it, the soul holds Communion with
Christ by that which desertions cannot hinder, salvation may be there, though
the joy of that salvation be gone, Covenant Relation may continue without
comfortable satisfaction, why bast thou forsaken me? (says Christ and David
his Type) yet my God still. Psalm. 51.8.
Christians, you are not to trust to present feelings; David does not say, make
me to feel, but hear joy and gladness, says one, because sense and feeling is
of no worth of it self, except first we hear it in a promise, that is a fancy
that is felt and not heard from God, and we are to build upon a word of promise,
even when we want the feeling of comfort; and it is not safealtoger the to lean
upon former experiences only, though these are good secondary helps, yet our
primary and Principal foundation is God in a Promise, as our God in Covenant;
let a dark and troubled spirit read, study, and practice that choice
instruction, Isa. 50.10. trust in the name of the Lord, there is enough in Gods
name to answer all^d ubts, read it, Exodus 34.5, 6 -- mercy there answers to our
misery, grace to our undeserving, long-suffering to our continued apostasy,
goodness answers our vileness, truth and faithfulness answers to our
Covenant-breach and falsehood; God keeps Covenant, though we break it, yea, God
keeps Covenant with us though we are apt to think he breaks it; David thought
Gods mercy was clean gone, and that his Promise failed for evermore, but he is
convinced at last that that apprehension was his infirmity, Psalm. 77.8, 9, 10.
therefore let a clouded soul in its blackest desertions lift up his eyes and
heart to these sure mercies, and ponder thus; it is true my soul is dark, and
God withdraws, it is a night of great affliction, but was it never day with
thee, O my soul? has not the blessed day star of grace risen in thy heart?
has not God united thee to Jesus Christ? did he never give thee the earnest of
his Spirit? did thou never feel the stirrings of its graces, or the stealing
of its comforts? reflect upon thy former state, or rather study the freeness
and the fullness of Gospel Grace; what though I be without any sensible feelings
of Gods grace, or shinings of his face? is not my life sometimes hid with
Christ in God, even from mine own eyes as well as from others? may not the Sun
be under a Cloud? shall I say my Father does not love me, because he does not
always dandle me upon his knee, and evidence his love to me in sweet embraces?
I am resolved to cleave unto him though he kill me, and to believe in him
though I cannot see him, I will venture my weary soul upon his free grace in
Christ; the Covenant is firm, its mercies are sure, there is hope in the God of
Israel; it may be he will cast a propitious aspect on a weary ^oul, however I
am resolved to lie at his ^eet, and act affiance and dependence on his
^mmutable promise, whether he ever shine upon my soul or no, this will bring a
good issue.

7. The last case wherein a Christian is to improve these sure mercies of David
is in the hour and power of death, when that grim Sergeant looks upon us with
its ghastly face, and arrests us with its cold hand, then mercy will stand us
in stead, and sure mercies will be our sweetest Cordial, these mercies pluck
out the sting of death, perfume the grave, make way for the gracious soul to
take its flight to glory, so that death is now become the Christians friend,
and servant, rest and interest, conquest and Crown; the Apostle does therefore
reckon up death as one part of the Saints Inventory, 1 Cor. 3.21, 22. all
things are yours, whether Paul or Apollo, or Ceph^s, or the World, or life, or
death, or things present, or things to come, all are yours -- this is the
fullest, longest, surest title; here is a sufficient enumeration, nothing can be
wanting either in the mercies ensured, or manner of ensuring, or the duration,
it is to all Eternity, and it is the best and clearest Tenure [in capite] in the
head Christ; and it is both by Purchase and by Conquest, nothing is wanting to
make these mercies sure for ever, for death which dissolves all other bonds of
relation does more firmly and closely join God and the gracious soul; it is as a
Porter to let them into their Fathers house; a divine Limbeck to purify and
prepare them for glory, and that voice which calls to the believer saying, come
up hither; in this life souls are but espoused to Christ, 2 Cor. 11.2.
after death they are presented to him, and the marriage is consummated; 2 Cor.
5.6, 8. ver. 1, 2. Phil. 1.21.
here we are absent from our husband, while present in the body, but it is more
desirable to be absent from the body and present with the Lord, and this is
done by a dissolving of the earthly house of this Tabernacle; so that hereby
death becomes a gain, and brings believers to their proper home; and why should
we be afraid of a stingless Serpent, or helpful servant, that does us the
greatest kindness? why are believers afraid to dye? why do they not rather say
with that good man, [egredere anima egredere] go forth my soul, go forth, and
meet thy dearly beloved. But we need go no further to prove either the
immortality of the soul, or the commodities of death than the subject we are
upon, even these sure mercies of David, for they continue to David even when he
is laid in the grave, therefore our Savior proves the Resurrection from the
Covenant with Abraham, Numb. 18.19. Mat. 32.31.
Isaac and Jacob, because it is a perpetual Covenant, a Covenant of Salt, and
thus runs the argument, God is the God of the living and not of the dead,
therefore these Patriarchs are living and have an existence, because he has
made a Covenant with them; otherwise if these arise not, then must the Covenant
of necessity cease, but the Covenant endures for ever, therefore those with
whom he makes the Covenant must live for ever, since God calls himself their
God, Exodus 3.6.
even after they are laid in their graves; therefore let Christians rest in
hope, when they are laying down their heads in the grave, for the Scripture
says the righteous have hope in their death, the Covenant abides firm still;
the mercies thereof dye not when the body dies; the Heathens themselves saw
this; Socrates says, the Swan was Dedicated to Apollo, because she sung
sweetly before her death; and the Romans when their great men dyed, and when
their bodies were burnt to ashes, they caused an Eagle to fly and mount on
high, to signify that the soul was immortal; and shall not the Children of
Promise sing cheerfully when their souls are ready to mount up to eternal
mansions. I confess I am really ashamed when I read Cicero, Cicero Tusc. Quest.
lib. 1. De contemn^ada morte: Maximum and argumentum est naturam ipfam de immo
talite animorum tacitam judicare, quod omnibus curae s^nt, and maxim quidem
quae post mortem futura s^nt: Serit arbores quae alteri secuco prosint -- quid
procreatio liberorum, quid proparatio nomi^is, quid adoptiones filiorum, quid
testamento^um diligentia, quid i^sa sepulchro um monumenta, quid elo^ia
significant, nisi nos futuna etiam cogitare? -- Nemo unquam sine magna spe
immortalitatis se pro patria offeret ad m^tem: -- and against fear of death he
adds -- Acherontia templa, alta orci. pallida leti, obnubila, obsita tenebris
loc^, nonpudet Philosophum in eo gloriari, quod haec non timeat: -- itaque non
deterret sapientem mors, quae propter incertos casus cotidie imminet, and
propter brevitatem vitae nunquam long potest abesse.
that any that call themselves Christians, should dispute against the
immortality of the soul, when he brings such arguments and Authors to assert
it, but I am much more ashamed that any real Saints should shrink with fears of
death, when even that poor Heathen has spoken so much for the contempt of it.
Let Christians learn something from Heathens. Take a few hints in the Marg.

I must but give a taste in this kind, a world more instances might be brought
out of Heathen Authors to shame professed Christians, that have an higher sort
of Arguments against the fear of death, yet the sense of Covenant Relation is
the strongest, and the sureness of Covenant-mercies is of singular use to
sweeten those bitter pangs, when the King of terrors does appear in the most
formidable manner, and strikes its last stroke with the most terrible kind of
death: and truly I may (with Mr. Dod) call death the friend of grace, though it
be the enemy of nature; our Savior has plucked out its sting and altered the
very nature of it: The Church. page 180.
I shall conclude this Branch with a Poem of Divine Herberts called Death.

Death thou wast once an uncouth hideous thing.
nothing but bones,
the sad effect of sadder groans,
Thy mouth was open, but thou could not sing.
For we considered thee as at some six
or ten years hence,
after the loss of life and sense
Flesh being turned to dust, and bones to sticks:
We looked on this side of thee shooting short,
where we did find
the shells of fledge souls left behind,
Dry dust, which sheds no tears, but may extort.
But since our Saviors death did put some blood
into thy face,
thou art grown fair and full of grace,
Much in request, much sought for as a good.
For we do now behold thee gay and glad
as at doomsday;
when souls shall wear their new array;
And all thy bones with beauty shall be clad.
Therefore we can go dye as sleep, and trust,
half that we have,
unto an honest faithful grave,
Making our pillows either down or dust.
CHAP. XIV.
IV. THE fourth and last head of Directions, that I promised to propound is an
answer to this Question, How a gracious soul that is interested in these
mercies is to behave himself? though this be a necessary point, yet I must cut
short in it, having insisted too long on the former Heads.

1. Believe and receive these mercies, this is a faithful saying and worthy of
all acceptance, De iis quae cognovit, futuris, and quae adhuc sub visum non
cadunt, tam certum habet persuasionem cognitione praedictus, ut ea mag is
adesse putat, quam quae sunt praesentia -- Clem. Alex. Strom. lib. 7.
that Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners, 1 Timothy 1.15. is it the
proposition only that is to be credited, embraced? is it not Christ and the
rest of the Covenant-mercies held forth in this precious maxim, which is the
sweetest flower in the Garden of Scripture, the choicest Pearl in the Word, and
most glorious Star in the whole Constellation of Gospel-promises? who dare
doubt what God has spoken? and who dare refuse what God does offer? he is so
wise that he cannot be deceived, and he is so good that he will not deceive
you; you may better believe God than your own sense; give glory to God by
embracing these mercies, deny or dispute no longer: be not ungrateful to that
Grace of God, that has condescended so low to give you evidences, on purpose
that you might believe.

2. Improve these sure mercies, make use of them in all your particular needs,
if a man have a good spring he will order it for convenient supplies of many
household wants, and draw it through several channels for several uses: so a
Christian must branch out the several mercies of the Covenant to his various
cases and uses, as enlightening mercy to his darkness, enlivening mercy to his
dullness, pardoning mercy in case of guiltiness, purging mercy in case of strong
corruptions, 2 Cor. 12 7.
-- because Gods grace is sufficient for us in all exigencies; in all storms
there is Sea-room enough in Gods infinite mercy for faiths full sail, Phil.
4.19.
our God supplies all wants; Religion is a spiritual bond to tie God and a soul
together, and a Christian in the exercise of his Religion singles out that in
God which is needful to him on all occasions: the life of faith is a retailing
of Divine commodities, as the Covenant of grace gives a soul a title thereto
(as it were) by wholesale. Oh let the heirs of promise improve these mercies.

3. Be content with these mercies, these are sufficient to make you happy, seek
not further to eke out your contentment in the Creature, as though you had not
enough in having these; what a strange passage is that of good Abraham, Genesis
1^.2. Lord God, says he, what will thou give me seeing I go childless? give
him! why had not God given him himself, and was not that an exceeding great
reward? ver. 1. and could Abraham desire more? O yes, all this is nothing
unless God give him a Child, he takes no notice of this in comparison of a Son;
this is just our case, let God give us himself and Covenant-mercies, we can
overlook all these in our distempered fits, and look upon them as of no worth
if he deny us some outward comfort that our hearts are set upon: but this is
our sin and shame, cannot God himself content us? can we go from
Covenant-mercies to mend us with common-mercies? nay do we not thereby weaken
our interest, dishonor our portion, and dis-ingage God to help us? is not God
a jealous God, and can he endure to have any corrival with him in your
affections.

4. Walk worthy of these sure mercies; Cum id praestiterit gratia ut moremur
pe^cata, quid aliud facicmus stvivemus in eo, nisi ut gratiae simus ingrati.
Aug. de Sp. et lib. c. 60. Romans 12.1.
oh do not disparage them by your unsuitable carriage; live after the rate of
heirs of Promise, walk exactly, spiritually, self-denyingly and
soul-resignedly, God has given himself and these best blessings to you in
mercy: oh give your selves and best services to God in a way of duty; if you
give your selves to God as a whole burnt-offering, it is but a reasonable
service, for he has given you more than you can give back to him: walk holily,
steadily, cheerfully as becomes these mercies, do much for God that has done
so much for you, let nothing discourage or disquiet your spirits, since yo^
have mercies, sure mercies to lodge in your bosoms; why should that soul be
sad that enjoys an interest in the father of consolations, the purchaser of
salvation, and comforting spirit? sure mercies with propriety beget solid
comfort and assurance for ever. Col. 1.10. Ephesians. 4.1.1 These. 2.12.
Oh Christians, learn the lessons much inculcated to walk worthy of God, of
your vocation, relation, and this Kingdom.

5. Be active and passive for these mercies, they cost Christ dear to purchase
them; do not you think any thing too dear to do or endure for promoting or
preserving of them: kindness is very endearing to a grateful heart; your pains
cannot be spent to better purpose than in the cause of God, we must always be
paying our debt, though we can never fully pay it, we must be behind-hand with
God, but let a soul under the sense of mercies sweat blood for God, if he call
to it: you sow not in a barren soul, as showrs of mercy engage you to
fruitfulness; so an abundant crop of mercy will be your sure reward: and in
your saddest Winter you shall have the sweetest harvest of mercy; if Christians
knew what grapes of Celestial Canaan they should taste in their
Wilderness-sufferings for Christ, they would not be so afraid of them as they
are; these mercies run most freely and sweetly when other streams are stopped:
fear not sufferings, mercies will meet and support you.

6. Plead these mercies for your posterity, though you should leave your
Children thousands a year, yet these Covenant-mercies will be the best portion;
you cannot assure your estates to your heirs, but these are sure mercies, so
that if you take hold of Gods Covenant, plead it, live up to it, you shall have
the benefit of these your selves, and some (at least) of your Children and
Successors shall enjoy the same mercies, for God will remember these unto a
thousand generations, though he be not bound to every individual soul of your
natural offspring, however the Scripture fully shows that this is the surest
way to obtain a portion for your Children; tell God, they are more his than
yours, you are but Nurses for his Children; tell the Lord, that thou must dye
and leave them, but he lives for ever, entreat him to be their loving
everlasting Father; tell him that though thou leave them something in the
world, yet that is neither suitable nor durable, but these sure mercies will
not fail them, and comfort your hearts for your house and family with the last
words of dying David, 2 Samuel 23.5. oh labor to transmit your title unto God to
future generations, as the two Tribes and an half did to future Ages by their
Altar Ed. Joh. 24.24, 28. see 1 Chronicles. 28.9.

7. Breathe after a full possession of these sure mercies, they are from
everlasting to everlasting, follow them to the spring in admiration and
thankfulness, and follow this stream of Covenant-mercies to the Ocean of
Eternity; indeed the streams are in time to the Sons and Daughters of men, but
the original is without a beginning, in God eternal thoughts of love, and the
end is without end in those everlasting embraces in Heaven; oh long to see the
end, if these mercies be so sweet here, what will they be in Heaven, in their
proper Element, as it were? oh that blessed state, that Paradise of pleasure,
that joy of our Lord, Abraham's bosom, an house not made with hands, a City
with foundations, a Crown, a Kingdom! art thou the happy product of these sure
mercies of David? do these mercies bring forth such felicity? oh happy day that
my soul has an interest in these sure mercies, but how long shall my soul be
kept from the full possession of these mercies? when shall I come and appear
before God? how long shall I sojourn in Mesech, and be detained from my Fathers
plenteous Table above? shall not a Captive long for his deliverance, and a
young heir for his full inheritance? and shall not my soul long to be with
Christ above? shall my body be so weary, and has not my soul more cause to be
weary of its burden and absence from home? Romans 8.19-23.
shall creatures groan, and shall not I much more to be delivered into the
glorious liberty of the Sons of God? shall the Spirit and the Bride say come,
and shall not my soul that hears these things, echo, come? shall he say
himself, Rev. 22.17, 20.
I come quickly, and shall not I answer Amen, even so come Lord Jesus, Come
Lord, I long to see the and of these wonders of grace, I much desire to enjoy
those mercies which eye has not seen, ear heard, or heart conceived, after
another manner than here I am capable; come, my God, I beseech thee show me thy
face; and because none can see thy face and live, let me dye that I may see thy
face, and be swallowed up in the Ocean of mercy, whence these Covenant-mercies
flow. Dear Lord, either come down to me, or take me up to thee: Make haste my
beloved, Song 8.14.
and be thou like a Roe, or to a young Heart upon the Mountains of Spices.

Thus I have at last dispatched this sixth Use of Instruction and Direction to
sinners and Saints.

CHAP. XV.
VII. THE seventh Use of Encouragement, Comfort and Refreshment, and here is an
abundant spring opened to revive all the heirs of Promise. But because I want
room, and because much of that which has been already delivered tends this
way, I shall rather improve it, to excite the people of God and heirs of
Promise to the great and sweet duty of thankfulness.

And here I might elarge upon the Nature, Use, Comfort and acceptance of the
duty of praise in the account of God and men; but I must wave that, and only
insist on some few particulars that concern the nature of these mercies, which
may engage us to be thankful, which are these,

1. They are free-mercies, they may be had without money or price, says this
Prophet here, Quanti O bomines profiteremini vos esse empturos, si salus
aeterna venderetur! ne si paeto tum quidem qui totus aureo ut est in favulis
fluit fluento, quis dedcrit, pro salute justum pretium numeraverit. Clem Alex.
adm. ad gentis.
free grace was the Fountain, Cause, and Original of these; he had mercy
because he would have mercy; nothing moved his bowels of mercy on our part;
free grace had no impulsive cause but it self: when you are to purchase these
mercies, the price it fallen to just nothing, he gives liberally and upbraids
not: oh what cause of thankfulness and admiration?

2. They are Dear mercies, this does not contradict the former, they are dear
to Jesus Christ, but free to us, they are purchased with the warmest blood in
the veins of the Son of God; yea, he thought his dearest heart-blood well
bestowed to purchase these sure mercies; he sees of the Travel of his soul and
is well satisfied; the fruits of his purchase are the joy of his heart; he
thinks these worth all his pains, pain and dolours; God the father is well
pleased and accounts these mercies a valuable fruit of his Sons purchase; and
shall not we be thankful?

3. They are Deep mercies, Aquae quo sunt profundiores, eo sunt puriores,
quoniam and crassa and terrea materia in profundum depressa est, -- hinc
profunditatem a quarum bibea. Ezekiel. 34.18.
high and broad, and have all the dimensions of greatness, Psalm. 36.5, 6. these
mercies can fetch up a drooping despairing soul out of the grave, yea out of
Hell; be the soul sunk as low as sin can make it in this World, these mercies
can fetch it up, and raise it out of the grave and pit of silence, and save to
the uttermost: Oh what a long arm of mercy has been reached forth unto your
troubled hearts in your low estate? and does not this deserve thankfulness?

4. They are Designed mercies, purposely designed, aimed and intended to set
forth riches of grace, the infinite contrivance of the blessed God to magnify
riches of love to sinners; it is true God intended to set off his power, wisdom,
justice, truth, but he has magnified his mercy above all the rest of his name;
it is beyond the rest of his works, the attributes of God are set very high, but
mercy sits in the chiefest Throne; he declares to Angels and Saints what he can
do for sorry man: oh advance free grace.

5. They are Dignifying mercies, such honor have all his Saints; oh what an
height does God raise his Covenant-Children to? he deals bountifully with them,
by these Covenant-mercies was David raised up on high, 2 Samuel 23.1.
and therefore confesses, that God regarded him according to the estate of a
man of high degree, 1 Chronicles. 17.17. and truly it is the highest preferment in
the World to partake of these sure mercies: and therefore we have great cause
of thankfulness.

6. They are Sanctifying mercies, they season all other mercies, and make
common mercies to become Covenant-mercies; yea, they make crosses, mercies,
they perfume the most offensive griefs, and are like Moses's Tree that sweetens
the Waters of Marah, if you pour a paile of Water on the floor, it seems a
little Sea, but pour it into the Ocean it is swallowed up and seems nothing; so
afflictions out of the Covenant are intolerable, but as in Covenant-love they
are inconsiderable, the depth of mercies drowns the depth of miseries, and is
not this ground of thankfulness?

7. They are Separating mercies, hereby are Gods Children distinguished from
all the people that are upon the face of the Earth, Exodus 33.16, 19.
even in their finding grace in Gods sight, and his presence with them, and
making his goodness pass before them; if there be any discriminating mercies
for any of the Children of men, as protection, provision, direction, these
Covenant-mercies usher them in, and sort them out to the heirs of Promise, and
if they be good for them, they shall partake thereof; then bless God.

8. They are Sealing mercies, they signify exhibit and represent Gods love to
the soul, wherever these mercies are laid up in the breast of a sinner, that
soul is the Jedidiah, or beloved of Gods soul, they testify such a souls
relation to God, and Gods affection to it; wicked men are strangers to
Covenant-love, Gods people are the proper subjects of these endeared thoughts
of Gods heart, and are you of that number? oh give God the glory of this mercy.

9. They are Extensive mercies, they are exceeding broad, they have wide arms,
and embrace all the heirs of Promise, not a gracious soul (though never so
poor) is left out, yea they are largely extended to every Christians state,
case, exigency, and necessity: let doubts be what they will; let ^ears, falls,
faults be sad and soul-astonishing, yet these sure mercies will answer all,
they are commensurate and proportionated to all conditions of soul, body,
estate, relations; oh bless God for them.

10. They are Comprehensive mercies, they contain all the good that God
promises, or a soul needs, grace and glory, holiness and happiness, peace
and pardon, all our fresh springs are herein, the good things of this life and
of a better, and there are many precious things put forth by this Sun of
righteousness in a Covenant-way. Oh what cause have we to bless God and admire
free grace, that has not only given us the spiritual good things of his
Kingdom, righteousness, peace and joy in the Holy Ghost; but temporal good
things by a sure and sweet tenure; so that these sure mercies of the Covenant
insure unto us the corporal mercies that are good for us; and and after another
and better manner than any uncovenanted persons (though never so great) can
enjoy them; for in a Covenant-way believers do enjoy common-mercies; 1. More
refinedly, taken off the dregs o^ cares and sorrows, Prove. 10.22. a Saints
bread, Psalm. 81.16.
(though never so course) is of the finest of the wheat, and he is satisfied
with honey out of the rock: Luke 8.18. Psalm. 39.
yea they come, 2. More really other comforts are but seeming comforts; as man
walks in a vain show, so what he enjoys is but a dream, but outward comforts
coming through the blood of Christ are solid substantial refreshments: again
they come more, 3. Sweetly, have not those prickles and stings that worldly
things have to natural men. Oh the peace and quietness that a Christian enjoys
with outward comforts; and further comforts come to a Child of God more 4.
Serviceably, the creature does homage to its Maker and Masters Children, so
that what they have is for their good and does them good: and comforts also
come more 5. Satisfyingly, a Godly man is more contented with his little than
the men of the world can be with abundance, a little, that the righteous has
is better than the riches of many wicked, Psalm. 37.16. and then a Child of God
enjoys his comforts in a Covenant-way more safely, he needs not fear want,
bread shall be given him, his waters shall be sure, Isai. 33.16. God is the
Christians purse-bearer, and it is in safer hands than in his own: and they are
here more, 7. Lastingly, we shall have corporal mercies as long as we need
them, and when we need them not, they shall be swallowed in eternal enjoyments.
O therefore let the Saints of God be truly thankful, let the high praises of
God be in their mouths; this is the chief rent and reasonable Tribute that God
expects for these sure mercies; sacrifice these sacrifices of thanksgiving,
take this Cup of salvation, and give God the praise that is due unto his name.
Begin that work here in time, which shall be fully managed by the ransomed of
the Lord to all Eternity: this, this shall be the burden of the Saints
triumphant Song in Heavenly Mansions, that glorious palace shall ring and
echo with the blessed note of mercy mercy, free grace laid the foundation, and
grace, grace only lays the top-stone of Saints glory. Oh how will God be
admired by and in all, that believe at that day? well sirs, begin those
Hosanna's here, that will be seconded with Hallelujahs hereafter; speak well of
your gracious God, admire this New Covenant design, and let him have all the
glory of this blessed contrivance, so shall you accomplish Gods end, and
evidence your Covenant Interest in these sure mercies of David.

Thus though these Divine graces which adorn the Temple of a Christians breast
do sometimes disappear, and sin costs the soul some tears, yet the gracious
soul has abundant ground of thankfulness for the whole transaction: take it in
Divine Herbert's Poem of Church-floor.

Mark you the floor? that square and speckled ston
which looks so firm and strong
is Patience;
And the other black and grave, wherewith eac^ on
is checkered all along,
Humility;
The gentle rising, which on either hand
leads to the Quire above,
is Confidence:
But the sweet Cement, which in one sure band
ties the whole frame, is Love
and Charity.
Hither sometimes sin steals, and stains
the Marbles neat and curious veins:
But all is cleansed when the Marble weeps,
Sometimes death puffing at the door,
blows all the dust about the floor:
But while he thinks to spoil the room, he sweeps.
Blessed be the Architect, whose art
could build so strong in a weak heart.
FINIS

