A BRIEF RELATION OF The Remarkable occurrences in the Northern parts: Viz.
The Landing of the QVEENES MAJESTY In the Bay of BURLINGTON: And The repulse
given unto the Rebels at the Town of NEWARK: Both signified by several
Letters on the same day, being Friday March. 3. 1642.

Printed by H. Hall. M. DC. XLII.

A BRIEF RELATION OF TWO REMARKABLE OCcurrences in the Northern parts, etc.
Affairs of ordinary nature may be, and are ^. The landing of the Queens
Majesty in the Bay of Burlington.
most properly imparted by the weekly Mercury; matters of higher consequence,
and more near concernment, deserve a story by themselves. And such is that we
now have in hand of the QUEENS Majesty's return after so long absence, after
so tedious a divorce from her dearest LORD, a whole years banishment at least
from Her sweetest Children, the common pledges of their loves. To this we
shall adjoyne a Brief Relation of the repulse the Rebels had, the last week,
at Newarke: partly because the story of so great a Princess ought not to come
into the world without some Attendant; partly because it was the most
remarkable success which befell His Majesty after Her arrival: and finally,
because the King received intelligence of both at the same time, and from the
hands of the same Messenger.

First for the QUEEN, it cannot be unknown to any upon what terms She took
the opportunity to go for Holland, that She might see Her dearest daughter
delivered safely to the hands of the Prince of Orange: her Majesty's affairs
here at that time being in such condition, that she could neither stay with
safety, nor yet be absent without danger. For who can possibly forget in so
short a space, the sequestring of her nearest servants, the Articles intended
to be framed against her, the flight she was compelled to make (nothing the
more secure because His Majesty did partake the same fortune with her) from
Whitehall unto Hampton Court, and from thence to Windsor. Nor need it be
related what good offices she did His Majesty during the time she spent in
those foreign parts, in furnishing him from time to time with Money, Arms and
Ammunition: and that too from a State no great friend to Monarchy, and where so
strong a party had been made against her, by the power and practice of those
men, by whom His Majesty's affairs had been reduced to so great extremities.
It is enough to say, that never King had a better Agent; and that as we
already do enjoy the benefit thereof, so shall posterity enjoy the story. Being
wearied at the last with so long an exile, and finding that His Majesty's
affairs were in such prosperity, that she might venture safely upon his
protection; she was resolved to come for England, and did accordingly put forth
to sea on the 19th of January last being well guarded and attended: the wind so
favorable that there was little doubt of Her speedy landing, and thereupon a
messenger dispatched to the Court at Oxford, to give His Majesty notice of it.
But the wind coming suddenly about, and the seas working very high, She was
enforced at last to make sail for Holland, after She had continued on the seas
eight days, and with a most invincible courage contended so long for the
mastery with that furious Element.

The news of this being brought to London, and a report In a Pamphlet called,
Certain informations. Number: 3.
withal, how many Soldiers and Commanders, what store of money, gunpowder,
Arms, and horses, She had intended to bring with Her: occasioned great joy
there for the ill success which had befallen Her at the present; and put Her
enemies (who have too great an influence on the two Houses of Parliament) on
some quick debates, how to prevent Her landing for the time to come; and if
that might not be prevented, then how they should proceed against Her when they
had Her here. Four ships which had been formerly appointed by the said two
Houses, to lie before the haven of Newcastle, were ordered not to suffer Her to
pass the bar at Tinmouth, unless She left In another Pamphlet called, A
continuation, etc. Number. 3.
Her Ordinance and ships behind Her. Upon occasion of a letter to the House of
Commons from the Mayor of Yarmouth, to know what entertainment he should give
Her Majesty if She landed there, (such a report of Her intentions being brought
unto him) Master Martin learnedly declaimes against that title, would not by
any means allow that style of MAJESTY to belong unto Her, no not so much as
in the right of participation with Her Royal Husband (a right which every
married woman in this Kingdom does lay claim unto) affirming with an impudent
confidence (like that of Bessus in the play) that she was no other then their
fellow Subject. This presently drew on a new debate (though not like that
amongst the Brethren of the sword, in jest,) how they should handle Her amongst
them, when she came again, some moved that a strict inquisition should be made
into all Her Actions, during the time she staid in Holland; and that according
thereunto an impeachment should be drawn against Her for those ill offices
which She had done unto this Kingdom, that is to say unto themselves. Others
of a more cunning malice, and more wit to hide it, would not have it so, this
being, as they said, no time to stir that controversy. Better some course
were taken to prevent Her coming, and that the ships they had at sea should
have charge to hinder it, if She attempted to set foot upon English-ground.
Accordingly this course was followed. And when intelligence was brought that
two of Her ships laden with Arms and Ammunition were landed safely at
Newcastle, under the conduct and command of Van-Trump, Admiral for the States
General of the united provinces; it was ordered by the Close Committee that if
the Queen or any of Her ships came again that way, they should either keep
them from the land, or give fire upon them. All which appears by several
letters of advise, from London.

We see the preparation made for her entertainment. Never was such a Feast
provided (I dare boldly say it) for the reception of a Queen; A Lady of so
innocent a greatness, that we may say of her, as the Historian does of the
beloved wife of Augustus Caesar, that never any of the subjects felt (...)
potenti^ nemo sen^, nisi aut le^ione pericu^, aut accessio^ dignitatis.
^elleius Pater^l. l. 2.
how great power she had, but either by adding to their honors, or mitigation
of their punishments. But it pleased God (who took her into his protection)
that though she felt their fury, yet she escaped their malice. For being brought
upon a second setting out, within sight of England, with such a calm and
gentle gale, as if both Sea and Winds repented of their former rudeness; the
Wind that studied her convenience, brought her being then within few leagues
of Newcastle, (where she intended to have landed) to the Bay of Burlington: by
means whereof her landing was more safe then it had been otherwise, her
passage shorter unto York, where she meant to stay until His Majesty should
give order for Her removal; and the Kings forces nearer at hand to conduct her
thither. Two days she lay at Anchor there e're she came on shore, dispatching
thence a Messenger to the Earl of Newcastle, to give him notice of her
coming; that She might be attended on by His Majesty's Army, for the security
of Her Person when She came to land: Which, as it did one way advance Her
safety, so did it in another keep Her within reach of danger. For the four
ships which lay before the Bar at Tinmouth, not far from Newcastle, either
discerning the Dutch Fleet when they were at Sea, or being advertised from the
place where she rode at Anchor, of Her landing there, made all the haste they
could to fall on upon Her before the coming of the Kings Army. And though they
came not soon enough to hinder her from landing, as 'twas hoped they might;
they did their best to kill Her in Her bed, as she was asleep, and make the
Land more cruel to Her, then the Seas had been: Which being an attempt so
barbarous, as would not easily find belief from a private pen, such as no
story of the Turks or Scythians, or any other savage or uncivil Nations can
give a Parallel unto; it shall be told you in the words of a public person,
who on the morrow after gave this account thereof by letter, which was
dispatched away by one of the ordinary Messengers, attending then upon the
Queen.

Burlington this 25 of February. 1642.
As Soon as we came into England, the Queen dispatched Progers to you; but
being this day informed that he was taken by the Enemy, She has again
dispatched this Bearer to render You an account of Her arrival, the which has
been (thanks be to God) very happy. For as rough as the Sea was the first
time we passed, at this time we came with a gentle gale, until we were within
15 leagues of Newcastle, where upon that coast the wind began to change to
North-west, which forced us to make for Burlington Bay; where after two days
riding at Anchor, the Cavalrie arrived; which perceiving, the Queen suddenly
landed, and the next morning the rest of the Army came to wait on Her. God,
that was careful to preserve. Her by Sea, did likewise continue his favor to
Her on the Land: For that night four of the Parliament Ships arrived at
Burlington, without being perceived by us; and at four a clock in the morning
gave us an Alarm, which caused us to send speedily to the Port to secure our
Boats of Ammunition, which were but newly landed. But about an hour after the
four ships began to ply us so fast with their Ordinance; that it made us all
to rise out of our beds with diligence, and leave the Village, at least the
women; for the Soldiers staid very resolutely to defend the Ammunition, in
case their farces should land. One of the Ships did Her the favor to flanck
upon the house where the Queen lay, which was just before the Peer; and
before She was out of Her bed, the Cannon bullets whistled so loud about Her,
(which Music you may easily believe was not very pleasing to Her) that all
the company pressed Her earnestly to go out of the house, their Cannon having
totally beaten down all the neighboring houses, and two Cannon bullets
falling from the top to the bottom of the house where She was; so that
(clothed as She could) She went on foot some little distance out of the Town,
under the shelter of a Ditch (like that of Newmarket;) whither before She could
get, the Cannon bullets fell thick about us, and a Sergeant was killed within
twenty paces of Her. We in the end gained the Ditch, and staid there two
hours, whilst their Cannon played all the time upon us; the bullets flew for
the most part over our heads, some few only grazing on the Ditch where the
Queen was, covered us with earth. At last the Admiral of Holland sent to the
Parliament ships to tell them, that if they would not cease shooting, he would
give fire upon them as enemies. (This was done somewhat late, but there is an
excuse for it, by reason of a mist, as he says.) Upon that they staid their
shooting, and likewise being ebbing water, they could not stay longer near the
shore. As Soon as they were retired, the Queen returned to the house where She
lay, being unwilling to allow them the vanity of saying. They made Her forsake
the Town. We went at noone to Burlington, whither we were resolved to go
before this accident; and all that day in the face of the enemy we
dis-imbarqued our Ammunition. It is said that one of the Captains of the
Parliament ships had been at the Town before us, to observe where the Queens
lodging was; and I assure you he observed it well, for he ever shot at it. I
may truly say that both by Sea and Land the Queen has been in some dangers,
but God by his especial grace and favor has preserved Her: and the Queen
says, She has great confidence in his goodness, that he will not forsake Her
Majesty in other things, since in this he has so protected Her. And She
protested, that in that confidence she durst have marched against a Cannon, if
She had not learned Thou shall not tempt. This Bearer was witness of all that
passed, yet I would not forbear to make you this Relation, which is very
punctual.

So far the very words of the Letter, which when the Reader has perused, I
would feign be told, if ever Treason were more impudent and more open faced:
what hope^ there is of safety to His Sacred Majesty, whom they endeavor thus
to murder in His dearest Consort; for preservation of whose life the Laws,
(if such a thing as Law be yet left amongst us) have no less carefully
provided, then for His own most sacred Person: What bounds these men prescribe
to their desperate malice, whom neither tenderness of sex, nobility of birth,
nor royalty of estate can prevail upon. Compare the danger which His Majesty
was in at the battle of Edgehill, when the undistinguishing bullets fell so
thick about Him; with this, wherein the Cannon bent against the QUEEN, shot
through the house in which She was, killed a man that stood so near, and
covered Her with earth even before Her burial; and read the Riddle he that
can, whose life has been more eagerly sought after, either His or Hers; which
of the two would fall the more acceptable Sacrifice to these angry Deities. If
all things else should fail to undeceive and disabuse the seduced people of
this Kingdom, who hitherto have been taught, and perhaps believe, that there
is nothing more endeavored then the preservation of His Majesty's Person, and
the advancement of His Honor. I doubt not but this barbarous and bloody
attempt upon the life of the Queen, (for nothing else was or can possibly be
pretended to be aimed at in it) will serve sufficiently to do it; else we have
reason to suspect, that God has laid that curse upon this Nation, whereof the
Prophet Esaias speaks in another sense; That hearing they shall hear, and
shall not understand; that seeing they shall see, and shall not perceive.

But I have too long played the Scholiast on so clear a Text, and wronged by an
impertinent gloss the Writers most perspicuous and full expressions; which
whosoever reads must needs understand, and whosoever understands the danger,
must abhor the Actors, and not the Actors only, but the Authors too. It was a
true, but tart saying of Augustus Caesar, Praestat Herodis porcum esse, quam
filium, That it was better being the swine then the son of Herod. And I pray
God (besides the detestation which we have our selves of so foul a fact) we
do not grow a byword to the Christian world; and that it be not thought an
happier fortune, as the world now goes, to be a Country Gentlewoman, then a
Queen of England. But it is time (for we have promised a brief Relation) that
we conclude first of these remarkable occurrences, of which there is no more
to come, but that the Messenger according to Her Majesty's command, made all
the speed the troubles of the time permitted, to the Court at Oxford, and
brought the acceptable news of the Queens safe arrival, to His Sacred
Majesty; so much more acceptable in that She had escaped so great and so many
dangers, and was come safe into the Realm, notwithstanding all the plots and
practices of malicious men, whose mischievous designs the Lord will one day
turn on their own heads, and punish them according to their own inventions.

Though this good news was of it self abundantly sufficient ^ The repulse of
the Rebels before Newarke.
to welcome and indeare the Messenger, yet found he some thing by the way which
might have added (were it possible) to the general joy which his first Message
had occasioned. His way to Oxford was by Newarke, a place well known to those
who use to travel the Northern Road, but at this time more notable for the
Garrison there placed by the prudent foresight of the Earl of Newcastle,
General of His Majesty's forces in the Northern parts; A Town at which the
enemies of His Majesty's peace have cast full many an envious eye, as being a
great bar to their proceedings; and suffered it to sink so deep into their
fancies and imaginations, that they have often taken it in their dreams, and
sometimes in their printed Newesbookes, but never durst appear before it
until Monday last, being the 27th of February. But then it pleased the Earl
of Lincoln, the Lord Willoughby of Parham, Colonel Ballard, and the other
Chiefetaines of the Rebels in Lincolnshire, to think upon some course for
satisfying the good people of London, Who had long mused amongst themselves,
why being so well furnished and provided of all things necessary for that
service, they had not set upon the Town, as one of their Diurnals tells us.
Which being resolved upon amongst them, and fearing that they might not be able
to effect the business without more help, they sent for Sir John Gell from
Darbyshire, to meet them with his Rabble at the day appointed: if for no other
reason (as there was not much) yet that they might be sure of some lucky hand
to deface Tombs and Monuments, and to kill dead bodies, whereat Gell was
excellent.

Of this design Colonel Henderson the watchful Governor of the Town having
timely notice, drew forth his Cavalrie, consisting of ten Companies some four
nights before, and went to Beckingham (a Town of Lincolnshire) near the
Rebels Quarters: whereof having some intelligence by their Espials, they kept
themselves such close and in so good order, that nothing could be done upon
them to frustrate or divert the action; so that he made a leisurely and fair
retreat to the Town again, there to expect their further determinationNor was
it long before they let him know their resolution, advancing on the day before
remembered with all their Forces, being 6000 and above, and ten Pieces of
Ordinance (most of them shooting bullets of six pound a Piece) toward the
Bekon-hill, a mile from Newarke: upon which hill the Governor having no
Ordinance in the Town to entertain them, had placed his Cavalrie with the
best advantage that he could. The Enemy seeing him so planted, advanced upon
him with the whole body of their Army, and still as they came forwards, caused
him to retire by the advantage of their Cannon, which he wanted; till at the
length by three removes he drew more near unto his works, and so at last into
the Town. And this was all that was done that day, the enemy retreating as the
night came on, and quartering all their forces in two small Villages, about a
mile distant from his trenches.

On Tuesday morning the last of February, they drew up all their forces into
one gross body, and coming as near unto his works as they could with
safety, sent a Trumpeter, and in the name of the King and Parliament (as their
manner is) demanded his surrendrie of the Town and Castle: Which being
answered with a negative, and that the Governor was resolved to keep the
Town for His Majesty's sole use, (with whom the two Houses of Parliament, were
never thought to be joynt-tenants of the Kingdom) they planted their
Ordinance, dividing their foot into three Brigades, took in the Earl of
Exeters house (which was an Hospital heretofore dependant on the Sea of
Lincoln, but now assured upon the Family by an Act of Parliament made this
Session) discharging 80 shot into the Town from their works and batteries. At
length the Nottinghamshire and Darbyshire forces, making one Brigade of
themselves, advanced and took a Ditch within Pistol shot of the Town works,
and thence discharged against the Town from eleven of the clock at noone,
until six at night; but with more courage then success: the Soldiers of the
Garrison playing their parts exceeding valiantly, and being bravely seconded by
the indefatigable pains of all the Officers, who behaved themselves both
stoutly and discreetly, as they were directed. In the mean time the other two
Brigades having placed themselves before some other of the works, and finding
them so strong, that there was little possibility of doing any good that way,
retired with all their Foot, Horses, and Artillery, to Gells Post, hoping with
their united Powers to force their entrance into the Town, and obtain the end
of their desires. Which being soon perceived by the wary Governor, he removed
all his Forces as they did, which was about three of the clock in the
afternoon; holding them play, and entertaining them with an hotter service
then they expected from that place, for three hours together. At length, it
being then about six at night, discerning an abatement in the courage of the
Enemy, who began to wax weary of the work, he made a sally out upon them with
such force and fury, that he drove all their Foot from their Post, or station,
unto the shelter and protection of their Cavalrie, impatoned himself with
three Pieces of Ordinance, which he caused to be haled into the Town: the
whole body of the Rebels retiring in great disorder and confusion till they got
the advantage of an hedge, and so stood with the Cavalrie before them, till
dark night came on, and made an end at that time of the disputation.

In this estate things stood, when the Messenger sent unto His Majesty, (whom
before I spoke of) came unto the Town; Who though he staid no longer there
then the necessity of corporal rest did invite him to: yet staid he long
enough to see the Enemies dislodged, and the Lords with their whole train
departed from such unhospitable hosts, who showed no more civility to men of
honor, which was as soon as they had light enough to see how to go away. But
being it was a service of such signal consequence, it was not thought fit to
entrust the story and relation of it only unto the wit and memory of the
Messenger, who being no Actor in the business might possibly be subject to
mistakings: and therefore Colonel Henderson the victorious Governor, sent an
account thereof in writing to His Sacred Majesty, and from thence you have it.

There were killed of the Kings side in this brave repulse, but one man only,
a common Soldier of the Garrison, and not many hurt. But of the Rebels there
were slain no fewer then 200 men; and many wounded, whereof the chief was
Colonel Ballard, and no mean one neither. There were taken also in the sally
about 60 Prisoners, many of which were found upon examination to be French
Papists; whom the two Houses of Parliament thought it not unfitting to take
into their pay, nor dangerous either to the Church or State to trust with
weapons; their nation and religion notwithstanding. By which it seems that
Forreiners may be called in, if occasion be, in maintenance of the rights and
liberties of the English subjects; and Papists may be armed for the defense and
preservation of the Protestant Religion if the necessities and distresses of
the Church require it. If so, then certainly His Majesty may far more
warrantably make use of his Popish subjects, who serve him for defense of his
prerogative and their own native liberties, upon the conscience of that duty
and allegiance which they bear unto him; then the two Houses, whatsoever
Privilege they pretend unto, can call in Foreign Nations of the Popish
profession, who serve them on no other motive but for pay and pillage. But such
is the infirmity of our humane nature, that we do commonly condemn that in
others, which we indulge unto our selves: and such the guilty courses of
seditious persons, that they regard but little, if they do at all, what crooked
lanes and passages they are forced upon, so they may come at last to their
journeys end. Some Papists, but those English Papists, had before been taken
prisoners by His Majesty at the famous battle of Edgehill, which gave His
Majesty occasion after their example, to enterteine some few Recusants of these
His Kingdoms, for the defense and safety of His Royal Person. And should he
call in Forreiners and those Papists too, to aid him in defense of His Royal
Power, he did no more then what he had example for from their own proceedings,
who have affirmed it of themselves that they cannot err.

Quod quisque fecit, patitur; Authorem scelus Repetit, suoque premitur exemplo
nocens. Seneca Tragoed. FINIS.

