THE General Assembly: OR, A DISCOURSE OF THE Gathering of all SAINTS to CHRIST.

WHEREIN It appears that all SAINTS in all Places and Ages, shall be at last
gathered together to CHRIST their Head.

TOGETHER With the Time, Manner, Ends and Reasons of this last Great
Congregating of all SAINTS, and what use may be made thereof.

BEING Some MEDITATIONS upon 2 Thessalonians. II. 1.

By O. H. Minister of the GOSPEL.

Melch. Adam in vit Joan. Jacob Grynaei, Page 877. O praeclarum illum diem cum
ad illud animorum concilium caelumque proficiscar: Et cum ex hac turba and
collatione discedam si enim Ethnicus ( i. e. Seneca) ita sensit, cur nos
Christiani eodem animo non simus.

LONDON: Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns in
Cheapside. 1700.

TO THE Christian Reader.
NEXT to the immediate Enjoyment of God (which is the Top and Height of a
Gracious Souls felicity) it is no doubt an adventitious Comfort to the Children
of God, that they shall meet with all the Holy Souls in Heaven, of whom they
have heard, and with whom they have enjoyed sweet Communion in this lower
World: What a ravishing Transport of Love was there reciprocally betwixt loving
Jonathan and his beloved David, in their mutual Embraces when they kissed one
another, and wept one with another, until David exceeded, 1 Samuel 20.41. Who can
read that Passage with dry Eyes! But oh, what raptures of transcendent Joy will
these Holy Souls be filled with, upon their meeting in Heaven! Where briny
Tears shall be whiped from their weeping Eyes, and Sin and Sorrow shall flee
away! Such joy would break their Hearts and kill them (as the Father died for
joy on his two Sons coming off Victors in the Olympic Games) did not Almighty
grace enlarge their Vessels to a vast Extent: When they told Jacob that Joseph
was yet alive, Jacob 's heart fainted, for he believed them not, Genesis 45.26, 27.
but when he saw the Wagons sent to carry him, the spirit of Jacob revived: Oh
but what full demonstrations both of the certainty and excellency of our godly
Friends felicity be in Glory! No hesitation remains either it be so, no bitter
ingredients to allay this joy: How will these pure streams mingle and recur
with ravishment to all Eternity! The once tenderhearted Mother, will turn her
desires into delight, and say, what my Son! Pro. 31.2.
and what, the Son of my womb! and what, the Son of my vows! Thou art welcome
hither, now my sad Agonies are turned into triumphant Songs: What sweet solace
will the godly Husband and gracious Wife take in each other! Once heirs
together of the grace of life, 1 Pet 3.7.
now full possessours of the life of glory: The godly Christian Friends that
walked to the house of God in company, Psalm. 55.14.
and took sweet counsel together, are now abundantly satisfied with the fatness
of God's house, Psalm 36.8.
and drink of the rivers of pleasures, yea bath themselves in this ocean of
delights: Surely it will be no small accession of their joy to meet their old
Friends, Relations and Companions there, never to part more: If Archimedes was
so transported with finding out a Mathematical Conclusion, that he cried out
[(...), (...)] I have found, I have found it, much more will the glorified
Saint be exceedingly ravished, when after all his Pains and Fears, he can say,
I have found my beloved, and all my Christian Friends before the Throne; Oh
happy day, Oh ravishing sight! To behold the Sun of righteousness in all his
Glory, and those radiant Stars glittering in that upper Firmament; this indeed
will surprise the Soul with astonishment: The reading of the incomparable
Writings of Eminent Ministers, has been often a great refreshment to studious
and serious Souls: Heynsius, the learned Library keeper of Leyden, professed,
that when he had shut up himself among so many illustrious Souls, he seemed to
sit down there as in the very lap of Eternity, and pitied Rich Worldlings that
were strangers to his delights. Oh but what brave Souls are the Spirits of just
Men made perfect! What pleasure will they take in the graces and happiness of
each other! If David could say of Jonathan, very pleasant have thou been unto
me; 2 Samuel 1.26.
thy love to me was wonderful passing the love of Women: O what love and
delight will be above in the proper Element of Love! Where Souls will be filled
with God, and delight in his Image shining in all the Saints.

It is certain, that all the real Saints that ever died since the World began,
are taken up into Heaven and enjoy God and each other; but whether the Saints
departed or Angels, were participants of that Glory before which they have
since Christ 's Ascension into Heaven, Dr. Owens Christolog. v. 158.
is doubted by some, yea the contrary asserted, which I dispute not; nay, I am
apt to think, every glorified Soul, loosed from the Flesh, will be some
addition to the Joy of the glorified above: O what acclamations of joy will
every Soul landing safely in Glory cause, to Celestial Inhabitants! Well met,
Brethren, after a tedious, dangerous Voyage, in this Haven of Rest: Glad, full
glad are we that you are got safe into Abraham's bosom: And whether the Saints
successively going off the stage of the World, inform them above of the State
of the Church below? I have not to say: But as there is no Grief there, or
occasions of Sorrow, so there is multitudes of objects and occasions of Joy and
Triumph, the felicitating object, the place, the company, the duration; all
afford matter of Comfort: And why may we not think their Reflection upon their
former State in this lower World, will contribute something to their
Refreshment! Yea, and their communicating Experiences one to another in that
blessed State: If any one doubt, whether glorified Souls will have such mutual,
intelligible Entercourses with each other, for Satisfaction herein, let them
read the excellent Discourse of precious Mr. John Flavil, called (...), or a
Treatise of the Soul of Man from Page 274 to 281, wherein you will find the
Objection answered of their wanting the Organs and instruments of Speech and
Hearing. Surely (he says) the Spirits of just Men are not mutes, such an
August Assembly of holy and excellent Spirits, do not live together in their
Fathers House, without mutual Converse and Fellowship with each other as well
as with God: The great Question is, how this Discourse is managed, and he
affirms out of Zanchy, that is but a turning the key of the Will, and their
Thoughts and Desires are presently seen and known by others to whom they will
discover them, as a Man's Face is seen in a Glass, when he pleases to turn his
Face to it: Would one Spirit make known his Mind to another, it is but to Will
he should know it, and it is immediately known: And this internal way of
speaking, is more noble, perfect and excellent then by Words and Signs, both in
respect of clearness, and also of dispatch and speed: See both cleared, ubi
Supra, p. 280.

This is the Language of Spirits (called the Tongue of Angels, 1 Cor. 13.1.)
but after the Resurrection when bodies are united to Souls, possibly there may
be the use of bodily Organs, howbeit in a more excellent way then now they can:
Yet in the glorified State the joy of the Soul shall redound to the Body;
Weemse p. 202.
so that some think there will be no use of the baser Senses but only of the
noble Senses, as Seeing and Hearing: The best pleasure is, that of the Souls
spiritual delights, are far more pleasant then sensual; immediately after a
gracious Soul is parted from the Body, it attains to that perfection of
Knowledge with more ease then it could attain to a small degree of Knowledge
whilst in the Body: Yet its questioned whether the glorified Soul shall be in a
proficiency of Knowledge, which yet will be an addition to its Happiness: For,
the Soul being a Finite Being, cannot attain to a comprehensive Knowledge of
God, but what they enjoy will be beatifical: O what an emphasis is in that
Word, seeing God face to face, 1 Cor. 13.12. 1 John, 3.2.
and seeing him as he is; who can now tell what it means? Its true the Saints
happiness lies in being ever with the Lord, 1 These. 4.17. 1 Cor. 15.20.
and God's being all in all to them: But this mutual Delight in one another
will be a blessed Circumstance of their Felicity.

Whilst I was musing on the great Number of precious Souls breathing their
last, Ministers and Christians, formerly and lately, known and unknown, whom I
shall never see any more in this World, I begun to contemplate what is become of
them, surely they are not lost but laid up, when shall we meet again? Where
shall we meet? In what Place or Condition? I am assured by Divine Revelation,
that the Souls of Believers do immediately pass into Glory, and as our Lord
says to the penitent dying Thief, Luke 23.43.
to day shall thou be with me in Paradise, so he says of the Soul of Lazarus,
Luke 16.22.
that he was carried by the Angels into Abraham 's bosom; there only Saints
are, there all the Saints are, it is a Place and State proper to Saints only,
yet common to all the Saints, not one excluded, we need not fear want of good
Company, yet, it is not the company of fellow Saints that will make us happy,
for as one says, Though the Strings receive not their sound and virtues from
each other, yet their concurrence causes that Harmony which could not be by
one alone; Mr. Baxters Saints Bost, Part I. p. 97.
for all the lines may be drawn from the center, and not from each other, and
yet their Collocation make them more comely then one alone could be: But in
this, caution is necessary, that we give Christ his Prerogative, and ascribe
not too much to Man, to expect that from them that is not in them; Survivers are
too prone to this Idolatry, as Popery testifies: But in Heaven our Affections
will be regular, God will have his due, and Saints theirs; we shall behold God
in his Saints: All the glory will redound to God in what God's Children have
been and then are; when he shall come to be glorified in his Saints, and to be
admired in all them that believe in that day. 2 These. 1.10.
Oh what an happy, honorable, triumphant Assembly will that be! The
contemplation I have had of this Day and State, has extorted from me these
Meditations; which have been very delightful to me in transcribing, and I shall
pray that they may be profitable to the Reader, and that we may land safe in
that blessed Haven, where so many of our godly Friends and Relations are
arrived, that we may rejoice and sing together the Song of Moses and the Lamb
for ever more: Which is the prayer and care of

thy faithful Friend and Monitor, O. H.
Sept. 22. School.
2 THESE. II. 1. Now we beseech you, brethren by the coming of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and by our gathering together unto him.


CHAP. I. The Context cleared, the Text opened, Doctrine raised.
THAT Jesus Christ will come down from Heaven to Judge the World, is an Article
of our Faith, commonly believed among professed Christians: But there have been
useless, endless Disputes about the Time of his Coming; but one would think,
what our Lord says in Math. 24.36. should silence Men's curious and
presumptuous Assertions concerning this Secret, for he says, thereof that day
and hour knows no Man, Mark. 13.32.
no not the Angels of Heaven, but my Father only: No nor Christ himself as Man:
No say they, the Day and Hour cannot be known but the Year may: But that is a
poor Evasion, for by day and hour is meant the Time; and if Christ know not, no
wonder if he foretold it not to his Disciples, for wise Reasons, that we might
be always ready: Grotius indeed says, that Paul thought the coming of Christ
would be in his days, yet you see here, that it would not be till certain Signs
foretold should come to pass, and after that, they were still to expect it as
uncertain: Ignorance of it is needful, but error about it is hurtful; let us
study what tends to Practice.

In this Text the blessed Apostle does vehemently beseech them by all that is
dear unto them, that no pretense either of Spirit, Word or Apostolical Letter,
do persuade them that Christ's coming is near at hand, and so torment their
Minds or stagger their Faith when they find it otherwise: What those preceding
Signs are, see Baxter's Paraphrase on this Chapter, those that can let them
consult it.

All that I shall do is, to take notice of this solemn obsecration or
obtestation in this Text, wherein he adjures them: 1. By the coming of our
Lord. 2. By our gathering together unto him.


It is a sacred and solemn Oath, like that in 1 Cor. 15.31. I protest by your
rejoicing which I have in Christ Jesus our Lord, I die daily: So here, it is as
if he should say, as you have an high and honorable Esteem of Jesus Christ
himself, and as you have a great esteem of, and make due preparation for the
coming of Christ, by which he will gather us all to himself, and really perfect
the Unity of his Body, both which are represented as proper objects of Faith,
which we admire and expect, and highly esteem. I do again beseech you by these,
be not too credulous of Men's predictions, who state that day to this or that
time as they fancy; sometimes preposterously hastening it, other whiles
procrastinating it, to a vast dimention: I must tell you, says Paul, these
conceits are scattered by Satan's Artifice: And it becomes an [exitiale
commentum] dangerous figment or invention of Men's Brains, for if it come not
to pass, some languish in their Faith, others grow presumptuous in their
Security: If the Devil prevail thus far, he will so work [ut nihil in Religione
certum aut fixam reliqueret] that he will leave nothing sure or fixed in
Matters of Religion, as Calvin says on this Text; yea, by this means Men
loosen the cords, and break the bands that join together the Articles of our
Faith, yea, strike at the foundation Article of the Resurrection.

Doct. I. Ministers must be Beseechers.
As they may command in their Masters nam^ so they must beseech as Servants t^
all the Faithful, 1 These. 5.12.
1 These. 4.1. We beseech you and exhort you: [(...)^ we humbly and earnestly
desire you, as if w^ went down on our knees to you; hence 1 The^ 2.7, 8. We
were gentle among you even as a Nurs^ cherishes her Children: Our business is
great sinners inexorable, we have great need to use the most obliging Terms, as
though God did beseech Sinners by us, to pray them in Christ stead to be
reconciled to God, 2 Cor. 5.20.

Doct. II. All God's Servants are Brethren.
Be they high or low, rich or poor, the most eminent Apostle and meanest, yea,
weakest believe they are Brethren, they have all one Father, God, our elder
Brother Christ, one holy Spirit that animates them all, one Covenant of Grace
to wrap them up in, one heavenly Inheritance that they are Heirs of; hence Col.
1.2. To the Saints and faithful Brethren in Christ: O what an endearing
Relation is this! Let us live up to it.

Doct. III. Christ will certainly come to Judgment.
It is certain this noble Man is gone into a far country to receive for himself
a kingdom, and to return, to reckon with his Servanrs, Luke 19. 12-27. Christ's
coming to Judge the Jews, was [Imago and Arrabo Adceptus ultimi] the Image and
earnest of his last coming; described in 1 These. 4.15, 16, 17.

Doct. IV. The coming of Christ is a most endearing Consideration to believers.
This is to the Christian as the Harvest is to the Husbandman, James 5.7, 8.
Be ye also patient says he, stablish your Heart for the coming of the Lord
draws nigh: O what a glorious Morning will that day be, when the Sun of
Righteousness will shine once again with help and healing in his Wings! Then
let the heirs of glory lift up their heads, for the day of their Redemption
draws nigh: Luke 21.28.
You cannot entreat them by more strong and obliging Obtestations or Arguments.

Doct. V. Though Christ 's coming be stopped to the Saints and certain in it
self, yet the Time is uncertain to us.
Our Lord says to his inquisitive Disciples, Acts. 1.6, 7. It is not for you
to know the times and the seasons, which the Father has put in his own Power;
hence he says, Mat. 24.42, 44. Watch therefore, be ye also ready, for in such
an hour as you think not; the Son of Man comes: This is a Key that the wise
God locks under his Girdle; he keeps this Secret [inter arcana imperij] among
the Mysteries of this glorious Empire;

In discoursing upon this pleasant Subject, I shall open these Seven things, 1.
What this gathering alludes to. 2. After what manner they are gathered. 3. What
is implied in this gathering. 4. For what End they are gathered. 5. How they
are gathered to Christ. 6. Why will God thus gather them. 7. What improvement
may be made of it.


CHAP. II. What Is meant by this gathering together, 1. What it alludes to, 2.
How it is managed, and when transacted.
1. I Shall briefly explain the Emphasis of this Word, what it signifies, and
the Allusions to something in common view.

1. It alludes to an Hospitable Persons taking in Wanderers to lodge them, and
kindly entertain them: So the Word is used, Mat. 25.35. I was a stranger and he
took me in [(...)] ye gathered me: Alas, God's Children are Strangers and
Pilgrims in the Path, Heb. 11.13. as Men often cast them out, and they wander
about in Sheepskins and Goats-skins, in Deserts, Mountains, Dens and Caves of
the Earth, v. 37, 38. but their loving Father takes them in and provides them
House and Harbor, 2 Cor. 5.1.
an house not made with hands eternal in the Heavens; Lazarus at the rich Man's
Gates is taken up into Abraham's bosom, a better lodging then the rich Man's
stateliest Chamber, thus God gathers them.

2. It alludes to a Man's gathering a rich Treasure together, Gold, Silver,
precious Stones, Laying up in store, Isa. 39.6.
as David gathered a prodigious Treasure for building the Temple, three
thousand talents of gold, seven thousand talents of refined silver, all manner
of precious stones, 1 Chronicles. 29.2, 4. Solomon gathered silver and gold, and the
peculiar treasures of King's: Eccl. 2.8. Exodus 19.5.
But what are all these to God's treasure? Which too calls his peculiar
treasure, more worth then both the Indies: These God has his time and way to
gather up, Mat. 3.17. They shall be mine says the Lord in the day when I make
up my jewels: God's jewels lie loose and scattered, but he will string them,
and lay them up safe with himself in Heaven.

3. This word alludes to congregating together, as in a Synagogue for Religious
Acts [caetus and conventus sacer] an holy Religious meeting, Luke 7.5.
He has built us a Synagogue, that is for Religious worship, so the Hebrew word
[(...)] imports a Religious meeting: And we read of a Synagogue of the
Libertines, Acts 6.9.
but this may be called the Synagogue or the Congregation of Licentiates or
highest Graduates in Divinity, that have in some sense commenced per Saltum,
and have leapt out of the Church below into the Church triumphant above, being
highly preferred by their blessed Master.

4. The word imports a meeting in an honorable Council, that is above an
ordinary Assembly, Mat. 26.3. Then assembled together the chief Priests, and
Scribes and Elders, etc. these were the Sanhedrim and sat as Judges upon causes
Criminal and Capital [(...)] it signifies not a vulgar, or a common meeting,
but a convention of States, to sit upon Life and Death; and though that was a
wicked meeting to condemn the Son of God, yet this glorious Assembly of Saints
shall be convened to be Assessors with Christ to judge their Judges, 1 Cor.
6.2. Know ye not that the Saints shall judge the World, Rev. 1.6. Psalm 45.16.
yea Angels: All the Saints of God are Kings and Princes in all the Earth; Oh
what an honorable Jury will there be to applaud the sacred Judicature of our
Lord!

This is the meaning of the Word.

2. I must show the manner, means and method, how this gathering together is
managed, or how the Saints come to be gathered together, and when;

1. Converting Grace gathers Sinners out of the world to God: This is initial
and preparatory; the word in Ephesians. 1.10. gathering together in one [(...)] is
very emphatical, it signifies to recapitalate, or recollect, or reduce all to
an Head, it implies that mankind by Sin, is separated from God, disjointed one
from another, the Members scattered; just like an old ruinous House that is
fallen: All the pieces thereof are gone asunder, till the workman come and set
them together, and rear up a stately Fabric of the old Materials; Man has not
lost the faculties of his Soul by the fall, but the rectitude thereof: Genesis
6.5. Genesis 3.8. Luke 15.
All the imaginations of Man's heart are become evil; He has banished himself
from God, into a foreign Country: In a natural Sense, Acts 17.27.
God is not far from every one of us: But in a moral Sense, God and unconverted
Sinners are at a great distance, Ephesians. 2.13. Chap. 4.18.
they are far off, alienated from the life of God, but Grace brings Sinners
from their wanderings: The Spirit in the word unites them by a blessed cement
in an efficacious manner, and that, he that is joined to the Lord is one
Spirit: 1 Cor. 6.17.
And the Blood of Christ unites God and the Soul meritoriously: O blessed
conjunction, Oh, Ephesians. 2.13, 22.
happy meeting! God has found out a way in the Gospel to gather together the
outcasts of Israel: Isa. 56.8.
Alas, we are all as Sheep going astray, Isa. 40.11. John 10.16.
but our Lord gathers the lambs into his arms, and brings them into fold, Jews
and Gentiles make one fold: For, says the Apostle Paul, ye are all the
Children of God by faith in Christ Jesus, Gal. 3.26. Faith makes a mistical
Union, Love a Moral, Ephesians. 4.15. But speaking the truth in love (or teaching it
in love) may grow up into him in all things, which is the head even Christ: Oh
this, this is the foundation of all the rest; conversion is the first
collection.

2. God gathers his Saints by Death to himself: Its said of Abraham, that he
should be gathered to his Fathers in peace, Genesis 15.15. and he was gathered to
his people, Genesis 25.8. Interpreters observe that this is usually applied in
Scripture to good Men, and it refers to the Soul, that they go to their godly
progenitors, Genesis 25.17. Genesis 49.29.
and because this is applied to Ishmael, therefore the Jews think he was a
Penitent: But however, Number. 20.24. Chap. 27.13.
the Phrase is applied most ordinarily to good Men, as Jacob, and of Aaron, of
Moses, of Josiah; it is said, 2 Kings 22.20. I will gather thee to thy Fathers,
and thou shall be gathered to thy grave in peace: Its true, he died in Battle,
but in peace with God, and was translated into the everlasting peace with the
Saints; this is the way of Divine Providence to carry his Children through a
tempestuous Sea into an Haven of Rest; they shall not always be tormented with
Satan's temptations, the Worlds oppositions, their own corruptions, but when
they have done their work here in this wary World, they shall enter into peace,
they shall rest in their beds, each one walking in his uprightness, Isa. 57.2.
Oh blessed change, God gives them a quietus est from the Troubles of this wary
Pilgrimage, Rev. 14.13.
1 These. 4.14.
they rest from their labors: their bodies sleep in Jesus, and are laid up
safe in a quiet Repository, Luke 23.43.
and their Souls do enter into Paradise, i. e. the third Heaven, the immediate
presence of God: As Earth is the common Mother of all, so Heaven is the
receptacle of all Believers.

3. God gathers them up out of their graves by the resurrection of their
Bodies, and the reunion of their Souls to those self same Bodies: This was a
Doctrine believed and well digested in the Old Testament, Job 19.25, 26, 27.
Though after my skin, worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God;
thy dead Men shall live says Isaiah, chapter 26.19. together with my dead body
shall they arise: The New Testament does abundantly confirm this great Article
of our Faith, John 5.28, 29. 1 Cor. 15. Oh what an Army of Saints will start up
out of the Earth! Their scattered bones and dust shall be reared up, and
coagulated, and our Lord will bring their glorified Souls along with him to
sing out the high Praises of Jehovah: Roses die, sweetest Flowers perish, and
the beauteous Complexion of the Earth turns to a bleak and withered hue in
Winter, yet in Summer there is a kind of Resurrection: If you say in them, life
is remaining in the Root and Seed, we say, the Soul is the root of the Body,
and Christ the root of the Soul, and both are living, Col. 3.34. and though
there be no physical Contract, yet there is a relative Union betwixt Soul and
Body, and a deep rooted love and inclination the Soul has to it; the silly
Snail by its natural life and power, can make for it self an Habitation, yea a
Silkworm becomes a winged Fly, See Mr. Baxter of Self-denial, Page 206.
the warmth of the Hen turns the Egg into a Chicken; these: are Emblems of the
Resurrection. And what cannot the Power of God effect? If a skilful workman
can turn a little earth and ashes into such curious transparent Glasses, why
should we doubt whether the mighty Power of God can communicate a glorious
perfection to the Flesh that is dissolved into its Elements? Luther says, I
love the noble Art of Chemistry, it is such a brave Emblem of the Resurrection:
O what a blessed ravishing sight will that be, to see the sanctified Soul
united to the glorified Body, to receive their reward together! This is the
next.

4. By the same power of God some shall be changed, others raised from the
dead, the Souls of the glorified Saints shall descend and be united to their
own Bodies, and then ascend to meet the Lord in the Air, and the wicked are
left behind on their dunghill the earth in setters to receive their Sentence,
and confined to their Prisons, this is that Mystery, which possibly the blessed
Apostle Paul heard from God when he was caught up into the third Heaven, and
heard unspeakable words [(...)] worldles words: 2 Cor. 12.4.
This is 1 Cor. 15.51, 52. Behold I show you a mystery, we shall not all sleep
(i. e. die) but we shall all be changed, in a moment, in the twinkling of an
eye: This is further confirmed and explained in 1 These. 4.15. For this we say
unto you by the word of the Lord, that we which are alive and remain unto the
coming of the Lord, shall not prevent them which are asleep: And verse 16. The
dead in Christ shall rise first, then we which are alive and remain, shall be
caught up together with them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air: Verse
17. Calvin says, he speaks here of the Faithful only, Calvin in 1 Cor. 15.5.
the resurrection of the Wicked, is a kind of change, though thy be not
mentioned there; but of such as shall bear the name of the heavenly or of
Christ, verse 49.50. this is equivalent to Death, when there shall be an
abolishing of the former Nature, and introducing a new one: This is a species
or kind of death, but as it is not a separation of Soul from the Body, so it is
not a sleep, but it is a sudden transition from corruptible Nature into a
blessed immortality: Here is the difference betwixt those that die and such as
are changed, that the former put off the substance of the body, but they that
are changed, put off nothing but the qualities of the body, the dead shall
rise, before the living are rapt up: He sends the Clouds for Chariots, as
Joseph his Wagons for Jacob and his Family: O what vast numbers will then mount
up like a Cloud and darken the Heavens? This is in order to their congregating
above.

5. The Angeles of God are sent to gather up the scattered Saints, Mat. 24.31.
And he shall send his Angels with a great sound of a trumpet, Mark 13.27.
and they shall gather together his Elect from the four winds, from one end of
heaven to the other: Its true, some take this to refer to the destruction of
Jerusalem, but the most solid interpreters apply it to this last Day: 1 Cor.
15.52.
Paul says, the trumpet shall sound, as of old, they called the Congregation
of Israel together by the sound of a Trumpet: So now, the Lord shall descend
from heaven with a shout with the voice of the Archangel, and with the trumpet
of God, 1 These. 4.16. I confess here are hard Points, which no mortal can
resolve, as 1st. Concerning this Trumpet, what it is, Calvin says [Relinquo
aliis subtilius disserrendum] leave to others to discourse subtilty of it:
2dly. What kind of shout this is, which is a kind of magnificent Acclamation to
the Judge; and summoning all to appear, for the word in Greek [(...)] does also
signify a Command: Alluding to Mariners or Soldiers summoned to be ready.
3dly. Who this Archangel is, and what Degrees there are among the Angels,
(which Schoolmen voluminously dispute,) or whether it be not Christ himself,
because its said, the dead that are in their graves shall hear his voice, John
5.28. and 4thly. Whether this shall be an oral shout or voice from the mouth of
Christ, or only an expression of his Divine Power, I am not able to determine:
But such a Summons there shall be, and all the Sons and Daughters of Adam shall
appear, not one Person gentle or simple can skulk or hide themselves, the
meanest shall not be looked on as inconsiderable, and the most potent Princes
are not at that day invincible: In vain shall the Kings of the earth, great
Men, rich Men, the chief Captains and mighty Men, bond and free hide
themselves, or call to the mountains and rocks to fall on them, Rev. 6.15, 16.
No, no, the Summons shall reach all, and all must obey and appear, whether they
will or no; the mighty, Almighty God can fetch them out, his all-seeing Eve can
spy them out: See the Summons, Psalm 50. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. He shall call to the
heavens from above and to the earth that he may judge his people: These be
words, gather my Saints together, unto to me, those that have made a covenant
with me by sacrifice: O what a vast multitude will then appear! Thousand,
thousands Minister to him, Dan. 7.10.
and ten thousand times ten thousand stand before him: Yea, a great multitude
which no Man can number, Rev. 7.9.
of all nations, kindred and people, and tongues stand before the throne and
the lamb, clothed with white robes and palms in their hands: O what a
glorious, celebrious, shining company of beautiful Persons will there be!

6. Yet further, these multitudes gathered together will have their Spirits
perfectly united, they shall all speak one Language, as the whole earth did
before the confusion at Babel: There will be an harmony of Minds, Wills,
Affections, Consciences, conversations; no clashing, no discord, they shall be
fully united, cemented and perfectly joined together, and all to one Rule and
Canon: They all conspire together in one celestial Song, the heavenly quire of
Angels stand round about the Throne, ecchoing to that innumerable company of
believing glorified Jews and Gentiles; saying, Amen, blessing, honor and
glory, and wisdom and thanksgiveing be unto our God for ever and ever Amen,
Rev. 7.10, 11, 12. Its worth observing, that upon Antichrists ruin, a great
voice of much people in heaven saying Alleluja, Rev. 19.1. And again they said
Alleluja, v. 3. then again, the four and twenty Elders, and four Beasts, still
echo out the same tune Alleluja: The former were more private this public, of
the whole Congregation: But still upon a new Summons they add ever Alleluja,
this was the Hosanna Rabba (as the Jews call it,) or an [Hallelujatica
victoria] as old Britans called their Victory over the Saxons: All but faint
Emblems of that great Solemnity, in which the multitudes of glorified Souls are
of one heart and lip, unanimously adoring their Redeemer, acquiessing in his
righteous Sentence [nemine contradicente] they neither contradict one another,
nor the will of God: There is not a jarring String in this Music: Whatever
apprehensions or languages may be here; they all speak the same there: Yea,
though they did not understand one another Dialect in this World, yet they
shall all speak the Language of Canaan, whether it shall be Hebrew (as some
conceive) who knows, but it will be intelligible by all that then meet
together: The Text says, they shall see eye to eye when the Lord shall bring
again Zion, Isa. 52.8. Now if ever that Text shall be fulfilled; even as two
Eyes look both on one Object, so the Eyes of all Saints shall be toward the
Lord: There will be a sweet agreement in Principles, Practices, Professions,
Affections, as the Primitive Christians that were of one heart and of one soul,
Acts 4.32. Then shall we all come to the unity of the faith, Ephesians. 4.13.

7. These congregated Saints shall be admitted into one place, and state of
Glory: They are before the throne of God, and he that sits on the throne
shall dwell among them, Rev. 7.15. These bright Stars shall make a glorious
Constellation in the heavenly orb: Though posibly one Star may differ from
another Star in Glory, yet they shall all be irradiated with the Sun of
Righteousness, according to their Capacities, though these vessels of grace be
of various quantity; yet they shall all be full in that vast ocean, not the
weakest, feeblest, shall be lost or left behind, the feeble among them shall be
as David, and the house of David shall be as God, as the Angel of the Lord
before them, Zech. 12.8. Not a grace duty, not a mite given in charity shall be
lost: Psalm. 56.8. Mat. 12.42.
Tears shall be here botled, and a cup of cold Water shall be rewarded, there
is room enough in Heaven for all the Saints, in my fathers house, says he, are
many mansions, John 14.2. Many for number, large for extension: Rev. 21.10, 12,
25.
That City is four square having twelve Gates, filled from all quarters of the
World: The gates of it continually open, never shut: O the stupendous vastness
of that upper Region! Earth is but a point, a small Pin-head compared to it;
though the Text in Revelations speak but of twelve thousand Furlongs, which
according to some make but fifteen hundred Miles: But what is that to Heaven,
if the City of the great King be meant there by the New Jerusalem as some
think: But doubtless it is exceeding spacious, if indeed it be a place
circumscriptively taken; but where the King is there is the Court, as the
Angels do always behold the Face of God, and therefore are still in Heaven,
Mat. 18.10. Heb. 1.14.
though employed about Saints on Earth; so it may possibly be with the Saints
after the Resurrection: Who knows whether the purified Earth may be one Place
of their Celestial Happiness; yet some think it will be wicked Men's Hell, and
place of Torments: But be that as it may, we are sure there is room enough for
all the Saints in Heaven; and our Lord will have them all with him, not an hoof
left behind as slighted, for he purchased all at a dear rate, prayed for them
when he was leaving the World: An idea and sum of his present Intercession, we
have in John 17. particularly verse 24. Father, I will that they also whom thou
have given me, be with me where I am: This will be a blessed Congregation
indeed, a spacious Temple, a large Paradise not in corners, houses, chapels,
where they are crowded, and often persecuted, fined, imprisoned, here they have
liberty, yea, possibly every Saint shall have his proper Mansion, yet in full
communion with God, and the rest of glorified Spirits: But more of this
hereafter.

Thus I have showed how they are gathered.

CHAP III. What is implied in this gathering together, what is included in it,
and consequences of it.
3. THE next Head to be opened is, to give a more particular account of this
work of the Saints gathering together, and this I shall do in these Seven
particulars.

1. That all the Saints in the several ages, places, conditions wherein they
have lived, shall be gathered into one general Assembly, this may seem strange,
but its true; all the Children of God that ever have lived this five thousand
Years and upwards, since Man was placed on this earthly Globe, all that ever
have lived, do live, or shall live till the end of time, shall be assembled,
such as have lived in far distant places many thousand Miles asunder, by vast
tracts of ground, mountains, seas, in Europe, Asia, Africa and America, such as
have died many thousand Years ago, and have been long singing praises and
enjoying God in the Church triumphant, Old Testament Saints, and New Testament
Saints: The Children of God in the Church militant, yet fighting under the
banner of Christ, shall meet with Victors that have been long crowned: Persons
of all Conditions, Ages, Sexes, Qualities, Rich and Poor, Old and Young; such
as never saw each others Faces in this World, no, nor ever heard of each other,
yet then they shall meet together, Luke 13.29. And they shall come from the
East and from the West, and from the North, and from the South, and shall sit
down in the Kingdom of God: Its said, Acts 2.5. There were dwelling at
Jerusalem Jews, devout Men, out of every Nation under Heaven: But what are
those to these out of all Countries of the World: O what a vast number of Souls
shall be congregated! Such as never appeared together in this lower Region:
When there shall be a general Collection of Mortals beyond the Theaters, or
Amphitheaters of the Ancient Romans, or Armies of Mahometans: Multitudes, Joel
3.14.
multitudes in this Mount as Joel speaks in the valley of decision.

2. That all this Congregation shall then be perfectly holy: So it may be truly
said of this Assembly, as the murmuring Princes said of Israel, Number. 16.3.
All the Congregation are Holy, every one of them, and the Lord is among them;
there is not one feeble Person among them, no infant of day's, but they are
grown up to be strong, turn Giants in Grace: They stand in no need of
Ordinances, ministerial Gifts, and the exercise thereof are only for perfecting
of the Saints, Ephesians. 4.12. But now they are above them, being perfected: That
City has no need of the Sun, Rev. 21.23.
or of the Moon to shine in it: As soon as ever the breath departs out of the
body of a Child of God, it shakes off all Sin, and puts on a new Garment of
perfect Holiness: They take their leave of the Body of Death and Earth
together: Not one speck of dirt to be seen upon all this great Multitude: Souls
take their leave of Sin, as they are taking their leave of this World: O what a
glorious sight will that be of milk-white Saints! Surely a lovely sight; there
will be no Pride, Passion, Impatience, nor any thing to vex themselves or
others: The dregs are left behind, and pure quintescence floats upwards:
Consecrated Souls are now elevated to the highest pitch, and defecated from
filthy and defiling dregs: Oh what a blessed day will that be!

3. That all Troubles and Temptations in this lower World shall then cease:
Neither the Devil nor wicked Men can follow them off this Dunghill, although
the Devil be called the Prince of the Power of the Air, Ephesians. 2.2.
yet he cannot stop or hurt the Saints as they pass through his Dominions; nor
shall he shoot a Dart at them or after them: All Troubles are at a Period:
Death it self the King of Terrors is strangled; it had no Sting to wound the
Saints before, 1 Cor. 15.56. Heb. 2.15.
now it has no being: The fear of it was gone in some degrees in their lives;
now the very feeling of it is gone: They are delivered not only from the Second
but from the First Death: They shall never receive a mortal wound, no, nor any
wound: The accuser (and abuser) of the Brethren is cast out: Rev. 12.10.
Not only cast down, but quite cast out, and all his Artillery and his
Instruments.

4. When Saints are thus gathered together, they shall know one another: Its
true, some kind of imperfect knowledge shall cease, that knowledge which is
only acquired in the use of Means shall vanish away, 1 Cor. 13.8. Or, that
which sees through a glass darkly, then shall we see face to face, verse 12. I
must needs confess those two words are beyond my comprehension, of knowing even
as we are known, 1 Cor. 13.12. 1 John 3.2.
and of seeing God as he is: And I suspect that no Mortal can understand what
they mean: But I think the Faculties will be strangely enlarged, so that the
Saints will know all natural things, and pierce into the Essence of the most
intricate Beings, the Nature and Efficacy of Creatures, the Properties of
Angels, the Mysteries of Redemption, the Councels of God: Though they are not
omniscient, their Knowledge is limited, yet I think they will know all the
Ancient Patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, David, Paul, Peter, though
they had never seen them in this World: Thus the rich Man though damned, knew
Father Abraham, Luke 16.23.
and Lazarus in his bosom: Luther discoursed the Night before he died, that
Saints shall know one another hereafter, from Adam's knowing who Eve was,
though he was asleep, Genesis 2.23.
the Disciples knowing Moses and Elias in Christ's transfiguration, Mat. 17.3.
and indeed his mutual knowledge will not be the least part of Saints heavenly
delight.

5. The Souls of Men live after they are separated from the Body: For, what is
it which is gathered with the Saints? Its not the Body, for that is laid in the
dust, but its the Soul, for the Body and Soul meet not till the great Day of
the Resurrection: Nor does the Soul sleep in the dust till then, for our Lord
said to the penitent Thief, Luke 23.43.
to day shall thou be with me in Paradise: And Paul desired to be loosed, that
he might be with Christ; Psalm. 1.23.
nor does the Soul cease to be, it has an existence in a separate State: Men
may kill the Body not the Soul: Mat. 10.20.
Atomists and Epicureans will not grant an annihilation of any one Atom in the
Universe, surely then not this excellent Creature, the Soul of Man: Yea the
Soul of Man continues its inviduation, i. e. its distinct being, and falls not
into one common universal Soul of the World, as some have imagined: Spirits
have a numerical Difference, a distinct Being: Nor are we to think that the
Soul returns into the Essence of God, because the Text says, The Spirit
returns to God who gave it, Eccl. 12.7. It does return to God to receive its
Sentence from him, not into his Being, for then we should make God Divisible,
and consisting of Parts, which is contrary to his infinite Divine Nature; thus
Souls have a distinct Being, yet depending on God the first Being, and are
individuals, and must be accordingly judged.

6. That the Soul being gathered with the Elect enters immediately into glory;
to know where Lazarus's Soul was, while he was in the Grave, requires more
skill then I can pretend to: Some think it hovered about the Grave by Christ's
order, as designing its re-entring the Body; but Scripture assures us of the
immediate Salvation of gracious Souls: They enter into peace, when the Body
rests in its Bed, Isa. 57.2. They are pronounced blessed that die in the Lord:
Rev. 14.13.
When Christ who is our life shall appear, then shall we appear with him in
Glory, Col. 3.4. Now they shall be glorious in their Souls: At the
Resurrection, their Bodies will be Glorious, Phi. 3.21.
even like Christ's glorious Body: This answers that Query, whether the Saints
shall have greater Glory at the Resurrection then they had immediately after
their Death? It is easy to determine, that so far as there is an Addition of a
glorified Body to the glorified Spirit, so far is the Glory greater, what
further, I know not: Though Dr. Hammond thinks the Word [(...)] when Flesh is
not joined to it, signifies, that Life which the Soul enters upon immediately
after Death, called Resurrection, i. e. Glorification: Certainly the Soul has
some intuitive Knowledge in its separate State and Felicity also, so far as it
is capable.

7. When these blessed Souls are thus gathered together they shall never part,
they shall live with God and each other for ever: Here we part and meet again,
and meet and part again, and part so as we shall never meet again in this
World: But in the other World we shall part no more through the Ages of
Eternity: After Millions of Years the Comforts are as fresh as at the first
Moment, never weary, nor interrupted, they are before the throne of God, Rev.
7.15. chap. 20.6. chap. 22.5.
and serve him day and night in his temple: These Waters have a perpetual
Spring; this Day has no Night: They shall reign with Christ not a thousand
Years definitively, but for ever and ever: O what a lasting and everlasting
enjoyment of God and Saints will that be! What can part them, God will not, the
Devil and wicked Men cannot, themselves shall not, for they have within them an
incorruptible Seed, even of that Word that lives and abides for ever, 1 Pet.
1.23. It is not with Saints in Heaven as with Boon-companions in playing,
drinking, carousing Matches of sport and vanity, that must part; nor is it with
Saints there as with God's Children here in the Worship of God, that have their
Intermission, Cessations, Interruptions, are forced to break off: But there the
work continues praising God, the place continues, it has Foundations, the
persons continue, he that does the will of God abides for ever, 1 John 2.17.

CHAP. IV. For what End the Saints are gathered together.
4. THE next Head is to open the End or Design of the Saints gathering
together, these are of Two Sorts, 1. Principal, 2. Secondary and Subordinate.

1. The primary and principal End is, the Glorifying of God; the great God does
all things for this great End, 2 These. 1.10. When he shall come to be glorified
in his Saints, and to be admired in all them that believe: The glory of the
Saints shall reflect glory to God: God takes himself honored in his Saints
Honor, as the Prince is magnified in the splendor of his Court: If God be
glorified in the bitterest Sufferings of his Saints, 1 Pet. 4.14.
how much more in their Exaltations? Oh what a Luster will they cast, when they
are all crowned as Kings, Dan. 12.3. Mat. 13.43.
when they shall shine as the Firmament, yea as Stars, yea as the Sun in its
Meridian glory, O what a strange change is this to be raised out of the Durst
and Dunghill, to sit upon Thrones? How came this to pass, surely the Author of
this Glory will have the chief share therein, all God's perfections will be
conspicuous: The Saints meeting together in the foresaid Manner, will tend to
the glory of

1. God's Sovereignty, wherein he chose these that were Children of Wrath even
as others to make them Vessels of Mercy, and left others as good as they to
perish and be banished from God to all Eternity; then those eternal Councels
will be displayed, and that Scripture fully explained, Romans 9.15, 18, 22, 23.

2. God's Wisdom shall be illustrious in contriving a way for Man's Redemption
and Salvation: This Wisdom of God in a Mystery, even the hidden wisdom which
God ordained before the world unto our glory, 1 Cor. 2.7. Then the Secrets of
this Wisdom will be clearly laid open, to Angels and Men, which now they desire
to look into, yea become Scholars in the Church to learn more of, Ephesians. 3.10. 1
Pet. 1.12.


3. The Power of God will be illustrious in bringing poor weak Creatures
through such a world of Difficulties and Oppositions, as Sheep in the midst of
Wolves, Lions, Bears, in an howling Wilderness, yea themselves shall wonder how
they ever got thither, and shall reflect with comfort and triumph, that they
were kept by the power of God through Faith unto Salvation, 1 Pet. 1.5.

4. But no Attribute of God will shine so bright in that day of Saints meeting
together, as that of his Free Grace, Love and Mercy, this orient Pearl in the
Gold-ring of Glory will shine brightest: That up-hill City is built all of
Freestone, they had none mounted so high, had not the arms of love been under
them: When this Head-stone of Glory is laid, it will be with shoutings, grace,
grace unto it, Zech. 4.7. The Celestial Palace will ring with Acclamations of
Grace: Grace laid the Foundation, and Grace lays the Top-stone in Glory: The
glorified Soul will stand amazed, and say, who am I O Lord God, and what is my
house that thou have brought me hitherto? 2 Samuel 7.18.
And Saints and Angels will stand gazing at them, and at God in them, that of
such filthy Beasts has made such holy Saints, of such Lepers not fit to be
touched, has advanced them above the ordinary rate of Men, equal unto the
Angels: Fellow-saints shall adore Free Grace, Luke 20.36.
Devils shall fret, Reprobates gnash their Teeth with envy, and Angels will
gladly admit them into their Society: And God will be glorified in all.

This is the first and chief End God has in gathering the Saints together.

2. There is also a secondary subordinate End of God's bringing his Saints
together, and that is for their mutual Communion, Converse and Society with
each other, and all with God together.

Negatively it shall not be.

1. To Trade, Buy and Sell, and have civil Commerce together, to make great
Purchases, or to go to Fairs and Markets, or meet upon Exchange for
Merchandice: There Is no such things there: Nor shall they Marry or be given in
Marriage; nor converse as Husband and Wives, Luke 20.35.

2. Nor shall they suffer together, or be thrown into Prisons, Dens, Caves of
the Earth, to endure Hardships, seeking Relief, or begging their Bread; the
Devil and his Instruments are there nonsuited, the accuser of the brethren is
cast down, Rev. 12.10. And all his Angels, Agents.

3. Much less shall they Sin together, by Acts of Immorality, or idle Talk or
Chat, there shall not be uttered one vain Word to all Eternity; nor shall they
Quarrel, or Contend, and thereby grieve and fret or vex the Spirits one of
another, or sadden the Hearts of each other; No, no, there shall be perfection
of Grace, and complete harmony of Minds and Affections.

4. Nor shall there be one word of Complaint as now there is, Christians when
they meet here, spend much of their Time in bemoaning themselves, or bemoaning
one another, in mutual Compassion, confessing their Faults to each other, James
5.16,
acquainting Christian Friends with their Grievances, begging their Advice, and
the help of their Prayers; O says one, I am Ignorant, Hard-hearted,
Unbelieving, have a treacherous Memory, am very Unprofitable; says another, I
am sore assaulted with Satan's Suggestions, hellish Temptations; another says,
I am in the dark, God hides his Face, I know not what to make of my Condition;
another complains of dark Providence, and is afraid of missing his Way, in
such a Case; every one has his peculiar Ailings and Grievances; and one while
raise their Hearts to God, another while to Christian Friends; but there shall
be no such thing as a whimper of complaining, when they meet together in that
Solemn day.

2. More positively and affirmatively, the Ends and Business for which the
Saints shall come together are these Two.

1. The former concerns their personal Felicity: The Second concerns their
mutual Society and Intercourse.

1. For their own personal Felicity, they shall meet together for these Ends:

1. To rest together, as their Bodies shall rest in the Grave, so shall their
Soul rest with God: This is the time of refreshing that comes from the presence
of the Lord, Acts 3.19. Now they rest from their labors, sinful, evil, Rev.
14.13.
and natural, never more to be pestered any more with the Hurries of a mad
World, Temptations of a malicious Devil, or Corruptions of a treacherous Heart:
Rest is sweet, this Rest is most sweet, when they enter into Peace they rest in
their Beds, Isa. 57.2.

2. To be rewarded; great is their reward in Heaven, Mat. 5.12. This Reward
does greatly animate God's Saints in their Labors and Losses, they still have
respect to the recompense of Reward, Heb. 11.26. Pro. 11.18.
and they shall not be disappointed for it is a sure Reward; and their
Confidence has great recompense of Reward, Heb. 10.35. Not by any thing we
have done in point of commutative Justice, yet by distributive Justice, by
virtue of God's promise in the New Covenant, God will be as good as his Word.

3. They meet to rejoice together, at present, they rejoice in hope of the
Glory of God, Romans 5.2. But Heaven is the true proper Element of Joy: If at a
distance and unseen, Isa. 35.10.
the Christian can rejoice with Joy unspeakable and full of Glory, upon actings
of a Faith of Adherence: 1 Pet. 1.8.
Oh what Joy will the Christian have above, this is an entering into our Masters
Joy, Mat. 25.21.
because our Vessels are too narrow for this joy to enter into us; O what
transport of joy at the Saints arrival!

4. They meet to Reign: The Saints of the most high shall take the Kingdom and
possess the Kingdom for ever, even for ever and ever, Dan. 7. 18. Rev. 22.5.
Not only shall godly Ministers receive a crown of glory that fades not a way;
1 Pet. 5.4.
but suffering Saints shall have the Crown of Life, which God has promised to
all that love him, James 1.12. Earthly Crowns are but rotten Trifles to this
Crown that all Saints shall receive: This is an high transcendent Preferment.

5. They meet together to receive their Inheritance: At present they are but as
Children in their Minority, but at Death they take possession of their rightful
Inheritance, and it is an Inheritance incorruptible, undefiled, and that fades
not away, reserved in Heaven for them, 1 Pet. 1.4. All God's Children are
Heirs, Gal. 3.29.
and heirs according to promise, and this Glory they have hereafter is a reward
of inheritance, Col. 3.24. The Kingdoms of the Earth countervail not this
blessed Inheritance above.

6. They meet together to triumph upon their blessed Conquest: What strange
Triumphers shall Saints be hereafter, Romans 8.37.
that are more then Conquerours here? All the Saints shall be clothed with
white robes and palms in their hands, Rev. 7.9. O the triumphant Song they
sing, Rev. 15.3. It is unintelligible by others, and cannot be learned by any
but overcomers: O happy Souls!

7. They meet to see the Execution of God's Vengance upon the Wicked, Jude
14.15. Behold the Lord comes to execute Judgment upon all, and to convince all
that are ungodly, of their ungodly deeds and hard speeches, -- the righteous
shall rejoice when he sees the vengance, Psalm. 58.10. The more the Saints Will
is melted into God's Will, the more content will they have in the executing of
Justice, not so much on God's Creatures, but his Enemies, see 2 These. 1. 6, 7,
8, 9.

8. They meet for a clear Manifestation of their inward Principles and outward
Practices to each other: Saints are called hidden ones, Psalm. 83.3.
their best part is most out of sight; their life is hid with Christ in God,
but when Christ who is our life shall appear, then shall we appear with him in
glory, Col. 3.3, 4. Yea, and the Creature waits for the manifestation of the
Sons of God, Romans 8.19. O what a display will there be at that day of Men's
inward States one to another, never before known, 1 John 3.1, 2.

9. They meet to have their Graces perfected: This (and never till then) is the
day when that is accomplished, Ephesians. 4.12, 13. The perfecting of the Saints till
we all come in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God,
unto a perfect Man unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ:
Then will every corner of the Soul be filled with Grace, to the full brim: He
that begun a good work here, will perform till the day of Jesus Christ, Phil.
1.6. Now they have attained to that they were pressing after; O blessed day! Oh
sweet attainment!

10. Yet, once more they meet together to enjoy God immediately together: This
Crowns all the rest, this is the top of all, the Achme and highest Felicity of
a rational Soul: This is that they have been long breathing after: Some glimpes
of his blessed Face they saw through the glass of Ordinances, and were thereby
changed into the same image from glory to glory, 2 Cor. 3.18. But that sight of
God was but through a glass darkly, but then face to face, 1 Cor. 13.12. When
he shall appear we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is, 1 John
3.2. What Man dwelling on this side Death knows the meaning of that Word? God
said to Moses, thou can not see my face, its well if we can see his back
parts; Exodus 33.20.
but then the Lord will unveil his blessed Face to glorified Souls: We cannot
till now how a finite Soul is capable of seeing an infinite Object, but then as
the faculties will be strangely enlarged and extended, so this Vision will
exceed our present low Apprehensions: This is called the beautiful Vision,
promised to the pure in heart that they shall see God; Mat. 5.8.
and its this that makes them completely Happy: That Is one of the sweetest
words in the Bible, 1 These. 4.17, 18. Then we which are alive and remain, shall
be caught up together with them in the clouds to meet the Lord in the air, and
so shall we ever be with the Lord, wherefore comfort one another with these
words.

CHAP. V. An Account of the Intercourse the Saints have at their meeting
together.
THE former Head referred to the main Business of the Saints meeting together,
which was glorifying God, enjoying of him, which consists in their personal
Felicity.

2. This latter concerns their mutual Society, and familiar Intercourse one
with another, which will be additional to their comfort and happiness in those
heavenly Regions.

Communion of Saints is one Article of our Faith, and the great Privilege of
Believers in this lower World; both that which is Catholic with all Saints
through the World, and that which is Personal and Immediate with Members of the
same Society: As soon as any Man commenceth Christian, he espouseth this
Communion, Phil. 1.5. For your fellowship in the gospel from the first day
until now: Wicked Men talk their good Fellowship in feasting, drinking,
jesting, gaming, alas they are all but Child's play, yea Devils sport to this,
and leave the Soul sapless and guilty: But this Fellowship of God's Children is
delectable, honorable and profitable, a distinctive Character of a Saint, an
Emblem of Heaven, a step to Communion with God.

Yet that Fellowship they have in Glory far exceeds that they have below, for
they are defecated from the dregs of Corruption and sinful Pasions, their Souls
purified, their Graces perfected, and though they be different Lives, yet all
center in God.

That the Saints above have familiar Intercourse one with another, is generally
asserted, and very probable; because such a Communication does greatly heighten
their Comfort and Happiness: But how this is carried on, is not so Evident;
whether it be [imprimendo] imprinting their Conceptions in the Minds of each
other, as Scotus says, or [representando, ordinando] ordering their
Conceptions in their own Minds, and so in some peculiar way representing them
by certain Species to others: So Aquinas; or [sonando] by forming Sounds, which
after their way are intelligible: But we that are so much strangers to the
Nature of Spirits, cannot conceive of these things.

Yet after the Resurrection, when Bodies are united to their Souls, possibly
they may hold Discourse vocally; yet, it must be said, whilst in this World,
in a sound Sense, that they know no Man after the flesh, 2 Cor. 5.16. How much
less in Heaven, when their Bodies become Spiritual, will they know each other,
or confer together in a low carnal Manner, as they do here in this World.

Let the more learned read Dr. Tuckny's Discouse in his Praelect. Theol, Page
152 to 157, upon this Question [Beati in statu gloriae se mutuo sunt aquituri:]
That the Blessed in the State of Glory shall know each other, for which he
brings Proofs out of Scripture, of Dives and Lazarus and Moses, and this in
Christ's Transfiguration, etc. and some Argument.

But of this I shall say as he [quod question ista in se contineat veritatem
theologicam non fundamentatem fidei Articulum] that this Question contains in
it a Theological Truth, not a Fundamental Article of Faith; not necessary to
our Salvation, but useful to our Edification and Consolation.

Now if it be asked, what Subjects the Saints glorified shall in all
probability discourse upon, I confess its an high an hard Question; for, I do
find in the 2 Cor. 12.4. that when the Apostle Paul was lifted up into the
Third Heavens, he heard [(...)] wordless Words, or Words that could not be
uttered, or which it is not lawful for a Man to utter: God forbid that I should
presume to express either the Matter or the Manner of these Conferences above:
But words or things they are that are uttered, and we may lawfully guess at
what the Saints above confer of, by the holy laudible Discourses they have
here; and they may be such as these:

1. Concerning the Work of Creation: For though the visible Heavens and Earth
shall be burnt up, yet nevertheless, according to his Promise, they shall see
new heavens and new earth, wherein dwells Righteousness, 2 Pet. 3.12, 13. Fire
purifies, Rev. 18.5.
so the visible Heavens which were defiled with Men's Sin, shall be purged with
Fire, Romans 8.21.
and the creature shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption: And oh
what a brave show will that present? Far beyond Golden Mountains, Rocks of
Pearl or Diamonds, or Crystal streams: A semblance of it we have in Rev. 21.
which is the wonderful Workmanship of the great Creator, enough to employ the
Eyes and Tongues of those Celestial Inhabitants to the Praise of Jehovah, Rev.
4.9, 10, 11. and though the first Creation be past away, yet the mighty Fabric
of this vast Universe will possess the Thoughts of the Saints, with admiration
of God's Power, Wisdom, Holiness which shines therein, and they will reflect,
upon with Discourses one to another, and adoring God: To the Honor of his
Majesty.

2. Concerning Man's Apostasy: How excellently God had placed Man in the
Primitive state of Perfection in his own Image, with perfect Faculties in the
Image of of God, Psalm. 8.6.
with dominion over the works of God's hands: Yet he unreasonably made
defection from God, and rose up in rebellion against God, by violating the
Moral Law engraven in his Heart; and the Positive Law of not eating the Fruit
of one Tree: Whereby he utterly ruined all his Posterity, made himself and his
Offspring subject to God's wrath and curse here and hereafter to all Eternity:
This will be greatly aggravated to the advancement of Free Grace in our
deliverance out of it.

3. Especially the Saints shall discourse of the Means of our Redemption: The
infinite Wisdom, Grace and Love in God's Contrivance of it; the transcendent
Love, Care, Faithfulness of Christ in the managing of it, the Nature, Birth,
Death, Resurrection, Ascension of the Son of God, his Offices, suited to our
State, and all his Mediatory Undertakings: This will be a Voluminous Book for
Saints to read, fairly written in indelible Characters; Ephesians. 1.20, 21.
and the glorious Object before their Eyes, at the right Hand of God, in
heavenly Places, above Principalities; to be a perpetual Monitor of his
glorious Transactions: This shall be the triumphant Harmony of the Celestial
Inhabitants to all Eternity, Rev. 5.8, 9, 13, 14.

4. The privilege of Believers; the blessed Fruits of Christ's purchases: Now
they shall more fully understand and take the due dimensions of the Benefits of
Reconciliation, Justification, Adoption, peace of Conscience, joy of the
Holy Ghost; these privileges will be better understood then, and discoursed of
one to another: O what blessed Effects of Divine Grace! We enjoyed them, but
did not duly conceive of them, now we see what it is to be the Children of God,
to be Justified, Sanctified; these were greater Mercies then we were aware of:
Let us cast our Eye back, and consider what we were once, what Bruits, Sots,
but how we were washed, sanctified, justified, in the name of the Lord Jesus,
and by the spirit of our God, 1 Cor. 6.11. Ah, what a pleasant Theme is this!

5. The Ordinances enjoyed: Oh, how many savory Sermons have we heard! How
often have we been feasted together at the Lord's Table? What sweet Fellowship
have we had with the Saints in the lower World! Many an Heart-melting Fast,
many a Soul-refreshing Thanksgiving, many an edifying, Heart-warning
Conference: I could then say, it was good for me to draw nigh to God: Psalm.
73.28.
Those Duties led us to this Glory: God help us to improve Ordinances, and now
we are got quite above Ordinances.

6. The difficulties of our Pilgrimage: While the Saints stand on the shore of
Eternity, and look back at the stormy tempestuous Sea they have passed, the
Pirates, Rocks and Sands they escaped, by the conduct of the great Pilot, it
fills them with Admiration and Astonishment: How many roaring Devils, surious
onsets of Men: What Temptations, Persecutions they have passed through, what
hard Duties they have performed, what Corruptions they have mortified, what
Burdens they have born; all these do accent their Joy to an high pitch.

7. Ministers, and their Hearers will communicate their former Experiences: Oh,
will the Convert say, it was a blessed Day that ever I saw such a Ministers
Face, or heard his Voice: I remember the Text, the Doctrine, the Particular,
that first touched my Heart: Cant. 2.3.
I sat under that shadow with great delight, the fruit was sweet to my Soul,
God healed me by the same Hand, that wounded me; possibly the Minister never
knew till now all the Souls he has been an Instrument to Convert: Now they
have a reciprocal Joy, when sower and reaper rejoice together, John 4.26.

8. Godly Relations will mutually reflect on Days that are past, though now not
as Husband and Wife, yet as quondam in that Relation: They were heirs together
of the grace of life, prayed, wept, 1 Pet. 3.7.
suffered, and sweetly converst togegether, the Father wept over the
miscarrying Child, prevailed with God, his Miscarriages cost him dear, but his
Conversion was as life from the dead, that was a costly Child, how the more
lovely the gracious Child reflects upon, recounts the godly Fathers and Mothers
Prayers and Tears, Counsels, Admonitions.

9. The distinction Grace has made betwixt them and others: Such a one as well
Born, Bred, Educated as we, sometimes under Convictions, sat under the same
means of Grace, of fine Parts, made a Profession, and were once as likely for
Heaven as I, but fell into gross Sin, or kept in a course of Formality, and
these are now swallowed up in Eternal Torments, why, am not I in their Case?
Who made us to differ? 1 Cor. 4.6.
It was nothing but Free grace that gave me a Repenting-heart: I was as likely
to Perish as he, and as unable to help my Self as he.

10. Christians will discourse of the various Providence of God in this World:
I was Sick and the Lord raised me up, had I dyed then, I had been undone, for I
was in a graceless State: God in faithfulness afflicted me, Psalm. 119.75.
I had perished, if I had not perished, I was wandering, and God brought me home
by weeping Cross: I had not been thus Happy, if I had not been Miserable; all
things did work for my Good: The Lord supplied my Wants, supported me in
Troubles, vouchsafed many Mercies in my Pilgrimage, wereby he rendered my
Condition comfortable: Many a particular Dispensation of Providence will be
then laid open to others.

11. The seasons of special Enlargement; they will then declare what God has
done for their Souls: Many things that passed betwixt God and their Souls, that
were not fit to be divulged in this World, will then be laid open to the glory
of God, and their own and others joy and abundant content as those two
Disciples said, Luke 24.32. did not our hearts burn within us, while he talked
with us by the way? Oh, what sweet Intercourse with God had my Soul in such a
Chamber, Cant. 7.12.
Close^; there did he give me his Loves, and I gave him mine: It was a little
corner of Heaven: Such an Ordinance, Presence, was as one of the Days of
Heaven; I could have been content to have died there.

12. Lastly, They shall discourse of the Felicity they are now advanced to, and
the Perpetuity of it: This State is beyond, what eye has seen, ear heard, or
could enter into the heart of Man; little, 1 Cor. 2.9.
ah little did I then know what I now enjoy: One hour in this blisful State,
compensates all my days of Service or Suffering: O that I had done more for
God! I am says Luther, ashamed that God should so abundantly reward so little
Work: But God acts like himself, I did but little for God, but God does much
for me: Who would not serve such a Master? My Sufferings were but light and
momentary, but this is a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory: O What
a beautiful Master have we served: 2 Cor. 4.17.
Nor is this for a short Season, to have an End, but it is lasting,
everlasting; it would damp our Joy, if we were in danger to lose this Felicity,
but let us take Courage, we shall never be expelled out of this our Paradise as
Adam was out of his: This Happiness shall run Parallel with the Life of God, and
live of Eternity.

You Will say, how do you know that this shall be their Discourses, have you been
there to hear it, or who told you?

I Answer no, but we may rationally guess at it, partly from some general Hints
in Scripture, partly from their profitable and comfortable Discourse on Earth,
which will then be heightened, and indeed because they shall speak and act such
things as most tend to the Glory of God, and their own greater Joy and Comfort.

CHAP VI. How the Saints shall be gathered together unto Christ, and Reasons
why thy must be gathered together.
5. THE next general Head is what is to be meant by the Saints gathering
together unto Christ, so says the Text.

I must confess, Interpreters greatly differ about the meaning of these Words,
[(...)] which some Interpret of meetings of Christians together in Assemblies,
Heb. 10.25. And so render [(...)] propter ipsum, as Jam. 2.7. that worthy name
[(...)] which is called upon you, super vos: So they will have this to refer to
the free Liberty of Christians, in uninterrupted meetings in Countries, Cities,
after the Scattering of the Jewish Nation that censured Christians as a wicked
Sect; but in the days of Vespasian, Titus, but especially in Constantines Time,
enjoyed liberty of meeting together for celebrating God's public Worship: So
indeed [(...)] and [(...)] convenire, congregare, in public Edict signify: But
most take it for that general universal Meeting at Christ's second coming in
the Air at the last Day, 1 These. 4.14, 17. when all the Elect shall be gathered
to Christ: Now this gathering of Saints to Christ does comprehend these Four
things; 1. The State and Qualification of the Object. 2. The Reason or Relation
betwixt them. 3. The Frame and Disposition of the Subject. 4. The Sight, Vision
or Fruition of him.


I shall very briefly open all these.

1. The State and Qualification of the Object, that is Christ, under a double
Notion, 1st. As God, Man; 2dly. As advanced to the right Hand of God.

1. They shall be gathered to him as God and Man, which is a State of the
highest Perfection: Complete Man as glorious a Creature as Adam in Innocence,
and yet much more endeared to his Saints, by that reflecting on what he has
done and suffered for them and the Fruits thereof; this is he of whom it is
said, when he brings in his first begotten into the world, he says and let
all the Angels of God worship him, Heb. 1.6. This is the admirable Person,
consisting of his two Natures, Divine and Humane; never did created or
uncreated Nature afford the like: In whom all Perfections meet, in whom all
Excellencies are united.

2. As exalted to the right Hand of God: They are not now to be gathered to
Christ, as he was in his State of Humiliation, when Multitudes flockt to his
Preaching, working Miracles, when he was but in the form of a Servant, or going
to suffer on the Cross, no, nor yet in his State of Transfiguration, which was
Glorious but Temporary; but now he is set down on the right hand of the Majesty
on high, Heb. Phil. 2.9, 10.
1.3. God has now given him a name above every name far above all
principalities and powers and has put all things under his feet and gave him
to be the head over all things to the Church, Ephesians. 1.20, 21, 22. It is this
State of Glory in which Christ is inthroned, and now receiving Homage from all
ranks of Creatures (Devils being confined to their Prisons,) attended with
innumerable Angels; it is Christ in this glorious State, that the Saints are to
be gathered to.

2. The Reason thereof, which consists in the Relation betwixt Christ and his
Saints, all which carry abundance of delight and sweetness in them: For, it is
not as Strangers or Enemies that love him not, nor yet as Malefactors brought
to the Bar, that dread him as Judge: But they are gathered to Christ under
these sweet Relations.

1. As Sheep to their Shepherd, whose Voice they know here, and follow him,
John 10.3, 4. yea they own him with a more then ordinary endearedness, because
he laid down his Life for the Sheep, verse 15. and carried those poor lambs in
his arms, Isa. 40.11.
and leads them to quiet resting-places, where they shall dwell safely, Ezekiel.
34.28.
and none shall make them afraid.

2. As Soldiers to their Captain, not to Fight, but to take the Spoil, the
Captain of our Salvation is made perfect through sufferings: He is now crowned
with glory and honor and brings many Sons unto glory, Heb. 2.9, 10. He
pitcheth out a Crown to every Soldier, and sets the victorious Champion with
him on his own Throne, Rev. 3.21.

3. As Scholars to their Master, who sets them not in a low Form, as under
Graduates, but they commence the highest degree of Perfection in the University
of Glory, to know as much as Creatures are capable, they shall know as they are
known, 1 Cor. 13.12. Now he is a vessel unto Honor, meet for his Masters use,
2 Timothy 2.21.
set on the shelf of Glory.

4. As Subjects to their Prince, to pe preferred into the King's
Presence Chamber: Not any longer to be banished into a foreign Country; no, nor
yet to be Retainers, hanging about the Court at a distance, but approaching
into his Presence: Jesus Christ is in the immediate Presence of God, Saints
shall be with him: Heb. 9.24.
In whose presence is fullness of joy at his right hand are pleasures for ever
more, Psalm. 10.11.

5. As Friends to a Feast: Our Lord called and accounted all his Saints,
Friends in this World, John 15.14, 15. and he deals familiarly with them,
providing for them a Feast of fat things: But there will come a day when he
will drink this wine new with them in his fathers kingdom, Mat. 26.29. O
blessed Feast! O sweet Society! When he will say, eat oh friends, drink, yea,
drink abundantly, O beloved, Cant. 5.2.

6. As Children are gathered to their Father, not only to receive a Blessing,
but to take full possession of their Inheritance, Col. 3.24. knowing that of
the Lord, ye shall revive the reward of the inheritance, for ye serve the Lord
Christ: All God's Son's are Heirs, and then it will be manifest who are Son's,
Romans 8.17. 1 John 3.2.
that is a blessed Word, Rev. 21.7. He that overcomes shall inherit all things,
and I will be his God, and he shall be my Son.

7. As Members are gathered to their Heart, Ephesians. 5.30. for we are members of
his body of his flesh and of his bones: Now alas the Members are often
disjointed from each other, and too much distant from the Head, but there will
come a day when they shall be joined all in one: There Is then no discrepancy
betwixt Head and Members, but they are grown up into him in all things, which
is the head even Christ, Ephesians. 4.15, 16.

Thus much for the Relation they have to Christ, which is the Reason of this
gathering together to him.

3. The Frame and Disposition of the Subject: There is in every Child of God, a
kind of natural Propensity, which inclines them in a peculiar Manner toward
Christ as the Needle toward the Loadstone, by which they move and bend Heaven
wards: Return unto thy rest, O my Soul says David, Psalm. 116.7. As all
Creatures move to their center, so does the sincere Soul God-wards; and can
never be quiet till it be closely joined and cemented to him, and that God that
has fixed these innate Principles in the Soul, will promote and perfect them:
Now this Frame and Disposition of a Child of God, proceeds 1st. From the
Conviction of Conscience, and Deficiency he finds in other things: 2dly. From a
sensible Experience that the Soul has of Satisfaction in Christ.

1. The Consciences of God's Children are fully satisfied, that all the World
cannot give the least ease to their Souls: This made Solomon cry out, Eccl. 1.2.
vanity of vanitie^, all is vanity: The Christian cries out, away with these
Toys: Worldly Enjoyments are not commensurate to an immortal Soul, Mat. 16.26.
The Judgment is convinced that the world passes away, and the lust ^hereof, 1
John 2.17. All the Splendour of the (...)ld fades, there is a varity and
emptiness in all Sublimaries [non est mortale quod opto] that is the Christians
Motto: I wish not, for, I am not content with mundane or worldly things: I must
look beyond the Moon to Heaven for a Felicity: I have sucked the juice of every
Flower in this Garden of the World, yet my Soul is empty.

2. The Christian has tasted that the Lord is Gracious, and this sets him a
longing and hungring for more Grace and Incomes from above, 1 Pet. 2.23. The
Gauls having tasted the sweet Wine of the Grapes that grew in Italy, were never
at rest till they had conquered the Country: So it is with the godly Soul
[optima demonstratio est a sensibus] Sense brings the clearest Evidence,
especially Spiritual Senses, for some Natural Senses may be deceived, this I
pray, says the Apostle, that your love may abound yet more and more in
knowledge, and in all judgment, Phil. 1.9. [(...),] in all Sense, for the Soul
has its Senses as well as the Body, and being sanctified and duly exercised,
Heb. 5.14.
they discern betwixt Good and Evil: And indeed this is the proper Genius of
the new Creature, to press forwards and aspire upwards, Romans 8.23. we which
have the first fruits of the spirit groan within our selves, waiting for the
adoption; the redemption of our body: There are Heaven born Principles laid up
in godly Souls, that make them sore aloft to enjoy God.

4. The gathering to Christ, includes the Sight, Vision and Fruition of Christ,
the full Enjoyment of him: Beholding God is properly Fruitive Vision of him:
Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God, Mat. 5.8. This is not of
mere Speculation, but Fruition; if we be dead with Christ, we believe that we
shall also live with him, Romans 6.8. This is by sight of him and appearing with
him in glory, Col. 3.4. This blisful sight of Christ, is that which makes
Heaven, for where the King is, there is the Court; this Glory is in conformity
to him, and communion with him: This is it to be gathered to Christ, i. e. to
have Christ fully revealed to us, the approach to him under dearest Relations,
the Soul disposed and duly qualified to enjoy him, and full Vision and Fruition
of him: If any of these be wanting, we cannot in Scripture-Sense be gathered to
Christ.

6. The next Head is the Reasons why our Lord will thus gather his Saints to
Christ at the last day?

Though I have touched at some things already, that might be improved as
Reasons, yet I shall add.

1. Because this is the good Pleasure of God, John 6.39. And this is the
Fathers will which has sent me, that of all which he has given me, I should
lose nothing, but should raise it up at the last day, how tender is God of his
Jewels, he will gather them and make them up carefully, Mat. 3.17. Romans 6.27.
To be sure he will neither keep them out, nor cast them out: The foundation of
God stands sure, having this seal, the Lord knows [and will own] them that
are his, 2 Timothy 2.19. the election must obtain salvation: It runs invisibly
much under ground, Romans 11.7.
but will appear at last in Mansions above.

2. Because this is the Fruit of Christ's Purchase, 1 Pet. 3.18. For Christ
has once suffered for sins, the just for the unjust that he might bring us to
God; He is the Ladder of Jacob, upon whom Elect Souls ascend to Glory: This was
the End of his reconciling us by his Blood, to present us holy, unblamable, and
unreprovable in his sight, Col. 1.20, 22. our Lord will not lose the Fruits of
his dear Purchase: Yea he follows it with his Prayer, John 17.24. Father, I
will that they also whom thou have given me, be with me where I am, God always
hears him.

3. Because of the sanctifying and sealing Work of the Spirit, 2 These. 2.13.
God has chosen you to salvation, through sanctification of the spirit, and
belief of the truth; observe it, Sanctification and Salvation, have an
inseparable Connection: Saints in the Old Testament and in the New have the same
spirit of faith, 2 Cor. 4.13. This animates all the Members of Christ, running
through the Veins of his mystical Body; 2 Cor. 1.22.
and this is the seal and earnest of our future inheritance, Ephesians. 1.13, 14. To
be sure God will not lose his Earnest, or throw it to Hell.

4. Saints shall be gathered together to Christ, because they are all wrapped in
the same Bond of the Everlasting Covenant; its called the bond of the covenant,
Ezekiel. 20.37. And by this Covenant all the Saints become one stick in the Lords
hand, Ezekiel. 37.17. Suppose abundance of Twigs be bound up together, yet they
all make up but one Rod; many Stones make but one building; many Inhabitants
make but one City or Kingdom: All Saints are fellow citizens, Ephesians. 2.19, 20,
21, 22. God will not part them either in this or in the other World: Sincere
and persevering Souls, shall all meet before the Throne, to sing Hallelujahs
with harmonious Melody: All the Saints through the World are Children of the
same Father, God; yea they that are of faith, are children of Abraham, Gal.
3.7. In a Spiritual Sense, one household of faith, Gal. 6.10. fellow heirs of
the same body, Ephesians. 3.6. fellow servants, Col. 1.7. brethren in Christ,
faithful brethren, Col. 1.2. fellow citizens with the Saints, Ephesians. 2.19. and of
the household of God: Such special Relation calls for this Congregating: No
doubt, they must be gathered together at last.

CHAP. VII. Inferences from this Doctrine of Saints being gathered together.
THE Improvement I shall make of this Point, shall be 1st. for Doctrine, or
information of our Minds and Judgments in these Ten Inferences and Consectaries.

1. That God is Omniscent and Omnipotent known, unto God are all his works from
the beginning of the world, Acts 15.18. He is infinite in Knowledge and Wisdom,
that takes account of the meanest Creatures, and he is of infinite Power to
gather them up; these are the Lord's People, and his Inheritance, which he has
brought out by his mighty power and stretched out arm, Deuteronomy 9.29. As God
brought his Israel out of Egypt, so he laid out the same Power in bringing them
into Canaan, so the same Power that converted Sinners, will also save them, for
they are kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation, 1 Pet. 1.5.

2. That Jesus Christ is a complete Savior, He is able to save to the
uttermost, Heb. 7.25. [(...)] every way, to all intents and purposes, Soul and
Body in all cases, difficulties, conditions, in all Dispensations: Yet it has
a further meaning, He is able to save totally, finally, perfectly and
perpetually, so as none shall need to come after him, to finish what he has
begun; yet further, He saves, so as he shall never cease to be a Savior to all
Eternity: For, though he finished his suffering Work on Earth, and his crowning
Work at the great Day of Judgment, yet the God-injoying Work shall be by him,
through the Ages of Eternity; as he shall be looked on as the Author, so he
will be the Object of their Happiness, and embrace them in the Arms of his Love
for evermore.

3. That Death is not terrible to a gracious Person: Its true to Nature it may
well be called the king of terrors; Job 18.14.
it is a dissolving of this compound Man, but it is the shell and clothing of
the Soul that is laid by, an Elementary composition that is dissolved, the Soul
is thereby set at liberty and takes its flight into another World, a World of
Spirits: A better State then here, Death is but a bridge, a portal that opens
the Door to Heaven: Christ has unstung Death, perfumed the Grave, and made it
a means of Manumission into the blessed Society of God, Angels and Saints,
thousands better then we are gone, who are we to be exempted? Its no untrodden
Path, our best Friends are above, let us not be afraid to follow them.

4. That Heaven is a capacious place; all the Saints in the Old Testament are
gone thither, and Millions in New Testament days, are mounted to Glory, an
hundred forty four thousand of all the Tribes of Israel, and a great multitude
which no man could number, Rev. 7.49. Moses and Elias came from Heaven at
Christ's Transfiguration; Abraham in glory, and all his spiritual Offspring,
which makes a vast number; yet there is room enough left in those extracted
Mansions above: How small a point is this habitable World compared with Heaven,
where there is innumerable company of Angels and spirits of just Men made
perfect: Heb. 12.22.
Yet none refused or kept out that are written in the lambs book of life:
Heaven is capable of entertaining all the Son's of God, it is a [this (...)]
universal Receptacle for all Pilgrims and Strangers here on the Earth. Heb.
11.13.


5. No unclean thing shall enter Heaven: Nothing that defiles; no Dogs shall
tread on that golden Pavement, Rev. 21.27. Chap. 22.15.
without are dogs, as large as it is, wicked graceless Sinners shall not creep
or crowd into it; our Lord keeps the Keys of Paradise in his own Hands, he
cannot be guilty of an over sight, for his Eyes are like a flame of fire, Rev.
2.18.
none can give him the slip undiscrep^bly; he knows them that are his, and he
disowns others: For without holiness no Man shall see the Lord, Heb. 12.14.
Grace and Glory go hand in hand, unconverted Sinners can no sooner enter Heaven
(continuing so) then Devils or damned Souls: Persons must be gathered by
Conversion, or not gathered by Salvation.

6. Saints glorified, shall retain their Intellection and some kind of
Sensation, as they shall intuitively see God, know as they are known, Mat. 5.8.
1 Cor. 13 12.
discern spiritual Mysteries more clearly then ever: So they shall have some
kind of sense and feeling, from whence come Love, Joy, Delight; for the Soul
wants not the exercise of its essential Faculties, for want of bodily Organs:
These opperations of the Soul in Flesh, are but imperfect shadows of that
Intellection and volition above, and so of that excellent Sense and Affections
of Love and Joy, which we now cannot clearly conceive of here below: See this
fully in Mr. Baxter's Dying Thoughts, page 201.

7. The Saints in Heaven will know one another; as the Disciples knew Moses and
Elias, and those that never saw one another Faces in this World shall meet
together with great content; and this shall be no small part of their
Happiness, when they shall say, there stands holy Enoch, righteous Noah,
grieving Lot, believing Abraham, upright David, patient Job, penitent Peter,
zealous Paul the beloved, lovely Disciple John, victorious Champions, and my
glorious Companions for ever: And we together are perfected and glorified, Oh
happy day, blessed meeting!

8. The multitudes enjoying God in Heaven, will be no diminution of their Joy:
Those thousands of Eyes beholding the Sun, do not extenuate its Light: For the
Acts diminish not the Object, no more then the King is less for his Courtiers
beholding him: The King of Heaven can give content to all the Celestial
Inhabitants, Psalm. 16.11. Chap. 36.9.
all the Saints shall bath in this pleasant River, and drink abundantly of the
fountain of life, nor will the different Degrees of Glory beget want or envy in
such as have less, for every Vessel shall be as full as it can hold: The
Celestial Courtiers have all God, 1 Cor. 15.28.
shall be all in all; it is thought, that such as had more Grace, and had done
God more service here, shall shine brighter then others, from Dan. 12.3. 1 Cor.
15.41. But yet there shall be no Emulation, nay, they shall rather rejoice in
each others Graces and Glory.

9. That in Heaven there will be a mutual and reciprocal exchange of Gifts and
Graces: And this will be no small part of their Comfort; O what clasping of
Arms! What endearedness of Affection! What inlettings into each others Hearts!
As the Sun shines on the Stars, so the Stars shine on each other: God does
abundantly irradiate their Souls, and they comfort one another: Not but that
there is enough in God to delight them, but this is in some respect
accumulative: The Saints above will look on each others Grace as if it were
their own: Yea there will be a mutual Aptitude and Disposition to serve each
other, and contribute to their Felicity.

10. The sweet Harmony of Spirits will be inconceivable Melody in Heaven, far
beyond the Music of the Spears they talk of: Those blessed Inhabitants shall
be filled with the Spirit, Love, Joy, Gal. 5.22.
Peace, then they shall indeed speak among themselves, in Psalms and Hymns and
spiritual Songs, singing and making Melody in their Hearts to the Lord, Ephesians.
5.18, 19. Then they shall with one Mind and one Mouth glorify God: Romans 15.6.
Not one jarring String in the heavenly Consort: Their Hearts will be centred
on God, and their Lines straight with each other: O blessed day when there will
be no jars or wranglings, but Luther and Calvin will sweetly agree, when
Melancthon and Zuinglius will sweetly conspire to celebrate the Praises of our
common Lord: O sweet and blessed day.

CHAP. VIII. Reprehension and Conviction of Graceless and Gracious Souls.
2. ANother Use is of Conviction: 1. O such as are Graceless, 2. Of Godly
Persons.

1. Of unconverted graceless Persons.

1. Must there be a gathering together o^ Saints, and only Saints, what then
will becom^ of Wicked men? They are not to be gathered with Saints, they cared
not for their Company here, and they shall not have their Society in the other
World.

1. Wicked men shall be banished from among the Godly, this is no small
Punishment He shall set the sheep on the right hand, and the goats on the left,
Mat. 25.32, 33. He shall separate them one from another, as a shepherd divides
his sheep from the goats. In this Worl^ they were mingled together, in the same
Kingdom, City, House, Assembly, and none wa^ able to distinguish them; they
were taken t^ be as Devout as the best, and they took themselves to be as good
as any: But now the shall be detected, and the rottenness of the^ Hearts shall
be laid open, before themselves, ^ngels, and Men, and they shall be an
abhorring unto all flesh, so says the Evangelical Prophet, ^sal. 66.24. This
will be none of the least of Wicked men's Punishment to see those that ^hey had
scorned, slighted, and censured, as ^ot worthy Humane Society, to mount up, and
sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, ^n the Kingdom of Heaven; and the
Children of ^he Kingdom (these Church Members) to be ^ast out into utter
darkness, Mat. 8.11, 12. O ^ad parting, never to meet again! How will ^he
Wicked wish they had lived in Prisons, Poverty, and woeful straits in this
World, so ^hey might now go along with them into Glory. O that we had spent our
time in Prayer, Reading, Meditation, Conference, and Works of Mortification, as
these Holy Souls ^id, then had we been happy, as these are: But now we see our
loss: We thought your Life madness, but now we are convinced of ^ur Folly, and
the wisdom of your Choice.

2. These poor graceless Souls must be for ^ver banished from the Eternal God,
the Foun^ain of all Happiness: They bid God depart, Depart from us, for we
desire not the knowledge of ^hy ways, Job 21.14. If not in so many words, yet
interpretatively by their Works: And now God will say, Depart from me, ye
^ursed, Mat. 25.41. The dreadfullest Word ^n the Bible, the most astonishing
Sentence that can come out of the Mouth of God, or can be heard by the Ears of
Men. The enjoyment of God is the Saints Heaven, banishment from God is the
Wickeds Hell; yea, the very Hell of Hells; the only Venom, Sting and Poison of
that Infernal Lake. They the are not gathered to God, are separated from God;
and once banished, and for ever banished; they cannot be parted from his
Revenging Justice, but from his Comfortin^ Love: Who shall be punished with
everlasting destruction, from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of
his power, 2 Thessalonians. 1.9. The pai^ of loss is greater than the pain of sense: O^
dreadful Case! Now poor Sinners will be banished from the Beatifical Presence,
and shall never more see God or Christ to their Comfort. O wretched State!
Sinners shall the^ know what the loss of God means. They gathered themselves
together under Ordinance^ but desired not God's Presence in Ordinances more
know what Communion with God meant, but they shall know what Separation from
God now means: Where Love ended Wrath begins, Fury comes in the room o^ Mercy.
Now consider this, ye that forget God lest he tear you in pieces, and there be
none to deliver, Psalm. 50.22.

3. Wicked Men shall be bound up together in bundles, and cast into the Fire of
Hell So says the Text, Mat. 13.30. In the time of harvest, I will say to the
reapers, gather ye together, first, the Tares, and bind them in bundles to burn
them. And why in bundles? Will this be any ease to them in Torments? They are
wont to say, Here, Neighbors Fare is good Fare: But it will be otherwise
there, the sight of each other will increase their Torment, where they shall
reflect upon their Guilt together, how they tempted others, and were tempted by
others to sin; thou wast one Instrument to bring me into this Place of Torment:
O that I had never known thee! Now merry Companions will be torturing Company;
their sweet Meat must have sour Sauce. This, this is the dreadful consequence
of our frantic Frolicks. It is thought, that this was the reason why the Rich
Man was loath his five Brethren should come to him in Hell; Euke 16.28.
not for love to them (for there is no such Charity in Hell) but Self-love, lest
their presence should aggravate his Torments. Hence is the gnashing of teeth
also mentioned, Mat. 13.50.
for spleen and spite both against themselves, and against each other; as
Communion advances the Saints Glory above, so Company of old Sinners
aggravates the Wicked's misery in Hell.

4. It will greatly aggravate Wicked men's Torment, to consider, that this was
their own doing: Their destruction is of themselves; Hos. 13.9.
they can challenge none but themselves, though they had many Incentives and
Temptations: Neither the Devil nor Wicked men could ever pu^ them to Hell
against their wills: God says He wills not the death of a Sinner. Jesus Chri^
expressed his earnest desire of their Salvation by his Death, the Spirit came
with its lovin^ motions and impulses, Godly Ministers, Christian Friends prayed
for them, took pains wit^ them to save them; so that our Lord himself says,
Mat. 23.37. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often would I have gathered thy
Children together even as a Hen gathers her Chickens under he^ wings; and ye
would not? There was God's gathering time of Mercy, but that is past; now
there is a gathering time of Wrath When the Chaff must be burnt i^ unquenchable
fire. Mat. 3.12.
They might have been happy, but would no^ They observed lying vanities, Jonah
2.8.
an^ forsook their own mercies; now there is no remedy. They chose the thing
wherein he delighted not, and now he will chus^ their delusions, Isa. 66.3, 4.
Alas, poor Sinner choose the Devil's Drudgery here, and Go^ gives them up into
his hands, to be tormente^ for ever; and as Christ will gather up his Saint
whom he purchased, so the Devil will gathe^ up all his Slaves, not one shall
escape him the Wicked are gathered by Death to their Master, and to their
proper place as it is said of Judas, Acts 1.25.
That he wen^ to his own place, that is Hell; For the wicked shall be turned
into Hell, and all the Nations that forget God, Psalm. 9.17. O, what a vast
Assembly will that be! Millions, Millions of Souls descend down into that Place
of Torments. Wide is the gate, and broad is the way that leads to
destruction, and many there be that go in thereat, Mat. 7.13. O tremble, lest
you be found among this greater number of the Sons of men.

Remember, all Mankind have their Faces Hell-wards, when they are born; The
wicked are estranged from the womb, they go astray as soon as they be born,
speaking lies, Psalm. 58.3. There is none righteous, no, not one; Romans 3.10, 11,
12.
we are altogether become unprofitable, without a saving turn we are all
marching Hell-ward, and must be gathered together, and, like Faggots, piled up
in that Infernal Lake, but especially such as have improved the stock of
Original Corruption in a course of Profane Swearing, Rioting, Drunkenness,
mocking of Religion, ridiculing Preciseness, condemning the Righteous,
justifying the Wicked: How can such as these expect to be gathered with the
Saints in the other World, whom they cannot endure in this? Surely the Godly
and Wicked go contrary ways, when they go off the Stage of this World into an
Eternal state.

2. As Wicked, Graceless Persons state is sad and hopeless, so continuing, so
also professed Christians, yea, real Saints are in some things too saulty, and
blameworthy.

1. Shall there be a gathering together at last, then how unaccountable are
those Distances, Animosities, and Heart-burnings among Christians? There is
utterly a fault among us: How contrary is this to Christian Love, so often
recommended by Christ and his Apostles? Yea, our Lord has made it the
Characteristical Note of his Disciples, to love one another, John 13.35. It was
wont to be said of the Primitive Christians by Heathens, See how they love one
another. But alas, Brotherly Love does not continue: It has been declared, to
the scandal of our Noble Profession, That there are Contentions among us. 1
Cor. 1.11.
Further, it has been said, That where strictest Professors fall out, they are
most implacable; Drunkards will sooner be Friends than these Puritans: God
forbid it should be true; God forbid that there should be Debates, 2 Cor. 12.20.
envyings, wraths, strifes, back bitings, whisperings, tumults, swellings.
Alas, that such unbecoming Fruits of the Flesh should be found among us! There
has been too much of this Evil Spirit; O, let us take heed, lest if we bite
and devour one another, we be not consumed one by another, Gal. 5.15. These are
the Devil's Artillery, whereby he sights, and too often prevails to do
abundance of mischief, and hinder much good; For where envy and strife is,
there is confusion, James 3.16.
and every evil work. How can you think of the Day of meeting one another in
Heaven with such peevish Spirits? Will you perpetuate your Quarrels into
another World? Are you Children of Peace, that thus Quarrel? For shame lay
aside your Differences, or lay aside your Profession of this Gospel of Peace.

2. If the Saints be gathered at last, why do they not keep close together in
this World? What unaccountable Separations do men make from each other upon
small Occasions? This is a Duty practiced by all the Saints in all Ages, the
Primitive Christians continued steadfastly in the Apostles doctrine and
fellowship, Acts 2.42. As soon as Paul was converted, he assayed to join
himself to the Disciples, Acts 9.26. and 17.4.
and others consorted with Paul and Barnabas. Phil. 1.5.
The Philippians were in the fellowship of the Gospel from the first day of
their Conversion. Like will to like: It Is Natural for a Child of God to hold
close Communion with his Father's Children: How comes it to pass then, that
some that profess themselves Christians, keep at a distance? Alas, have you the
same Name, Nature, and Divine Image, and do you not care for their Company? How
will you like to live with them for ever in Heaven, that love not their Society
on Earth? How comes it to pass that you keep off? It Is possible some do it out
of modesty, they are not worthy to associate with them; these are but few:
Others out of Singularity, Retiredness, they can find none good enough to whom
they think fit to vouchsafe intimate Familiarity. Others have a pique against
such and such Christians, or against the whole Party, and most hold off from
supine Negligence, Carelessness, and Oscitancy; most men are unconcerned about
their Edification: How unwilling are some Christians to be drawn to Communion
of Saints? If it be an Article in their Creed, it is no part of their Practice,
as though they had never subscribed to it; yea, there are some, that were once
forward for this Work of Christian Communion, that are now fallen off, like
those Hebrews that believed, of whom the Apostle says, Not forsaking the
assembling of our selves together, as the manner of some is, Heb. 10.25. The
Donatists of old, and the Sectaries of late, have made dreadful Rents and
Schisms in the Church; the more Holy Christians are, the more Catholic Spirits
they have: They are most likely to be sensual, that needlessly separate
themselves, yea, not having the spirit, Jude 19. however they may boast
themselves to be more full of the Spirit than others they separate from. Well,
Sirs, consider what you do, how you prejudice your selves, weaken your
Brethrens Hands, sadden their Hearts, yea, you weaken the Interest of Religion
hereby: What, Friends, shall one Heaven hold you, and cannot one Church hold
you? Do you look for comfort at Christ's second Coming among his Saints, and
will you not keep by the footsteps of the flock? The Lord awaken you.

3. Some Christians make nothing of offendting the Saints of God, that they
should not offend; that is a dreadful word, Mat. 18.6. Whosoever shall offend one of
these little ones, which believe in me, it were better for him that a
millstone were hanged about his neck, and that he were drowned in the depth of
the Sea. I confess this is spoken of open and violent Persecutors, whom our
Lord will banish among the pushing Goats: But even Christians are too apt to
offend one another; sometimes by provoking words, sometimes by offensive
carriages, doing that which (however it seem indifferent to us) yet thereby a
Brother stumbleth, or is offended, or made weak, Romans 14.21. Unadvised walking
may hinder much good, occasion much evil, at least may make sad the hearts of
those whose hearts God would not have made sad: With what comfort or confidence
will you look in the Faces of those whom you have justly offended? An eminent
Divine says, Mr. Baxter in a Letter before Mr. Burgess's Book of Christian
Commemoration.
if it be my weakness, I have much ado to think but some shame with confusion
will accompany me, when I first meet any there, that I have been unkind to, or
wronged, or that will know my faults better than here they did, and that I
shall ask them forgiveness, which will be soon granted, being forgiven by
Christ. However matters will go then, it becomes all the Saints to be very
choice and chary of the Holiness and Comsort of their Fellow Members on Earth,
and to say, with Paul, 1 Cor. 8.13. Wherefore if meat make my brother to
offend, I will eat no flesh while the world stands, lest I make my brother to
offend. Happy are they that neither give Offense carelessly, nor take Offense
causelessly.

4. Yet still there is a great (if not greater) fault, of good People, and that
is, to be too familiar with Wicked Men, to comply too far with Sinners, to the
dishonor of God, scandal of Religion, and wronging of our own Consciences.
Paul writes, and writes again, 1 Cor. 5.9.11.
not to keep company with fornicators; the word is very emphatical, [(...)] not
to be mingled with them by intimate familiarity, as streams of Water mix
together; but Christians must be like Oil, that will not mix with Water;
especially scandalous Professors of the True Religion, if such be disorderly
Persons, Idle, Busybodies, disobedient to the Word; sound close-walking
Christians must note that man, and have no company with him, that he may be
ashamed, 2 Thessalonians. 3.11.14. Brand such an one as infamous, discover a
strangeness in your Carriage to him, [(...)] that he may turn into himself, and
consider what may be the cause in him of this your alienation from him: Such a
Recognition may become a means of his Repentance; whereas if you still smile
upon him, as if you saw nothing amiss in him, you do but harden him in sin: Yet
there is something worse in your sinful compliance, you contract Guilt to your
own Souls, and are in danger to be infected, and so partake of their Sins, Rev.
18.4.
and of their Plagues. How often does God call, Come out from among them, and
be ye separate, says the Lord -- What fellowship has righteousness with
unrighteousness? 2 Cor. 6.14.17.
Have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but reprove them
rather, Ephesians. 5.11. How often does David bid Wicked Men depart from him? And if
they will not be gone, he will flee from them as from a Pesthouse: Psalm. 26.4,
5. I have not sat with vain persons, neither will I go in with dissemblers. I
have hated the Congregation of evil doers, and will not sit with the wicked:
And then prays, ver. 9. Gather not my soul with sinners. Oh, Friends, tremble
to be found among Wicked Men in the Gathering-day.

CHAP. IX. Examination of our Souls, whether we shall be gathered with Saints.
3 ANother Use is of Trial, Whether we be the Persons that shall be gathered to
Christ with the rest of his Saints in that Solemn Day of his Appearing.

1. Consider, you may know whether you be of that number yea or no; assurance
is possible, attainable; God's Children have obtained it, 2 Cor. 5.1. For we
know that if our earthly house of this Tabernacle were dissolved, we have a
building of God, an house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens. We can
be well content to forego this tottering Cottage, because we are well assured
of a Celestial Palace; there we shall lodge with God, Christ, Angels, and
glorified Spirits for ever.

2. Nor is this Assurance only communicated by Divine Revelation, but may be
obtained in the diligent use of God's appointed means, hearing the Word,
Prayer, Meditation, exciting and exercising of Grace, holy Warfare, and Victory
over Temptations, Corruptions, walking close with God, particularly by a
Practical Syllogism, where the Word of God is the Major, Conscience the Minor,
the Spirit makes the Conclusion: Thus, such whose Eyes are opened that are
turned from darkness to light, from the power of Satan to God, shall have an
inheritance among them that are sanctified, Acts 26.18. Then Conscience brings
in the Minor, I have found my Heart and Life thus changed by Conversion; then
the holy Spirit brings in the Inference or Conclusion, therefore I do
groundedly hope, I shall obtain the Inheritance of Glory with the rest of the
Saints: This is called the witnessing of the Spirit with our Spirits that we
are the Children of God, Romans 8.16.

3. Therefore it is the Duty of all Christians to endeavor after it, we are
commanded to give diligence to make our calling and election sure, 2 Pet. 1.10.
We desire says the Apostle, that every one of you do show the same diligence
to the full assurance of hope to the End, Heb. 6.11. Such as look not after
Assurance conscientiously, render their spiritual Estate suspicious: For it is
the Nature of Grace to put the Possessour forwards to Perfection: The sincere
Christian will be perfecting holiness in the fear of God, 2 Cor. 7.1.
and press forward to enjoy more of God's Presence: Let us (says the Apostle)
draw near with a true heart in full assurance of faith, Heb. 19.22.

4. And oh the advantage and benefit that God's Children have by a
well-grounded Assurance of their Salvation, it will raise your Hearts in praise
of God, and transport your Spirits in love to and delight in him: This drops
sweetness into all worldly Enjoyments; it chears up the Heart in Sufferings,
Heb. 10.34. fortifies the Soul against Temptations; excites the Christian to
all Acts of new Obedience; gives Contentment in every Condition: This
strengthens against fears of Death, and is a certain preludium and forerunner
of Heaven: O happy Soul that can say God is my Father, Saints my elder
Brothers, and I shall meet them all in Glory, and sing praises with them to God
and the Lamb for evermore.

Quest. But how shall a Man know that he shall be one of those that shall be
gathered together to Christ, in that Solemn day?

Answ. I desire you will faithfully Answer these Seven Questions.

1. Have you been gathered to Christ by converting Grace? To him (i. e. to
Shiloh) shall the gathering of the People be, Genesis 49.10. Has the Spirit of
God in the Word convinced you of your distance from God, prevailed with you to
enter into Solemn covenant with him? Alas, by nature we are as Sheep going
astray, Psalm. 119.176.
Prodigals in a far Country, have neither skill nor will to return to God, but
Christ the good Shephard calls his own Sheep by name, and leads them out,
they know his voice and follow him, John 10.34. Formerly (says the returning
Sinner) I heard but the Voice of Man, now methinks I hear the Voice of God,
rending my Heart, discovering those Secret-lusts, that no mortal can know of,
the very Secrets of my Heart are made manifest; I must fall down on my face and
worship God and must report that God is there (in such an Ordinance) of a
truth, 1 Cor. 14.24, 25. What concussions and shakings of Soul have you found
to unsettle you from your carnal Peace and Security? Has the Lord hewed you by
his Prophets, Hos. 6.5.
and slain you with the words of his mouth? What convictions of your lost
Condition? Hos. 11.10, 11.
What tremblings after the Lord? When he roareth as a Lion? Are you of those
that tremble at the Word of the Lord? Isa. 66.5.
Yet it does not afright you from him, but to him: I can be safe no where but
under the shadow of his Wings: Come let us join our selves to the Lord in a
perpetual Covenant that shall not be forgotten, Jer. 50.5. I will tie this
slippery Heart to the Lord, with the strongest and streightest Bonds: I will
not only say it with my Mouth, but subscribe it with my Hand, Isa. 44.5.
yea and swear my self to be the Lords, and his only: Some indeed Swear by the
Name of the Lord, Isa. 45.23. chapter 48. 1. chapter 49. 22.
but not in truth, nor in righteousness, but the sincere Christian is most
afraid of Hypocrisy, longs after sincerity, approves his Heart to God, resolves
to resort to his Standard, fight his Battles, and be on his Side for ever: Let
Flesh and Blood and all the Devils in Hell say what they can to the contrary,
is this your Peremptory resolution?

2. Have you separated from Sinners, 2 Cor. 6.17. Wherefore come out from among
them and be ye separate says the Lord, and touch not the unclean thing, and I
will receive you: For, ver. 14. 15.
what communion has light with darkness? As Man cannot carry their vain
Companions to Heaven, so not into the Church State: No unclean thing or person
can enter the Gates of this holy City: Rev. 21.27.
For without are Dogs: chapter 22. 15.
Saints may not deny civil Converse with the worst of Men in Neighborhood or
near Relation, 1 Cor. 5.10. But in two respects the Apostle denies Society with
gross Sinners, 1st. Not too much or needless Familiarity with them; not to be
mingled with them, as Water and Oil will not mix, Christians must not, will not
be Hail-fellow with dissolute Persons: 2dly. Especially with such as are
pretended Christians, and belly their Profession by scandalous Actions; these of
all others we must keep at a distance from, 2 These. 3.14.
as a piece of their Punishment to bring them to Shame and so to Repentance: If
you Act as Christians, you will let him see a strangeness in you toward him,
ut quaeras ubi. So possit prae pudore occultare, that he may turn into himself
by Self-reflection, recognize his Disorders, or seek where to hide himself: But
that is not all, for a godly Person has a kind of antipathy against wilful
Sinners, and avoids them as afraid of being infected by them, as Joseph was shy
of his Mistress: And as Solomon advises, Prove. 58.9. By familiar Converse you
may encourage them in Sin, and prejudice your Selves: Hence all Pious Persons
have been afraid to associate with Sinners, so David, Psalm. 26.4. I have not
sat with vain Persons, neither will I go in with dissemblers: For, in their
Company I shall get either Guilt or Grief; if I Act as they, I shall be guilty;
if not, I shall be grieved: The best is, to meddle as little as I can with
them, for God's Honor, and my own Peace: I will resolve with Old Jacob, Genesis
49.6. O my Soul come not into their Secret: I dare not touch the Rope, least I
hear the Bell: 1 These. 5.22. Jude 23.
I will abstain from the appearance of evil; and hate the Garment spotted by
the flesh.

3. Have you associated your Selves to them that fear God? Godly Persons were
holy David's intimate Friends, Psalm 16.3. the Saints were in his Account the
excellent in the Earth, in whom is all my delight: Companion am I to all them
that fear thee: Psalm. 119.63.
I have wise Senators, valiant Soldiers, but what are these to me, if they be
not truly Religious, one Jonathan is better then many Joabs, one Hushai better
then a thousand Achitophels; I love them that fear God with a peculiar Love,
yea though they should be severe upon me if I offend, I will not only patiently
bear it, but thankfully own them as my Benefactors: Let the righteous smite me,
Psalm. 141.5. Prove. 27.6.
it shall be a kindness: Faithful are the wounds of a friend: I will love
Nathan the better whilst I live, for his Faithfulness: [Sit anima mea piis]
let my Soul be united to Saints: I will live with them on Earth with whom I
would sing Praises in Heaven: Communion of Saints, is not only an Article in my
Creed, but a main Point of Practice, yet next to Communion with God my highest
Privilege: These, these will I converse familiarly with; I will confer with
them about the things of God, pray and praise God with them, sit down with
these at the holy Supper, and walk hand in hand with them in my journey
Heaven-wards: There is an holy Union of all Saints, which yet is not natural,
or corporal, political nor yet personal, but yet it is Real, and this Union is
either Mystical, as Members of the same mystical Body, Ephesians. 5.30. or
Ecclesiastical: These Converts are said to be added to the Church, and have
mutual external Fellowship, Acts 2.41.42. Thus Paul when converted assayed to
join himself to the Disciples, Acts 9.26. Acts 17.4.
And others consorted with Paul and Silas, and indeed it is natural for a Child
of God to desire, yea and delight in the Society of the Saints; thence the
Apostle mentions the Philippians fellowship in the gospel, Phil. 1.5.
from the first day until now mark it, it was early and permanent: A good Man
knows not how to go to Heaven alone: They must go forth by the footsteps of
the flock, Song. 1.8, 6.
and are like a company of horses in Pharaohs chariot: So amiable, profitable
and pleasant is Christian Society.

4. Do you lay to Heart the scatterings of Christians? Zeph. 3.18. I will
gather them that are sorrowful for the solemn Assembly who are of thee, to whom
the reproach of it was a burden: This scattering is either by Persecution or
Dissension, 1st. If Enemies prevail and break up the Saints solemn meetings,
God's poor Children lay it deeply to Heart; hence such lamentable complaints
and expostulations of God's People, Psalm. 143.4. Lift up thy feet unto the
perpetual desolations even all that the enemy has done wickedly in the
sanctuary, Isa. 64.9. -- 12. This was one Ingredient of Judah's Lamentation,
that the ways of Zion mourn, and God's People did mourn with her, Lam. 1.4. --
7. Such sympathy speaks kindly bowels, and moves God's Heart, and possibly in
this World, they may be gathered however in the other, Isa 66.10. Rejoice ye
with Jerusalem and be glad with her, all ye that love her, rejoice for joy with
her all ye that mourn for her: Sions Friends shall partake of Sions Comforts:
2dly. Such as grieve for the Divisions of the Church within her self, Judge.
5.15, 16. For the divisions of Reuben, there were great thoughts of heart,
great searchings of heart: O the sad Contentions and Animosities that have
risen up in the Church in all Ages, and the pious and peaceable Members thereof
have been grievously afflicted therewith! Sometimes upon Personal, sometimes
Doctrinal differencess have rent the Bowels thereof, and rent the Hearts of
publick-uniting Spirits, and they have almost despaired of seeing an End of
them in this World, till they arrive in the place where Luther and Calvin are
made perfect Friends, and all the Saints shall be of one Mind; Mourners for
these Breaches shall be perfectly cured and comforted, Isa. 51.11. Therefore
the redeemed of the Lord shall return and come with singing unto Zion, and
everlasting joy shall be upon their head, they shall obtain gladness and joy,
and sorrow and mourning shall flee away.

5. Do you follow the Army of Martyrs in bearing your Cross, and preparedness
to suffer for Christ? [hac fitur ad astra] This way have all the Saints gone to
Heaven, this is the established, enacted Law of Heaven: If any man will come
after me let him deny himself, and take up his cross and follow me, Mat. 16.24.
Acts 14.22.
We must through much tribulation enter into the kingdom of God: Heaven is
taken by Storm, and the gracious Soul is resolved to go through Storms: For
Persecution and [Evangelii genius] the common constant Lot of all the Saints: 2 Timothy 3.12.
All that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution: Yea, but
the Christian is not appaled with nor ashamed of the Cross of Christ; nay, he
takes pleasure in infirmities, in reproaches, in necessities, in persecutions,
in distresses for Christ's sake, 2 Cor. 12.10. Nay, he glories in the Cross,
and in the marks of the Lord Jesus, Gal. 6.14.17.
as much as an Old Soldier in his Wounds received in the Wars: As the poor
Woman in the Book of Martyrs thought it a piece of Honor and Happiness, that
her Foot was put in the same Hole of the Stocks wherein Mr. Philpot's had been
before. So the Christian rejoices to follow that blessed Army of Martyrs to
Heaven, not merely by an Apish Imitation from a good Conceit they have of them,
2 Cor. 4.13.
but having the same spirit of Faith, they make their Profession, and endure
Opposition; whatever it cost, onwards he will, though he die in the Conflict;
he sees a Crown attending him, and so gathers strength by every bout, yea, by
every foil, as it was said of Rome, [Roma cladibus animosior,] that every
Battle, yea, every slaughter of Men made her more courageous. So it is with the
conflicting Soul, none of these things move him, Acts 20.24.
that startle others, but animate him with more Courage in his Christian
Warfare and Voyage through this boisterous Sea to the Haven of Rest: Is it thus
with you?

6. Do you daily make Proficiency in Grace? Are you marching on in your
Christian course, adding daily some Cubits to your Spiritual stature? There Is
no standing still in Heaven's Road, [non progredi est regredi,] not to go
forward, is to go backward. Paul says, I press toward the mark for the Prize
of the high Calling of God in Christ Jesus, Phil. 3.14. Nothing would serve him
on this side Perfection: Ver. 11.
He longs after that pitch of Grace he shall attain to in the Resurrection. The
sincere Christian grows brighter and better, as the shining Light, Prove. 4.18.
that shines more and more unto the perfect day. Where there is Truth, there
will be Growth. Grace is like a Grain of Mustard Seed; the Christian never
thinks he has grown enough, he is still perfecting Holiness in the fear of
God, 2 Cor. 7.1.
getting Ground daily of the Body of Death. This is their Duty, this is their
Property, this is what the Apostle earnestly prays for, 1 Thessalonians. 3.12, 13. And
the Lord make you to increase and abound in love one toward another, and
toward all men, etc. I would, says the Saint, be holier than the holiest
Saint on Earth, Ephesians 3.8.
but judge my self lesser than the least of all Saints. O that I were perfectly
free from Sin! O that my Blossoms of Grace were ripe Fruit! O that I could
increase with the increase of God! Col. 2.19. 2 Thessalonians. 1.13.
Let my Faith grow exceedingly to full assurance; let my Love grow to delight
in God, my Repentance be more Evangelical, my Hope more fixed, my Fear more
filial, my Obedience more universal, and all my Graces more lively, and my
whole Man more conformable to Christ, the perfect Pattern of Holiness. Oh that
I could go from strength to strength, Psalm. 84.7.
till in Zion I appear before God.

7. What blessed Instinct inclines you Heaven-wards? Heavy things move
downwards, light things upwards; every thing moves toward its Center. The
Church is compared to pillars of Smoke, Cant. 3.6.
still mounting toward its proper Element. John 3.3.
So the Christian is [(...)] born from above, and naturally inclines to things
above. Grace resembles God, it widens the Soul's Faculties, and makes it
altogether unsatisfied with Sublunaries: Even an Heathen Seneca could say,
[major sum and ad majora natus,] I am born to higher things than to these
Trifles; my thoughts are carried quite above visible Objects, Mortal things
cannot fill an Immortal Soul, especially touched with a Coal from the Altar,
and raises sparks upwards to the Fountain of Light and Love. Our Lord gives
this as a certain [(...), or] token of a Soul that is either for this or for
another World: Mat. 6.21. Where your treasure is, there will your heart be
also. The workings of the Heart are an infallible demonstration of a
Christian's state. Is the rational, habitual motion, and tendency of your
Hearts God-wards, Heaven-wards? Have you a strong, impetuous motion and bent of
Soul to things above? Are you best pleased when your Hearts are in a frame for
God? Do you take it ill, and resent that with some regret and indignation that
obstructs your Soul's motion? Have you a strong impulse Heaven-wards, by the
restless motion of Desire, and by the acquiescing affection of Delight? Never
so well as when you are conversant about Heavenly Objects. It Is also the
blessed Apostle's Character of a Saint, Col. 3.7. If you then be risen with
Christ, seek those things which are above. There, there is a Christian's Life,
his Love, and Delight; thither he is mounting as on Eagles Wings, Isaiah 40.
and is never satisfied till he be swallowed up in the Divine Embraces: He is
glad of Communion of Saints below, more glad of Communion with God in his
Ordinances, but still most restless till he be wrapped up in the full Enjoyment
of God above. For our Lord has said in, ^uke ^7 37. Wheresoever the body is,
thither will the Eagles be gathered together. The Saints are united to Christ
by Faith, as Members to the Head, and have an innate Propensity to him, and
cannot be satisfied without a full Enjoyment of him, and that will never be,
till the Soul get above this drossy, reeling Earth into the Regions above. Is
this your frame? Are these your aims? Are your motions Heaven-wards, though,
alas, too often interrupted, to the grief of your hearts? Your Souls are now
espoused to Christ your Husband, and you earnestly long for the complete
Nuptials, 2 Cor. 11.2.
That you may be presented to your Heavenly Husband as chaste Virgins.

CHAP. X. A Persuasion to all to seek after this blessed Gathering at last.
4. USE of Exhortation: 1. To Sinners. 2. To Saints.

1. To Sinners: A word or two to those Souls that are yet in the gall of
bitterness, Acts 8.23. 2 Timothy 2.26.
and bonds of iniquity; tied with Chains to the Prince of Darkness, led captive
by him at his pleasure. Suffer your selves to be gathered unto Christ; what
would poor Ministers give that they might prevail with you? How does our Lord
spread his Arms to embrace you? After all your wanderings, and Extravagancies,
the Father of the Prodigal would run toward the returning Prodigal, fall on
your Neck, kiss you, and make you kindly welcome; and Godly Christians would not
envy your Entertainment, but delight in your Society, as not diminishing but
increasing their Felicity. Luke 15.7.10.
There is joy in Heaven over one sinner that repents, says our Lord; yea,
there is joy in the presence of the Angels of God over one sinner that
repents. Glad are the Saints of such Consorts, glad are the Holy Angels of
such Babes to attend upon; glad would poor Ministers be if your Souls were
savingly converted and gathered to Christ: But if you still stand out, you have
neither part nor lot in this matter, but must be Exiles, banished and punished
with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and the glory of
his power, 2 Thessalonians. 1.7, 8, 9. As meanly as you think of God's Children now, it
will be a doleful parting from them in the great Day: Now be wise for your
precious Souls.

1. Yet there is a possibility that you may be converted and saved; Now is the
accepted time, 2 Cor. 6.2.
now is the day of Salvation; to Morrow it may be past, and never return again.
You are yet alive, many are past hope, past help, thousands are dead and damned
since you deserved to be in Hell, you are yet Monuments of Mercy.

2. The Spirit is yet striving with you, poor Ministers are studying for you,
pouring out their Souls to God for you, longing after you, crying out, Why will
you die? Why will you refuse this blessed Call of God? Be it known to you, God
will not always be affronted, Genesis 6.3.
His spirit shall not always strive.

3. If ever your Souls be converted and saved, your selves must be Instruments
as well as God is the Efficient cause thereof; for God works Morally, so as to
preserve Men's nature and the principles thereof; if ever you repent the Work
is yours, though the power to work is from God, Baxter's Myth. Theol. Part
III. page 46.
Phil. 2.12, 13. [omne opus humanum est virium nostrarum opus and vires nullae
sunt nobis nisi a deo libere donatae] says a great Divine: The Duty is our's,
the Grace is his: God is the efficient, Man the Agent.

4. Your work is then to fall down on your Knees, and beg of God a Spirit
suited to the Grace of God, and fitted for this day of gathering; Lord, I am
now going to hear thy Word, oh come with power from on high, Acts 16.14.
open my Heart as thou did the Heart of Lydia: Melt my Heart like wax, then
set thy stamp upon me: 2 Cor. 10.5.
Cast down my vain imaginations -- and bring into captivity every thought to
the obedience of Christ: Square my Soul to be a Temple of the holy Ghost: Put
spiritual Life into my Soul, 1 Pet. 2.5.
and let me be one of those lively Stones, built up a spiritual House with the
rest of thy Saints: Song 5.4.
Put thy Hand in by the hole of the door of my heart, and make my bowels move
toward thee: Let the power of thy Grace be such an hidden, prevailing,
uncontrollable Efficacy as may win my Soul to thee: All I can do is nothing
unless the Spirit prevail: If thou will work who can let it? If thou work not,
all I do is in vain O Lord let me not perish with the rest of the Infidel
World, gather not my soul with sinners, Psalm. 26.9, 12.
nor my life with bloody men, but in the midst of thy congregation let me bless
the Lord.

2. But the parties I have to deal with, more directly are Christians, real
Saints, who are gathered to Christ, and hope to be gathered to him at last with
the rest of God's People; such as these I will give these few Instructions to,
and all Professors:

1. Be Sincere: Be really what you seem to be by Profession: It will be a
dreadful disappointment to pass for Saints, and be found among them, and not be
of them; for its said, Romans 9.6. They are not all Israel, which are of Israel,
i. e. they are not of the same Spirit that are of the stock of Israel, some
Goats may be found among the Sheep till the separating day: Some may have a
name to live and be dead: All Is not Gold that glisters, Rev. 3.1.
shining Lamps, and Oil in the Vessels, are different things: It will be a
dreadful thing when the Master of the Feast comes to view his Guests, and finds
one not having on a wedding Garment, and thus Expostulates with him, Friend,
how came thou in hither not having a wedding garment! Alas he was speechless
and cast into utter darkness: Oh what weeping and gnashing of teeth! Mat.
22.11, 12, 13. O take heed of a show and semblance of Religion: Tremble least
when you are weighed you be found wanting, least your Works be not perfect
before God, Rev. 3.2.
[(...)] filled up with the necessary Essentials that constitute a Christian.
Sirs, a day is coming when your inside will be turned out, to the open view of
all: When God will bring to light the hidden things of darkness and make
manifest the councels of the heart, 1 Cor. 4.5. See then that your Hearts be
sound in God's Statutes that you may not be ashamed: Psalm. 119.80.
Be sincere and then you will be without offense till the day of Christ: Phil.
1.10.
Be upright in Heart and downright in Life: Keep Conscience void of Offense:
Walk with God, and you shall rest with God.

2. Gather your selves together in solemn Exercises of Religion: Especially in
cases of public Calamity and common Danger, so God calls to Israel, Zeph. 2.1,
2. Gather your selves together, yea gather your selves together, O nation not
desired, before the decree bring forth: Be unanimous and harmonious in Fasting
and Praying: How often does God call his People of Old, Joel. 1.14. chapter 2.16.
to sanctify a fast, call a solemn Assembly, gather the Elders, -- there is
great reason for it, all have sinned, all must be humbled, all are concerned:
Persons may be helpful one to another, a threefold cord is not easily broken:
Eccl. 4.9, -- 12.
God sometimes expects unanimous Votes, which make a great sound in his Ears:
Let Christians do as the Children of Israel and Judah, go together to God
weeping and seeking the Lord their God, covenanting with God, as in Jer. 50. 4,
5. Yea in ordinary Duties of Prayer, Conference, Reading; let them strengthen
one another Hands in God: Provoke each other to love and to good works: Heb.
10.24.
Sing God's praises together: Oh what an Emblem of Heaven is this Communion of
Saints! Many live sticks make a great blaze: Grapes put together ripen one
another: Is Communion of Saints good in Heaven, and is it not good here? Are
not some Christians ignorant and want informing? Are not some dead and want
quickening? Hard and want softening? Wandering and want reducing? Are not some
staggering and want settling? Are not some weak, and should not we lift up the
hands that hang down, and the feeble knees? Heb. 12.12.
Get together here as you hope to come together hereafter.

3. Agree lovingly: Let not Christians fall out by the way, that hope to meet
in the End: Away with discords and divisions, if any occasions of Difference
fall out (as its likely there will) rest not till you seek and obtain
Reconciliation: If thou have any thing against thy Brother, be thou faithful in
admonishing if it be his Fault, to bring him to Repentance, keep not Malice
burning in thy Heart; avenge not your selves, express brotherly kindness to
him: Be not overcome of evil, but overcome evil with good, study Romans 12.18, --
21. If thou remember that thy brother has ought against thee leave thy gift
before the altar, and go thy way, first be reconciled to thy brother, and then
come and offer thy gift, Mat. 5.23, 24. God will rather tarry for his due then
thou should neglect thy Duty; if thou be conscious to thy self that he has
just reason to be offended with thee, humble thy self, confess thy Fault to God
and Him; if thou be conscious that thou have done him wrong, go to him and know
the reason of his Strangeness to thee, and endeavor to pacify him, but do not
fall out with any Brother, but live in peace, that the God of love and peace
may be with you: 2 Cor. 13.11.
Oh take heed of Quarrels and Animosities; study the Wisdom which is from
above, that is first pure, James 3.17.
then peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated; you must agree in the End, now
lovingly Agree, for shame of the World, for the credit of Religion, for your
own Comfort live peaceably; cut not asunder the Veins and Sinews of the
Mystical Body of Christ, study 1 Cor. 1.10. Phil. 2.1, 2.

4. Travel over Sinners for their Conversion: Do your utmost, endeavor to
bring in Souls to God, that there may be more at that great Day to be gathered
together to Christ: This is your present Duty, this will be your future
Comfort: This is Ministers proper Work, and every Christians Concern: I have
heard of a private Christian that used to follow Persons to their Shops, Plows,
and discoursed with them about Soul-affairs, and thereby was an instrument to
convert forty Souls to Christ: O what an honor would this be, doubtless
private Christians if Wise, Serious, and Zealous, might do much good this way,
and yet keep their Places, Jude 22.23. Of some have compassion, making a
difference, others save with fear, putting them out of the fire: Alas Sirs, how
can you find in your Hearts to see Relation or any miserable Sinner dropping
into the Fire of Hell, and not speak one Word to stop them? O dreadful cruelty!
Are you not some way accessory to that Man's death that is a going to cut his
own Throat, and you neglect to lay hands on him? Consider this, and be not
Merciless to Souls: Advise, admonish, rebuke, entreat them for Christ's sake,
for their Souls sake to pity themselves, and not leap into the Pit of
Destruction; who knows what good you may do, if you be but instrumental to
convert one poor Sinner from the error of his way, you save a soul from death,
and shall hide a multitude of sins, Jam. 5.20. And oh what joy on both sides
will there be at your next meeting before the Throne!

5. Moderately lament and profitably improve dead Christian Friends: They are
gathered to Christ and the rest of their Brethren: They are safely laid up out
of danger, they would be loath to be back again in this sinful sorrowful World:
You may lawfully lament your loss, but envy not your Friends gain: Sorrow not
even as others which have no hope, 1 These. 4.13. As if they were lost, or as if
you should never meet again, for the dead in Christ and survivers shall be ever
with the Lord, 15, 17. it is but a short absence, there shall be a joyful
meeting: A little recess, shall be attended with an everlasting converse: David
would not mourn for his dead Child, for says he, I shall go to him but he
shall not return to me, 2 Samuel 12.23. chapter 18.33.
but he lamented sore for Absolon whom he was never to see again with comfort:
Those that die in the Lord are not lost but laid up: Their Bodies sleep in
Jesus, and, their Souls rest in the bosom of their dear Lord: They are with him
in Paradise and say, Luke 23.28, 43.
weep not for us but weep for your selves: Imitate our Example, worship the
same God as we do, live at the rate of Heaven, let your Affections be with
ours, hold Communion with us: This I have treated of in my Book of Heavenly
Converse.

6. Make ready to follow these crowned Saints: They are got above, we are
below, they pray for the filling up of their Number, let us pray that we may be
made meet to be partakers of the inheritances of the Saints in light, Col.
1.12. The Language of Jesus Christ (and all the Saints) is, be ye therefore
ready also: Luke 12.40.
Be dressing your selves for that Marriage-day: Blessed are they that are
called to the marriage supper of the Lamb, and have put on their fine linen,
clean and white, which is the righteousness of Saints, Rev. 19. 7, 8, 9.
[(...)] Righteousnesses both inherent and imputed: Both are necessary for their
several Ends and Uses: Whether this refer to the Day of Antichrist's fall or at
the Resurrection, its true in both: There Is great and good things which God
has prepared for them that love him, 1 Cor. 2.9.
freedom from Sin, Sorrows, perfection of Peace and Joy, immediate Communion
with God, fullness of Grace and eternal Happiness: Wherefore, beloved seeing
that you look for such things, be diligent that ye may be found of him in peace
without spot and blameless, 2 Pet. 3.14. Watching, warring, wrestling, working,
well-doing, waiting till your change come, with your Loins girt, your Lamps
light, Luke 12.35. v. 36.
burning and shining with Splendor, and you your selves like unto men that
wait for your Lord.

7. Be longing for that blessed Day, when your Souls shall be gathered among
them, with our blessed Lord; Paul says, he desired to depart and be with
Christ, Phil. 1.23.
which is far better: Its good to be with Saints here, but its far better,
infinitely better to be with them in Heaven, where the King makes the Court,
and the Courtiers are all crowned Kings: Is there not great reason the Saints
should cry out with Monica, Austin's Mother [quid hic facio?] What do I here?
Or with Calvin [usque quo Domine?] How long Lord? Oh when shall my poor
imprisoned Soul be set at liberty from this body of clay and this body of
death? When shall I mount up above the Stars, into those Celestial Regions? Oh
the groanings of my Soul under this body of death and distance from God: Yea I
groan earnestly desiring to be clothed upon with an house which is from heaven:
2 Cor. 5.1, 2, 3.
When will my dear Lord break down these clay-walls, and break this cage and
let this Soul fly up into the Heavens, where it shall be perfected? How long
shall I dwell in Meshech, and sojourn in the tents of Kedar: Psalm 120.5.
I am weary of Sin, and distance from my dear Lord, most of my godly Friends
are gone, when shall I follow after? Why is his chariot so long in coming, why
tarry the wheels of his Chariots: Jude 5.18.
Make have my beloved and be thou like to a roe or to a young heart upon the
mountains of spices: Romans 6.27.
Why does my Soul thus linger and lagg behind my old Companions? Such and such
are gone with whom I took sweet council in familiar Conference about the things
of God, and our heavenly Country; many with whom I have prayed and praised God,
with whom I have sitten down at the Lord's Table; now they are drinking this
Wine new in my Father's Kingdom, and why am I left thus far behind, worshipping
afar off? Lord come thou down to me or take me up to thee, reach out thy hand
pluck me out of this low Dungeon, and set me where thou have promised, Mat.
19.25.
such as have followed thee in the Regeneration, upon Thrones, yea thou have
promised. that such as overcome shall sit with thee in thy throne: Rev. 3.21.
The preferment is too high for such a worthless worm, such a dirty villain as
I am, but thy promise is sure to be performed: I depend upon it, I long for
such a day; some, yea thousands have taken possession; I am one of thy redeemed
ones, thou have given me the earnest of thy Spirit, and some foretasts and
perelibations of Glory: Oh for a full harvest! I reach out my arms toward
thee, and hope at last to enjoy thee the spirit and the bride say come, and let
him that hears say come, Rev. 22.17, 20.
he which testifies these things says surely I come quickly, my soul eccho's
Amen, even so come Lord Jesus.

CHAP. XI. Encouragement to God's Children from the Saints gathering together
in sundry Cases.
5. THE last use is of Consolation, or Encouragement to the People of God, that
there shall be such a blessed gathering together.

1. That the Saints of God that have lived in all Ages, shall then meet and
know and enjoy each other with mutual Content. It Is worth observing, that Plato
brings in Socrate's comforting himself with the hopes that upon his Removal
hence, he should be with Orpheus and Musaeu's, with Hesiod and Homer: Yea, he
should greatly be pleased with the Society of Palamedes and Ajax: But oh how
much more content shall translated Saints take in the Society of those
Celestial Inhabitants, of whom they have so often read, and heard of with
delight, when they shall say, there stands holy Enoch that walked with God, and
was translated Body and Soul to Heaven: There stands Noah that just and perfect
Man, the Father and Founder of a New World: There stands Abraham the Father of
the Faithful, and Friend of God: There stands just Lot, wrestling Jacob: The
beloved Joseph more glorious now then in Pharaoh's Court: There stands meek
Moses the Jews Lawgiver, once King in Jeshurun, that conversed with God face to
face: There stands Aaron the Saint of God far more glorious now then in his
priestly Garments in the Holy of Holies: There appears holy Lot, patient Job,
zealous Josiah, David the Man after God's own Heart: Behold a troop comes up of
Old and New Testament Saints, all the Prophets, Apostles, Ministers, Martyrs,
Confessors, and Saints in all Ages; which will represent a splendid show, next
to the infinite God, and our glorious Redeemer: Romam in flore Paulum in ore
Christum in corpore.
If Augustine judged it a brave sight, and worth wishing for to see Rome
Flourishing, hear Paul Preaching, and behold Christ in the Flesh, much more
will it be a ravishing sight to behold our glorified Redeemer surrounded with
myriads of blessed Souls: This will be a delectable sight.

2. Saints that have enjoyed sweet Communion together in this World, shall
enjoy sweeter and perpetual Communion above; they that have kept day's of
Fasting and Prayer, day's of Thanksgiving and Conference, that have sitten
under the same Preaching, have sung Psalms together, have sat down together at
the holy Supper, and feasted upon the Fruits of Christ's meritorious Sacrifice,
shall now drink this Wine new with him, in his Fathers Kingdom: Oh what
communication of Experiences, of what they met with in their Passage through
this Wilderness into their Celestial Canaan: How will they echo to each other
and say, We sat down under his shadow with great delight, Song 2.3.
and his fruit was sweet to my taste: It was sweet then, it is sweeter now: O
the peculiar Acts of distinguishing Grace! Why did God choose us rather then
others to be Objects of this transcendent Love! We were fed with Manna in the
Wilderness, now we are come into the Land of Promise, we have royal dainties,
and drink abundantly of these Rivers of Pleasures; and bath our Souls in this
boundless Sea of satisfying Delights; then they will sing with a louder Echo
then ever, Come, and hear all ye that fear God, and I will declare what he has
done for my Soul: Psalm 66.16.
I was with my dear Lord in such a corner, now I declare his Goodness in the
height of Zion.

3. Saints that parted sorrowfully with their Relations by Death, now meet them
again to part no more. Death drew a Cloud over our Natural and Christian
Friends: They disappeared, and we saw them again no more; but now we are met
again in a better place than in our Houses, or Temples made with hands. We once
took mutual content in each other, but that was but a shadow, a saint
resemblance of that we now enjoy; the Husband and Wife were heirs together of
the grace of life, 1 Pet. 3.7.
now they are Possessors together of the fullness of that Grace in Glory. We
prayed, wept, discoursed together: We loved each other in the Flesh, but now
our spark is become a flame; we love one another at another rate. The Godly
Child will say, This is my tenderhearted Mother, my prudent, pious Father,
that shed many a Tear for me. The Parent shall say, This my Child cost me many
times a sad heart, many a bitter groan, he is the Son of my Vows; then the
Child of my Hopes, now the Child of my Joys; his miscarriages cost me dear, his
happiness raises my Spirits; he caused me to make many an Errand to the Throne
of Grace, he now raises my Spirit into an Ecstasy of Joy: My Prayers are fully
heard, my Joy is fulfilled in the Enjoyment of God with my dear Relations.

4. Souls fully refined from the dregs of Passion and Corruption, shall then
without such allays enjoy each other: Alas, we cannot discourse together here,
but some piece of Vanity interposeth it self: Our discourses are often
impertinent, sometimes unsavory, sometimes giving and often taking offense:
Alas, what discords, distances, dissentions are there among Christians: Even
Paul and Barnabas may part in a pet: Alas, what Animosities and Heart-burnings
are to be found here in this lower World even among the Saints! That we may
sadly sigh and say [tant aene animis coelestibus irae] how comes it to pass
that such hellish sulphurous Flames should rise out of heavenly Hearts! But now
those Flames are quenched, now they all unite in an harmonious Melody, singing
the Song of Moses, and of the Lamb, now they are perfect, of good comfort, of
one mind, 2 Cor. 13.11.
they live in peace, and the God of love and peace is with them, and they are
with God. They shall never quarrel more. O the delectable Melody of this
Palm-bearing Company! Far beyond the Music of the Spears: Not one jarring
string in all that blessed Consort: They have left behind them all their
cudgils at the entrance of this Temple of Peace: Their Hearts are centred in
God, and their Loins are straight with each other: Luther and Calvin are there
perfectly agreed, never to contend more.

5. Saints shall be perfectly drained from the Converse with vile Persons in
this dirty World! Here the godly and wicked are mixed: It is impossible to
forbear some civil Converse with carnal Neighbors, for then must we needs go
out of the world: 1 Cor. 5.10.
Even notorious Blasphemers, Idolaters, Covetous, that ^et and vex the Hearts
of the godly: But in Heaven there is none such: No unclean thing enters there:
The godly Soul shall never be vexed with unruly Company more: There in a day
when the Saints and none but Saints shall be gathered together: There shall be
no more the Canaanite (or Hypocrite) in the house of the Lord of hosts: Not a
profane Esau, Zecha. 14.21.
or a scoffing Ishmael in that household of God, among all those innumerable
Saints: These have left the mad World on Earth sinning, or in Hell suffering
for ever.

6. Godly Ministers and their gracious Converts shall meet together with Joy:
Oh what reciprocal Joy, and transcendent Satisfaction will they take in each
other, when both he that sows and he that reapeth shall rejoice together:
John 4.36.
O says the glorified Saint, yonder is my spiritual Father, under whose
Ministry I have sat with trembling many a time, by astonishing Convictions
upon my Conscience, when the Law has thundered wrath against me: The same hand
has closed the wound and applied a plaster of a Gospel-promise to my bleeding
Soul: Many melting, heart scearching Truths, have these Ears heard from that
Mouth, that have come warm to my Heart: Blessed be God that ever I saw his Face
or heard his Voice: The Minister shall be surprised with a transport of Joy
when he shall see his spiritual Children, begot in the bonds of the Gospel,
over whom he has wept many a Tear, traveled with Cares and Fears, and for
whom he has put up many affectionate Prayers: Now he shall see, and say his
Labor was not in vain in the Lord; I must say of these, what is our hope, or
joy, or crown of rejoicing? are not even ye in the presence of our Lord Jesus
Christ at his coming; for ye are our glory and joy, 1 Thessalonians. 2.19, 20.

7. Christians that have been scattered by Persecution, shall now quietly meet
and part no more: How will they with comfort reflect on the solemn Assemblies
sorrowfully broken up by Officers and unruly Bailiffs, their Names taken, their
Persons dragged before Magistrates, their Houses rifled, and themselves hurried
to Prison; now those days are over and gone, no danger of Conventicles or
unlawful Assemblies in that upper Region, they shall worship God on an Hill, in
the Mountain of the height of Israel: They shall no more be prosecuted by
Murdering or scattering Acts, they shall now be out of date, they shall no
more hear the Voice of the Oppressor, there have been many such days as those
in the Apostles times, great persecutions against the Church, Acts 8.1.
that they were all scattered abroad through foreign Regions: But now the
storms are blown over, the clouds scattered, and the glorified Saints shall
never be broken up or disturbed by the Sons of Violence any more: They shall
recount those by past troubles with Songs of Praise.

8. The Saints of God that have been confined to Prisons, shall be set at
liberty and enjoy sweet content together: The Lord made their very Prisons
sweet by mutual Communion, but Heaven will be sweeter: The imprisoned Bird
never sings so sweetly in the Cage as at liberty: O blessed enlargement! Now
they are delivered (with the rest of the Creation) into the glorious liberty of
the children of God: Romans 8.21.
They walk abroad at liberty at another rate then ever: How shall they with joy
and triumph recount their wandering about in Deserts and Mountains, Heb. 11.37,
38.
in Dens and Caves of the Earth: Sometimes thrust into dark and dirty Dungeons
with Felons and Malefactors, yea condemned, tortured, executed, but now they
have obtained a better Resurrection: O happy deliverance! These shall have
their proper Mansions in their Fathers House, and the Celestial Palace will
resound sweet Eccho's of their triumphant Praises, they shall not now with Paul
and Silas sing in the Stocks, Acts 16.24, 25.
but above where they shall be advanced together.

9. The Saints that have providentially parted one from another upon any
occasion, shall meet again and part no more: When Paul was to be bound at
Jerusalem, and the Disciples understood it, they took on heavily, Paul said,
what mean ye to weep and to break my heart? Acts 21.11.13.
Their weeping breaks his Heart: But especially says the Text, they sorrowed
most of all, Acts 20.38.
for the words that he spoke, that they should see his face no more: And this
is the Case of many Christian-friends, but the relief is, they shall see each
others Faces again, and their Faces will shine as the Sun, and their
Contentment shall be exceeding the bounds of any Capacity in this lower World:
They parted but for a Season, that they should receive each other for ever,
Philemon. 15.
when the gracious God has received them into everlasting Habitations.

10. The Saints that divided and could not agree to walk together in one Church
upon Earth, shall be perfectly reconciled above, and then shall mutually
embrace each other: They shall all speak the same thing, and never have the
least reflecting Speech or Thought against each other: Possibly in this World
the Contention [or Paroxism] betwixt a Paul, and Barnabas may be so sharp that
they may depart asunder one from another: Acts 15.39.
As all God's People are necessarily scattered into distinct Societies, though
uniting in Spirit in the bonds of Peace; yet good Persons of different
Persuasions, may in some cases refuse to hold Communion occasionally one with
another (some being for greater Latitude, others for smaller Bonds, or being of
different Principles in smaller Matters, or through Prejudice or Passion,) yet
in Heaven they shall be all of one Mind and one Heart, and all Dissension and
Division will be laid aside; O what perfect Love, sweet Harmony, and joyful
Delight will there be in the Persons and Graces of each other! There will be no
saying then, I am of this Opinion, or of this Party, or a Member of this Church
and not of another; but they shall attain to be in the Unity of the Faith, and
united Members of the Triumphant Church.

11. Christians that had their natural Infirmity, shall leave them behind them,
and their united Spirits shall be made perfect: How rough-hewn Natures have
some godly Souls? How unsociable are some that proves a great Affliction to
themselves and all about them, still quarrelsom and discontented, nothing
pleases them, and sometimes they cannot help it, though they strive and fight
and pray against it, it still recurs and returns, and breeds much vexation; but
upon this blessed gathering together, the crooked shall be made straight, Isa.
40.45.
and the rough places (and spirits) plain, when the glory of the Lord shall be
revealed: O happy day, when there will be no envy or discontent, but the Saints
shall rejoice in each others Graces and Comfort as their own, and lie square to
each others Spirits: Though some Stars shall outshine others in luster and
glory, yet every Vessel shall be full both of Grace and Comfort, and not a wry
Look or peevish Word shall be found there to all Eternity.

12. The Saints that here condoled themselves and each other in their Personal
afflictions, shall leave their Sorrows behind them, and all the occasions and
grounds thereof, and unanimously thank God for complete Immunity from all, some
are sick, some are pained, some are pinched with Poverty, others are tormented
with wicked Children and bad Relations: Some have troubles of Conscience under
darkness, hidings of God's Face, some assaulted with hellish Infections,
Fatanical Temptations, some are deeply Melancholy, and under sad Complaints:
Now we are required to bear one another burdens: Gal. 6.2.
And Paul says, who is weak and I am not weak? 2 Cor. 11.29.
Who is offended and I burn not? Grace in the Heart commands sympathy with
others; but that perfect State discharges all Compassion as well as Passion:
They that mourned together shall rejoice together, not a sigh or groan shall
ever possess a glorified Spirit.

13. The Saints shall lay aside all difficult and self-denying Duties: There
are many personal Duties that require some cost, and it becomes a Christian
before hand to sit down and count the cost, Luke 14.28.
to mortify some special Lusts, to maintain a strict watch over Heart and Life,
to worship God in the Spirit, exercise every Grace, maintain constant Communion
with God, these will cost a Soul much care and industry, and though these are
sweet in managing to purpose, Prove. 3.17.
for wisdoms ways are pleasantness, yet because of the corruption of our
Hearts, and aversness to any thing that is good, they become difficult, and then
relative Duties are difficult, to discharge trust to Relations, Parents to
Children, Masters to Servants, Christians one to another, mutual Inspection,
Admonition, giving and taking Reproofs, faithfully, humbly: Christians find
these Duties hard and grievous to flesh and blood: But the more Spiritual any
Man grows, the more Easy they grow, the more Love is in our Hearts to God, the
less are his commandments grievous: 1 John 5.3.
Now in Heaven Love will be perfected: And holy Souls will be in their Element
while they are serving God and doing the works of that Place: But the more you
can sing in the ways of the Lord, Psalm. 138.5. Jer. 31.12.
the more cheerfully will you sing in the height of Zion.

14. The Saints that have attended Ordinances with many defects and
imperfections will leave them all behind them, and attend the Lord without the
least defect, distraction or imperfection: The best of God's Children have a
weight hanging on them, and a sin that too easily besets them, Heb. 12.1.
and impedes their Motion and obstructs their Ascent upwards: But these
shackles shall be shak'd off with the Body, never a wandering Thought more to
all Eternity: Here we weaken the hands one of another, Heb. 12.12.
by our hands falling down and our feeble knees, bodily infirmities often render
the best Services wearisom, because the holiest Saints have but a Measure of
Affection, hence it was that Three of Christ's choicest Disciples slept while
Jesus was in his Agony, for though the spirit was willing yet the flesh was
weak: Mat. 26.36, -- 41.
Alas Aaron and Hur must hold up Moses hands here, the best at some seasons may
be out of frame for Duty; but in Heaven the Saints shall join hearts and hands
without weariness or distraction in singing the high Praises of God in that
heavenly Quire, and none shall fail his Fellow, or fall short of Duty.

15. Saints of the meanest stature and standing here shall be complete, and
commence the highest degree of Grace in Glory: I say, not that all the Saints
shall have equal Degrees of Glory; the Text says, that at the Resurrection, 1
Cor. 15.41, 42.
one star differs from another star in glory: Its true all these heavenly
luminaries shall be perfectly joined in one constellation: But good Divines
think, that as there will be Degrees of Torments in Hell, so of Joys in Heaven:
As the Vessels are larger to contain more, or as Men have honored God more
here below, yet the meanest Saint will be top full of glory: For they that are
wise shall shine as the brightness of the firmament, and they that turn many
unto righteousness, as the stars for ever and ever, Dan. 12.3. Weak Christians
shall no more complain of Defects, but he that it feeble in that day shall be
as David, Zech. 12.8.
and the house of David as God, as the Angel of the Lord before them: There
will no more be thence an infant of days: Isa. 65.20.
The meanest Christian will in some respects be equal with the Angels in
heaven. Mat. 22.30.
Children in Grace shall be grown up to be perfect Men, Ephesians. 4.13.
to the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ.

16. Saints at that day shall he raised above the revilings, calumnies, and
slanders of a malicious World, and be advanced to the highest Honor: In this
World every one can throw dirt on God's Children, and account them the vilest
of Men, not worthy to live upon Earth, and cry as they against Paul, away with
such a fellow from the earth for it is not fit that he should live: Acts 22.22.
But what says God of such: Of whom the world was not worthy: Heb. 11.38.
No Nicknames shall follow them to Heaven, they shall not be there called
Puritans, Fanatics, Schismatics, Fools, nay, possibly they shall be honored
among Men when dead and raised to glory: Prove. 10.7, 14.
The memory of the just is blessed: The godly above shall honor them, though
sometimes they thought and spoke slightly of them, nay, the wicked and damned
in Hell shall esteem honorably of them, as the Rich Man that thought (once
Poor) Lazarus a fit Ambassador to send to his Rich Brethren on Earth, yea it
may be wretched Hypocrites on Earth will build the tombs of deceased prophets,
Luke 16.28.
and garnish the sepulchers of the righteous, Mat. 23.29.
in honor to them, whom they or such as they were, did once abuse and revile
on Earth, they will call the dead Saints and canonize them, when as they miscal
such as they, are Hypocrites and no better then Devils: God often turns the
Scales and rolls away the Reproach of all his Servants.

17. Saints that have exercised Charity and Hospitality, and such as received
their Bounty, shall embrace each other with mutual Alacrity: Our Lord affirms
it, That whosoever gives but a cup of cold water (if he has not a fire to warm
it) to a little one in the name of a disciple (though he may be mistaken)
verily I say unto you, he shall in no wise lose his reward, Mat. 10.42. O will
the poor Beggar say, there is my loving Benefactor, the Debtor will there own
his Creditor that forgave him all when he had nothing to pay; Mat. 18.26, 27.
well says the Free-hearted disburser, I do not repent it, since I am so
richly rewarded, this Recompense is above my expectations, and contrary to my
deserts: Strange that I should receive so much for laying out so little, this
is above Isaac's reaping an hundred Fold: How comfortable will that Language of
our Lord be, when he shall say as in Mat. 25.34, -- 40. Come ye blessed of my
father inherit the kingdom prepared for you, etc. Behold my Deputies, in
relieving of whom you relieved me, I took it as done to my Person what you did
to my Members, and you shall be glorified together.

18. Saints that have wanted many things in this World, when they meet above
shall want nothing: In this World the Body is full of Wants, we want
necessaries to supply Nature, we want food to nourish us, clothes to cover us,
physic to cure us, arrows to defend us, sleep to refresh us, yet these but
supply particular wants, and Men ordinarily have dependence one upon another
for Supplies: But when God's Children get above, yet though they shall have
sweet Communion with each other, yet their Happiness chiefly depends on the
Vision and Fruition of God: With him is the fountain of life, Psalm. 36.9. Psalm.
16.11.
in in his light they see light, in his presence is fullness of joy: The Sun
does dart its Beams through the whole Universe: God's Presence (not Saints)
makes Heaven: The King makes the Court not Courtiers: Nothing can satisfy the
capacious Soul but God: I shall be satisfied, says David, when I awake with
thy likeness: Psalm. 17.15.
That and nothing else gives content: Angels, and glorified Spirits, as
Creatures must say, it is not in me to satisfy you: God alone can: Now and
never till now the Soul says, I have enough, I need no more: I have not only
tasted but drunk deep of this River of Pleasures, yea bathed my Soul in this
blessed Ocean of Delights: Nor do I surfeit upon these, but fresh Springs of
joy yield me perpetual contentment.

19. All Saints pass through the valley of the shadow of Death to that Glory:
None exempted but Enock and Elias, and those that shall be found alive at the
last day: It is no strange thing, For it is appointed to Men once to die: Heb.
9.27.
It is the common Lot of Mankind, even the best Men: The Sting of Death is
gone, its but a Trap-door to let us into Heaven: Thousands are gone before us,
they are not lost but laid up: We shall meet them again: O who would be afraid
of Death when Jesus Christ has perfumed the Grave for us? Well may a graceless
Soul be afraid to die, because he knows not what Company he shall converse with
in the other World, but may fare with Devils and damned Souls, but the
righteous has hope in his death, Prove. 14.32.
and sees Jesus Christ standing with a Crown on his Head and another in his
Hand, saying Be thou faithful unto death and I will give thee a crown of life:
Rev. 2.10.
Why should we then fear this King of Terrors that is disarmed, it may hiss,
but cannot sting us: 1 Cor. 15.56, 57.
It may kill us, but cannot hurt us: See yonder glorified Assembly of the
Spirits of Just Men made perfect have conquered Death, and are set upon
triumphant Thrones.

20. This blessed Society of departed Souls, shall continue through the Ages of
Eternity: In this World they met and parted again, there was many intermissions
in their sweet Communion: But now they shall for ever dwell in the House of the
Lord, and sing praises to the lamb for evermore: Rev. 3.12.
Such as overcome shall be pillars in the temple of God, and shall go no more
out: They shall never be banished out of this heavenly Paradise: This word
ever, evermore, everlasting, puts new Life into the glorious Songs of Praise,
and daily revives their Spirits: After ten thousands of Millions of Ages shall
the Joy be as fresh as at their first Entrance: That River is still running, in
thy presence is fullness of joy, Psalm. 16.11.
at thy right hand there are pleasures for evermore: Mortality is writ upon all
Sublunaries: Eternity puts an Accent upon Spirituals: There shall be no night
there [no Clouds, no Eclipes of that Glory, Rev. 22.5.
] for the Lord God gives them light, and they shall reign for ever and ever:
It is recorded of Diagoras, that when he saw his three Son's crowned in one day
at the Olympic Games as Victors, died away while he was embracing them for
joy: But though the Saints shall be in a continual Extacy and transport of Joy,
in beholding their Children in Christ, and their godly Christian-Friends, yet
their Heart Strings shall not break, but be enlarged with comfort, and
perpetuated for evermore.

Oh what a day will that be, when all the Son's of the Second Adam shall meet
together, so many pure Spirits defecated from the sordid dregs of Sin and
Suffering shall join their, Harmonious Music and Melody in praising our dear
Lord, whose glorious Perfections we could never extol! What a brave Quire will
that make! Not a discordant String among them all: But as one Eye moves the
other rolls, when one String is struck the other sounds, such a blending
sympathy will there be of well-tuned Praises in that heavenly Chorus: Ignatius
thinks the Sun Moon and Stars, made a Quire about the Star that appeared at
Christ's Incarnation; oh then what an Halcyon-day will that be, when the
morning stars shall sing together, Job ^8.7.
and the son's of God shall shout for joy: O what in harmonious Harmony, in
perfect Sympho^ What mutual Love and Delight in each (...) Yea they shall Love
one another the better for the perfect Love they have to God: And bathing their
Souls in that fathomless Ocean of divine Love.

Its true, the infinite God is ultimately and objectively the Saints proper
delight both here and in Heaven, but glorified Bodies united to these blessed
Souls, and the blissful Society of Angels and Saints, will be no small
accessories of the Saints Happiness: As there will be no Hypocrite there to
cool their Charity, so there will not be missing the meanest Member of Christ:
The weak Christian that cried out my lameness, my lameness, shall then be
strong: The dark Soul that rarely got a glimpse of God, or a sealing of the
Spirit, shall walk for ever in the light of God's countenance: The grieved
Saint shall be now in an Extacy of Joy: Not a gracious Soul shall be missing,
not the least Grace wanting, not a Duty lost, all secret Prayers, Tears,
Groans, shall come to light and be rewarded, Psalm. 56.8.
their Tears were bottled, their Prayers bookt, and now shall be produced: Not
an Act of Charity, though the Left Hand knew not what the Right Hand did (much
less others) but it shall be brought to light before Angels and Men, with high
Approbation and Commendation.

Oh who would not be preparing for such a Day? Who would not long for it,
breath after it, and freely welcome it? Let all the Children of the
bride-chamber make themselves ready, Luke 12.35.
let your loins be girded about and your lights burning: Be waking and
watchful, attend his Motions, be glad of his Approaches, and gladly welcome the
Bridegrooms coming with all his holy Angels and glorified Spirits, descending
in the Clouds to fetch you home into those Celestial Mansions to be for ever
with the Lord: Be not afraid, when he says, surely I come quickly, let the
redeemed of the Lord echo, Amen, even so come Lord Jesus, Amen, so be it.

FINIS.
Advertisement.
These BOOKS are Published by the Reverend Mr. Oliver Heywood, M. A. Minister
of the Gospel, and Sold by Thomas Parkhurst at the Bible and Three-Crowns in
Cheapside, viz.
1. BAptismal Bonds Renewed, being some Meditations on Psalm. 50.5. 2. Closet
Prayer a Christians Duty. 3. Sure Mercies of David. 4. Isreal's Lamentation
after the Lord. 5. The Holy Life and Happy Death, of Mr. John Angier, Minister
formerly at Denton, near Manchester. 6. Advice to an only Child, or excellent
Counsel to all young Persons. 7. Best Intail, a Discourse on 2 Samuel 23.5. 8.
Family Altar, a Discourse on Genesis 35. 2, 3. for to Promote the Worship of God
in private Families. 9. Meetness for Heaven on Colos. 1.12. designed for a
Funeral Legacy. 10. The New Creature on Galations, 6.15. lately Published.
BOOKS written by the Reverend Mr. J. How.
OF Thoughtfulness for the Morrow. With an Appendix concerning the immoderate
Desire of Foreknowing Things to come. Of Charity, in reference to other Men's
Sins. A Sermon at the Funeral of Mr. Richard Adams, M. A. sometime Fellow of
Brasen-Nose College in Oxford. The Redeemer's Tears wept over lost Souls: In a
Treatise on Luke 19.41, 42. With an Appendix, wherein somewhat is occasionally
discoursed, concerning the Sin against the Holy Ghost, and how God is said to
will the Salvation of them that perish. A Sermon directing what we are to do
after a strict enquiry, Whether or no we truly love God. A Funeral Sermon for
Mrs. Esther Sampson, the late Wife of Henry Sampson, Doctor of Physic. The
Carnality of Religious Contention. In two Sermons, preached at the Merchants
Lecture in Broadstreet. A Sermon for Reformation of Manners. A Sermon preached
on the Day of Thanksgiving, December 2. 1697. to which is prefixed Dr. Bate's
Congratulatory Speech to the KING. A Calm and Sober Enquiry, concerning the
Possibility of a Trinity in the Godhead. A Letter to a Friend, concerning a
Postscript to the Defense of Dr. Sherlock's Notion of the Trinity in Unity,
relating to the Calm and Sober Enquiry upon the same Subject. A View of that
part of the late Considerations to H. H. about the Trinity: Which concerns the
Sober Enquiry on that Subject. The Redeemer's Dominion over the Invisible
World. A Funeral Sermon for Mrs. Hammond. A Funeral Sermon for Dr. Will. Bates.
A Funeral Sermon for Mr. Mat. Mead.
BOOKS written by Mr. Flavel.
1. THE Fountain of Life opened, or a Display of Christ in his Essential and
Mediatorial Glory; containing Forty two Sermons on various Texts. Wherein the
Impetration of our Redemption by Jesus Christ is orderly unfolded, as it was
begun, carried on, and finished by his Covenant Transaction, mysterious
Incarnation, solemn Call and Dedication, blessed Offices, deep Abasement, and
Supereminent Advancement. 2. A Treatise of the Soul of Man, wherein the Divine
Original, excellent and immortal Nature of the Soul are opened; its Love and
Inclination to the Body, with the necessity of its Separation from it,
considered and Improved. The Existence, Operations and States of separated
Souls both in Heaven and Hell immediately after Death, asserted, discussed, and
variously applied. Diverse knotty and difficult Questions about depraved Souls,
both Philosophical and Theological, stated and determined. 3. The Method of
Grace in bringing home the Eternal Redemption, contrived by the Father, and
accomplished by the Son, through the Effectual Application of the Spirit unto
God's Elect, being the second Part of Gospel Redemption. 4. The Divine Conduct
or Mystery of Provividence, its Being and Efficacy asserted and vindicated: All
the Methods of Providence in our Course of Life opened, with Directions how to
apply and improve them. 5. Navigation spiritualized, or a new Compass for
Seaman, consisting of Thirty two Points of pleasant Observations, profitable
Applications, serious Reflections, all concluded with so many spiritual Poems,
etc. 6. Husbandry Spiritualized, or the Heavenly use of Earthly things. 7. A
Token for Mourners. 8. The Saint indeed or the Great Work of a Christian. 9.
The Touchstone of Sincerity or the sign's of and symptoms of Hypocrisy: Being
the Second Part of the Saint Indeed. All these Nine by John Flavel, late
Minister at Dartmouth.
1. A Funeral Sermon on the Death of Mr. Joseph Barret; by John Whitlock,
Junior; to which is added his Holy Life, his Evidences, Experiences, Holy
Resolves, Divine Meditations, and his constant Course of Self-Examination,
being part of an Exact Diary written by his own Hand. 2. The Remains of Mr.
Joseph Barret, being the Second Part, taken out of an Exact Diary written by
his own Hand.

