Parliaments Power, In Laws for RELIGION. OR, AN ANSWER To that old and
groundles Calumny of the Papists, nick-naming the Religion of the Church of
England, by the name of a Parliamentary RELIGION. Sent to a friend, who was
troubled at it, and earnestly desired satisfaction in it.

OXFORD, Printed by HENRY HALL Printer to the UNIVERSITIE. 1645.

The Preface.
SIR,
AT my being with you last, you seemed to be much scandalized for the Church
of England. You told me you were well assured that her Doctrine was most true
and orthodox, her Government conform to the word of God, and the best Ages of
the Church; her Liturgy an Extract of the Primitive Forms: Nothing in all the
whole composure but what did tend to edification, and increase of Piety. But
that you were not satisfied in the ways and means by which this Church
proceeded in her Reformation: That you had heard it often objected by some
Partisans of the Church of Rome, that our Religion was mere Parliamentarian;
or, as Doctor Harding said long since, That we had a Parliament-Religion, a
Parliament-Faith, and a Parliament-Gospell; to which Sanders and some others
added, That we had none but Parliament Bishops, and a Parliament-Clergy. That
you were apt enough to think, the Papists made not all this noise without some
ground for it, in regard you see the Parliaments in these latter times so bent
to catch at all occasions whereby to manifest their power in Ecclesiastical
matters. And finally, that you were heartily ashamed, that being so often
choked with these objections, you neither knew how to traverse the Indictment,
or plead not guilty to the Bill. This was the sum of your Discourse; and upon
this you did desire me to be think my self of some fit plaster for this sore,
to satisfy you (if I could) of your doubts and jealousies, assuring me that
your desires proceeded not from curiosity, or an itch of knowledge, or out of
any disaffection to the high Court of Parliament; but merely from an honest
zeal to the Church of England, whose credit and renown you did far prefer
before your life, or whatsoever else could be dear unto you; adding withal,
That if I would take pains for your satisfaction, and help you out of those
perplexities which you were involved in, I should not only do good service to
the Church it self, but to many a wavering Member of it, whom these objections
mainly stagger in their Resolution. In fine, that you desired to be informed
how far the Parliaments of England have been interessed, in the former times,
in matters which concern Religion, and God's public worship; what ground
there is for all this clamor of the Papists; and whether the two Houses, or
either of them have exercised, of old, any such authority in things of
Ecclesiastical and Spiritual nature, as they now pretend to. Which, though
it be a dangerous and invidious Subject (as the times now are) yet for your
sake, and for the truths, and for the honor also of Parliaments, which seem
to suffer much in the accusation, I shall undertake it; Premising first, that I
intend not to say any thing to the point of Right, whether or not the
Parliament may lawfully meddle in such matters as concern Religion, but shall
apply my self only unto matters of fact, as they relate unto the Reformation
here by Law established. And for my method in this business, I will begin
with the Ejection of the Pope and his authority; descending next to the
Translation of the Scriptures into the English tongue, and the Reformation of
the Church in Doctrinals and Forms of Worship; and so proceed unto the power
of making Canons for the well ordering of the Clergy, and the direction of the
people in all such particulars as do concern them in the exercise of their
Religion. And in the canvasing of these points, I shall make it good, that till
these busy and unfortunate days, in which every man intrudeth on the Preistly
function, the Parliaments did not any thing at all either in matters Doctrinal,
or in making Canons, or in translating of the Scriptures; and that concerning
Forms of Worship they did nothing neither, but strengthen and establish what
was done before in the Clergy-way, by adding the Secular authority to the
Constitutions of the Church, according to the usage of the best and happiest
times of Christianity.

PARLIAMENTS POWER, in Laws for Religion.
1. Of the Ejection of the Pope.
AND first, beginning with the Ejection of the Pope and his authority, that led
the way unto the Reformation of Religion which did after follow: It was first
voted and decreed in the Convocation, before ever it became the subject of an
Act of Parliament. For in the year 1530. 22o. H. 8. the Clergy being caught in
a Praemunire were willing to redeem their danger by a sum of money, and to
that end the Clergy of the Province of Canterbury bestowed upon the king the
sum of 100000 pounds, to be paid by equal portions in the five years
following. But the king would not so be satisfied unless they would
acknowledge him for the supreme head on Earth of the Church of England, which
though it was hard meat, and would not easily down amongst them, yet it
passed at last. For, being thoroughly debated in a Synodicall way, both in the
upper and lower houses of Convocation, they did in fine agree upon this
expression. Cujus (Ecclesiae sc. Anglicanae) singularem Protectorem, unicum et
supremum Dominum, et (quantum per Christi leges licet) supremum Caput, ipsius
Majestatem recognoscimus. To this they all assented and subscribed their hands,
and afterward incorporated it into the public Act or Instrument, which was
presented to the King in the name of his Clergy, for the redeeming of their
error, and the grant of their money, which as it does at large appear in the
Records and Acts of the Convocation, so is it touched upon in an Historical
way in the Antiq. Britan: Mason de Minist. Anglic. and some other Authors; by
whom it also does appear, that what was thus concluded on by the Clergy of the
Province of Canterbury, was also ratified and confirmed by the Convocation for
the Province of York (according to the usual custom) save that they did not
buy their Pardon at so dear a rate. This was the leading Card to the game
which followed. For on this ground were built the Statutes prohibiting all
Appeals to Rome, and for determining all Ecclesiastical suites and
controversies within the Kingdom 24. H. 8. c. 12. That for the manner of
Electing and Consecrating of Archbishops and Bishops. 25. H. 8. c. 20. and, the
prohibiting the payment of all impositions to the Court of Rome; and for
obtaining all such Dispensations from the Sea of Canterbury which formerly were
procured from the Popes of Rome. 25. H. 8. c, 21. which last is built expressly
upon this foundation; That the King is the only supreme Head of the Church of
England, and was so recognized by the Prelates and Clergy, representing the
said Church in their Convocation. And on the very same foundation was the
Statute raised 26. H. 8. c. 1. where in the King is declared to be the supreme
head of the Church of England, and to have all honors and Preeminencies which
were annexed unto that Title, as by the Act it self does at full appear,
which Act being made (I speak it from the Act it self) only for corroboration
and confirmation of that which had been done in the Convocation, did
afterward draw on the Statute for the Tenths and First Fruits, as the point
incident to the Headship or supreme authority, 26. H. 8, c. 3.

The second step to the Ejection of the Pope, was the submission of the Clergy
to the said K. Henry, whom they had recognized for their supreme Head. And this
was first concluded on in the Convocation, before it was proposed or agitated
in the houses of Parliament; and was commended only to the care of the
Parliament, that it might have the force of a Law by a civil Sanction. The
whole debate with all the traverses and emergent difficulties which appeared
therein are specified at large in the Records of Convocation, Anno 1532. But
being you have not opportunity to consult those Records, I shall prove it by the
Act of Parliament, called commonly the Act of the submission of the Clergy, but
bearing this Title in the Abridgement of the Statutes set out by Poulton, That
the Clergy in their Convocations shall enact no Constitutions without the Kings
assent. In which it is premised for granted that the Clergy of the Realm of
England, had not only acknowledged according to the Truth, that the Convocation
of the same Clergy, is, always has been, and ought to be assembled always
by the Kings Writ; but also submitting themselves to the Kings Majesty, had
promised in verbo Sacerdotii, That they would never from henceforth presume to
attempt, allege, claim, or put in ure, enact, promulge or execute any new
Canons, Constitutions, Ordinances Provincial, or other, or by whatsoever other
name they shall be called in the Convocation, unless the Kings most Royal
assent may to them be had, to make, promulge and execute the same, and that his
Majesty do give his most royal Assent and Authority in that behalf. Upon
which ground work of the Clergies, the Parliament shortly after built this
superstructure, to the same effect: viz. That none of the said Clergy from
thenceforth should presume to attempt, allege, claim or put in ure any
Constitutions or Ordinances, Provincial or Synodals, or any other Canons; nor
shall enact, promulge, or execute any such Canons, Constitutions, or Ordinances
Provincial (by whatsoever name or names they may be called) in their
Convocations in time coming (which always shall be assembled by the kings
Writ) unless the same Clergy may have the kings most royal Assent and License
to make, promulge and execute such Canons, Constitutions and Ordinances
Provincial or Synodicall, upon pain of every one of the said Clergy doing the
contrary to this Act, and thereof convict, to suffer imprisonment and make fine
at the kings will. 25. H. 8. c. 19. So that the Statute, in effect, is no more
than this, an Act to bind the Clergy to perform their promise, to keep them
fast unto their word for the time to come, that no new Canon should be made in
the times succeeding in favor of the Pope, or by his authority, or to the
diminution of the Kings Royal Prerogative, or contrary to the Laws and
Statutes of this Realm of England, as many Papal Constitutions were in the
former Ages: which Statute I desire you to take notice of, because it is the
rule and measure of the Churches power in making Canons, Constitutions, or
whatsoever else you shall please to call them in their Convocations.

The third and final Act conducing to the Popes Ejection, was an Act of
Parliament 28. H. 8. c. 10. Entitled an Act extinguishing the Authority of the
Bishop of Rome. By which it was Enacted That if any person should extol the
authority of the Bishop of Rome, he should incur the penalty of a Praemunire;
that every Officer, both Ecclesiastical and Lay, should be sworn to renounce
the said Bishop and his authority, and to resist it to his power, and to repute
any Oath formerly taken in maintenance of the said Bishop, or his authority, to
be void; and finally that the refusal of the said Oath should be judged high
Treason. But this was also usherd in by the Determination first, and after by
the Practice of all the Clergy. For in the year 1534, which was two years
before the passing of this Act, the King had sent this Proposition to be
agitated in both Universities, and in the greatest and most famous Monasteries
of the Kingdom, that is to say, An aliquid authoritatis in hoc regno Angliae
Pontifici Romano de jure competat plus quam alii cuicunque Episcopo extero? By
whom it was determined Negatively, that the Bishop of Rome had no more power of
right in the kingdom of England, than any other foreign Bishop: Which being
testified and returned under their hands and seals respectively (the Originals
whereof are still remaining in the Library of Sir Robert Cotton) was a good
preamble to the Bishops and the rest of the Clergy assembled in their
Convocation to conclude the like. And so accordingly they did, and made an
Instrument thereof subscribed by the hands of all the Bishops, and others of
the Clergy, and afterward confirmed the same by their corporal Oaths: The
copies of which Oaths and Instrument you shall find in Foxes Acts and
Monuments vol. 2. fol. 1203. and fol. 1210. and 1211. of the Edition of John
Day, An. 1570. And this was semblably the ground of a following Statute 35. H.
8. c. 1. Wherein another Oath was devised and ratified, to be imposed upon the
Subject, for the more clear asserting of the Kings Supremacy, and the utter
exclusion of the Popes for ever; which Statutes though they were all repealed
by one Act of Parliament 1. and 2. of Phil. and Mary c. 8. yet they were
brought in force again 1. Eliz. c. 1. save that the name of Supreme Head was
changed unto that of the Supreme Governor, and certain clauses altered in the
Oath of Supremacy. Where (by the way) you must take notice that the Statutes
which concern the Kings Supremacy, are not introductory of any new Right, that
was not in the Crown before, but only declaratory of an old, as our best
Lawyers tell us, and the Statute of the 26. of H. 8. c. 1. does clearly
intimate. So that in the Ejection of the Pope of Rome, which was the first and
greatest step toward the work of Reformation, the Parliament did nothing, for
ought yet appears, but what was done before in the Convocation, and did no
more than fortify the results of Holy Church by the Addition and Corroboration
of the Secular Power.

2. Of the Translation of the Scriptures, and permitting them to be read in
the English Tongue.
THE second step toward the work of Reformation, (and indeed one of the most
especial parts thereof) was the Translation of the Bible into the English
Tongue, and the permitting all sorts of people to peruse the same, as that
which visibly did tend to the discovery of the errors and corruptions in the
Church of Rome, and the intolerable Pride and Tyranny of the Roman Prelates,
upon which grounds it had been formerly translated into English by the hand of
Wickliff, and after, on the spreading of Luther's Doctrine, by the pains of
Tyndall, a stout and active man in king Henry's days, but not so well
befreinded as the work deserved: especially considering that it happened in
such a time when many printed Pamphlets did disturb the State (and some of
them of Tindals making) which seemed to tend unto Sedition and the change of
Government. Which being remonstrated to the King, he caused diverse of his
Bishops, together with sundry of the learnedest and most eminent Divines of all
the Kingdom to come before him: whom he required freely and plainly to declare
as well what their opinion was of the foresaid Pamphlets, as what they did
think fit to be done concerning the Translation of the Bible into the English
Tongue; And they upon mature advise and deliberation, unanimously condemned the
aforesaid books of Heresy and Blasphemy (no smaller crime.) Then, for
translating of the Scriptures into the English tongue, they agreed all with one
assent, that it depended wholly on the Will and Pleasure of the Sovereign
Prince, who might do therein as he conceived to be most agreeable to his
occasions; but that with reference to the present estate of things, it was more
expedient to explain the Scripture to the people by the way of Sermons, then
to permit it to be read promiscuously by all sorts of men: yet so that hopes
were to be given unto the Laity, that if they did renounce their errors, and
presently deliver to the hands of his Majesty's Officers all such books and
Bibles (which they conceived to be translated with great fraud and falsehood)
as any of them had in keeping, his Majesty would cause a true and catholic
Translation of it to be published in convenient time, for the use of his
Subjects. This was the sum and substance of the present Conference, which you
shall find laid down at large in the Registers of Archbishop Warham. And
according to this advice the King sets out a Proclamation not only prohibiting
the buying, reading, or translating of any the aforesaid books, but straightly
charging all his Subjects which had any of the books of Scripture, either of
the old Testament or of the new, in the English tongue, to bring them in
without delay. But for the other part, of giving hopes unto the people of a
true Translation, if they delivered in the false (or that at least which was
pretended to be false) I find no word at all in the Proclamation. That was a
work reserved unto better times, or left to be solicited by the Bishops
themselves, and other learned men who had given the counsel; by whom (indeed)
the people were kept up in hope that all should be accomplished unto their
desires.

And so indeed it proved at last. For in the Convocation of the year 1536. the
authority of the Pope being abrogated, and Cranmer fully settled in the Sea of
Canterbury, the Clergy did agree upon a form of Petition to be presented to
the King, that he would graciously indulge unto his Subjects of the Laity the
reading of the Bible in the English tongue, and that a new Translation of it
might be forth with made for that end and purpose. According to which godly
motion, his Majesty did not only give order for a new Translation, which
afterward he authorized to be read both in public and private; but in the
interim he permitted Cromwell his Vicar-Generall to set out an Injunction for
providing the whole Bible both in Latin and English, after the translation
then in use, (which was called commonly by the name of Matthew's Bible, but was
indeed no other, than that of Tyndall somewhat altered) to be kept in every
parish Church throughout the kingdom, for every one that would to repair
unto, and caused this mark or character of authority to be set upon them in
red Letters Set forth with the Kings most Gracious License, which you may see
in Fox his Acts and Monum. p. 1248. and 1363* Afterward, when the new
Translation so often promised, and so long expected, was complete and finished,
printed at London by the Kings authority, and countenanced by a grave and pious
Preface of Archbishop Cranmer; the King sets out a Proclamation dated May. 6.
An. 1541. Commanding all the Curates and Parishioners throughout the kingdom,
who were not already furnished with Bibles so authorized and translated as
before is said, to provide themselves before Alhallowtide next following, and
to cause the Bibles so provided to be placed conveniently in their several and
respective Churches; straightly requiring all his Bishops and other Ordinaries to
take special care, to see his said Commands put in execution. And therewithal
came out Instructions from the King to be published by the Clergy in their
several parishes, the better to possess the people with the Kings good
affection toward them in suffering them to have the benefit of such heavenly
Treasure; and to direct them in a course by which they might enjoy the same to
their greater comfort, the reformation of their lives, and the peace and quiet
of the Church. Which Proclamation and Instructions are still preserved in that
most admirable Treasury of Sir Robert Cotton. And unto these Commands of so
great a Prince, both Bishops, Priests and People did apply themselves with such
cheerful reverence, that Bonner (even that bloody butcher, as he after
proved) caused six of them to be chayned in several places of Saint Paul's
Church in London, for all that were so well inclined to resort unto, for their
edification and instruction, the book being very chargeable, because very
large; and therefore called commonly (for distinctions sake) The Bible of the
greater Volume. Thus have we seen the Scriptures faithfully Translated into
the English Tongue, the Bible publicly set up in all parish-churches, that
every one which would might peruse the same, and leave permitted to all people to
buy them for their private uses, and read them to themselves, or before their
families, and all this brought about by no other means than by the Kings
authority* only grounded on the advice and judgment of the Convocation. But
long it was not I confess, before the Parliament put in for a share, and
claimed some interest in the work; but whether for the better or the worse* I
leave you to judge. For in the year 1542, the King being then in agitation of
a league with Charles the Emperor, he caused a complaint to be made unto him
in his Court of Parliament That the liberty granted to the people in having in
their hands the books of the old and new Testament, had been much abused by
many false glosses and interpretations which were made upon them, tending to
the seducing of the people, especially of the younger sort, and the raising of
sedition within the Realm. And thereupon it was enacted by the authority of
the Parliament (on whom he was content to cast the envy of an Act so contrary
to his former gracious Proclamations) that all manner of books of the old and
new Testament of the crafty, false, and untrue Translation of Tyndall, be
forthwith abolished, and forbidden to be used and kept. As also, that all other
Bibles not being of Tyndalls translation in which were found any Preambles or
Annotations, other than the quotations or Summaries of the Chapters, should be
purged of the said Preambles and Annotations, either by cutting them out, or
blotting them in such wise that they might not be perceived or read. And
finally that the Bible be not read openly in any Church, but by the leave of
the King or of the Ordinary of the place; nor privately by any Women,
Artificers, Prentices, Iourneymen, Husbandmen, Laborers, or by any of the
servants of Yeomen or under, with several pains to those who should do the
contrary. This is the substance of the Statute of the 34. and 35. H. 8. cap. 1.
which though it shows that there was somewhat done in Parliament, in a matter
which concerned Religion (which howsoever if you mark it, was rather the
adding of the penalties, than giving any resolution or decision of the points
in Question) yet I presume the Papists will not use this for an Argument, that
we have either a Parliament-Religion, or a Parliament-Gospell; or that we stand
indebted to the Parliament for the use of the Scriptures in the English Tongue,
which is so principal a part of the Reformation. Nor did the Parliament speed
so prosperously in the undertakiug (which the wise King permitted them to have
an hand in for the foresaid ends) or found so general an obedience in it from
the common people, as would have been expected in these times, on the like
occasion; but that the King was feign to quicken and give life to the Acts
thereof by his Proclamatiom. An. 1546. which you shall find in Fox his book.
fol. 1427.

To drive this nail a little farther. The terror of this Statute dying with H.
8. or being repealed by that of K. E. 6. 1 E. 6. c. 12. the Bible was again
made public; and not only suffered to be read by particular persons, either
privately, or in the Church; but ordered to be read over yearly in the
Congregation, as a part of the Liturgy, or divine Service; which how far it
relates to the Court of Parliament we shall see anon. But for the publishing
thereof in print for the use of the people, for the comfort and edification of
private persons, that was done only by the King, at least in his name, and by
his authority. And so it also stood in Q. Elizabeth's time, the Translation of
the Bible being again reviewed by some of the most learned Bishops appointed
thereunto by the Queens Commission (from whence it had the name of the
Bishops-Bible) and upon that Review, reprinted by her sole Commandment, and by
her sole authority left free and open to the use of her well affected and
Religious Subjects. Nor did the Parliament do any thing in all her Reign with
reference to the Scriptures in the English tongue, otherwise than as the
reading of them in that tongue in the Congregation, is to be reckoned for a
part of the English Liturgy, whereof more hereafter. In the translation of them
into Welsh or British, somewhat indeed was done which does look this way. It
being ordered in the Parliament 5. Eliz. c. 28. That the B. B. of Hereford, St.
David's, Bangor, Landaffe, and St. Asaph, Should take care amongst them for
translating the whole Bible, with the book of Common* Prayer into the Welsh or
British tongue, on pain of forfeiting 40 a piece, in default hereof. And to
encourage them thereunto, it was enacted, that one book of either sort being
so translated and imprinted, should be provided and bought for every Cathedral
Church, as also for all parish Churches and Chappells of ease, where the said
tongue is commonly used: the Ministers to pay the one half of the price, and
the parishioners the other. But then you must observe withal, that it had
been before determined in the Convocation of the self same year. An. 1562.
That the Common Prayer of the Church ought to be celebrated in a tongue which
was understood by the people (as you may see in the book of Articles of
Religion. Art. 24. which came out that year) and consequently as well in the
Welsh or British, as in any other. And for the new Translation of K. James his
time, to show that the Translation of Scripture is no work of Parliament, as
it was principally occasioned by some passages in the Conference at Hampton
Court without recourse unto the Parliament, so was it done only by such men as
the King appointed, and by his authority alone imprinted, published and
imposed; care being taken by the Canon of the year 1603. That one of them
should be provided for each several Church, at the charge of the Parish. No
flying in this case to an Act of Parliament, either to authorize the doing of
it, or to impose it being done.

3. Of the Reformation of Religion in points of Doctrine.
NExt, let us look upon the method used in former times in the reforming of the
Church, whether in points of Doctrine, or in forms of Worship, and we shall
find it still the same. The Clergy did the work as to them seemed best, never
advising with the Parliament, but upon the post fact, and in most cases not at
all. And first for Doctrinals, there was but little done in king Henry's time
but that which was acted by the Clergy only in their Convocations, and so
commended to the people by the Kings sole authority, the matter never being
brought within the cognizance of the two Houses of Parliament. For in the year
1536, being the year in which the Popes authority was for ever banished,
there were some Articles agreed on in the Convocation, and represented to the
King, under the hands of all the Bishops, Abbats, Priors, and inferior Clergy
usually called unto those meetings; the Original whereof being in Sir Robert
Cottons Library I have often seen: which being approved of by the King, were
forthwith published under the Title of Articles devised by the Kings Highness
to stable Christian quietness and unity amongst the people. In which it is to
be observed, first; that those Articles make mention of 3 Sacraments only, that
is to say of Baptism, Penance, and the Sacrament of the Altar. And secondly,
that in the declaration of the Doctrine of Justification, Images, honoring of
the Saints departed, as also concerning many of the usual Ceremonies, and the
fire of Purgatory, they differed very much from those opinions which had been
formerly received in the Church of Rome, as you may partly see by that extract
of them which occurres in Fox his Acts and Monuments, vol. 2. fol. 1246. For
the confirming of which book, and recommending it to the use of the people,
his Majesty was pleased in the Injunctions of the year 1536. to give command
To all Deanes, Parsons, Vicars and Curats, so to open and declare in their
Sermons and other Collations the said Articles unto them which be under their
Cure, that they might plainly know and discern, which of them be necessary to
be believed and observed for their salvation, and which do only concern the
Decent and politic Order of the Church. And this he did upon this ground,
that the said Articles had been concluded and condiscended upon by the
Prelates and Clergy of the Realm in their Convocation, as appears in the
very words of the Injunction: for which see Fox his Acts and Monuments fol.
1247. I find not any thing in Parliament which relates to this, either to
countenance the work, or to require obedience and conformity from the hands of
the people. And, to say truth, neither the King nor Clergy did account it
necessary, but thought their own authority sufficient to go through with it,
though certainly it was more necessary at that time then in any since, the
power and reputation of the Clergy being under foot, the King scarce settled in
the Supremacy so lately recognized unto him, and therefore the authority of the
Parliament of more use than afterward, in times well balanced and established.

It Is true that in some other years of that Princes Reign, we find some use
and mention of an Act of Parliament, in matters which concerned Religion, but
in was only in such times when the hopes of Reformation were in the wane, and
the work went retrograde. For in the year 1539. being the 31 H. 8. When the
Lord Cromwell's power began to decline, and the King was in a necessity of
compliance with his neighboring Princes, there passed an Act of Parliament
commonly called the Statute of the six Articles (or the whip with six stringes)
In which it was enacted. That whosoever by word or writing should preach,
teach, or publish, that in the blessed Sacrament of the Altar, under form of
bread and wine, there is not really the natural Body and Blood of our Savior
Jesus Christ, conceived of the virgin Mary, ( or affirm otherwise thereof then
was maintained and taught in the Church of Rome) should be adjudged an
Heretic, and suffer death by burning, and forfeit all his Lands and Goods, as
in case of high Treason. Secondly, that Whosoever should teach or preach, that
the Communion of the blessed Sacrament in both kinds is necessary for the
health of man's Soul, and ought so to be ministered. Thirdly, or that any man
after the Order of Priesthood received might marry, or contract matrimony:
Fourthly, or that any woman which had vowed and professed chastity, might
contract marriage. Fifthly, or that private Mass were not lawful and
laudable, and agreeable to the word of God. Or, sixthly, that Auricular
Confession was not necessary and expedient to be used in the Church of God,
should suffer death, and forfeit Lands and Goods, as a felon. 31 of H. 8. c*
14. The rigor of which terrible Statute was shortly after mitigated in the
said Kings Reign, 32. H. 8. c, 10. and 35. of H. 8. c. 5. and the whole
Statute absolutely repealed by Act of Parliament, 1. Ed. 6. c. 12. But then it
is to be observed first, that this Parliament of King Henry the Eighth, did not
determine any thing in those six points of Doctrine which are therein recited,
but only took upon them to devise a course for the suppressing of the contrary
opinions, by adding by the secular Power, the punishment of Death, and
forfeiture of Lands and Goods, unto the censures of the Church, which were
grown weak, if not invalid; and consequently, by degrees became neglected ever
since the said King Henry took the Headship on him, and exercised the same by
a Lay Vicar-Generall. And secondly, you must observe that it appears
evidently by the Act it self, that at the same time the King had called a
Synod and Convocation of all the Archbishoppes, Bishops, and other learned
men of the Clergy, that the Articles were first deliberately and advisedly
debated, argued and reasoned by the said Archbishops, Bishops, and other
learned men of the Clergy, and their opinions in the same declared and made
known, before the matter came in Parliament, and finally that being brought
into the Parliament, there was not any thing declared and passed as doctrinall,
but by the assent of the Lords spiritual, and other learned men of the
Convocation, as by the Act it self does at large appear. Finally, whatsoever
may be drawn from hence, can be only this, That King Henry did make use of his
Court of Parliament for the establishing and confirming of some points of
Popery, which seemed to be in danger of a Reformation. And this compared with
the Statute of the 34. and 35. prohibiting the reading of the Bible by most
sorts of people, does clearly show that the Parliaments of those times did
rather hinder and retard the work of Reformation, in some especial parts
thereof, than give any furtherance to the same.

But to proceed. There was another point of Reformation begun in the Lord
Cromwell's time, but not produced, nor brought unto perfection till after his
decease, and then too, not without the midwifery of an Act of Parliament. For
in the year 1537. the Bishops and others of the Clergy of the Convocation, had
composed a book entitled the Institution of a Christian man, which being
subscribed by all their hands, was by them presented to the King, by his most
excellent judgment to be allowed of, or condemned. This book, containing the
chief heads of Christian Religion, was forth with printed, and exposed to
public view. But some things not being clearly explicated, or otherwise
subject to exception, he caused it to be reviewed, and to that end; as Supreme
Head, on Earth, of the Church of England (I speak the very words of the Act of
Parliament. 32. H. 8* c. 26.) appointed the Archbishops and Bishops of both
Provinces, and also a great number of the best learned, honestest, and most
virtuous sort of the Doctors in Divinity, men of discretion, judgment, and
good disposition, to be called together, to the intent that according to the
very Gospel and Law of God, without any partial respect or affection to the
Papisticall sort, or any other Sect or Sects whatsoever, they should declare,
by writing, and publish, as well the principal Articles and Points of our
Faith and Belief; with the Declaration, true understanding and observation of
such other expedient points, as by them, with his Grace's advise, Counsel and
Consent, shall be thought needful and expedient: As also for the lawful
Rites, Ceremonies, and observation of Gods service within this Realm. This was
in the year 1540. at what time the Parliament was also sitting, of which the
King was pleased to make this especial use, that whereas the work which was
in hand (I use again the words of the Statute) required ripe and mature
deliberation, and was not rashly to be defined and set forth, and so not fit to
be restrained to the present Session: An Act was passed to this effect, that
all Determinations, Declarations, Decrees, Definitions and Ordinances, as
according to God's Word and Christ's Gospel should at any time hereafter be set
forth by the said Archbishops and Bishops, and Doctors in Divinity, now
appointed, or hereafter to be appointed by his Royal Majesty, or else by the
whole Clergy of England, in and upon the Matter of Christ's Religion, and the
Christian Faith, and the lawful Rites, Ceremonies, and observations of the
same, by his Majesty's advice and confirmation under the Great Seal of
England, shall be by all his Graces Subjects fully believed, obeyed, observed
and performed to all purposes and intents, upon the pains and penalties
therein to be comprised, as if the same had been in express words and
sentences plainly and fully made, set forth, declared and contained in the said
Act. 32. of H. 8. c, 26. Where note that the two houses of Parliament were so
far from meddling in the matter which was then in hand, that they did not so
much as require to see the determinations and Decrees of those learned men whom
his Majesty had then assembled, before they passed the present Act to bind the
subject fully to believe, observe and perform the same; but left it wholly to
the judgment and discretion of the King and Clergy, and trusted them besides
with the ordaining and inflicting of such pains and penalties on disobedient
and unconformable persons, as to them seemed meet.

This ground work laid, the work went forwards in good order, and at last
being brought unto as much perfection as the said Archbishops, Bishops, and
other learned men could give it, without the cooperation and concurrence of the
Royal assent, it was presented once again to the King's consideration, who
very carefully perused it, and alterd many things with his own hand, as
appears by the book it self still extant in the famous Library of Sir
Robert Cotton, and having so altered and corrected it in some passages,
returned it to the Arcbishop of Canterbury, who bestowed some further pains
upon it, to the end that being to come forth in the Kings name, and by his
authority, there should be nothing in the same which might be justly
reprehended. The business being in this forwardness, the King declares in
Parliament, An. 1544. being the 34 year of his Reign his zeal and care, not
only to suppress all such books and writings as were noysom and pestilent,
and tended to the seducing of his subjects: but also to ordain and establish a
certain form of pure and sincere teaching, agreeable to Gods Word, and the
true doctrine of the Catholic and Apostolic Church, whereunto men may have
recourse for the decision of some such controversies, as have in times past,
and yet do happen to arise. And for a preparatory thereunto, that so it might
come forth with the greater credit, he caused an Act to pass in Parliament for
the abolishing of all books and writings comprizing any matters of Christian
Religion, contrary to that doctrine which since the year 1540. is* or any time
during the Kings life, shall be set forth by his Highness, and for the
punishment of all such (and that too with most grievous pains) which should
preach, teach, maintain or defend any matter or thing contrary to the book of
Doctrine which was then in readiness 34.35. H. 8. c. 1. Which done he caused
the said book to be imprinted in the year next following, under the Title of
A necessary Doctrine for all sorts of people; prefixing a Preface thereto in
his own Royal name, to all his faithful and loving Subjects, that they might
know the better in those dangerous times, what to believe in point of Doctrine,
and how they were to carry and behave themselves in point of practice. which
Statute, as it is the greatest evidence which those times afford, to show, that
both, or either of the houses of Parliament had any thing to do in matters
which concerned Religion; so it entitles them to no more (if at all to any
thing) then that they did make way to a book of doctrine which was before
digested by the Clergy only, revised after and corrected by the Kings own
hand, and finally perused and perfected by the Metropolitan. And more than so
(besides, that being but one swallowe, it can make no summer) it is
acknowledged and confessed in the Act it self (if Poulton understand it
rightly in his Abridgement) that recourse must be had to the Catholic and
Apostolic Church, for the decision of Controversies. Which as it gives the
Clergy the Decisive power, so it left nothing to the Houses but to assist and
aid them with the Temporal sword, when the Spiritual Word could not do the
deed, the point thereof being blunted, and the edge abated.

Next let us look upon the time of king Ed. 6. and we shall find the Articles
and Doctrine of the Church (excepting such as were contained in the book of
Common Prayer) to be composed, confirmed and settled in no other way than by the
Clergy only in their Convocation, the kings authority cooperating and
concurring with them. For, in the Synod held in London An. 1552. The Clergy did
compose and agree upon a book of Articles, containing the chief heads of the
Christian Faith, especially with referrence to such points of Controversy as
were in difference between the Reformators of the Church of England, and the
Church of Rome, and other opponents whatsoever; which after were approved and
published by the Kings authority. They were in number 41, and were published by
this following Title, that is to say, Articuli de quibus in Synodo London, An.
1552. ad tollendum opinionum dissentionem, et consensum verae Religionis
firmandum, inter Episcopos and alios Eruditos viros convenerat, Regia
Authoritate in lucem Editi. And, it is worth our observation, that though the
Parliament was held at the very time, and that the Parliament passed several
Acts which concerned Church Matters, as viz. An Act for uniformity of Divine
Service, and for the confirmation of the book of Ordination, 5. and 6. Ed. 6.
c. 1. An Act declaring which days only shall be kept for holy days, and which
for fasting days, c. 3. An Act against striking or drawing weapon either in
the Church, or Churchyard* c. 4. and finally another Act for the legitimating
of the marriages of Priests and Ministers, c. 12. yet neither in this
Parliament, nor in that which followed, is there so much as the least syllable
which reflects this way, or medleth any thing at all with the book of
Articles. Where, by the way, if you behold the lawfullnesse of Priests
Marriages as a matter Doctrinall, or think we owe that Point of Doctrine, and
the indulgence granted to the Clergy in it, to the care and goodness of the
Parliament, you may please to know, that the point had been before determined
in the Convocation, and stands determined by and for the Clergy in the 31. of
those Articles, and that the Parliament looked not on it as a point of
Doctrine, but as it was a matter practical, conducing to the benefit and
improvement of the Commonwealth. Or if it did, yet was the Statute built on no
other groundwork, than the resolution of the Clergy, the Marriage of Priests
being before determined to be most lawful (I use the very words of the Act it
self) and according to the word of God, by the learned Clergy of this Realm in
their Convocations, as well by the common assent, as by subscription of their
hands. 5.6* Ed* 6. c. 12.

And, for the time of Q. Elizabeth, it is most manifest that they had no other
body of Doctrine in the first part of her Reign, then only the said Articles
of K. Edward's book, and that which was delivered in the book of Homilies of
the said kings time; in which the Parliament had as little to do, as you have
seen they had in the book of Articles. But in the Convocation of the year
1562. being the fifth of the Queens Reign, the Bishops and Clergy taking into
consideration the said book of Articles, and altering what they thought most
fitting, to make it more conducible to the use of the Church, and the
edification of the people, presented it unto the Queen, who caused it to be
published with this name and Title, viz. Articles whereupon it was agreed by
the Archbishops and Bishops of both Provinces and the whole Clergy in the
Convocation holden at London An. 1562. for the avoiding of diversity of
opinions, and for establishing of consent touching true Religion, put forth by
the Queens authority. Of any thing done or pretended to be done by the power
of Parliament, either in the way of approbation, or of confirmation, not one
word occurres either in any of the printed books, or their public Registers.
At last indeed in the thirteenth of the said Queens Reign (which was eight
years full after the passing of those Articles) comes out a Statute for the
redressing of disorders in the Ministers of holy Church; In which it was
enacted. That all such as were ordained Priests or Ministers of God's Word and
Sacraments, after any other form than that appointed to be used in the Church
of England; all such as were to be ordained, or permitted to preach, or to be
instituted into any Benefice with cure of Souls, should publicly subscribe
to the said Articles, and testify their assent unto them: which shows (if you
observe it well) that though the Parliament did well allow of and approve the
said book of Articles, yet the said book owes neither confirmation nor
authority to the Act of Parliament. So that the wonder is the greater, that
that most insolent scoff which is put upon us by the Church of Rome, in
calling our Religion by the name Parliamentaria Religio, should pass so long
without control, unless perhaps it was in reference to our Forms of worship,
of which I am to speak in the next place.

But first we must make answer unto some objections which are made against us,
both from Law and practice. For Practice, first it is alleged by some out of
Bishop Jewel, in his answer to the cavil of Dr. Harding, to be no strange
matter to see Ecclesiastical causes debated in Parliament; and that it is
apparent by the Laws of K. Inas, K. Alfred, K. Edward, etc. That our godly
forefathers the Princes and Peers of this Realm, never vouchsafed to treat
of matters touching the common State, before all controversies of Religion, and
Causes Ecclesiastical had been concluded. Def. of the Apol. pt. 6. c. 2.. 1.
But the answer unto this is easy. For first, if our Religion may be called
Parliamentarian, because it has received confirmation and debate in
Parliament, then the Religion of our Forefathers, even Papistry it self
(concerning which so many Acts of Parliament were made in K. Henry 8. and Q.
Mary's time) must be called Parliamentarian also. And Secondly, it is most
certain, that in the Parliaments or Common Councels (call them which you will)
both of King Inas time, and the rest of the Saxon Kings which Bishop Jewel
speaks of, not only Bishops, Abbats, and the higher part of the Clergy, but
the whole body of the Clergy generally had their votes and suffrages, either in
person or by Proxy. Concerning which, take this for the leading Case, That in
the Parliament or Common Council in K. Ethelbert's time, who first of all the
Saxon Kings received the Gospel, the Clergy were convened in as full a manner,
as the Lay subjects of that Prince* Convocato co^muni Concilio tam Cleri, quam
Populi, says Sr. H. Spelman in his Collection of the Councels. An. 605. p.
118. And for the Parliament of King Ina which leads the way in Bishop Jewel,
it was (says the same Sr. H. Spelman p. 630. Commune Concilium Episcoporum,
Procerum, Comitum, necnon omnium Sapientum, Seniorum, populorumque totius
Regni; where doubtless Sapientes and Seniores (and you know what Seniores
signifies in the Ecclesiastical notion) must be some body else then those
which after are expressed by the name of Populi, which shows the falsehood and
absurdity of the collection made by Master Prynne, that in the epistle to his
book against Doctor Cousins, viz. That the Parliament (as it is now
constituted) has an ancient, genuine, just and lawful Prerogative, to
establish true Religion in our Church, and to abolish and suppress all false,
new, and counterfeit doctrines whatsoever: unless he means, upon the
post-fact, after the Church has done her part, in determining wh^t was true,
what false; what new, what ancient; and finally what Doctrines might be counted
counterfeit, and what sincere. And as for Law, it is true indeed, that by the
Statute 1 Eliz. cap. 1. The Court of Parliament has pawer to determine and
judge of Heresy; which at first sight seems somewhat strange, but on the
second view, you will easily find that this relates only to new and emergent
Heresies, not formerly declared for such in any of the first four General
Counsels, nor in any other General Council adjudging by express words of
holy Scripture; as also that in such new Heresies, the following words
restrain this power to the Assent of the Clergy in their Convocation, as being
best able to instruct the Parliament what they are to do, and where they are
to make use of the secular sword for cutting off a desperate Heretic from the
Church of CHRIST, or rather from the body of all Christian people.

4. Of the Forms of Worship.
THIS rub removed, we now proceed unto a view of such forms of Worship as have
been settled in this Church, since the first dawning of the day of Reformation;
in which our Parliaments have indeed done somewhat, though it be not much. The
first point which was altered in the public Liturgies, was that the Creed,
the Paternoster, and the ten Commandments, were ordered to be said in the
English tongue, to the intent the people might be perfect in them, and learn
them without book, as our phrase is. The next; the setting forth and using of
the English Letanie, on such days and times, in which it was accustomably to
be read as a part of the Service. But neither of these two was done by
Parliament, nay (to say truth) the Parliament did nothing in them. All which
was done in either of them, was only by the Kings authority, by virtue of the
Head ship or Supremacy which was vested in him, either cooperating and
concurring with his Convocation, or else directed and assisted by such learned
Prelates, with whom he did advise in matters which concerned the Church, and
did relate to Reformation. By virtue of which Head-ship or Supremacy he
ordained the first, and to that end caused certain Articles or Injunctions to
be published by the Lord Cromwell, then his Vicar-Generall. An. 1536. And by
the same did he give order for the second, I mean, for the saying of the
Letany in the English tongue, by his own royal Proclamation. An. 1545. for
which, consult the Acts and Mon. fol. 1248. 1312. But these were only
preparations to a greater work which was reserved unto the times of King Ed.
6. In the beginning of whose Reign there passed a Statute for the administering
the Sacrament in both kinds to any person that should devoutly and humbly
desire the same. 1 Ed. 6. cap. 1. In which it is to be observed, that though
the Statute do declare, that the ministering of the same in both kinds to the
people was more agreeable to the first Institution of the said Sacrament, and
to the common usage of the primitive times. Yet Mr. Fox assures us (and we may
take his word) that they did build that Declaration, and consequently the Act
which was raised upon it, upon the Judgment and opinion of the best learned
men, whose resolution and advise they followed in it. fol. 1489. And for the
Form by which the said most Blessed Sacrament was to be so delivered to the
Common people, it was commended to the care of the most grave and learned
Bishops, and others, assembled by the King at his Castle of Windsor; who upon
long, wise, learned and deliberate advice did finally agree (says Fox) upon
one Godly and uniform Order for receiving the same, according to the right rule
of Scriptures, and the first use of the primitive Church. fol. 1491. which
Order, as it was set forth in print. An. 1548. with a Proclamation in the name
of the King, to give authority thereunto amongst the people, so was it
recommended by especial Letters writ unto every Bishop severally from the
Lords of the Counsel, to see the same put in execution; A copy of which
Letters you may find in Fox. fol. 1491. as before is said.

Hitherto nothing done by Parliament in the Forms of Worship, but in the
following year there was. For the Protector and the rest of the Kings Counsel
being fully bent for a Reformation, thought it expedient that one uniform,
quiet and godly Order should be had throughout the Realm, for Officiating God's
Divine Service. And to that end (I use the very words of the Act it self)
appointed the Archbishop of Canterbury, and certain of the most learned and
discreet Bishops, and other learned men of the Realm to meet together,
requiring them, that having as well eye and respect to the most pure and
sincere christian Religion taught in Scriptures, as to the usages in the
primitive Church, they should draw and make one convenient and meet Order, Rite
and Fashion of Common Prayer, and Administration of Sacraments to be had and
used in this his Majesty's Realm of England. Well, what did they being thus
assembled? that the Statute tells us: where it is said, that by the aid of the
holy Ghost (I pray you mark this well) and with one uniform agreement they did
conclude upon and set forth an Order, which they delivered to the Kings
Highness, in a book entitled, The Book of Common Prayer and Administration
of the Sacraments, and other Rites and Ceremonies of the Church, after the use
of the Church of England. All this was done before the Parliament did any
thing. But what was done by them at last? Why first, considering the most godly
travail of the Kings Highness, and the Lord Protector and others of his
Highness Counsel, in gathering together the said Bishops and learned men.
Secondly, the godly prayers, Orders, Rites and Ceremonies in the said book
mentioned. Thirdly, the motives and inducements which inclined the aforesaid
learned men to alter those things which were altered, and to retain those
which were retained; and finally, taking into consideration the honor of God,
and the great quietness which by the grace of God would ensue upon it; they
gave his Majesty most hearty and lowely thanks for the same, and most humbly
prayed him that it might be ordained by his Majesty, with the assent of the
Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, and by authority of the same, that
the said Form of Common Prayer and none other, after the Feast of Pentecost
next following, should be used in all this Majesty's Dominions with several
penalties to such, as either should deprave or neglect the same. 2. and 3. Ed.
6. cap. 1. So far the very words of the Act it self. By which it evidently
appears that the two Houses of Parliament did nothing in the present
business, but impose that Form upon the people, which by the learned and
religious Clergy men (whom the King appointed thereunto) was agreed upon, and
made it penal unto such as either should deprave the same, or neglect to use
it. And thus does Poulton (no mean Lawyer) understand the Statute, who
therefore gives no other Title to it in his Abridgement published in the year
1612* than this The Penalty for not using uniformity of Service, and
Ministration of the Sacraments. So then, the making of one uniform Order of
celebrating Divine Service, was the work of the Clergy, the making of the
Penalties, was the work of the Parliament.

And so much for the first Liturgy of King Edwards Reign; in which you see how
little was done by the authority or power of Parliament, so little, that if it
had been less, it had been just nothing. But some exceptions being taken
against the Liturgy by some of the preciser sort at home, and by Calvin abroad,
the book was brought under a review: and though it had been framed at first (if
the Parliament which said so erred not) by the aid of the holy Ghost himself,
yet to comply with the curiosity of the Ministers, and mistakes of the People,
rather then for any other weighty cause, As the Statute 5. and 6. Ed. 6. cap.
1. it was thought expedient by the King, with the Assent of the Lords and
Commons in Parliament assembled, that the said Order of Common-Service should
be faithfully and godly perused, explained and made fully perfect.

Perused and Explained; by whom? Why, questionless by those who made it; or
else, by those (if they were not the same men) who were appointed by the King
to draw up, and compose a Form of Ordination for the use of the Church. And
this Assent of theirs (for it was no more) was the only part that was ever
acted by the Parliament, in matter of this present nature, save that a Statute
passed in the former Parliament, 3. and 4. Ed. 6. c. 12. unto this effect, that
such Form and manner of making and consecrating Archbishops, Bishops, Priests,
Deacons and other Ministers of the Church (which before I spoke of) as by six
Prelates, and six other men of this Realm, learned in Gods Laws, by the King
to be appointed and assigned, shall be devised for that purpose, and set forth
under the Great Seal, shall be lawfully used and exercised, and none other.
Where note, that the King only was to nominate and appoint the men, the Bishops
and other learned men were to make the book, and that the Parliament in a
blind obedience, or at the least upon a charitable confidence in the integrity
of the men so nominated, did confirm that book, before any of their Members had
ever seen it, though afterward indeed, in the following Parliament, this
book, together with the book of Common Prayer, so printed and explained,
retained a more formal confirmation, as to the use thereof throughout the
kingdom, but in no other respect, for which see the Statute 5. and 6. Ed. 6.
c. 1. [ As for the time of Q. Elizabeth, when the Common prayer book now in use
(being the same almost with the last of King Edward) was to be brought again
into the Church, from whence it was cast out in Q. Mary's Reign; it was
committed to the care of some learned men, that is to say, to Master Whitehead
(once Chaplain to Q. Anne Bullen) Doctor Parker, after Archbishop of
Canterbury, D. Grindall after Bishop of London, D. Coxe after Bishop of Ely, D.
Pilkinton after Bishop of Durham, D. May Deane of S. Paul's, D. Bill Provost of
Eaton, after Deane of Westminster, and Sr. Tho. Smith. By whom being altered in
some few passages which the Statute points to 1 Eliz. cap. 21. It was presented
to the Parliament, and by the Parliament received and established without more
ado, or troubling any Committee of both or either Houses to consider of it,
for ought appears in their Records. All that the Parliament did in it; being
to put it into the condition in which it stood before in King Ed. Reign,
partly by repealing the Repeal of King Ed. Statutes, made in the 1 of Q. Mary
cap. 2. and partly by the adding of some farther penalties on such as did
deprave the book, or neglect to use it, or wilfully did absent themselves from
their parish-Churches. And for the Alterations made therein in King James his
time, being small and in the Rubric only, and for the additions of the
Thanksgivings at the end of the Letany, the Prayer for the Queen and the royal
Issue, and the doctrine of the Sacraments at the end of the Catechism, which
were not in the book before; they were never referred unto the Parliament, but
were done only by authority of the Kings Commission, and stand in force by
virtue only of his Proclamation, which you may find before the book, the charge
of buying the said book so explained and altered, being laid upon the several
and respective parishes, by no other authority than that of of the eightieth
Canon, made in Convocation. An. 1603. The like may also be affirmed of the
Forms of Prayer for the Inauguration day of our Kings and Queens, the
Prayer-books for the fifth of November, and the fifth of August, and those
which have been used in all public Fasts: All which, without the help of
Parliaments, have been composed by the Bishops, and imposed by the King.

Now unto this discourse of the Forms of Worship, I shall subjoyn a word or
two of the times of Worship, that is to say, the holy days observed in the
Church of England; and so observed, that they do owe that observation cheifely
to the Churches power. For whereas it was found in the former times that the
number of the holy days was grown so great, that they became a burden to the
common people, and a great hindrance to the thrift and manufactures of the
kingdom; there was a Canon made in the Convocation. An. 1536, for cutting off
of many superstitious and superfluous holy days, and the reducing them unto
the number in which now they stand (save that St. Georges day, and Mary
Magdalens day, and all the Festivals of the blessed Virgin had their place
amongst them) according to which Canon, there went out a Monitory from the
Archibishop of Canterbury to all the Suffragans of his Province, respectively
to see the same observed in their several Diocesses, which is still extant on
Record. But being the authority of the Church was then in the wane, it was
thought necessary to confirm their Acts, and see execution done upon it by the
Kings Injunction: which did accordingly come forth with this Form or preamble,
That the abolishing of the said holy days was Decreed, ordained and
established by the kings Highness Authority, as supreme Head in Earth of the
Church of England, with the common consent and assent of the Prelates and
Clergy of this his Realm, in Convocation lawfully assembled and Congregate, Of
which see Fox his Acts and Monuments fol. 1246.1247. Afterward in the year
1541. The King perceiving with what difficulty the People were induced to leave
off those holy days, to which they had been so long accustomed, published his
Proclamation of the twenty third of July, for the abolishing of such holy days
(amongst other things) as were prohibited before by his Injunctions: both built
upon the same foundation, namely, the resolution of the Clergy in their
Convocation.

And so it stood until the Reign of King E. 6. at what time the Reformation
of the public Liturgy drew after it by consequence an alteration in the
present business, no days being to be kept or accounted holy, but those for
which the Church had set apart a peculiar office, and not all those neither.
For, whereas there are several and peculiar offices for the day of the
Conversion of Saint Paul, and the day of St. Barnabas the Apostles; neither of
these are kept as holy days, nor reckoned or esteemed as such in the Act of
Parliament, wherein the names and number of the holy days is precisely
specified, which makes some think the Act of Parliament to have had an
overruling power on the Common Prayer Book; but it is not so, there being a
specification of the holy days in the book it self, with this direction,
These to be observed for holy days and none other; in which the Feasts of the
Conversion of St. Paul, and the Apostle Barnabas are omitted plainly, and upon
which specification the Stat. 5. and 6. Ed. 6. cap. 3. which concerns the holy
days seems most exprestly to be built. And for the Offices on those days in
the Common Prayer Book, you may please to know that every holy day consists
of two special parts, that is to say, Rest, or cessation from bodily labor,
and celebration of Divine or Religious duties; and that the days before
remembered are so far kept holy, as to have still their proper and peculiar
Offices, which is observed in all the Cathedralls of this kingdom, and the
Chapels Royal, where the service is read every day; and in most Parish
churches also as often as either of them falls upon a Sunday, though the people be
not on those days enjoined to rest from bodily labor, no more then on the
Coronation day, or the fifth of November, which yet are reckoned by the people
for a kind of holy days. Put all which has been said together, and the sum
is this, That the proceedings of this Church in the Reformation were not merely
Regal, (as it is objected by some Puritans) much less that they were
Parliamentarian in so great a work, as the Papists falsely charge upon us, the
Parliaments for the most part doing little in it, but that they were directed
in a justifiable way, the work being done Synodically, by the Clergy only,
according to the usage of the Primitive times, the King concurring with them,
and corroborating what they had resolved on, either by his own single Act in
his Letters Patent, Proclamations and Injunctions, or by some public Act of
State, as in times, and by Acts of Parliament,

5. Of the power of making Canons for the well ordering of the Clergy, and the
directing of the People in the public duties of Religion.
WE are now come to the last part of this Design, unto the Power of making
Canons, in which the Parliament of England have had less to do than in either
of the other which are gone before. Concerning which I must desire you to
remember, that the Clergy, who had power before to make such Canons and
Constitutions in their Convocations as to them seemed meet, promised the King
in verbo Sacerdotii, not to Enact or Execute any new Canons, but by his
Majesty's royal Assent, and by his Authority first obtained in that behalf:
Which is thus briefly touched upon in the Antiq. Britan. in the life of William
Warham Archbishop of Canterbury. Clerus in verbo Sacerdotii fidem Regi dedit,
ne ullas deinceps in Synodo ferrent Ecclesiasticas leges, nisi and Synodus
authoritate Regia congregata, and Constitutiones in Synodis publicatae eadem
authoritate ratae essent. Upon which ground I doubt not but I might securely
raise this proposition, That whatsoever the Clergy did, or might do lawfully
before the Act of Submission, in their Convocation, of their own power,
without the Kings authority and consent concurring, the same they can, and may
do still, since the said Act of their Submission; the Kings authority and
consent cooperating with them in their Counsels, and giving confirmation to
their Constitutions. Further, it does appear by the aforesaid Act. 25. H. 8.
c. 19. That all such Canons, Constitutions, Ordinances, and Synodalls
Provincial, as were made before the said Submission, which be not contrariant
nor repugnant to the Laws, Statutes, and Customs of this Realm, nor to the
Damage or hurt of the Kings prerogative Royal, were to be used and executed as
in former times. And by the Statute 26. H. 8. c. 1. Of the Kings Supremacy,
that (according to the Recognition made in Convocation) our said Sovereign
Lord, his Heirs and Successors Kings of this Realm, shall have full power and
authority from time to time, to visit, repress, reform, order, correct, etc.
all such errors, heresies, abuses, offenses, contempts, and enormities
whatsoever they be, etc. as may be most to the pleasure of Almighty God, the
increase of virtue in Christ's Religion, and for the peace, unity and
tranquillity of this Realm, and the confirmation of the same. So that you see
these several ways of ordering matters for the public weal and governance
of the Church; First, by such ancient Canons and Constitutions, as being made
in former times, are still in force. Secondly, By such new Canons as are, or
shall be made in Convocation, with and by the Kings Consent. And thirdly, by
the sole authority of the Sovereign Prince, according to the Precedents laid
down in the book of God, and the best ages of the Church. Concerning which you
must remember what was said before, viz. that the Statutes which concern the
Kings Supremacy, are Declaratory of an old Power only, not introductory of a
new; which said, we shall the better see whether the Parliament have had any
thing to do either in making Canons, or prescribing Orders for the regulating
of Spiritual and Ecclesiastical matters, and unto whom the same does of right
belong according to the Laws of the Realm of England.

And first, King Henry being restored to his Head-ship or Supremacy (call it
which you will) did not conceive himself so absolute in it (though at first
much enamored of it) as not some times to take his Convocation with him, but at
all times to be advised by his Prelates, when he had any thing to do that
concerned the Church; for which there had been no provision made by the Ancient
Canons, grounding most times, his Edicts and Injunctions Royal, upon their
advise and resolution. For on this ground, I mean the judgment and conclusions
of his Convocation, did he set out the Injunctions of the year 1536. for the
abolishing of superstitious and superfluous holy days, the exterminating of
the Popes authority, the publishing of the book of Articles, which before we
spoke of number, 8. by all Parsons, Vicars and Curats; for preaching down the use
of Images, Relics, Pilgrimages and superstitious Miracles; for rehearsing
openly in the Church, in the English tongue, the Creed, the Paternoster, and
the ten Commandments; for the due and reverent ministering of the Sacraments
and Sacramentals, for providing English Bibles to be set up in every Church for
the use of the people; for the regular and sober life of Clergy men, and the
relief of the poor. And on the other side the King proceeded some times only
by the advice of his Prelates, as in the Injunctions of the year 1538. for
quarterly Sermons in each Parish; for admitting none to preach but men
sufficiently Licensed: for keeping a Register book of Christnings, Weddings and
Burialls; for the due paying of Tithes, as had been accustomed: for the
abolishing of the commemoration of St. Tho. Becket: for singing Parce nobis
Domine, instead of Ora pro nobis, and the like to these. And of this sort were
the Injunctions which came out in some years succeeding, for the taking away
of Images and Relics, with all the Ornaments of the same: and all the
Monuments and writings of fained Miracles, and for restraint of offering or
setting up lights in any Church, but only to the Blessed Sacrament of the
Altar, in which he was directed chiefly by Archbishop Cranmer: as also those
for eating of white-meates in the time of Lent, the abolishing the fast on St.
Marks day, and the ridiculous (but superstitious) sports, accustomably used on
the days of Saint Clement, St. Catherine and St. Nicholas. All which and more
was done in the said Kings Reign without help of Parliament. For which I shall
refer you to the Acts and Mon. fol. 1385. 1425. 1441. The like may also be
affirmed of the Injunctions published in the name of K. Ed. 6. An. 1547. and
printed also then for the use of the Subjects: and of the several Letters
missive which went forth in his name, prohibiting the bearing of Candles on
Candlemas day: of Ashes in Lent, and of Palms on Palm Sunday: for the taking
down of all the Images throughout the kingdom: for administering the Communion
in both kinds, dated March 13. 1548. for abrogating of private Masses Iun. 24.
1549. for bringing in all Missals, Graduals, Processionals, Legends and
Ordinals, about the latter end of December of the same year: for taking down
of Altars and setting up Tables instead thereof An. 1550. and the like to
these: All which particulars you have in Foxes book of Acts and Mon. in King
Edwards life, which whether they were done of the Kings mere motion, or by
advice of his Counsel, or by consultation with his Bishops (for there is
little left upon Record of the Convocations of that time, more than the
Articles of the year 1552) certain I am that there was nothing done, nor yet
pretended to be done in all these particulars, by the authority of Parliament.

Thus also in Q. Elizabeth's time, before the new Bishops were well settled, and
the Queen assured of the affections of her Clergy she went that way to work in
the Reformation, which not only her two Predecessors, but all the godly Kings
and Princes in the Jewish State, and many of the Christian Emperors in the
Primitive times had done before her, in the well ordering of the Church and
People committed to their care and government by Almighty God. And to that end
she published her Injunctions An. 1559. A book of Orders An. 1561. Another of
Advertisements An. 1562. all tending nnto Reformation, unto the building up of
the new Jerusalem, with the advice no doubt of some godly Prelates, as were
then about her. But past all doubt, without the least concurrence of her Court
of Parliament. But when the times were better settled, and the first
difficulties of her Reign passed over, she left Church-work to the disposing
of Churchmen, who by their place and calling were most proper for it. And they
being met in Convocation, and thereto authorized as the Law required, did make
and publish several books of Canons, as viz. 1571. An. 1584. An. 1597. Which
being confirmed by the Queen under the broad Seal of England, were in force
of Laws to all intents and purposes, which they were first made; but being
confirmed without those formal words, Her Heirs and Successors, are not
binding now, but expired together with the Queen. No Act of Parliament
required to confirm them then, nor never required ever since on the like
occasion. A fuller evidence whereof we cannot have, then in the Canons of the
year 1603. being the first year of King James, made by the Clergy only in the
Convocation, and confirmed only by the King. For, though the old Canons were in
force, which had been made before the Submission of the Clergy as before I
showed you, which served in all these wavering and unsettled times for the
perpetual standing rule of the Churches Government; yet many new emergent
Cases did require new Rules, and whilst there is a possibility of mali mores,
there will be a necessity of bonae Leges. Now in the Confirmation of these
Canons we shall find it thus, That the Clergy being met in their Convocation
according to the Tenor and effect of his Majesty's Writ, his Majesty was
pleased by virtue of his Prerogative Royal and Supreme authority in Causes
Ecclesiastical, to give and grant unto them by his Letters Patents dated Apr.
12. and Iun. 25. full, free, and lawful liberty, license, power, and
authority, to confer, treat, debate, consider, consult, and agree upon such
Canons, Orders, Ordinances, and Constitutions, as they should think necessary,
fit, and convenient, for the honor and service of Almighty God, the good and
quiet of the Church, and the better Government thereof from time to time, etc.
to be kept by all persons within this Realm, as far as lawfully, being members
of the Church, it may concern them: which being agreed on by the Clergy, and by
them presented to the King, humbly requiring him to give his Royal assent unto
them, according to the Statute made in the 25. of K. H. 8. and by his Majesty's
Prerogative and Supreme authority in Ecclesiastical Causes, to ratify and
confirm the same: his Majesty was graciously pleased to confirm and ratify
them by his Letters Patents, for Himself, his Heirs and lawful Successors;
straightly commanding and requiring all his loving Subjects, diligently to
observe, execute and keep the same in all points, wherein they do or may
concern all or any of them. No running to the Parliament to confirm these
Canons, nor any question made till this present, by temperate and knowing men,
that there wanted any Act for their confirmation, which the Law could give
them.

But against this, and all which has been said before, it will be objected,
That being the Bishops of the Church are fully and wholly Parliamentarian, and
have no more authority and jurisdiction, nisi a Parliamentis derivatam, but
that which is conferred upon them by the power of Parliaments, as both Sanders
and Schultingius do expressly say; whatsoever they shall do or conclude upon,
either in Convocation, or in private Conferences, may be called Parliamentarian
also. And this last calumny they build on the several Statutes 24. H. 8. c.
12. touching the manner of electing and Consecrating Archbishops and Bishops.
that of the 1. Ed. 6. c. 2. appointing how they shall be chosen, and what
Seals they shall use. those of the 3 and 4 Ed. 6. c. 12. and 5 and 6 Ed. 6.
for authorizing of the book of Ordination. But chiefly that of the 8 Eliz. c.
1. for making good all Acts since 1 Eliz. in consecrating any Archbishop or
Bishop within this Realm. To give a general answer to each several cavil,
you may please to know; that the Bishops, as they now stand in the Church of
England derive their Calling together with their Authority and Power in
Spiritual matters, from no other hands, than those of Christ and his Apostles,
their Temporal honors and possessions, from the bounty and affection only of
our Kings and Princes; their Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in Causes
Matrimonial, Testamentary and the like, for which no Action lies at the
Common-Lawe, from continual usage and prescription; and owe no more unto the
Parliament than all sort of Subjects do besides, whose fortunes and Estates
have been occasionally and collaterally confirmed in Parliament. And as for the
particular Statutes which are touched upon, that of the 24 H. 8. does only
constitute and ordain a way by which they might be chose and consecrated,
without recourse to Rome for a confirmation, which formerly had put the
Prelates to great charge and trouble: but for the Form and manner of their
Consecration, the Statute leaves it to those Rites and Ceremonies wherewith
before it was performed; And therefore Sanders does not stick to affirm, that
all the Bishops which were made in King Henry's days were Lawfully and
Canonically ordained and Consecrated, the Bishops of that time, not only being
taken and acknowledged in Queen Mary's days, for lawful and Canonical
Bishops, but called on to assist at the Consecration of such other Bishops (
Cardinal Poole himself for one) as were promoted in her Reign, whereof see
Mason's book de Minist. Ang. l. 3. c.. Next for the Statute 1 Ed. 6. cap. 2.
besides that it is satisfied in part by the former Answer as it relates to
their Canonical Consecrations, it was repealed in Terminis in the first of Q.
Mary's Reign, and never stood in force nor practice to this day. That of the
authorizing of the book of Ordination in two several Parliaments of that King,
the one a part ante, and the other a part post, as before I told you, might
indeed seem somewhat to the purpose, if any thing were wanting in it which had
been used in the formula's of the Primitive times; or if the book had been
composed in Parliament, or by Parliament men, or otherwise received more
Authority from them, then that it might be lawfully used and exercised
throughout the Kingdom. But it is plain that none of these things were objected
in Queen Mary's days, when the Papists stood most upon their points, the
Ordinall not being called in, because it had too much of the Parliament, but
because it had too little of the Pope, and relished too strongly of the
Primitive Piety. And for the Statute of the 8 of Q. Elizabeth, which is chiefly
stood on, all that was done therein was no more than this, and on this
occasion. A question had been made by captious and unquiet men, and amongst the
rest by Dr. Bonner, sometimes Bishop of London, whether the Bishops of those
times were lawfully ordained, or not; the reason of the doubt being this (which
I mervaile Mason did not see) because the Book of Ordination which was annulled
and abrogated in the first of Q. Mary, had not been yet restored, and revived
by any legal Act of Q. Elizabeth's time: which Cause being brought before the
Parliament in the 8. year of her Reign, the Parliament took notice first,
that their not restoring of that book to the former Power in Terms significant
and express, was but Casus omissus; and then declare that by the Statute 5 and
6 Ed. 6. It had been added to the Book of Common Prayer, and Administration of
the Sacraments, as a member of it, at least as an Appendant to it, and
therefore by the Statute 1 Eliz. c. 2. was restored again together with the
said book of Common Prayer, intentionally at the least, if not in Terminis. But
being the words in the said Statute were not clear enough to remove all
doubts, they therefore did revive it now, and did accordingly enact, that
whatsoever had been done by virtue of that Ordination, should be good in Law.
This is the Total of the Statute, and this shows rather in my judgment, that
the Bishops of the Queens first times had too little of the Parliament in
them, then that they were conceived to have had too much. And so I come to your
last objection which concerns the Parliament, whose entertayning all occasions
to manifest their power in Ecclesiastical matters, does seem to you to make
that groundles slander of the Papists the more fair and plausible.

It Is true indeed, that many Members of both Houses in these latter times, have
been very ready to embrace all businesses which are offered to them, cut of a
probable hope of drawing the managery of all Affairs as well Ecclesiastical
as Civil into their own hands: and some there are who being they cannot hope
to have their fancies authorized in a Regular way, do put them upon such
designs, as neither can consist with the nature of Parliaments, nor the esteem
and reputation of the Church of Christ. And this has been a practice even as
old as Wicklef, who in the time of K. Rich. 2. addressed his Petition to the
Parliament (as we read in Walsingham) for the Reformation of the Clergy, the
rooting out of many false and erroneous Tenants, and for establishing of his
own Doctrines (who though he had some Wheat, had more Tares by ods) in the
Church of England, and lest he might be thought to have gone a way, as
dangerous and unjustifiable, as it was strange and new, he laid it down for a
Position, that the Parliament or Temporal Lords (where by the way, this
ascribes no authority or power at all to the House of Commons) might lawfully
examine and Reform the Disorders and Corruptions of the Church, and on
discovery of the errors and corruptions of it, divest her of all Titles and
Temporal endowments, till she were reformed. But for all this, and (more than
this) for all he was so strongly backed by the Duke of Lancaster, neither his
Petition nor his Position found any welcome in the Parliament, further than
that it made them cast many a longing eye on the Churches Patrimony, or
produced any other effect toward the work of Reformation, which he chiefly
aimed at, then that it has since served for a Precedent to Penry, Pryn, and
such like turbulent Innovators to disturb the Church, and set on foot those
dreams and dotages, which otherwise they durst not publish. And to say truth,
as long as the Clergy were in power, and had authority in Convocation to do
what they would in matters which concerned Religion, those of the Parliament
conceived it neither safe nor fitting to intermeddle in such business as
concerned the Clergy, for fear of being questioned for it at the Churches
bar. But when that power was lessened, if it were not lost, by the Submission
of the Clergy to K. H. 8. and the Act of the Supremacy which ensued upon it;
then did the Parliaments begin to entrench upon the Church's Rights, to offer
at and enterteine such businesses, as formerly were held peculiar to the Clergy
only; next, to dispute their Charters, and reverse their Privileges, and
finally to impose some hard Laws upon them: Of which Matt. Parker thus
complains in the life of Cranmer, Qua Ecclesiasticarum legum potestate
abdicata, populus in Parliamento coepit de rebus divinis inconsulto Clero
Sancire, tum absentis Cleri privilegia sensim detrahere, juraque duriora quibus
Clerus invitus teneretur, constituere. But these were only tentamenta, offers
and undertakings only, and no more than so. Neither the Parliaments of K.
Edward, or Q. Elizabeth's times knew what it was to make Committees for
Religion, or thought it fit that Vzzah should support the Arc, though he saw
it tottering. That was a work belonging to the Levites only, none of the other
Tribes were to meddle with it. But as the Puritan faction grew more strong and
active, so they applied themselves more openly to the Houses of Parliament, but
specially to the House of Commons, putting all power into their hands as well
in Ecclesiastical and Spiritual Causes, as in matters Temporal. This,
amongst others, confidently affirmed by Mr. Prynne, in the Epistle to his book
called Anti-Arminianisme, where he averres, that all our Bishops, our
Ministers, our Sacraments, our Consecration, our Articles of Religion, our
Homilies, Common Prayer Book, yea and all the Religion of our Church, is no
other way publicly received, supported, or established amongst us, but by
Acts of Parliament. And this not only since the time of the Reformation, but
that Religion, and Church affairs were determined, ratified, declared and
ordered by Act of Parliament, and no ways else, even then when Popery and
Churchmen had the greatest sway. Which strange assertion falling from the Pen
of so great a Scribe, was forthwith cheerfully received amongst our Pharisees,
who hoped to have the highest places, not only in the Synagogue, but the Court
of Sanhedrim, advancing the authority of Parliaments to so high a pitch, that
by degrees they fastened on them, both an infallibility of judgment, and an
omnipotency of Power. Nor can it be denied (to deal truly with you) but that
they met with many apt Scholars in that house, who either out of a desire to
bring all the grist to their own Mill, or willing to enlarge the great power of
Parliaments by making new Precedents for Posterity, or out of faction, or
affection, or what else you please, began to put their Rules in practice, and
draw all matters whatsoever within the cognizance of that Court; In which their
embracements were at last so general, and that humor in the House so
prevalent, that one being once demanded what they did amongst them, returned
this Answer, That they were making a new Creed: Another being heard to say,
That he could not be quiet in his Conscience, till the holy Text should be
confirmed by an Act of Theirs, which passages if they be not true and real (as
I have them from an honest hand) I assure you they are bitter jests. But this,
although indeed it be the sickness and disease of the present times, and
little to the honor of the Court of Parliament, can be no prejudice at all to
the Cause of Religion, or to the way and means of the Reformation, amongst
sober and discerning men: the Doctrine of the Church being settled, the Liturgy
published and confirmed, the Canons authorized and executed, when no such humor
was predominant, nor no such Power pretended to, by both or either of the
Houses of the High Court of Parliament.

Thus, Sir, according to my promise, and your expectation have I collected my
Remembrances, and represented them unto you in as good a fashion as my other
troublesome affairs, and the distractions of the time would give me leave; and
therein made you see, if my judgment fail not, that the Parliament has done
no more in matters which concerned Religion, and the Reformation of this Church,
then what has formerly been done by the secular Powers, in the best and
happiest times of Christianity; and consequently* that the clamor of the
Papists, which has disturbed you, is both false and groundless. Which if it
may be serviceable to your self, or others, whom the like doubts and
prejudices have possessed or scrupled, it is all I wish: my studies and
endeavors aiming at no other end, then to do all the service I can possibly to
the Church of God; to whose Graces and divine Protection you are most heartily
commended in our Lord and Savior JESUS CHRIST. by

SIR Your most affectionate friend to serve you. E. Y.
Covent Garden Iun. 29. 1645.

