A SERMON Preached in the Collegiate Church OF (...) PETER in WESTMINSTER, On
Wednesday May 29th. 1661. Being the Anniversary of his Majesty's most joyful
Restitution to the Crown of England.

By PETER HEYLYN, D. D. Chaplain in Ordinary to his Majesty, and one of the
Prebendaries of that Church.

2 Samuel 19. 14. And he bowed the heart of all the men of Judah, even as the
heart of one man; so that they sent this word unto the King, Return thou and
all thy servants.

August. de Civit. Dei. lib. 1. cap. 7. ^^squis non videt, caecus: quisquis
videt nec laudat, ingratus: quisquis laudanti reluctatur, insanus est.

LONDON: ^^inted by E. C. for A. Seile over against St. Dunstans Church in
Fleetstreet. M.DC.LXI.

To the READER.
THis Sermon gods not to the Press for want of Hearers, for seldom has been
seen a more numerous Auditory then was assembled in this Church at the
Preaching of it. Nor does it go into the world to seek for Readers; who should
not be solicited to the loss both of time and patience, if nothing more than
ordinary did present it to them, and perhaps not that. Some Guests are commonly
best pleased when they are least courted, and think themselves most welcome
when they are not looked for. And yet the Master of the feast in our Saviors
Parable, when the invited Guests neglected or refused to come, sent forth his
Servants into all the streets and lanes of the City, to bring in all that could
be found, whether good or bad, till he had filled his Table, and made up his
company* And 'twas a wedding dinner too, which our Savior speaks of. A feast
prepared for celebrating the most joyful Marriage betwixt Christ and his
Church; or (as this was) betwixt a Mighty Prince, and a loving People. But so
it is in all great Meetings of this nature, that many come not to the feast,
though they are expected; and many come not time enough to enter when the
Bridegroom does; some cannot reach to that which is set before them, and others
have received no invitation to attend the Nuptials. Who notwithstanding would
not easily be contented with the fragments of it, though they should possibly
amount to as many baskets full, as the first provision. And therefore* that the
honest desires of some, and even the curiosity of others, may not rest
unsatisfied, it is now served in cold but whole; with grace before it, and
grace after it, lest otherwise there might be some defect in the entertainment.
Nothing remains, but that the Guests fall to, and much good may it do them.

Westminster, June 8* 1661.
PSALM XXXI. ver. 21.
Versio Septuagint. Interpret. (...) Versio Vulgaris. Benedictus Dominus,
quoniam mirificavit misericordiam suam mihi in Civitate munita. Versio Sancti
Hieron. Benedictus Dominus, quoniam mirabilem fecit misericordiam suam mihi, in
Civitate munita. Versio Tremelii. Benedictus sit Iehova; quia mirificam reddit
benignitatem suam erga me, ut in Civitate munita collocans me. The Old English
Translation. Thanks be to the Lord: for he has showed me mavelous great
kindness in a strong City. The New English Translation. Blessed be the Lord:
for he has showed me his mavelous kindness, in a strong City. A SERMON
Preached at the Collegiate Church OF St PETER in WESTMINSTER, On Wednesday May
29th. 1661.
PSALM XXXI. 21. Blessed be the Lord, for he has showed me his mavelous
kindness, in a strong City.
1. SERMO opportunus est optimus. It is affirmed by Solomon, amongst his
Proverbs, Prove. 15. 23
that a word spoken in due season, is like to apples of gold in pictures of
silver; that is to say, as pleasing to the ear and understanding of judicious
men, as Jewels made like apples of gold in nets of silver, are in the eyes of
curious and magnificent persons. And of this nature is the Text now read unto
you, accommodated to the time, to the present Solemnity. A Text of
Thankfulness, and a Time of Thankfulness: A Time of great deliverance, and a
Text of great deliverance. And as the Text, such also is the Psalm out of which
it is taken; A Psalm of Consolation, and a Text of Comfort; a Psalm of
Confidence, and a Text of Confidence. A Psalm of Confidence, In te Domine
speravi, In thee, O Lord, do I put my trust, so it begins. A Psalm of
Consolation, Viriliter agite, Be of good courage, and you shall be strengthened
in the Lord, with which words it ends. From the beginning to the end, it speaks
Gods infinite mercies unto his Anointed, and in him to us. As for the form, it
is like many of the rest, Plaints mixed with Prayers, things present mingled
with things past; the sad remembrance of his former troubles, indeared and
sweetened by the consideration of some mavelous mercies which God had showed
unto him after all his troubles. But what this kindness was, how great, how
mavelous; how David blessed the name of God for so great a mercy, and what we
are to do upon the sense and apprehension of the like felicity; we shall the
better see, if you shall please to join with me in humble and hearty Prayer to
Almighty God, etc. Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.

2. Victori Psalmus David. The Title of this Psalm (as St. Hierom reads it)
makes it to be composed in memory of some great deliverance, which God, the
giver of all victory had marvellously wrought for his servant David. But what
particular deliverance it was, which is herein celebrated, has been made a
question. Lyra, a natural Jew by birth, affirms upon the credit and authority
of Rabbi Solomon, that David framed this Psalm, existens in persecutione
Saulis; when he was under those calamities which were forced upon him by the
house of Saul; or rather, On the sense and remembrance of them, as from the
composition of the Psalm may be easily gathered. Theodoret, an old Greek
writer, thinks rather, that it was composed by the Royal Penman, Cum ab
Absolome persecutionem pateretur, when he was outed of his Kingdom by the arts
of Absalom. Which difference, how great so ever it appears, may be soon agreed.
For, even the Treason of Achitophel, and the Rebellion of Absalom, were
cherished and fomented by some Grandees of the house of Saul, as we may be
clearly evidenced by some passages of the Sacred Story, in which it is
affirmed, that Shimei who threw stones at him, and reviled him for a man of
blood, when he was forced to quit Jerusalem to the party of Absalom; was of
the family or kindred of the house of Saul; And Sheba who revived the War, 2 Samuel 20. 1.
and blew the Trumpet of Sedition, when all the people were returning to their
old obedience, is plainly said to be a man of the Tribe of Benjamin, 2 Samuel 16.
5.
(which was Saul's own Tribe) and generally believed to be of Saul's kindred
also, who could not easily lay aside their hopes of the Crown of Israel, till
all Saul's sons were hanged in Gibeah before the Lord, of which the Scripture
speaks in the second of Samuel, chap. 22. So that we may declare in favor of
the first opinion, that the great kindness, so much magnified by the Royal
Psalmist, relates to his deliverance from the house of Saul, when he was settled
in Jerusalem, and reigned in peace and glory over all the Tribes. In which
estate he sung this Benedictus to the Lord his God, that is to say, Benedictus
Dominus, Blessed be the Lord, for he has showed me his mavelous kindness in
a strong City.

3. The Text it self contains in it these two general Parts, God's Mercy,
David's Thankfulness; God's mercy unto David in that great deliverance, and
David's thankfulness unto God for so great a Mercy. In the first General, God's
Mercy, we have these particulars; The Subject of it first, and that was David,
David the King, the Lord's Anointed, one chosen by the Lord out of all his
Family, to be the blessing of his Tribe, and the Prince of his People;
Mirificavit mihi, He has showed to me. 2ly The condition and extent thereof,
as being not only called a kindness, a great kindness too, in our old
Translation; but, misericordia mirabilis, a mavelous great kindness; a
kindness which had very much of a Miracle in it. 3ly; The Author, or the Donor
of it, Misericordia sua; His kindness, or the Lord's own kindness. And lastly,
On what Theater, or Stage, this mavelous kindness of the Lord was acted, in
Civitate munita, in a strong City. Over all which, I mean to draw so thin a
veil, that under it we may behold the face of our own affairs, but helped by
some reflections from the Glass of Scripture, and some comparisons of the Copy
with the old Original. In the next General, David's Thankfulness, we shall
observe the Retribution which he made to the Lord his God for such multiplied
mercies, whether it were expressed in his words, or actions. And then the
duties of the Day will come in of course, as the Conclusion follows on the
Premises in a wellformed Syllogism. I begin therefore with the first General,
God's mercy unto David in that great deliverance, and therein first of all with
the Subject of it, David the King, the Lord's Anointed, the Author of this
Psalm, and the argument of it.

4. Experta morbi molestia, evidentior fit jucunditas Sanitatis, as St. Austin
has it. None can so rightly estimate the benefit of a perfect health, as he
who has been long oppressed with a languishing sickness. Contraries set
together, do most perfectly illustrate and express each other. If therefore we
would know, how great God's kindness was to David in the time of his Glories,
we must a little look upon him in his fall, in his lowest fortunes, his
wanderings in the vale of misery, or rather, in the Valley of the shadow of
Death, as his own words are. A misery which fell upon him when he least looked
for it, when he conceived himself most happy, and on the steps of his Ascendent
to the Throne of Israel; 1 Samuel 16. 13.
Anointed privately by Samuel in his Father's House, and by that art designed
for the next King of the House of Jacob: Of great esteem amongst the people, 1 Samuel 17. 24.
for taking up their quarrel against Goliath, when all men else fell off, and
refused the combat; Amongst the Priests, as men that had some secret notice of
the designation, or otherwise, beheld him as a man replenished with the Spirit
of God; Amongst the Courtiers as a Prince of the Royal Family, in being married
unto Mich^l his Master's Daughter; 1 Samuel 28. 28.
Amongst the Military men for his singular valor made known in many fortunate
skirmishes against the Philistims, 1 Samuel 18. 27.
two hundred of whose fore-skins he brought back with him for a sign of his
Victory; And, finally, amongst the Damsels or Ladies of Israel, for his
personal gallantry, who playing on their Musical Instruments, did use to answer
one another, saying, That Saul had slain his Thousands, 1 Samuel 18.
and David his Ten Thousands.

5. But, Eminentis fortunae comes est invidia, said the Court-Historian. This
general applause and those public honors, made him a fit subject for as
great an envy; and drew upon him the displeasure of that mighty Tyrant, who
looked not only on him as his Rival in pursuit of glory, but a competitor with
the Princes of the house of Kish for the Regal Diadem. And being once possessed
with these fears and jealousies, he thinks of nothing but to bring him to a
swift destruction; 1 Samuel 19.
and to that end incenseth all his servants to conspire against him, 1 Samuel 19.
1.
reproves his daughter for not betraying her husband to his rage and fury, and
darts a Javelin at his own son Jonathan for daring to affect the man whom his
father hated. 1 Samuel 20. 33.
No safety being to be found for David in or near the Court, he must be take
himself to places more remote and private; and in his flight obtains both Arms
and Victuals from Abimelech, 1 Samuel 21. 6, 9.
being at that time the High Priest of the Jewish Nation. For which small
courtesy Abimelech himself, and more then fourscore of the Priests, such as
did wear a linen Ephod, as the Text informs us, were miserably slaughtered by
the hands of Doeg a malicious Sycophant; 1 Samuel 22. 18, etc.
their City sacked, their Wives and Children smitten with the edge of the
Sword; their Sheep, their Oxen, and their Asses, together with the rest of
their goods and substance, 1
given over for a prey to their Barbarous Enemies. Poor David in the mean time
had retired to Akish the King of Gath, 1 Samuel 21. 10.
and consequently the old Enemy of his native Country, where he could promise
to himself no great hopes of safety, considering those many sorrows and that
foul dishonor he had wrought unto them in the death of their Champion.

6. I should both tire my self and afflict your patience, if I should lead him
back again to the land of Judah, follow him there in all his wanderings, from
thence wait upon him to the Court of Moab, where he was forced to leave his
Parents, that he might save them from the fury of the present Army. 1 Samuel 22.
3.
And he might rather choose to leave them in that Country then in any other,
by reason of his Descent from Ruth, a Moabitish woman, as the Scripture tells
us; and therefore like to find some favor amongst those of her kindred. But
look upon him where we will, either in the cave of Adullam, the wilderness of
Ziph, the Deserts of Mahum, or the Rocks and Mountains of Engeddi, (Inter
Serpents aprosque avid^sque Leones), 1 Samuel 23.
and we shall find him no where safe from the hand of his Enemies as long as he
continued in the Realm of Israel. 1 Samuel 23. 20.
The Keylites, whom he had redeemed from the power of the Philistims, resolved
to have betrayed him to the malice of Saul, had he not been forewarned by God
of their ill intentions. The men of Ziph, more savage then the wild Beasts in
all those Deserts, had entertained the like design, but were as happily
prevented as the treacherous Keylites. Nabal the churl, whose flocks had been
protected by him from all Thieves and Robbers refused to gratify him with some
part of that superfluity which was provided for his Sheerers. 1 Samuel 25. 11.
And though his Brethren, 1 Samuel 22. 1.
and some few of his next Relations had repaired unto him; yet, generally, his
friends and kindred look upon him as a man forlorn, whom they could neither
privately supply without manifest danger, nor openly relieve without certain
ruin.

7. And yet he was not so deserted, 1 Samuel 27. 2.
but, 1 Samuel 22. 2.
that some companies resorted to him from all parts of the Realm, either to
mend their own condition, or to sweeten his. Not altogether men of such
desperate fortunes as Nabal the old churl reported, and perhaps believed. Some
of them, questionless, might be persons no less eminent both for place and
quality, as for their good affections to him; though generally they were (as
the Scripture tells us) either is debt or discontent, or some great distress;
that is to say, such as were either discontented with the Tyranny of the
present Government, or were indebted to some cruel and unmerciful creditors,
from whom they could expect no favor, and as little Justice; or, in a word,
were otherwise distressed upon some suspicion, that they were wedded to the
Interest of the son of Iess. The taking of these few Volunteers for a guard to
his person, is publicly declared to be the Levying of a War against the King;
1 Samuel 29. 8.
and all the Forces of the Realm must be forthwith armed to suppress those men,
who were not able to withstand the twelfth part of a Tribe. 1 Samuel 27. 2.
This drives him once again to the Court of Akish, where he found better
entertainment then he did before, because he came accompanied with a Train of
courageous followers; from whom the Barbarous King assured himself of no mean
assistance in his next Wars against his Neighbors, without excepting those of
the house of Israel.

8. But now the Tide begins to turn, and a strong flood of mercies of flow in
upon him. As there is no deep Valley, but near some high Mountain; so, near
unto this Vale of Misery was a Hill of Mercy, and we shall see him climb the
top of it without any great difficulty. Akish beholds him as a person so
depressed and injured by the power of Saul, that no reconciliation could be
made between them; and thereupon bestows upon him the strong Town of Ziglag, to
serve for him and his adherents as a City of Refuge, 1 Samuel 27. 6.
to which his party might resort upon all occasions. And for his better welcome
thither, the news of Readiness uncomfortable, but unpittied death, is swiftly
posted to him on the wing of Fame; which opened the first passage to him for
the Crown of Israel. For now there daily came unto him many men of note and
merit, whose names are on record in the Book of Chronicles, affirmed there to
be mighty men, 1 Chr. 12. 1, etc.
experienced in the use of Arms, Captains of Hundreds and of Thousands, and
such as seemed to carry Victory in their very countenances. 1 Chr. 12. 22.
And they came thither in such numbers as they made up a great Host like the
Host of God, (as the Scripture calls it) that is to say, a puissant and mighty
Army, fit for the undertaking of the noblest actions. By whose encouragement,
but chiefly at the instigation of the men of Judah, who had repaired to Ziglag,
amongst the rest; he goes up to Hebron, 2 Samuel 2. 1, 4.
the Principal City of that Tribe, having first taken Gods direction and
commission with him. There he is cheerfully received, and anointed King, King
only over Judah, his own native Tribe, the rest of Israel still adhering to the
house of Saul. For, Abner Captain of Readiness Host, and one as near to him in
blood, as in place and power, had gained so far upon the Military men, 1 Samuel
14. 50.
that they agreed to set the Crown upon the head of Ishbosheth, 2 Samuel 2. 8, 9.
the eldest of Readiness Sons which survived his Father: And this he did, not on
design to divide the Kingdom, to break it into two, and set up Scepter against
Scepter, as Jeroboam and on the death of Solomon; but, with a purpose to compel
the men of Judah by force of Arms to cast off David, to unite themselves to the
rest of Israel, and all together to be subject to a Prince of the house of
Saul. A Prince indeed of no great parts, affirmed to be a person of a dull and
unactive spirit, more given to ease and pleasures, then to deeds of Arms, and
magis extra vitia quam cum virtutibus, in the words of Tacitus: but fit enough
to bear the Title of a King, whilst Abner and the Soldiers managed all
affairs as to them seems best.

9. This brings new troubles upon David, though they held not long. A breach is
made between the new King, and that great Commander; Who being impatient of
rebuke, and netled with some words which escaped his Master, 2 Samuel 3. 8.
resolves upon delivering the whose Kingdom to the hands of David: to which end
he maintains a Treaty with him, and concludes the business. But, before all
things could be settled, the Titulary King is murdered by the two sons of
Rimmon, 2 Samuel 4. 2.
both of them Captains in his Army, both

Natives of the Tribe of Benjamin (his Fathers Tribe) and possibly both of them
of some kindred and relation to him. This puts an end unto the war; the west of
Israel seconding the Tribe of Judah, and altogether calling upon David to
accept the Government. To which end they annoint him the third time, and own
him by that Sacred Ceremony for their Sovereign Prince. And such as Prince as
must have somewhat in him of the Priest, and the Prophet also. For, Rex est
mixta persona cum Sacerdote, as our Lawyers tells us, and capable on that
account of the Sacred Unction (if some of our Masters of the Ceremonies have
not been mistaken). But so it was, that those of Benjamin could not so easily
forget their late pretentions to the Crown of Israel, which they had held
successively under two great Princes, and therefore came not up to Hebron with
the rest of the Tribes, to confer the Kingdom upon David, but to obtain it for
themselves (as Josephus tells us). Antiq. Iud. lib. 7. cap. 2.
A secret not to be concealed from David a discerning Prince, and one that was
well studied in his own concernments. Who therefore to cut off their hopes, and
prevent their practices, resolves to get into his hands the strong City of
Sion. Which standing in a corner of the Tribe of Benjamin, might serve for a
sufficient bridle to hold them in, if they should practice any thing against
his quiet for the time to come. And being afterward enlarged at the charge of
David, by taking in the City of Salim, and building all from Millo inward (as
the Scripture tells us) he caused it to be called Jerusalem, peopled it with
such Families as he might confide in, and made it from thenceforth the chief
seat of his Royal Residence. Never till now was David settled in the Kingdom,
and now he grows considerable in the eyes of all forain Princes, who court
him, and send presents to him, and try all means imaginable to obtain his
favor.

10. And thus the Scepter promised to the Tribe of Judah is put into the hands
of David the Son of Iesse, one of the chief Princes of that Tribe. And all this
done at such a time, when they had all the reason in the world to fear the
contrary. The Government having passed through many Tribes, from Moses of the
race of Levi, to Joshua the Son of Nun of the seed of Ephraim, and so from one
Tribe to another, until it came to Saul of the stock of Benjamin. And this may
seem to have been done for these reasons chiefly: First, That the Tribe of
Judah might not claim the Kingdom otherwise then by Gods donation, as possibly
they might have done, if they had entered on the Government, upon the death of
Moses, by any Military Vote, or Popular election, or in relation to that
Primogeniture, which was vested in them by the last Will and Testament of their
Father Jacob. And 2ly, It was so done, that the people being sensible of the
inconveniences of the former Government, the miseries which they had endured in
the times of Anarchie, and the extremities which they had been reduced to, in
the Reign of Saul; might with a greater cheerfulness embrace a Prince of the
Royal Family, whom God had so miraculously preserved, and commended to them.

11. And it may seem to have been kept so long from David, for two Reasons
also: First, that he being trained up in the School of experience, and hammered
on the Anvile of Affliction, might be the better qualified for mannaging all
affairs of State, then if he had been educated in the pride and pleasures of a
Princes Court. And, Secondly, it was so disposed of, that, being to be married
to the Realm of Israel; he might more passionately long to in^oy his Spouse,
then if she had cast her self into his embraces at the first making of the
Contract. And this was done according to the custom of the Jewish Nation, who
use to place some fitting and convenient interval, betwixt the Espousal and the
Wedding, for which St. Austin gives this reason, August. in Confess. lib. 8.
cap. 2.
Ne vilem habeat maritus datam, quam non suspiravit sponsus dilatam; for fear
(says he) lest otherwise the Bridegroom might despise her in the first
fruition, for whom he had not longed with some vehement passion. But being
longed for, and long looked for, they are met at last, to the full comfort of
both parties, the pleasure of Almighty God, and the joy of the Nation.

12. Such was Gods kindness unto David, expressed in his mavelous
preservation, when he was compassed round about with invincible dangers; his
exaltation to the Throne, from keeping sheep, to be the Shepherd of his people;
and therefore not a kindeness, a great kindeness, only; but, misericordia
mirabilis (in St. Hieroms reading) a mavelous great kindeness, as my Text
assures me. For, what particular is there in all this kindeness which is not
mavelous, mirabile in oculis nostris, as mavelous in our eyes as it was in
his? And not a mavelous kindeness only; but, miserecordia mirifica, a
kindness which wrought wonders, as Tremelius reads it. What can it else be
thought, but a singular miracle that God should for so many years preserve this
poor fugitive Prince, both from the treachery of his friends, and the power of
his enemies; that he should find more favor in the Land of Moab, then he
durst hope for in the place of his birth and breeding; that men from all parts
of the Kingdom should resort unto him, when he had neither Town of War to
secure their persons, nor any stock of money and provisions to maintain their
Families; That Akish and the men of Gath, should lay aside their animosities
against him for the death of Goliath, and put into his hands a piece of such
strength and consequence, as might enable him to create unto them a far greater
mischief?

13. And was it not as great a miracle, if it were not greater, that Saul
should come to such a miserable and calamitous end, without engaging David in a
ruinous and destructive War, against those men which were designed to be his
Subjects? That God should so incline the hearts of the men of Judah, as to
accept him for their King, and thereby to involve themselves in a tedious War;
when all the rest of the Tribes adhered still to Abner, and the Sons of Saul:
That God was pleased to make to use of any of David's party for the destruction
of Saul's house, but acted that great work by Abner and the Sons of (...),

being the Kings near kinsmen and his chief Commanders: That all the Tribes of
Israel should unite together to set and Crown upon his head, whom they had
formerly pursued from one place to another, till they had forced him to take
Sanctuary in a forain Nation: That all this should be done without noise or
trouble; more then the noise of joyful shouts and acclamations, and the short
trouble of an easy, though a martial, progress: That there should be so few
men killed on either side, between the death of Saul, and the Crowning of
David; and, that God should put into his hands the strong, Fort of Sion, which
neither Saul, nor any of the Judges, nor Joshua himself, nor Gideon, nor
Ieptha, Duo Fulmina belli, the veriest Thunderbolts of War, had before
attempted.

14. And yet the kindeness was the greater, and the more miraculous,
considering that it was extended to spiritual mercies, and not confined to
temporal preservations, and external benefits. For notwithstanding the horrid
murder of Abimelech, the terrible massacre of so many Priests, and the
unmerciful sacking of the City of Nob; Abiathar the next High Priest, and many
others doubtless, of that Sacred Order, joined themselves unto him. Abiathar
was too great a person, and too well beloved, not to bring some attendants with
him; and, who more like to bear him company then the Priests and Levites? Not
so much out of care to preserve themselves, as to do service unto him whom the
Lord had chosen. By means whereof, not only he; but, all his followers, were
instructed in the things of God: and thereby kept from-being any way infected
with those gross Idolatries, which were predominant in Moab and the Court of
Gath. Than which there could be nothing more conducible to his future
advancement, or which could more indear him to the Jewish Nation; when they
came once to be assured, that neither flatteries could entice him, nor great
threats affright him, nor hope of promised aid allure him, from standing fast
to the Religion of his Fathers, to the Law of Moses. And more then so, 1 Samuel
23 6.
Abiathar brought along with him the sacred Ephod, by which the High Priest
used to consult with God, and to enquire his will and pleasure in all difficult
cases. The want whereof, necessitated the unhappy Tyrant to have recourse for
counsel to the Witch of Endor, as if he had been forced upon that desperate
resolution in the ancient Poet, ( Flectere si nequeo superos, Acheronta movebo)
that since he could not move the Gods, he would try the Devil.

15. Nor was all this a kindeness only, or a great kindeness,
as the old Translation, and misericordia mirabilis, a mavelous great
kindeness, in the eyes of all men; but, it was misericordia sua, the Lords own
kindeness, and factum Domini, the Lords own doing; to which, no humane prudence
could pretend a title. This David understood, none better. And therefore
attributes his safety and deliverance to the Lord alone, Ipse sit licet magna
unique cura and industria usus, Muscul. in Psalm. 31.
(as Musculus has night-well observed), though he himself had used all
possible industry and care* for his own preservation. He had his agents and
intelligeneers in the Court of Saul, to give him notice of the secret purposes
of his mortal enemy; He entertained Abiathar in a place both of trust and
nearness, that by his means he might maintain a correspondence with the rest of
that Order. And when necessity compelled him to engage in battle, he sent out
Ioab, (a man of most undaunted courage) to encounter Abner, with whom he was
competitor for the Palm of victory. More providence and care could no man use
then David did; and yet, he calls it, misericordiam Domini, only Gods mercy,
and his mavelous kindeness, by which he was preserved in the day of trouble.

16. And so indeed it was; merely Gods mercy, and his mavelous great
kindness, by which he was preserved in the days of Saul, and raised to the
Throne of Israel on the death of Ishbosheth. For what could David have effected
with all his diligence, had not God secretly forwarned him of those dangers
which were near at hand; or what advantage could Abiathars discoveries have
procured unto him, had not God sent the spirit of infatuation amongst the
Princes of Saul's house; supplanted their designs, and turned their wisdom into
foolishness? Or, what could Ioab with all his valor have achieved against so
many enemies, had not God broken them in pieces, had not God thrown amongst
them such a Ball of discord, such a (...), as made them turn their Swords upon
one another. In which dissension the Royal Nothing is dispatched on his bed of
ease, and dispossessed at once both of Crown and Life, before he had served out
his Indentures in the Trade of Government; which also must be factum Domini,
the Lord's doing only, as to the ordering, permitting, and disposing of it;
though Abner and the sons of Ri^mon had their own vile ends. For, who but God
could turn his own Sword upon him, and so infatuate the Counsels of his chief
Commanders, as to contrive the ruins of their nearest kinsman, by whose sole
power they stood, and might have longer stood (in all apparent probability) in
their former greatness.

17. Psalm. 127. 1.
Except the Lord does keep the City (says the Royal Psalmist) the watchman
watches but in vain. Except the Lord does build the house, their labor is but
lost that build it. What then? Shall then the Workman play, Origin. in Rom*
cap. 9.
and the Watchman sleep? Not so, says Origin, ^mpendant ipsi, quantum in se
est, laboris et sollicitudinis, etc. Let them continue their indevours in the
name of God, and let the Watchman watch, and the Workman labor. Though God be
all, and that our safety is from him, and from him alone; yet, he has told us,
that the lazy person shall not eat; and, the careless person shall not
prosper: It is the hand of the diligent which makes rich; and he becomes poor
that deals with a slack hand, (faith the wiseman Solomon). God in the
ordering and disposing of humane affairs, is like the Pilot in a Ship; It is
the Pilot only which does steer and guide the Vessel, and brings it safe into
the Haven; yet, it is expected that every several Mariner do discharge his
duty, and yield obedience to the whistle of the Boat-swain.

18. But on the other side, it is not therefore to be thought, that we may
warrantably entitle either our industry, or strength, or wisdom to the rights
of God. The wisdom of the wise (says Paul) is it not foolishness with the
Lord? What Man is there (says David) that can save himself by his much
strength; Yea, or by taking thought (says the Son of David) can add one cubit
to his stature. Man purposes, but God disposes: And, when we have most spent
our spirits, and consumed our bodies in the well ordering of our fortunes; yet,
it is all in vain, and fruitless, and of no effect except the Lord, even our
own God, does give us his blessing. Ascribe we therefore to the Lord, the glory
of his own exployts; and let us not presume to say in any of our prosperous
actions, that, This my own right hand has done, or my wit effected. Though
David did as much as care and wisdom could perform for his own security; yet he
refers it all to God, and reckons it His mercy only, and his mavelous
kindeness whereby he was preserved from danger, made Master of Jerusalem, and
settled, after all his troubles, in so strong a City.

19. In a strong City. That Is the next. In civitate munita, In a fenced City,
says the Latin. (...), a City walled and ditched about, as the Greek Text
reads it. In civitate robusta and firmata, A City strong in men, and as
strongly fortified, in St. Hierom's Gloss. Only Tremelius, with some notable
difference from all men else, does translate it thus: Benedictus Dominus,
Blessed be the Lord for she has showed his mavelous kindeness to me in as
great a measure, ut in civitate munita collocans me, as if he had enclosed and
kept me safe in a Town of War, as if I had been billited and strongly
garrisoned in a Fort and City. It Is true indeed, Gods mercy is the surest Hold,
to which we may commit our safety; the strongest Castle of defense, to which we
may entrust our persons. A fortress against all our foes; an Antidote against
all Plagues; a Remedy against all Diseases. He that is so defended, need no
other Arms. Horat.
Non eget Mauri Iaoulis, nec arcu; Not shield, nor bow, nor poisoned arrows.
Gods mercy is all kind of weapons to him, both for annoyance and defense. No
armor is so sure of proof, but it may be broken; nor Town so strong, but may
be taken; nor walls so high and close, to keep our contagion. Put if Gods mercy
does protect us, and his power defend us; if we be compassed round about with
his deliverance, as with a wall; we will not be afraid through war, and
poverty, and sickness, do conspire against us. For we are sure that then we are
in such a City, which neither enemy can force, nor want of trade impoverish,
nor disease infect. Deus meus and omnia. Let God be mine, and I am strong
enough against all the world, against all violence, against all practices,
against all misfortunes. I could enlarge my self on this general Topic as to
the moral of my Text, but that I am to keep my self to the literal sense, to
the strong City herein meant by the Royal Psalmist.

20. And if I keep my self to the literal sense, we must inquire what City is
here meant by David. And we shall find upon a very short inquiry, that it was
either Ziglag, Hebron, or Jerusalem, and the last most likely. St. Austin, and
St. Hierome, so resolve for certain, with whom the Moderns do agree, as to that
particular; all telling us, That God declared his mavelous mercies unto
David, by settling his affairs, in Civitate Jerusalem, in the strong City of
Jerusalem, in the Fort of Sion. For there he found an end of his former
sorrows, thither he brought the Ark, to that place he removed the Trabernacle,
and there did he fix his Royal Palace, with the Courts of Justice, and thereby
drew unto it, by degrees, all the wealth of the Kingdom; and there he reigned
in greater glory and renown, then any of the Kings and Princes which were round
about him.

21. Now Cities are accounted strong in two respects: first, in the strength of
situation, or of art; and next in the multitudes and natural courage of the
people: and in both these Jerusalem, as it flourished in the time of David,
might worthily be called a strong City, (as indeed it was) Civitas munitissima,
as my Author has it. For first, it was well situated and strongly fortified,
three Towns in one of them seated on steep Hills, and all of them environed
with high Walls, strong Bullwarks, and unpassable Ditches: But none to be
compared with the City of Sion, which made the Iebusites presume so far upon
the strength of the place, that, in contempt of David's Forces, they manned
their walls with none but their blind and lame, A^iq. Iud ic. (...). 7. chap 3.
as Josephus tells us* and then sent word, (whether with greater pride or
folly, it is hard to say) that except he took away the blind and the lame, he
could not come thither. Which was to tell him in effect, that those poor
wretches were sufficient to make good the Fort against all his Army, and
therefore must be first removed, before he could expect to be Master of it.
Such confidence, says he, they had in their Walls and Trenches, that they
conceived them able, without further help to keep out the Enemy.

22. But Walls, we see by this example, are but simple strengths, if there be
any want of people, or in the people any want of courage to make good the
place. The honor of a King consists not in the strength of Towns, and
frequency of Garrisons; but in the multitude, and courage, and good affection
of his Subjects. Kings are then safest, when they trust rather to their Castles
of bones, then their Castles of stones; according to the Aphorism of Sir Henry
Savage, an old English Soldier. Lycurgus also seemed to be of the same
opinion, when he prohibited the Spartans to immure their City, or to use any of
the Arts of Fortification. And in this sense lerusalem was strong; because it
was as populous, and no less capacious, then either Nineveh, or Babylon, or
Eckbatana, or any other Cities in the Eastern Countries. So populous, that at
the siege thereof by Titus, there perished by the Sword and Famine of all sorts
and sexes, loseph. de ^ello. Iud. lib. 7. c. 17.
1100000. and above, as Josephus tells us. And so prodigiously capacious,
that once the High Priest (at the request of Cestius a Roman President)
numbering the people which came thither to observe the Passover, Id. ibid.
found them to be two millions and seven hundred thousand men (besides women
and children) all sound and purified, and fitted by the Law for that Sacred
Ceremony. A number numberless, and not indeed to be believed, were not Josephus
generally reckoned for a true Historian, (...), as the good Father, Justin
Martyr, has assured us of him. And though these numberings of the people in
that mighty City happened long after David's time; yet the City after David's
time received small inlargements. Ten of the Tribes revolting on the death of
Solomon, and never afterward returning to the Kings of Judah.

23. As for the courage of the People, and Inhabitants of it, in the time of
David; we may conceive it equal at the least, if it were not greater, then that
of their posterity in the times succeeding. Which was so eminent, that he which
reads the Story of their final ruin, when besieged by Titus, will find the
Romans so put to it, that they never purchased any City at a dearer rate. And
hereupon may say in the word of Justin, Et tanta animorum virtus fuit, etc.
That though they had just cause at all times to despair of safety; yet, for the
most part, they presumed, and came off with safety, till God was pleased to
give them over for a prey to the Sword of their Enemies.

24. And yet there might be somewhat in it, which more assured David of his
peace and happiness, than either the Courage of the people, or the Strength of
the place; which was their good Affection and fidelity to him. And this appears
plainly by their carriage toward him, when he was forced to give way to the
Treason of Absalom. For, when he left them to the power of the Enemy, the
people followed him in great numbers, to express their loyalty; and followed
him in tears, to express their affection. So, as it cannot be affirmed, that
either they betrayed, or forsook their King: but, that the King rather in a
Royal pity did withdraw from them; left otherwise he might have brought some
evil on the City, as the Text informs us. Lay all that has been said,
together, of the strength of this City, and we shall find, that David had good
reason to extol Gods Name for giving him possession of a place so strong, so
populous, and so replenished with a loyal and courageous people.

25. And thus I have run over all the parts of my Text, as they declare God's
mavelous kindness unto David; so, that it can be no hard matter to remove the
vail, and to behold the face of our own affairs, the mercies of this day, and
the glories of it. A day in which we solemnize the memory of as great a
kindness; a kindness as remarkable in respect of the Person, as mavelous in
its own condition, no less peculiar to the Lord as the Author of it, and in a
place as notable, our Principal City, our strongest City of descence. To which,
by Gods assistance, and your Christian Patience, I shall now proceed, and then
descend unto the duties of the days, where we shall meet with David's
thankfulness, and our own to boot.

26. Et, De quo loquitur Propheta, vel populus fidelis? And in this place may
be asked in the Eunuch's words, Of whom here speaks the Prophet, either of
himself, or of some other? Not of himself alone says Cassianus, an old
Christian Writer, but in behalf of all Gods children, of his faithful servants.
The Books of Psalms is so composed says Athanasius, Athanas. in Epist. ad Mar.
in Tom. 3.
that every man may read his own Story in them, and find therein his own
particular concernments; and that as punctually, as if the purpose of the Psalm
had been addressed and fitted only unto his occasions. Let it be so, and then,
Who may not find the quality of our late afflictions, and our deliverance
together in this present Psalm, and read the state of our affairs in the Story
of David; and then draw down an easy and familiar parallel betwixt the
Persons, and the mercies, and the places too? A parallel, right worthy of the
pen of Plutarch, if any such were found amongst us; but, such as seems to have
been done in part already, by laying before you David's troubles and his great
deliverance. And therefore passing by those things which apply themselves, and
those in which the Story of both Princes seems to make but one; we will observe
the method which is used by Plutarch, in laying down the points in which they
differ, or, those wherein one party seems to have pre-eminence above the other.

27. First then, It may be truly said of our English David, as Commodus, not
without vainglory, did affirm of himself, Quem Primum Sol and Principem and
hominem vidit, that he was born a Prince, and that the Sun did never otherwise
behold him then as Heir to a Kingdom. Which cannot be affirmed of David, nor of
David's Ancestors; though all of them might live in expectation of obtaining
that Scepter, which had been promised to that Tribe, in the person of Judah.
And as his Birth was higher, so his Fall was lower, and his afflictions so much
greater; and the more insupportable, because he was more tenderly bred, and
less able to bear them. Nay, they were greater in themselves then the heavyest
sorrows that ever fell upon David in the time of his troubles; who kept himself
most commonly unto those retreats which his own Country did afford him, and
when he was compelled to retire to Moab, or to sojourn in the Realm of Gath,
neither Readiness malice, nor his power did pursue him there. But so it was not in
the case of our Royal Exile; Driven out of all the Forts and Cities of his own
Dominions, by the power of his Enemies; and, by their practices, not suffered
to remain in France; nor to be entertained in Holland; compelled to shift from
one Imperial City to another; from the Higher, to the Lower Germany; but,
pursued in all, seldom nor never free from their trains and treacheries, who
would not think themselves secure but in his destruction. Sic aquilam fugiunt
trepidae Columbae; Never was Patridge flown at with a swifter wing by a
well-train'd Falcon, nor game more hotly followed, by the fiercest Hounds; than
this poor Prince was chased by those mighty Hunters, those Nimrods, those
Robusti Venatores, as the Scripture calls them: who had the building of that
Babel which they raised amongst us. They had their cunning Lime-hounds to draw
Dry-foot after him, and plied the chase with all the Kennil at his Heels, when
the Hunt was up: not with a purpose to call off when they had breathed their
Horses or tried their Dogs; but with a merciless retreat to hunt him down, and
then to wash their cruel and accursed hands in his precious blood, as is
accustomed in the fall of a Buck of Stagg.

28. And as the dangers which accompanied our English David, were more
transcendent in respect of his Sacred Person; so, were they far more grievous
to him in respect of his party: whose tears he put into his bottles, whose
stripes he bare on his own body, and whose calamities did more afflict his
righteous Soul, then his own misfortunes. And, if we look upon his Party with
an equal eye, we shall soon find them to have suffered more and far heavier
pressures in his cause and quarrel, then all the Hebrew Nations did for the
sake of David. We read indeed of 85. Priests slaughtered by the cruelty and
command of Saul; But we may read of more than twenty times that number of our
Regular Clergy; all the Bishops, Deans, and Dignitaries, and almost all the
Heads of Houses imprisoned, plundered, sequestered, ejected; their wives and
children miserably turned out of doors, some of them left for dead in the open
streets. And why all this? but for adhering to his Majesty, and his Fathers
house, and to the Laws, and the Religion here established, and for no crime
else. But then again, we do not read of any man of quality in the Tribes of
Israel, condemned and executed, or otherwise deprived of Lands and Liberties,
for his well wishing unto David. Amongst us, nothing was more common than the
imprisoning of our choicest and most able Gentry, selling the Goods,
confiscating the Lands, and calling those in question for their very lives,
whose known fidelity was imputed to them for their only crime. For, now we had
attained to that height of wretchedness, that Loyalty must pass for Treason,
and Treason must be Unicum eorum crimen quivacabant crimine, as in the worst
and most deplorable condition of the Roman Empire. And thereupon it was
concluded in the School of Tyrannus, that they who were so prodigal of their
Money, Arms and Victuals to another man, especially, to one marked out for
ruin by their mighty Masters, should have no bread to feed their Families, or
money to maintain themselves; or other Arms, but Prayers, and Tears, to save
them from the violence of unjust Oppression, even from Death it self.

29. Besides, it might be some alleviation unto David's followers, to suffer by
the hands of a lawful King, a King set over them by God, by the Lord himself;
whose Power they were not to resist, whose Person was too Sacred, and his
Authority too transcendent to be called in question. But it must be a torment
unexpressible to a generous spirit, to be trod underfoot by an Adoni-bezek; to
have their lives and Vineyards taken from them, at the will of an Ahab; to see
the Bramble Reign as King over all the Trees our tallest Oaks felled down by a
shrub of yesterday; and all the goodly Cedars of the Church, grubbed up, to
make room for a stinking Elder.

30. In the next place, as the calamities which fell upon our English David,
and his faithful followers, were more in number and more grievous, then all
those which had been suffered by the other; so was the kindness of the Lord
more mavelous in his preservation, the hand of God more visible in his
Restitution. And first, the kindness was more mavelous in his Preservation,
because we do not find that David ever hazarded his own person in the day of
Battle, but managed all his Wars with Abner, Absalom, and Sheba, by the hand
of Ioab. Which gave him means and opportunity to provide for himself, though
all his Forces had been routed, and their General taken. But our great Master
put himself into the head of his Army, ventured his life for the Redemption of
his people, charged and recharged through the thickest of his enemies, the
first that came into the field, and the last that left it; and thereby gained
the honor, though he lost the victory of the day. By what miraculous means he
was preserved from death in that fatal Overthrow, and with what Loyal secrecy
conveyed from one place to another, is not so clearly and distinctly known as
the cause deserves; and therefore to be wished that it may publicly be
declared by his Sacred Majesty; that God might have the glory of his own great
Mercies, and all good men the honor of their brave fidelity. In the mean time,
we may with piety believe, that he was either carried off by God on the wings
of Angels, so that none could reach him; or else inveloped round about with a
cloud of darkness, so that none could see him, Virgil. Aencid.
Cernere ne quis eum, ne quis contingere poss it, as Virgil tells us of
Aeneas in the last condition.

31. And then again, the hand of God was far more visible in his Restitution.
For, was it not a mavelous kindness, that God was pleased to preserve a
strong party for him, which had not been infected with the errors and
corruptions, which then reigned amongst us; that in a time of such a general
defection from the rules of the Church, so many thousands should be found of
all sorts and sexes, which had not bowed the knee to Baal, nor to the golden
Calves of Dan and Bethel, nor the more gilded Calves that grazed and bleated
upon these mountains of the Lord. And that far more should keep their hearts
entire and loyal in those times of danger, when they could find no means to
signify it by their tongues and hands. And this not only was a kindness, and a
mavelous kindness; but, misericordia sua, the Lords kindness also, most
properly to be called the work of God, who did both bow their Hearts, and
advance their Hands, and use them both, for the facilitating of the Kings
Reduction.

32. 1 King. 18. 44.
In which conjuncture of affairs, a little cloud arises from the Northern Sea,
after the heavens had been shut up for some years together. Which though it
were no bigger then a man's hand in the first appearance, yet brought along with
it such abundance of rain, as did not only comfort and refresh the afflicted
Land, but forced our politic Ahabs, and their followers too, to take their
Chariots and make haste away to some other place, before the storm should
overtake them. And certainly this must needs be misericordia sua, as well Gods
mercy in it self, as to be reckoned for a mavellous mercy in the eyes of men.
For neither the Party was so weak, nor the Cause so desperate, as to be broken
by the coming of so small a power, as rather seemed to be a Guard to their
Generals person, then of sufficient force to oppose that Army, before which two
great Kings were not able to stand. And then it is to be observed, that such as
draw their Swords upon God's Anointed, use commonly to throw away the scabbards
also; and find no way of doing better, but by doing worse. Tacit. Hist li. 2.
Nil medium inter summa and. praecipitia. No middle way for them to walk in,
but either to bear up like Princes, or to die like Traitors. But it was
otherwise in the case which we have before us. God so prevailing on the hearts
of the men of war, that they became no less ready to receive their King, then
his own party to invite him; And they which first engaged in the War against
him, expulsed him hence, and voted him incapable of the Regal Dignity, are now
as zealous as the best to advance him to it. Nay, they contended eagerly with
the rest of the Subjects (as once the men of Israel did with the men of Judah)
which of the two should show most zeal for his Restitution; and did not only
send word to him that he should return, both he and his servants with him; but,
some of them passed over the Flood, that they might bring him back unto his
Country with the greater glory. Et certant ipsi secum, utrum contumeliosius
eum expulerint, an honorabilius revocaverint; as in the case of Alcibiades is
observed by Justin.

33. But possibly our Gideon with such a handful of men, might not have been of
power sufficient to effect the enterprise, if our great City had not openly
appeared in favor of it, and thereby given encouragement to the rest of the
Subjects, whose hearts stood firm unto the King. A treble City of three Towns
together, but all of them united in one common name, as Jerusalem was; and no
less strong then that, in regard on the multitude; but stronger, in respect of
the power and riches of the people of it. For here it was, in this strong City,
the principal City of our Nation, the abstract or Epitomie of all Britain (In
Britanniarum compendio) as my Author calls it, that the design was most
advanced, though not there contrived. And here it was in this strong City that
this great miracle of mercy did receive accomplishment, by opening both their
Gates, and Hearts, and Hands, to receive their Sovereign. Let them continue in
that obedience to our Lord the King, and they shall wipe away the memory of
their former Errors. Nay, our Posterity shall behold them with a cheerful
gratitude, as the restorers and preservers of our common happiness, by giving
good example to the rest of the Kingdom. For certainly the practice of great
Cities, is exemplary, not only in their Morals; but, their Politics too.
According to the motion of the Primum mobile, the lower Stars and Planets move
in their several Spheres, and think it no disgrace to be sometimes retrograde,
or in their motus trepidationis; when the first Orb begins to be irregular, or
seems to be left destitute of those Intelligences which are said to move it.

34. And therefore it concerns great Towns and populous Cities, upon whose
actions all men's eyes are fixed and busied, to be a pattern of good works, of
Loyalty, and of due obedience to the rest of the people. Faction, and
Opposition to Authority, are two dangerous plagues, more fatal and destructive
to the greatest Empire, than the Sword, Pestilence, or Famine. Which if they
get into a City or a Town of note, Non ibi consistunt ubi caeperunt, Vellei.
(...) Hist. l. 2.
infect not there alone where they first brake out; but, as the nature of the
Plague is observed to be, from thence it springs into the Villages adjoining,
and in the end to all the quarters of the Kingdom. It cannot be denied, but
that we found it to be so in the first revolt; but then it must be granted
also, that the Tide never turned in the lesser Rivers, until the Thames had
made a stand under London Bridge. The noise of which great miracle (as it was
no other) made all the waters clap their hands, and the floods rejoice, and
even the Ocean to be proud of so rich a burden, as was committed to its trust
by the heavenly Pilot.

35. For now the King prepares for his return to the Royal City, not with an
Army to besiege it, to smite it with the edge of the sword, and to root out the
Iebusites, which were planted in it, as David did when he first brought
Jerusalem under his command. Not so; but, as a Prince of peace, as the Son of
David, to bring the glad tidings of salvation to all his Subjects, to put an
end to all the miseries of his People, and to restore them to that peace and
happiness, which they had forfeited by pride and wantonness, by disobedience to
his Person, and distrust to his Promises; and, in a word, by doing more then is
to be repeated, since it has been pardoned. And to this City came the Tribes
to receive their King; whether, in greater numbers, or with greedier eyes, or
with more joyful hearts, it is hard to say. Of which, I shall speak little now,
because more anon. This was the blessing of the day, and this conducts me next
to the duties of it, which we shall take from David's Doctrine and example,
Benedictus Dominus, Blessed be the Lord.

36. Et quemodo dicit, Benedictus Dominus? Number illi opus est benedictione
nostra? What means the Prophet (says St. Hierom) by this form of speech? Has
the Lord need of us that we should bless him? No, but we say, with Vatablus,
that it is an Hebraism, a garb of speech peculiar to the Hebrew Language; the
meaning this, Dignus est omni laud Dominus, The Lord is worthy to be praised,
His mighty Acts to be preserved in perpetual memory. What David's practice was,
we need make no question; or, if we did, we have sufficient evidence for it in
the Book of Psalms. Most of which were composed to no other purpose, but to
extol Gods name, and set forth his praises for all the blessings which he had
bestowed upon him in his soul and body. Among which last, there was none more
great, more mavelous, more fit to be ascribed to the Lord alone, then the
preserving of his Person, the raising of him to his Throne, and the
establishing of that Throne in so strong a City. And therefore, Benedictus
Dominus, Let thanks be given unto the Lord, says our old Translation.

37. But more particularly we may behold the thankfulness of David, in his
Works and Actions. We may behold it in his Works, if we consult that notable
passage of Josephus, where it is said, that David being delivered from his Wars
and troubles (...), Antiq. Iudaic. lib. 7. chap. 10.
indicted Anthems, Psams, and Hymns in the praise of God; calling to mind
those manifold and great occasions which might induce him to a pious and
religious gratitude; and more then so, he procured many Instruments to be made
for God's public service, Organs, and Psalteries, and Harps, and taught the
Levites how to praise Gods name upon them (says the same Josephus) not only on
the Sabbath, but the other Festivals. For doing which, he had no precept from
above, or any warrant that we read of, but his own authority, and that he
thought it fit and decent.

38. David, no question, knew as perfectly Gods nature and the true nature of
his service, as any other man whatsoever he was: Yet thought he not that either
of them was profaned or made less edifying by the occasion of sweet Music
and melodious Harmony. Which made him call so often upon all his people, not
only to set forth Gods praises in their Songs and Hymns, but to extol and
celebrate his Name, with Trumpets and loud sounding Cymbals, with Psalteries
and Harps, Stringed instruments, and Organs also; and that not in their houses
only, but in the blessed Sanctuary, as appears plainly in the last of the Book
of Psalm. And he appointed also that the singers, and such as played upon the
Musical instruments, in the performance of this service, should be clothed in
white, or rather with a linen vesture over the rest of their garments, as it
is said expressly in the 1 Chro. chapter 15. From whence (or from the linen ephod
which was worn by the Priests) we have derived the Surplisse now in use amongst
us, and not from any garment used by the Priests of Isis, as some of the
preciser sort have most idely fancyed.

39. But David was as excellent in paying his thankfulness to God in the acts
of piety, as praising him with songs and hymns, and musical Instruments. The
Ark of God which had been taken by the Philist ms in the time of Eli, and kept
at Keriath-jearim all the Reign of Saul; is now brought back* and settled in
Jerusalem by the care of David, who gave not only order for the doing of it,
but saw it done and was himself a principal actor in that sacred Ceremony. He
thought it no way mis-becomming any earthly Majesty, to look to all such
matters as concerned Religion and appertained unto the service of the most high
God; Nor is there any thing which makes a King more esteemable in the eyes of
his subjects, then to be active and industrious in the restoring of Gods
worship to it is ancient purity. Ille diis proximus habetur, per quem deorum
majestas vindicatur, are the words of an Heathen, yet such as may become the
most sober Christian.

40. Follow him yet a little further, and we shall see him putting the whole
service of God into a better frame and order, then it had been formerly. To
which end he appointed to the priests their several tunes, that every man might
know the course of his ministration; and so distributed and disposed them under
several heads, that all things might be acted by them without confusion. Which
Heads or Rulers, or chief Captains, as the gospel calls them, being in number
twenty fowr, besides the High Priest, and his Sagan or the second High Priest,
twenty six in all, make up the just tale of our English Bishops. And in regard
the Tribe of Levi had remained so faithful to him, and done and suffered so
much for him, in the time of his troubles, he is resolved to make a retribution
worthy of a Royal spirit. Some of them therefore he sets over the treasures of
the house of God, that is to say, such treasures as were dedicated and laid up
in the Holy Temple, or otherwise offered and designed for Religious uses.
Others he made officers and Judges in the Tribes of Israel, and that not only
in all businesses of the Lord, in all sacred matters, but in the business of
the King, even in civil concernments, as is expressed most plainly in the
first of Chro. chapter 26. So far was David from conceiving, that sacred Orders
were a super-sedeas to all civil prudence; and that he might not lawfully make
use of the abilities of any of his Subjects, of what sort soever, as
Councillors, Judges, Officers, or what else he pleased.

41. Thus David did, and thus our David has done also. He made it his first
act to close the breaches in this Church, both in Doctrine and Discipline, and
to restore the ancient government of Bishops, according to Gods words and the
primitive practice. He takes care that Divine service be officiated with as
much solemnity, as in the best and happiest times of his predecessors, adorns
his Chapel in a costly and magnificent manner, gathers together the best
voices in his whole dominions, and intermingleth them with Musical Instruments,
which seem to carry a resemblance to that heavenly Harmony which some ascribe
unto the Spheres. A form of service highly magnyfied by the primitive
Christian, and such as gained exceedingly upon men's affections. St. Austin,
when an Heathen or at best a Manich^e found two temptations to invite him to
the Christian Churches; that is to say, to hear the eloquence of St. Ambrose
when he was in the Pulpit, and the H^rmonious Melody which was made in the
Quire. And it is hard to say, which of the two prevailed most toward his
Conversion. The music of the Church so mollified his stony heart that it drew
tears from his eyes ( ut flevi ad cantus Ecclesiae tuae) Aug Conf. lib. 10. chapter
23.
and thereby made him apter for all such impressions of the Holy Spirit, as
afterward advanced him highly in the favor both of God and Men, Retained on
this account, (as he after tells us) in all the Churches of those times, both
Greek and Latin, Ut per oblectamenta aurium, Id. ibid.
in firmior assurgat animus in pietatis affectum; because it did compose men's
thoughts, and calm their passions, and fit them to the serious and the grave
performance of religious Offices: Which makes it seem the greater wonder, that
any man, preferred and dignified in the Church of England, should in a Sermon
preached, and printed, and exposed to sale; compare the heavenly music in
Cathedral Churches to that confused medley of the Flute, Dan. 3. 5.
the Sackbut, and the Harp, the Psaltery, the Cornet, and the Dulcimer, which
played before the Golden Image, advanced by Nebucadnezzar in the fields of
Babylon. But he hath-long since smarted for his folly, and so let him go.

42. Our English David stays not here, but looks upon the services and the
sufferings of the Regular Clergy; some of which he restores to their former
fortunes, and raises others unto greater then they had before. All the
Episcopal Sees, but one, are filled with Learned and Religious Prelates, of
whom the tongue of envy, hatred, malice and uncharitableness can speak no
reproach. And as the Sees are filled with Learned and Religious Prelates; so is
it to be hoped that by the Piety of these times, those Prelates shall be
re-established in those Powers and Privileges, which the Iniquity of the last
Times has taken from them. Without which they must pass for Ciphers in the
Church-Arithmetick, disabled from proceeding in the work of God; of less esteem
amongst their friends, and a scorn to their adversaries. The State was never
better served, then when the Messengers of Peace were the Ministers of it: when
Kings asked Counsel of the Priests, and that the Priests were Counselors,
Officers, and Judges in their several times. Which David must needs know as
well as any (being a Prince replenished with the Spirit of God) or else he had
not called them to those employments which the Scripture speaks of.

43. Thus has the King performed his duty, we must next do ours; and pay our
thankfulness to God on the knees of our hearts, for the advancement of our
David to the Throne of his Fathers; and, thereby giving us such a fair and
blessed Sunshine after a long Egyptian darkness, and so miraculous a calm upon
the back of that most dreadful intermixture of Thunder and Lightning (the
roaring of the Cannons, and the burning of Towns), which was never equalled in
this Nation. Which as it ought to be our duty to the last day of our lives; so,
more particularly of this day, which by the Piety of the State has been set
apart for the Celebration, for the commemorating, of that kindness, that
mavelous great kindness which he has showed to us, and to his Anointed, in
the chief City of our Nation, the abstract or Epitomie of the whole, as before
was said. Such Festivals as these come not within the censure of our nicer
spirits: Those which have quarrelled at the rest, the Festivals of Christ, and
his Apostles, and his Virgin Mother; do yet allow of Feriae repentinae, and ex
re nata institutae, as they please to phrase it: Such as are instituted and
ordained upon new Emergencies. If any thing displease them in it, it is the
settling of it by a Law to be made perpetual; to be a day of Thankfulness and
Commemoration to succeeding Ages. Which being the adding of a new to the
ancient Festivals, may spur on those which are in eminent place and power, to
rejoyn the old Festivals to the new, and cause them both to be observed with
such Christian Piety, that all men laying aside their Trades and profane
Employments, may diligently repair to their Parish Churches, to set forth God's
most worthy praise, to hear his most holy Word, and to ask those things which
be requisite and necessary both for the body and the Soul, according to the
Laws and Statutes in that case provided. But, as for this particular day, it is
to be observed as our Feast of Purim, in memory of our deliverance from the
hands of Haman, and Haman's being hanged upon the Gallouse of his own
preparing, together with his ten sons (mark the number well) all executed by
the Common Hangman on the same account. A day of praising God in our Public
Churches, of Feasting and Rejoicing in our private Houses, of Joy and Triumphs
in our Streets; A day to be observed with all due Solemnity, as being the
Birthday of the King and the Kingdom too.

44. And so it cannot choose but do, if we look back upon the miseries of the
former Tyranny, as well in our Spiritual Concernments as our Civil Rights. And
then reflect upon this Day as it was celebrated by all sorts of People at the
King's Reduction. And first, if we take notice of the miseries of the times
preceding in reference to Spiritual matters, we may observe our Public
Liturgy disgraced, and at last discharged, to make way for the rash,
seditious, and inconsiderate evaporations of those turbulent spirits, whose
very Prayers, in fine, were turned into Sin: The Pulpits every where left open
to all sorts of Mechanics; and either no Priests made at all, or, none but
such as were of Ieroboam's making, Priests of the lowest of the People;
abhorring Idols made a color for committing Sacrilege, such Sacriledges too
as seldom or never had been heard of amongst the Gentiles; Pictures and Images
in Church-windows (retained for Ornaments till this day in the Lutheran
Churches) defaced on purpose, for the ostentation of a swifter Zeal, than could
keep company with Knowledge. But, in the mean time, such a worshipping of
Imaginations advanced and countenanced as seemed no less destructive to all
Christian Piety, than the worship of Images; and, in a word, all the exploded
Heresies of the elder times revived, and justified, without reproach to them
that did it; to the displeasure of Almighty God, the dishonor of the Church,
the grief of all good men, and the shame of the Nation. Nor did we speed much
better in our Civil Rights, in reference to that liberty and property, which
seems peculiar in a manner to the English Subjects. Quocunque aspiceres, luctus
gemitus que sonabant, in the Poets language. No news in any of our Streets, but
that of leading men into fresh captivity; nor Music to be heard in our private
Houses, but the sighs, groans, and cries of afflicted people, who either
suffered in themselves, or their friends and kindred. Our persons haled unto
the prisons, and our heads to the block* our children born to bondage, and
brought up to servitude, our goods taken from us, and exposed to sale; all our
Lands either held in villenage; or, which was worse, ad voluntatem Domini,
during the will and pleasure only of our mighty Landlords. Such a confusion in
the City, such spoils and rapines in the Country, and such oppressions in all
places under their command; that greater miseries never fell upon God's own
people in those wretched times, in which there was no King in Israel.

46. To put an end to which misfortunes, God brings the King unto his Throne,
as upon this day; and brings him to his Throne after such a manner, as makes it
seem all-miracle in the eyes of Christendom. When first, like Noah's Dove in
the book of Genesis, he left the Ark of his retreat and preservation, that he
might try whether the waters were assuaged from the face of the earth, he
found no resting place for the soles of his feet; but when he took his second
flight, and came next amongst us, and brought an Olive leaf in his mouth, to be
a Pledge of Peace and Reconciliation betwixt him and his people, he made his
coming most agreeable to those very men, who before most feared it. A coming so
agreeable to all sorts of people, that never King was entertained with more
signs of joy, or welcomed with a greater concourse of his faithful Subjects;
all of them with Te Deum in their mouths, and the Magnificat in their hearts;
old women being as busy at their Benedicite's, in their dark retreats, as
Children were at Hosanna's in the ways and fields. The mountains skippe like
Raws, and the little hills like young Sheep, as he passed along; the Trees bowed
down their heads to salute their King; and the glad earth, rejoiced to become
his footstool. But when he came within the view of the Royal City, Good God!
what infinite throngs of people did run out to see him? With what a gallant
equipage did the Nobility and Gentry set forth to meet him. Never did England
see it self so glorious as upon that day, nor old Rome so magnificent in her
stateliest Triumphs, as our great City then appeared in the eyes of those, who
flocked from all parts of the Kingdom in such infinite numbers, that London
could no more be called the abstract or epitome of the Realm of England, but
the Realm it self.

47. Encouraged with which general Welcome, he has received here (here in this
Church, he has received) his last Anointing, to the great joy of all his true
and faithful Subjects; who once again repaired to our Capital City, but in
greater multitudes, that by their quality, numbers, and external Gallantry,
they might express their good affections, and add some new Luster to the
accustomed Pomp and Splendor of the Coronation. The Pomp and Splendor of
which day, is not to be described by a readier pen than I am able to pretend
to; nor to be equalled by any other in the times preceding, but only by the
glorious day of the Kings Reduction; of which we may affirm with the Court
Historian, though with no such flattery, La^itiam illius diei, consursum totius
civitatis, and (...) pene inferenti^m coelo m^^is, etc. What pen is able to
express the Triumphs of those two great days, when all the bravery of the
Nation seemed to be powered into the City, and the whole City emptied into some
few streets, the windows in those streets to be glased with eyes, the houses in
a manner to be tyled with men; and all the people in the streets, the windows
and the house tops also, ingeminating and regeminating this most joyful
acclamation, God save the King.

48. For which great mercies, and the rest of this glorious day, let us sing
our Benedictus also, to the Lord our God: Blessed be the Lord God of Israel,
for he has visited and redeemed his people, and has raised up a mighty
salvation for us in the house of his servant David. To which Immortal and
Invisible God, the Almighty Father; and to the Honorable, true and only Son,
the Lamb that sits upon the Throne; and to the Holy Ghost the Comforter; Let us
ascribe, as we are bound, all Majesty, Might, Praise, Power, and Glory, from
this time forth for ever more. And let all the people say, Amen.

THE END.

