THEOLOGIA VETERVM: OR THE SUM OF Christian Theology, Positive, Polemical,
and Philological, CONTAINED IN THE Apostles CREED, Or reducible to it:
According to the tendries of the Ancients both GREEKS and LATINS.

IN THREE BOOKS.

By PETER HEYLYN, D. in D.

JER. 6.16. Stand in the ways and see, and ask for the OLD PATHS, where is
the good way, and walk therein, and you shall find rest for your souls.

VINCENT. LIRIN. Cap. 3. In ipsa item Catholica Ecclesia magnopere curandum
est, ut id teneamus, quod UBIQUE, quod SEMPER, quod AB OMNIBUS creditum est.

LONDON, Printed by E. Cotes for Henry Seile, over against St. Dunstans Church
in Fleetstreet, M. DC. LIVE.

To the Right Honorable the LORD MARQUESS of HARTFORD.
IT may seem strange unto your Lordship to see a name subscribed to this
Dedication, which neither has an Interesse in your Noble and illustrious
Family, nor any relations to your Person. But when I have acquainted you with
the reasons of it, I hope those reasons will not only justify, but indear my
Confidence. My large Cosmography having been Dedicated in the first
Delineations and Essay thereof, to one of the greatest Princes in the Christian
world; could not descend, with any Fitness, to a lower Patronage, after so
many Additions, and so great Improvements. And for such other Books of mine as
have seen the light, they were in justice and congruity, to be Inscribed to him
alone, or to some of His, by whose Appointment they were written, and from
whose service I was fain to borrow the greatest part of the time which I spent
about them. But being now (unhappily) at my own disposing, and left unto the
liberty of presenting the ensuing work, as my own Genius should direct me; I
look upon your Lordship as a Person fitted with the best Capacities to receive
this Present at my hands. The Eminent zeal wherewith your Lordship stood so
firmly, for the established Doctrines and Devotions of the Church of England,
when there appeared so great a readiness in too-many others to give them up as
an Oblation or Peace Offering for their own security; in the first place,
Entituleth you to the best performances in which the Orthodoxies of that Church
and the Conformity thereof, to the ancient patterns, are declared and
vindicated. To this as Seconds, may come in, your Lordships Interesse in that
University where I had my breeding, and more particularly in that College,
whereof I had the happiness to be once a Member; your studiousnesse in the
ways of learning; the fair esteem you hold of those which pretend unto it;
and the Encouragements you have given to the advancement of good letters, in
forwarding with a bountiful and liberal hand the new Impression of the holy
Bible in so many Languages; A work of such transcendent profit, and so many
advantages above all others of that kind, as will not only redound to the
honor of the Undertakers, but to the glory of the Furtherers and Promoters of
it.

These are the motives which on your Lordships part have prompted me to this
Dedication; and there are reasons for it on my own part also. Your Lordship
cannot but remember what great cries were made At, and before the beginning of
the late long Parliament, concerning a design to bring in Popery; the Bishops
generally defamed as the chief Contrivers; the regular and established Clergy
(my self as much if not more, then any of my rank and quality) traduced in
public Pamphlets as subsurvient Instruments. And this was unicum eorum crimen
qui crimine vacabant, in the words of Tacitus; the only Crimination laid upon
those men, who hitherto have been convicted of no crime at all How wrongfully
accused even in that particular, time which brings all things unto light, has
now clearly evidenced. For which is there of all the Bishops, how few of all
the Sequestered and exauctorated Clergy, who notwithstanding all the
provocations of want and scorn (greater then which were never laid on generous
and ingenuous Spirits) have fallen off to Popery? So few in all (to the
Eternal honor of both Orders be it spoken here) that were the rekoning or
account to be made in Greek, it hardly would amount to a plural number. And
for my self, how free I am, and have been always, from any Inclinations of
that kind; in my Epistle to the Reader I have shown at large, and manifested
more particularly in this present work. It had been else too great a folly (or
a frenzy rather) to present any thing of mine to your Lordships sight, of
whose sincerity in the true Protestant Religion here by Law established,
neither the jealousy nor malice of these last and worst times, has raised any
suspicion. And this I hope will be a full acquitment to me from all future
clamours; for where a Person of such eminent and known Integrity makes good the
Entrance, who dares suspect that any thing Popish or Profane, is either
harborred in the work, or the Author of it? And if I gain this point, I have
gained my purpose.

These are (my Lord) the principal Impulsions which have put me upon this
Adventure. And these I hope will be of so great prevalency with your Lordship
also, as to procure a favorable Entertainment to the following work; that
others may afford it the like fair Reception, when they shall find it Owned and
Countenanced by your Lordships name. Which honor if your Lordship shall
vouchsafe unto It, the work shall have a sublunary Immortality beyond the
Author; who whatsoever he is now, or shall be hereafter, is and shall be at all
times, and on all occasions, redeuable to your Lordship for so great a favor,
as best becomes

My LORD Your Lordships most devoted And Most humble Servant Peter Heylyn.
Lacies Court in Abingdon; June ^. 1654.
TO THE READER.
AND now Reader I am come to thee, who may perhaps wonder (and I cannot
blame thee) to see me so soon again in Print, and that too in a Volume of so
large a bulk. It Is like enough thou may conceive me guilty of that vanity,
which a devout Author finds in some sort of men who desire knowledge only that
they may be known; possibly of that vanity of vanities which the Wiseman speaks
of, consisting in the writing of many books, Eccl. 12.12.
of which there was no end to be expected as he there informs us. And if this
vanity were so strong in the time of Solomon, when the art of Writing was not
vulgar, the art of Printing not invented, and that there wanted many helps
which we now enjoy; it cannot be but that the humor must be more predominant
in these latter days, wherein there are so many advantages for publishing our
own conceptions to the view of others, as were not granted unto those of the
elder ages. And we may say more truly then the Poet did, (by how much more we
have those helps and opportunities which they had not then) Scriptorum plus est
hodie quam muscarum olim cum caletur maxim, Plautus.
that greater are the swarms of writers then of flies in Summer: And here I
look it should be said that in those things wherein I thus judge others, Romans
2.1.
I condemn my self in doing the same things which I judge them for; and so am
rendered inexcusable for so great a folly. And though it cannot be denied, but
that I have been as great a Scribler, as almost any other of my age and time:
yet thus much I must say in my own defense, that except the first Essay and
draught of my Geography, digested for my private pleasure, and Printed probably
out of ambition and vain glory; I never published any thing with or without my
mane subscribed unto it, but what was either by the strong hand of importunity
extorted from me; or else imposed by the appointment and command of the noblest
power under which I lived. Had I been troubled as some are, with an itch of
Printing, or carried on by a desire of being in action; I could have offered to
thy view some Pieces long before this time (and those, it may be, not unworthy
of thy consideration) which hitherto I have kept by me, and possibly shall do
so still, until they may be found subsequent to the public peace. For that
there is a time to keep silence, Eccl. 4.7.
as well as times for men to speak, is as Canonical a line for a man to walk
by (in my poor opinion) as to be instant in season, and out of season, is
esteemed by others.

But the truth is, I never voluntarily engaged my self in any of those public
quarrels, by which the unity and order of the Church of England has been so
miserably distracted in these latter times. Nor have I ever loved to run
before, or against Authority; but always took the just counsels and commands
thereof for my ground and warrant: which when I had received, I could not think
that there was any thing left on my part but obsequii gloria, Tacit. Ann.
the honor of a cheerful and free obedience. And in this part of my obedience
it was my lot to be most commonly employed in the Puritan controversies: in
managing whereof although I used all Equanimity and temper which reasonably
could be expected (the argument and persons against whom I writ being well
considered); yet I did thereby so exasperate that prevailing party, that I
became the greatest object of their spleen and fury. Hardly a libell in those
times, which exercised the patience of the State for so long together, in which
my reputation was not blasted, my good name traduced, my Religion questioned;
and whether I would or not I must be a Papist, or at the least an Under-factor
for the Church of Rome. But the best was, I had the honor of good Company,
which made the burden pleasing to me: not only the Bishops generally, but some
Particulars amongst them of most eminent note, being traduced in the same
Pasquils for carrying on a design to bring in Popery; the King himself given
out (witness the Popish royal Favorite, amongst other Pamplets) to be that
way biassed. And if they call the Master of the house by the name of Beelzebub,
the servants must not look to find better language. And though I took all
honest and ingenuous courses to wipe off this stain, yet when the calumny once
was up, necesse est ut aliquid haereat, it was impossible for me (in a manner)
so to purge my self, as not to suffer under the injustice of the imputation.
Concerning which I shall make bold to tell thee a remarkable passage, which is
briefly this: It was about the time that my Lord of Canterbury had published
his learned and laborious work against Fisher the Jesuit, when I had preached
some Sermons before the King upon the Parable of the Tares (which Parable I had
chosen for the constant argument of my Sermons intended for the Court): of
which some moderate and judicious men were pleased to say, that in those
Sermons I had pulled up Popery by the very roots, and subverted the foundations
of it: to which it was replied by some of those bitter spirits (whether with
more uncharitableness or imprudent zeal, it is hard to say) that the
Archbishop might Print, and Dr. Heylyn might Preach what they would against
Popery, but they should never believe them to be any thing the l^sse Papists
for all that. A censure of a very strange nature, and so little savoring of
Christianity, that I believe it is not easy to be parrallel'd in the worst of
times. But from the envy, hatred, malice, and uncharitableness of such kind
of men, no less then from plague, pestilence, and famine, good Lord deliver us.

I could add much more not much short of this, did I love to rub up these old
sores, as indeed I do not: the clamor not being made less, if it went not
higher in the sitting of the late long Parliament; though no complaint or
information was made against me; or if it were, was thought considerable enough
to be enquired into, or took notice of. Nor indeed had I said thus much but in
compliance to the grave counsel of St. Hierome, whose saying it was, In
suspicione hareseos se nolle quenquam fore patientem; that for a man to keep
silence when accused of Heresy, was a selfe-conviction. And yet I cannot
choose but note the great and unprofitable pains, which has been taken by the
Author of that Voluminous nothing, entitled Canterburies Doom, to find me
guilty of some points of supposed Popery: only because in some particulars not
determined by the Church of England, I had adhered unto the words and tendries
of the Ancient Fathers; or bound my self in matters publicly resolved on, to
vindicate this Church to her genuine tenants. And to say truth, the least
endeavor of this kind was cause enough for any clamor or reproaches which the
tongues and pens of those bitter men could impose on them who did not stand as
strongly in defense of Outlandish fancies, as of the true and natural
doctrines of the Church their mother. Witness the fearful outcry made against
B. Bilson for preaching otherwise of Christ's descending into hell; and the
great hubbub raised against Peter Baro for writing otherwise in the points of
Predestination, then had been taught by some of the Genevian Doctors; though
neither the one had Preached, nor the other Printed, but what was consonant to
the Doctrine of approved Antiquity, and to the true intent and meaning of the
book of Articles here by Law established. Private opinions, especially if
countenanced by some eminent name, were looked on as the public Resolutions of
the Anglican Church, and the poor Church condemned for teaching those opinions,
which by the artifice of some men had been fastened on her. So that it was not
without some ground that the Archbishop of Spalato being gone from hence, did
upbraid this Church in his Consilium redeundi, for taking into her confession
(which he acknowledges of its self to be sound and profitable) multa Calvini
and Lutheri dogmata, many strange Doctrines broached by Luther, and held forth
by Calvin. To which when Dr. Crackanthorp was commanded to make an Answer, he
thought it neither safe nor seasonable to deny the charge, or plead not guilty
to the bill: and therefore though he called his book Defensio Ecclesiae
Anglicanae, yet he chose rather to defend those Dogmata which had been charged
upon this Church in the Bishops Pamphlet; then to assert this Church to her
genuine Doctrines. They that went otherwise to work were like to speed no
better in it, or otherwise requited for their honest zeal, then to be presently
exposed to the public envy, and made the common subject of reproach and
danger. So that I must needs look upon it as a bold attempt (though a most
necessary piece of service) as the times then were, in B. Montague of Norwich
in his answer to the Popish Gagger and the two Appellants to lay the saddle on
the right horse, as the saying is, I mean to sever or discriminate the opinions
of particular men from the received and authorized Doctrines of the Church of
England; to leave the one to be maintained by their private fautors, and only
to defend and maintain the other. And certainly had he not been a man of a
mighty spirit, and one that easily could contemn the cries and clamors which
were raised against him for so doing, he could not but have sunk remedilesly
under the burden of disgrace, and the fears of ruin, which that performance
drew upon him. To such an absolute authority were the names and writings of
some men advanced by their diligent followers, that not to yield obedience to
their Ipse dixits, was a crime unpardonable.

It is true, King James observed the inconvenience, and prescribed a remedy,
sending instructions to the Universities bearing date Ian. 18. Ann. 1616.
(which was eight years or thereabout, before the coming out of the Bishops Gag)
wherein it was directed amongst other things, that young students in Divinity
should be excited to study such books as were most agreeable in doctrine and
discipline too the Church of England, and to bestow their time in the Fathers
and Councels, Schoolmen, Histories and Controversies, and not to insist to long
upon Compendiums and Abbreviators, making them the grounds of their study. And
I conceive that from that time forwards the names and reputations of some
leading men of the forain Churches, which till then carried all before them,
did begin to lessen: Divines growing every day more willing to free themselves
from that servitude and Vassalage, to which the authority of those names had
inslaved their judgments: But so, that no man had the courage to make such a
general assault against the late received opinions as the Bishop did; though
many when the ice was broken, followed gladly after him. About those times it
was, that I began my studies in Divinity, and thought no course so proper and
expedient for me, as the way commended by King James, and opened at the charges
of B. Montague, though not then a Bishop. For though I had a good respect both
to the memory of Luther, and the name of Calvin; as those whose writings had
awakened all these parts of Europe out of the ignorance and superstition under
which they suffered; yet I always took them to be men: Men as obnoxious unto
error, as subject unto humane frailty, and as indulgent too to their own
opinions, as any others whatsoever. The little knowledge I had gained in the
course of Stories, had preacquainted me with the fiery spirit of the one, and
the busy humor of the other: thought thereupon unfit by Archbishop Cranmer,
and others the chief agents in the reformation of this Church, to be employed
as instruments in that weighty business. Nor was I ignorant how much they
differed from us in their Doctrinals and forms of Government. And I was apt
enough to think, that they were no fit guides to direct my judgment, in order
to the Discipline and Doctrine of the Church of England; to the establishing
whereof they were held unusefull: and who both by their practices, and
positions had declared themselves to be friends to neither. Yet give me leave
to say withal, that I was never master of so little manners, as to speak
reproachfully of either; or to detract from those just honors which they had
acquired: though it has pleased the namelesse Author of the reply to my Lord
of Canterburies* Book against Fisher the Jesuit, to tax me for giving unto
Calvin in a book licenced by authority the opprobrious name of schismatic
Heretic. Page 350.
Had he told either the parties name by whom it was licenced, or named the Book
it self in which those ill words escaped me; I must have been necessitated to
disprove, or confess the action. But being as it is, a bare denial is enough
for a groundless slander. And so I leave my namelesse Author (a Scot as I have
been informed) with these words of Cicero, Quid minus est non dico Oratoris sed
hominis, quam id objicere Adversario, quod si ille verbo negabit, longius
progredi non possis.

Pardon me Reader I beseech thee, for laying my naked soul before thee, for
taking this present opportunity to acquit my self from those imputations which
the uncharitableness of some men had aspersed me with. I have long suffered
under the reproaches of the public Pamphleters; not only charged with Popery
and Heterodoxies in the point of faith, but also (as thou see) with
incivilities in point of manners; and I was much disquieted and perplexed in
mind till I had given the world in thee, a verbal satisfaction at the least
to these verbal Calumnies. How far I am really free from these criminations, I
hope this following work will show thee. So will the Sermons on the Tears,
preached in a time when the inclinations unto Popery were thought (but falsely
thought) to be most predominant both in Court and Clergy; if ever I shall be
persuaded to present them to the open view. In the mean time take here such
testimonies both of my Orthodoxie and Candor, as this work affords thee. In
which I have willingly pretermitted no just occasion of vindicating the Ancient
and Apostolical Religion, established and maintained in the Church of England,
against Opponents of all sorts; without respect to private persons, or
particular Churches. And as old Pacian used to say, Christianus mihi nomen est,
Pacian in Biblioth. Patr.
Catholicus cognomen; so I desire it may be also said of me, that Christian is
my name, and Catholic my surname. A Catholic in that sense I am, and shall
desire by Gods grace to be always such a true English Catholic. And English
Catholic I am sure is as good in Grammar, and far more proper in the right
meaning of the word, then that of Roman Catholic is, or can be possibly, in
any of the Popish party. And as an English Catholic I have kept my self unto
the Doctrines, Rites, and forms of Government established in the Church of
England, as it was constituted and confirmed by the best Authority which the
Laws could give it, when I began to set my self to this employment, and had
brought it in ^ manner to a full conclusion. And though some alterations have
since happened in the face of this Church, and those so great, as make no small
matter of astonishment to the Christian world, yet being there is no
establishment of any other Doctrine, Discipline, or new form of Government,
and that God knows how soon the prudence of this State may think it fitting (if
not necessary) to revive the old; I look upon it now as in the same condition
and constitution in which it shined and flourished with the greatest beauty,
that any National Church in Christendom could justly boast of. In all such
points (which come within the compass of this discourse) wherein the Church
has positively declared her judgment, I keep my self to her determinations
and decisions, according to the literal sense and Grammatical meaning of the
words (as was required in the Declaration to the book of Articles) not putting
my own sense upon them, nor drawing them aside to propagate and defend any
foraine Doctrines, by what great name soever proposed and countenanced. But in
such points as come before me, in which I find that the Church has not
publicly determined, I shall conceive my self to be left at liberty to follow
the dictamen of my own genius, but so that I shall regulate that liberty by the
Traditions of the Church, and the unanimous consent of the Ancient Fathers;
though in so doing I shall differ from many of the common and received
opinions, which are now on foot. For why should I deny my self that liberty
which the times allow me, in which not only Libertas opinandi, but Libertas
prophetandi, (the liberty of Prophesying it is I mean) has found so many
advocates and so much indulgence? Common opinions many times are but common
errors, and we may truly say of them as Calderinas did (in Ludovicus Vives)
when he went to Mass, Whitac. Contr. 2. q. 9. c. 8.
Eamus ergo quia sic placet in communes errores. And as I shall make bold to
use this liberty in representing to thy view my own opinions, so I shall leave
thee to the like liberty also of liking or rejecting such of my opinions as are
here presented, Horat. de art Poet.
( Hanc veniam petimusque damusque vicissim): and good reason too, for my
opinions as they are but opinions, so they are but mine. As opinions; I am not
bound to stand to them my self; as mine, I have no reason to obtrude them on
another man. I may perhaps delight my self in some of my own fancies, and
possibly may think my self not unfortunate in them: but I shall never be so
wedded to my own opinions but that a clearer Judgment shall at any time
divorce me from them.

As for the book which is now before thee, I must confess that there was
nothing less in my first intention then to write a Comment on the Creed: my
purpose being only to inform my self in that part thereof which concerns
Christ's sufferings, especially his descending into hell: a question at that
time very hotly agitated. For having gotten the late Kings leave to retire to
Winchester about the beginning of May, An. 1645. I met there with the learned
and laborious work of B. Bilsons, entitled, A Survey of Christ's suffering for
man's redemption, etc. which finding very copious and intermixed with many
things not pertinent to the present subject (though otherwise of great use and
judgment) I was resolved to extract out of it all such proofs and arguments as
concerned the local descent of Christ into hell, ^o reduce them to a clearer
Method, and to add to them such conceptions and considerations which my own
reading with the help of some other books could supply me with. Which having
finished, and finding many things interspersed in the Bishops book touching the
sufferings of Christ; I thought it not amiss to collect out of him whatsoever
did concern that argument, in the same manner as before: and then to add to it
such considerations and discourses upon the crucifixion, death and burial of
our Savior Christ, as might make the story of his Passion from the beginning
of his sufferings under Pontius Pilate to his victorious triumph over Hell and
Satan complete and perfect. And then considering with my self, that not that
Article alone of Christ's descending into hell, but the authority of the whole
Creed had been lately quarrelled; (the opinion that it was not written by the
holy Apostles being more openly maintained and more indulgently approved of,
then I could imagine) I thought it of as great importance to vindicate the
whole Creed, as assert one part; and then, and not till then did I first
entertain the thoughts of bringing the whole work to that form and order, in
which now thou feast it. For though I knew it was an Argument much vexed, and
that many Commentaries and Expositions had been writ upon it; yet I conceived,
that I was able, by interweaving some Polemical Disputes, and Philological
Discourses, to give it somewhat more then a new dress only; and that what
other censure soever might be laid upon it, that of Nil dictum est quod non
dictum fuit prius, should find no place here. But I had scarce gone through
with the general Preface, when the surrounding of Winchester by the forces of
the Lords and Commons, made me leave that City; and with that City, the
thoughts and opportunities of proceeding forwards; save that I made some entry
on the first Article, at a private friends house in a Parish of Wiltshire,
where I found some few tools to begin the work with. The miserable condition
of the King my most gracious Master, the impendent ruin of the Church my most
precious Mother, the unsetledness of my own affairs, and the dangers which
every way did seem to threaten me, were a sufficient Supersedeas to all matter
of study; even in the University it self (to which I was again returned not
without some difficulties): where the war began to look more terrible, then it
had done formerly. And I might say of writing books (as the world then went) as
the Poet once did of making verses, Ovid. Tri^t. Eleg. 1.
Carmina proveniunt animo deducta sereno,
Me mare, me tellus, me fera jactat hyems.
Carminibus metus omnis abest, ego perditus ensem
Haesurum jugulo jam puto jamque meo.


That is to say, Verses proceed from minds composed and free,
Sea, earth, and tempests join to ruin me.
Poets must write secure from fears, not feel,
As I do at my throat, the threatening steel.
Yet so intent I was upon my design, that as soon as I had waded through my
Composition, and fixed my self on a certain dwelling near the place of my birth
(which was about the middle of April, in the year 1647.) I resumed the work;
and there, by Gods assistance, as the necessity of my affairs gave me time and
leisure, put an end unto it. So wandering and uncertain has the latter part of
my Pilgrimage been, that I began this work in Winchester the prime City of
Hamshire, continued it in a Parish of Wiltshire, finished it at my house in
Oxfordshire, and am now come to publish it ( Quem das finem Rex magne laborum?)
from Abington the chief Town of Barkshire. Virg. Aen. l. 1.
For I had but finished it, if that, and not bestowed my last hand upon it,
when by the importunity of some special friends I was prevailed with to the
writing of my large Cosmography. Which being published and received with some
approbation, I began to fear I might go less in the esteem which I had
gotten, If I should venture this piece to the public view. Jealous I was of
being thought a better Geographer then Divine; or that it should be said of me
(as it had been in some cases of some other men) (...), that is to say, that I
had spent more of my stock upon the Accessorie then upon the Principal; more on
Geography, which was a thing ad extra to me, then I had done upon Divinity my
own proper element. Considering therefore to whose hands I might commend the
perusal of it, I pitched at last on the right reverend Father in God, and my
very good Lord, the Lord B. of Rochester; of whose severity in judging without
partiality, and friendly counsel in advising without by-respects I was very
confident. And he accordingly having bestowed some time upon it, returned me
the encouragement and approbation of this following Letter, which (not without
some hope of his Lordships pardon) I shall here subjoyne, as that which was the
special motive to this publication.

SIR,
I Have as you desired, read your soul on the Apostles Symbol, and although I
have not done it (...), yet I have read it so, as I dare say when you shall
have reviewed it, perfected the quotations, and added the last hand thereto, it
shall not only redound to your deserved honor, but much, very much to the
benefit of any candid and learned Reader. And in this Approbation, I have the
concurrent judgment of a Scholar, and sound Divine, who read the book with me.
There remains nothing more on my part, then to receive your directions where,
and to whom the book shall be commended by

Your real friend and humble servant JOHN ROFFENS.
October, 14. 1651.
I am now drawing toward an end (good Reader) and shall only tell thee, that I
had entertained a Project of an higher nature, such as has not been ventured
on (for ought I can learn) by any other whosoever: which if God had pleased to
continue me in those abilities of mind and body, which he has formerly
vouchsafed me, would more conduce to the advancement of good letters, then any
or all the rest of my undertakings. But I have found of late (God help me)
such great and sensible decay of sight, that I may say too truly in the
wisemans words, Tenebrescunt videntes per foramina, and claudunt ostia in
platea; that is to say, those that look out of the window be darkened, and the
doors are shut in the streets, as our English reads it. And for my part, I
never had the faculty (as some men have) of studying by another man's eyes, or
turning over my books by another hand; but have been fain to work out my
performances by my proper strength without the least help or cooperation to
assist me in them. If by thy prayers for good success on such Physical means,
as I submit my self unto, it shall please God to make my sight so useful to me
as to enable me to go through with the undertakings, I shall with joy and
cheerfulness employ the remainder of my time to complete that work, which I
have digested in my thoughts: but so that it lies still within me, like an
unpolished and unperfect Embryo in the Mothers womb: the children being come to
the birth but wanting strength to be delivered. In the mean time, I render all
humble and hearty thanks to the Lord my God, for giving me such a measure of
his holy assistance, as to bring this work to a conclusion: which if it may
redound to his glory, the benefit of this Church, and thy particular
contentation, it is all I aim at: And that thou may receive herein the more
full contentment, I have drawn up the heads and sum of all the Chapters,
which I refer to thy perusal; and gathered an Errata or Correction of the
faults, which I desire thee to amend accordingly as thou go along: Thou will
by that means be somewhat better able to judge whether Geography be better then
Divinity, (Remember the now well known scoff which was put upon me). And so I
leave thee to Gods grace and the Churches blessing.

Lacies Court in Abingdon, June 6. 1654.
POSTSCRIPT.
READER,
I Am to give thee notice, that in the seventh Chapter of the third Book there
is a whole Section or Paragraph misplaced, that being subjoyned to the end,
which should have found its proper place in the beginning of that Chapter. And
therefore I desire that after these words, viz. that he made Israel to sin,
which thou shall find fol. 464. lin. 23. thou would turn over to fol. 479.
lin. 17. beginning with these words viz. I know it does much trouble, etc.
which having read to the end of that Section; thou may return to the place
where thou were before, viz. Now to these positive texts, etc. and so proceed
unto the end without interruption. The rest of the Errata thou shall find
summed up after the general Contents, which I desire thee to correct, (as
before was intimated) before thou settle to the work; and so fare thee well.

SYLLABVS CAPITVM, OR The Contents of the Chapters.
The PREFACE. Of the Authority and Antiquity of the Creed commonly called the
Apostles Creed, with answer to the chief Objections which were made against it.
ALl things made One by God from the first beginning. One Faith essential to
the Church, and upon what reasons. What moved the Apostles to comprehend the
chief heads of Faith in so short a Summary. Whether the Creed of the Apostles
were not that form of sound Doctrine, which the Apostle recommends to Timothy.
Proofs for the Antiquity of the Creed from Irenaeus and Tertullian; not the
Creeds only, but the authority of the Fathers, disputed and disproved in these
later times; and by whom; especially some reasons warranting the Creed to have
been framed by the Apostles. The story how the Creed was made at large related
by Ruffinus. The story of Ruffinus justified by the Ancient Writers. Traditions
how far entertained in the Protestant Churches. An Apostolical Tradition by
what marks discerned; and those marks found in the Tradition which transmits
the Creed. The reverend esteem held by the Ancients of the Creed in Commenting
upon the same, and keeping it unaltered in the words and syllables. The Creed
to be first learned by all that required Baptism* When first made part of the
public Liturgy, and rehearsed by the people standing; in what particulars
discriminated from other Formula's. The first objection, that the Creed is no
Canonical Scripture, produced and answered. An answer to the second objection
about the variation of the words in which the Creed was represented. Several
significations of the Greek word Catholic, and that it was a word in use, in
and before the time of the Apostles, contrary to the third objection. The last
objection from the words of Ruffinus answered. The scope and Project of this
work. The Authors appeal unto antiquity. The testimony given unto antiquity by
the Ancient Writers; and also by the Church of England. Calvin's Authority
produced for the asserting of this Creed to the twelve Apostles, closes up the
Preface.

PART. I.
CHAP. I. Of the name and definition of faith; the meaning of the phrase, in
Deum* credere: The Exposition of it vindicated against all exceptions.
THe Greek word (...) what it signifies, and from whence it comes. The proper
Etymology of the Latin fides. Faith how defined, and how it differs from
experience, knowledge, and opinion. The grounds of faith less falli^le, th^n
that of any Art or Science. Why faith is called by St. Paul (...), or, the
substance of things not seen, etc. The usual distinction between credere Deum,
credere Deo, and credere in Deum, proposed and explicated, according to the
general tendries of the Schools: neither the phrase in Deum or in Christum
credere and the distinction thereon founded, so generally true as it is
pretended. Credere with the proposition in, not so peculiar unto God, as by
some conceived. No difference in holy Scripture between Deo and in Deum
credere; nor in the meaning of the Creed. Of the faith of Reprobates; and why
faith has the name of fides electorum, in the Book of God. The faith of
Devils, what it is; and why it rather makes them tremble, then serves to
nourish them in the hope of grace and pardon. The Vulgar distinction of faith
into Salvifical, Historical, Temporary, and the faith of Miracles, proposed,
examined, and rejected.

CHAP. II. That there is a God, and but one God only; and that this one God is
a pure and Immortal Spirit, and the sole Governor of the world; proved by the
light of reason, and the testimony of the ancient Gentiles.
THe notion of a Deity ingraffed naturally in the soul of man. Pretagoras,
Diagoras, and Euhemerus, why counted Atheists in old times. Fortune and Fate
why reckoned of as gods, by some old Philosophers. Natural proofs for this
truth, that there is but one God, summed up together and produced by Minutius
Felix; and seconded by the testimonies of Mercurius Trismegistus, the Sibyls,
and Apollo himself; confirmed by the suffrages of Orpheus, and the old Greek
Poets. The being of one God alone strongly maintained by Socrates, affirmed by
Plato and his followers; countenanced by Aristotle, and the Peripateticks;
verified also by the Academicks, the most rigid Stoics, and by the general
acknowledgment of all sorts of people. The judgment of the learned Gentiles
touching the Essence and Attributes of God, conformable to that of the Orthodox
Christians. The Heresies of the Manichees, and the Anthropomorphites, confuted
by the writings of the old Philosophers. A parallel between the Tutelary gods
of the old Idolaters, and the Topical or local Saints of the Pontificians.

CHAP. III. Of the Essence and Attributes of God, according to the holy
Scripture; the name of Father, how applied to God. Of his Mercy, Justice, and
Omnipotency.
THe diligence of Justin Martyr, when an Heathen, in the search of God. The
name JEHOVAH when, and for what occasion first given to God in holy Scripture.
The superstition of the later Jews in the use thereof. The Hebrew Elohim
sometimes communicated to the creature. The several Etymologies of the Greek
word (...). The names of El, Elion, and Adonai, what they do import. Of the
Simplicity, Eternity and Omnipresence of God. Of his Knowledge, Wisdom, and
Omnipotency. The name of Father Almighty given to God by the learned Gentiles.
God, in what sense, the Father of our Lord JESUS CHRIST; and of none but him.
The pre-eminence due in that respect to God the Father, the name of Father how
communicable to the whole Godhead. God proved to be the Father of all mankind;
in the right of Creation; and of his faithful people by the laws of Adoption:
Many resemblances between adoptions among men, and man's adoption to the sonship
of Almighty God. The love, care, and authority of our Heavenly Father, compared
with that of our earthly parents. The care of God in educating all his children
in the knowledge of his will, how far extended unto the Infidels and Pagans,
and how far beneficial to them. The title of Almighty given to God the Father,
what it imports in it self; and what in reference to the creature, to his
Church especially.

CHAP. IV. Of the Creation of the World and the parts thereof, that it was made
at first by Gods Almighty power, and since continually preserved by his
infinite Providence.
GEneral inducements moving God to create the world. An answer to that idle
question, what God did before the creating of the world. The error of
Lactantius in it. God differenced by this great work, from the gods of the
Gentiles, and that in the opinion of the Gentiles themselves. The work of the
Creation ascribed to the whole Godhead jointly in the holy Scripture. Of the
first matter out of which, and the time when it was created. The opinion of the
worlds eternity, refelled by Cicero: why supposed by Aristotle. The worlds
creation by the power of Almighty God, proved by the testimonies of
Trismegistus, of Plato, Aristotle, and others of the learned Greeks: As also by
the suffrages of Varro, Tully, Seneca, and others of the principal wits amongst
the Latins. Why God did pass no approbation on the works of the second day,
and doubled it upon the third. Probable proofs, that by the waters above the
Firmament, mentioned in the first of Genesis, Moses intended not the clouds and
rain, but some great body of waters above the Spheres. The praise and honor
due to God for the worlds creation. The general Providence of God in ordering
the affairs thereof, asserted both against the Stoics and the Epicureans. Gods
goodness toward all mankind, especially to his chosen people. And of his
Justice, or veracity in performing the promises made unto them. Gods justice in
retaliating to the sons of men, and meting to them, with that measure which
they mete to other. Ungodly men how used as executioners of divine vengeance.
That neither the impunity nor prosperous successes of the wicked, in this
present world, are inconsistent with the justice of Almighty God.

CHAP. V. Of the creation of Angels. The Ministry and office of the good. The
fall and punishment of the evil Angels, and also of the creation and fall of
man.
OF the name and nature of the Angels. Why the creatioon of the Angels not
expressed in Scripture. Probable conjectures that the Angels were created
before the beginning of the world, and those conjectures backed by authority of
the Ancients both Greeks and Latins. The several orders and degrees of the
holy Angels. The Angels, ministering to Almighty God, not only in inflicting
punishments upon the wicked, but in protection of the godly. Many things said
in Scripture to be done by God, which were effected by the Ministry of the
blessed Angels. That every one of Gods people, and they alone, has his
Angel-guardian, proved not only by the authority of the Ancients, but by the
testimony of the Scripture. Of the Demons of the ancient Gentiles. That the
worshipping of Angels mentioned in Coloss. 2. did arise from thence. Angel
worship not alone forbidden by Scriptures, and Fathers, but by the very Angels
themselves. The evil Angels first created in a state of integrity. Of their
confederacy and fall. That the sin of ambition was the cause of the fall,
proved by the Scriptures, and the Fathers; and by several reasons. Several
differences between the sin and fall of man, and the sin and fall of the evil
Angels. The reason why CHRIST took not on himself the Angelical nature. The
Devils diligence and design in seducing mankind. The Devil why, and how,
called the Tempter. Of the Mali Genii. Of the Gentiles and that the Daemonium
Socratis so often mentioned by the Ancients, was not of that nature. Several
Artifices of the Demons in gaining Divine honors to themselves. The Devil not
without much difficulty, dispossessed of the Sovereignty he had gotten in the
souls of men. The goodly structure of man's body, and some contemplations thence
arising. That the soul of man is not ex traduce, proved by the Scriptures, and
the Fathers. The Image of God imprinted on mankind, in what it does consist
especially; and of the several degrees and perfections of it. The voluntary
fall of man, and how it came to be imputed to his whole posterity: the remedy
of God provided to restore lost man. The fall of Adam not decreed, and in what
sense permitted by Almighty God.

CHAP. VI. What Faith it was which was required for Justification, before and
under the Law of Moses. Of the knowledge which the Patriarchs and Prophets had,
touching Christ to come. Touching the Sacrifices of the Jews; the salvation of
the Gentiles; and the justifying power of Faith.
THe general project of this Chapter. No faith in Christ required of Adam, till
his fall; nor after that explicitly affirmed of our Father Abraham. The error
and mistake of Eve, touching the Messiah. Whether the Prophets fully understood
their own predictions touching Christ to come. In what Gods Prophets differed
from the Heathen Soothsayers. The Heathen Soothsayers why called extatici, and
arreptitii, and furiosi. No explicit faith in Christ required of the
Patriarchs before the law, nor of the people of the Jews, who lived under the
Law. What faith it was which was imputed for righteousness to our Father
Abraham. The Sacrifices of the Jews not counted expiatory in reference unto
Christ to come: but by the Ordinance and Institution of Almighty God. Why
CHRIST is said in Scripture to be the end of the Law. Or the advantages which
the Jews had above other Nations. The Gentiles not left destitute of means, and
helps, to bring them to the knowledge and Worship of God. No point of Reverence
performed by Gods people anciently in the act of Worship, which was not
practiced by the Gentiles. The Sacrifices of the Gentiles what they aimed at
chiefly, before perverted by the Devil. The Sacrificing of men and women among
the Gentiles, by whom first introduced; and upon what grounds. The eminence of
some Gentiles in all moral virtues. The union of man's soul with Almighty God,
proposed as the chiefend of li^e by the old Philosophers. The salvation of the
nobler souls amongst the Gentiles, defended by some late Divines; denied by St.
Augustine formerly, and upon what grounds: the grounds on which he built
examined. The virtues of the Gentiles not to be counted sins or vices for any
circumstantial imperfections which are noted in them. The special help
wherewith God might supply amongst the Gentiles, the want of Scripture. The
charitable opinion of Franciscus Iunius, touching the Infants of the Gentiles.
The case of the Gentiles altered since our Saviors passion; and so St. Peter,
Act. 2. and the 17. Article of the Church of England, to be understood. What it
is, that makes Faith instrumental unto Justification. (...) credere, or the act
of faith, imputed to a man for righteousness, proved by the testimony of the
Scriptures, and the Ancient Writers. The Homilies of the Church explicated, and
applied to the present point.

LIBER II.
CHAP. I. Nothing revealed to the Gentiles, touching Christ to come. The Name
of JESUS what it signifies, and of bowing at it. Of the name CHRIST, and the
Offices therein included. The name of Christians how given unto his Disciples.
SAlvation of the world by Christ, kept as a Mystery from the Gentiles
generally before the Preaching of the Gospel. The Sib^lline Oracles what they
say of Christ; not to be counted pie frauds, and with what care preserved from
the common view. The term or ^^tion of (...) or the WORD, frequently found in
Plato, and his followers. The sum of our belief touching Christ our Savior.
The name of JESUS whence derived, and what it signifies. A parallel between
JESUS the Son of God, and Joshua or Jesus the son of Nun. The Greek word (...)
rendered Salvator, by the Writers in the Christian Church, till the alteration
made by Beza, and of the full meaning of those words. The dignity of the name
of Jesus. That bowing at the Name of JESUS, was anciently used in the Church of
Christ, and from the first beginning of the Reformation in the Church of
England. The name CHRIST, whence derived, and what it signifies; and of the
several Offices it relates unto. That the name of Christian was not given unto
the followers of Christ's Doctrine, without some solemnities. Chrestos and
Chrectiani, mistakingly used for Christus, and Christiani, by some Heathen
Writers.

CHAP. II. That JESUS CHRIST is the Son of God: Why called his only, or his
only begotten Son. Proofs for the Godhead of our Savior. Of the title of LORD.
THe name of the Son or Sons of God, ascribed in several respects, to men and
Angels, and also to the Saints departed; given in a more peculiar manner to
Kings and Prophets, then unto any other of the sons of men: in all of these
respects communicable unto CHRIST our Savior; but after a more excellent
manner then to all the rest. CHRIST not the Son of God only, but his only Son;
properly to be called the natural and begotten Son of Almighty God, in
reference to his birth from the Virgin Mary. The only Son, and the best beloved
Son equivalent in holy Scripture. Christ why entitled the first born of every
creature. The rights of Primogeniture what they were, and how vested in him.
CHRIST so to be accounted the Son of God, as to be also God the Son. That the
Messiah was to come in the form of man. The testimony given by Christ to his
own Divinity cleared from all exceptions. The story of Theodosius the Jew in
Suidas touching Christ our Savior, justified. The testimony given to Christ's
Divinity by the Heathen Oracles, The falling of the Egyptian Idols, the Poet
Virgil, and the Roman Centurion. The Heresies of Ebion, Artemon and
Samosatenus, in making Christ our Savior a mere natural man; briefly recited,
and condemned. The perplexed niceties of the School, avoided purposely by the
Author. The name of LORD appropriated in the Old Testament unto God the Father,
but more peculiar since the time of the Gospel, to God the Son. The title of
LORD disclaimed by the first Roman Emperors; and upon what reasons. CHRIST
made our LORD not only in the right of purchase, but also by the law of Arms.

CHAP. III. Of Gods free mercy in the Redemption of man; the WORD why fitted to
effect it. The Incarnation of the Word why attributed to the holy Ghost; the
Miracle thereof made credible both to Jews and Gentiles.
THe controversy between Mercy, Peace, Truth, and Justice, on the fall of man;
made up and reconciled by the oblation of Christ, then designed and promised.
That God could have saved mankind by some other means, then by the Incarnation
and death of Christ, had he been so minded. The Oblation of Christ rather a
voluntary act of his own mere goodness then necessitated by imposition or
decree. Some reasons why the work of the Incarnation, was to be acted chiefly
by the holy Ghost. The manner of the Incarnation with a more genuine
explication of the Virgins answer. The miraculous obumbration of the holy
Ghost, made more intelligible by two parallel cases. The impure fancies of some
Romish Votaries touching this Obumbration, and the blessed Virgin. The large
faculties of Friar Tekell. Sleidan corrupted by the Papists. The strange
conceit of Estius, in making Christ the principal, if not only Agent, in the
Incarnation. The miracle of the Incarnation made perceptible to the natural
man, to the Jews and Gentiles. The Virgins Faith a great facilitating to the
Incarnation. The Antiquity of the feasts of Annuntiation. Christ why not called
the Son of the holy Ghost. The body of Christ not formed all at once, as some
Popishs writers do affirm, and the reasons why.

CHAP. IV. Of the birth of CHRIST; the Feast of his Nativity. Why born of a
Virgin. The Prophecy of Esaiah, the Parentage and privileges of the blessed
Virgin.
NO cause for the WORD to be made flesh but man's Redemption. Our Savior Christ
not only born, but made of the Virgin Mary, and the manner how. That several
Heresies in the Primitive times touching this particular. The time and place
made happy by our Saviors birth. That Christ was born upon the five and
twentyeth day of December, proved by the general consent of all Christian
Churches. The high opinion of that day in the Primitive times. The miracle of
Christ being born of a Virgin Mother made perceptible by some like cases in the
Book of God. A parallel between Eve and the Virgin Mary. The promise made by
God to Eve. The clearest Prophecy in Scripture, that Christ our Savior should
be born of a Virgin Mother. That so much celebrated Prophecy, Behold a Virgin
shall conceive, etc. not meant originally and literally of the birth of Christ.
The genuine meaning of the Text, and how it was fulfilled in our Saviors
birth. Whether Christ were the direct heir of the house of David. The
Genealogy of Christ why laid down in such different ways, by the two
Evangelists. The perpetual Virginity of Christ's Mother asserted against the
Heretics of former times, defended on wrong grounds by the Pontificians. The
Virgin freed from Original sin by some zealous Papists; and of the controversy
raised about it in the Church of Rome. What may be warrantably thought touching
that particular. The extreme errors of Helvidius and the Antidicomaritani in
giving too little, and of the Collyridians and the Papists on the other side,
in giving too great honor to the blessed Virgin. Some strange extra^vigancies
of the learned and vulgar Papists. The moderation in that kind of the Church
of England. The body of Christ a real, not an imaginary substance; and subject
to the passions and infirmities of a natural body.

CHAP. V. Of the sufferings of our Savior under Pontius Pilate, and first of
those temptations which he suffered at the hands of the Devil.
ANnas and Caiaphas why said to be High Priests at the self same time. Of
Pontius Pilate his barbarous and rigid nature; and of the slaughter which he
made of the Galileans. By what SPIRIT, for what reasons, and into what part of
the Wilderness Christ was led to be tempted. A parallel between Christ and the
Scapegoat. Reasons for our Redeemers fast; why neither more nor less, then
just forty days. Of the Ember weeks. The institution and antiquity of the
Lenten fast; and why first ordained. St. Luke and St. Matthew reconciled. A
short view of the three temptations; with a removal of some difficulties, which
concern the same. How Satan could show Christ our Savior from the top of a
mountain, and in so short a space of time, the Kingdoms of the earth, and the
glories of them. In what respects it is said of Christ, that he was, or could
be tempted of the Devil.

CHAP. VI. Of the afflictions which our Savior suffered both in his soul and
body, under Pontius Pilate; in the great work of MAN'S REDEMPTION.
THe heaviness which fell on Christ not so great and terrible as to deprive him
of his senses. In what respect it is said of Christ in his holy Gospel, that
his soul was sorrowful to the death. The Greek word (...) what it signifies in
the holy Penmen. The meaning of our Saviors words, Ioh. 12.27. No contrariety
in Christ's Prayer to the will of God. Why death appeared so terrible in our
Saviors eye. The judgment of the Ancients on that Prayer of Christ. The
doctrine of the Schools touching the natural fear of death. Why Christ desired
not to receive that Cup from the hands of the Jews. Of the comfort which the
Angel brought unto our Savior in the time of his heaviness. A passage of St.
Paul expounded, Heb. 57. The meaning of the word Agony in the best Greek
Writers, and in the usual style of Scripture. Christ's Agony and bloody sweat,
rather to be imputed unto a fervency of zeal, then an extremity of pain. The
sentence put upon our Savior in the High Priests Hall, and at the Judgment
Seat of Pilate. A brief survey of Christ's sufferings both in soul and body.

CHAP. VII. Of the crucifying, death, and burial of the Lord JESUS CHRIST; with
the diquisition of all particulars incident thereunto.
THe death of Christ prefigured both in that of Abel, and of Abels lamb. The
definition of a Sacrifice how abused by Bellarmine, and on what design. The
Sacrifices of the Law how accounted expiatory. Several resemblances between the
Sacrifices of Christ and the legal sacrifices. A parallel beawixt Christ and
Isaac, and betwixt Christ and the Brazen Serpent. Calvin's interpretation, and
the practice of the Papists much alike unsound. How Christ is said to be made a
curse. The cruel intention of the Jews, to prolong Christ's miseries under the
false disguise of pity. Several sorts of Dereliction, and in what sort our
Savior Christ complained that he was forsaken. Whether Christ spoke those
words in his own Person, or in the person of his members: the Schoolmen in this
point very sound and solid. Why vinegar was given to Christ, at the time of his
passion. The meaning of those words, Consummatum est. That the death of Christ
is rather to be counted voluntary, then either violent or natural; and upon
what reasons. The death of Christ upon the Cross a full Propitiation for the
sins of man, both in the judgment of Scriptures and the Ancient Fathers. That
Christ suffered not the death of the soul, as impiously is affirmed by some.
The Eucharist ordained for a Sacrifice by our Lord and Savior. The Sacrifice
or Oblation of Bread and Wine, used anciently (by that very name) in the Church
of Christ; why called Commemorative, and why an Eucharistical sacrifice, and
why the Sacrament of the Altar. The Sacrifice asserted by the Ancient Writers,
corrupted by the Church of Rome, and piously restored by the Church of England.
St. Cyprian wrested by the Papists to defend their Mass. A parallel between the
Peace Offerings and the blessed Eucharist. The renting of the Vail at our
Saviors passion, what it might portend. The Earthquake and Eclipse then
happening, testified out of Heathen writers. The reconciliation of St. Mark and
St. John about the time and hour of our Saviors suffering. Various opinions in
that point, and which most improbable. Universality of redemption defended by
the Church of England. Both Sacraments how said to issue from our Saviors
side. The breaking of our Saviors body in the holy Eucharist, how it agrees
with the not breaking of his bones. The true and proper meaning of the Greek
word (...). Certain considerations on our Saviors burial; and of the weekly
fasting days thereupon occasioned. That Judas hanged himself, made good from
the ancient Fathers; against the new devise of Daniel Heinsius. The fearful
and calamitous ends of Pontius Pilate, Annas, Cajaphas, and the whole nation of
the Jews.

CHAP. VIII. Of the local descent of Christ into hell. Hades and inferi what
they signify in the best Greek and Latin authors, and in the text of holy
Scripture; an examination, and confutation of the contrary opinions.
Christ's descent into hell the first degree of his Exaltation; and so esteemed
by many of the ancient Fathers. The drift and project of this Chapter. Several
Etymologies of the Greek word HADES. The Greek word HADES, used most commonly
by the old Greek writers to signify hell, the place of torments; sometimes to
signify Pluto, the King of hell: the word so used also by the sacred Penmen of
the new Testament. The faultiness of our last translators in rendering the
Greek HADES by the English grave, 1 Cor. 15.55, etc. contrary to the exposition
of the best interpreters. By HADES in the Ecclesiastical notion of it is meant
only hell in the opinion of all Greek writers of the elder and middle times.
The Latin word inferi whence derived, and what it signifies. Inferi generally
used by the Ancient writers for the place of torments; not for the receptacles
or repositories of the righteous souls. The Greek word Hades generally rendered
in the new Testament, by the Latin inferi. The meaning of these words, viz. He
descended into hell, Grammatically gathered from the Premises. Arguments for
the local descent of Christ into hell from St. Paul's words, Romans 10.6, 7. and
Ephesians. 4.8, 9, etc. with the explication of both places. The leading of
captivity captive, Ephesians. 4. and the spoiling of principalities and powers,
Col. 2.15. used by the ancients as arguments for Christ's descent into hell: the
like proved by St Peter's argument, Act. 2.27, etc. the pains of death mentioned
verse. 2.24. in the latter editions of that book, the very same with the pains
of hell in some ancient copies. The Local descent of Christ into hell, proved
by the constant and successive testimonies of the old Greek Fathers; and by the
general current of the Latin writers: together with the reasons which induced
him to it. Considerations on this point, viz. whether Christ by his descent
into hell, delivered thence the souls of such holy men, as either dyed under or
before the Law. Bullengers moderation in it.

CHAP. IX. The Doctrine of the Church of England touching Christ's descent into
Hell, asserted from all contrary opinions, which are here examined and
disproved.
THe Doctrine of the Church of England touching the local descent of Christ
into Hell, delivered in the book of Articles, in the book of Homilies, and
Catechismes publicly allowed. The error of Mr. Rogers in that point, charged
upon the Church. The Doctrine of a local descent, defended by the most eminent
writers in the Protestant Churches; and of some of the Reformed also. The first
objection against the local descent, viz. that there was no such clause in the
old Creed or Symbol of the Church of Rome. The second objection, that our
Savior went on the day of his passion with the Thief to Paradise. The third
objection, that Christ at the instant of his death commended his soul into the
hands of God the Father. The pertinency and profitablenesse of the local
descent, declared and stated; and freed from all the Cavils which are made
against it. The false construction of this Article by our Masters in the Church
of Rome. Brentius and Calvin falsely charged by Bellarmine. The Article of
Christ's descent, by whom first made the same with his burial; the inconvenience
of that sense, and the absurdities of Beza in indevoring to make it good. The
new devise, which makes the descent into hell to be nothing else, but a
continuance for three days in the state of death; proposed, and answered. A
Theological Dictionary necessary for young Divines. The Author and progress
of the new opinion, touching the suffering of hell pains in our Saviors soul.
A particular of the torments in hell; that is to say, remorse of conscience, 2.
rejection from the favor of God, 3. despair of Gods mercy, 4. the fiery
flames there being. That none of all these could find place in our Saviors
soul. The blasphemy of some who teach that Christ descended into hell, to
suffer there the torments of the damned souls. Several sorts of punishment
agreed on by the Schoolmen; and how far Christ was liable to any of them.
Eternity of punishments how proportioned to the sin of Man. Two objections
answered. The Doctrine of the Church of England still the same it was.

CHAP. X. Of the Resurrection of our Lord and Savior; with a consideration of
the circumstances, and other points incident to that Article.
THe Article of Christ's resurrection. Most proper for St. Thomas, and upon what
reasons. The credibility of the resurrection proposed and proved, by the types
of Isaac, and of Joseph. Joseph why called Zaphnath-paaneah. The types of
Daniel, and of Jonah: and how applyable, especially the last, to the story of
Christ. Examples of a resurrection no strange thing to the Jews themselves. The
Resurrection of Christ foretold by the holy Prophets; the time and place
thereof, sufficient to convince the Jews of their incredulity. The allegation
of the Soldiers touching the stealing of Christ's body, examined and derided.
The Doctrine of the Resurrection of how swift a growth. Arguments for the
resurrection to convince the Gentiles. How Christ may be said to lie in the
grave three days and three nights. Several ways to salve the doubt, and which
most probable. The strange conceits of Gregory Nyssen, and of Dr. Alabaster;
with the learned and judicious Solution, made in the case by Paulus
Semproniensis an Italian Bishop. An accord made between the four Evangelists
about the time and hour of the resurrection. The first day of the week why
chosen for the day of the resurrection? why, and by whom celebrated as a weekly
Festival? why Christ was raised from the dead in a terrible earthquake? why he
appeared first to women? and why first of all to Mary Magdalen? How Christ is
said to be the first fruits of the dead. The resurrection of Christ's body a
sure pledge of ours. Some reasons for the resurrection in respect of Christ,
and the necessity thereof in respect of man. The Institution and antiquity of
the feast of Easter; the high esteem it had in the Primitive times, and
anciently in the Isle of Britain; the extreme follies of some men, on the other
side.

CHAP. XI. Of the Ascension of our Savior; with a discussion of the points and
other circumstances, which are most considerable in the same.
THe connection between the Ascension of Christ, and the coming down of the holy
Ghost foresignifyed by the Prophet David. The antiquity of the feast of holy
Thursday. Some doubts resolved about the time and place of the Ascension; the
Creed reconciled with the Gospel. Enoch and Elijah types of Christ's Ascension;
and in what particulars. The Prophecies in holy Scripture touching Christ's
ascension, as also touching the time, place and manner of it; with observations
upon each. A parallel between the old Roman triumphs and the Lords ascension.
Probable conjectures of the disposing of those bodies, which were raised with
Christ. The Captives what they were, which Christ led in triumph. The benefits
redounding unto mankind by Christ's ascension. A dissertation of the problem,
whether Christ merited for himself, or ^or mankind only. The inconsequence of
Maldonates illation, touching the worshipping of Christ after his ascension.
That the body of Christ after his Ascension, does still remain a natural body,
proved by the Scriptures and the Fathers. The Doctrine of Transubstantiation
destructive of Christ's natural body; and of the monstrous Paradoxes which do
thence arise.

CHAP. XII. Of sitting at the right hand of God; the proper meaning of the
Phrase; and of the Privileges which accrue thereby to our Lord and Savior.
THe meaning of the phrase sedere ad dextram Dei. Sitting at the right hand of
Kings and Princes, accounted for the greatest honor that could be done unto a
subject; not always so, though so in ordinary use, amongst common persons. The
middle, the most honorable place, amongst the Romans and Numidians. The right
hand of God what it signified in holy Scripture. The right hand, a hand of
power, and love; as also of friendship and fidelity. What the word sitting
means in the present Article. Sitting and standing words of repose and ease;
and how both Postures do agree with Christ in his several offices. The ill
construction made by Maldonate, touching Christ's sitting at the right hand of
God the Father; the faultiness of his Rule, and instance upon that occasion;
his aim therein discovered, canvassed and confuted. That Christ by sitting at
the right hand of God, obtains not an equality with God the Father, contrary
to the common opinion of the Protestant Schools. Several Preheminences given
to Christ by sitting at the right hand of God above all the Angels. That
sitting at the right hand of God, may piously be taken in a literal and
Grammatical sense. Considerations to that purpose, to make it percepitble and
intelligible to a rational man. Moderation in matters of opinion practiced by
the Ancients, and approved by the Author.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Priesthood of our Lord and Savior which he executes
sitting at the right hand of God, wherein it was foresignifyed by that of
Melchisedech; in what particulars it consists; and of Melchisedech himself.
THe Regal and Sacerdotal offices exercised by Christ as he sits at the
right hand of God. The difference between the calling of Christ and that of
Aaron; the Parallel and differences between the consecration of Christ, and the
consecration of Aaron; seven days designed unto the consecration of Christ,
how employed and spent; the Priesthood of Christ when it took beginning.
Melchisedech what he was, and from whom descended. In what the Priesthood of
Melchisedech did consist especially, with the error of the Papists in that
particular. Resemblances between Melchisedech and Christ in their name and
titles; and in performance of the office of the holy Priesthood. Christ made
the Mediator between God and man, and upon what reasons the Mediator not of
redemption only, as the Papists say, but of intercession. A story of
Themistocles how applied to Christ. How necessary it was, in reference to the
Priestly office, that Christ should have humane infirmities about him. The
ingenious conceit of Mat. Corvinus K. of Hungary. No sacrifice for sin, but
that of Christ upon the cross. The Heterodoxies of the Church of Rome, and
Orthodoxie of the Church of England, in that particular. The smart but true
censure of Averroes the Moore upon the Christians of his time. The sacrifice of
Christ though not to be reiterated by man, yet daily to be represented by
Christ himself unto God the Father. The manner how Christ made his entrance
into the sanctum Sanctorum, compared with that of the high Priest in the Jewish
Church A right of titles inherent in the Priesthood of our Lord and Savior,
and consequently in the Ministers of the Gospel also.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Regal or Kingly office of our Lord as far as it is executed
before his coming unto judgment. Of his Vicegerents on the earth, and of the
several Viceroyes put upon him by the Papists and the Presbyterians.
THe title of King designed to Christ long before his birth, given to him by
the Soldiers and confirmed by Pilate. The general opinion of the Jews and of
the Apostles and Disciples for a temporal Kingdom to be set up by their
Messiah; the like amongst the Gentiles also. Christ called the head of the
Church, and upon what reasons. The actual possession of the Kingdom not
conferred on Christ till his resurrection. Several texts of Scripture
explained and applied for the proof thereof. Christ by his regal power defends
his Church against all her enemies; and what those enemies are against which he
chiefly does defend it. Of the Legislative power of Christ, of obedience to his
laws and the rewards and punishments appendent on them. No Viceroy necessary
on the earth to supply Christ's absence. The Monarchy of the Pope ill grounded
under that pretense. The many Viceroyes thrust upon the Church, by the
Presbyterians; with the great prerogatives given unto them. Bishops the Vicars
of Christ in spiritual matters; and Kings, in the external regiment of the
holy Church. That Kings are Deputies unto Christ, not only unto God the Father,
proved both by Scriptures and by Fathers. The Cross why placed upon the top of
the regal Crown. How, and in what respects, Christ's Kingdom is said to have
an end. Charity, for what reasons greater then faith, and hope. The proper
meaning of those words, viz. Then shall he deliver up the Kingdom unto God the
Father; disputed, canvassed, and determined.

CHAP. XV. Touching the coming of our Savior to judgment both of quick and
dead; the souls of just men not in the highest state of bliss till the day of
judgment; and of the time and place and other circumstances of that action.
THe several degrees of CHRIST'S exaltation. A day of judgment granted by the
sober Gentiles. Considerations to induce a natural man to that persuasion, and
to enforce a Christian to it. That Christ should execute his judgment, kept as
a mystery from the Gentiles. Reasons for which the act of judging both the
quick and the dead, should be conferred by God, on his Son CHRIST JESUS. That
the souls of righteous men attain not to the highest degree of happiness till
the day of judgment, proved by authority of Scriptures; by the Greek Fathers,
and the Latin; by Calvin and some leading men of the reformation. The
alteration of this Doctrine in the Church of Rome, and the reason of it. The
torments of the wicked aggravated in the day of judgment. The terrors of that
day described, with the manner of it. The error of Lactantius in the last
particular. How CHRIST is said to be ignorant of the time and hour of the day
of judgment. The gross absurdity of Estius in his solution of the doubt, and
his aim therein. The audaciousnesse of some late adventurers, in pointing out
the year and day of the final judgment. The valley of Iehosophat designed to
the place of the general judgment. The Eastern part of heaven most honored
with our Saviors presence. The use of praying toward the East, of how great
antiquity. That by the sign of the Son of man, Mat. 24.30. we are to
understand the sign of the cross, proved by the Western Fathers, and the
Southern Churches. The sounding of the trumpet in the day of judgment,
whether Literally or Metaphorically to be understood. The several offices of
the Angels in the day of judgment. The Saints how said to judge the world* The
Method used by Christ in the act of judging. The consideration of that day, of
what use and efficacy in the ways of life.

LIBER III.
CHAP. I. Touching the holy Ghost, his divine nature, power, and office. The
controversy of his Procession laid down historically. Of receiving the holy
Ghost, and of the several Ministrations in the Church appointed by him.
Several significations of these words, the holy Ghost, in the new Testament.
The meaning of the Article according to the Doctrine of the Church of England.
The derivation of the name, and the meaning of it in Greek, Latin, and
English. The general extent of the word Spirit more appositely fitted to the
holy Ghost. The divinity of the holy Ghost clearly asserted from the constant
current of the book of God. The gross absurdity of Harding in making the
divinity of the holy Ghost to depend merely upon tradition and humane
authority. The many differences among the writers of all ages, and between St.
Augustine with himself, touching the sin or blasphemy against the holy Ghost.
The stating of the controversy by the learned Knight Sir R. F. That the
differences between the Greek and Latin Churches concerning the procession of
the holy Ghost, are rather verbal then material; and so affirmed to be by most
moderate men amongst the Papists. The judgment of antiquity in the present
controversy. The clause a Filioque first added to the ancient Creeds by some
Spanish Prelates, and after countenanced and confirby the Popes of Rome. The
great uncharitableness of the Romanists against the Grecians for not admitting
of that clause. The graces of the holy Ghost distributed into Gratis data, and
Gratum facientia, with the use of either. Why Simon Magus did assert the title
of the great power of God. Sanctification the peculiar work of the holy Ghost,
and where most descernible. Christ the chief Pastor of the Church, discharged
not the Prophetical office, until he had received the unction of the holy
Spirit. The Ministration of holy things conferred by Christ on his Apostles,
actuated and enlarged by the holy Ghost. The feast of Pentecost an holy
Anniversary in the Church, and of what antiquity. The name and function of a
Bishop, in St. Paul's distribution of Ecclesiastical offices, included under
that of Pastor. None to officiate in the Church but those that have both
mission and commission too. The meaning and effect of those solemn words, viz.
receive the holy Ghost used in Ordination. The use thereof asserted against
factious Novelty. The holy Ghost the primary Author of the whole Canon of the
Scripture. The Canon of the Evangelical and Prophetical writings closed and
concluded by St. John. The dignity and sufficiency of the written word asserted
both against some Prelates in the Church of Rome, and our great Innovators in
the Church of England.

CHAP. II. Of the name and definition of the Church. Of the title of Catholic.
The Church in what respects called holy. Touching the head and members of it.
The government thereof Aristocraticall.
THe name Church no where to be found in the old Testament. The derivation of
the Greek word (...), and what it signifies in old Authors. The Christian
Church called not improperly, by the name of a Congregation. The officiation of
that word in our old Translators, and the unsound construction of it by the
Church of Rome. Whence the word CHVRCH in English has its derivation. The word
promiscuously used in the elder times, to signify the place of meeting, and
the people which did therein meet. That by these words Ecclesia quae est domi
ejus, St. Paul means not a private family, but a Congregation. Several
significations of the word in the Ecclesiastical notion of it. The Clergy
sometimes called the Church. The Church called Catholic in respect of time,
place, and persons. Catholic anciently used for sound and Orthodox;
appropriated to themselves by the Pontificians, and unadvisedly yielded to them
by the common Protestants. Those of Rome more delighted with the name of
Papists then with that of Christian. The Church to be accounted holy
notwithstanding the unholinesse of particular persons. The error of the old
and new Novatians touching that particular, confuted by the constant current of
the book of God. Neither the Schismatic, nor the Heretic, excluded from being
Members of the Catholic Church. The Catholic Church consists not only of
Elect or Predestinate persons. The Popes supremacy made by those of Rome the
principal Article of their faith. Of the strange powers ascribed unto the Pope
by some flattering Sycophants; as well in temporal mattters, as in things
Spiritual. The Pope and Church made terms convertible in the Schools of Rome.
The contrary error of the Presbyterians and Independents in making the Church
to be all body. St. Hieroms old complaint revived in these present times. The
old Acephory what they were, and in whom revived. The Apostles all of equal
power, amongst themselves, and so the Bishops too in the Primitive times, as
successors to the Apostles in the public government. Literae Formulae what
they were in the elder ages. Of the supremacy in sacred matters exercised by
the Kings of Judah: and of that given by Law and Canon to the Kings of England.

CHAP. III. Of the visibility and infallibility of the Church of Christ; and of
the Churches power in expounding Scripture, determining controversies of the
faith, and ordaining ceremonies.
WHat we are bound to believe and practice touching the holy Catholic Church,
in the present Article. The Church at all times visible, and in what respects.
The Church of God not altogether, or at all invisible in the time of Ahab and
Elijah; nor in that of Antiochus, and the Maccabees. Arianisme not so universal
when at the greatest, as to make the Church to be invisible. The visibilitie of
the Church in the greatest prevalency of the Popedom; not to be looked for in
the congregations of the Albigenses. Husse or Wicliffes answer to the question,
Where our Church was before Luthers time; the Church of Rome a true Church,
though both erroneous in Doctrine and corrupt in manners. The Universal Church
of Christ not subject unto error in points of Faith. The promises of Christ
made good unto the Universal, though not to all particular Churches. The
opposition made to Arianism in the Western Churches: and in the Churches East
and West, to the Popes Supremacy, to the forced Celibat of Priests, to
Transubstantiation, to the half Communion, to Purgatory, Worshipping of Images,
and to Auricular confession. General Councels why ordained; how far they are
privileged from error, and of what authority. The Article of the Church of
ENGLAND touching General Councels abused and falsified. The power of National
and Provincial Councels in the points of faith, not only manifested and
asserted in the elder times, but strenuously maintained by the Synod of Dort.
Four Offices of the Church about the Scripture. The practices of the Jews and
Arians to corrupt the Text. The Churches power to interpret Scripture asserted
both by Ancient and Modern Writers. The Ordinances of the Church, of how great
authority: and that authority made good by some later Writers. The judgment
and practice of the Augustane, Bohemian and Helvetian Churches in the present
point. Two rules for the directing of the Churches power in ordaining
Ceremonies. How far the Ordinances of the Church do bind the Conscience.

CHAP. IV. Of the Communion which the Saints have with one another, and with
CHRIST their Head. Communion of affections infers not a community of goods
and fortunes. Prayers to the Saints and adoration of their Images an ill result
of this communion.
THe nature and meaning of the word Communio in the Ecclesiastical notions of
it. The word Saints variously taken in holy Scripture. In what particulars the
Communion of the Saints does consist especially. The Union or Communion which
the Saints have with CHRIST their Head as Members of his Mystical body, proved
by the Scriptures and the Fathers. The Communion which the Saints have with one
another evidenced and expressed in the blessed Eucharist. Of the Eulogia or
Panes Benedicti sent from one Bishop to another in elder times to testify
their unity in the faith of Christ. The salutation of the holy kiss how long it
lasted in the Church, and for what cause abrogated. The name of Brothers and
Sisters why used promiscuously among the Christians of the Primitive times. Of
the (...) or Love Feasts in the elder ages. The readiness of the Christians in
those blessed times not only to venture, but to lay down their lives for one
another. Pleas for the community of the Estates studied by the Anabaptists, and
refelled by the Orthodox. The natural community of mankind in the use of the
creatures contrary unto Law and Reason, and to the pretentions also of the
Anabaptists themselves. The Orthodoxie in this point of the Church of England.
A general view of the communion which is between the Saints departed, and those
here on earth. The Offices performed by godly men upon the earth to the Saints
in Heaven. That the Saints above pray not alone for the Church in general, but
for the particular members of it. The Invocation of the Saints how at first
introduced. Prayers to the Saints not warranted by the Word of God, nor by the
writings of the Fathers, nor by any good reason. Immediate address to Kings
more difficult then it is to God. The Saints above not made acquainted in any
ordinary way, with the wants of men: Arguments to the contrary from the Old
Testament, answered and laid by. An answer to the chief argument from the 15.
chapter of St. Luke. Several ways excogitated by the Schoolmen, to make the
Saints acquainted with the wants of men; and how unuseful to the Papists in the
present point. The danger and doubtfulnesse of those ways, opened and
discovered by the best learned men amongst the Papists themselves. Invocation
of the Saints, and worshipping of their Images a fruit of Gentilisme. The vain
distinctions of the Papists to salve the worshipping of Images in the Church of
Rome. Purgatory how ill grounded on the use of Prayers for the dead. Prayers
for the dead allowed of in the primitive times, and upon what reason. The
ancient Diptychs what they were. The heresy of Aerius, and the Doctrine of the
Church of England, concerning Prayer for the dead. Purgatory not rejected only
by the Church of England, but by the whole Churches of the Greeks, and the
ancient Fathers. The ireconcileable differences amongst the Papists, and the
fluctuation of St. Augustine in the point of Purgatory.

CHAP. V. Of the first Introduction of sin: God not the Author of it. Of the
nature and contagion of Original sin. No actual sin so great, but it is capable
of forgiveness. In what respect some sins may be accounted venial, and others
mortal.
Forgiveness of sins the first great benefit redounding unto mankind by our
Saviors passion. Man first made righteous in himself, but left at liberty to
follow, or not to follow the ways of life. Adam, not God, the author of the
first transgression; proved by the Scriptures and the Fathers. The heresy of
the Cataphrygians, and of Florinus in making God the Author of sin; as also of
Bardesenus and Priscilian, imputing sin to fate and the stars of Heaven. The
impious heresy of Florinus revived by the Libertines. The Founder of the
Libertines a member of the Church of Rome, not of Calvin's School. Calvin and
his Disciples, not altogether free from the same strange tenets. The sin of
Adam propagated to his whole posterity. Original sin defined by the Church of
England, and in what it specially consists. That there is such a sin as
original sin, proved by the testimony of the Scriptures; by the light of
reason; and by the Practice of the Church. Private Baptism why first used, and
the use thereof maintained in the Church of England. Not the day of their
birth, but of the death of the Saints, observed as Festivals by the Church, and
upon what reasons. The word natalis what it signifies in the Martyrologies.
Original sin how propagated from one man to another; and how to children borne
of regenerate Parents. The sin of Adam not made ours by imitation only, but by
propagation. Of the distinction of sins in venial and mortal, and how far
abominable. Equality of sins a Paradox in the School of Christ. No sin
considered in its self to be counted venial; but only by the grace and
goodness of Almighty God. No sin so great but what is capable of Pardon, if
repented of; no not the murdering of Christ, nor the sin against the holy
Ghost. Arguments from the holy Scriptures, as Heb 6.4, 6. and Heb. 10.26, 27.
and 1 Ioh. 5.16. to prove some sins to be incapable of pardon produced and
answered. The proper application of the several places; with the error of our
last Translators in the second Text.

CHAP. VI. Of the remission of sins by the blood of Christ, and of the
Abolition of the body of sin by Baptism and Repentance. Of confession made
unto the Priest, and the authority Sacerdotal.
GOD the sole Author, Christ the impulsive meritorious cause of the
forgiveness of sins. Remission of sins how and in what respects ascribed to
the blood of Christ. Power to forgive sins conferred upon, and exercised by the
Apostles. The doctrine of the Church of England, touching the efficacy of
Baptism in the washing away of sin, confirmed by the Scriptures and the
Fathers, and many eminent Divines of the reformed Churches. Baptismal washings
frequently used of old, both by Jews and Gentiles; as well to expiate their
sins, as to manifest and declare their innocence. The waters of Baptism in
what respect made efficacious unto the washing away of the guilt of sin. What
it is which makes Baptism to be efficacious unto the washing away of sin. The
rigor of the Primitive Church toward such as sinned after Baptism. The
Clinici what they were, and how then esteemed of. The institution and antiquity
of Infant Baptism. The old rule for determining in doubtful cases, how
applied to this. Proofs for the Baptism of Infants, from St. Augustine up to
Irenaeus, inclusively. What faith it is by which Infants are Baptized and
justified. Of the necessity of Baptism, the want thereof how supplied, or
excused in the Primitive times; and of the state of Infants dying unbaptized.
Repentance necessary and effectual in men of riper years, for remission of
sins. Confession in the first place to be made to God; satisfaction for the
wrong done to be given to man. Satisfaction for sin, in what sense to be given
to God, by the Penitent sinner. Private confession to a Priest allowed of and
required by the Church of England. The Churches care in preserving the seal of
confession, from all violation. Confession to a Priest defended by the best
Divines of the Anglical Church, approved by the Lutheran^, not condemned by
Calvin. The disagreement of the Papists in the proofs of their auricular
confession from the Texts of Scripture. The severity of exacting all particular
circumstances, in confession, with the inconveniences thereof. That the power
of sacerdotall Absolution in the opinion of the Fathers, is not declarative
only, but judicial: and that it is so also both in the Doctrine and the
practice of the Church of England.

CHAP. VII. Of the Resurrection of the body, and the proofs thereof. The
objections against it answered. Touching the circumstances and manner of it.
The History and grounds of the Millenarians.
THe resurrection of the body derided and contemned by the Ancient Gentiles.
Proofs for the resurrection from the words of Job, from the Psalms, and
Prophets; and from the Argument of our Savior in the holy Gospels. Our
Saviors Argument for the resurrection, against the cavils of the Sadduces,
declared, expounded, and applied to the present purpose. Several Arguments to
the same purpose and effect, alleged by St. Paul in his Epistles; and that too
of the same numerical not another body. Baptizing of or for the dead, a
pregnant proof or argument for the resurrection; several expositions of the
place produced, and which most probable. Baptizing or washing of the dead,
anciently in use amongst the Jews, the Gentiles, and the Primitive Christians;
with the reasons of it. Practical and natural truths for a resurrection. The
resurrection of the same b^dy denied by Heretics; and justified with strong
reasons by the Orthodox Christians. Two strong and powerful arguments for the
resurrection, produced from the Adamant, and the art of Chemistry. That the
dead bodies shall be raised in a perfect stature, and without those deformities
which here they had; and in their several sexes also, contrary to the fancies
of some vain disputers. Considerations raised on the Doctrine of the
resurrection, with reference unto others and unto our selves. The Doctrine of
the Millenarians originally founded on some Jewish dotages; by whom first set
on foot in the Church of Christ, how refined, and propagated. The Millenarian
Kingdom described by Lactantius, and countenanced by many of the ancient
writers, till cried down by Hierome. The texts of Scripture on which the
Millenarians found their fancies produced, examined, and l^yed by as unusefull
for them. The disagreement of the old Millenarians, in the true stating of
their Kingdom.

CHAP. VIII. Of the immortality of the soul, and the glories of Eternal life
prepared for it; as also of the place and torment of hell. Hell fire not
Metaphorical but real. The Conclusion of all.
THe immortality of the soul asserted by the holy Scriptures; denied by some
Heretical Christians, abetted and defended generally by the learned Gentiles.
That the world shall have an end, and that it shall have an end by fire, proved
by the old Poets and Philosophers. A place of everlasting rest and happiness
designed by the learned both Greeks and Romans, for the souls of just and
virtuous men to inhabit in; with a description of the place so by them
designed. That the Patriarchs, and other holy men of God were nourished in the
hopes of eternal life, maintained by the Church of England and by the plain
Texts of holy Scripture; denied by Servetus the whole Sect of the Anabaptists,
and by some of our great Masters in the Church of Rome. Eternal life frequently
promised in the new Testament, to the true believer; the several names by
which it is presented to us, and the glories of it. That the Saints shall have
a full knowledge of one another, in the state of glory, proved by clear
evidence of Scripture. Several estates of glory and degrees of happiness
amongst the Saints; proved by the Scriptures and the Fathers. The consideration
of those glories of what great power and efficacy on a pious soul. Hell pains
designed for the ungodly. Of Hades, Abyssus, Tartarus, and Gehenna (by which
names both the place and names of Hell are represented in the new Testament):
and what they do amount to being laid together. That the Scriptures mentioning
hell fire, are literally not Metaphorically to be understood, proved by the
word it self, by the authority of the Fathers, and the light of Reason.
Arguments from the same topics, to prove the pains of hell to be everlasting;
contrary to the fancies of latter Heretics. The end of all.

FINIS.
Addend. Fol. 453: lin. 37.
-- May believe in others. Nor does it any way disagree with the Analogy of
Faith, or the proceedings in like cases, that it should be so; that the
confession of the Faith made by the sureties or sponsores (the Godfathers and
Godmothers as we call them now) in the Infants name, should be accepted by the
Lord to the best advantage of the Infant, for whom they stipulate. Not to the
Analogy of the faith; for find we not in the 7. Chapter of St. Luke that the
Centurions sick Servant was healed by Christ of his bodily diseases, upon the
faith of his Master only? And is it not expressly said, Mat. 9.2. that Christ
pronounced the forgiveness of sins to the sick of the Palsy, upon the faith
of them that brought him? which story we find more at large Mark 2.3. Luke
5.18. but all concentring on this truth, that it was not the faith of the
sickman, but of them that brought him, which did procure the sentence of
Absolution, or Remission of sins, from the hands of Christ. Not with
proceedings in like cases; for by the Laws, the Stipulation made by Sureties,
or such as have the charge of Guardianship of Infants, made in their name and
to their advantage, in the improvement or establishment of their Estates, is
taken for as good and valid, as if it had been made by himself in his riper
years. And of this we have a fair example in King James the sixth of Scotland,
and the first Monarch of Great Britain, who was crowned King of the Scots, and
received for such, upon the Oath of some Noble men, swearing and promising in
his Name that he should govern that Realm and People according to the Laws
established: which I find urged by that King in the conference at Hampton
Court, in justification of the Interrogatories proposed to Infants in their
Baptism, and of the Answers made thereto by the mouth of their Sureties. And to
say truth, there is the same reason for them both; the Infant in the one case
(which is that of Baptism,) being bound in conscience to perform that, when he
comes unto riper years, which his Godfathers and Godmothers did vow and
promise in his Name. And in the other case (which is that of civil contract or
stipulation) he is bound by law to make that good, which in his name and for
his benefit and advantage his Guardians or Curators had so undertaken.

ERRATA.
In the Epistle Dedicatory for already read clearly. In that to the Reader fol.
2. f. subsequent r. subservient. In the Preface ^ol. 11. f. calling in r.
casting in. f. creating r. preaching. f. decurrisse r. decursu. f. 21. f. mo^e
r. promote. ^. new opinions r. no opinions. f. 21. f. consent r. consult.

In the Book it self f. 2. f. traditio r. tradito. f. Evang r. ^xani. f. 17. f.
Eubemerus r. Eubemerus. f. 20. f. fellows r. followers. f. 27. f. Numens r.
Nations. f. 31. f. ne se r. ne sic. f. 34. f. his land r. his hand. f. 37. f.
the name r. the means. f. 39. f. godly r. goodly. f. 41. f. compassion are r.
compassionate. f. 42. f. in time r. in fine. f. 50. l. 52. f. powerful world r.
powerful word. f. 52. f. materials r. immaterials. f. 73. f. Panaon r.
Panarion. f. 76. f. Gigamire r. Gigantine. f, 81. f. repertimes r. reperiemus.
f. 91. f. divinam r. divinatio. f. not to make r^ not only to make. f. 93. f.
may acts r. many acts. f. 95. f. justification r. institution. f. 96. f. been
r. had been. f. 101. f. valendinem r. valeludinem. f. 104. f Galcalus Martius
r. Galeatius Martius. f. 107. f. kindred r. children. f. 122. f. internal r.
infernal. f. 139. f. suffered him r. suffered himself. f. these lazy lives r.
the lazy lives. f. 152. f. doties r. does. f. 157. f. his r. this. f. 170. f.
imuition r. intuition. f. 180. f. blind him. r. blind him. f. 197. for which
the speaks of r. for which the Gospel speaks of. f. 200. f. skin r. shin. f.
202. f. Arius r. Aerius. f. 231. f. meuth. r. mead. f. 233. f. being then
found out r. being not then found out. f. 234. f. I must confess r. to which I
must confess. f. 240. f. by believing only r. by feeling only. f. 241. f. moral
r. mortal. f. 246. f. descent r. desert. f. 251. f. Calendar r. Kalends. f.
269. f. how all this doctrine r. how ill this doctrine. f. 275. f. more then in
there virtues read more in their virtues. f. 280. f. strongest r. strong. f.
282. f. happiness r. holiness. f. 294. f. the Priesthood r. the Priest stood.
f. 305. f. transubstiated r. transubstantiated. f. on the r. in the. f. 308. f.
certainly r. as certainly. f. 310. f. nor new. r. or new. f. 314. f. gravora r.
graviora. f. to great r. to so great. f. 315. f. any other sight r. any other
light. f. 315. f. day of days r. the days. f. 322. f. Loyal r. Loyola. f. 328.
f. utraque r. utroque. f. 374. f. now give r. not give. del. application. f.
379. f. the same r. the name. f. 387. for consorti r. consortio. f. 401. f. in
their baptism. r. in their infancy before baptism. f. 414. f. most high Ghost
r. most high God. f. 391. f. Syrius r. Syria. f. 396. f. a siquidem r.
siquidem. f. 397. f. Arminians r. Armenians. f. 398 f. convenientem r.
convenientium. f. 416. f dum quo r. cum quo. f. suppetas r. suppetias. f. 456.
f. declanative r. declarative. f. 453. f, an evitable r. unevitable. f. 471. f.
inventute r. injuventute. f. 495. f. which continual r. with continual.

THE SUM OF Christian Theology, Positive, Philological, and Polemical;
CONTAINED IN THE Apostles CREED, Or reducible to it.

IN THREE BOOKS.

By PETER HEYLYN.

1 John 5.7. There are three that bear record in Heaven, the Father, the Word,
and the holy Ghost; and these three are one.

LONDON, Printed by E. Cotes for Henry Seile, over against St. Dunstans Church
in Fleet Street, 1654.

A PREFACE To the following Work, CONCERNING The ANTIQVITY and AVTHORITY OF THE
CREED CALLED THE Apostles CREED: With Answer to the chief Objections which are
made against it. The Drift and Project of the WORK.
IT was a saying of St. Ambrose Ambros. in Hexaemer.
, Unus unum fecit qui unitatis ejus haberet imaginem; that God made only one in
the first beginning, after the likeness or similitude of his own unity. The
creation of the World was the pattern of Man, Man of the Church, the Almighty
of all. Being one himself, or rather being unity, he bestowed upon the World
not a being only, but his blessing with it, that being it should be but one.
One in the general comprehension of parts, and therefore by the Grecians
called (...). The Latins call it universum, a name of multitude indeed, but of
a multitude united. Universi qui in uno loco versi, say the old Grammarians.
One also in opposition unto numbers, and so maintained by Aristotle in his
first De Coelo, against the errors of Empedocles and Democritus, two old
Philosophers. Now as he made the world but one, after the similitude of
himself, so out of the world, and according to that pattern, created he man.
Made by the Lord, according to his own image; and made but one, because the
Lord was so that made him, because the world was so out of which he was taken.
The several parts and members in him, do but commend the unity of the whole
Compositum; for though they are many members, yet but one body 1 Cor. 12.20
, says St. Paul. Which mutual resemblance and agreement, as it occasioned
many of the old Philosophers to call man an Abridgement of the world; so might
it no less justly have occasioned others to style the world an enlargement of
man. Nay more then this, seeing that only man was without an helper, the Lord
resolved to make one for him; and to make her out of his own body only, that so
he might preserve still the former unity. Nor stayed he here, but he did give
her unto man to be one flesh with him, that to the unity of Original, he might
add the union of affections. Magnum mysterium Ephesians. 5.32.
, says the Apostle, but I Speak only as he did, touching Christ and the
Church. For this Creation of the woman, as St. Augustine tells us, was a most
perfect type of the birth and being of the Church of Christ, Christum enim et
Ecclesiam tali facto jam tunc prophetari oportebat De Civit. dei. l. 22. c. 17.
. The woman was created out of the side of man, at such time as the Lord had
caused a deep sleep to fall upon him: the Church was also taken out of the
wounded side of Christ, being cast into a deeper sleep then that of Adam. And
as the woman was one body, both in the composition of her parts, and one with
Adam both in the union of love, and unity of being; so is it also with the
Church. She is at perfect union with him in the union of her affections, being
married Hos. 2.19.
unto him for ever; one with him in the unity of her original, for we are
members of his body Ephesians. 5.30.
, and of his flesh, and of his bone: and lastly one in the consent and harmony
of all her parts, acknowledging one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism Ephesians. 4.5.
. For though the Church consisted in those early days both of Jews and
Gentiles, Greeks and Barbarians, bond and free, men not alone of different
countries, but of different natures, yet being all incorporated into that
society of men which we call the Church, they make but one body 1 Cor. 12.13
only, as St. Paul has testified. And whence proceeds that unity of this
visible body, but in that uniformity which all those several persons have
which belong unto it, by reason of that one Lord, whose servants they do all
profess themselves to be; that one Faith, of which they do all make
confession; and that one Baptism, wherewith they are initiated into that
society? the outward and uniforme profession of these three things, which
appertain to the very essence of Christianity, being necessarily required of
each Christian man. Christians they neither are nor can be who call not Christ
their Lord and Master. From hence it came that first in Antioch, and afterward
throughout all the world, all who were of the visible Church were called
Christians. Author nominis ejus Christus Tacit. Annal. lib. 15.
, says Cornelius Tacitus. But the bare calling of CHRIST JESUS our Lord and
Master is not enough to prove us to be Christians, unless that we do also
embrace that Faith which he delivered to his Apostles, and was by them
delivered unto all the world. And though we are not reckoned members of this
visible Church, till we receive admittance by the door of Baptism: yet is the
door of Baptism opened unto none, until they make profession of their faith
in Christ. It is not honesty of life, nor moral righteousness which gives
denomination to a Christian (although the want thereof does exclude from
heaven) because they are not proper unto Christian men, as they are Christians;
but do concern them, as they are men. The moral Law was given to mankind in
the state of nature; and after promulgated to the Jews in more solemn manner.
Hence was it that so many of the ancient Gentiles (not to say any thing of the
Jews) before the coming of our Savior were eminent in so many parts of moral
virtue. But for the acts of Faith whereby we do confess that JESUS CHRIST is
Lord of all things, and willingly believe all those sacred truths which he came
to publish to the world; and by confession of the which, we carry as it were a
key to the door of Baptism: that is the proper badge and cognizance of a
Christian man, by which it is made known unto all the world, both to what Lord
he appertains, and by what means he was admitted for a member of his house
and family. Which faith, or rather the doctrines of which faith, being first
delivered by our Savior, with this comfort and reward annexed Joh. 3.16.
, that whosoever believed in him should not perish but have life everlasting;
and after preached by the Apostles both to Jew and Gentile: was finally
committed unto writing to this end and purpose, that by reading it, or hearing
it read and declared by others we may believe that JESUS is the CHRIST the Son
of God, and that believing we may have life through his name Joh 20.31.
, as St. John assures us. And though this be affirmed by him of his Gospel only
(I mean that written by himself) yet we may safely say the same of all the rest
of the Apostolical and Evangelical writings, as being dictated by the same
Spirit, writ by men equally inspired, and all conducing to this end, to teach
us to know JESUS CHRIST, and him crucified, and to enable us to give a reason
to all that ask of the faith that is in us.

But being the writings of the Evangelists and Apostles were of too great a
bulk to be committed unto memory, and that there were some things in them so
obscure and difficult, that many ignorant and unstable 2 Pet. 3.16.
(but well meaning) men both might and did wrest them to their own destruction;
other things which related rather unto moral duties, then to points faith: it
was thought fit by the Apostles to draw the points of saving faith, such as
were necessarily to be believed of all Christian people, into a brief and
narrower compass. It was not for the ordinary sort of men to trouble
themselves with doubtful disputations Romans 14.1.
as St. Paul calls them, whereof many do occur in his Epistles; disputes of
too great difficulty and sublime a nature, for every man, especially the weak
in faith, either to understand or conceive aright. Nor was it possible that men
of mean parts and laborious callings, of which the Church consisted for the
most part in the first beginning, should either have so much leisure as to read
over their writings, or so much judgment as to gather and collect from thence
what of necessity was to be believed that they might be saved, what not; or so
much memory as to treasure up and repeat by heart, the infinite treasures of
divine knowledge, which are comprehended in the same. And if it were so (as no
doubt it was) when the Apostles and Evangelists had left those excellent
Monuments of themselves in writing, which the Church has ever since enjoyed;
to which men might resort, as occasion was, for their information and
instruction: how necessary then must we think it was, for some such Summarie
and Abstract of the Christian faith to be resolved upon amongst them; which men
of weak memories might repeat by heart, and men of shallow comprehensions
righly understand. Those blessed souls knew well, none better, how to apply
themselves to the capacities of the weakest men; that there were many Babes in
Christ, who were to be fed with milk and not with meats Heb. 5, 13, 14.
; and that if they became not all things unto all men, they must resolve
amongst themselves to save but few. Upon this ground (then which what juster
could there be to induce them to it?) it is conceived they drew up that brief
abstract of the Christian faith, which we call the CREED; and couched therein
whatever point was necessary for all sorts of men, in all times, and all places
of the world, both to believe in their hearts, as also to profess and confess
upon all occasions, though to the apparent hazard of their lives and fortunes.
And why this might not be that (...), that form of sound words, whereof St.
Paul says to Timothy 2 Timothy 1.13.
, Hold fast that form of sound words thou have heard of me, I must confess
that I could never yet see a convincing reason. Certain I am, that Irenaeus who
lived very near the Apostles times, has said of this confession of the faith,
this Creed, which has so generally and unanimously been received over all the
world: Ecclesia per universum orbem usque ad fines terrae, Iren. adv. haeres.
l. 1. c. 2.
etc. The Church (says he) throughout the world, even to the ends of the
earth, received from the Apostles and their Disciples that faith which
believes in one God the Father Almighty, maker of heaven and earth, etc. and
in JESUS CHRIST the Son of God incarnate for our salvation; and in the holy
Spirit, which preached by the Prophets the dispensation and coming of God; and
the birth of CHRIST our Lord by the Virgin, his passion, resurrection and
ascension with his flesh into heaven; and his coming from heaven in the glory
of his Father, to raise up all flesh, and to give just judgment unto all.
Which words lest possibly we might interpret of the doctrine of faith, which
questionless was always one and the same over all the world, and not of any
summary or abstract which they had digested for the use and benefit of Gods
people; or think that they relate rather to the substance of faith, then to any
set and determinate form of words in which that substance was delivered: let us
behold what the same Father has delivered in another place Id. ibid. c. 3.
. This faith (says he) which the Church though dispersed through the world
received from the Apostles and their Disciples, yet notwithstanding does it
keep it as safe as if it dwelt within the walls of one house, and as uniformly
hold (N. B.) as if it had but one only heart and soul; and this as consonantly
it preaches, teaches and delivers, as if but one tongue did speak for all.
He adds Iren. adv. hae^es. l. 1. c. 3.
, which makes the point more plain, that though there be different languages in
the world, (...), yet the effect and sum of the tradition, ( i. e. the faith
delivered in that form) is one and the same: and I presume, he means not by
tradition those doctrines of faith, which are delivered in the books and
writings of the Evangelists and Apostles. Finally he concludes with this
expression (and it is worthily worth our marking in the present case) that he
amongst the Governors of the Church who is best able to speak, says no more
then this; and no less then this, the simplest and the most ignorant person:
which certainly he had not said, but that there was one uniforme and
determinate order of words, which every one was bound to learn and adhere unto*
Tertullian he speaks plainer yet, and affirms expressly Tertull. de veland.
Virgin.
, regulam fidei unam omnino esse, solam, immobilem, et irreformabilem, that
there is but one rule of faith at all, and that unmovable and unalterable. How
could he say that there was but one rule of faith in the Church, if every
several Church had a several rule; or that it was unmovable and unalterable,
(as he says it was) if there were no certain form of words prescribed which
men were to keep to, but every one might change and alter as he saw occasion?
So that I take it for a truth unquestionable, that in the first ages, nay the
first beginnings of the Church of CHRIST, there was a certain form of words
prescribed for the ease and benefit of the Church, a summarie or abstract of
the Articles of the Christian faith, drawn up as briefly and as plainly, but
yet withal as fully as might stand with brevity; a constant rule or standard (
Regula fidei, as Tertullian calls it) which both the people were to learn, and
the Priests or Ministers to teach. And to this purpose it is said by Austin of
the Creed or Symbolum, that it was simplex, breve, plenum, plain, short, and
perfect Aug. Sermon. de Temp. 115.
, simplicitas ut consulat rusticitati audientium, brevitas memoriae, plenitudo
doctrinae; that so the plainness of it might comply with the capacities of the
hearers, the shortness with their want of memory, the perfection or the
fullness of it with their edification. Had any one of these been wanting, had
it been plain enough to be understood, but too long and copious to be born in
memory; or short enough to be remembered, but obscure and difficult, above the
reach of ordinary apprehensions; or plain and short enough, but imperfect,
maimed, and wanting in some points of principal moment; it had been no fit rule
for the Church of CHRIST, produced no benefit at all, at least not worthy the
divine Apostolical spirit, for the use of Christians.

I know the age we live in has produced some men (and those of special
eminence in the ways of learning) who seem to bid defiance unto all antiquity;
and will have neither Creeds nor Fathers, no nor ancient Councels, to bear a
stroke in any thing which concerns Religion. It is not long since that the
Apostles Creed has been out of credit, as neither theirs, nor anciently
received by the Christian Church in that form we have it: but none have taken
more unhappy pains in this fruitless quarrel, then one Down of Devonshire.
Vossius has lately writ a book De Tribus Symbolis, wherein he has not only
derogated from this of the Apostles, which others had quarrelled to his hand;
but very unfortunately endeavors to prove, that that ascribed to Athanasius,
and so long taken to be his by the chief lights for piety and learning in the
Church of Christ, was not writ by him. Nor is he pleased with that form set
forth and recommended to the Churches by the Council of Nice; for fear there
should be any obligation laid upon men's consciences to believe otherwise then
they list. And whereas it was thought till these subtiller times, that the most
certain way to interpret Scripture, was by the Catholic consent and
commentaries of the ancient Fathers, so much renowned both in their own times
and all ages since: they are now made so inconsiderable, such poor-spirited
men; that truth will shortly fare the worse, because they delivered it. Our
Down, and after him one Dalie a Frenchman, had not else beat their brains,
and consumed their time, and stretched their wits unto the utmost, to make them
of no use or credit, either in points of faith or controversy, as they both
have done. The next thing that we have to do, is to cry down the Canon of the
Scripture also: and as we have vilifyed the Creeds, Councels, and Fathers, to
make the fairer room for our own right reason, which is both Fathers, Creeds,
and Councels to our now great wits; so to reject the Scriptures also (as some
do already) to make the clearer way for new revelations, which is the Paraclet,
or the holy Ghost, of our present Montanists. To meet with this strange pride
and predominant humor, I have most principally applied my self at this time of
leisure; wherein (God help) it is not lawful for me to attend that charge in
which God had placed me, to restore this ancient and Apostolic Creed to its
former credit; and to expound the same, as it stands in terminis, according to
the sense and meaning of those Orthodox and Catholic writers, which have
successively flowrished in the Christian world, and were the greatest ornaments
of the age they lived in. For being free from prejudice and prepossessions,
which do too often blind the eyes of the wisest men; and no way interessed in
the quarrels which are now on foot, to the great disturbance of the Church and
peace of Christendom: what men more fit then they to decide those
Controversies which have been raised about the meaning of those Articles of the
Christian faith, which are comprised in it, or deduced from it? So doing, I
shall satisfy my self, though I please not others: and have good cause to
thank this retreat from business, for giving me such opportunities to consult
Antiquity, and thereby to inform my own understanding. For my part I have
always been one of those qui docendo discunt, who never more benefit my self
then by teaching others. And therefore though these Papers never see the light,
or perhaps they may not, I shall not think I could have spent my time more
profitably, then in this employment. So God speed me in it.

To go back therefore where we left, exceeding necessary it was (as before was
said) for some short summarie or compendium of the Christian faith, to be
agreed on and drawn up for the use of Gods people; and that for these 3.
reasons chiefly. First, to consult the wants and weaknesses of poor ignorant
persons, such as were Novices in the faith, and but Babes in CHRIST; ut
incipientibus et lactantibus quid credendum sit constitueretur Aug. de fide and
Symb. c. 1.
, as St. Augustine has it. Secondly, that there might be some standing rule,
by which an Orthodox Teacher might be known from a wicked heretic, a Christian
from an unbeliever; and to this end the Creed or Symbolum served exceeding
fitly: Of which St. Austin gives this note, His qui contradicit aut a CRISTI
fide alienus est, aut est haereticus Id. in Encheirid a Laur.
, that whosoever contradicts it, is either an Heretic or an Infidel. Thirdly,
that people of all nations finding so punctual and exact an harmony in points
of doctrine to be delivered by the Apostles, wheresoeoer they came, might be
the sooner won to embrace that faith in which they found so universal and
divine a consonancie; and be united with and amongst themselves in the bonds of
peace, which is not to be found but where there is the spirit of unity. And who
were able think you to prescribe a rule so universally to be received over all
the world, so suddenly to be obeyed by all Christian people; but the Lords
Apostles? Who else but they were of authority to impose a form on the Church of
CHRIST, to be so uniformly held, so consonantly taught in all tongues and
languages, as we find this was by Irenaeus; to be esteemed so unalterable and
unmovable, as this was counted by Tertullian; to be illustrated by the notes
and Commentaries of the most glorious lights of the Christian firmament, St.
Cyril, Chrysostom, Austin, and indeed who not? ^and finally to continue for so
long a time as for 1600. years together, not only without such opposition as
other Creeds have met with in particular Churches, but without any sensible
alteration in the words and syllables? Assuredly such respects and honor had
not been given to any humane rule or form, in the primitive times, not coming
from the Lords Apostles; nor had it been a plant of so long continuance, had it
not been both sown and watered by those heavenly hands, God himself giving the
increase. But being reasons of this nature are not so prevalent with some men,
as those which are derived from testimony, and the consent and general
agreement of the ancient writers, who may best be credited in matters done so
long ago: we will now show what was conceived in the best and purest times of
Christianity, touching the Authors and occasion of this Creed or Symbol. The
story whereof is thus delivered by Ruffinus, according unto that tradition
which was then generally received in the Christian Church Ruffin. in Symbol.
. Tradunt Majores nostri, etc. Our Ancestors (says he) have delivered to us by
tradition, that when fiery tongues had fallen upon all the Apostles after
CHRIST'S Ascension, by the coming of the holy Ghost, so that they could speak in
several languages, and that there was no tongue so barbarous, which they
understood not, they received commandment from above to travel every one into
several nations, for the preaching and promulgating of the Gospel. Being
therefore forthwith to depart from one another, they did agree upon a certain
form of words, to be the rule and square of their future preachings, lest being
separated far asunder, any the the least difference should appear amongst them
in those things, which were to be communicated unto them whom they invited to
the knowledge of eternal life. Omnes igitur in uno positi, and sancto Spiritu
repleti, etc. To this end being all together with one accord, and all filled
with the holy Spirit, they drew up a short Rule or form, whereby to regulate
their doctrine (as before was said) which they composed by casting in every one
his part, (as in a common shot or reckoning) and so agreed to give it for a
rule unto all believers. And this (says he) they called by the name of
Symbolum, not without good reason. For (...) in Greek does signify both a sign
or cognizance, and a contributing or conferring of many things together, to
make up one. And they had framed this Abstract of the Faith to this end and
purpose, that it might serve both for a character or mark, whereby the people
might distinguish those false Apostles, which then began to scatter their
pernicious doctrines in the Church of Christ, from such as preached the Gospel
of our Lord and Savior with an upright heart; as also for a sign or watchword
to be kept amongst them, such as they had observed that Officers and Commanders
in the wars did give unto their soldiers under their command, that being asked
the word they might know the better whether the man they met with were a friend
or enemy. And to the same intent and purpose they thought it best not to commit
the same to writing, but only to imprint it in the hearts of the true
believers; (lest otherwise it might happily fall into the hands of unbeleevers)
that no man might pretend to have learned it otherwise, but only ex traditione
Apostolorum, from the Tradition of the Apostles. Thus, or to this effect
Ruffinus. And to this relation we might add St. Austins, who does not only say
as Ruffinus does, that the Creed was made by the Apostles, every one casting in
his shot, or Symbolum Aug. Sermon. 115. de Temp.
, whence it had that name; but does assign to every one his several Article;
according to that form and order which we have presented in the beginning of
this Tractate, and therefore for avoiding needless repetitions shall omit it
here. And though perhaps that Sermon may be none of Augustines, as indeed many
of those de Tempore, have been suspected to belong to some other Author: yet
the Author whosoever he was, was of good Antiquity, and says no more then what
agrees to that Tradition which has been generally received in these Western
Churches.

And now I would fain know what one thing there is in this Narration of
Ruffinus, to which the Writers of most fame and credit in the Primitive times
do not give countenance. Is it, that the Creed was made by all the twelve
Apostles, as he says it was? S. Ambrose says the same expressly Ambros. Sermon.
38.
, Duodecem Apostolorum Symbolo fides sancta concepta est; the holy Faith, says
he, is conceived (or comprehended) in the Symbol of the twelve Apostles. St.
Hierome though a bitter enemy to Ruffinus, and a man too indulgent to his own
affections, yet notwithstanding that does affirm the Creed to have been made by
the Apostles Hieron, Epist. ad Pammach. 61.
; and calls it, Symbolum fidei ab Apostolis traditum, in which after the
confession of the holy Trinity, and unity of the Catholic Church all the
mysteries of Religion are closed up with the Resurrection of the flesh (to
eternal life). Pope Leo, (no worse man because Pope of Rome) comes more home to
Ruffin; Catholici Symboli brevis and perfecta Confessio duodecem Apostolorum
totidem est signata sententiis Leo Epi. 13. ad Palcher.
, that is to say, the short but full confession of the Catholic Creed, was
made up of twelve sentences of the twelve Apostles. Is it that the Creed was
not made upon that occasion of the Apostles being to depart from one another,
as he says it was, but rather in some time ensuing? St. Isidore of Sivil says
as much as he, Discessuri ab invicem, normam prius sibi futurae praedicationis
in commune constituunt De Eccl. Officiis, l. 2 c. 3.
; that being ready to depart from one another, they agreed first together on a
certain form to be observed in that which they should after preach in all parts
of the world; to the end that nothing should be preached or proposed to those
whom they brought unto the Faith of CHRIST, wherein was any difference to be
found at all, so much as in appearance only. Rabanus Maurus, a man of good
esteem for the times he lived in, in his second Book de institutione Clericorum
Cap. 56.
, does affirm the same. Or is it, that it had the name of Symbolum, from such a
casting in of their several parts, as Ruffinus intimates? The word imports no
less both in Greek and Latin; and every Schoolboy can inform us, that
Symbolum dare Terent. in Andria.
in the Comedy, is to pay ones shot, as at an Ordinary or other meeting of
good fellowship. And so the Author of 115. Sermon de Tempore, inscribed to St.
Augustine, (if it be not his, as for ought I can see, it may be) Quod Graece
Symbolum, Latin Collatio nominatur. That, says he, which is called Symbolum
in Greek, is called Collatio in the Latin, that is to say, a contribution or
casting in of many things together to make up one, by reason that the sum and
substance of the whole Catholic Faith is contained therein; every Apostle
casting in his Article in this manner following. Or is it, that it was intended
for a mark or character by which to know an Heretic from a true Believer?
Remember what was said out of Austin formerly, that whosoever contradicted that
which was there delivered, Aut haereticus, aut a Christi fide alienus Aug.
Encheir. ad Laurent.
, was either an Heretic or an Infidel. If none of these particulars may be
justly quarrelled, it must be then that the Apostles thought not fit to commit
it to writing, but left it to depend on tradition only. And yet St. Augustine
says the same. Catholica fides in Symbolo nota fidelibus, memoriaeque mandata,
etc. Id. lib. de fide and Symb. c. 1.
The Catholic faith contained in the Creed (says he) so well known to all
faithful people, and by them committed unto memory, is comprehended in as
narrow a compass as the nature of it will bear. St. Hierome no great friend of
Ruffines, as I said before, is more plain then he; who tells us that the
Symbolum of our faith and hope delivered by Tradition from the Apostles Epist.
61. ad Pammach. c. 9.
* Non scribitur in charta and atramento, sed in tabulis cordis, was not
committed (in those times) to ink and paper, but writ in the tables of men's
hearts. Irenaeus calls it in plain terms (...) Lib. 1. c. 3.
, which is the Greek word for Tradition; and Tertullian fetches it as high as
from the first creating of the Gospel. Hanc regulam Tertul. adv. Praxeam.
ab initio Evangelii decurrisse, as expressly he. Compare these passages of
Irenaeus and Tertullian, whereof the first conversed with Polycarpus the
Apostles Scholar, with that which is told us by Ruffinus of Majores nostri,
that the relation which he makes came from the Tradition of their forefathers:
and we shall find as strong, as constant, and as universal a Tradition for the
antiquity and authority of the Creed in question; as for the keeping of the
Lord's Day, or the baptizing of Infants, and it may be also for the names and
number of the Books of Canonical Scripture. And yet behold two witnesses of
more antiquity then Irenaeus and Tertullian. The first Ignatius Ignat. Epist.
ad Trallian.
, one of the Apostles scholars, and successor unto St. Peter in the Sea of
Antioch; who summeth up those Articles which concern the knowledge of CHRIST
JESUS in his incarnation, birth, and sufferings under Pontius Pilate, his death
and descending into Hell, his rising on the third day, etc. as they stand in
order in the Creed. The second is Thaddeus Eusebius. Hist. l. 1. c. ult.
whom St. Thomas the Apostle sent to Abgarus the King or Toparch of Edessa,
within few years after the death of our Redeemer; who being to instruct that
people in the Christian faith, gives them the sum and abstract of it in the
same words and method as concerning CHRIST, in which we find them in the Creed
at this very day.

Nor shall I fear to fare the worse amongst knowing men for relying so far upon
Traditions, as if a gap were hereby opened for increase of Popery. For there
are many sorts of Traditions allowed of and received by the Protestant Doctors,
such as have labored learnedly for the beating down of Popery and all Popish
superstitions of what kind soever. Chemnitius that learned and laborious
Canvasser of the Council of Trent Examen. Council. Trident. sess. 4.
, allows of six kinds of Tradition to be held in the Church: with whom
agrees our learned Field in his fourth book of the Church, and 20. chapter. Of
these he makes the first kind to be the Gospel it self, delivered first by
the Apostles viva voce, by preaching, conference and such ways of lively
expressions; Et postea literis consignata, and after committed unto writing, as
they saw occasion. The second is of such things, as at first depend on the
authority and approbation of the Church, but after win credit of themselves,
and yield sufficient satisfaction unto all men of their divine infallible
truths contained in them: and of this kind is that Tradition which has
transmitted to us from time to time, the names and number of the Books of
Canonical Scripture. The third is that which Irenaeus and Tertullian speak of,
and that says he, is the transmission of those Articles of the Christian
faith, quos Symbolum Apostolicum complectitur, which are contained in the
Apostles Creed, or Symbol. The fourth touching the Catholic sense and
interpretation of the Word of God, derived to us by the works and studies of
the FATHERS, by them received from the Apostles, and recommended to posterity.
The fifth kind is of such things as have been in continual practice, whereof
there is neither precept nor example in the holy Scripture, though the grounds,
reasons, and causes of such practice be therein contained, of which sort is the
Baptism of Infants, and the keeping of the Lord's Day or first day of the week,
for which there is no manifest command in the Book of God; but by way of
probable deduction only. The sixth and last sort is de quibusdam vetustis
ritibus, of many ancient rites and customs, which in regard of their Antiquity
are usually referred unto the Apostles: of which kind there were many in the
Primitive times, but alterable and dispensable, according to the circumstances
of times and persons. And of this kind are those Traditions spoken of in our
Book of Articles Articl. of 1562. Art. 134.
, where it is said, that it is not necessary that Traditions and Ceremonies be
in all places one, or utterly like, in that at all times they have been diverse,
and may be changed according to the diversity of countries, times, and men's
manners, so that nothing be ordained against Gods Word. So that the question
between us and the Church of Rome, is not in this, as many ignorant men are
made believe, whether there be or not any such Traditions as justly can derive
themselves from the Apostles, or whether such Traditions be to be admitted in a
Church well constituted. I know no moderate understanding Protestant, who makes
doubt of either. The question briefly stated is no more but this, that is to
say, whether the Traditions which the Church of Rome does pretend unto, be
Apostolical or not. Now for the finding out of such Traditions as are truly and
undoubtedly Apostolical, there are but these two rules to be considered: the
first, St. Austins, and is this Contra Donat. l. 4. c. 23.
, Quod universa tenet Ecclesia, that whatsoever the Church holds, and has
always held from time to time, not being decreed in any Council, may justly be
believed to proceed from no other ground then Apostolical authority. The second
rule is this, and that is Field l. 4. c. 21.
a late learned Protestants, that whatsoever all, or the most famous and
renowned in all Ages, or at the least in diverse ages, have constantly delivered
as from them that went before them, no man gainsaying or doubting of it without
check or censure, that also is to be believed to be an Apostolical Tradition.
By which two rules if we do measure the Traditions of the Church of Rome, such
as they did ordain in the Council of Trent, to be embraced and entertained pari
pietatis affectu, with the like ardor of affection as the written Word; What
will become of prayer for the dead, and Purgatory, the Invocation of the Saints
departed, the worshipping of Images, adoration of Relics, single life of
Priests, and the like to these? Assuredly they are all so far from having the
general consent of all times, that generally they have had the consent of none:
no not so much as in the Church of Rome it self, till the candle of all good
literature was put out by the night of ignorance. But for the Creed of the
Apostles try it according to these rules, by both, or either, and it will
evidently appear not only that it has been universally and continually
received in the Church for theirs; but that the most famous and renowned men of
all times and ages have so received it from their Fathers, and recommended it
for such to the times ensuing; no man gainsaying or opposing till these later
times, in which the blessed Word of God cannot escape unquestioned. So that we
have as much authority as the Tradition of the Church, the consent of Fathers,
and the succession of all times can give us, to prove this Creed to have been
writ by the Apostles, by them commended to the Churches of their several
plantations, and so transmitted to our selves without interruption. And no
authority but divine, immediately declared from the God of heaven, is to be
balanced with this proof, or heard against it.

Thus having proved that the Creed was writ by the Apostles, and proved it by
as great authority as any can be given by the Church of CHRIST, and the consent
of the most renowned Writers of the Primitive times: Let us next see what
reputation and esteem it carried in all parts of Christendom; and draw from
thence such further arguments, as the nature of that search will bea^. And
first, it is a manifest and undoubted truth, that as this Creed was universally
received over all the world, ab ipsis Apostolorum temporibus, from the very
times of the Apostles, as Vigilius has it Vigilius contra Eutych. l. 4.
, without the least contradiction or opposition: so has it passed from hand to
hand for above these 1600 years, without alteration or addition. This we did
touch upon before, but now press it further, and use it for another argument,
that none but the Apostles, were or could be the Authors of it: and that if it
had otherwise been esteemed of in the former times, it would have been
obnoxious unto alterations, yea and to contradiction also, as others the most
celebrated Creeds in the Christian world. It was the saying of Pope Gregory the
Great, that he esteemed of the four first General Councels, no otherwise then
of the four Evangelists. And who is there, to whom the name of Athanasius and
the Nicene Council, and the first general Council holden in Constantinople, is
not most venerably precious? And yet the Creed of Athanasius has found such
sorry welcome in some parts of the world, as to be called either in dislike or
scorn the Creed of Sathanasius Hooker Eccles. Polit. l. 5.
: and he himself condemned of extreme arrogance, if not somewhat worse, for
imposing it upon the consciences of all Christian men, as necessary to their
salvation. Non potuit Satan altius evehere humanam formulam Apolog. pro
Confess. Remon.
; as the Remonstrants please to phrase it. The Nicene Creed was of no long
continuance in the Church of Christ, before these words secundum Scripturas
Durand. Rationale Divin.
, according to the Scriptures, were added to the Article of the Resurrection.
And to the Constantinopolitan the Churches of the West have added, Filioque, in
another Article, and no mean one neither Field of the Church, l. 2. c. 1.
, that namely of the proceeding of the holy Ghost; without the leave and liking
of the Eastern Prelates. The reason of which boldness is, because they are and
were conceived to be humane formula's of Ecclesiastical constitution only, no
divine authority; and therefore might be altered and explained, and fitted to
the best edification of the Church. Whereas the Creed of the Apostles is come
unto our hands without alteration, in the same words and syllables, as it came
from them: none ever daring in the space of so many years to alter any thing
therein, though many have applied their studies to explain the same. And this I
make a second argument evincing the Authority and Antiquity of the sacred
Symbolum, that men of most renown and credit for the times they lived in, did
purposely apply their studies to expound this Creed, with as much diligence and
care as any part, or most parts at least of the holy Scriptures. Witness the
fourth Catechism of St. Cyril Bishop of Jerusalem, two of the Homilies of St.
Chrysostom, some of St. Augustines Sermons de Tempore, his two whole Tracts de
fide and Symbolo, and de Symbolo ad Catechumenos: all principally made for
explanation of this Creed: together with the Commentaries of Ruffinus, Maximus
Taurinensis, Venantius, Fortunatus B. of Poyctiers, ancient writers all, and
all composed upon no other text or argument but this Creed alone. Not to say
any thing at all of the learned works of many eminent men in the ages following
and of the present times we live in, though otherwise of different persuasions
in Religion. A thing which cannot be affirmed of the Nicene Creed, or any other
Creed whatever: none of which have been commented, or scholied on, by any of
the ancient Doctors of the Catholic Church, or of the disagreeing parties in
the present times. And to say truth, there was good reason why this Creed
should be thus explained, why such great pains should be bestowed to expound
the same: it being a very ancient custom in the Church of CHRIST, not to admit
any to the sacred Font, but such as made a public profession of their faith
according to the words of this Creed, and understandingly recited it in the
Congregation. Mos ibi servatur Antiquus apud eos qui gratiam baptismi
suscepturi sunt, public, i. e. fidelium populo audiente, Symbolum reddere
Ruffinus in Exposit. Symb.
, so says Ruffinus for his time of the Church of Rome; we may affirm the like
for those of Antioch, Jerusalem, Africa, upon the credit of St. Chrysostom,
Cyril, Augustine, in their works now mentioned. Nor was it long before it was
ordained in the Council of Agde, Ann. 506. that in regard of the great
confluence of all persons to the Church to receive the Sacrament of Baptism
upon Easter day, the Creed should be expounded every day in the way of Sermons
to the people, from the Sunday we call Palm Sunday to the Feast it self
Council. Agathens. Can. 13.
Symbolum ab omnibus Ecclesiis ante octo dies Dominicae resurrectionis public
in Ecclesia competentibus praedicari, as the Synod has it. Nay they conceived
the learning of this Creed by heart so necessary in the former times; that it
was first desired, and afterward enjoined that all should learn it and retain
it in their hearts and memories: who either were desirous to be counted good
Catholic Christians, or to partake of any of the solemn offices in the
Christian Church. St. Augustine commended it unto his Auditors, that for the
better keeping it in memory, they should repeat it to themselves, Quando
surgitis, quando vos collocatis ad somnum Aug. Homil. 42.
, both when they rose, when they betook themselves to sleep, or put on their
clothes: and diligently learning and retaining of it, being commended also to
all sorts of people, omnis aetatis, omnis sexus, omnisque conditionis Conc.
Foro-Iuliens.
, by the Council holden in Friuli, Ann. 791. And by a Canon superadded unto
those of the last of the three Ecumenical Councels holden in Constantinople,
it was expressly ordered by the Fathers there, not only that no person should be
admitted unto Baptism or to Confirmation, or to stand Godfather for any in
those sacred Acts, (except infants only) who could not say the Creed and Lords
prayer without book Apud Binium. Tom. 3. par. 1. l. 1. p. 262.
: but also Catholicum esse non posse, that he who was so negligent in the
things which did so nearly concern him in the way of his salvation, could not
be a Catholic. And yet this was not all the honor, nor were these all the
marks of difference which were put upon it, to set it high in estimation above
other Creeds. For whereas that of Nice, and Athanasius, were ordered to be said
or sung but at special times, according to the usages of particular churches:
it was decreed by Damasus who sat Pope at Rome, A. 370. or thereabouts, that
the Apostles Creed should be repeated every day in the public Liturgies
Durand. Rational. Divin.
, on the Canonical hours of prayer. And whereas it was ordered by Pope
Anastasius, that at the reading of the Gospel, not the Priests only and the
Ministers but all people present, venerabiliter curvi in conspectu Evangelii
starent Anast. apud Platinam, and in Collect. Council.
, should stand upon their feet, and bow down their bodies, as in the way of
veneration: it was not long before the same gesture had been taken up (for I
find not that it was imposed by public Sanction) at the reading also of the
Creed, as being the sum and substance of the holy Gospels. Et cum Symbolum
est verbum Evangelicum quoad sensum, ergo illud stando sicut Evangelium dicitur
Durand. Rational. Divin.
, as Durandus has it. The like authority it had in all general councels, in
which it is usual to be recited (as Baronius Baron. Annal. Eccl. A. 44.
very well observes) quasi Basis et fundamentum totius Ecclesiae structurae,
as the foundation and groundwork of the whole Ecclesiastical edifice: and
this he proves out of the acts of the Councels of Chalcedon, Ephesus, and
Constantinople, whither I refer you. Finally, as this Creed is sometimes called
the Creed without any addition, the Creed (...), or by way of eminence, all
other being called for distinction sake, the Constantinopolitan, the Nicene,
the Creed of Athanasius, or the Creed of Damasus: so was this anciently
esteemed the one and only Creed devised for the general use of all the Church,
the rest being only made as Expositions or as Comments on it, upon occasion of
particular and emergent heresies. And so much Perkins does confess Perk.
Exposition of the Creed.
, though he be otherwise persuaded of the Authors of it, then had been taught
him by the greatest and most eminent Writers of the Primitive times.

For against this that has been said many Objections have been studied both by
him and others, to make the Creed of latter standing, and of less authority.
And first they say, that if the Creed were indeed framed by the Apostles in
that form of words, in which it is come unto our hands Id. ibid.
, it must be then a part of the Canonical Scriptures, as the residue of their
writings are: which also I find granted, and I wonder at it, in our learned
Bilson. The Creed (says he) we do not urge as undoubtedly written by all the
Apostles, for then it must needs be Canonical Scripture B. Bilsons Survey. p.
664.
. Which being said, he answers himself in the words next following, where he
affirms that it is the best and perfectest form of faith, delivered to the
Christians at the first planting of the Gospel by the direction of the Apostles
and by their Agreement. If so, if it was framed by their direction and
agreement, it is as much to my intent, as if it had been written by them all
together, it being not their pen, but their authority and consent which makes
it be entitled to them, and called Apostolical. St. Paul's Epistle to the
Romans were not else Canonical, because written by the hand of Tertius as it is
said, Romans 16.22. And as to the conclusion which is thence inferred, I answer
that not every thing which was writ by the Apostles, or by any of them, was
ipso facto to be called canonical Scripture, because writ by them: but only
that which they committed unto writing, by the dictamen and direction of the
holy Ghost, with an intent that it should be Canonical, and for such received.
For otherwise the Epistles of St. Paul to Seneca (supposing them for his, which
I here dispute not) and all the letters of intercourse betwixt them and their
private friends, of which no question need be made but they writ many in their
time as occasion was, (had we the copies of them extant) must have been
Canonical, as well as those upon record in the book of God. And this is that
which we find written by St. Austin August. de doctr. Christian.
, Quicquid ille de suis dictis factisve nos scire voluit, hoc illis scribendum
tanquam suis manibus reposuit: and in another place to the same effect, Deus
quantum satis esse judicavit locutus Id. de Civit. l. 11. c. 3.
, scripturam condidit. His meaning in both places does amount to this, that
whatsoever God conceived to be fit and necessary for the edification of his
Church, he did impart to the Apostles; and when he had communicated so much as
was fit and necessary, he closes the Canon of the Scripture: not giving way
that any thing should be added to it as the word of God, but that which he did
so communicate and impart unto them. It is objected secondly, that in the
Primitive times it had not any exact form at all, but that the Fathers varied
in the repetition of the heads thereof B Bilsons Survey. p. 664.
: and to this end, Ignatius, Irenaeus, Tertullian, Origin, and others of the
ancients are brought in as witnesses; but prove no such thing. All that can be
collected from those ancient writers, is no more then this, that many times,
the Fathers as learned men and great discoursers use to do, enlarge the words
and syllables of the Creed, as they saw occasion, the better to deliver the
true meaning of it: and sometimes they contract into fewer words the whole
sum thereof, as thinking it not pertinent to the present purpose, to tie
themselves unto the words. Which appears plainly by Tertullian, who does
acknowledge that there was but one only Creed, or set rule of faith, affirmed
by him to be unalterable and unchangeable: yet having three occasions to repeat
the heads thereof, does vary every time in the words and phrases. And yet it
cannot be inferred upon these variations, that at the first, or rather in the
Primitive times, the Creed had no exrct form at all, or not the same in which
it is retained now in the Christian Church: no more then any man can say, that
there was never any exact form of the Nicene Creed, commended by that Council
to the use of the Church; because that in the Council of Chalcedon, and in the
works of Athanasius and St. Basil, it is presented to us with some difference
of the words and phrases. Of which the most that can be said must be that of
Binius Binuis in Annot. in Council. Tolet. IV. Tom. Council. 2. part. 2.
, idem est plane sensus, sed sermo discrepans, i. e. that the sense is every
where the same, though the words do differ. In the third place it is objected,
that the Creed could not be written by the Apostles, because there are therein
certain words and phrases, which were not used in their times Perk. Exposition
of the Creed.
: and for the proof of this they instance in these two particulars, first in
our Saviors descent into hell, which words they say are not to be found in all
the Apostolical Scriptures; and secondly in that of the Catholic Church, which
was a word or phrase not used, till the Apostles had dispersed the Gospel over
all the world. And first in answer to the first we need say but this, that
though these words of Christ descended into hell, be not in terminis in the
Scriptures, yet the Doctrine is: which we shall very evidently evince and
prove, when we are come unto the handling of that Article. And if we find the
doctrine in the book of God, I hope it will conclude no more against the
authority and antiquity of the Creed we speak of, then that the word Homousion
in the Nicene Creed, did or might do against the authority of that Creed or
Symbol, because that word could not be found in all the Scriptures, as was
objected by the Arians in the former times. And for the second instance in the
word Catholica, there is less ground of truth therein, then in that before. But
yet because it has a little show of learning, and does pretend unto antiquity,
we will take some more pains then needed, to manifest and discover the
condition of it. Know then that the Apostles might bestow upon the Church the
adjunct of Catholic, before they went abroad into several Countries to preach
the Gospel; not in regard that it was actually diffused over all the world,
according as it has bin since in these later Ages: but in regard that so it
was potentially, according to the will and pleasure of their Lord and Savior,
by whom the bar was broken down which formerly had made a separation between
Jew and Gentile, and the Commission given Mar. 16.15.
of Ite and praedicate, to go and preach the Gospel unto every creature.
Catholic is no more then universal. The smallest smatterer in the Greek can
assure us that. And universal questionless the Church was then, at least
intentionaliter, and potentialiter, when the Apostles knew from the Lords own
mouth, that it should no longer be imprisoned within the narrow limits of the
land of Iewry, but that the Gentiles should be called to eternal life. Without
this limitation of the word I can hardly see how the Church should be called
Catholic in her largest circuit: there being many Nations, and large
Dominions, which are not actually comprehended within the Pale of the Church,
to this very day. I hope their meaning is not this, that there was no such word
as Catholic, when the Apostles lived and composed the body of the New
Testament. If so they mean, although they put us for the present to a needless
search, yet they betray therein a gross piece of ignorance. For the discovery
whereof we may please to know that the word Catholic is derived from the Greek
(...), which signifies in universum (as that from (...) which is totum, all)
as (...), i. e. that I may sum up all in brief. And so the word is used by
Isocrates, that famous Orator Isocrat. in Orat. ad Nicoclen.
, (...). that is to say, generally, or in a word I shall endeavor to declare
what studies it were fittest for you to incline unto. But the proper
signification of it is in that of Aristotle Aristol. Analytic. prior.
, where he opposes (...), a general, or universal demonstration, to that which
he calls (...), that which is partial only, or particular. Hence comes the
adjective, (...), i. e. universal, and so the word is taken by Quintilian,
saying, Quintilian l. 2. cap. 13.
Propter quae mihi semper moris fuit quam minimum me alligare ad praecepta quae
(...) vocant, i. e. (ut dicamus quomodo possumus) universalia vel perpetualia.
Thus read we in Hermogenes an old Rhetorician, (...), of usual and general
forms of speech, and thus in Philo speaking of the laws of Moses, Philo de vita
Mofis l. 3.
(...), that he ordained a general and perpetual law for succession into men's
inheritances. Take which of these three senses they best like themselves, and
they will find at last it comes all to one. If the word Catholic do signify
the same with universal, it also signified the same in and before the times the
Apostles lived in: and how the Church might then be called universal, we have
shown already. If they desire rather to translate it general, Pope Julius will
tell us how the Church might be called General, in the first days and hours
thereof: Iulii Etist. decretal. c. 8.
Quia sc. generalis est in eadem doctrina ad instructionem, because it
generally proposes the same doctrine for edification: or if by that of
perpetual rather, there is no question to be made but that our Saviors promise
to be with them to the end of the world Mat. 28 20.
, did most sufficiently declare unto them that the Church which they were to
plant was to be perpetual. There is another meaning of the word Catholicus, as
it denotes an Orthodox and right believer; which whether it were used in the
Apostles times may be doubted of: it being half granted by Pacianus an ancient
writer Paci. Epist. 1. ad Symp.
, sub Apostolis CHRISTIANOS non vocari Catholicos, that Christians were not
then called Catholics. But this at best, being not the natural, but an
adventitious meaning of the word, according to a borrowed metaphorical sense;
it neither helps nor hinders in the present business, and in this sense we
shall speak more of it hereafter, when we are come unto the Article of the
Catholic Church. One more objection there remains (and but one more which is
worth the answering) and is that which is much pressed by Downs Downs of the
Authors and Authority of the Creed.
: namely that to affirm, as Ruffinus does, that the Apostles did compose the
Creed to be the rule or square of their true preaching, lest being separated
from one another there should be any difference amongst them in matters which
pertain to eternal life; were to suppose them to be guided by a fallible
spirit, and consequently subject unto Error. For answer whereunto, we need say
but this, that the difference which Ruffinns speaks of Ruffinus in posit. Symb.
, and which he says the Apostles labored to avoid by their agreement on this
sum or abstract of the Christian Faith; related not to points of doctrine,
which could not but be every where, at all times, the same, because all guided
by the same infallible spirit; but only to the form of words wherewith they
were to clothe and express those doctrines, which if not in all points the same
might amongst many simple and illiterate people be taken for an argument of a
different faith. Whereas the consonancie which all Churches held with one
another, not only in the Unity which they maintained amongst themselves in
point of judgment, but also in that uniformity wherewith they did express that
consent in judgment: was a strong evidence no doubt to the weak and ignorant,
who are governed more by words then matters that the Faith wheresoever they
traveled was in all parts the same, because they found it every where
expressed in the self same words. So that for ought appears by these shifts
and cavils, the CREED may still retain the honor which of old was given it;
and be as it is commonly called, The Apostles Creed.

The next thing that I have to do is to resolve upon the course and order which
I mean to follow, in the performance of the work I have undertaken. And here I
shall declare in the first place of all, that as the main of my design is to
illustrate and expound the Apostles Creed; so I shall keep my self to that
Creed alone, and not step out into those intricate points of controversy,
which principally occasioned both the Athanasian and the Nicene Creeds. For
though I thank God I can say it with a very good conscience, that I believe the
doctrine of the holy Trinity, according to the Catholic Tradition of the
Church of CHRIST: yet I confess with all, (such is the want and weakness of my
understanding) that I am utterly unable, (as indeed who is not?) to look into
the depths of so great a mystery; and cannot but cry out (...), (as the Apostle
did in another case) Oh the unsearchableness, the depth of this heavenly
Oeconomie! What then I am not able to inform my self in, those things wherein I
am not able to content and satisfy my own poor, shallow understanding; how can
I hope so to express in words or writing, as to give satisfaction and content
to a mind more curious? Id fides credat, intelligentia non requirat, was
anciently the Fathers rule Lact. l. 2. c. 9.
, and shall now be mine. In matters of so high a nature, I believe more, then I
am able to comprehend (the gift of faith supplying the defect of mine
understanding) and yet can comprehend more by the light of faith, then I am
able to express. So that I shall not meddle in this following Tractate; with
the eternal generation of the Son of God, or any of those difficult but divine
sublimities, which are contained in the Creed of the Nicene Council: nor with
the manner of the holy Ghosts procession, whether from the Father only, or from
the Father and the Son; nor how God can be one in three, and three in one. Such
lofty speculations and sublimities of so high a nature, I leave to be discussed
and agitated by men of larger comprehensions and more piercing judgments then
I dare challenge to my self: resting contented with those mediocrities, which
God who gives to every one his several Talent, has graciously vouchsafed to
bestow upon me. In other points I shall make use sometimes of such
explications, as the Athanasian or the Nicene Creeds do present unto me: which
I shall handle rather in a Scholastical, and if occasion be presented in a
Philological way also, then a way merely Catechetical, or directly practical,
wherein I see so many have took pains already: taking along the stating and
debating of such points of Controversies, as either naturally do arise from the
words themselves, or may be very easily deduced from thence, on good and
logical deductions. And in such points of Controversy as shall here be
handled, as also in such Observations as shall be here amassed together; I
chiefly shall rely on the Ancient Fathers, whose reputation and authority is
most precious with me: but so that I shall now and then make bold, as I see
occasion, to spoil the Egyptians also of their choicest Jewels, for the
adorning of this body of Divinity, which I had brought into the forge since my
first retreat, and is now ready for the Anvil. St. Paul esteemed it no
disparagement to his holy doctrine, to strengthen it with reasons drawn from
the best Philosophy, to prove and press it home in a Logical way; and to adorn
it with the dictates of three old Greek Poets, Menander, Aratus, and
Epimenides, whose testimonies he makes use of in three several places Act.
17.28. 1 Cor. 15.33. and Tit. 1.12.
. As long as Hagar does submit herself to her mistress Sarah, and not contend
for the precedence with her; so long she is and may be serviceable in the house
of Abraham. And humane literature, especially in relation unto Paganish
errors, is of as necessary use as she, in the Church of God, if it conform
unto the Scripture, and be guided by it; and do not bear it self too high on
the conceit and reputation of its own great excellencies. But for the main of
this discourse, I shall especially repose my determination, on the authority
and general consent of the Fathers, as before I said* not meddling with the
Protestant Writers of the foreign Churches, but when a doubt is to be cleared
which concerns themselves; nor often with the Writers of this Church of
England, but when I have occasion to enquire into such particulars, as must be
proved to be the true intent and doctrine of this CHVRCH by law established.
The holy Scriptures are the main foundation which I am to build on, according
to that sense and interpretation which have been given us of them by the holy
Fathers, and other Catholic Doctors of the Church of Christ, who lived before
the truth degenerated into Popish dotages; and whose authorities and judgments
I conceive most fit for the determining of such Controversies which are now on
foot, as being like to prove most indifferent Umpires, because not any way
engaged in our present quarrels.

I know that Down, Dalie, and others of great parts and wit have labored to
disclaim them as incompetent Judges, not to be trusted in a business of such
main concernment, as the determination of the controversies in the Church of
Christ; out of an high conceit of their own great worth, which is not willing
to acknowledge a superior eminence. And I know well that many, if not most of
our Innovators, whether it be in point of Discipline or Doctrine, decline all
trial by the Fathers, Councels, and other the records and monuments of the
Catholic Church; because directly contrary to their new devices. But all this
moves not me a jot, nor makes me yield the less authority to their words and
writings. The Church of England waves not their authority, though some of her
conceited children, and others of her factious ones have been pleased to do it.
Witness that famous challenge made by Bishop Jewel B. Jewels challenge.
, by which the several points in issue between the Church of England and the
Church of Rome, were generally referred to the decision of the Ancient Fathers;
with great both honor and success. Witness these words of Peter Martyr, a man
of great employment in the REFORMATION of the Church, and sent for hither by
Archbishop Cranmer to mote it here. Pet. Mart. de votis and coelebat.
In judging things obscure (says he) the Spirit, there are two ways or means
for our direction; whereof the one is inward, which is the Spirit, the other
outward or external, the Word of God: to which (says he) Si Patrum etiam
autoritas accesserit, valebit plurimum, If the authority of the Fathers do come
in for seconds, it will exceedingly avail. And unto this agrees Chemnitius
also, though of a different judgment from him in some points of doctrine; who
having told us of the Fathers, that we may best learn from their own words and
sayings, what we may warrantably conceive of their authority; gives in the
close thereof this note, and a sound one it is, Chemnit. Examen. de Tradition.
c. 6.
Nullum dogma in Ecclesia novum, and cum tota antiquitate pugnans recipiendum,
that is to say, that new opinion which seems new, and is repugnant to the
general cu^rent of Antiquity, is to be entertained in the Church of God. What
is decreed herein by the Church of England, assembled representatively in her
Convocations; what by the King and three Estates convened in Parliament; we
shall see anon. In the mean time take here the judgment of the Ancients in this
very case. It Is true indeed the Fathers many times and in sundry places humbly
and piously have confessed the eminency of Canonical Scriptures above all the
writings of men whatsoever they be; for which consent St. Augustine contr.
Faust. Manic. l. 11. c. 5. de Baptismat. contr. Donatist. l. 1. c. 3. and
Epist. 19. and in Proem. lib. de Trinitate: desiring liberty of dissent from
one another when they saw occasion, and binding no man to adhere unto their
opinions, further then they agreed with the Word of God delivered by the holy
Prophets and Apostles, which have been since the world began, August. Epist. 19.
De quorum Scriptis, quod omni errore careant dubitare nefarium est, and of
whose writings to make question whether or not they were free from error, were
a great impiety. And this is that whereof St. Hierome speaks in an Epistle to
Pope Damasus, Ut mihi Epistolis tuis sive tacendarum sive dicendarum
Hypostase(...)n detur autoritas Hieronyn. ad Damas. Epist. 57.
, that he might be left to his own liberty either in using or refusiug the word
Hypostasis. But then it is as true withal, that Vincentius give it for a rule,
Vincent. Lirin. adv. haeres. c. 38.
Multorum and magnorum consentientes sibi sententias Magistorum sequendas esse,
that the ancient consent of godly Fathers is with great care both to be
searched into and followed in the Rule of Faith. And it is as true, that having
moved this question in another place, that if the Canon of the Scripture be so
full and perfect, and so abundantly sufficient in it self for all things, Quid
opus est ut ei Ecclesiasticae intelligentiae jungatur autoritas? what need
there is that the authority of Ecclesiastical interpretations should be joined
with it Id. ibid. c. 2.
? returns this answer in effect, Lest every man should wrest the Scriptures to
his own private fancy, and rather draw some things from thence to maintain his
errors, then for the advancement of the truth. Of the same resolution and
opinion was St. Augustine also, who though he were exceeding careful upon all
occasions to yield the Scriptures all due reverence: yet he was willing
therewithal to allow that honor which was meet, both to the writings of the
Fathers which lived before him; and to the Canons and Decrees of preceding
Councels; and to submit himself unto their Authorities. For speaking of General
Councels, he subjoyns this note, Quorum est in Ecclesia saluberrima autoritas
Augustine. in Epist. 118.
, that their authority in the Church was of excellent use. And in another place
alleging the testimonies of Irenaeus, Cyprian, Hilarie, Ambrose, and some
other Fathers, he concludes thus. Hoc probavimus autoritate Catholicorum
sanctorum, etc. Id. contr. Julian. Pelagi. l, 2.9.
, This we have proved by the authority of Catholic and godly men, to the end
that your weak and silly novelties might be overwhelmed with their only
authority; with which your contumacie is to be repressed. (He speaks this unto
Julian a Pelagian Heretic). And Id. ibid. c. 10.
with these testimonies and authorities of such holy men, thou must either by
Gods mercy be healed ( i. e. recovered from his error) or else accuse the
famous and right holy Doctors of the Catholic Church; against which miserable
madness I must so reply, that their faith may be defended against thee, even as
the Gospel it self is defended against the wicked and professed enemies of
Christ. More of this kind might be produced from the Ancient Writers. But what
need more be said in so clear a point, especially to us that have the honor to
be called the children of the Church of England, who by a a Canon of the year
1572 does bind all men in holy Orders, not to preach any thing in their
Congregations, to be believed and holden of the people of God, but what is
con^onant to the doctrine of the Old and New Testaments Canon. An. 1571. cap.
de Concionator.
; Quodque ex illa ipsa doctrina Catholici Patres and Veteres Episcopi
collegerint* and had been thence concluded or collected (take which word you
will) by the Catholic Fathers, and ancient Bishops of the Church. The like
authority and respect is given to the first four General Councels by the
unanimous vote and suffrage of the Prince and three Estates convened in
Parliament, in the first year of Queen Elizabeth of famous memory An. 1. Eliz.
cap. 1.
, wherein it was ordained or declared rather amongst other things that nothing
should be deemed or adjudged Heresy in the Kingdom of England, but what had
been adjudged so formerly in any of the said four General Councels, or any
other General Council determining the same according to the Word of God, etc.
Where we may see that the Estates in Parliament did ascribe so much to the
authority of those four Councels, and the judgment of the Fathers which were
there assembled; as not to question any thing which they had determined
concerning heresy; or to examine whether it agreed with Gods Word or not: but
left the people of this Kingdom totally to repose themselves upon their
authority, and to take that for heresy without more ado, which they judged to
be so. And so I close this point with those words of Saravia, a learned man,
and one that stood up stoutly in this Churches cause, against the innovating
humors which was then predominant (though not so high as in these times of
Anarchie); Saravia de diverse. ministerii gradibus.
Qui omnem Patribus adimit autoritatem, nullam relinquit sibi: that is to say,
He who depriveth the Fathers of their due authority, will only teach Posterity
to give none to himself. And having thus asserted the authority of the Creed
which I have in hand, declared the course and purposes of this following work,
and shown you what grounds I am especially resolved to proceed upon: I shall
with the assistance of Gods gracious Spirit fall roundly to the work it self,
taking the Articles in order as they lie before me.

And yet before I shall descend unto particulars, I think it not amiss to add
the testimony and consent of Calvin to that which is before delivered touching
the Authors and authority of this common Creed; according as I find it in an
old Translation of his Book of Institutes, (for I have not the Original now by
me) printed at London in the year 1561. And thus says he Calvin Inst l. 2. c.
16. sect. 1^.
: Hitherto I have followed the order of the Apostles Creed, because whereas it
comprehends shortly in few words the chief Articles of our Redemption, it may
serve us for a Table, wherein we do distinctly and severally see those things
that are in Christ worthy to be taken heed unto. I call it the Apostles Creed,
not over carefully regarding who were the Authors of the same. It is verily by
great consent of old Writers ascribed to the Apostles, either because they
thought it was by common travail written and set out by the Apostles, or for
that they judged that this Abridgement being faithfully gathered out of the
doctrine delivered by the hands of the Apostles was worthy to be confirmed by
such a Title. And I take it to be out of doubt, that from whence soever it
proceeded at the first, it has even from the first beginning of the Church,
and from the very time of the Apostles been used as a public Confession, and
received by the consent of all men. And it is likely that it was not privately
written by any one man, for as much as it is evident that even from the
farthest age it has always continued of sacred authority and credit among all
the godly. But that which is only to be cared for we have wholly out of
controversy, which is, that the whole History of our Faith is briefly and well
in distinct order rehearsed in it, and that there is nothing contained therein
which is not sealed with sound testimonies of the Scripture. Which being
understanded, it is to no purpose either curiously to doubt, or to strive with
any man, who were the Authors of it; unless perhaps it be not enough for some
man to be assured of the truth of the holy Ghost, but if he do also understand
either by whose mouth it was spoken, or by whose hand it was written. So he And
this is very much for one, who was no greater Champion of the ancient Farmulas.

THEOLOGIA VETERVM: OR, THE SUM OF Christian Theology, Positive, Polemical,
and Philological; CONTAINED IN THE Apostles CREED, Or reducible to it;
According to the tendries of the Ancients both GREEKS and LATINS.

THE FIRST BOOK.

By PETER HEYLYN.

Heb. 11.6, 3. He that comes to God must believe that he is, and that he is a
rewarder of them that diligently seek him.

Through faith we understand that the Worlds were framed by the word of God, so
that things which are seen were not made of things which do appear.

LONDON, Printed by E. Cotes for Henry Seile, 1654.

SYOLON TON APOSTOLON. Symbolum Apostolicum secundum Graecos.
(...), 2. (...). 3. (...). 4. (...). 5. (...). 6. (...). 7. (...). 8. (...).
9. (...). 10. (...). 11. (...). 12. (...).

Symbolum Apostolicum secundum Latinos.
St. PETRUS. 1. Credo in Deum Patrem omnipotentem, St. JOHANNES. 2. Creatorem
coeli and terroe: St. JACOBUS. 3. Credo and in Iesum Christum filium ejus
unicum, dominum nostrum. St. ANDREAS. 4. Qui conceptus est de Spiritu sancto,
natus ex Virgin Maria, St. PHILIPPUS. 5. Passus est sub Pontio Pilato;
crucifixus, mortuus, and sepultus. St. THOMAS. 6. Descendit ad inferos; tertia
die resurrexit a mortuis. St. BARTHOLOMAEUS. 7. Ascendit in coelos; sedet ad
dextram dei Patris omnipotentis: St. MATTHAEUS. 8. Inde venturus judicare vivos
and mortuos. St. JACOBUS ALPHAEI. 9. Credo and in Spiritum sanctum; sanctam
Ecclesiam Catholicam; St. SIMOE ZELOTES. 10. Sanctorum communionem, remissionem
peccatorum, St. JUDAS JACOBI FR. 11. Carnis Resurrectionem. St. MATTHIAS. 12.
Et vitam aeternam, Amen.
ARTICLE I. Of the First ARTICLE OF THE CREED Ascribed to St. PETER. (...). i.
e. Credo in Deum Patrem omnipotentem. i. e. I believe in God the Father
almighty.
CHAP. I. Of the name and definition of Faith; the meaning of the Phrase, in
Deum credere; the Exposition of it vindicated against all exceptions.
HAving thus vindicated the Authority of the common Creed, and intimated the
design and project of this present work: I now proceed unto the Explication of
it, and every branch and Article therein contained, as they lie in order:
beginning first of all with that which testifies our Faith and belief in him,
which is the first of all beginnings. A Jove principium, was the rule of old;
and a more excellent Rule then that who can teach us now? But first, as a
Praecognitum unto all the rest, I must insist upon the nature and
interpretation of the first word of it, which has a special influence and
operation over the whole body of the Formula, and gives denomination to it.
For from the Latin Credo, comes the name of Creed; from the first English
word, which is I believe, we call the whole the Articles of our belief; and so
the verb (...), comes from the Greek word (...), which in the Ecclesiastical
notion of it, we interpret Faith. So that in whatsoever language we behold the
same, the the word is verbum operativum, as the Lawyers call it Coke in Calvin's
case.
a word which has relation unto every Article, to every branch and member of
the whole Compositum; as, I believe in God the Father Almighty, I believe in
Jesus Christ his only Son, I believe that Jesus was conceived of the holy
Ghost, I believe that he was born of the Virgin Mary, I believe that he
suffered under Pontus Pilate; and sic de caeteris. And first for the quid
nominis, of the word (...), it signifies to assent, or to join credit or
belief to such things as are laid before us. As, (...), in the old Poet
Phocylides, Phocylid. sentent.
that is to say, give no credit to the talk of the common people, who are
unconstant and uncertain in their words and actions. Derived it is from the
word (...), which we render faith; and that from (...) the praeterpluperfect
tense of the passive (...), which signifies to be persuaded, to be taught, to
be induced to give assent unto such propositions as are made unto us. Thus is
the word used by the great Apostle, (...), etc. Romans 8.38.
For I am persuaded that neither life nor death, etc. shall be able to separate
us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. And again, (...),
etc. Philip. 1.6.
Being confident of this very thing, ( Persuasum habens hoc ipsum, as Beza very
properly does translate the word) That he which has begun a good work in you,
will perform it till the day of Jesus Christ. So that the word (...) which we
render faith, being hence derived, may not unfitly be construed a persuasion,
or a firm assent, persuasionem seu firmam assensionem, Valla in Annotat. in N.
Test.
as the learned Valla has observed; and then the verb (...) being brought from
thence, will signify in the true and proper notion of it, I am persuaded
verily of the truth of that which so many godly and religious men have related
to me, and give as full and firm an assent unto it, as if I had been present
when the deed was done. Thus also for the Latin word Fides, the Etymology
thereof is drawn from fio, from the doing or performance of those things which
are said or promised. Fides enim dicitur (says Cicero) eo quod fiat quod
dictum est. And therefore faith, or fides, call it which you will, as it
relates unto the promises of God, is defined by Zanchius, to be firma and certa
persuasio de promissionibus dei Zanch. de Natura Dei. c. 3.
, a strong and confident persuasion that God will graciously fulfill those
promises which he has pleased to make unto us. And therefore I shall fix upon
that definition of the thing it self, which I find amongst the Ancient
Schoolmen, affirming it to be a firm assent to supernatural truths revealed.
Which definition lest it should fare the worse for the Authors sake, is backed
and seconded by so many learned men both of the Protestant and Reformed
Churches, as may well serve to set it free from all further cavils: For thus
Melanchthon for the Protestant or Lutheran Churches, Fides est assensus omni
verbo Dei nobis tradito Melancht. in Exam. Artic. de Iustificatione.
. Faith says, he, is an assent to the veracity or truth of the whole Word of
God delivered to us. And so says Vrsin for the Doctors of the French or
Calvinian party, defining it almost in the self same words, Vrsin. in Exposit.
praecept. 1.
to be Vera persuasio qua assentimur omni verbo Dei nobis tradit^o. With these
agree Chemnitius in Evan. Council. Trident. cap. de Iustificatione. Pet. Martyr,
ad Romans 3. v. 12. Polanus Partit. Theolog. lib. 2. page 368. besides diverse
others. Which being the true and proper definition of belief, or faith,
according to the natural meaning of the word both in Greek and Latin: I may
conclude from hence without further trouble, that to believe (according as the
word here stands in the front of the Creed) is only to be verily persuaded of
the truth of all those points and articles which are delivered in the same; and
to give a firm assent unto them, agreeable unto the measure of our
understanding.

Faith thus defined, differs not only from experience, knowledge, and
opinion, all which do come within the compass of Assents, in general; but from
all other things whatsoever, which come within the compass of our belief. When
we assent unto the truth of such things, or matters as are discernible by
sense, we may call it perception or experience: as when a man assents to this
proposition, that ice is cold, or that fire is hot, because he feels it to be
so by his outward senses. If our assent be weak, unsettled, or grounded only
upon probabilities, we then call it opinion: in matters of which nature men are
for the most part left at liberty, their understandings being neither convinced
by the power of a superior truth, nor settled and confirmed by demonstrative
proofs. This though it be an assent, is no firm assent; and therefore nothing
less then Faith. If our assent be grounded on demonstrative proofs, and built
upon the knowledge of natural causes, it is then termed Science, or knowledge,
properly so called: for, Scire est per causas scire Arist. in lib. Demonstrat.
, said the great Philosopher. But he that gives assent unto any truth, only
because of the authority of the man that speaks it, neither examining his
proofs, nor searching into the probabilty or possibility of the thing related:
that man, in true propriety of speech, is said to believe: and to believe (we
know) is the act of faith. Thus it is said of the Samaritans, that many of them
believed on him for the saying of the woman which testified (thus of him, viz.)
He told me all that ever I did Joh. 4.39.41, and 42.
: but more believed because of his own words when they had heard him speak, and
observed his doctrine. And yet not every truth believed on the speakers credit,
is the proper object of belief, or faith, according as we use the word in the
Schools of Christ, but only supernatural truths, such truths as our depraved
nature could not reach unto, without revelation from above: by consequence not
the authority of every speaker, but only of such holy men of God, who spoke as
they were moved by the holy Ghost 2 Pet. 1.21.
, is the foundation of this faith, which we here define. I give belief unto the
Histories of Xenophon, Thucydides, Polybius, and Corn. Tacitus; because I hold
a good opinion of the men that writ them. And I believe that Edward the Black
Prince won the battle of Crecie, being then but 18 years of age, and that
King Henry the fifth subdued the greatest part of France within five or six
years, because I find it so related, without contradiction, both by our
English Chroniclers, and the French Historians. But I rely on no humane
authority, how great soever it be, for a rule of Faith: which as it has truths
only supernatural for the object of it; so have those truths, or the revelation
rather of those truths, no other Author then the Spirit of God. So then faith
is a firm assent, which makes it differ from opinion, which may be called an
assent also, but weak and wavering. It is a firm assent to truths; for to
believe in lies is not faith but folly. A brand or character set on those by
Almighty God, who seeing they would not receive the love of the truth that they
might be saved; have been, and are given over unto strong delusions, and to
believe in lies, that they should be damned 2 These. 2* 10, 11, 12.
. It Is an assent to truths revealed, not grounded on demonstrative proofs, or
the disquisition of natural causes, or the experiment of sense; but only on the
authority of him who reveals it to us: which differenceth it most clearly both
from experience and from knowledge, which have surer grounds: And finally it is
a firm assent to truth supernatural, and supernaturally revealed; which makes
it differ from that credit or belief, (call it which you will) which commonly
we ascribe and give to humane authorities: which being but humane must needs be
fallible, and therefore no fit ground for our faith to rest on, according to
the notion of that word in the Church of Christ. For though both knowledge and
experience rest on surer grounds, as to the satisfaction of the understanding,
to which a demonstration is of more authority then an ipse dixit; that being a
convincing argument which commands assent, this but artificiosum argumentum, as
Logicians call it: yet are the grounds of faith less fallible, then those of
any other Art or Science whatsoever it be, because they are communicated to us
by the Spirit of God, qui nec fallere nec falli potest, who being infallible in
himself will most infallibly lead unto all those truths, the knowledge of the
which is either necessary or expedient for us.

It Is true, St. Paul lays down another definition, or description rather, of
belief, or faith; which he defines to be Substantiam rerum sperandarum,
argument. non apparentium Heb. 11.1.
, that is to say, The substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not
seen: Which definition or description we will first explain; and then declare,
to what acception of the word Faith, it relates especially. Now the first thing
to be considered in this definition, is the word (...), which the Vulgar Latin
renders by Substantia? Beza more like a Paraphrast, Illud quod facit ut extent
quae sperantur. Which being so obscure as to need a Commentary, he helps our
understanding with a marginal note, and calls it su^si^tentiam rerum quae
sperantur, Beza in Heb. c. 11. v. 1.
which is the true meaning of the word in its natural sense. For faith is
therefore called the subsistence (or the existence, as the word is sometimes
translated) of things hoped for, because it makes those things which are yet in
hope, and are no otherwise ours then in expectation, subsistere in cord nostro
quasi ante oculos corporis Haymo in Heb. c. 11. v. 1.
, to subsist or exist no l^ss really in our hearts, or souls, then if we saw
them present with our bodily eyes. And this he does illustrate by the
Resurrection, which is not past already 2 Timothy 2.18.
as some Heretics taught, nor come as yet, as to the accomplishment and
performance of it: and yet faith makes it to subsist or exist in the mind of a
Christian, ac si prae oculis eam habeamus Haymo in Heb. c. 11. v. 1.
, as if we were already possessed thereof. The word has other senses in the
holy Scripture, as in the third chapter of this Epistle to the Hebrews, where
we find (...), initium substantiae, as the Vulgar reads it, principium illud
quo sustentamur, as more truly Beza, Heb. 3.14.
The beginning of our confidence, say our last Translators: where that which in
the Greek is called (...), is Englished confidence, according as we find it
also Psalm. 39. where that which by the Septu^gint is translated (...), ((...))
is in our English rendered hope; Surely my hope is even in thee. verse. 7.
Budaeus that most learned Critic in the Greek tongue, will, have it signify
courage, or praesentiam animi, Budaeus in Comment. Gr. Linguae.
deriving it from the verb (...) which signifies to sustain or endure a shock;
in which regard that Sou^dier is called miles (...), who stands his ground, and
will not turn his back unto his adversary. And in this sense we find it also
in St. Paul's Epistle unto those of Corinth, twice meeting with (...) 2 Cor.
9.4. and 11.17.
, an unmoved constancy in boasting, or praefidentem gloriationem, as Beza
renders it, that is to say, a glorying that will not shrink, or be put out of
countenance. Which also very well agrees with the nature of faith, and serves
most fitly to express the full vigor of it, by which a man is made assured and
confident in all times of danger, and scorns to give ground, or to turn his
back, though Principalities and powers, and all the rulers of the darkness of
this present world Ephesians. 6.12.
were armed against him. The second thing to be observed in this definition, or
description rather, which the Apostle has laid down in the place aforesaid, is
the word (...) the evidence of things not seen, as the English reads, Beza
translates it, quod demonstrat; the Vulgar Latin, Argumentum: and both these
say the same though in diverse words. Arguere dicebant antiqui ostendere, a quo
venit argumentum, quasi ostensio. The old Grammarians, says Haimo, used the
word Argue in that sense which we use the word to declare and show Haymo in
Heb. 11. v. 1.
. And, Argumentum proprie ratio est, qua quis rei dubiae facit fidem; an
argument, says he, is the proof or evidence whereby a doubtful matter is
confirmed and ratified. And then the meaning of St. Paul will be briefly this,
Fides est ea credere quae non videntur Id. ibid.
, faith makes us to believe such things as we never saw, and are not subject to
our senses: the mind being so convicted with the evidence of divine authority,
as to submit it self or to give assent to every thing which is delivered in the
holy Scriptures, even touching the invisible things of Almighty God, Rev. 1.20.
as the Apostle calls them in the first to the Romans. But then we must observe
withal, that this is not a proper definition of faith it self, according to
the rules of Art, and the true character and nature of a definition: but rather
a description of the fruits and effects of faith, in that it represents those
things which are yet in hope, as if they were possessed already; and does so
clearly look into things invisible, as if they were before our eyes. And this,
says Beza on the place, Beza in Heb. c. 11. v. 1.
Excellens fidei descriptio ab effectu est, quod res adbuc in spepositas
repraesentet, and invisibilia veluti oculis subjiciat. So then, we may define
Belief or Faith, as before we did, St. Paul's description notwithstanding, to be
a firm assent to supernatural truths revealed: which does most fully manifest
the true nature of faith, and no way crosses that which St. Paul delivers.
For that faith represents the things hoped for, and is the evidence or proof of
things not seen; is an effect or consequent of that firm assent to supernatural
truths revealed, which works both that evidence and existence in us. It
follows thereupon, as we before said, that to believe, according as the word
here stands in the front of the Creed, is only to be verily persuaded of the
truth of those points and Articles as are delivered in the same, and to give a
firm assent unto them, according to the measure of our understanding.

This being thus stated and determined, we now proceed unto the explication of
the first Article, I believe in God the Father Almighty: that is to say, I
believe that there is one Immoratal and Eternal Spirit, of great both Majesty
and Power, which we call God; and that this God is the Father Almighty, the
Father both of Jesus Christ and of all mankind, who as a Father has not only
brought us into the world, but has provided us of all things necessary both
for body and soul, protecting us by his mighty power, and governing us and our
affairs by his infinite wisdom. This is the sum of that which is to be
conceived of this present Article of our belief in God the Father Almighty. I
know the Schoolmen do distinguish very frequently between Credere Deum, Credere
Deo, and Credere in Deum: the first whereof they make to be a general belief of
the being of God, that is to say, that God is, that there is a God; the second
an affiance or relying on the veracity or truth of that which he has pleased
to impart to us in the holy Scriptures; the last (which is the phrase here
used) a confidence which we have in his grace and goodness, a casting of our
selves entirely into his mercy and protection. For thus the Master of the
Sentences, lib. 3. distinct. 23. cap. illud est; and Thomas Aquinas, 2.2. qu.
2. Ant. 2. ad 1. and 4. the Author of the Ordinary Gloss. Romans 4.5. Durandus in
Rationale divin. cap. de Symbol. and indeed who not? And I know also that this
nicety is generally fathered on Augustine, who indeed makes a signal difference
between credere Deo, and credere in Deum. Credere in Deumutique plus est quam
credere Deo August. in Psalm. 77.
to believe in God, is more, says he, then to believe that which the Lord has
spoken. Of which he gives this instance in another place, Nam and daemones
credebant ei, at non credebant in eum Id. in Johan. tract. 29.
; for the Devils do believe what God says unto them, who cannot for all that
be said to believe in God. And finally he concludes, or the Schoolmen from
him, that when we say, I believe in God, we do not only say, I believe God is,
or I give credit to his words, but me ipsum amare, and credendo in eum ire, and
membris ejus incorporari Compend. Theol. lib. 5. c. 21.
, by believing to love him, by believing as it were to grow into him, and be
incorporate with his members. The Protestant Doctors many of them go the same
way also, making the Credo of this place, to be the same with Fiduciam in Deo
colloco, the placing of our whole trust and confidence in God Almighty
Zuinglius in Matthew. 23.13.
, which are Zuinglius words: with whom agree, as to the meaning of the phrase,
P. Ramus de Relig. l. 1. c. 2. Zanch. de tribus Elohim part. 1. lib. 4. cap. 7.
and lib. 5. c. 2. Amesius in Medull. Theol. lib. 1. cap. 3. number. 15. besides
diverse others, whose names it were impertinent to remember here. By these in
Deum credere, to believe in God, is made the highest and most excellent act or
degree of faith; the (...) or full assurance of the understanding, which St.
Paul speaks of Coloss. 2.2. higher then which a Christian cannot go in this
present life. Tertia fidei pars, vel gradus, as we read in Musculus, non modo
de Deo, and Deo, sed and in Deum credere Muscul. loci commun. loco de Fide. n.
3.
. And this he does define to be, Spem omnen in Deum dirigere, firmaque fiducia
ab illius bonitate pendere: making it so peculiar unto God alone, ut nec Moysi,
nec Prophetis, nec Apostolis, imo ne Angelis quidem debeat accommodari; that it
is neither to be used when we speak of Moses, or of the Prophets, or Apostles,
no nor of any of the Angels. Finally for the phrase it self, (...), which the
Apostles have made use of in this place of the Creed, and in other parts of
Divine Writ, they make it an expression or form of speech so proper to the holy
Ghost, that neither the Septuagint in their Translation, nor any learned Author
amongst the Graecians ever used the same Wotton de Reconcil. Peccat. part. 1.
lib 2. c. 14. n. 3.
. Which notwithstanding I am yet unsatisfied in the solidity and truth of the
said distinction, and also of the explication of the phrase here used. And
therefore with the leave of the learned Reader, and with all due respect to
those Reverend men, who have transmitted them unto us; I shall endeavor to
evince these two conclusions: first, that the phrase in Deum, or in Christum
^redere, the explication of the phrase in Deum credere, and the distinction
thereon founded, is not so generally and universally true as it is pretended;
And 2. that howsoever it may be admitted in some texts of Scripture, in which
that phrase is used by the holy Ghost, it can by no means be admitted in this
place of the Creed.

First, for the phrase in Deum, or in Christum credere, they make it signify
(as before I said) that (...), or full assurance which a Christian has of the
love of God, the confidence which we have in his love and goodness, the casting
of our selves entirely into his goodness and protection: which I conceive is
more then the phrase imports, or was intended by it in the holy Ghost. The
only place in which we find this form of speech in St. Matthews Gospel, is in
the 18. chap. verse. 6. where it is said, Whosoever offends any of these
little ones, ((...), qui credunt in me) which believe in me, it were better
that a mil-stone were hung about his neck, etc. In which place, by those little
ones, or pusilli, which our Savior speaks of, he neither means little
children, nor men small in stature, (they must needs wrest the words too far,
who do so expound them) but men weak in faith; such as he elsewhere calls
(...) Mat. 8.26.
, men of little faith. And certainly a weak faith, or a little faith, cannot
consist with that (...), that full assurance and persuasion which is by them
intended in the phrase in question. Or if they mean it literally of little
children, because they find (...), parvulum, a little child Mat. 28.2. etc.
, to be a great part of the argument of that discourse, either they, must mean
somewhat else by in Christum credere, then their explication of the phrase
admits of, or else confess that little children are endued with that (...),
that confidence in the love and goodness of Almighty God in Jesus Christ, which
is the highest pitch and (...) of the strongest faith; which I think no wife
man will affirm. Thus is it said of the Disciples in the second chapter of St.
John, that when they had seen the miracle which Jesus did in Cana of Galilee,
(...) crediderunt in eum, they believed on him. ver. 11. Assuredly the faith of
the Disciples at this time was but weak and wavering, and needed many signs and
miracles to confirm the same. Magna vero Christi indulgentia, quod pro
Discipulis habet in quibus tam pusilla est fides Calvin in Ioh. cap. 2. v. 11.
And this, says Calvin on the place, declares the goodness and indulgence of
our Savior Christ, who would admit such men to be his Disciples, in whom there
was so little faith. And yet these men, in whom there was so little faith, are
said in eum credere to believe in him; because upon the sight of so great a
miracle, tun^ demum se illi addicere coeperunt, they first began to fasten a
more close dependence on him. The like is said of the Samaritans, that on the
same raised of our Savior by the woman, (...), multi in eum crediderunt, many
of them believed in him Joh. 4.39.
. And this the holy Ghost has reported of them, before they heard our Savior
speak, or had so much as seen his person, believing in him, at that time on no
other ground, then propter verbum mulieris, for the saying of the woman only.
Now if the (...) of a Christian faith be so firmly grounded, Vt non possit vel
seductorum versutia, vel Tyrannorum violentia, vel ulla machinatione Diaboli
expugnari, that neither the fraud of Heretics, nor the violence of Tyrants,
nor all the machinations of the Devil can prevail against it, as Bishop
Davenant says it is Davenant in Coloss. 2. v. 2.
, and exceeding rightly: either it must have better grounds then the words of a
woman, a woman of an ill name and a scandalous life, (for such she is described
to be verse. 18.) or else when the Samaritans are said to believe in Christ,
propter verbum mulieris, only upon this woman's words; the phrase imports no
such assurance, no such strength of faith, as has been formerly supposed. In
the same Gospel of St. John we find it written also, that many of the chief
Rulers, (...), crediderunt in eum, believed in him, cap. 11. v. 42. but then it
follows thereupon, that because of the Pharisees they did not confess him, lest
they should be put out of the Synagogue Joh. 11.42
. Here is a Credere in eum, accompanied with a very weak faith, ( Quanta in
illis fidei imbecilli^as Calvin in Ioh. cap. 11. v. 42.
, as it is in Calvin) a faith that durst not show it self by any outward
confession, or look abroad into the world for fear of the Pharisees. And
therefore credere in eum, in that place (as in those before) is no more but
this, as Calvin notes it, Christo n^men dare, and doctrinam ejus amplexos esse,
to profess the faith of Christ, and embrace his Gospel. The like may be
affirmed also of the blind man in the 9. chapter of St. John, who was required
to believe on the Son of God, when he was fain to ask this question, Quis est
Domine ut credam in eum? i e. Who is ^e Lord that I might believe on him? verse.
36. and of the Iayler in the Acts, of which more anon. Besides that which in
all these places, and in many others, is called (...), in Ch^is^um credere, in
other places of the Scripture, is called (...), in nomen ejus credere, As many
as received him, to them gave he power to become the sons of God, (...), Nempe
iis qui credunt in nomen ejus Joh. 1.12.
, even to them that believe in his Name; that is to say, to them that do
believe on him. And yet we find it said of some, when they saw his miracles,
that they believed on his Name, in Nomine ejus Joh. 2.23.
, (or in Nomen ejus, as Beza more near unto the Greek) whom yet our Savior
never held to be true Disciples ( pro germanis Discipulis non habuit, as it is
said by Calvin Calv. in locum. cap. 2. v. 23.
, but slighted them as light and inconsiderable men. And therefore it is said
of them in the following words, Non credebat eis semetipsum Joh. 2.24.
, that he did not commit himself unto them, because he knew the falsehood and
hypocrisy which was within them. So that by looking over so many of those
texts of Scripture in which this form of speech is used, it is more then
manifest, that the Explication of the same before delivered is not so generally
and universally true, as has been pretended. Let us next see what ground there
is for the distinction which is founded on it.

And first, whereas it is affirmed of this form of speech, that it is so
peculiar unto God alone, that it is not to be used of any creature, neither of
Moses nor the Prophets, nor of men or Angels Muscul Loci commun. de fide.
; I hold this to be gratis dictum, a building without good foundation. Those
which are learned in the Hebrew have long since noted, that where the Affix
(...) Beth is added to the word which signifies credere, to believe, it does
import as much as in: and that whereas we read in all late Translations, the
people feared the Lord, and believed the Lord and his servant Moses Exodus 14.
v. 31.
, the words in the Original will bear this translation, that they believed in
the Lord, and in Moses his servant. Musculus does acknowledge this Muscul. ut
supr.
, and grants that the words may be thus translated, Et crediderunt in Dominum
and in Mosen servum ejus, and that the words do bear this sense; though Hierom,
as he says, haud inconsulto, not without good reason and advice did thus
change the same, Et crediderunt Domino and Moysi servo ejus; which has been
since retained in the Latin Bibles, and in all National Translations that I
have met with. So also, when God said to Moses, Lo, I come unto thee in a
thick cloud, that the people may hear when I speak with thee, and believe thee
for ever Exodus 19.9.
: the words in the Original, as before they did, do bear this construction,
(and Musculus does so translate them) Et etiam in te credant in seculum; that
the people may for ever believe in thee. But being after changed by Hierom,
because in aliquem credere, much about his time began to be esteemed a solecism
in the Christian Grammar; in stead thereof, we have Et credat tibi in
perpetuum, both in the Vulgar Bibles, and all late Translations. Conform unto
which phrase in the Original, Crediderunt in Dominum and in Mosen, St. Basil a
most learned Father of the Greek Church, speaking of the Jews, says that they
were baptized in Moses (or in the name of Moses, and believed in Moses: (...)
Basil. de sancto Spiritu. c. 14.
, as his own words are, Baptizati sunt in Mosen, and crediderunt in illum, as
it is turned by his Translator. Nor is this said of Moses only, the principal
Founder, under God, of the Jewish Church, as a man more in grace with Almighty
God, then any of the sons of men since his time have been, but of the Church of
CHRIST in general. For in the Greek copies of the Apostles Creed, it is said
expressly, (...), that is to say, I believe in the holy Catholic Church: and in
the Nicene Creed it was said of old, (...), i. e. Credo in unam Catholicam
Ecclesiam, as the Translator of Socrates Socrat. hist. Eccles. l. 1. c. 25.
, where that Creed occurreth. And though the same be not expressed in terminis
in the Latin Creed, yet in the Grammar of the words it is understood. For
where the Latin Creeds run thus, Credo in Spiritum sanctum, sanctam Catholicam
Ecclesiam, etc. that is to say, I believe in the holy Ghost, the holy Catholic
Church, etc. as the English has it: either the word Credo must be interposed,
as Credo in Spiritum sanctam, credo sanctam Catholicam Ecclesiam, i. e. I
believe in the holy Ghost, I believe the holy Catholic Church; or else the
Preposition In, must relate to both, as also to the rest that follow. I know
indeed, that after Credere in Deum, or in Iesum Christum, was thought to be a
different act and degree of faith, from Credere Deo, or Jesus Christo: that men
began to think it somewhat inconvenient, to say as formerly, Credo in sanctam
Catholicam Ecclesiam, or Credo in Mosen and Prophetas, I believe in the holy
Catholic Church; or, I believe in Moses and the holy Prophets which have been
since the world began. And so we are to understand both Ruffin Ruffin. in
Exposit. Symboli.
and Paschasius Paschas. de Spirit. sancto. lib. 1.
, when they speak thereof, both fitting their expressions to such forms of
words as were then authorized in the Schools of CHRIST. The like is to be said
of St. Augustine also, viz. Credimus Paulo, non credimus in Paulum, etc.
August. in Ioh. tractat. 29.
. We believe Paul (says he) we believe not in Paul; and we believe Peter, we
believe not in Peter: Where note, the Father speaks not of the property, but of
the use of the phrase, according to the language of the times he lived in: for
ab initio non fuit sic, that it was otherwise intended at the first beginning,
we have shown already. Whether the phrase be so peculiar an expression of the
holy Ghost, as that it is not to be found in the old Greek Writers, I will not
meddle at the present: though I conceive the holy Ghost did dictate nothing of
the Scriptures, but the matter only, and left the language thereof to the
sacred Penmen. But for the Septuagint, although they do not use the word (...)
with the Preposition (...) preceding an Accusative Case, (which is the
singularity of expression so much insisted on in this business) yet use they
other words to the same effect. For those which stand so highly on singularity
cannot choose but grant Wotton de Reconcil. Peccat. part. 1. l. 2. c. 14.
that many times they use (...), not seldom (...), and sometimes also though
not often (...): which whosoever should translate in the English tongue, could
not translate it otherwise, then thus, to believe in God: So that whether it be
(...), or (...), i. e. Credo in Deum, or Credo in Deo, it makes no difference
in this case: no more, then that these words of the Evangelist Joh. 2.23.
(...), by Beza are translated Crediderunt in nomen ejus, but by the Author of
the Vulgar, in nomine ejus; which come both to one. This makes it evident in
part that the said distinction between Credere Deo, and credere Deum, stands
not upon so sure a ground as was imagined; but I must make it yet more evident,
that in the true intent and meaning of the sacred Penmen, there is no
difference at all to be found between them. For in the 16. chapter of the Acts,
the Iaylor did demand of Paul and Silas, what it behoved him to do that be
might be saved; verse. 30. to which they made this following answer, (...),
Creed in Dominum Iesum Christum, etc. believe on the Lord JESUS CHRIST, and
thou shall be saved and thy house Act. 16 31.
. It follows thereupon in the sacred story, that being instructed in the
Word, and baptized with water, he rejoiced greatly, (...), Credens Deo, as both
Beza and the Vulgar read it; Believing in God with all his house; verse. 34.
where if (...) in the 34. be not the same with that of (...), in the 31 verse,
as to the act of faith, which is one in both, although the Object of this Act
be given us in a different manner; the Iaylor had fallen short of that way to
Heaven; and possibly might have been as far from the hopes of Salvation, as
when he first proposed the question. And if they be the same, as no doubt they
be, then Credere Deo, and Credere in Deum, differ not at all: and therefore
neither the distinction, nor the Explication, so generally true, and
universally to be embraced, as has been supposed, which was the first thing to
be proved.

The second was, that howsoever Credere in Deum in some texts of Scripture may
possibly admit that explication which is made thereof; yet can it not be
possisibly admitted in this place of the Creed. My reason is, because all
Novices or Catechumeni, which were to be admitted into the Church, by the door
of Baptism; all children formerly baptized, which either came or were brought
before the Bishop for Confirmation; were first to give an account of their
faith, to make a public profession or confession of it in the face of the
Church, according to the very words and Articles of this common Creed. For
which see proof sufficient in the former chapter. Now if by Credere in Deum,
and in Iesum Christum, the Church intended such a (...), such an adhaesion unto
God in JESUS CHRIST, such an assurance and persuasion of our interest in him,
as the phrase is pretended to import: the Church did very ill to exact it from
the hands of Novices, or from the mouths of babes in Christ; considering how
strong the meat was, and how agreeable unto the stomach of the strongest faith.
My second reason is, (which before was touched at) because if (...), to believe
in God the Father Almighty, in Jesus Christ his only Son, and in the holy
Ghost, the Lord and giver of life, import no less then such a dependence on
them as is due from the Creature to his God; and that too ex vi Phraseos, out
of the very prhase or form of speech in Deum credere: the same dependence must
all Christians have upon the Church, the same on the Communion of Saints; and
the rest that follow. Will you have a reason of this reason? It is because the
very same phrase (...), is extant still interminis, in terms expressed, in all
Greek copies of the Creed; and necessarily employed in the Latin also, as
before was shown. Which if it may not be admitted in the Articles of the
Catholic Church, and the Communion of Saints, with the rest that follow: I see
no cause why it should be admitted in the front of all, which was to be the
leading Case unto all the rest. But other men of higher mark have seen this
before me, who give no other sense the^eof in this place of the Creed, then to
believe that there is one only eternal God, the Maker of all things. For thus
the Book entitled Pastor, and commonly ascribed to Hermes St. Paul's scholar.
Ante omnia unum credere Deum esse, qui condidit omnia Hermes.
i. e. Before all other things believe that there is one God who made all
things. Origin thus, Primum credendus est Deus qui omnia creavit, Origin (...)
in prooemio.
, i. e. In the first place we must believe that there is a God, by whom all
things were created. S. Hilary of Poyctiers thus, In absoluto nobis and facilis
est aeternitas, Iesum Christum a mortuis suscitatum credere Hilar. de
Trinitate, l. 10.
, i.e. Eternity is prepared for us, and made easy to us, if we believe that
Christ is risen from the dead. And finally thus Charles the Great in the Creed
published in his name, but made by the most learned men which those times
afforded; Praedicandum est omnibus, ut credant Patrem, Filium and Spiritum
sanctum unum esse Deum omnipotentem Symbol. Caroli, M.
, i. e. the Gospel must be preached to all men, that they may know that the
Father, Son, and holy Ghost is one God Almighty. Which resolution and authority
of the ancient Fathers, is built no doubt upon the dictate and determination of
S Paul himself, who did thus lead the way unto them; viz. He that c^meth to God
must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek
him Heb. 11.6.
. Where the first Article of the Creed I believe in God, is thus expounded, and
no otherwise, (...), I believe that God is, that there is a God. According to
which Exposition of the blessed Apostle our Reverend Jewel publishing the
Apology and Confession of the Church of England did declare it thus Jewel.
Apol. Eccles. Anglic.
. We believe that there is one certain Nature and Divine power which we call
GOD, etc. and that the same one God has created Heaven and Earth, and all
things contained under Heaven. We believe that Jesus Christ the only Son of the
Eternal Father, when the fullness of time was come, did take of that blessed and
pure Virgin both flesh and all the nature of man, etc. that for our sakes he
died and was buried, descended into Hell, etc. We believe that the holy Ghost
is very God, etc. and that it is his property to mollify and soften the
hardness of men's hearts, when he is once received thereunto, etc. We believe
that there is one Church of God, and that the same is not shut up (as in times
past amongst the Jews) into some one corner or Kingdom; but that it is
Catholic and Universal, and dispersed throughout the whole world, etc. and
that this Church is the Kingdom, the Body, and the Spouse of CHRIST, etc. To
conclude, we believe that this our self same flesh wherein we live, although it
dye and come to dust, yet at the last shall return again to life by the means
of Christ's Spirit, which dwells in us, etc. and that we through him shall
enjoy everlasting life, and shall for ever be with him in glory. Which
consonancy of expression being so agreeable to that observed before by the
ancient Fathers; and that observed before by the ancient Fathers, so consonant
unto the expression of S. Paul the Apostle, is the last reason which I have for
this resolution, that the so much applauded explication of the phrase in Deum
credere, is not to be admitted in this place of the Cre^d. And this shall also
serve for a justification of that gloss or Commentary, which I have given on
this first Article: viz. that to believe in God the Father Almighty, is only to
believe that there is one Immortal and Eternal Spirit, of great both Majesty
and Power, which we call GOD; and that this God is the Father Almighty, the
Father both of JESUS CHRIST and of all mankind, who as a Father has not only
brought us into the world, but has provided us of all things necessary both
for body and soul, protecting us by his mighty power, and governing us and our
affairs by his infinite wisdom.

But against this there may be some objections made, which must first be
answered, before we come unto the further explication of this Article. For if
Faith be no other then a firm assent to supernatural truths revealed; the
Reprobate, (as they call them) may be said to have faith, which yet is reckoned
in the Scripture as a peculiar gift of God unto his Elect, which is therefore
called Fides electorum, or the Faith of the Elect, Tit. 1.1. 2. If to believe
in God the Father Almighty, and in JESUS CHRIST his only Son, etc. be only to
believe that there is a God, and that all those things are most undoubtedly
true and certain which be affirmed of JESUS CHRIST in the holy Scripture; the
Devil may be reckoned for a true believer, S. James assuring us of this, that
the Devils do believe and tremble, Iam. 2.19. And 3. if the definition and the
explication before delivered, be allowed for current, it will quite overthrow
the received distinction of Faith into Historical, temporary, saving or
justifying faith, and the faith of Miracles; so generally embraced in the
Protestant Schools. This is the sum of those objections, which I conceive most
likely to be made against me; but such as may be answered without very great
difficulty. For that the Reprobate (as they call them) may have Faith in
CHRIST, is evident by many instances and texts of Scripture. Of Simon Magus it
is written in the Book of the Acts, that he believed and was baptized, and
continued with Philip Act. 8.13.
the Evangelist. Adhaerebat Philippo, says the Vulgar, he stuck so fast unto
him, that he would not leave him. Ask Calvin what he thinks of this faith of
Simons, and he will tell you, Majestate Evangelii victum, vitae and salutis
authorem Christum agnovisse, ita ut libenter illi nomen daret Calvin Instit. l.
3. c. 2. ^. 10.
; that being vanquished by the power and Majesty of the Gospel of Christ, he
did acknowledge him to be the Author of salvation and eternal life, and gladly
was enrolled amongst his Disciples. And whereas some had taught and published
amongst other things, that Simon never did believe, but counterfeited a belief,
for his private ends: Calvin does readily declare his dislike thereof,
acknowledging this faith of Simons to be true and real, though but only
temporary. Non tamen multis assentior qui simulasse duntaxat fidem putant quum
minime cred^ret Idem in Act. 8.13.
, I cannot yield to them (says he) which think he only made a show of faith,
which he never had: Why so? Quia Lucas aperte testatur eum credidisse, because
S. Luke affirms that he did believe, being convinced by the signs and miracles
which S. Philip wrought, as many others of Samaria at the same time were. And
yet no doubt but Simon Magus was a Reprobate, a man rejected by the Lord in
regard of his wickedness Act. 8.21, 22.
, and that his heart was not right in the sight of God: and afterward an
author of such mischief in the Church of God, that Ignatius, who lived near
those times, very rightly calls him (...) Ignat. Epi.
, the first begotten of the Devil. The like may be affirmed also of Alexander,
Hymeneus, and Philetus 1 Timothy 1.19, 20. and 2 Timothy 2.17, 18.
, who had been made partakers of the Faith of CHRIST, and were zealous in it
for the time; but afterward made shipwreck of it, denying (amongst other
Articles of the Christian faith) that of the resurrection of the dead; and
thereby overthrowing the faith of some. Men questionless given over to a
reprobate sense, or else we may be well assured St. Paul had never given them
over to the hands of Satan, as it is plain he did 1 Timothy 1.20.
. But what need search be made into these particulars, when Calvin himself
affirms in general, Reprobis fidem tribui, eosdem interdum simili fere sensu
atque Electos affici, eosque merito dici Deum sibi propitium credere Calvin
Instit. l. 3. c. 2. n. 11.
, etc. that Faith is given unto the Reprobate; that sometimes they are touched
with the like sense of Gods grace as the Elect ones are, and may deservedly be
said to believe that God is favorable and propitious to them? God sometimes
makes the Sun of Righteousness as well as the Sun of Heaven, to shine on the
evil and on the good. Which notwithstanding, Faith is called, and that most
properly, Fides Electorum, the Faith of Gods Elect, in that and other places of
the Book of God, because the fruits thereof are in them more visible, the
confession of the same more fervent, the seeds thereof more fastly rooted, and
the fruit more durable. For which cause possibly the Apostle does there join
together the faith of Gods Elect, and the knowledge of the truth which is after
godliness: Which is indeed the special difference, which is between the faith
of the Elect, and the faith of the Reprobates. For if the fruit be unto
holiness, no question but the end thereof will be life everlasting Romans 6.22.
. It is not then the weakness or the want of faith, which does alone exclude
the Reprobate from the Kingdom of Heaven, and make him finally incapable of the
grace and favor of the Lord, in the day of judgment, but the want of a good
conscience in the sight of God. And therefore if we mark it well, St. Peter did
not charge it upon Simon Magus, that he wanted faith, or that his faith was
only a dissembled hypocritical faith; upbraiding him, as formerly Ananias in
another case, that he had not only lied unto men, but unto God Act. 5.4.
: but that he was in the gall of bitterness, and in the bonds of iniquity, not
having his heart right in the sight of God Act. 8.23.21.
. Nor did St. Paul accuse the said three Apostates, that they never had
received the faith, or that the faith which they received was not true and
real; but that first having put away a good conscience 1 Timothy 1.19.
, they afterward made shipwreck of the faith also, blaspheming God, and
scattering abroad their dangerous errors, to the seducing of their brethren.
If Simon had repented of his wickedness Act. 8.22.
as St. Peter advised, it may be charitably supposed that the thoughts of his
heart had been forgiven him. And Hymeneus and Alexander, if they had made good
use of the Apostles censure 1 Timothy 1.20.
, (when he delivered them unto Satan) for the destruction of the flesh 1 Cor.
5.4.
, no question, but their spirits might have been saved in the day of the Lord
JESUS. Which may suffice for answer to the first objection, touching the faith
of reprobates, (as they use to call them) whose firm assent to supernatural
truths revealed, makes them not inheritable to the Kingdom of Heaven, because
they hold the truth revealed in unrighteousness, and so become without excuse
Romans 1. 18.20.
, as St. Paul tells us (in another case) of the ancient Gentiles.

The next Objection is, that if this phrase in Deum credere, import no more
then this, that there is a God, and that all his words are Divine truths, and
all the world the workmanship of his hands alone; the Devils do believe as
much, as St. James assures us. Thou believe (says he) that there is one God;
thou do well: the Devils also believe and tremble, Iam. 1.19. The answer unto
this is easy. St. James assures us of the Devils that they believe there is
one God, but does withal assure us this that this belief of theirs confirms
them in the certainty and foreknowledge of their everlasting damnation; the
apprehension of the which produces nothing in them but fear and horror. The
Devils do believe that there is a God, and that this God is just in all his
actions, and righteous in all his ways; unchangeable in his Decrees; Yesterday,
and to day, and the same for ever. What other comfort can they reap from this
faith of theirs, but that being once condemned by God to eternal fire, they are
reserved in everlasting chains under darkness, to the judgment of the great
and terrible day Jude v. 6.
? For knowing that the judgments of the Lord are just, and his doom
unchangeable; they must needs know withal the certainty of their own
damnation, or else they cannot properly be affirmed to believe this truth, that
there is a God. And as they do believe that there is a God, so they believe
also that he is the Maker of heaven and earth. For being at the first created
by Almighty God with so great perspicacity and clearness of the understanding,
they could not choose but know the hand that made them, and consequently
believe that he made all those things which are ascribed to God in the holy
Scripture. Though by their fall, they lost the favor of the Lord, their first
estate in which they were created by Almighty God, the grace by which they
stood, and the glories which they did possess: yet lost they not that quickness
and agility of motion, that perspicacity and clearness of the understanding,
wherewith they were endowed by God at their first Creation. But what makes this
unto their comfort, when the same knowledge or belief (call it which you will)
by which they are assured that God made the Heavens and the Earth, and all the
things therein contained; will keep them always in remembrance of this most sad
truth, that he also made an Hell of fire, where there is weeping and gnashing
of teeth, prepared for the Devil and his Angels Mat. 25.30.1.
? To go a little farther yet, the Devils did not only believe long since, that
CHRIST was come in the flesh, but publicly proclaimed him in the open
Synagogue, to be the holy Son of God Mark 1.24.
, JESUS the Son of God Mat. 8.29.
, in another place. What benefit do they expect from this Confession, what
recompense for that Belief so professed and published ^; but an assurance that
they have no part in David, nor any inheritance at all in the Son of Iesse? How
so? Because they knew full well, no mere Creature better, that CHRIST took not
on him the nature of Angels, but that he took on him the seed of Abraham Heb.
2.16.
. And if he took not on him the nature of Angels, as they knew he did not, he
could not be a Mediator between them and God: and if no Mediator between them
and God, they have no interest in his merits, nor can claim any profit by his
death and passion; but must continue in that state wherein God has plunged
them for their sins, without hope of remedy. The Devils then believe, but
withal they tremble; and good reason for it: that belief making them assured
that their case is desperate, and that there is no mercy for them in Gods
heavenly Treasury: Besides, admit the Devil did believe all those sacred
truths, which are affirmed of CHRIST in the Book of God; what will this avail
them? For must they not then believe this truth amongst the rest, that without
true repentance there can be no entrance into the Kingdom of Heaven? and if
they do believe that truth, must they not conclude, that there can be no place
for them in the heavenly glories, because the door of repentance is shut
against them, and that the Baptism of Repentance is a way to Heaven, whereof
their nature is not capable? Small comfort doubtless in this faith, but of
anguish plenty.

So far I had proceeded in this discourse when I incountred with a Treatise of
Doctor Iacksons the late Dean of Peterburgh, containing the Original of
Unbelief, misbelief, etc. In which I find so strong a confirmation of my
opinion herein, that I have thought it not unnecessary to lay down his words
for the clear evidence thereof. Sect. 1. chapter 2.
Thus then says he. To believe in God has gone current so long for so much as
to put trust or confidence in him, that now to make it go for less will perhaps
be an usurpation of authority more then critical, and much greater then befits
us. Notwithstanding if on Gods behalf we may plead what Lawyers do in cases of
the Crown, Nullum tempus occurrit Regi, that the Ancient of days may not be
prejudiced by antiquity of custom or prescription, especially whose Orignal is
erroneous; the case is clear, That to believe in God in their intention, who
first composed this Creed, is no more then to believe there is a God, or to
give credence to his Word. For justifying this Assertion, I must appeal from
the English Dialect in which the manner of speech is proper and natural, if it
were consonant unto the meaning of the Original: as also from the Latin in
which the phrase being forain and uncouth, is to be valued by the Greek, whose
stamp and character it hears. Now the Greek (...), as also the Hebrew phrase
whereunto by sacred Writers it was framed, is no more then has been said, To
believe there is a God; Otherwise we must believe not only in God the Father,
in Christ the Son, and in the holy Ghost, but in the Catholic Church, in the
Communion of Saints, in the forgiveness of sins, and in the resurrection of the
body, and in life everlasting, seeing the Greek particle, (usually expressed by
the Latin In) is annexed after the same manner to all these objects of our
belief, as is apparent in the Ancient Greek Creeds. And he that diligently
reads the Translation of the Septuagint shall find the Greek phrase which is
verbatim, rendered by the Latin, in Deum credere, to believe in God,
promise^ously used for the other credere Deo, i. e. to believe God. Or if
besides the evident Records of the ancient Copies personal witnesses be
required amongst the Ancients, I know few, amongst Modern Writers none more
competent, then those that are expressly for us, as Beza, Mercer, Drusius, unto
whom we may add Ribera and Lorinus also. Now as to use the benefit of a truth
known and testified is always lawful; so to us in this case it is most
expedient, almost necessary. For either I did not rightly apprehend whilst I
read it, or at least now remember not how the Schoolman removes the stumbling
block, which he had placed in the very entry to this Creed. [If to believe in
God, be as much as to put trust or confidence in him, by exacting a profession
of this Creed at all men's mouths, we shall enforce a great many to profess a
ly.] For of such as not only out of ordinary charity, but upon particular
probabilities, we may safely acquit from actual Atheism, or contradicting
infidelity, a great number do not put their trust or confidence in God; this
being the mark at which the belief of Novices must aim, not the first step they
are to make in this progress. And not long after he makes answer unto this
Objection, touching the belief of Devils, or of wicked Angels: of whom we
cannot say (say some) that they do believe in God, though they believe his
being more firmly then we can do, and know his Word as clearly. For as he
handsomely illustrates; If the Kings Majesty should proclaim a general pardon
to a number of known Rebels, and vow execution of judgment without mercy upon
some principal offenders, which had maliciously and cunningly seduced their
simplicity: I suppose his will and pleasure equally manifested unto both, and
so believed, would as much dishearten the one, as encourage the other to rely
upon his clemency. Such notwithstanding altogether is the case between men and
wicked angels. The one believes CHRIST took the Woman's seed, and therefore
cannot without such wilful mistrust of the promise of life, as was in his first
Parents to Gods threats of death, despair of Redemption by the eternal
Sacrifice. The other as firmly believe, or rather evidently know, that CHRIST
in no wise took the Angelical nature; and without this ground the better they
believe his Incarnation, the less are their hopes of their own Redemption.

As for the third and last Objection touching the overthrow of the distinction
of Faith, into Historical, Temporary, saving or justifying faith, and the faith
of Miracles, so generally received and countenanced in the Protestant Schools;
it works no effect at all in me: who am resolved not to hazard the loss of a
truth, to save the credit of a distinction. Nor are the membra dividentia, as
Logicians call them, so well choyced and stated, as either to require such care
of their preservation, or not to bring them into question. For all faith is
Historical, there is no doubt of that; and the other members of the distinction
either are coincident, or but degrees only of the same one faith. Vrsinus, the
Divinity Reader in Heidelberg, though he both uses and approves this
distinction, yet to my seeming, takes not the terms to be so different as the
members of a good Division ought to be by the rules of Logic; and indeed so
confounds them one with another, that we can hardly see where the difference
lies. For he confesses in plain terms, Vrsin. Theses Theol. c. 13.
fidem Iustificantem Historicam semper inse complecti, that justifying faith
does always comprehend the Historical in it, and that the faith of Miracles,
has either Temporary or Historical faith always joined unto it. If so, the
difference between them must be very small, consisting more in magis and minus,
and such degrees of comparison, then in any spiritual and formal difference:
and possibly it may fall out that the faith of miracles, (as they call it) is
rather an extraordinary gift or effect of faith, then any distinct species or
branch thereof. First, for Historical faith, that faith whereby we do believe,
Ea vera esse Id. ibid.
quae in libris Prophetarum and Evangelistarum tradita sunt, by which we do
believe those things for true which are contained in the Books of the Old and
New Testament, as themselves define it: I cannot see wherein it differs from
justifying or saving faith, unless perhaps it be in the application, which
rather is an Act of faith then a species of it. And it is but a perhaps, if
that, for in my mind Dr. Iackson reasons very well Iackson of justifying
faith. c. 2.
, That our Faith is not to be counted unsound or non salvifical, because
Historical, but rather oft-times therefore insufficient to some because not so
fully Historical as it might be; or in that our apprehension of diverse matters
related in Sacred stories is not so great, so lively and sound, as to equalize
the utmost limits of some belief, which yet may be fully comprehended under
Historical assent: there being no assent which can exceed the measure of that
belief or credence which is due unto sacred Writers. Which if it be on our
parts as it ought to be, to Gods general promises, it will more forcibly, more
truly and naturally apply them to us in particular, then we our selves can
possibly do, by beginning our faith at that particular application where indeed
it must end. For temporary faith they define that next, Vrsin. Cutech. part. 2.
qu. 21.. n. 2.
to be an Assent unto the Doctrine of the Gospel accompanied with joy and
gladness, and the outward profession of the same, but such as lasts but for a
season, and fades in time of persecution and affliction. And this they ground
upon that passage in our Saviors parable, where it is said, Matthew. 13.20, 21.
that He which receives the seed in stony places, the same is he that
receives the Word, and anon with joy receives it; yet has he not root in
himself, but dureth for a season: For when tribulation or persecution arises
because of the Word, by and by he is offended. But for my part I could never
see any reason to persuade me yet, that our Savior in that Parable did purpose
to represent unto our view the several kinds of Believers, but the several
kinds of hearers only; many of which do hear the Word with diverse ends and
different purposes, but only they which do so hear the Word of God, as to bring
forth the fruit of good living, shall like the good grain in the following
Parable, be laid up at the last day in the barn of the Heavenly husbandman. Or
granting that they build this definition on a ground well laid, yet I see
nothing to the contrary, but that the temporary faith which is there defined
may be a true and lively faith, and justify the man that has it in the sight
of God; though failing in the course of his Christian race, he do not get the
prize proposed unto them that win, and hold out to the very end. A temporary
faith may justify for the present time, and bring forth many fruits of
holiness and newness of life; but it is faith with perseverance in the works of
Piety, which shall receive the Crown in the day of Judgment. And if this
Temporary faith be not saving also, it is not in regard of it self, that it
wants any of those signs and tokens by which a saving faith is to be discerned;
but that the man that is endued or invested with it, has not the gift of
perseverance, but out of worldly fear, or on by-respects makes shipwreck of his
faith, or casts it overboard in the storm as a thing unprofitable. So that the
difference between Temporary and Salvifical faith, is not in any thing
essential to the true nature of faith; but only in duration, which is
accidental, and extrinsical: which make it no more a distinct species of faith,
or to fall short in any thing which true faith should have, then that a man who
dies in the flower of his youth, wants any thing of being as complete and
perfect a man, as he that lives unto the age of Methusalem. That magis and
minus do not differ specie, is an old rule in Logic. And so Bucanus does
conclude to the point in hand, though as professed and rigid a Calvinian as any
other whatsoever, affirming plainly Bucan Com. loc. de Fide.
, Fidem languidam esse veram fidem, that a weak and languishing faith is a true
faith; on this very reason, Quia magis and minus non variant rerum species, as
before is said. Which rule if it hold good in the intension of Faith, as to
strength and weakness, will certainly hold good in the extension of it also, as
to length and shortness of duration.

Last of all, for the faith of Miracles or fides Miraculorum, as they please to
call it, is defined by the said Vrsinus to be Donum singular faciendi aliquod
opus extraordinarium, aut praedicendi certum eventum ex revelatione divina
Vrsin. Catech. part. 2. qu. 21.
that is to say, a singular gift of doing some extraordinary and supernatural
work, or foretelling things to come by divine Revelation. But this considered
as it ought, is so far from being a distinct species of faith, that it ought
not to be called faith at all: but is rather the effect of an eminent faith, or
some more extraordinary gift super-added to it. For CHRIST our Savior
reckons it as the effect of a powerful faith, saying to his Disciples, when
they seemed to complain, because they could not cast the Devil out of a man who
was brought before them Mat. 17.20.
, that it was propter incredulitatem ipsorum, by reason of their unbelief, as
our English reads it, that it to say, because their faith was yet but weak and
newly planted, not strong nor spiritful enough to effect such wonders. And the
Apostle reckoning up those gifts and graces of the holy Ghost, which God
bestowed upon his Church in her first plantations, gives us this punctual list
or catalogue of them, saying, that unto one is given by the Spirit the Word of
Wisdom, to another the Word of knowledge by the same Spirit; to another is
given Faith by the same Spirit; to another the gift of healing by the same
Spirit 1 Cor. 12.8, 9, 10.
; to another power to do miracles; to another prophecy; to another the
discerning of spirits; to another diverse kinds of tongues, etc. Where plainly
Faith, the gift of healing, Prophesying, and the power of working Miracles, are
counted for distinct graces of the holy Ghost; by consequence, the power of
working Miracles is no species of faith, but rather something extraordinary
super-added to it as before I said. So that we need not stand so much upon this
distinction, as in regard thereof to recede from the Exposition before
delivered, wherein it was affirmed that in Deum credere, to believe in God, is
only to believe that there is one Immortal and Eternal Spirit, of great both
Majesty and Power, which we call GOD: and that this God is the Father Almighty,
who as he made all things by his mighty power, so he does still preserve them
by his divine Providence, and preserve them by his infinite wisdom. And this
Interpretation of the phrase in Deum credere, or in Christum credere, does hold
best correspondence with the definition of faith before laid down. For if Faith
be no other then a firm assent to supernatural truths revealed: then to include
no more in these forms of speech, then that there is a God, an Almighty God the
maker of all things, and that his only Son JESUS CHRIST our Lord both did and
suffered all these things which are affirmed of him in the holy Scriptures, and
briefly laid together in the present Creed; must needs be most agreeable to the
nature of faith* Which being premised once for all, we shall proceed unto the
proof of the present Article: in which we shall first make it clear and evident
out of monuments and records of the learned Gentiles (for in this point it were
unnecessary to consult either the Scriptures or the Fathers) that there is an
infinite incomprehensible and eternal Spirit, whom we call by the Name of GOD;
and secondly that this GOD is only one, without any Rival or Competitor in the
public Government of the Universe: And this shall be the argument of the
following Chapter.

CHAP. II. That there is a God, and but one God only, and that this one God is
a pure and immortal Spirit, and the sole Governor of the World; proved by the
light of Reason, and the testimonies of the Ancient Gentiles.
THat GOD is, or that there is a God, is a truth so naturally graffed in the
soul of man, that neither the ignorance of letters, nor the pride of wealth,
nor the continual fruition of sensual pleasures have been able to obliterate
the Characters or impressions of it. For Tully very well observes, Nullam
gentem tam feram esse, neminem omnium tam immanem, cujus mentem non imbuerit
deorum opinio, That there was never Nation so barbarous, nor man so brutish and
inhumane, but was seasoned with this opinion, that there was a God Cicer. in
Tusc. quaest. l. 1.
: And though (says he) many misguided by ill customs, or want of more civil
education do conceive amiss of the Divinity, yet they did all suppose a nature
or power Divine: to which they were not drawn by conference and discourse with
others, nor by tradition from their Ancestors, or the laws of their Country;
but by a natural instinct imprinted in them. quae gentium omnium consensio lex
putanda est, which general consent of all people concerning this matter is to
be esteemed the Law of Nature. And though the civil wisdom which appears in
the laws of Lycurgius, Numa, and other ancient Legislators amongst the
Heathens, may argue probably an opinion in them of framing many particular
rites of Religion, as politic Sophisms to retain that wild people in awe, for
whose sake they devised then; yet could not their inventions have wrought so
succesfully upon men's affections, unless they had been naturally inclined to
the ingraffed notion of a GOD in general, under pretense of whose Sovereign
right, those particulars had been commended to them, or obtrud^d on them. A
more plentiful experiment of which evident truth, has been suggested to us in
these later Ages, wherein diverse Countries peopled with Inhabitants of
different manners and education have been discovered; the very best whereof
have been far more barbarous, then the worst of those which were so counted in
the days of Tully, yea or of Numa or Lycurgus, though long time before him. And
yet amongst these savage Indians, who could hardly be discerned from brute
beasts, Nisi in hoc uno quod loquerentur Lactant. l. 3.8.
, as Lactantius once said in a case much like, but only in that they had the
use of speech: were found to have acknowledged several Gods or superior powers,
to which they offered sacrifices and other rites of Religion, in testimony of
their gratitude for benefits received from them. As if the signification of
man's obligements to some invisible power for health, food, and other
necessaries, or for their preservation from dysasters and common dangers were
as natural to him, as fawnings or the like dumb signs in dogs, other tame,
domestic creatures, are to those who cherish them. Concerning which, as Cicero
one of the wisest of the Gentiles gives an excellent rule; so of that natural
inclination did the Apostle of the Gentiles make an excellent use. For there
were many great and famous Philosophers, which did not only ascribe the
government of the World to the wisdom of the Gods; but did acknowledge all
necessary supplies of health and welfare to be procured from their providence.
Insomuch that corn and other increase of the Earth (says Cicero) together with
that variety of times and seasons; with those alterations or changes of
weather, by which the fruits of the Earth do spring up, and ripen, are by them
made the effects of Divine goodness, and of the love of GOD to mankind. And on
this ground St. Paul proceeded in his Sermon to the people at Lystra, whom he
endeavored to bring unto the knowledge of the only true invisible GOD, by
giving them to understand, that though in times past he had suffered all
Nations to walk in their own ways Act. 14.16, 17.
, yet did he not leave himself without witness, in that he (was beneficial or)
did good unto them, and gave them rain from heaven, and fruitful seasons,
filling their hearts with food and gladness. From which one stream of Divine
goodness, experienced in giving rain, (to proceed no further) did the old
Grecians christen their great god Jupiter by the name of (...); as the Latins
on the same reason did surname him Pluvius.

And to say truth, the prudent Orator had very good ground both for his
observation and the reason of it. For of all the Nations known in the times he
lived in, there was none branded with the stain of Atheism, but the poor Fenni,
a Sect or Tribe amongst the Germans. Of whom it is affirmed by Tacitus, that
they had neither household gods, nor corn, nor cattle, nor any thing in property
they could call their own; but were indeed a people of so extreme a poverty,
that they no more needed the helps of God or man, then the Beasts of the field.
Fennis mira feritas, foeda paupertas, non arma, non equi, non penates Tacit. de
mor. German.
, as he tells us there. And more then so, they had attained, says he, to the
hardest point, Vt ne voto quidem opus sit, that they had no need nor use of
prayers to the gods on high. For what need they make supplication to the gods
and goddesses for blessings on their Corn, and their Wine, or Oil, who neither
sowed nor planted, nor used any husbandry? What should they do with household
gods who had no houses, but the Earth only for their bed, and the Heavens for
the Canopy? And yet perhaps these Fenni were not altogether without the
knowledge of GOD, or to be counted absolute Atheists, more then the barbarous
people of other new discovered Countries; but that they had this Character
bestowed upon them, because they showed less signs of any Religion then those
Nations did with whom the Romans had had longer acquaintance, and so were more
experienced in their rites and customs. And of all men that flourished before
Tullies time, there were none stigmatized with the brand of Atheism, but only
Diagoras Melius, and Protagoras the Cyrenaean; to whom some added Enhemerus the
Tegaean also. Of the two first indeed it is said by Lactantius, Protagoras deos
in dubium vocavit, Diagoras exclusit Lactant. l. 1.2.
, that Protagoras first called the being of the gods in question, and that
Diagoras was the first who denied it absolutely, who therefore was surnamed,
(...), or the Atheist, as Minutius has it. And yet perhaps it will be found
upon further search, that neither of the three did doubt or deny this truth,
that there was a God; but that they got this ill repute amongst the Gentiles,
for scoffing and deriding those Idol-gods, whom their neighbors worshipped. For
of Diagoras it is said, that when he cast the Statua of Hercules into the fire,
he did it with this scoff or jeere, In hoc decimo tertio agone mihi inservias,
that he should serve him now in that thirteenth labor, as he had done
Eurystheus in the other twelve Ap. More. de vera Relig.
. And as well known is that of Protagoras also, who is said to have thus mocked
at the Idolatries of the old Egyptians; Si dii sunt, cur plangitis? si mortui,
cur adoratis? i. e. If they be gods, why do you lament them? (for in the rites
and sacrifices of the goddess Isis, they used to make great lamentations) if
dead, why do you then adore them? As for the third man Euhemerus (for these
were all of note who stand thus accused) he was accounted guilty of Atheism for
no other reason, but because he had composed an history of the birth, lives and
actions of the Heathen gods, proving that they had been no other then some
famous men, whose Statua's had been turned to Idols, and themselves worshipped
by the people in tract of time for some powers Divine. Which book of his
Lactantius Lactant l. 1. c. 11.13, etc.
, and some others of the Primitive Writers do make very good use of, in their
discourses with and against the Gentiles. It Is true, that on those grounds, and
on those occasions which are spoken of by Enhemerus, the greatest part of the
old Heroes, as Saturn, Jupiter, Apollo, Neptune, Mars, Hercules, and the rest
of that infinite rabble became by degrees to have divine honors conferred upon
them. And it is as true, that the Egyptians worshipped Apis in the form of an
Ox, or the Ox rather under the name of Apis, as being of greatest use to them
in the course of their tillage; and so they did also Leekes and Onions, and
diverse other of the fruits of the Earth also, by which they lived; and some
strange creatures also which they dreaded most. quis nescit qualia demens
Aegyptus portenta colat Lucan. Pharsal. l. 10.
, as the Poet has it. As true it is, that other Nations worshipped the Sun and
Moon, and all the rest on the heavenly bodies, unto whose glorious light and
influences they thought themselves so much heholding. Which may be used as a
further and most invincible argument to prove that the knowledge of this truth,
that there was a God, was naturally ingraffed in the souls of all men; and that
this natural inclination was so powerful in them, that they rather would have
any gods then none at all, and therefore made themselves such gods as came next
to hand, worshipping STOCKS and Stones, and Leekes and Onyons, and whatsoever
else their blind fancies dictated. And this, I take it, gave the hint to
Democritus first, and after him to Epicurus, and the whole Sect of the Stoics,
Lactant. l. 2.
to set up FATE and Fortune in the place of the Gods; or otherwise to invest
dame Nature with the powers of a Deity. For finding that the biass of all sorts
of people inclined them strongly to believe that there was a God, they were
content to let the gods hold their place in Heaven, but then they robbed them
of their power or supreme providence in governing the World, and ordering the
affairs thereof. And this was the disease of David's fool in the Book of Psalms,
who used to say in his heart that there was no God. Not that he was so very a
fool as to think there was no God at all: but that he thought the God of Heaven
was so far above him, and so employed in matters of an higher nature, as
neither to take care or notice of the things beneath: Which therefore he^, as
Democritus, and the Epicureans after did, ascribed to Chance and Fortune, or to
Fate and Nature. And as it seems this error in the time of the Poet Iuvenal,
found such a general entertainment amongst the Romans, that he thought fit to
tax it in his Satyrs Iuvenal. Sat. 13.
thus; Sunt qui Fortunae jam casibus omnia ponunt,
Et Mundum nullo credunt Rectore moveri,
Natura volvente vices and lucis and anni,
Atque ideo intrepide quaecunque Altaria jurant.


That is to say; Some think the World by slippery chance does slide,
That days and years run round without more guide,
Then Natures Rule: From whence without all fear
Of Gods or men, they by all Altars swear.


But howsoever this opinion, carrying a less show of impiety then that of
Diagoras and Protagoras had done before, became more generally to be received
among the Gentiles; yet in effect in rather changed then bettered the state of
the question. And though it did not strike down all the gods at a blow, yet by
degrees it lessened their authority amongst the people, and brought them to
depend wholly upon chance and fortune, or on fate and destiny; that in the end
there might be no other God thought of, none of the Heavenly Powers be sued to,
or adored at all. Which plainly was their aim, as St. Austin tells us, where
notwithstanding their pretenses he affirms this of them August. de civit. Dei.
l.
, that all they did conduce to no other end, quam ut nullus omnino aut rogetur,
aut colatur Deus. And in this state the business stood when the first Advocates
which pleaded in the behalf of the Christian faith, did undertake the
vindicating of Gods power and providence: and labored to possess the world
with a right opinion both of the Being and divine Nature of GOD; and also of
his sovereign power in ordering the course of nature, and governing all
sublunary affairs of what kind soever. Whose arguments being drawn especially
from the light of reason, and therefore fittest to convince the gainsaying
Gentiles, are elegantly summed up by Minutius Felix; out of whose excellent
Dialogue I shall here present them according as they lay before me, and then
confirm the truth of that which he there delivers, out of the works and
writings of the old Philosophers, and other learned men amongst those Gentiles,
whom prejudice and prepossession had not formerly blinded Minut. Fell in Octavio.
The difference, says he, betwixt us men and beasts does consist in this, that
they whose faces are inclined to look down to the earth, seem to be chiefly
made to look after their provender. But we whose countenances are raised up
toward the Firmament, to whom is given both speech and reason, by which we may
know, feel, and imitate the works of God, must needs be counted inexcusable,
should we be ignorant of that divine light which does even thrust it self on
our eyes and senses. It is an high degree of Sacrilege to seek for that upon
the Earth, which is not to be found but in Heaven on high. Which makes them
seem to me to l^^ve neither understanding, sense, nor so much as eyes, who
would not have this World accomplished by the Divine wisdom of God, but
compacted only of several parcels joined together by chance. For what can be so
obvious, so confessed, so manifest, whether we lift up our Eyes to Heaven, or
behold those things which are beneath and round about us, then that there is
some Divine power of most exquisite judgment, by which the whole frame of
Nature is inspired, moved, maintained, and ordered? Behold the Heaven it self,
of what a vast circumference, and how swiftly moved, bespangled in the night
with stars, illustrated in the day time with the beams of the Sun; and thou
may know by that, the wonderful and divine disposure of its Supreme
Governor. Observe the year, how it ends the circular motion of the Sun; the
month distinguished by the increase and wane of the Moon; the mutual
succession of light and darkness, that rest and labor may by turns succeed one
another. Let us relinquish to Astronomers a more exact discourse of the Stars
and Planets; whether they serve to direct the course of Navigation, or usher in
the seasons of seed and harvest: which as they were not made, created, nor
disposed of, without a Supreme Workman of most perfect wisdom, so could they
not be comprehended and made intelligible, but by great art and understanding.
When the orderly method of the season distinguishes it self by the constant
variety of several fruits, does it not openly avouch who is the Author and the
Parent thereof? that is to say, the Spring bedecked with flowers, and the
Summer with corn, the Fall made acceptable by its fruits; and the Winter
necessary by its Olives. Besides how great an argument is it of an heavenly
Providence, to interpose the temperament of the Spring and Autumn, lest if it
were all Winter it should freeze us with cold; or if it were all Summer, it
should scorch us with heat, that so one part of the year might fall into the
other, without producing any sensible or dangerous alteration in the state of
things? Behold the Sea, how it is bounded with the shore, which it may not
pass: the Earth, how it is fructified with trees which it self produces: the
Ocean, how it is divided between ebbs and floods; the Fountains, how they flow
with continual streams; the Rivers, how they pass away with perpetual waters.
What need I speak of the perpendicular height of Mountains; or the declivities
of the hills, or the extension of the fields? What need we speak of that variety
of weapons, wherewith brute beasts are armed for their own defense; some
fortified with horns, others palisadoed with teeth; some furnished with hoofs,
some provided of stings; and others having means to preserve themselves either
by the nimbleness of their feet, or the help of their wings? Especially
consider the comeliness and beauty of our own bodies, made of an upright
structure, an erected countenance, the eyes advanced as Sentinels in the Keep
or Watchtower, and all the rest of the senses placed in the Fort or Capital:
and will not that acknowledge GOD for its sole Artificer? An endless work it
were to run over all particular members; take this once for all, that there is
not one part in all the body, which serves not both for necessary use and
ornament also. And which is yet more wonderful then all the rest, though there
be the same structure of all, yet has every man his several and proper
lineaments, by which though we are all alike, yet are we also so unlike as to
be easily discerned from one another. The manner of our birth, and the desire
of procreation, is it not given by GOD alone? That the dugs spring with milk
when the Babe does ripen, and that the Infant grows up by that milky dew,
proceeds it not from the same Author? Nor does GOD take care only of the whole;
but of every part. The Isle of Britain, which is defective in the heat of the
Sun, is notwithstanding refreshed with the warmth of the Sea which does
incompass it. Nilus does satisfy for the want of rain that is in Egypt,
Euphrates fatneth Mesopotamia, and Indus is reported both to sow and water the
Eastern Regions. If then as often as thou entrest into any house, and see in
what an excellent order all things therein are both disposed of and set ^ut at
the best advantage, thou can not choose but think there is some Lord or
Master of it which has so disposed it, and one that is much better then the
things themselves: so in this great house the World, when thou observest the
Heaven and Earth, the order, law, and providence by which they are guided, how
can thou choose but think that there is some Lord of this Universe, the
Author of those Stars and Constellations, of far more beauty then the loveliest
of those several parts? But possibly thou may not so much call in question,
whether there be a Divine Providence which rules all things, as whether it be
subject to the power of one or of many Gods: which will be no great difficulty
to determine neither, if we observe the Arts of Empire used in Earthly
Kingdoms, which have their pattern from above. For when did ever any
partnership in Empire, either begin upon good terms, or not end in blood! For
to say nothing how the Persians being weary of the government of many Rulers,
designed the Empire unto him whose Horse should first neigh on the morrow
morning; nor to revive the dead fable of the Theban brothers: who has not
heard the story of the Roman twins, contending for the command of a few
Shepherds, and a Realm of Cottages? The more then Civil Wars betwixt Caesar
and Pompey for the Empire of Rome, which though of very vast extent could not
hold them both? Look also how it is in the Oeconomie of Nature, one King
amongst the Bees, one Supreme Captain over the flock, and in the herds of
Cattle one more principal Ruler. And can thou think the Government of that
Heavenly Monarchy can be dismembered or divided? It being so manifest and
apparent that God, who is the Father of all things, has neither beginning nor
ending; that to all creatures gives a being, to himself Eternity; who was a
world unto himself when no World was made, and by his Word commands, by his
wisdom disposes, by his virtue protecteth, what thing soever is to be found in
the whole World. This GOD we cannot see, he is too bright for our eyes; nor
touch, he is too pure for our unclean hands; nor apprehend, he is above the
reach of our understanding; being infinite, incomprehensible and known how
great he is to himself alone. Shall I speak freely what I think? He that
conceives that he can comprehend the Majesty of God, does under value him, and
he who would not undervalue him, must profess he cannot comprehend him. Nor
need we be inquisitive to know his name, his name is GOD: there being no use of
proper names, but where a multitude is to be distinguished by their particular
appellations. GOD therefore being but one, has no name but GOD. And to this
truth I have the general consent of all men. For when the common people lift
their hands to Heaven, they then make mention but of one God only; using to
say, (as their occasions do require) that God is great, and that God is true,
and if God permit. Which whether it be the natural expression of the common
people, or the Confession of a Christian saying his Belief, it is hard to
guess.

This is the sum of that which was alleged by the Christian Advocates, in
defense of the Divine nature and power of God; and that this God was one only
Sovereign and commanding power, who governed and disposed of all things both in
Heaven and Earth. In which there is not any thing affirmed of God, which has
not been before delivered by the ancient Gentiles; whose judgments and opinions
in this particular I shall next present. And first beginning with Mercurius
surnamed Trismegistus, Lactantius tells us of him that he wrote many books, In
quibus Majestatem summi and singularis Dei asserit, in which he does assert the
Majesty of that one and only Supreme God: particularly that he is but one, and
being but one, has no other name then that of GOD Lactant. l. 1.6.
. (...). God, says he, is but one, and being but one, he wants no name, but is
simply nameless, or Anonymus: the very same with that of Minutius Felix, nec
nomen Dei quaeras, nomen est Deus Minut. Fell. in Octavio.
: which is thus seconded by Lactantius, who had seen his Dialogue, Deo quia
semper unus est proprium nomen est DEVS. And there is very good reason for it
too, I mean why God should have no known name to call him by, as had the Idols
of the Heathens; because there is no use of a proper name, Nisi ubi discrimen
exegerit multitudo, but where distinction must be made between one and another:
which cannot be where there is but one, and never shall be more then one of
that rank and order. But Mercurius goes further yet, and does not only testify
that God is one, but that he is the Radix or root of all things, without which
nothing was made; that he is infinitely good, (...), even goodness it self, and
that the name of Good belongs unto none but him Mereur. Trism. in Paeman. c.
2, 3, 4, etc. El in Asclep. c. 6, 7.
: and though he gives the name of GOD to the Heathen deities, yet he confesses
in plain terms, that they are so entitled honoris causa, and not naturae
ratione. Descend we next unto the Sibyls, and we shall find one of them saying
thus of God, (...), that there is but one God, and that he only is Almighty,
and unbegotten Lactant. l. 1.6.
: another of them saying thus in the Person of GOD, (...), i. e. I am the one
and only God, and besides me there is none other. Pass we on next unto the
gods, as the Gentiles called them, and we shall hear Apollo being asked the
question, what was to be conceived of God, to have returned an answer in one
and twenty verses, whereof these are three, as they stand cited by Lactantius
Id. cap. 7.
: (...),
(...),
(...), etc.


In English thus; Begotten of himself, without a Mother,
Not taught of any, nameless, 'cause no other;
Unmoved with worldly things, and one that dwells
In brightest Heaven, is God that all excels.
In the translation of which verses, I have took liberty to render (...), in
brightest Heaven, because I think that either Apollo did allude to the Coelum
Empyraeum, used among Philosophers, or that the old Philosophers took that
term from him. But whether it were so or no, certain I am that Lactantius does
conclude from hence upon very good grounds, that this answer of Apollo can by
no means imaginable be applied to Jupiter, Qui and matrem habuerit and nomen,
who had both a Mother and a name, as he there observes; and therefore must be
meant of the living GOD. Whom when the Heathens call by the name of Jupiter,
Falluntur in nomine, sed de una potestate consentiunt, says Minutius Felix
Minut. Fell. in Octavio.
, though they are mistaken in the name of that Supreme God, yet they agree with
us in this, that he is but one. Proceed we forwards to the Poets, and Orpheus
the most ancient of them, and one who was Co-temporary with the GODS
themselves, as we read in Lactantius, l. 1. cap. 6. not only does affirm of him
that he was (...), or the first begotten, before whom none was, which could not
be affirmed of Jupiter the Son of Saturn, but that he existed of himself only,
and gave being to all things besides. (...), as it is cited amongst many of
his verses to this purpose by Clemens of Alexandria Clem. Alexand. in Pro^rept.
an old Christian writer. What other Poets say of God we shall see hereafter,
when we shall look upon him as the Maker of Heaven and Earth. In the mean time
conclude we this first rank of testimonies with that of Pythagoras, who was
both a Poet and Philosopher, who tells us of God, as I find him cited in the
works of Clemens, and other Writers of good credit, Deus unus est, Principium
omnium rerum, Animatio and motus universi, that there is but one God, the
beginning of all things, who animateth and gives motion to the whole World or
Universe.

In the next rank come the Philosophers or Sages of the Ancient Gentiles, who
speak no less divinely of this one God, then the Poets, or Sibylline Oracles
have done before. And in the first place we meet with Socrates, who by Apollo
himself was pronounced to be the wisest man of all the Grecians; but yet so
little a friend of his, or any of the rest of the Heathen gods, that he used
openly to deride them upon all occasions, and at the last was poisoned by
Decree of the Senate of Athens Laert. in vita Socrat.
, because he disallowed the multitude of gods whom the people worshipped,
endeavoring to bring them to the knowledge of the only God. Tertullian hereupon
does put this witty scorn on their great Apollo, for giving the testimony of
the wisest man of all Greece, to him who only of that Nation did deny him and
others of his rank and quality to be Gods indeed. O Apollinem inconsideratum
(says he)! sapientiae testimonium reddidit ei viro, qui Deos esse negabat
Tertul. in Apolog. c. 46.
. And though it grew into a byword in the following times, when any man
thought otherwise of their many gods, then the vulgar did, (...), that Socrates
his cup was ready for him Laert. in vita Socr.
; yet Plato who was his scholar did not only follow him in the same opinion,
but publicly maintained it in his Books and Writings. Nay he was so resolved
to make good this point, that he gave it out for a rule to his special friends,
how they should know whether the business which he writ to them about, were
seriously proposed or not. Cum serio, ordior Epistolam ab uno Deo; cum secus, a
pluribus Plato in Epist. 13. ad Dionys.
; when I intend the matter seriously, I then begin my letters in the name of
the one God only; when otherwise, in the names of many. And as his rule was,
such was his Divinity or Theology also: calling the true God by the name of
(...), which may be rightly Englished Being or existing; and is the name by
which the LORD does call himself in the holy Scriptures Exodus 3.14.
; but for the Idol-gods he affirms of them, that they were (...), things which
in very deed had no being at all; which is the very same with that of St.
Paul, saying, Idolum nihil est 1 Cor. 8.4.
, that an Idol is nothing. In many places of his Writings, he speaks of God, as
solely existing in himself, the beginning and the end of all things, by whom,
and for whom they were first created: though otherwhiles, especially in his
Books de Legibus, which were for every vulgar eye, he seems to be inclinable to
the vulgar error. The Platonists in general speak as divinely of this one God,
as their Master did, Iamblicus affirming that there was one cause of all
things, and one God the Lord of all things Iamblith de myster. c. 12. etc.
, whom he calls (...), both self-sufficient, and self-being; PROCLVS, that
this one God was the Supreme King, who subsisting in and of himself, gave life,
and beauty, and perfection to all things besides Proclus de Theolog. Platon.
; Simplicuis, that he was that one and only good from whence all goodness did
proceed, that unity from which all things took their Original, the God of gods,
and the cause of causes Simplicius in Ariani Epictet.
; Plotinus, that there is one beginning of all things, of self-sufficiency,
communicating life and being to all creatures else, and that those others are
no otherwise happy, then by contemplating that intelligible light which shines
so gloriously in the Godhead, as the Moon borrows all her light from the
beams of the Sun Plotin. Enn. 1. l. 8. and Enn. 9.
. Porphyrius, the scholar of this Plotinus, defining GOD to be both every
where, and no where, filling all places whatsoever, but contained in none, and
that from him alone do all things proceed, which were, and are, and are to come
Porphyr. de Abstinent. l. 2.
. Finally, not to wander through more particular, this seems to have been the
general Tenet of all Plato's followers: Quod (...) and (...), ejusdem erant
insaniae, that Atheism and the worshipping of many gods, were of equal madness.

Proceed we next unto the Peripateticks, and their Master Aristotle, who being
loath to seem beholding to his Master Plato, did purposely run cross to him in
many things, which otherwise his own excellent judgment would have gladly
followed. And yet though elsewhere a defender of their many gods, yet in his
Books of Metaphysics, and in that de Mundo, he does not only reduce all motion
unto one first mover, but does expressly say of God, that the World and the
whole course of Nature is preserved by him Aristot. de Mundo.
, that he gives motion to the Sun and Moon, poiseth the Earth on her Basis, and
sustaineth all things. And finally it is said of him, that at the time of his
death he brake out into this divine expression, Ens entium miserere mei, that
is to say, O thou eternal Being from whom all things exist, have mercy upon
me. So many principles there are in his works and writings, which may conduct a
man to the knowledge of GOD, and so divinely does he speak of the Heavenly
powers, that the Divines of Colen have writ a Book (but on what grounds and
warrants, it concerns them to look) entitled De Salute Aristotelis, of the
Salvation of Aristotle. Theophrastus that great Doctor in Physic, but by Sect
a Peripatetick, maintains that there is one only Divine principle, or
beginning from whence all things exist Theophr. in Metaph and de Saporibus.
, one only God who out of nothing has created all things. And Alexander
Aphrodiseus of the same Sect also, composed a whole Tract of the divine
Providence of God, in which he shows that there is one God who rules all
things, and is of power to do whatsoever he pleases Alex. Aphrodis. de
Provident.
. Let us next look upon the Academicks, whose common guise it was to leave all
things doubtful, Qui omnia facerent incerta, as Lactantius has it Lactant. l.
1. c. 6.
, and we shall find it said by Tully, who was one of that Sect, Nihil est
praestantius Deo, etc. Cicero de not. doerum, l. 2.
that there was nothing more excellent then God; and therefore that by him the
whole world was governed, who neither did subject himself unto FATE or Nature.
And Plutarch, though much given to Fables, does advise expressly, that we
worship not the Heavens, nor the heavenly bodies, which are but as the Myrours
or Looking-glasses in which we may behold his most wonderful Art who made and
beautified the world Plutarch. de Isid. and Osiride.
: Quid enim aliud est Mundus quam Templum ejus? for what else is the World then
the Temple of God? Last of all for the ancient Stoics, Zeno is said by
Aristotle to have taught of God, that there was only one, or none; and that
this one God was Optimus and Maximus, both the best and greatest. And it is
registered for the reverend say of old Cleanthes, O Deus rege me per eam causam,
per quam omnia temperas and moderaris, Rule me O God by that prime cause
whereby thou do dispose of all things. Which Cause they called by the name of
Fate or destiny. Epictetus, as of later time, so he speaks more plainly, whose
dictates are much made of by the old Platonicks, Proclus, Simplicius, and the
rest. Discendum ante omnia unum esse Deum, etc. Epictet. in Arrian.
It is to be learned (says he) in the first place, that there is but one God,
who does govern all things; and whatsoever we do, or say, or think, is not hid
from him. In Seneca, whom Lactantius calls Stoicorum acerrimum Lactant. l. 1.
c. 5.
, the most resolute Stoic of the Romans, there are so many several passages
to prove this point, that he who would produce them all must transcribe him
wholly. For an essay therefore take that which Lactantius cites, where he
calls God, Deorum omnium Deum, or the God of gods, the Governor of Heaven
and Earth, by whom those other Deities whom the people worshipped, were many
times suspended and restrained from action.

Hitherto have we traced the footsteps of the ancient Poets, and all the
several sects of the old Philosophers, and found a general consent amongst them
that there is a GOD, and that there is but one God, who takes care of all
things: Whom, if they call sometimes by the name of Fate or Providence, or
Nature, as sometimes they do, we must still understand them of that one God in
whom we Christians do profess that we do believe. Or, if they sometimes call
him by the name of Jupiter, we are to understand the same one God, in whom the
rest are comprehended as subservient Instruments. So witnessed the most learned
Varro, affirming, as I find him cited by St. Augustine August. de Cinit. l. 4.
c. 9.
, that though the Doctors of the Gentiles did use sometimes to speak of the
Gods and Goddesses* yet were they all contained in Jupiter, whose powers and
Ministers they were. And thereupon the Father builds this resolution, that
our Ancestors were not either so blind or simple, as to think that Bacchus,
Ceres, and the rest were Gods indeed Id. ibid. l. 4.24.
: but rather the gifts and ministrations ( Munera and functiones, as his words
are there) of that one only God whom they did believe in. And this persuasion
was so naturally implanted in the minds of all men, that in their dangers, and
necessities, and more sober thoughts they still made mention of one God, and
but one alone. What was observed to this purpose by Minutius Felix is declared
before. The same we find to be observed by Tertullian also. Anima licet diis
falsis ancillata, etc. The soul, says he, though servilely obsequious unto
these false Gods, yet upon better thoughts, as if awakened newly from sleep and
wine, it speaks of one God only in the singular number: it being the common
voice of all, to say, If God grant me this; or looking on him as their judge to
pronounce these words, God sees, and I refer it unto God, and God shall acquit
me. And saying this, says he, they lift their eyes up toward heaven, not
toward the Capitol Tertul. Apol.
. Novit enim sedem Dei vivi, as knowing Heaven to be the seat of the living
God. The like Lactantius tells us too, Cum jurant, cum optant, etc. When they
swear, or wish, or render thanks, or that the noise of war do affright their
ears, they neither do then speak of JOVE, or their many Gods, but of God alone
Lactant. l. 2.1.
; though after they have escaped the danger, ad Deorum Templa concurrunt, they
run unto the Temples of their Idol-gods to offer sacrifice. May we not say of
these and the like expressions as Tertullian does, that they are testimonia
Animae naturaliter Christianae, the testimonies of a Soul that is naturally
inclined to the Christian faith; or the Confession of a Christian saying his
Belief, as Minutius phrased it? If now after these testimonies of the learned
Gentiles, and the general acknowledgement of all sorts of people; we should
proceed to prove by reason, or in way of argument, that there is one God, and
but one alone: it might be thought an endless and impertinent work,
considering^ that there is no herb so ordinary, nor fly so small, nor worm or
creature so contemptible, but is an argument sufficient to evince a Godhead.
Minutius has so fully satisfied in that particular, that they which are more
copious in pursuit thereof, are but as Commentators, and he the Text;
discoursing on his plain song with a fuller descant. And therefore I shall
supersede from that way of discourse, resting content with that discovery and
progress we have made herein, out of the ancient Poets, and the old
Philosophers, and the concurrent testimony of all sorts of people; who lived in
those dark times of ignorance, when as the multitude of Gods was in most
esteem, and the true worship of this one God, confined, and as it were
imprisoned in the House of Israel.

This therefore being proved or supposed as granted, that there is one GOD, and
but one alone; the next particular enquiry which we are to make, must be to
find out what GOD is, how we are to define him. A point esteemed so difficult
in the former times, that Simonides being asked by Hiero of Syracusa, Quid Deus
esset Cicero de Nature. Deor.
, what God was; desired first one day to consider of it, afterward two, then
four, and still more and more. Of which being asked the reason, he returned
this answer, that the more he did consider of it, the more he was unable to
determine in it. Both Xenophon and Plato did conceive so also, as Plotinus
witnesses, who has recorded this for a speech of theirs, Deum pervestigare
nec possibile etc. that it was neither possible nor lawful to enquire too far
into the nature of GOD. And yet they ventured many of them, upon such
particulars, as though they do not make amongst them an exact definition; yet
they describe him by those Attributes, as show they were not ignorant of his
heavenly nature. Their judgments in this point collected by Minutius Felix,
take together here Minut. Fell.
; Sit Thales Milesius omnium primus, etc. Let us begin, says he, with Thales,
who though he make water the first cause of all things yet makes he God to be
that universal Soul who out of that created all things; the mystery of water
and the Spirit being more sublime, then to be understood by the sons of men.
Anaximenes, and after him Apolloniates Diogenes make him to be the Air, because
both infinite and immensurable. Anaxagoras his opinion was, that GOD was an
infinite understanding; Pythagoras, that he was that Soul, which dwelling in
the whole frame of Nature, did give life to all things. Xenophanes did use to
say, that every infinite with understanding, might be called GOD. Antisthenes,
that there were many popular Gods, and but one natural one, or one God of
Nature; Speusippus, that God was that natural and animal power, by which all
things are governed* Democritus, though the first inventor of that absurd
opinion, that the World was made of several Atoms, joined by chance together;
yet for the most part he puts Nature in the place of GOD, as also did Straton
and the Epicureans: And Aristotle though inconstant and of many minds, yet
other whiles he makes him be that Soul or understanding which presides over the
World. Heraclides Ponticus will have him also to be a Divine soul or
understanding; and thereunto inclined Theophrastus, Cleanthes, Zeno, and
Chrysippus; save that they sometimes call him by the name of Fate. Xenophon the
Disciple of Socrates, was of opinion that the form of the true GOD could not be
seen by any man, and therefore was not to be sought or inquired into: Aristo
Chius, that he was not to be comprehended: both of them guessing at the Majesty
of Almighty God, by a despair of understanding what indeed he was. And Plato
finally not only does affirm of God, that he is the Parent of the World, the
Maker of all Celestial and Terrestrial creatures; but by reason of his eminent
and incredible power, it was a difficult thing to find what he was, and having
found it an impossible matter to express it rightly. And of all these Minutius
notes, that they are Eadem fere quae nostra, the same almost with that which
was affirmed of GOD in the schools of CHRIST: Insomuch, says he, that one
might very justly think, that the modern Christians were Philosophers, or that
the old Philosophers had indeed been Christians. Lactantius also does affirm
that they did vail the same truth under diverse notions; and that whether they
called him Nature, Reason, Understanding, Fatal necessity, the Divine Law, or
in what phrase soever they did use to speak him; idem est quod anobis Deus
dicitur Lact. l. 1.5.
, it was the same with that which we (the followers of CHRIST) call GOD.

His nature being thus declared (as far as could be seen by the Eye of Reason)
proceed we next unto those Epithets or Adjuncts, whereby that nature is set
forth in the best of their Writers. Philolaus a scholar of Pythagoras has told
us of him, that he is singularis, immobilis, sui similis, that there is but one
God, the chief Lord of all, and that he is immovable, always like himself V.
Morn. de verit. Rel. Chr. c. 3.
: the Divine Plato, that God is good, and the Idea of all goodness, the Author
of whatsoever is good or beautiful, and the fountain of truth, that he is also
living and everlasting. (...), as I have somewhere found him cited. Aristotle
sometimes also does come home to this, in whom the attributes of (...),
immortal and eternal do eft-soones occur. By Orpheus it is said that he is
invisible, that he has his dwelling in the heavens, that he sits there in
(...), in a Golden Throne, and from thence does dart his thunders upon wicked
men. Phocylides has given us as much of him, as one verse can hold Phocyl. Car.
(...). There is one God, says he, most wise, most powerful, and most happy.
One of the Sibyls, heaps upon him the most glorious attributes, of being of
great Majesty, begotten by none, invisible, yet beholding all things: and
Apollo one of the Heathen Gods comes not short of her, saying of God that he
was begotten of himself, and taught of none, immovable, and of a name not to
be expressed. These two last passages we before cited out of Lactantius, but
then it was to prove that there was a GOD. And to these add that verse of the
same Apollo, which is elsewhere cited by Lactantius Lactant. l. 1. cap. 6, 7.
, (...), in which he calls him the immortal and eternal GOD, the unspeakable
Father. Lay all which has been said together, and we may gather out of all
this description of him (for to define him rightly is a thing impossible) that
GOD is an immortal and eternal Spirit, existing of himself, without any
beginning, invisible, incomprehensible, omnipotent, without change or passion,
by whose Almighty power all things were created; and by whose divine goodness
they are still preserved. What more then this is said by the Church of England,
the purest and most Orthodox of the daughters of Sion; which in her book of
Articles thus declares her self Art. 1. Of faith in the holy Trinity.
, that is to say, There is but one living and true God, everlasting, without
body, parts, or passions, of infinite power, wisdom and goodness; the Maker and
preserver of all things, both visible and invisible. What more has been
delivered by the Ancient Fathers, who had the light of Scripture to direct them
in it; then that which has been said by these learned Gentiles, upon no other
ground then the light of Reason? Which manifestly proves that both the Being
and the Nature of God, were points so naturally graffed in the souls of men,
that neither the ignorance of letters, nor the pride of wealth, nor the
continual fruition of sensual pleasures have hitherto been able to efface the
Characters and impressions of it, as before I said. And if a GOD and but one
only, he must be such as is described, or no GOD at all. But of the Attributes
and Acts of Almighty God, we shall speak more at large in the two next chapters.

In the mean time, by this Theology of the learned and more sober Gentiles we
may see sufficiently, that many of those who are counted Christians do fall
most infinitely short of them in the things of GOD. Of this kind were the
Anthropomorphitae, a sort of Heretics proceeding from one Andaeus, by birth a
Syrian, but living for the most part in Egypt, who miserably mistaking many
Texts of holy Scripture, conceived and taught Deum humana esse forma, eundemq
corporalia membra habere, that God was made of humane shape, and had the same
members as men have Niceph. Eccles. hist. l. 11. c. 14.
. Which though it was so gross a folly as would have been hissed out of all the
schools of Philosophy; yet found it such a plausible welcome with the Monks
of Egypt, that Theophilus the learned Patriarch of Alexandria was in danger to
be torn in pieces, because he had opposed them in their peevish courses
Nicephor. hist. Eccles. l. 13. c. 12.
. And of this sort also were the Manichees, who for fear they should make God
the Author of any thing which was not pleasing to them, as darkness, winter,
and whatsoever else did seem evil to them; would needs obtrude upon the world
two contrary principles, or two Supreme Powers, from one of which all that was
good, from the other all that was evil or so seemed to them, did proceed
originally Id. Eccles. hist. l. 6. c. 31.
. The first Author of this Heresy amongst the Christians, was one Manes, who
lived about the times of Aurelianus, Anno 213. by birth a Persian, to whom this
error was first propagated out of the Schools of Zoroaster, that great Eastern
Rabbin, who seeing but with half an eye into sacred matter, had fancied to
himself two Gods, both of equal power, one good, the other bad; the one called
Oromases, and the other Arimanius; the one the Author of good things, and the
other of evil. Other impieties he maintained, which made him execrable in the
eyes both of God and man; but I take notice of no other at this present time,
as being not within the compass of the work in hand. And even in this we need
not spend more time to confute his fellows, then to send him and his to school
to the old Philosophers; most of the which acknowledged but one principium, or
common principle, from whom all creatures in the world took their first
beginning: Or if they did allow of many principia, as many times they did unto
several things, which seemed to be of contrary nature unto one another; yet
they referred all in the last resort to one only principle or principium, in
which all others met as their common center Simplic. in Ariani Epictet.
. And this they called Principium omnia principia supereminens, the Principle
or principium which excelled all others, and finally resolved, ab hoc uno
principio omnia principia, that from this one principle or principium all the
rest descended. Had it been otherwise, what a continual conflict had there been
since the world began betwixt God and the Devil, betwixt the good principle and
the bad; betwixt the giver of blessings, and inflicter of punishments. For
being of contrary affections, Fieri posse ut aliquid diversum velit, it might
well be (or rather it could not otherwise be) that they should differently
declare themselves in some one particular Lactant. l. 1. c. 3.
, which must needs draw them into such remediless quarrels, as Homer fableth to
have been amongst the Gods of Gentiles, whiles some declared themselves for
Troy, and the rest against it. Mulciber in Trojam, pro Troja stabat Apollo,
said the Latin Poet. Which what a confusion and distraction it would bring on
the course of Nature, I leave to any man to judge which has common sense. But
Manes, as it seems, being a near neighbor to the Curdi, who dwelt close by
Persia, had entertained also their Religion* of whom it might be said, and that
not unfitly, as Lactantius does of some of the Greek Numens, se alios deos
colere ut prosint, alios ne noceant Lactant. l. 1.20.
, that they did worship some Gods for fear, and others for love; some out of
hope to receive benefits and blessings from them, others lest else they should
be troubled and afflicted by them. But Manes was his name, and madness was his
nature, (so the name does signify). And little less then mad are they, who for
fear they should be thought to savor of the Manicheans, have run themselves
upon the contrary extreme; in making God not the prime Author only of the evil
of punishment, but also of the evil of sin.

Nor can it but seem strange to a knowing man, who looks with an indifferent
eye upon the ancient Gentiles, and some present Christians; that either those
in times of such an Epidemical and general darkness, should have so much of the
Christian in them, or that they which live under the light of Christ's glorious
Gospel, should have so much in them of the Heathen. The learned Gentiles though
they did acknowledge but one Supreme power, whom they called Deum naturalem, or
the God of Nature: yet they allowed of many National and Topical Gods, as
before I told you out of Varro. And find we not that though the Pontificians
publicly profess but one Sovereign God, yet the poor Christians every where in
the Church of Rome are taught to place their confidence in more local Saints,
then ever Heathen-Rome did muster of its Topical Gods? Which whether it grew
upon that Church by the inundation of barbarous Nations; or that the late
converted Paynims, before their hearts were thoroughly cleansed from their
former leaven, did share the dignities and honors of the Heathen Gods amongst
such Saints and Martyrs as they most affected, I will not take upon me to
determine here. Certain I am, that a in very little time Rome-Christian came to
have more tutelarie Saints, and Patrons, and those of each Sex too, as their
fancies led them, then ever, Heathen Rome could show Gods and Goddesses: whose
Offices they have so divided amongst the Saints, that changing but the name,
and perhaps the dress, the superstition is as gross now, as amongst the
Gentiles. And this I speak, I am sure, on as good authority as any can be had
in the Church of England, even from the very words of the book of Homilies,
which does state it thus Homil. against Idolatry, part. 3.
: What I pray you be such Saints with us, to whom we attribute the defense of
certain Countries, spoiling GOD of his honor herein, but the Dii Tutelares of
the Gentile Idolaters; such as were Belus to the Babylonians; Osiris and Isis
to the Egyptians; Vulcan to the Lemnians. What are the Saints to whom the
safeguard of certain Cities is appointed, but the Dii Praesides of the
Gentiles; such as were Apollo at Delphos, Minerva at Athens, Juno at Carthage,
and the like. What be such Saints to whom contrary to the use of the Primitive
Church, Temples and Churches be erected, and Altars builded, but the Dii
Patroni; such as were Jupiter in the CAPITOL, and Diana in the Temple of
Ephesus. And where one Saint has Images in diverse places, and same Saint must
have diverse names, as had the Gods and Goddesses amongst the Gentiles. So that
when you hear of our Lady of Ipswich, our Lady of Walsingham, our Lady of
Wilsdon and such others; what can we think but that it is in imitation of the
Heathen Idolaters, who had their Venus Cypria, their Venus Paphia, and their
Venus Gnida; Dianae Agrotera, Diana Coryphea, and Diana Ephesia? Nor have they
only spoiled the true living God of his due honor in Temples, Cities,
Countries and Lands, by such inventions and devices as the Gentiles had done
before them; but the Sea and waters have as well special Saints with them, as
they had Gods with the Heathen; in whose places are come St. Christopher, St.
Clement, and our Lady specially, to whom the Ship-men sing Ave Maris stella.
Neither has the fire escaped their Idolatrous inventions: for in stead of
Vulcan and Vesta, they have placed St. Agatha, and make letters on her day to
quench fire withal. Every Profession and Artificer has his special Saint, as
a peculiar God: as for example, Scholars have St. Nicolas; Painters St. Luke;
neither lack Soldiers their Mars, or Lovers their Venus among Christians. Nay
all diseases also have their special Saints, as Gods to cure them: the Pockes
St. Roche, the Falling-evill Cornelius, the Toothache St. Apollin, etc. Neither
do beasts and cattle lack their Gods with us; for St. Loy is the Horse-leech,
St. Anthony the Swine-heard, and sic de cateris. Nor is this any studied
calumny, but so clear a truth, that it was never yet gainsaid by their greatest
Advocates; So much has Rome relapsed to her ancient Gentilism; revived again
so many of her Gods and Goddesses; that both the Jews and Infidels may have
cause to question, whether she does believe in one God alone; or that he only
is the Father Almighty whom the Creed here mentions. Of which and other of
the Attributes of Almighty God I am next to speak.

Articuli 1. pars 2da. (...). i. e. Patrem Omnipotentem. i. e. The Father
Almighty.
CHAP. III. Of the Essence and Attributes of God according to the holy
Scripture. The name of Father how applied unto God; of his Mercy, Justice, and
Omnipotency.
BY that which has been said in the former Chapter, out of the Monuments and
Records of the ancient Gentiles, it is apparent that they knew that there is a
GOD, that he was one only, and that this one God was an Eternal and Immortal
Spirit, existing of himself, without any beginning, invisible,
incomprehensible, omnipotent, without change or passion. In which description
we have all those Epithels summed up together out of the works and writings of
those reverend Sages; which Ruffinus, a good Christian Writer of the Primitive
times, has bestowed upon him in his Exposition of the Creed. Deum cum audis,
substantiam, intellige, sine initio, sine fine, simplicem, sine ulla
admixtione, invisibilem, incorpoream, ineffabilem inaestimabilem, in quo nihil
adjunctum, nihil creatum Ruffin in Symb.
. And though it could not be expected that the Gentiles guided only by the
light of Nature should have said so much: yet for the better knowledge of the
Essence, Attributes, and works of GOD we must not rest our selves contented
with that measure of light, which was discovered unto them, but make a more
exact search for it in the holy Scriptures. Concerning which there is a
memorable story of Justin Martyr, which he relates in his Dialogue with Trypho
the Jew. St. Paul has noted of the Greeks, that they seek after wisdom 1 Cor.
1.22.
; and never was the note more exactly true then in that particular. For being
inflamed with a desire of coming to a more perfect knowledge of the Nature of
GOD then had been generally attained by the common people; first he applied
himself unto the Stoics, who by the gravity and preciseness of their
conversation, did seem most likely to direct him. But this knowledge was not
with the Stoic, (...), nor could he learn much there of the nature of God
Justin Mart. in dial. cum Tryph.
. Next he betook himself to the Peripateticks, men most renowned for their
knowledge in the works of Nature, and the subtilties of disputation. But there
he profited less then before with the Stoics, the Peripateticks being more
irresolute, and speaking less divinely of the things of GOD, then any of the
other Sects of Philosophy. Then had he severally recourse unto the Pythagorean
and the Platonist, who were most eminent in those times for the contemplative
parts of learning, (...), and in the search of immaterials. But true Divinity
was not to be found in all the writings either of the Pythagoreans or the
Platonists; although these last did seem to come more near the truth, then
either the Peripatetick, or the Stoic. At last he was encountered by a Reverend
old man, a Christian Father, and was by him directed to the Book of God, writ
by the Prophets and Apostles, (...), as they which only knew the truth, and
which alone were able to unfold it rightly. The counsel of which Reverend man
he obeyed full gladly, and profited so well in the Schools of CHRIST, that he
became a Martyr for the Faith and Gospel. So we, if we would come unto the
perfect knowledge of GOD, though we may sport our selves, and refresh our
thoughts in the pleasant walks and prospects of Philosophy; must at the last
apply our selves to the holy Scriptures, where we shall be as far instructed in
the things of GOD, as he thinks fit to be communicated to the sons of men.

Now for our better method in the present search, we will consider GOD in those
names and Attributes, by which he has made known himself in his holy
Covenants. And first we meet with that of the Lord JEHOVAH; which the Greeks
usually called the Tetragrammaton, or the name consisting of four letters, (for
of no more it does consist in the Hebrew language) the Jews more properly nomen
appropriatum and gloriosum, the most peculiar and most glorious name of the
Lord our God, appropriated unto him in so strict a manner, that it was not
lawful to communicate it unto any Creature. By this name was he first pleased
to make himself known unto Moses, saying, that he had appeared to Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob by the name of God Almighty, but by this Name of Jehovah, he
had not made himself known unto them Exodus 6.3.
. And in the Prophet Esaias, thus, Ego sum Jehovah, illud est nomen meum, i. e. I
am Jehovah, that is my Name, and my glory will I not give unto another Esaias
42.8.
. Derived it is from Iah, an old Hebrew root, which signifies ens, existens,
Being or existing. And hereupon was that when Moses in the third of Exodus v.
14. asked the name of GOD, the Lord returned this answer to him, I Am that I
Am, and thus shall thou say unto the people, I AM has sent me unto you. And
hereupon it was that St. JOHN calls him in the Book of the Revelation, (...),
which is, which was, and which is to come Apoc. 1.4.
. Nor does it signify alone a self-existence, by which he has a Being in and
of himself, and does communicate a being unto all the creatures: but it is
used in Scripture for a name of power, by which he governs all those
creatures, on which he has been pleased to bestow a being. And therefore if
we mark it well, though he appear unto us by the name of God in the first of
Genesis, when the Creation was an Embryo, an imperfect work: yet he is no where
called by the name of the Lord Jehovah, till the Creation was accomplished, and
his works made perfect: The Fathers hereupon observe (and the note is
handsome) that the name of GOD is absolute, essential, and coeternal with the
Deity; but that of JEHOVAH, or the Lord, not used, except in reference to the
creature. And it is noted by Tertullian in his Book against Hermogenes, that in
the first of Genesis it is often said, Deus dixit, Deus vidit, and Deus fecit,
God said, and God saw, and God created. But that he was not called the Lord, by
the name of JEHOVAH, till the second Chapter, when he had finished all his
works, the Heaven and Earth, and all things in the same contained, and that
there was some creature framed on which to exercise his Power and Supreme
command. Ex quo creata sunt in quae potestas ejus ageret ex eo factus est and
dictus DOMINVS Tertul. adve s. Hermog.
, (for by the word Dominus do the Latins render the name JEHOVAH, as the
Greeks by (...)) as he tells us there. In this regard, if possible there had
been no other reason, it was a name or Attribute (call it which we will) which
was not fit to be communicated unto any creatures, as many other of his names
and Attributes have used to be. And this the Jews so stood on in their later
times of that State, that they would by no means give it to an earthly Prince:
Josephus the Historian Joseph. Antiqu. Iudaie. l. 2. c. 18.
telling us of some amongst them, whom no extremity of torment could enforce to
confer this title on any of the Roman Emperors, though at that time they had
their Country in subjection, and did Lord it over them. Had they stayed here,
it had been well. No body could have grudged or murmurred, that GOD should have
a name peculiar to himself alone, or that his name should not be mentioned
otherwise then with fear and reverence. But afterward it gave occasion to such
superstitions, as made them subject to the scorn and censure of all other
people; the use of that most sacred Name being forbad at all times upon pain of
death: for fear ^orsooth, Ne quotidiano usu vilesceret Buxdorfius in Lexic.
Hebr.
, lest the promiscuous use thereof should bring it into disesteem amongst the
Vulgar. The very same reason, if you mark it, for which the Massing-Priest in
the Church of Rome is bound to speak the words of Consecration in so low a
voice, that the next stander by cannot hear a syllable. Ne se. vilescerent
sacrosancta verba Innocent. ^. de Sacro Alt* mist. l. 3. cap. 1.
, lest they should grow into contempt with the common people.

The second name which does occur of GOD in the holy Scripture (for of Elijah
which proceeds from the same root, I forbear to speak) is that of Eloah in
the singular, but most frequently that of Elohim in the plural number. It
sigfieth the mighty Judges, and is derived from Alah, which is to swear:
because that in all weighty causes, when necessity requires an Oath to find
out the truth, we are to swear only by the name of God, who is the righteous
Judge both of Heaven and Earth. For the most part it is rendered by the English
GOD, and is first used by Moses in the first words of Genesis, Genesis 1.1.
Bereshith bara Elohim, says the Hebrew Text, In principio creavit Deus, says
the Vulgar Latin; in the beginning God created, says the Modern English.
Where Elohim, a Nown of the plural number, is joined with Bara, being a Verb of
the singular number, to signify the Mystery of the glorious Trinity, as many
of our late Divines have been pleased to note: though neither any of the old
Translations which have been formerly in use in the Christian Church, did take
notice of it; nor are constructions of that kind such strangers in the Hebrew
tongue (as other learned men have noted) as that so high a mystery of the
Christian faith should have no better grounds to stand on then so weak a
Criticism. This name is generally rendered in Greek by (...), (whence the Latin
Deus) and in English, GOD: and is not so peculiar to the heavenly Majesty, as
not to be communicated sometimes to the creature also. For thus the Lord to
Moses in the Book of Exodus, Ego constitui te Deum Pharaonis (the word is
Elohim in the Hebrew) I have made thee a God unto Pharaoh Exodus 7.1.
, that is to say, I have made thee as a God unto him, to be the internuncio or
Ambassador betwixt me and him. And in this sense it is applyable also unto
Kings and Princes; as, Ego dixi, Dii estis, I have said, ye are Gods, Psalm.
82. because they do participate of his Supreme Power, and are his Substitutes
and Vicegerents here upon the Earth: in which respect they are called
Potestates, Powers, in the very Abstract. The Powers that be (says the
Apostle) are ordained of GOD Romans 13.1.
. And for the Greek word (...), (whence the Latin Deus) there are given us
three Originations of it, all serviceable to set forth the nature of the
glorious Godhead. For first it is derived (...), which signifies to run,
because of that swift motion which he seems to have, by being present in all
places: those which conceived not the miracle of his Omnipresence, conjecturing
at him by the swiftness and agility of motion. According unto that of Virgil
Virgil. Georg. lib. 4.
, -- Deum ire per omnes
Terrasq tractusque maris, Coelumque profundum:
The very same with that of David, If I climb up into Heaven, thou art there,
if I go down into Hell, thou art there also Psa. 139.8.
. A thing objected by Cecilius against the Christians, who had been well enough
contented if they had only given him a Supreme direction over all wordly
affairs: Sed quod loc is omnibus inter erret Minut. Fell.
, but that he should be present in all places also, that was conceived to be
too great a prejudice to those many Gods whom the Gentiles worshipped and shut
up in their several Temples. But of this more anon in a place more proper. The
second Etymon of (...), is (...), which is to see, according to another passage
of the Prophet Jeremy, Ierem. 3.24.
Can any man hide himself in secret places, so that I shall not see him, says
the Lord Ibid. v. 7.
? In this respect the good old Father Irenaeus, has affirmed of God, that he
is totus oculus, totum lumen, all eye, all light: and Orpheus an old Heathen
Poet tells us also of him, that though he be invisible, yet he sees all things.
(...), as Clemens cites him in his Protrepticon, or Exhortation. The third and
last is (...), to inflame or kindle, because that by the virtue of his heavenly
power, he does inflame our souls with the fire of zeal, and kindle a right
spirit within us; Est deus in nobis, agitante calescimus illo Ovid. de Fast.
1.6.
, as in another case said the Heathen Poet.

But leaving these Grammatical observations on the name of GOD, pass we on
forwards to those other titles, by which he is presented to us in the holy
Scripture, which are El, Helion, and Adonai. Of these the first is El, and
signifies as much as the strong God: GOD being not only strong in his own
Essence, but giving strength and fortitude to all the creatures, according to
their several natures. By this name Christ invoketh the assistance of his
heavenly Father, saying, Eli, Eli Mat. 27.46.
, (or Eloi, Eloi Mar. 15.34.
in the Syriack) My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? and by the same is
called himself in the Prophet El Gibber, or the strong and most mighty GOD,
Esa. 9.6. The next is Helion the most high, Altissimus; a name ascribed to God
in both the Testaments, Pay thy vows to the most High, Psalm. 50.14. the power
of the most High, Luke 50.32. the Son of the most High, Luke 8.28. Most high,
not only in respect of his habitation, because he has his dwelling on High,
Psalm. 113. (in which respect the Heathen Poets said of their Idol-Iupiter,
(...) Hesiod. in. Noct. and dies.
, that he dwells in the Highest Heavens) but in relation to his Essence, by
which he infinitely exceeds all creatures, both in Heaven and Earth, who in
comparison of him are but toys and trifles. So little reason have we to be
proud of our earthly fortunes, or of our natural parts and graces; that rather
looking whence we are, made of dust and ashes, the thought thereof should
humble us in the sight of God, and make us have recourse to him to obtain
perfection. The last we meet with in this kind, (for still we are upon those
Names or Attributes which are both absolute in God, and Essential to him) is
that of Adonai, or my Lord. A name, as it is noted in the Mazoreth, found of it
self no more then 134 times in all the Old Testament, but substituted by the
Modern superstitious Jews, in the place of Jehovah, as often as they meet that
word in the course of the Text. A name derived by the learned from the Hebrew
Eden, which signifies a Basis or foundation, on which the whole building does
rely: and therefore very fitly chosen to express his nature, who bears up
the pillars of the Earth, as the Psalmist has it; by whom the whole fabric of
the Universe is preserved in being. These are the names or Titles of Almighty
God, by which he has made known himself to his chosen servants, all of them
absolutely his, without relation to the creature, and such as rather serve to
declare his Essence, then set forth his office: for Deus est nomen naturae non
officii, as St. Ambrose has it. All of them laid together teach us this of
GOD, that he is of a self-existing, of infinite power, of incomprehensible
strength, and unspeakable Majesty: and that as he has all this of himself
alone, so like an Universal Parent, he communicates a being to all the
creatures, and does endue them with so much of his power and wisdom, of his
strength and Majesty, as shall suffice to every one in their several places.
Not that the creature does partake of his heavenly Essence, we conceive not so;
but that he is the principal and Original cause by which all creatures have an
Essence: non ut de essentia ejus, sed ut causa essendi Aquin. in Summa Theol.
, as Aquinas stateth it: and that having thus received an essence or a being
from him, we receive also out of his abundance all additaments of what sort
soever, which are expedient for us in our several callings. For out of his
fullness we have all received Joh. 7.16.
, as we are told by the Apostle.

Now by the knowledge of these names, or rather of the nature of God
represented in them, we come unto the knowledge of those real attributes,
which are so proper and peculiar to the Lord our God, as not to be communicated
unto any creature; of which we must first speak a little, in the way of
groundwork or foundation, before we can behold him as the Father Almighty: And
these are principally two, simplicitas, and infinitas. Simplicitas, or the
simpleness of God, if we may so call it, is that whereby he is void of all
composition, either of matter and form, or parts and accidents compounding,
whether they be sensible or intelligible only. For whereas all corporal
substances are compounded of matter and form, and the angelical natures of a
potentia and an actus, as the Schoolmen phrase it: GOD being incorporeal has
no matter of form; and being wholly existing, all at once together, must be
purus actus, not having any thing in potentia, which at first he had not. For
if GOD were compounded of matter and form, there must be some pre-existent
matter out of which he was made; and if he be compounded of potentia and actus,
he must and may be somewhat which at first he was not: both which are so
destructive of the nature of GOD, as being once admitted, he is God no longer.
And therefore in my mind the judicious Scaliger has very well determined of
it, in these following words, Scalig. Exercit. 6. Sect. 2.
Intelligentiae habent aliquid simile materiae, aliquid simile formae. Solus
Deus simplex est, in quo nihil in potentia, sed in actu omnia; imo ipse purus,
primus, medius, ultimus actus: that is to say, The Angels or Intelligences have
something proportionable unto matter, and something which resembles form. God
only is a simple uncompounded essence, in whom there is nothing in potentia,
but all things in act: he being a pure act himself, and the first,
intervenient, and last act of all. God then is in the first place a simple, or
uncompounded essence, without parts or accidents: his attributes not differing
from his essence at all, but being of his very essence, (for in Deo non est
nisi Deus, as the old rule was); nor differing essentially from one another,
but only in regard of our weak understanding: which being not able to know or
comprehend the earthly things by one single act, must of necessity have many
distinct acts and notions, to comprehend the nature of the incomprehensible
God. And being such a simple uncompounded essence without parts or accidents,
he is both great without quantity, and good without quality, merciful without
passion, every where without motion, in heaven without a place or ubi.

The second Attribute of God which before we spoke of, is that of
Infiniteness, by which God is absolutely and actually infinite in his acts and
essence. And this infinite or infiniteness, is defined to be that without
which nothing is or can be. Infinitum est extra quod nihil est, said the old
Philosophers: so that it is impossible for any thing to be without or besides
that, before or after that, in which all possible being is comprehended. And
this infinity does branch it self into these four species, that is to say,
Infinity in regard of duration, which we call Eternity. 2. Infinity in regard
of dimensions, which we call Immensity. 3. Infinity in regard of
comprehensions, by which we say that God is of infinite wisdom, and of
infinite knowledge. And last of all, Infinity in regard of power, which we call
Omnipotence. And first, Infinity in regard of duration, which we call Eternity,
is that attribute of the Lord our God, by which he is without beginning or end;
without beginning of days, or end of time; without succession or precession,
if I may so speak. Or else we may define it with Boethius to be the entire or
total possession of interminable life, all at once together: or otherwise
thus, to be a circular duration, whose instants are always, and whose
terminations of extremities never were nor shall be, which are the words of
Trismegistus with some little change. In this respect God took unto himself
this name, I AM, or I AM THAT I AM: all time being present unto God, as is also
that infinity which was before the beginning of time, and shall be also as it
is, when time it self shall be no more. In this regard he tells us also of
himself, that he is A and O, Apocal. 21.6. c. 1.4.
or the first or the last, which was, and is, and is to come; still the same
for ever. And finally in this respect it is said by Tertullian, Ante omnia Deus
erat solus, et erat sibi tempus, mundus et omnia, i. e. Tertul. advers. Praxeam.
Before all things were, God was, and he was also to himself, time, the world,
and all things. He was alone, quia nil aliud extrinsecus praeter illum, because
there was not any thing without or besides him: and yet not then alone, if we
weigh it rightly, Habebat enim Deum quod habebat in semet ipso, etc. for he had
always with him that divine wisdom, which he had always in himself. And so
the old Philosophers are to be expoonded when they say of God, that he is
(...), immortal and eternal, or everlasting; that is to say, not only a part
post, as Angels and the souls of men are called mortal; but also a part ante,
which none was but God. Which makes up that conclusion of the royal Psalmist,
Before the mountains were brought forth, or ever the earth and the world were
made, thou art God from everlasting, and world without end Psalm. 90.2.
; world without end a part post, from everlasting also, a part ante, but in
both eternal.

Of the same nature is that infiniteness in Almighty God in respect of
dimensions, which by a name distinct may be called immensity, whereby he is of
infinite extension, not circumscribed with any bounds, filling all places
whatsoever, but contained of none. Of this immensity or unmeasurableness does
the Prophet speak, saying, Who has measured the waters in the hollow of his
Hand, and meted out heaven with his span, and comprehended the dust of the
earth in his three fingers, (after such a manner as men take up a dust or sand)
and weighed the mountains with scales, and the hills in a balance Isa. 40.12,
15, 17.
. Who takes up the Isles as a very little thing, before whom all nations are
as nothing, as the drop of a bucket. This by an other name, and in other
respects is also called Vbiquity, or Omnipresence, by which our GOD is present
in all places every where, and confined to none: but as a sphere (as very
understandingly said Trismegistus) whose Center is every where, his
circumference no where. In reference to this we find it said by Moses of the
Lord our God, that he is God in Heaven above, and in the earth below Deuteronomy. 4 39.
. The very same with that of the royal Psalmist, If I climb up into Heaven,
thou art there; if I go down into Hell, thou art there also Ps. 139.8.
. And so we have it both in Moses and in the Psalms. In reference unto this it
is said by Jeremy, Do not I fill Heaven and Earth, says the Lord? Ier. 23.7,
24,
And, Can any man hide himself in secret places that I shall not see him? And
so we have it in the Law and the Prophets too. And though the Gentiles did
exceedingly stomach at the primitive Christians, for giving this Vbiquity or
Omnipresence to their Lord and God, Discurrentem scilicet illum volunt et
ubique praesentem Minut. Fell.
, as Cecilius in the Dialogue did object against them: yet did the Fathers of
all times stand most stoutly to it, and would not yield a jot to their
importunities. For thus says the renowned Augustine, Deus meus ubique
praesens, ubique totus, nusquam inclusus August de civit. dei. l. 1.29
, My GOD says he, is in all places present, in all places wholly, but so in
all places as contained in none. More fully Gregory the great, Deus est intra
omnia non inclusus, extra omnia non exclusus, supra omnia non elatus; i. e.
Gregor. in Psalm. 139.
GOD is in all things, but not enclosed; he is without all things, but not
excluded; he is above all things, but not lifted up; and finally beneath all
things, and yet not depressed. And though it may be truly said of the sons of
men, Qui ubique est, nusquam est; he that is every where, is no where: that is
to say, he that ingageth himself in every business, will go through with none:
yet so it cannot be affirmed of the God of Heaven, unless perhaps it be in a
qualifyed sense, interpreting nusquam esse, by non includi. And in that sense
is that saying of St. Bernard exactly verifyed, Nusquam est, et ubique est: i.
e. He is no where, because no place either real or imaginary can comprehend or
contain him; and he is every where, because no body, no space, nor spiritual
substance can exclude his presence.

Proceed we next to the third species or kind of infiniteness, which we called
the infinity of comprehensions, by which all things whatsoever, as well things
future, as things past, are alike present to him, and for ever before him; by
which he knows things that are not as if they were, and does accordingly
decree and determine of them, with as much perspicacity of wisdom, and
infallibility of judgment, as if they were actually before his eyes. For first,
God being of an infinite knowledge, most perfectly and simply knows all
things in himself, which ever were, or shall be in the times to come: and then
being of an infinite wisdom to dispose of all things, as may conduce most to
his honor and glory; has either given them bounds which they shall not pass,
or left them a dispositive power of their own occasions; putting upon things
necessary the law of necessity, and leaving things contingent to the lot of
contingency. The due consideration of which weighty point, brought the Apostle
to cry out, (...), O the depth of the riches of the wisdom and knowledge of
God Romans 11.33.
! Which two, though two distinct acts and attributes in our apprehension, yet
differ not in GOD, as before was said, nor perhaps very much in themselves at
all. For wisdom is but the excellency of knowledge, consisting either in the
dignity or usefulness of the matter known, or the more perfect manner of
discerning what they truly are. And of this wisdom or more useful kind of
knowledge, there are these two offices, the one steadfastly to propose a right
end; the other to present a right choice of means for effecting thereof. But
being it is equally consonant to Gods infinite wisdom, and not a whit
derogatory to his infinite power, that some things should be as truly
contingent, as other are really and truly necessary: therefore has God been
pleased as well to decree contingency, as to decree or fore-determine of
necessity. Hereupon it will follow by good rules of Logic, that though there
be an immutability in the counsails of God, arising from the infiniteness of
his knowledge and wisdom; yet that there are some things which might not have
been, and that some things are not which yet might have been, or might have
been far otherwise then now they are. For neither is the prescience or
foreknowledge of almighty God (for by that name his infinite knowledge may be
styled) the necessary and adaequate cause that things shall fall out as they
do, not otherwise; but rather because things shall in time so fall out,
therefore GOD fore-knowes them. Nor does his infinite wisdom in pursuit of the
means conducing to the end proposed, so fetter and entangle his most infinite
power, but that he is still liberum agens, and is at liberty to produce his end
by things plainly contingent, as well as by such whereon he has imposed an
everlasting necessity; or to suspend the execution of some former edict,
according as he sees just occasion for it, which liberty in the holy one of
Israel is an high perfection. For as his eternal knowledge of all things does
not make all things which he knows to be eternal: so neither does the
immutability of his decrees make every thing which he decrees to be immutable;
there being many temporal and mutable things which he eternally both knew and
decreed accordingly. So that for GOD to alter his proceedings with men,
according as they stand or fall in the acts of piety, now punishing where he
lately rewarded, and presently rewarding where before he punished, argues no
mutability in the counsails of GOD, but rather an unmovable constancy to the
immutable rule of justice, which being always one and the same without
variation, must needs afford different measure unto different deserts, and sit
contrary dispositions with contrary recompenses. And on the other side to make
this conclusion, that because God fore-knoweth by his infinite knowledge, and
by his infinite wisdom has decreed of all things even from all eternity;
therefore it is as impossible for any thing to be otherwise then it is, or
otherwise then it has been or will be hereafter, as to recall again that which
is past already: were either to make GOD an impertinent agent in the continual
governance of humane affairs, or that he has nothing else to do but to behold
the issue of his former counsails. For plainly they which so conceive of the
counsails of GOD, that all things are decreed and predetermined by him, even to
the taking up of a straw; (which was Cartwrights Ap. Hook. Eccl. Polit.
phrase) although they have not said it in terms express, yet do they
necessarily infer or involve thus much: That God by his eternal and immutable
decrees did set the whole course of nature going with an irresistible and
untractable swindge; and does since only look upon it with an awful eye, as
Masters sometimes watch their servants, to see how willingly or unwillingly,
how carefully or negligenly they attend his business. Which how derogatory it
is to the truth of the Gospel, those words of CHRIST, Et pater adhuc operatur
Joh. 5.17.
, i. e. I work and my Father also works, do declare sufficiently: it being
evident by that Text, if considered rightly, that there is altogether as much
need of Gods power and wisdom, to manage and direct the affairs of the world,
as at first to make it.

Thus are we come at last to the fourth and last species of Infinity, which is
that of Power or of Omnipotence, and therein to behold GOD as the Father
Almighty: the Father, because the fountain and root of being; and the Almighty
Father too, because that being in himself an eternal being, he had withal a
power invested or inherent in him, to give a being to the Creatures, and to
make all things out of nothing, which needs must be the act of a power most
mighty. To this, the former part of this Chapter served but as a preamble, or a
necessary introduction to bring us to the knowledge of this part of the
Article, viz. That GOD is not only a Father, but a Father Almighty: which could
not otherwise have been fully cleared and made known unto us, then by a serious
looking on him in his names and attributes. For finding in the name JEHOVAH
that he is existing of himself, and that from him all things that are receive
their being; his mighty strength in the name of El, his eminent power in that
of Adonai or Lord; that he is God most high in Helion, and a Judge in Elohim:
and then concluding out of these, that being such, he must be of an
uncompounded, and most simple essence; by consequence, eternal, and
incomprehensible, of infinite knowledge to foresee, and wisdom to effect what
he means to do; we may from all together come to this result, that he can be
no other then the Father Almighty. And this was the result which was made of
old by the most learned of the Gentiles: who having made a muster of his
several Attributes, resolved all into this at last, that he was the general
Father both of God and Men, the Parent of the Universe, both of Heaven and
Earth; and therefore without question an Almighty Father. Mercurius
Trismegistus calls him in terms express, Patrem mundi Trismegist. in
Paemand. c. 2, 3. etc.
, the Father or Parent of the world; affirming that the name of good, and of a
Father, belong only to him: and so Pythagoras calls him too, as is said by
Clement. Plato entitled him Universi Patrem, the Father or Parent of the
Universe. Iamblichus one of Plato's followers, (...), or self-father, as before
was noted. By Aristotle in his book de Mundo, he is called Pater deorum et
hominum, the Father both of Gods and Men; (...), in the words of Homer; By
Virgil in the same sense, Hominum sator atque Deorum, in the first of the
Aeneids; By Orpheus, (...), the Original Ancester of all; and by Apollo
himself, (...), the unspeakable Father. And for the titile of Almighty, I find
it given expressly to him in a verse of one of the Sibyls, where he is called,
(...), i. e. Omnipotent, invisible, and yet seeing all things. The like does
frequently occur in the Latin Poets, who call him the Almighty Father in as
positive terms, as he is called here in the Creed. Tum Pater Omnipotens
foecundis imbribus, etc. And in another place, At pater Omnipotens speluncis
abdidit atris, as we read in Virgil. At Pater Omnipotens misso perfregit
Olympum, etc. so it is in Ovid Ovid Met. l. 1.
. And by Valerius Soranus one of elder times, their Jupiter, or supreme deity
had the title of Almighty, and King of Kings assigned unto him, Jupiter
Omnipotens, Regum Rex ipse Deusque, as St. Augustine August. de Civit. dei. l.
7.
cites him out of Varro. More might be added unto this, were not this
sufficient to show that even the learned Gentiles did acknowledge God to be the
Father Almighty. We must next see, how and in what respects he is called a
Father, and does stand so entitled in the front of the Creed.

And first the name of Father as applied to God in holy Scripture, is taken
(...), or Personally, as it denotes the first person in the Oeconomie of the
glorious Trinity. There are three that bear record in heaven, (as St. John has
it) the Father, the Word, and the holy Ghost, and these three are one 1 John
5.7.
. And in this notion or acception of the word, GOD is the father of our Lord
and Savior JESUS CHRIST, whom he has begotten to himself before all worlds,
generatione (...), by such a kind of generation, as neither the tongue of Men
nor Angels can express aright. In this respect our Savior says of GOD the
first person, I and my Father are one Joh. 10.30.
: and in another place, which we saw before on another occasion, I work, and my
Father also works Joh. 5.17.
. In this sense God the Father says of the second person, This is my beloved
Son in whom I am well pleased Mat. 3.17.
. And finally in this, as no man living, no not any of the host of Heaven, is
to be called the Son of God but the second Person; so none of the three Persons
takes the name of Father, but the first alone. Though GGD has several sons,
and by several means, as shall be showed anon in the place fit for it; yet
only CHRIST is called his begotten son: and therefore God a natural Father (if
I may so say) unto none but him. And this is that which Gregory Thaumaturgus
has told us, saying, (...) Greg. Thaumat. in S. Theophan.
, God has no other son by nature, but thee my Savior. The name of this
generation I forbear to speak of. It is a point I waived from the very first,
when first I undertook to expound this Creed Vid. Chap. 1.
; as being of too sublime and transcendent nature for the shallowness of my
capacity to inquire into. It is enough that I acknowledge God to be the Father
of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, by an eternal generation: though I profess my self
unable to discourse thereof, with any satisfaction to my self or others. And
for the generation of our Savior in the fullness of time, by which he was
conceived of the Virgin Mary, I shall have opportunity to speak in a place more
proper. So that not having more to speak of the name of Father, as it is
personal and hypostaticall in the first Person only; I shall proceed to that
acception of the word, wherein it is taken (...), or essentially, and so given
to GOD, that every person of the Trinity does partake thereof. But first I
cannot choose but note that even in that equality or unity which is said to be
between the Persons of the blessed Trinity, the Father seems to me to have some
preheminency above the others. For not only the Greek Church does acknowledge
him to be (...), the root and fountain of the Godhead; but it is generally
agreed on by all Orthodox writers, that the Father is first in order, though
not in time: Pater est prior ordine, non tempore, as Alstedius states it; and
by Aquinas amongst those of the Church of Rome, that the Son or second person
is Principiatus non essentiatus Aqu. Sum.
, that is to say, if I rightly understand his meaning, that there was a
beginning of his existence though not of his essence, or a beginning of his
Filiation, but not of his Godhead. And yet I dare not say that I hit his
meaning, (for I profess my self incapable of these Schoole-niceties) because I
find it generally agreed on by most learned men, V. Field of the Chapter l. 5. c.
11.
that CHRIST receives the being and essence which he has from the Father;
although not in the way of production of an other essence, which was condemned
as an impious heresy in Valentinus Gentilis, but by communication of the same.
Add here, that those who have most constantly stood up in the defense of the
doctrine of the Trinity against some Heretics of this Age, do notwithstanding
say and declare in public, that CHRIST though looked upon as the Son of God in
his eternal generation, cannot be said to be (...), or self-essentiate: And
that both Genebrard Genebr. de Trin. l. 1. and Lindan. in Dubitant. l. 2.
, Lindanus and some others of the Romish Doctors have quarrelled. Calvin (whom
Beza labors to excuse in that particular) for saying that he is (...), and
has his Godhead from himself; wherein he is deserted by Arminius also Armin.
Respons. ad Artic. 31.
, and those of the Remonstrant party in the Belgic Countries. But that the
Father Almighty mentioned in my Creed was not, and is not, both (...), and
(...) too, has never been affirmed, nor so much as doubted of, by any
Christian writer of what times soever.

Next look we on the name of Father as it is taken (...) essentially in the
holy Scriptures, and then it is appliable to every person of the blessed
Trinity; each of which in his several person or subsistence, may be called our
Father. Thus read we of the second person (for of the first there is no
question to be made) in the 9. of Esaias, that unto us a Son is born, and that he
shall be called wonderful, the mighty God, the everlasting Father, Verse. 6.
Thus in St. James, we find that the holy Ghost is called Pater luminum, Jam.
1. 7.
the Father of lights; it being his office to illuminate every soul which is
admitted for a member of the Church of CHRIST: in which respect the Sacrament
of Baptism, in which men are regenerated and born again of water and the holy
Spirit, was anciently called (...), or illumination. The reason why the name
Father does in this sense belong respectively to each, is because they equally
concur, as in the work of Creation, God the Father creating the world in the
Son by the holy Ghost; so in those also of Redemption and Sanctification. From
whence that maxim of the Schools, Opera Trinitatis ad extra sunt indivisa, that
is to say, the outward or external actions of the Trinity, are severally
communicable to the whole essence of GOD, and not appropriated unto any
particular person. And yet the name of Father even in this acception is
generally, (...), and in the common course of speech referred to the first
Person only; as he that is (...), the root and fountain of the Godhead, as
before was said. For thus has CHRIST himself instructed us to pray, and say,
Our Father which art in heaven, Mat. 6.9.
. And the Church following his command who has willed us to pray after that
manner, begins many of her prayers in the public Liturgy, with this solemn
form of compellation, Almighty and most merciful Father. Not that we do
exclude the Son or the holy Ghost, in our devotions, but include them in him.
In Patre invocantur filius et spiritus sanctus, Bellarm. de Chr. l. 8. c. 17.
as Bellarmine has most truly noted. And therefore though we commonly begin
our prayers with a particular address to God the Father, yet we conclude them
all with this, through Christ Jesus our Lord; and sometimes add, to whom with
thee and the holy Ghost, be praise for ever. But leaving these more intricate
speculations to more subtle heads; The name of Father in this sense, is
ascribed to God by two several titles.

First, Iure Creationis, by the right of Creation, by which he is the Father of
all mankind.

And secondly, Iure Adoptionis, by the right and title of Adoption, by which he
has anew begotten us (in St. Peter's language) to an inheritance immortal,
undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved for us in the Heavens 1 Pet. 1.3,
4.
.

First, GOD is said to be our Father in the right of Creation, by which as all
the World, and all things in the same contained, may be called the workmanship
of his hands; so may all mankind be called his children: not only those which
trust and believe in him, but also those which know him not, nor ever read so
much of him as the Book of nature; those which yet live as out-lawes from the
rule of reason, and barbarous and savage people of both the Indies. Thus
Malachi, the last Prophet of the Jews, Have we not all one Father, has not
God created us Mal. 2.10.
? Thus the Apostle of the Gentiles does affirm of GOD, that out of one blood
he has made all kindreds of men Act. 17.26.
. And CHRIST himself, who brake down the partition wall between Jew and
Gentile, Call no man Father on Earth, for one is your Father which is in Heaven
Mat. 23.9.
. Not that the Lord would have us disobedient to our natural Parents, or
ashamed to own them; for this is plainly contrary both to Law and Gospe^t: but
that we should refer our being unto him alone which is the fountain of all
being. Solus vocandus est Pater qui creavit Lactant. instit. l. 4 c 4.
, said Lactantius truly. Now God is said to be our Father by the right of
Creation, for these following reasons: as first, because he was the Father of
the first man Adam, out of whose loins we are descended, or of whose likeness
since the fall we are all begotten. Therefore St. Luke when he had made the
Genealogy of our Savior CHRIST in the way of ascent, does conclude it thus,
which was the son of Seth, which was the son of Adam, which was the Son of God
Luke 3.38.
: the son of God, but not by generation, for so our Savior only was the Son of
God, and therefore it must be by Creation only. Secondly, GOD is called our
Father, because he has implanted in our Parents the virtue Generative, molded
and fashioned us in the secret closets of the Womb. Thy hands have made me and
fashioned me Psalm. 119.
. Thine eyes did see my substance being yet imperfect, and in thy book were all
my members written, says the Royal Psalmist Psa. 139.15.
. The bodies of us men are too brave a building for man and Nature to erect.
And therefore said Lactantius truly, Hominem non patrem esse sed generandi
ministrum Lactan^. l. 5.19.
. Man only is the instrument which the Lord does use for the effecting of his
purpose, to raise that godly edifice of flesh and blood which he contemplates
in his children. Last of all for our souls, which are the better part of us, by
which we live, and move, and have our being, they are infused by GOD alone;
man has no hand in it. God breathes into our nosthrils the breath of life, and
by his mighty power does animate and inform that matter, which of it self is
merely passive in so great a wonder. In each of these respects, and in all
together, we may conclude with that of Aratus, an old Greek Poet, as he is
cited by S. Paul Act. 17.28.
, (...), for we are all his offspring, all of us his children.

The second Interest which GOD has in us as a Father, in the way of adoption,
by which we are regenerate, or anew begotten to a lively hope of being heirs
unto the promises, and in the end partakers of eternal glories: by which we are
transplanted from our Fathers house, and out of the Wilderness and unprofitable
Thickets of this present world, and graffed or inoculated on the Tree of life.
Adoptare enim est juxta delectum sibi quos quisque velit in filios eligere
Minsing. in Instit. l. 1. c. 11.
. Adoption is the taking of a child from another family, to plant and cherish
in our own, say, the Civil Lawyers: and he that so adopteth may be called our
Father; by approbation of the laws, though not by nature. Examples of this case
have been very ordinary, from Moses who was adopted for her son by the daughter
of Pharaoh, (though he refused to be called the son of Pharaohs daughter Heb.
11.24.
, as St. Paul said of him) down through all the stories both of Greece and
Rome. And if it may be lawful to make such resemblances, the motives which
induced GOD to proceed this way, and other the particulars of most moment in
it, do seem to carry a fair proportion or correspondency with such inducements
and particulars, as has been used by men on the same occasions. For in the
Laws adoption was to be allowed but in these four cases Minsing. in loco citato.
;

First, Quod quidam Matrimonii onera detrectarent, because some men could not
away with the cares of Wedlock.

Secondly, Quod conjugium esset sterile, because God had not blessed the
marriage with a fruitful issue.

Thirdly, Quod liberi ipsorum morerentur, because their own children by
untimely death, or the unluckie chance of War, had been taken from them; in
which last case, adoption by especial dispensation, was allowed to women.

Fourthy, Quod liberi ipsorum improbi essent and degeneres, because their own
children were debauched and shameless, likely to ruin that estate, and
disgrace that family into which they were born. And upon such grounds as these,
is GOD in Scripture said to adopt the Gentiles; to make them who by nature were
the sons of wrath, and seemed to be excluded from the Covenant which he made
with Abraham, to be the heirs of God, and Coheirs with Christ. God looked upon
the Jews as his natural children. And at the first one might have known them
easily for the sons of God, by the exemplarie piety of their lives and actions:
(...), etc. as men know commonly their neighbor children by a resemblance to
their Fathers Basil. Epist. ad Gregor.
. St. Paul has made a muster of some chiefs amongst them in the 11. chap. to
the Heb. But they being took away by the hand of death, there next succeeded in
their room a g^neration little like them in the course of their lives, and
therefore little to the comfort of their heavenly Father. For his part he was
never wanting unto his Vineyard Esai. 4.4.
; nor could there any thing be done to it, which he did not do, yet when he
looked for grapes in their proper season, it brought forth nothing but wild
grapes, sit only for the wine press of his indignation. So that the Lord was
either childless, or else the Father of a stubborn and perverse generation, of
whose reclaim there was no hopes, or but small, if any. In which estate he cast
his eyes opon the Gentiles, who either knew him not at all, or knew no more of
him then they could discern through the false lights, as it were, of depraved
nature, or the dull spectacles of Philosophy. Thus witnesses St. Paul in the
4. to the Galatians, saying, that when the fullness of time was come, God sent
his Son made of a woman, made under the law, to redeem those which were under
the law, that they might receive the Adoption of sons, verse. 5. And in the 8.
unto the Romans, We have, says he, received the Spirit of Adoption, whereby we
cry unto him Abba, Father: the Spirit of God bearing witness with our spirit,
that we are the heirs of God, and coheirs with CHRIST, verse. 15.

Other particulars there are, wherein the Adoption of us sinners to the
Kingdom of Heaven, holds good proportion with Adoptions made upon the earth;
some of which I shall briefly touch at, to make the mystery of our Adoption
the more clear and signal. First then, Adoption by the Civil or Imperial Laws,
(which is jus Gentium or the Law of Nations, as they use to call it) however
privately agreed upon between the parties, was never counted valid and of good
authority, till it was verified by the Magistrates before all the people, in
the Town Hall, or Common Forum, and under such a form of words, which either
law or custom had prescribed unto them. Which form of words too long to be
repeated here, are extant still in Gellius A. Gell. No^t. At.
, and Barnabas Brissonius a late French Writer. So our adoption unto life is
ratified and confirmed unto us by the public Minister openly in the Church, in
the Congregation, if it may conveniently; and under such a Form of words which
we may not alter. We have not only custom for it, but a strict command, that we
baptize all those which are presented to the Church as the children of God, In
the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost. We find it also
in the practice, though the law required it not, that they who were adopted
into any family used presently (...) Dion. Cass. in Augusto.
, to take unto themselves the name of that house o^ family into the which they
were assumed. Examples of this truth are infinite almost, and obvious in the
Roman stories. So we, being adopted into the kingdom and inheritance of our
Savior CHRIST, have took unto our selves Christ's name, or the name of
Christians. And the Disciples were first called Christians at Antiochia, Act.
11. Suppose we now that our adoption is confirmed, ratified by the Magistrate,
and good in law, are we hereby exempted from the power of our Natural Parents?
Not so, the Law is otherwise, and resolves it clearly, Quod jura Patris
naturalis minime solvuntur Justin. Instit. l. 1. tit. 11. sect. 2.
, that the authority of our Natural Parents is the same as formerly. Too many
of us think not so, but being once possessed with a conceit of our adoption to
the kingdom of God, we cast off all obedience and regard of man. Neither our
Natural, nor our Civil Parents are to be obeyed, if once the Son of God has
but made us free. Thus did the Anabaptists preach in some parts of Germany;
and we have had too many followers of their Doctrines here. And last of all it
is a Rule or Maxim in the Laws Imperial, that children once adopted, are to be
used and disposed of in all respects, ac si justis nuptiis quaesiti Ibid. l. 2.
tit. 13. s^ct. 4.
, as if they were our own by the law of Nature. And it does follow thereupon,
Haeredes vel instituendi vel exhaeredandi, that as we think it fit, and as they
deserve, we may assign them portions out of our estates, or exclude them
utterly. Whether it be thus also in adoptions unto life eternal, whether it may
not be revoked at the pleasure of GOD, if we behave our selves unworthily; need
not be made a question amongst rational men. Or if it be, I have no list nor
leisure to dispute it here. Only I cannot choose but note it as an error in
Monsieur de Moulin, to ground the irreversible Decree of our Adoption to the
Kingdom of Heaven, on the like irreversibleness of adoptions here upon the
Earth: Ex eo quod absoluta sit inter homines adoptio, as his own words are
Molin. Anatom. Arm. c. 22. sect. 9.
. But Absque hoc. The law we see is otherwise, and resolves the contrary. And
for the error of du Moulin, being it is ignorantia juris, an error in point of
law, and not of fact, whether, and if at all it may be excused, I leave to be
resolved upon grave advice by some such learned Casuist, as his friend Amesius.

GOD is a Father then by all ways and means by which a name of Father may be
gained by any: And if a Father, as he is, no doubt but we shall find in him
the same affections, which are in Parents toward their children: the same, but
not with all or any of those imperfections, which we observe to be too often
intermingled in humane affections. Do Parents naturally love their children? We
find the love of GOD to his, not only to be equal unto that of an earthly
father, but to surpass the love of women. Can a woman forget her sucking child,
that she should not have compassion on the fruit of her womb? yes says the
Lord, they may forget, but I will not forget my people Esa. 49.15.
. Do Parents out of the affection which they bear their children, provide them
of all necessaries for this present life? Do any of them, if their children ask
for bread, give them a stone Mat. 7.10.
, or if they ask for a fish, present him a Serpent? Our Savior thereupon
infers, that if they being evil know how to give good gifts unto their
children, how much more should our Father which is in Heaven, give good things
unto them that ask him Ibid. v. 11.
Assuredly the love of GOD to all his children, especially to those which walk
after his commandments, is infinitely greater then the love of our natural
parents to those which are the children after the flesh. Out of this love of
GOD it is, that he gives us both the former and the latter rain, that he makes
his Sun to shine on the good and bad; that their Oxen are alike strong to
labor, that their sheep bring forth thousands, yea and ten thousands in their
streets; and finally that their fields do laugh, and their medows sing with
fruitful plenty. Are parents naturally compassionate toward their children,
when they fall into misery and distress; and pity them at least, if they cannot
help them? Behold, says God, like as a Father pitieth his own children, so the
Lord pitieth them that fear him: for he knows whereof we are made, he
remembers that we are but dust Psalm. 103.13, 14.
. Are parents patient and long-suffering toward their children when they do
amiss? Alas, what is this patience of theirs, compared to that of GOD toward
sinful man. The Lord is full of compassion, and mercy, long-suffering, and of
great goodness, says the Prophet David Ibid. v. 8.
. O Jerusalem, Heirusalem, says the son of David, how often would I have
gathered thee together as a Hen does her Chickens, but ye would not Mat. 23.37.
But is the patience of a Father so implanted in him, that it can never be worn
out, and converted to anger. Not so, we know it is a proverb, that patientia
laesa fit furor, the greatest patience if abused, may possibly be turned to the
greatest fury, or anger at the least in the highest degree. How angry was old
Jacob with his two sons, the Brethren in evil, when he desired his soul might
not come into their secret Genesis 49.6, 7.
; and prayed to God to scatter them in Jacob, and divide them in Israel? And
cannot God be angry think we, with his stubborn and rebellious children, when
they do wilfully transgress his holy laws, and with an high hand violate all
his sacred precepts? Why then does he so often punish those that do amiss? for,
Ira Dei non est aliud quam voluntas puniendi August. de Cru. Dei. l. 15.15.
, as St. Augustine has it, the anger of God is only his just will to chastise
the sinner. Why then did he repent of his making man, or rain down fire and
brimstone upon Sodom and Gomorrah, as it is said he did? Why then do we beseech
him with such shame and sorrow, to correct us in his judgment and not in his
fury, that we may not be consumed and brought to nothing Jer. 10.24.
? He that bids us be angry and sin not Phil. 4.20.
, intended not the extirpation but the moderation of anger. And thereupon
Lactantius very well infers, Qui ergo iras^i nos jubet, ipse utique
irascitur Lactant. de ira Dei.
: he that bids us be angry (so we do not sin) can without doubt be angry too
when he sees occasion. The like may be affirmed also of those other affections
which are in Parents toward those whom they have begotten. Remove the
imperfections from them, and the affections of themselves after separation, may
without any danger, (and as some Schoolmen think, without any Metaphor) be
ascribed to GOD.

Now out of those affections which before we specified, arises the chief care
of our natural parents, which is to see us trained up in some lawful trades, or
in the knowledge of good letters: that being put into a course of good
education, we may subsist with credit, and escape those miseries which poverty
and necessity may else bring upon us. And out of that authority which they have
by nature to dispose of us as they see most suitable unto our deserts, arises
the chief power of our natural parents, either to make us heirs of their goods
and fortunes, or to leave us out. First, for the care of education, it seemed
so necessary to the Grecians in the former times, that one of their Wisemen did
use to say, Praestat non nasci, that it was better not to be born, then not
well instructed. And by the laws of Rome, which they had from Greece, when as
the father now grown old and out of work, did sue his son for Alimonie, as we
use to call it; it was a good plea in the son against his Father, that he had
never taken care of his education, or trained him in the knowledge of any Art,
either ingenuous or mechanic Leg. 12. Tab.
. Filius art carens Patris incuria, eidem necessaria vitae subsidia ne
praestato, was one of the laws of the twelve Tables. How much more necessary
must we think that part of our education, which the wise Grecian never knew,
nor ever was prescribed by the laws of Rome: that part I mean, by which young
children are instructed in the fear of GOD, and taught betimes to run the
paths of the Lords commandments? But if the Father do his office, if that no
care be wanting on his part to instruct his children, if he admonish and advice
them when they do amiss, and they continue still to afflict his heart, either
by neglecting that employment in which he has placed them, or wasting his
estate in riotous and licentious courses: is the poor Father left without
further remedy, then what may be had upon complaint from the Civil Magistrate?
No, by no means. The Father at the first by the law of Nations, had potestatem
vitae and necis Minsing. in Instit. l. 1. tit. 9.
, the power of life and death over all their children. But after the receiving
of the Christian faith, the law was altered in that case by the following
Emperors. And now as the Civilians tell us, Parentibus solummodo relinquitur
honesta emendatio, and maximis ex causis exhaeredatio, i. e. The fathers power
consists most especially in these points, to punish and chastise them for
their smaller faults, and disinherit them in time, if they prove incorrigible.
Which power as it was used by Jacob on his eldest son Reuben Genesis 49.4.
, because he had defiled his old fathers bed: so has it since been ordinary in
the practice of all times and ages; though perhaps more to be commended where
it may not, then where it may possibly be spared.

Such also is the care, and consequently such the power of our Heavenly Father.
For who but he taught Abel how to order Sheep Genesis 4.2.
, and Cain to till the ground, or to be an husbandman; Iubal to play on
instruments Genesis 4.21, 22.
, and Tubal-cain to work in iron? who but he called forth Joshua to fight his
battles; and Aaron and his sons to serve at the holy Altar Levit. 8.2.
? And for the bringing of them up in the fear of GOD, he has revealed himself
so far to the Turks and Pagans, and in the former times to the ancient
Gentiles, (which are his children only by the right of Creation) that by the
things which he has made, they may perceive both his eternal power and Godhead
Romans 1.20.
. Though he permitted them for a while to walk in their own ways, and so fulfill
their several lusts, yet left he not himself (...), or without a witness Act.
14.16, 17.
, in that he showed his works unto them, and filled their hearts with food and
gladness. Nay, that which may be known of God, (...), as St. Paul calls it,
is manifest in them Prove. 1.20.
: for the invisible things of God, says the same Apostle, from the creation of
the world, are clearly seen: that is, as Augustine does expound it, per
visibilia Creaturae pervenisse eos ad intelligent am invisiblis Creatoris
August. de Spir. and lit. c. 12.
, by studying on the Book of Nature, they came to understand the nature of GOD.
For further proof whereof, if more proof be necessary, we need but have
recourse to the former Chapter; where we did prove this point, that there was a
God, and that he is eternal and incomprehensible, of infinite both power and
wisdom. Nor did GOD leave them so in this general knowledge, but he revealed
so much of his will unto them, as is included or expressed in the law of
Nature. The Gentiles (says St. Paul) which have not the law, do by nature the
things contained in the law, which shows the work of the law written in their
hearts; their conscience also bearing witness, and their thoughts excusing or
accusing one another Romans 2.14.
. By means whereof, such of them as were careful to conform their lives unto
that law, and put not out that light which did shine within them; attained unto
an eminent height in all moral virtues. (...) Greg. Nazian. Orat. 31.
, as it is in Naziazen. Which moral piety of theirs, if not directed to the
glory of GOD, as it ought to be, but either to advance their projects, or else
to gain opinion and be seen of men; may perhaps mitigate their torments, but
not advance them to the glories of eternal life. Nec vitae aeiernae veros
acquirere fructus, De falsa virtute potest Prosp. Carm. de ingrat.
, as Prosper has it. Not that those actions in themselves were not good and
commendable, and might deserve some more then ordinary blessings at the hands
of GOD: but that those men being so far instructed and illuminated, they
desisted there; holding the truth, (as St. Paul tells us) in unrighteousness
Romans 1.18, 20.
, and so became without excuse. But of this more hereafter in another place.
And if the Lord has been so gracious to the ancient Gentiles, and still is to
the Turks and Pagans of the present ages; which are his children only by the
right of Creation; no question but he does instruct whom he has adopted, after
a more peculiar manner. He showed his word unto Jacob, his statutes and his
Ordinances unto Israel Psa. 147.19.
, says the Prophet David of the Jews. And as for us which have the happiness
to live under the Gospel, the Lord himself has said by the Prophet Jeremy,
that he would write his law in their hearts, and put it in our inward parts
Jer. 31.33.
, and by another of his Prophets, that our sons and daughters should prophecy
Joel 2.28.
, and that we should be (...), or taught of God. If after so much care on the
part of God, if after all this done by our Heavenly Father, we still continue
ignorant of his will, or shut our eyes against that light which does shine upon
us, and stop our ears against the voice of the Charmer, charm he never so
sweetly: no wonder if he draw his sword, and either cut us off by a temporal
death, or publicly expose us unto shame and misery. For sure it cannot be
denied, but that the Lord our heavenly Father has potestatem vitae and necis,
the power of life and death over all his children. The Lord has power of life
and death, (as the wise man has it) he leads to the gates of Hell, and
brings back again, Wisd. 16.13. But this a severity which God reserves unto the
last, as the utmost remedy, inflicting in the mean time moderate chastisements
on his wilful children, in hope by that means to reclaim them. Which if they do
not take effect, he then proceeds unto the woeful sentence of disinheritance,
expungeth them out of the Catalogue of his Elect, razeth their names out of the
sacred Book of life, and leaves them no inheritance in the house of Jesse, or
any portion at all in the son of David. So excellently true is that of
Lactantius, Deus ut erga bonos indulgentissimus Pater, ita adversus improbos
justissimus Iudex. God, says he, as he is a loving and indulgent Father
toward his good and godly children; so toward those who are past hope of
reformation, he will become as terrible and severe a Judge; so he Institut.
tut. l. 1. cap. 1.

And certainly it does concern us in an high degree, to keep the love and good
opinion of our heavenly Father; who is not only able to chastise us with such
light corrections as are inflicted on us by our earthly Parents; but to arm all
the hosts of Heaven, and all the creatures of the Earth against us, as once he
did against Pharaoh and the land of Egypt. GOD is not here represented to us by
the name of a Father only, but by the name of a Father Almighty. The title of
Omnipotent makes a different case; and may be our Remembrancer upon all
occasions, to keep us from incurring his just displeasure, and drawing down his
vengeance on our guilty heads. This is that infinity or infiniteness of power,
which before I spoke of, and is so proper unto God, that it is not to be
communicated unto any creature, no not unto the man CHRIST JESUS. The Roman
Emperors indeed in the times of their greatest flourish did take unto
themselves the style of (...); whereby they gave the world to understand that
they were absolute and independent, not tied to the observance of any laws, or
bound by the Decrees of Senate: but that of (...), or Omnipotent, was never
challenged by the proudest, nor given unto them by the grossest of their many
Parasites. Now GOD is said to be Almighty, because that he is able to do, and
does upon occasion also, whatsoever pleases him both in Heaven and Earth, as
the Psalmist has it Psalm. 135.6.
: For with God nothing is impossible, says the holy Angel Luke 1.37.
. And though some things may seem impossible in the eyes of men, yet apud Deum
omnia sunt possibilia Mat. 19.26.
, all things are possible to God, says CHRIST our Savior: yet still observe
the words of David before mentioned, which is the Rule or Standard, if I may so
call it, by which not only possibility and impossibility, but even Omnipotency
it self is to be measured: and David says not of the Lord that he can do all
things, but whatsoever pleases him, be it what it will. For therefore God the
Father is said to be Almighty or Omnipotent, not that he can do every thing
whatsoever it be, and will do all things that he can: but because he can do all
things that he plaaseth, all that can be done. Because he can do all things,
whatsoever he pleases. For as S. Augustine well observes, nec ob aliud
vocatur Omnipotens, nisi quia quicquid vult potest August. in Enchirid. c. 96.
, Because he can do all things which can be done. For some things are not
denied to be impossible even to God himself; as namely such as do imply a
contradiction: and so the dictate of Aquinas is exceeding true, Deus omnia
potest quae contradictionem non implicant Aquin. 1. qu. 25. Art. 3.4.
. Nor can he do such things as may argue him to be capable of any defect, as
namely to be unjust, to lie, to be confined to place, or to change his being:
according to another rule of the same Aquinas, i. e. Omnipotentia excludit
defectus omnes qui sunt impotentia, ceu posse mentiri, mori, peccare, etc. The
reasons are, first because those things in themselves would make him liable to
impotency, wants, and weakness, and utterly deprive him of the title of a
Father Almighty. Nam si haec ei acciderent non esset Omnipotens August. de
Civit. dei. l. 5. c. 10.
, as most excellently it is said by Augustine. Secondly, actions of that
nature, are in themselves so contrary to the nature of God, that were they once
admitted in him, he must instantly renounce himself, and forfeit, as it were,
his Deity. Unto which purpose that of Origin serves exceeding fitly. (...),
etc. Orig. adv. Cel. Sum. l. 3.
. God (says he) can do every thing whatsoever it be, by doing which he may
continue as he is, just, true, and gracious. For as (says he) that which is
sweet by nature, cannot make any thing unpleasant; and that which was created
to illuminate, cannot be possibly employed as an help to darkness: (...), etc.
so neither is it possible that God being just and wise by nature, should either
deal unjustly, or do any thing with indiscretion. Upon these reasons and
authorities, the Schoolmen have divided the power of God into actual and
absolute. God doing by his actual power whatsoever he pleases, and by his
absolute power all things that are possible. But that he should do any thing to
the dishonor of the Godhead, is not possible: and therefore as he will not do
it, so we may safely say he cannot. Other the subtilties of the Schools
touching this particular, which are more likely to entangle the wits of men,
then reform their judgments; I have no list to intermingle with my present
discourse.

Leaving them therefore to the sweet contentment of their own curiosities, we
rather will consider the Omnipotence of our Heavenly Father, in the effects it
has produced for the good of his children, then in those needless speculations
which are raised about it. And these we shall behold, at the present time,
either in reference to his suspension of the works of Nature; or his strange
turning of the hearts and intents of men, quite contrary to what they had
before resolved on; or in those many and most miraculous deliverances, which he
has shown unto his people in their great extremities. Of the first sort are
those which are related in the Book of God, as namely, the standing still of
the Sun in the Valley of Aialon, that Joshua might have the more time to
destroy his enemies Josh. 10.12, 13.
and the making of it to go back ten degrees on the Dial of Ahaz, for an
assurance unto Hezekiah, that the Lord would heal him 2 King. 20.11.
; his interdicting of the Red Sea that it should not flow, but stand divided
like a wall on both sides of Israel, till they were gone through it Exodus 14.22.
; and causing Iren which is a gross and heavy body to swim upon the top of the
water, at the prayer of Elisha 2 King.6.5.
; His suspending of the nature of fire, that it should not burn, nor singe so
much as the clothes of the three Hebrew Salamanders, when they were cast fast
bound into the burning fiery furnace Dan. 3.22. and 27.
; and making the same fire to move out of his course, when it laid hold on
those who were to execute the great tyrants commands: His shutting the mouths
of the hungry Lions, and bringing his servant Daniel back in safety from that
dreadful Den Id. c. 6.22.
; and making the Ravens which by nature are birds of prey, to be the Caterers
of Elijah to bring him bread in the morning, and bread and flesh in the evening
1 King. 17.6.
: His making a night of three hours in the midst of day, when our Savior was
upon the Cross Mat. 27.45. and 52.53.
; and causing that the Graves did give up their dead, to wait upon our Savior
at his Resurrection. How many more instances of this kind might be here
presented, not only out of Sacred, but Ecclesiastical and Civil Histories, were
not these few sufficient to evince this truth, that God the Father Almighty and
the God of nature, by his Omipotence or Almighty power, is able to suspend the
whole course of nature, when soever he shall think it to be most conducible
either to his own glory, or the good of his people? And this Omnipotence of
his, is shown as evidently in those manifold and most miraculous deliverances
of his faithful, as well by extraordinary means and miracles, which are above
the course of nature; as by those which do suspend that course, and are quite
against it. Of this sort was the reprieving of Isaac, when all hope was
hopeless, holding back Abraham's hand by the voice of an Angel Genesis 22.11.12.
; and showing so many miracles in the land of Egypt, for the redemption of the
seed of that Isaac from the house of bondage Exodus chapter 7, 8. etc.
: His blowing down of the walls of Jericho by the sound of Rams-horns Josh.
6.20.10, and 11.
, and killing more with hailstones in the battle of Gideon, then all the men of
Israel had slain with the sword. Of this sort was the casting of a mist as it
were on the eyes of the Moabites, that they mistook the Sunshine on the water
for streams of blood; which made them run disorderly into the camp of the
Israelites, where they were sharply entertained to their full discomfiture 2
King. 3.20, etc.
: His making Benhadad and the dreadful Army of the Syrians, to hear the noise
of horses, and the noise of chariots, and thereby putting them to flight in
such soul disorder, that they left their Tents, and victuals to the starved
Samaritans 2 King. 7:6, 7, and 19.35.
; His smiting of an hundred threescore and five thousand fighting men in the
Camp of the Assyrians, by the sword of an Angel, and thereby freeing Hezekiah
from the threats of Sennacherib; and finally by delivering his Infant-Church
out of the tyranny of persecution, by giving Herod Act. 12.
, whilst yet living, a prey to worms. Are not all these and infinite others of
this kind, not only the pregnant testimonies of his love and goodness, but
also the eternal monuments and everlasting characters of his Omnipotence?

But that which most sets forth this great power of GOD, is in my mind, his
turning of the hearts and intents of men, quite contrary to that which they had
formerly resolved on, at often as he thinks that way fittest for the
preservation of his servants. Thus did he turn the heart of Laban, who pursued
after Jacob with no good intention, that he could not speak to him one
displeasing word Genesis 31.24. etc. 33. v. 4.
: and did so turn the heart of Esau, who had vowed his death; that instead of
putting him to the sword, having power to do it, he fell on Jacobs neck, and
kissed him, and they wept together. Thus did he so incline the hearts of the
Egyptians toward the seed of the same Jacob, of whom they did esteem no
otherwise then of a perpetual race of Bondmen; that they did not only let them
depart in peace, but furnished them with jewels of silver, and jewels of gold,
and ornaments Exodus 12.35.
of several sorts to set out their sacrifices: and did so overruled both the
heart and tongue of the Prophet Balaam, that being hired to curse the whole
house of Israel, he could not choose but bless them all at once together Numb.
chapter 23. and 24.
. And this I take to be a greater manifestation of Gods Omnipotence, then any
contra-natural, or supernatural kind of means; by which he has preserved his
people from the hands of their enemies: the Heart of man being a bottomeless
pit of deceit and villainy, and mischievous imaginations, and invincible
malice. But of all miracles of Omnipotence mentioned in the Scripture, there is
not in my judgment any one more eminent, then that which he wrought upon the
children of Ammon and Moab, and those of Mount Seir, when they joined all their
Forces together against Iehosaphat the good King of Judah 2 Chr. 20.1.
. For by a strange misprision which God sent amongst them, the children of
Ammon and Moab fell upon the inhabitants of Mount Seir, and slew them and
destroyed them utterly; and when they had made an end of the Inhabitants of
Seir, every one to destroy another Ibid. v. 23.
. Never so great a slaughter made, never so signal a deliverance given to the
people of God by the swords of their Enemies; even by the swords of those who
had joined together, to root out their memorial from the face of the earth. If
now we should d^scend from Scriptures to Ecclesiastical History, shall we not
find the great power of God exemplified as visibly in the protection and
defense of the Christian Church: and that not only in the miraculous
propagation and increase thereof, and bringing to calamitous ends her greatest
enemies; but working on the hearts of the sharpest Persecutors, to intermit
their rage, and lay down their fury? Witness the Edict of Trajan, the Author of
the third Persecution, De Christianis non inquirendis Eusebius. Eccles. hist. l.
3.30.
, that no such Inquisition should be made against them as in former times; that
of the Emperor Adrian, Ne Christianus indicta causa puniatur Id. l. 4.9.
, that no Christian should from thenceforth be punished without some crime laid
to his charge, in which he had offended against the Laws. Antonine adding unto
this ut delator poenae subjaceat, that the Promoter should be liable to
punishment Id. l. 4 13.
, if he proved it not. The like of Marcus as great a Persecuter at the first as
any which had been before him, who did not only stay the fury of the
Executioners, but mortem iis minabatur qui Christianos accusabant Id. l. 5.5.
, but threatened death to the accusers. Nor staid God here, but for the further
manifestation of his mighty power in ruling and overruling the hearts of men,
he wrought so wonderfully and Omnipotently on the hearts of some of their
greatest enemies, that from their bitter and most violent Persecutors they
became their Patrons. Witness the Mandate or edict of the Emperor Galienus, not
only for the intermitting of the persecution which Valerianus his Father had
raised against them, but authorizing the Prelates and other Ministers Id. l.
7.12.
, Vt cuncta munia pro consuetudine obirent, to perform all the sacred Offices
which belonged unto them. Finally, witness the like Edict of Maximinus, one of
the chief Instruments of Diocletians butcheries, and a great slaughterman
himself when he came to the Empire: commanding that the Christians should be
left to their own Religion* and not compelled as formerly under pain of death
to offer sacrifice to Idols, but won if possibly it might be, blanditiis and
adhortationibus Id. l. 9.9.
, by the fairest means, and the best persuasions that the wit of man could lay
before them. These things as they were mavelous in the eyes of all men, so
mavelous that they could not choose but see and say, A Domino haec facta,
that they were all of them of the Lords own doing: so was it as easy to be
seen that they were the effects of his Omnipotence, proceeding from the love
and power of a Father Almighty.

ARTICLE II. Of the Second ARTICLE OF THE CREED Ascribed unto St. JOHN. (...).
i. e. Creatorem Coeli et Terrae. i. e. Maker of Heaven and Earth.
CHAP. IV. Of the Creation of the World and the parts thereof: that it was made
at first by Gods mighty power, and since continually preserved by his infinite
Providence.
WITH very great fitness does the Article of the Worlds Creation, come next the
Attribute of Almighty; as being that act which might alone entitle GOD unto
Omnipotence, were there none besides. For what but an Omnipotent power could
out of no praeexistent matter create that goodly edifice of Heaven and Earth,
and all things in the same contained, which every natural man beholds with
such admiration, that possibly he cannot choose but say with the royal
Psalmist, The Heavens declare the glory of God, and the Earth shows his handy
work Psalm. 19.1.
? A work so full of wonder to the ancient Gentiles, that some of them made the
world a God; Vis illum (i. e. Deum) mundum vocare, non falleris, as it is in
Seneca Senec. in quaest. Natural.
: others more rationally conceiving GOD to be the soul of the World, as giving
animation or being to it. And though they erred as well in making the World a
God, as making GOD to be the Soul of the World: yet they might very well have
said as one since has done, that the World is nothing else but God unfolded
and manifested in the Creature. Nil aliud Mundus universus quam Deus
explicatus, as Cusanus has it. And certainly the special motions which did
induce GOD unto this great work, were a desire and purpose to express his
power, to exercise his providence, and declare his goodness. For though GOD
needed not to have made the World in regard of himself, for the World we know
was made in the beginning of time, but GOD is infinite and eternal before all
beginnings: yet it seemed good to him to create it at last, as a thing most
conducible to his praise and glory. Some measuring the God of Heaven by their
own affections, and finding nothing so agreeable to their own dispositions, as
to be in company, conceive that God being at last weary of his own solitude did
create the World, that he might have the company of the Angels in Heaven, and
make a start into the Earth when he saw occasion, to recreate himself with the
sons of Men. Quae beata esse solitudo queat? What happiness, said Hortensius,
can be in solitude? Lactan. l. 1. c. 7.
To which Lactantius not being furnished with a better, does return this
answer, that GOD cannot be said to be alone, Habet enim Ministros quos vocamus
nuncios, as having the society of the holy Angels. But then Lactantius must
suppose that the Angels have been coeternal with GOD himself, (which were to
make all Gods, and no God at all) or else his Answer is no answer as to that
Objection. How much more rightly might we have thus replied unto them, that the
supreme contentment possible to Almighty God, is by reflecting on himself, and
in himself contemplating his own infinite glories: which being co-aevall with
himself, even from all eternity, he needed no no more company before the World
was made then he has done since. Lactantius being a man of a very geat reading
(though indeed a better Humanitian then Divine) could not but know those sweet
delights which a man habited in learning takes in contemplation; and the
society which he has of his own dear thoughts, though never so much removed
from the sight of men. And if the wise Gentile could affirm so sadly, nunquam
minus solum esse quam cum solus esset, that he was never less alone then when
he was by himself: what need can any rational man suppose in Almighty God, of
having more company then himself in? If this suffice not for an answer to that
needless demand, What God did before he made the World, Aug. Confess l. 11. c.
12.
let him take that of Augustine on the like occasion: who being troubbled with
this curious and impertinent question, is said to have returned this answer,
Curiosis fabricare inferos, that he made Hell for all such troublesome and idle
Questionists.

But it pleased God at last, when it seemed best unto his infinite and eternal
wisdom, to create the World, and all things visible and invisible in the same
contained. A point so clear and evident in the Book of God, that he must needs
reject the Scripture who makes question of it. And as the Scripture tells us
that God made the World; so do they also tell us this, that because he made the
World, he is therefore God. For thus says David in the Psalms, The Lord is
great and very greatly to be praised, he is to be feared above all Gods. As for
the Gods of the Heathen they are but Idols, but it is the Lord which made the
Heavens Psalm. 96.5.
. Where plainly the strength of David's argument to prove the Lord to be God,
does consist in this, because it was he only, not the gods of the Heathen,
which created the World. The like we also find in the Prophet Jeremy, The
Lord, says he, is the true God, he is the living God and an everlasting King,
and the Nations shall not be able to abide his indignation. Thus shall ye say
unto them, The Gods that have not made the Heavens and the Earth, even they
shall perish from the Earth, and from under these Heavens Jer. 10.10, 11.
. He has made the Earth by his power, and established the World by his
wisdom, and has stretched out the Heavens by his discretion. In which two
verses of the Prophet we have proof sufficient, first that* God made the World
by his power and wisdom; and secondly that this making of the World by his
power and wisdom, does difference or distinguish him from the gods of the
Heathen, of whom it is affirmed expressly, that they were so far from being
able to make Heaven and Earth, that they should perish from the Earth and from
under Heaven. But what need Scripture be produced to assert that truth, which
is so backed by the authority of the Learned Gentiles? whose understandings
were so fully convinced by the inspection of the Book of nature, especially by
that part of it which did acquaint them with the nature of the Heavenly Bodies,
that they concluded to themselves without further evidence, that the Author of
this great Book was the only God; and that he only was that great invisible
power, which did deserve that Sovereign title. And this Pythagoras, one of the
first founders of Philosopie amongst the Grecians, who in all probability had
never seen the works of Moses, as Plato and those that followed after are
supposed to have done, does most significantly aver in these following
verses, which are preserved in Justin Martyr Just. Mart. de Monarch. dei.
.

(...)
(...).
Which may be thus paraphased in our English tongue: He that will say, I am a
Power divine,
A God, besides that one; let him first make
A world like this, and say that this is mine,
Before he to himself that title take.


For the next point, that God the Father Almighty did create the World, it is a
truth so clear and evident in the Book of God, that he must needs reject the
Scripture who makes question of it: it being not only told us in the holy
Scriptures that God made the World, but also when he made it, and upon what
reasons, with all the other circumstances which concern the same. The very
first words of Gods book, if we look no further, are in themselves sufficient
to confirm this point. In the beginning (says the Text) God created the
Heaven and the Earth Genesis 1.1.
. As Moses, so the royal Psalmist, He laid the foundations of the Earth, and
covered it with the deep as it were with a garment, and spreads out the
Heavens like a curtain Psalm. 104.5, 6, 2.
. He made Heaven and Earth, the Sea and all that therein is Psalm. 146.5.
. And so the whole College of the Apostles when they were joined together in
their prayers to God, Lord (said they) thou art God which made Heaven and
Earth, the Sea and all that in them is Act. 4.24.
. Made it, but how? not with his hands assuredly, there is no such matter. The
whole World though it be an house, and the house of God, ( cum Deo totus mundus
sit und domus Minut. Fell.
, said the Christian Orator) yet it is properly to be called (...), an house
not made with hands. How then? He made it only by his word. Dixit et facta
sunt, He spoke the word and they were made, says the sweet finger of Israel
Psalm. 33.9.
. There went no greater pains to the Worlds creation, then a Dixit Deus Genesis
1.3, 6, 9, etc.
. And this not only said by Moses, but by David too, Verbo Domini coeli
firmati^ sunt, et spiritu oris ejus omnis virtus eorum; i. e. By the word of
the Lord were the Heavens made, and all the hosts of them by the breath of his
mouth Psalm. 33.6.
. In which it is to be observed, that though the creation of the World be
generally ascribed unto God the Father, yet both the Son and the holy Ghost had
their parts therein. Verbo Domini, by the word of the Lord were the Heavens
made, says the Prophet David. In the beginning was the Word Joh. 1.1, 3.
. All things were made by him, and without him was nothing made: says St. John
the Apostle. The Spirit of God moved upon the waters, says Moses in the Book
of the Law Genesis 1.2.
; and Spiritu oris ejus, by breath of his mouth were all the hosts of Heaven
created, says David in the book of Psalms. Made by his word, but yet not made
together in one instant of time; to teach us men deliberation in our words and
actions, and to set forth unto us both his power and wisdom. His power he
manifested in the Method of the worlds creat on, in that he did produce what
effects he pleased without the help of natural causes, in giving light unto the
World before he had created the Sun and Moon, making the earth fruitful, and
to bring forth plants, without the motion or influence of the Heavenly bodies.
And for his wisdom he expressed in as high a degree, in that he did not create
the Beasts of the field, before he had provided them of fodder, and sufficient
herbage; nor made man after his own image, before he had finished his whole
work, filled his house, and furnished it with all things necessary both for
life and pleasures.

Some time then God thought fit to take for perfecting the great work of the
Worlds creation; six days in all, of which the first did lay the foundation,
the rest raised the building. The foundation of it, I conceive to be that
unformed matter, out of which all things were extracted in the other five
days: which Moses first calls the Heaven and the Earth Genesis 1.1, 2.
, because they were so in potentia; but after tells us more explicitly, that
that which he called Earth, was inanis et vacua, without form, and void; and
that which he called Heaven, was but an overcast of darkness, or tenebrae super
faciem Abyssi, as the Vulgar reads it. Of which Chaos or confused Mass we thus
read in Ovid Ovid. Metam. 1.
, who questionless had herein consulted with the works of Moses, before his
time communicated to the learned Gentiles.

Ante mare, et terras, et quod tegit omnia Coelum,
Vnus erat toto naturae vultus in orb,
Quem dixere Chaos; rudis indigestaque moles,
Nec quicquam nisi pondus iners, congestaque eodem
Non been junctarum discordia semina rerum, etc.
Which I shall English from Geo. Sandys with some little change.

Before the Earth, the Sea, or Heaven were framed
One face had nature which they Chaos named;
An undigested lump, a barren load
Where jarring seeds of things ill-joyn'd abode.
No Sun as yet with light the World adorns,
Nor new Moon had repaired her waning horns.
Nor hung the self-pois'd Earth in thin Air placed,
Nor had the Ocean the vast shores embraced.
Earth, Sea, and Air, all mixed; the Earth unstable,
The Air was dark; the Sea un-navigable.
No certain form to any one assigned,
This that resist's. For in one body joined
The cold and hot, the dry and humid fight,
The soft and hard, the heavy with the light.
Out of this Chaos or first matter did GOD raise the World according to those
several parts and lineaments which we see it in: not as out of any preexistent
matter which was made before, and had not GOD for the Author or Maker of it;
but as the first preparatory matter which himself had made, including in the
same potentially both the form and matter of the whole Creation, except the
soul of man only which he breathed into him after he had molded up his body
out of the dust of the earth. And therefore it is truly said that GOD made all
things out of nothing: not out of nothing as the matter out of which it was
made, for then that nothing must be something: but as the terminus a quo, in
giving them a real and corporeal being, which before they had not, and did
then first begin to have, by the mere efficacy and virtue of his powerful
world. And though it be a maxim in the Schools of Philosophy, Ex nihil^ nil
fit, that nothing can be made of nothing, that every thing which has a being
does require some matter which must be pre-existent to it: yet this must either
be condemned for erroneous doctrine in the chair of Divinity; or else be
limited and restrained, as indeed it may (con^idering from whence it came) to
visible and natural agents, which cannot go beyond the sphere of their own
activity. Invisible and supernatural agents are not tied to rules, no not in
the production of the works of nature; though nature constituted and
established in a certain course, work every thing by time and measure in a
certain rule.

Now as the World was made of nothing; that is to say, without any uncreated or
precedent matter, which may be possibly conceived to have been coexistent with
the Godhead it self, and thereby gained a being or existence which before it
had not: so had it a beginning too, that is to say, a time in which it first
did begin to be, what before it was not. This Moses calls principium, a
beginning simple: In principio creavit Deus Coelum et Terram Genesis 1.1.
, In the beginning God created the Heaven and the Earth: which is all one as if
he had said, the Heaven and the Earth had a beginning, and that this unformed
Mass of Chaos, was the beginning, or first draught of them, the first in order
of time, because made before them, not in the way of causality as the cause
thereof. Coelum et Terra in principio; i. e. ante omnia facta sunt, as Simon
Pottius has observed in his notes or Scholies on St. John's Gospel. So that
whether we do expound those words that the Heaven and Earth had a beginning, or
that Moses by those words did mean that out of that which he calls the Heaven
and the Earth as out of the beginning or first matter all things were created,
it comes all to one: because it is acknowledged that that first matter was
created by God, and therefore of necessity was to have a beginning. Nor does
the Scripture only tell us that the World had a beginning, but by the help of
Scripture and the works of some Learned men, we are able to point out the time
when it did begin, or to compute how many years it is precisely from the first
beginning, without any notable difference in the Calculation. For though it be
most truly said, Citius inter Horologia quam Chronologia, that clocks may
sooner be agreed then Chronologers; yet most Chronologers in this point come so
near one another, that the difference is scarce observable. From the beginning
of the World to the birth of Christ, in the account of Beroaldus, are 3928.
years; 3945. in the computation of the Genevians; 3960. in the esteem of
Luther; and 3963. in the calculation of Melanchthon: between whom and
Beroaldus, being the least and the greatest, there is but 35. years difference;
which in so long a tract of time can be no great matter. Now if unto the
calculation made by Beroaldus, which I conceive to be the truest, we add 1646.
since the birth of CHRIST; the total of the time since the Worlds Creation
will be 5576. years, neither more nor less. And to this truth that the World
had a beginning whenever it was, and was not of eternal being or a
self-existency, most of the old Philosophers did consent unanimously; guided
thereto by this impossibility in nature, that any visible work either natural
or artificial, should either give it self a being, or have that being which it
has from no cause precedent. For from that principle, Tully argues very
rightly, that as a man coming into a goodly house in which he found nothing but
rats and mice, could not conceive that either the house had built it self, or
had no other maker but those rats and mice which were nested in it: so neither
can it be imagined, that either this World should be eternal, of a
self-existency, or was composed by any natural agent of what power soever
Cicero de Natura Deor.
. And this is that which is more briefly and expressly said by St. Paul to the
Hebrews, viz. That every house is built by some man, but he that built all
things is God Heb. 3.4.
. It Is true that Aristotle being a great enquirer into the works of nature,
conceived the World to be eternal; and yet not always constant unto that
opinion. But then it is as true withal, that there was something else which
inclined him to it, then his mere admiration of the works of nature. Democritus
and some others of the old Philosophers had been of opinion, that the World was
made in the first beginnings fortuitis atomorum concur ^ionibus, by the
accidental union or communion of several parcels, of which the Universe
consisted; that man himself was only voluntaria Elementorum concretio Minut.
Fell.
, a voluntary mixture of all the Elements into which he finally was resolved.
To which absurd opinion (as indeed it was) though it then found a general
embracement amongst most Philosophers, when Aristotle knew not how to submit
his most exquisite judgment; and yet was destitute of such further light, as
might more fully have instructed him in the true Original; he rather chose to
grant the world to be eternal, then to be made of such ridiculous and unsound,
though eternal Atoms. Et maluit pulchram han^ Mundi faciem ab aeterno esse,
Valles. de sacr. Phil. p. 16.
quam aliquando ex aeterna deformitate emersisse; as Vallesius pleades in his
behalf; and I thank him for it, who am (I must confess) a great friend of
Aristotle's; the Praecursor (as some call him) of our Savior CHRIST in
naturalibus, as John Baptist was in divinis.

And now I am thus fallen on these old Philosophers, I shall produce the
testimonies of some chiefs among them for proof of this, that the Creation of
the World was an effect of the most infinite power of Almighty God: the
knowledge whereof in such particular terms as by them delivered, was first
communicated to the Grecians by the wise men of Egypt, who questionless had
learned it of the Hebrews when they lived among them. And first Mercu^ius
Trismegistus, not only does affirm that God made the World, but that he made
it by his word; that he did only say, Existat Sol, let the Sun arise, and
presently the Sun shined on the face of the earth: and that by the power and
efficacy of the same Word, the Elements were distinguished, the Heavens
beautifyed with stars, the Earth adorned with herbs and plants of each several
sort; as his words are cited by St. Cyrill Cyr. contra Julian. l. 2.
. Thales one of the wise men of Greece, who had spent some part of his time in
Egypt, and was the first qui de Coelestibus disputavit, who brought the
knowledge of divine matters amongst his Countrymen, making the Element of
water to be the first matter as it were whence all things proceeded: Deum autem
eam mentem quae ex aqua cuncta formaverit, and that God was that infinite mind
or understanding, which out of that created all things Minut. Fell. in Octavio.
. In which he comes so near the next laid down by Moses, that Minutius
reckons him to have affirmed the same thing though in different words. Vides
Philosophi principalis opinionem nobiscum penitus consonare. Plato does seem to
speak so doub^ingly in this point, that many did conceive that he inclined to
the opinion of the Worlds eternity. But besides that this is one of the great
controversies betwixt him and Aristotle; Plutarch who was well versed in his
works and writings, does absolutely free him from that imputation: not only
saying of those who did so conclude, that they did torquere verba ejus, extend
his words upon the Rack, to make them speak that which he never meant Plutarch.
de dogmat. Philos.
; but positively affirming that in his Book inscribed Timaeus, he treated of
the Worlds Creation, as the chief scope and subject of that discourse. For
Aristotle next, though in his books of Physics or natural Philosophy, he
labor to maintain the Worlds Eternity, upon the grounds before delivered: yet
in his Metaphysics, where he speaks of abstracted notions, and travailed in
the search of materials, he does express himself in another manner. Qui* Deum,
seu mentem, causam and autorem dixit, etc. He (says that excellent
Philosopher) who does affirm that God is the cause and Author not only of all
living creatures, but even of nature it self, and of the universal World and
the course thereof, speaks like a sober-minded man; they which say otherwise
being rash unadvised persons Arist. Met.
. And this he does express more clearly in his tract inscribed De Mirabilibus,
if at the least that tract be his, where he declares that naturally the Sea
both did and would overwhelm the whole face of the Earth, because higher then
it in situation; but that it is restrained by the power and command of GOD, to
the intent the Earth might serve the better for the use of men, and other
living creatures which inhabit on it Id. lib. de Mirabilibus.
. What he has said of God in his book De Mundo, where he calls him the
Father both of Gods and Men, has been shown before: Theophrastus a great
follower of Aristotle, not only does maintain that the World was created by
God, but that he was ex nihilo, without any pre-existing or precedent matter
Theop. lib. de Saporibus.
. And Galen that great Doctor in Physic* who had no more religion in him then
what might serve for a Physician and an Heathen too, having surveyed and as it
were dissected all the parts of the World, concludes at last, that it was very
fit both for him and all men Canticum comp^nere in Creatoris nostri laudem, to
make an Hymn in honor of their great Creator; and therein to express his
wisdom, his great power and goodness.

The Latins as they borrowed their Philosophy from the learned Greeks, so did
they take up such opinions as they found most prevalent amongst them; though
otherwise divided into several Sects as the Grecians were. Varro as the most
ancient, so the most learned of the Romans, (as St. Augustine out of Cicero
August. de Civit. dei. l. 6.2.
does affirm he was) reckons the first Period or Era, at which he does
begin all his computations, from the creation of the World: and makes it the
opinion both of Zeno and the Stoics generally, that the World had a beginning,
and should have an end. Cicero though an Academick, and consequently a Sceptick
in all points of controversy, does yet conclude, Deum condidisse et ornasse
hominem, mundum etiam, mare, terram divino nutui parere; that GOD made man, and
^urnished him with those endowments which he still enjoys Tull. de nature.
Deorum. l. 2.
; and that the World, the Sea and Earth are obedient unto his command.
(Remember what was said before of the Rats and Mice, and then no question need
be made what he thought herein.) For Seneca as he was a Stoic, so there is
little doubt but that he held those Tenets which Varro does ascribe to the
Stoics generally. But yet to take him in our way, we shall hear him saying,
that God created all the World, yea and Man himself Senec. de vit. beata. l. 2.
c. 31.32.
. And of this truth he was so certain, that he thought it loss of time to
enquire any further after the beginnings of things, who made them and did first
extract them out of the common mass or Chaos where before they lay. Quid
quae^am (says he) quae sint initia universorum, quis rerum formator, qui omnia
in uno mersa et materia inerti convoluta dis^reverit Id. quaest. natural. l. 1.
? Macrobius speaks more plainly yet, although he somewhat failed in his
computation, affirming that the World must be lately made, Cujus cognitio bis
mill annos non excedat Macrob. Saturnal. l. 1.
, considering that there was no monument or record thereof which could entitle
it to the age of two thousand years. The like may be affirmed of the Poets, who
do ascribe the glory of the Worlds Creation unto God alone; Ovid in plain
significant terms, Sine ulla nominis dissimulatione, as Lactantius has it
Lact. l. 1.5.
, without boggling or scrupling at the name of God; Virgil more covertly under
the names of Men's and Spiritus, under the which names the old Philosopers used
to mask him. For Ovid having before described the general Chaos, then adds
Ovid Men. l. 1.
, Hanc Deus et melior litem natura diremit,
Nam Coelo terras, et terris abscidit undas.


That is to say; But God, the better nature, this decides,
Who Earth from Heaven, the Sea from Earth divides.
And shortly after speaking of the Creation of Man, he gives God these most
honorable titles, the Maker of all things, the Author of a better World; or
Ille opifex rerum, mundi melioris origo, in his proper language. Virgil
although he speaks more covertly, as before was said, yet he ascribes that to
his Men's or Spiritus, which Ovid in more plain terms does assign to God; and
so co^es somewhat near the truth, Non long fuit a veritate, as Lactantius
notes Lact. l. 1.5.
. For in his Aeneads thus he tells us.

Principio Coelum et Terras, camposque liquentes,
Lucentemque globum Lunae, Titaniaque Astra,
Spiritus intus alit, totamque infusa per artus
Men's agitat molem, et magno se ^orpore miscet Virg. Aen. l. 6.
.
Which may be Englished thus in brief; Heaven, Earth, and Seas, the Sun and
Moons bright sphere,
In the beginning by some Spirit were
Divinely cherished; which diffused through all,
Did like the Soul quicken this massy Ball.


In which we have not only intimated the powerful influence of the Spirit, but
the words In principio, which are used by Moses.

But to return again to the Word of God; we find not only there that God made
the World, and that he made it in such time as himself best pleased; but also
the course and method which he used in so great a work. A work which took up
six whole days as before was said; God taking a delight as it were in his own
productions, and giving them the commendation of good, as they were created; or
pretermitting that commendation, as sometimes he did, when any thing was
wanting unto that perfection which was after added. For in the work of the
second day, wherein God did divide the waters above the firmament, from those
which were disposed beneath it; we do not find this approbation, et vidit Deus
quod esset bonum: because that did not bring the waters to that use and
perfection which after they received when they were separated from the Earth,
and gathered together into one body which he called the Sea. And this
consideration is alone sufficient to consute a strange conceit of some late
Divines. Who on pretense of some authority out of Augustines works, have told
us that all things were created at once, by the power of God, and that not only
in one day, sed in eodem momento or eodem nunc, as Vallesius phraseth it
Valles. de sacr. Phil. c. 1.
; the distinction of six days being made by Moses, the better to complie with
our incapacities. For questionless there cannot be a better reason, why God
should pass no approbation on the second days work, and double it upon the
third: but that the separation of the Waters not being fully perfected till the
said third day, required one special approbation from the mouth of God; as the
production of the earth and the fruits thereof, which was the work of that day
also, did require another. But here a question may be made concerning those
waters which are said to be above the firmament; or rather of the firmament
which is said to divide them. I know the general opinion of most writers is,
that by the Firmament in that place we are to understand the Air: as being
interposed, inter aquosam et humidam superioris Regionis molem, et^ aquas
marium fluminumque, between the waters of the upper Regions, and that which is
dispersed in the Seas and Rivers. So Iunius for the Protestant Doctors Estius
et Iun* in Genesis 1.
, and Estius for those of the Church of Rome, do expound that Text; and for my
part I have not been unwilling to conform to that in which both parties are
agreed. But I have met of late with the Observations of a right learned man,
upon some passages of Scripture Mr. Greg. of Chapter Chapter Oxou.
, in which I find some strong presumptions, that an Abyss of Waters must
needs be granted to be above the highest Orb: whose Arguments I shall lay down
as I find them there, and so refer the matter wholly to the Readers judgment.
For first he says, (and I think very truly) that the Waters above the Heavens
called upon by David, and the three Children in their Song, to praise the Lord,
cannot be taken for the watery Region of the Air: because in the same Canticle,
by an express enumeration of all the Meteors, this Region is invited to the
like celebration O every showers and dew, bless ye the Lord, and magnify his
name for ever, says the Benedicite. Fire and hail, snow and vapor, wind and
storm, fulfilling his word, says the book of Psalms, Psalm. 148. He tells us
secondly that in the separation of the waters spoken of by Moses, the waters
below the firmament, were gathered together into that Receptacle which he
called the Sea, and that in the space above the firmament he laid up the rest
of the deep, as in a storehouse, Psalm. 33.7. From whence when he uttered his
voice (as at the flood) there was a multitude (or noise) of waters in the
Heavens, Ier. 10.13. Which lest it might be gratis dictum, he proves it by the
story of the general Deluge in which the waters being said to prevail at least
15. cubits above the top of the highest mountains, must needs have more time
then 40. days, and 40. nights for their falling down, according to the course
of nature, unless there had been some supply from this great Abyss; and that
God by an high hand had forced down those waters, which he had laid up there as
in a storehouse. And that there was such a supply from this infinite and
inexhaustible storehouse, he shows out of those words of the 7. of Genesis,
where it is said that the fountains of the great deep or (as the Angel calls
them in the Book of Esdras) the springs above the firmament, were broken up:
which on the abatement of the waters are said to have been stopped or shut up
again, Genesis 8.2. A thing, says he, not to be understood of any subterraneous
Abyss, without an open defiance to the common principles of nature. Besides it
does appear from the Text it self, that at the first God had not caused it to
rain on the earth at all (perhaps not till those times of Noah); but that a
moisture went up and watered the whole face of the ground, Genesis 2.5.6. as still
it is observed of the land of Egypt. And that it did continue thus till the
days of Noah, may be collected from the bow which God set in the Clouds; which
otherwise, as Porphyrie did shrewdly gather, had been there before: and if no
clouds nor rain in the times before, the Cataracts of heaven spoken of Genesis 7.
11. and 8.2. must have some other exposition then they have had formerly. Nay
he collects (and indeed probably enough from his former principles) that this
abundance of waters falling then from those heavenly treasuries, and sunk
into the secret receptacles of the earth; have been the matter of those clouds
which are and have been since occasioned and called forth by the heat and
influence of the Sun, and others of the stars and celestial bodies. These are
the principal reasons he insists upon. And unto those me thinks the
Philosophical tradition of a Crystalline heaven, the watery Firmament we may
call it, does seem to add some strength or moment: which has been therefore
interposed between the eighth sphere and the primum mobile, that by the natural
coolness and complexion of it, it might repress and moderate the fervor of the
primum mobile, which otherwise by its violent and rapid motion might suddenly
put all the world in a conflagration. For though perhaps there may be no such
thing in nature as this Crystalline heaven, yet I am very apt to persuade my
self, that the opinion was first grounded on this Text of Moses, where we are
told of Waters above the Firmament; but whether rightly understood I determine
not. But I desire to be excused for this excursion, though pertinent enough to
the point in hand; which was to show the power and wisdom of Almighty God in
ordering the whole work of the Worlds Creation.

To proceed therefore where we left. As we are told in holy Scripture that God
made the World, and of the time when, and the manner how he did first create
it; so find we there the special motions which induced him to it. Of these
the chief and ultimate is the glory of God, which not only Men and Angels do
daily celebrate, but all the Creatures else set forth in their several kinds.
The Heavens declare the glory of God, and the Firmament shows his handy work,
says the royal Psalmist Psalm. 19.1.
. And, Benedicite domino opera ejus, O bless the Lord, says he, all ye works
of his, Psalm. 103.22. The second was to manifest his great power and wisdom,
which does most clearly show it self in the works of his hands: there being no
creature in the world, no not the most contemptible and inconsiderable, of all
the rest, in making or preserving which we do not find a character of Gods
power and goodness. For not the Angels only, and the Sun and Moon, nor Dragons
only, and the Beasts of more noble nature; but even the very worms are called
on to extol Gods name Psalm. 148.10.
. All come within the compass of laudate Dominum; and that upon this reason
only, He spoke the word, and they were made, he commanded, and they were
created. In the third place comes in the Creation of Angels and men, that as
the inanimate and irrational creatures do afford sufficient matter to set forth
Gods goodness: so there might be some creatures of more excellent nature, which
might take all occasions to express the same; who therefore are more frequently
and more especially required to perform this duty. Benedicite Domino omnes
Angeli ejus, O praise the Lord all ye Angels of his, ye that excel in strength,
ye that fulfill his commandments (for the Angels are but ministering spirits,
Psalm. 104.4.) and hearken to the voice of his words Psa. 103.20.
. And as for men, he calls upon them four times in one only Psalm, to discharge
this Office, which shows how earnestly he expects it from them. O that men
would therefore praise the LORD for his goodness, and declare the wonders which
he does to the children of men Psalm. 107.8, 15, etc.
. Then follows his selecting of some men out of all the rest, into that sacred
body which we call the Church: whom he has therefore saved from the hands of
their enemies, that they might serve him without fear, in righteousness and
holiness all the days of their lives Luke 74, 75.
. And therefore David does not only call upon mankind generally to set forth
the goodness of the Lord; but particularly on the Church. Praise the Lord O
Jerusalem, Praise thy God O Sion Psa. 147.12.
. And that not only with and amongst the rest, but more then any other of the
sons of men. How so? because, he shows his word unto Jacob, his statutes and
his Ordinances unto Israel. A favor not vouchsafed to other Nations, nor have
the Heathen knowledge of his laws; for so it follows in that Psalm, v. 19,
20. The Church then because most obliged is most bound to praise him; according
to that divine rule of eternal justice, that unto whomsoever more is given, of
him the more shall be required. And last of all, the Lord did therefore in the
time when it seemed best to him, accomplish this great work of the Worlds
Creation: that as his infinite power was manifested in the very making, so he
might exercise his Providence, and show his most incomprehensible wisdom, in
the continual preservation and support thereof.

And certainly it is not easy to determine whether his Power were greater in
the first Creation, or his Providence more wonderful and of greater
consequence, in the continual goverance of the World so made: which
questionless had long before this time relapsed to its primitive nothing, had
he not hitherto supported it by his mighty hand. For not alone these sublunary
creatures which we daily see, nor yet the heavenly bodies which we look on with
such admiration; but even the Heaven of Heavens, and the Hosts thereof*
Archangels, Angels, Principalities, Powers, or by what name soever they are
called in Scripture, enjoy their actual existence and continual being, not
from their own nature, or their proper Essence, but from the goodness of their
Maker. For he it is (as St. Paul tells us in the Acts) who has not only made
the World and all things therein, but still gives life and breath unto every
creature Act. 17.24, 25, 26.
, and has determined of the times before appointed, and also of the bounds of
their habitation. And so much Seneca, Paul's dear friend (if there be any truth
in those letters which do bear their names) has affirmed also. Manent cuncta,
non quia aeterna sunt, sed quia defenduntur cura Regentis. Immortalia tutore
non egent. Haec autem conservat Artifex, fragilitatem materiae vi sua vincens
Senec. Epi. 58.
. All things (says he) continue in being as at first they were, not because
they are eternal in their own nature, but because they be defended by the
Providence of their Governor. Things in themselves Immortal have no need of a
guardian. But those things are preserved by the power of their Maker, which
over-ruleth the weakness of the matter, out of which they are made. So that it
seems by the Philosophy of this learned man, that the creature is preserved
from perishing, not by any power which it has in it self, but by the power and
providence of its Heavenly Maker. And this no less true in the Divinity of the
holy Scriptures. How long before this present time, had the unbridled Ocean
overwhelmed the land, had not God set bounds unto it which it shall not pass,
nor turn again to cover the earth Psalm. 104.9.
? What a combustion had the World been brought into long before this time, by
the perpetual jarring of contrary Elements, had not GOD so disposed it by his
heavenly Providence, as to interpose this vast airy Firmament betwixt the
Elements of fire and water, and so to temper drought with moisture, that
neither should be able to consume the other? How long before this time had
those many millions of men which possess the World, perished for want of food,
and devoured one another; had not he opened his hand, and filled all things
living with plenteousness Psalm. 145.16.
? did not he give the former and the latter rain, making the Valleys fruitful,
and so full of corn, that they do seem to laugh and sing, in the Psalmists
language Psalm. 65 14.
? How long before this time had the race of mankind been utterly exterminated
out of all the world, by those violent and consuming Wars, which have raged in
every part thereof since the times of Nimrod; since men began to hunt after one
another, and made the sword the instrument of their lusts and cruelties; did
not he keep unto himself the Sovereign power of making wars to cease Psalm. 46.^.
whenever he pleases, and sending Peace into our borders Psalm. 147: 14.
when we look not for it? Finally, not to instance in more particulars, how
long before this time had the World been emptied of Inhabitants, and no place
peopled but the Graves, by the continual prevalencie of Plagues and Leprosies,
and other pestilent diseases, which the intemperance of diet, or the malignant
influences of the heavenly bodies have so often produced: had not he given a
Medicinal virtue unto herbs and plants for cure of ordinary but contagious
sicknesses; and say to his destroying Angel, that it is enough 2 King. 24.16.
, when the devouring Plagues do most fiercely rage? That Pestilence which cut
off seventy thousand men in less space then a day, must needs have utterly
destroyed all mankind in less space then a year, had not the Lord restrained
the fury of it by his grace and goodness. Look where we will, cast we our eyes
on every side upon all the creatures, and we shall find as much of Gods
wonderful Providence in their preservation, as of his mighty Power in the first
Creation. That he spoke the word and they were made, that he commanded only and
they were created; is the most notable effect of his mighty Power: But that he
made them fast even for ever and ever Psalm. 148.5, 6.
, and gave them such a law for their rule and governance, as shall not be
broken, is a more admirable effect of his singular Providence.

When therefore it is said in the holy Scriptures that God rested on the
seventh day from all the works which he had made; we are to understand it thus,
that he desisted then from adding any thing unto the work of his hands, which
he had finished and made perfect the six days before; but not from ordering and
disposing of it as he sees occasion; which is a work as highly to be prized as
the first Creation, and from the which God never rests, no not on the
Sabbath. Semper videmus Deum operari and Sabbatum nullum est in quo non
operetur, in quo non producat solemn suum super bonos and malos Origin. hom. 23.
in Number.
. Sabbaths and all days are alike in regard of Providence, in reference to the
universal government of the World and Nature. Nor is there any day, says
Origin, whereon God does rest from the Administration of the World by him
created, on which he does not make his Sun to shine both on good and bad, and
makes his rain to fall on the just and wicked. Pater meus usque modo operatur
says CHRIST our Savior Joh. 5.17.
. I work (says he) and my Father also works to this very time. By which our
Savior means (as S. Augustine notes) that God rested not from ordering the
things which he had created, Nec ullam sibi cessationis statuisse diem August.
cont. Faust. Man. l. 16. c. 6.
, and that there was no day whatsoever it was in which he tended not the
preservation of the creature: and therefore for his own part that he would not
cease from doing the will of him that sent him, Ne Sabbatis quidem, no not so
much as on the Sabbath. It was the folly or the frenzy of the Epicureans, that
they robbed God of his Providence, and made him nothing but a dull Spectator,
an idle and unnecessary looker on; letting all worldly matters go, as they
would themselves. Et Deos aut otiosos finxit aut nullos Minut. Fell.
, said the Christian Advocate. The Stoics saw this Error and took care to
avoid it, but then they fell upon as bad, appointing that which they called
Fate, in the place of Providence, and by that Fate so tying up the hands of GOD
that he could do nothing, but what was formerly decreed and resolved upon.
Which were it so, Cur non illae potius regnare dicantur Lact. l. 1. c. 11.
, as wittily Lactantius scoffeth it, why was not Fate and Destiny put in the
place of God, which even the Gods themselves are compelled to obey? The
Peripateticks therefore thought it to be better Divinity, to grant to GOD the
oversight and super-inspection of all, but yet ascribed so much unto second
causes, that they left little more to be done by GOD, then to set the first
wheel, as it were, on going, and leave the rest to move in their course and
order. Which though it came more near the truth, yet it comes not home: the
Providence of God being so particular, that the very hairs of our head are said
to be numbered Mat. 10.29.
, and that a Sparrow does not fall to the ground without his knowledge and
permission. But leaving this discourse of Gods general Providence, we will
consider it at the present in these principal parts, his goodness toward all
his creatures; his Justice in the governance of humane affairs, concluding this
with that of Alexander Aphrodiseus, a great Aristotelean, who pleads thus in
behalf of this general Providence. Quod Deus inferiorum rerum curam gerere
nolit, a Dei natura alienum est nimis, etc. Alex. Aphrod. l. de Provident.
To say, says he, that GOD refuses to take care of inferior things, is too
too much abhorrent from the nature of God; or makes him liable to the passions
of an envious man. And on the other side, to say he could not do it, were
altogether as unworthy, and to make him impotent: neither of which by any means
may be said of God. And therefore we must needs determine, that God is both
willing and able to take care of all things, which he has made already, or
shall make hereafter.

And first the goodness of the Lord, though indivisible in it self, (as all
things in him) has been divided by the Schoolmen, with very good propriety
both of words and meaning, into these kinds: the one of which they call (...),
Original; the other (...), exemplified; Illa in Deo existens, haec in Creaturis
expressa, the first existing solely in the Lord our God, the other manifested
in his Creatures. That which they call (...), or Original, we may define to be
an Everlasting and unalterable quality in the Lord our God, qua modis omnibus
and. sum bonus est, by which he is supremely and entirely good. In which
regard the Divine Plato said of God, that he is (...), good only in and of
himself; (...), the only saving good, the most desirable felicity, as others of
the Heathen called him. And he that knew him best, our most gracious Savior,
has given this to us for a Maxim, Vnus est bonus, DEVS, that there is none
good but only God Mat. 19.17.
: so good, that his most blessed vision is the summum bonum, the highest and
supremest good, that any of the Saints and Angels can aspire unto. The other
species of goodness, which the Schools call (...), or Exemplified, is that
which God has manifested on his Creatures, and imparted to them: and this they
do again divide into general, and special; that being extended unto all his
Creatures, this more particularly restrained to his chosen servants. His
general goodness he has shown, as before was noted, in the continual
preservation of the works of his hands, clothing the hills with grass, and the
vales with corn; feeding the Lions and young Ravens, when they call upon him;
apparelling the Lillies with a greater beauty, then that of Solomon in his
greatest glory; making his Sun to shine, and his rain to fall, as well upon the
sinner as the righteous person; and in a word, opening his hand, and filling
all things living with his plenteousness. In which respect it is most truly
said by the Royal Psalmist, Repleta est Terra bonitate Domini, the Earth is
full of the goodness of the Lord, Psalm. 32.5. His special goodness he
restrains to his chosen servants, to such as fear his name, and observe his
Precepts. The Lord is good to Israel, says the Prophet David, even unto all
such as are of a clean heart Psalm. 73.1.
And so the Prophet Jeremy in the Lamentations, The Lord is good to them that
wait for him, to the soul that seeks him Lam. 3.25.
This manifested in delivering them from the evils both of sin and punishment;
and in accumulating on them his sacred blessings both of Grace and Glory.
Goodness is graciousness in this sense; and to be good is only to be kind and
gracious. Sis bonus O felixque tuis, in the Poets language. And then we have it
thus expressed in the words of David, viz. The Lord is gracious, and full of
compassion, slow to anger, and of great mercy Psalm. 145.8.
: that is to say, of great mercy in the pardon of our sins and wickednesses;
and gracious in the free collation of the gifts of the holy Spirit, which
therefore are called Graces quia gratis data. By grace we are made fit for
mercy, by mercy capable of glory. And by his grace and mercy on his chosen
servants, does he preserve the world from those dreadful plagues, which else
would fall upon the wicked: from whom he does withhold his hand, and keep off
his vengeance, out of that grace and mercy to the righteous persons, amongst
whom they live. For certainly it is most true which Ruffinus tells us, Mundum
sanctorum meritis stare Ruffin. in Symbol.
, that the World has hitherto been preserved by the prayers of the Saints. And
it is as true which is affirmed by Stapleton, a learned Papist, Deum propter
bonos sustinere malos Staplet. in promptuar.
, that God gives many temporal blessings to ungodly men, because they live so
intermingled with his faithful servants: and respites them sometimes from the
hand of punishment, not for their own, but for the righteous persons sake,
amongst whom they dwell. If Sodom stood so long unpunished, it was because of
righteous Lot, who then dwelt amongst them Genesis 18.32, etc.
. And possibly it might have stood to this very day, at least have escaped that
fiery deluge which then fell upon it, had it contained no more then teri
righteous persons. Far be it from the Lord our God to stay the godly with the
wicked. The Judge of all the World is more just then so. When God raineth
vengeance from above on the wicked man, it cannot be but that the righteous
must partake of the common miseries; which do befall that State or Nation in
the which he lives; as Abraham, Isaac, Jacob did of those several famines
which God had sent upon their Neighbors. There are not always such
distinctions, as was between the land of Goshen and the rest of Egypt. God
therefore sometimes holds his hands, when the sins of wicked men cry loud for
vengeance, out of his grace and mercy to the righteous man; or else abbreviates
the time of their tribulation out of respect unto his chosen. If they partake
alike of the common miseries of Famine, Pestilence, War, as sometimes they do:
it is because that even the best men have their imperfections, and ever and
anon commit some foul sins, which God thinks fit to expiate with a temporal
Purgatory.

But Justice bears the greatest stroke in all Public Governments. Mercy and
Grace, although they be the fairest flowers in the Royal Diadem, are used but
at some times, and on choice occasions. But Justice is the standing and
perpetual rule, by which Kings reign, and order the affairs of their several
States. And this the Civil Lawyers do define to be Perpetua and constan^
voluntas jus suum cuique tribuendi Justin. Institut. l. 1. c. 1.
, a constant and perpetual purpose to give to every man his due. Which
definition well accords with that heavenly justice which is Original in God,
and essential to him: since that the Will of God is the only Standard, by which
his justice is directed in the Government of the World and mankind. Norma
justitiae divinae est voluntas Dei, as the old Rule was; a shadow of which
Sovereign power we may behold in some of the Roman Emperors; who though they
ruled the people by the advice of the Senate, yet ruled the Senate as they
pleased, and made the intimation of their own will and pleasure, to pass as
current as Law. Quod Principi placuerit Legis habet valorem Ibid. 1.
, says the book of Institutes. And such almost is the conclusion of those
Royal Edicts which daily is set out by the French Kings, which generally ends
with these formal words, Car tell est nostre plaisir; for such is our pleasure.
But this in these and other Princes of the like authority, is rather a
character of power, then a Rule of justice: the Rule of justice being to be
straight and even, and always constant to it self; not alterable on occasions,
or turned aside by passions and humane affections. The will of God is subject
to no such vicissitudes, to such turns and changes, as the wills of men; but an
unalterable and most constant rule, without variation, such as the rule of
equal and impartial justice is of right to be. And by this rule it is that the
Lord proceeds in executing justice over all the World. Which justice either
does consist in the performance of his promises, (for even a just and righteous
man is as good as his word) and then it may be called veracitas; and is a
species or kind of Commutative justice: or else in punishing or rewarding the
sons of men, according to the exigence of their several works, and then it has
the name of distributiva, or distributive justice. That part thereof which does
consist in the performance of his promises, and is called Veracitas, may be
defined to be a constant and unalterable purpose in Almighty God, of bringing
every thing to pass, which he has either promised to the sons of men, or spoke
concerning them by his holy Prophets, which have been since the World began. In
the first sense it is said so often of him in the holy Scipture, that he
remembered the Covenant made with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, performing to their
seed and their children after them, whatsoever he was pleased to promise: more
generally by the Royal Psalmist, Custodit veritatem in seculum, that he keeps
his promise for ever, Psalm. 146.6. And in the other sense, it was said unto the
Virgin Mary by her Cousin Elizabeth, that there should be a performance of all
those things which had been told her by the Lord, Luke 1.45. by the Apostle,
that all the Promises of God in Christ Jesus are yea and Amen, 2 Cor. 1.20. by
CHRIST himself, that Heaven and earth should pass away, but that there was not
one Iod or title in the Word of God, which in due time should not be
accomplished. If it consist in punishing the impenitent sinner, or chastising
his own dear children for their wilful follies; we then call it punitive, and
so it comes within the compass of Gods heavenly anger, which as St. Augustine
does define it, non aliud est quam voluntas puniendi, is nothing but the will
of God to punish such as do offend against his Commandments. If in rewarding
those who conform themselves (as far as humane frailty will permit) to his laws
and precepts; it is called Remunerative, and has a great admixture in it both
of love and mercy, in passing by our faults to reward our faith: that saying of
St. Bernard being always true, Semper invenies Deum benigniorem quam te
culpabilem Bern. Ser. 11.
. Nay even his anger or his punitive justice is so mixed with goodness, that in
the midst of judgment he remembers mercy, and deals not so extremely with
us as we have deserved: it being as true, which I find noted by Nicephorus,
Deum vindictae gladium oleo misericordiae semper acuere Niceph. Hist. Eccles.
l. 17. c. 3.
, that God does always scour the sword of his vengeance with the oil of his
mercy. The World had been reduced by this time to its former nothing, had not
he sweetened the severity of his judgments by the balm of his mercies; and
grown into a Wilderness or vast confusion, had he not held in by his Justice
the exorbitant power of those who make their lusts and their wills a Law.

And certainly, if we consult the Monuments and Records of former times, we
shall find no Age nor State of men or Nations, which do not give us evident
and plain examples of Gods proccedings in this kind, when the necessities of
his Church, or the sins of men do require it of him. The subtle tyranny of the
Egyptians had not only taught them to oppress Gods people for the present, but
to extinguish the whole race of them for the time to come: and therefore a
command was given to the Midwives of Egypt, to murder all the Male Children
which were born to Israel Exodus 1.16.
. Did not God scourge them with their own rod, and pay them in their own coin,
as we use to say, when he slew all the firstborn in the land of Egypt? And
possibly the piety and compassion of the Midwives of Egypt, in sparing many of
the Male children whom they might have murdered, occasioned God to lay the fury
of his vengeance on the firstborn Male Exo, 12.30.
, and not on any of the Females throughout the Country. When David surfeiting
on plenty and the sweets of power, not only had defiled the wife, but destroyed
the husband* how fitly did God square the punishment unto the offense? 2 Samuel
13.14, 29.
For presently a violent mixture of rape and incest is committed by one of his
own sons on his daughter Tamar; that rape revenged not long after in the death
of the Ravisher: the Murderer getting in short time such a potent party, as to
drive his Father out of Jerusalem, and to defile his Wives and Concubines in
the fight of the people 2 Samuel 16.22.
. When David was restored to his Crown again, and growing vain in conceit of
his own great power, must needs command a general muster to be made of all his
subjects; that all the World might see of what strength he was, and stand in
fear of his displeasure 2 Samuel 24.
: how justly did God punish him and take down his pride, in cutting off so many
thousands of his people in whose strength he trusted, and bringing him to this
confession, that all his strength and power was from God alone. The loss of so
many of his subjects was a loss to David, (the glory of a King consisting in
the multitude of his subjects, as the Wiseman tells us) And though David
interceded for them, and took all the fault upon himself, saying in the
affliction of a troubled soul, At oves istae quid fecerunt? what had those
sheep done? yet was there none at all of that seventy thousand, who had not
many ways offended against Gods Commandments, and therefore had deserved death
as the wages of sin Romans 6. ult.
. How patiently did God bear with the house of Judah, in their Idolatries and
apostasy from his Laws and Precepts? how frequently did he command them to
rely on him in all times of danger? By consequence, how justly did he plague
them by the hands of Idolatrous Nations; and give them over as a prey to the
Babylonians 2 King. 20.13.
, whose favor they had courted in undecent ways, and such as argued a distrust
of Gods power or favor? And when those Babylonian Princes whom God used as
scourges to punish the transgressions of the house of Judah, began so far to
forget God, and to contemn that power which raised them to that height of
Empire, as to profane the Vessels of his holy Temple in their drunken Feasts
Dan. 5.3, 4.
, did not God throw them in the fire (so tender Mothers do their rods) as no
longer serviceable; and give over to the hands of the Medes and Persians? And
when the Medes and Persians of a frugal People began to drench themselves in
wine and prohibited pleasures, growing as sordid and effeminate as
Sardanapalus, as drunken and gluttonous as Belshazzar: how soon did God subvert
their Empire, and eclipse their glories, by the hands of an impuissant though a
valiant Prince; whom also, when he fell into the Persian riots, he cut off in
the very midst of his youth and conquests. The many moral virtues in the people
of Rome, their Temperance, Justice, Valor, and Magnanimity, it pleased God to
reward with a temporal Monarchy; the greatest that ever the Sun had shined on,
in the times before. But when together with the conquest of Asia, they had
brought home the Asian vices and effeminacy, making their lusts their law, and
their wills the rule by which their actions must be squared, and the whole World
governed: God plagued them first with Civil and unnatural wars, after subjected
them unto the lust and arbitrary rule of their fellow Citizen. And finally when
the Christian faith was so far from reclaiming them, that they became a scandal
and dishonor to it Salvian de Gubern. Dei.
; he gave them over as a prey to those barbarous Nations, who either knew not
Christ at all, or else were as erroneous in points of Doctrine, as the Romans
were grown scandalous in matter of practice. Infinitum esset ire per singula.
It were an infinite attempt to follow Gods justice by the track over all the
World: although the footsteps of it be so plain and evident, that he would
hardly lose his way that should undertake it: there being no National History
either old, or modern, in which we find not many notable instances to evince
this truth; that God is just in all his ways, and righteous in all his works
Psalm: 145.17.
, and that he meteth such measure to the sons of men, wherewith they meted unto
others Mat. 7.11.
. Some more examples of the which he that lusts to see, may find them summed
up in the Preface of Sir Walter Raleigh before his History of the World, though
to say truth, we need not look far before us. For certainly if all the
instances of Gods justice had been lost in the world, and there were no
monument of writing left to the former times; the very times and Countries in
which we live, would give us such and so many sad remembrances, as are
sufficient in themselves to set forth Gods justice, and make it more remarkable
then all ancient stories. The Instances whereof I had rather the Ingenuous and
discerning Reader should make unto himself then expect from me. Let no man
therefore in the pride of his worldly wisdom ^est in the success of a
prosperous mischief, or flatter and deceive his poor soul with this, that God
does not see it. For though God seems to wink, yet his eyes are open; and does
not only see, but will bring to light the practices of wicked and malicious
men, though never so secretly contrived, or so cunningly plotted. And his
Divine justice, though slow paced at first, will overtake us at long running,
how much soever we may seem to have got the start: God dealing still with
wicked and bloodthirsty men, as heretofore with Haman, Absalom, Achitophel,
and such other Instruments. When they have served his turn, then he hangs them
up. And so I close this point of the Divine Justice of the true God, with that
which a false God truly said in behalf thereof; for thus the Oracle of Apollo,
as Porphyrius cites him.

(...)
(...),
(...),
(...).
Which with some little alteration may be Englished thus; Let no man think to
blind the Eye of Heaven,
With juggling plots or colors smooth and even.
God fills all places, and sees round about;
He that made all things, shall not he find out?


And yet I would not have it gathered out of this discourse, that because GODS
justice in these cares has been quick and sudden, and followed close on the
offense, it must be always so on the like occasions; or else that question may
be made, whether he has forgotten to be just and gracious, or that the Divine
Providence be asleep and regards us not. The Providence of God in ordering
humane affairs is no less eminent in suffering wicked men to prosper, and sin
to escape unpunished in the present world: then if the Divine vengeanee of
Almighty God followed them close upon the heels. God uses the exorbitant lusts
and passions of the wicked man, as the wise Physicians do poisons in the course
of Physic, thereby to purge some hurtful and predominant humor out of the
bodies of his Saints: which otherwise might grow too corrupt and rank, and draw
them into such diseases as were irrecoverable. For though God has no need of
the wicked man for the manifestation of his glory, who can by other means
effect what himself best pleases: yet since men will be wicked and given up to
sin, God may and will effect by them what he has a mind to, Aut nescientibus
iis aut nolentibus, either against their wills, or besides their purposes. God
neither does incline them, nor excite them to those works of wickedness,
(whatsoever some are pleased to say unto the contrary) no nor so much as to
permit them, but in this sense only, as he affords them not such a measure of
grace by which they must have been restrained from the acts of sin. Only he
makes this use of their lewd affections, their cruelty, ambition, or such other
lusts, as he finds most predominant in them; that they become fit instruments
to set forth his glory, and execute his vengeance when he sees occasion. Non
operando in malis quod ei displicet, sed operando per malos quod ei placet
Fulgent. ad Monin.
, as Fulgentius has it. Thus used he the envy which the sons of Jacob did
carry most unworthily toward their brother Joseph, as a great means of saving
them and all their families in the following Famine, with which he did intend
to afflict those parts. And so much Joseph does acknowledge, when he said unto
them; that they should not be afraid nor troubled because they sold him into
Egypt when he was a child Genesis 45.5, 7.
. Pro salute enim vestra misit me Deus ante vos in Aegyptum; for God had sent
him into Egypt before hand for their preservation. So also in the case of our
blessed Savior, of whom Joseph was a Type or figure: the Lord determined out
of his counsel and foreknowledge (as St. Peter tells us Act. 2.23.
, that he should be the Propitiation for the sins of the world; and in due time
he made the avarice of Judas, and the malice of the Scribes and Pharisees, his
means and instruments, that by their wicked hands and obdurate hearts, he might
be crucified and slain. So used he the ambition of the Kings of Babylon, to
punish and chastise his people of the house of Judah; and the desire of glory
which he found in Titus, for the subversion of that wicked and perverse
generation, who had not only made themselves drunk with the blood of the
Prophets, but against all rules of Law and Justice, had filled themselves with
the blood of the Son of God. Thus when he had a mind to assay Jobs patience,
he used the Chaldees and wild Arabs, who did trade in theevery; to fall upon
the herds of his Kine and Camels; and was content the Devil should try some
experiments on his body also, to leave the fairer pattern of unconquered
patience for the times to come. And though in these and other occasions of this
nature, he make use of the wicked to effect his purposes; yet he rewards them
answerably to their deservings: proportioning their Wages to their own
intentions, and not according unto that effect which he works out of them.
Recipient vero non pro eo quod Deus been usus est eorum operibus malis, sed
quod ipsi male usi sunt Dei operibus bonis Fulgent. ad Monin.
, said Fulgentius truly. And though some of them have the hap, or the seeming
happiness, to go down into the grave in peace, and carry the reputation with
them of successeful wickedness; yet God will find them out at last, and meet
with these sour grapes in his general Vintage, and tread them in the
Wine Press of his indignation. And to say truth, there are as great and weighty
reasons, why some men's punishments should follow after them, as that the rest
should have a trial and essay of their future miseries; by those which they
endure in this present life. For as St. Augustine well observes, if all men's
sins were punished in this present world, Nihil ultimo judicio reservari
putaretur, it would occasion some to think that there were no necessity nor use
of the general judgment August. de Civit. Dei. l. 1. c. 8.
: and on the other side if none, Nulla esse divina providentia crederetur,
others would be too apt to think that there were no Providence, and say with
him in David's Psalms, Tush! God does not see it. God therefore does so order
the affairs of this present life, as may be most subservient unto that to come:
not giving such success to the prayers of his servants, as they think most
conducible unto their estates, but as he thinks most expedient for them, in
reference to a better life then what here they have. And if he do not always
give the victory to the justest cause, but that the good man may complain as
once Cato did, Victrix causa placet superis, sed victa Catoni Lucan. Pharsal.
, that the worst cause sped best in the chance of war: that also is a special
testimony of his heavenly Providence. For either they which seem to have the
justest cause may manage it by wicked and ungodly instruments, or else rely
too much on the Arm of flesh; or God may possibly foresee, that they will use
the Victory unto his dishonor, or grow secure and negligent of all pious
duties upon the strength of that success. In all which cases if God give them
over to the hands of their enemies, they have no reason to complain of Almighty
God; as if he either were not just in his distributions, or that his Providence
were asleep, or too highly busied, to look upon such passages as are here
beneath. God does that which is most agreeable to his heavenly justice, in
punishing the sins of those whom he loves most tenderly, with some temporal
punishments; that they may escape the wrath of the day to come: and lets the
wicked man go on with success and glory, until he has made up the measure of
his sins and wickednesses, and so is fitted and prepared for the day of
slaughter. But of this Argument it is enough to have said a little: the
Providence of God in governing the affairs of the present world, being a point
so generally granted by the sober Heathens, that Aristotle being asked what
answer should be given to those who made question of it, is said to have
replied, The whip. His meaning was, that they who ware so irreligious, as to
make any doubt of Gods heavenly providence, were rather to be answered with
stripes then with demonstrations. And with this resolution I conclude this
Chapter and the point together.

CHAP. V. Of the Creation of Angels; the ministry and office of the good; the
fall and punishment of the evil Angels: And also of the Creation and fall of
Man.
OF the Creation of the World we have spoken before; and are now come to speak
of the creation of Angels and Men, as the more noble parts thereof. These,
though included in those words of Heaven and Earth, according as they stand in
the Creed, are more significantly expressed by the Nicene Fathers: who to those
words of Heaven and Earth, have added as by way of Gloss or Commentary, and of
all things visible and invisible. That under the notion of things visible they
intended Man, as well as any other visible work of the whole Creation, is a
thing past question. And that by things invisible they did mean the Angels,
will prove to be as clear as that, and testified by St. Paul expressly,
saying, that By him all things were created, whether in Heaven or Earth,
visible or invisible; whether they be thrones, or dominions, or principalities,
or powers, all things were created by him, and for him Coloss. 1.16.
. In which we have not only the Apostles testimony, that by the things
invisible are meant the Angels; but an enumeration of the several ranks and
degrees of Angels, which were created by the power of the Lord our God. Of
these degrees and ranks we shall speak anon; having prepared our way unto that
discourse, by taking first a short survey of the angelical nature. For the quid
nominis, to begin first with that, it is merely Greek; and English word Angel,
and the Latin Angelus, being the same in sound and sense, with the Greek word
(...), and that derived from (...), nuntio, which is to carry a message, or to
go of an errand. Angelus then is no more then nuncius, an Angel but a messenger
in our English language. And so it it expressed by Lactantius, saying, Habe^
enim Ministros quos vocamus nuncios Lact. l. 1.7.
. This as it notifyeth their name, and the reason of it, so does it signify
their office; for Angelus nomen est officii non naturae, (as the Fathers tell
us) which is to be the messengers from God to Man, as often as there is any
important business which requires it of them; to be the Nuncios as it were,
from Gods supreme holiness, to manage his affairs with the sons of men. And
unto this the Apostle also does agree, telling us that they are (...), or
ministering Spirits, sent forth to minister unto them that shall be heirs of
Salvation Heb. 1.14.
. Spirits they are according to the nature in which they were made, and
Ministering Spirits (or Ministers as he calls them out of David, v. 7.) with
reference to the office unto which designed. We have their nature in the word
Spirits, which shows them to be pure incorporeal substances, not made of any
corrupt matter as the bodies of men, and so not having any internal principle
of being, they can have none neither of dissolution: and yet as Creatures made
by the hand of God they are reducible to nothing by the hand that made them,
although they have not in themselves any passive principle, to make them
naturally moral. It is the privilege or prerogative of Almighty God to be
purely Simple, without composition, parts, or passion. The Angels though they
come most near him, yet fall short of this. Who though they are not made of a
matter and form, and so not naturally subject to the law of corruption: yet
are they made up or compounded of Act and Power, (or Actus and Potentia, in the
School-mens language) an Act by which they are, a Power into which they may be
reduced. And being so made up of an Act of being, and a Power of not being,
(though probably that Power shall never be reduced into Act) they fall
exceeding short of the nature of GOD, whose name is, I AM, and is so, that it
is impossible that he should not be, or be any other then he is; God being as
incapable of change, as of composition. Nay, so great is the difference betwixt
their nature and the nature of God, so infinitely do they fall short of his
incomprehensible and unspeakable Purity, that though in comparison of Men (as
well as in themselves) they are truly Spirits; yet in comparison of GOD we may
call them bodies.

But whatsoever their condition and ingredients be, they owe not only unto God
their continual being, by whom they are so made as to be free from corruption;
but unto him they are indebted for their first original, without which they had
not been at all. St. Paul, we see, does reckon them amongst things created; and
so does David too in the Book of Psalms. Where calling upon all the Creatures
to set forth Gods praises, he first brings in the Angels to perform that
office, and then descends unto the Heavens and the other Creatures. O praise
the Lord of Heaven (says he) praise him in the height Ps. 148.1, 2.
; Praise him all ye Angels of his, praise him all his Hosts, Praise him Sun
and Moon, etc. Then adds of these and all the rest of the hosts of heaven, He
spoke the word, and they were made; he commanded, and they were created. This
with that passage of St. Paul before mentioned make it plain enough, that the
Angels were created by Almighty God. And to this truth all sorts of writers
whatsoever, which do allow the being of Angels, do attest unanimously. Apollo
in the Oracles ascribed unto him, having laid down the incommunicable*
Attributes of God, concludes it thus; (...) Ap. Lact. l. 1. c. 7.
, that such is God, of whom the Angels are but the smallest portion. Where
though Apollo (or the Devil in Apollo's statua) would fain be thought to be an
Angel, and as an Angel would be thought to have somewhat in him, which might
entitle him to be a Godhead: yet he confesses plainly that he owed his being
to the power of God, and was to be obedient unto his commands. Hosthanes one of
the chief of the Eastern Magi, not only did allow of Angels, as the Ministers
and messengers of the only God; but made them so subservient to his will and
power Minut. Fell.
, ut vultu Domini territi contremiscant, that they could not look upon him
without fear and trembling. A Creature therefore doubtless, not of
self-existence; and a Creature of Gods making too, or else what need they
tremble when they look upon him? Of Plato it is said by Tertullian briefly,
Angelos Plato non negavit Tertull. Apolog. c. 22.
; but by Minutius more expressly, that he did not only believe that there were
Angels, but came so near the knowledge of their constitution, as to affirm
that they were inter mortalem et immortalem mediam substantiam Minut. Fell.
, a substance of a middle nature betwixt immortal and mortal: that is to say,
not so eternally immortal as Almighty God, nor yet so subject to mortality, as
the children of men. And herein Aristotle comes up close to his Master Plato
affirming more like a Divine then a Philosopher, that to the perfection of the
World there were required three sorts of substances: the first wholly
invisible, which must be the Angels; the second wholly visible, as the Heaven
and Earth; and the third partly visible, and invisible partly, or made up of
both. And this says he is none but man, compounded of a visible body and an
invisible soul. The Angels then, though reckoned amongst things invisible, yet
being reckoned amongst such things as necessarily concurred to the Worlds
perfection: must have the same Creator which first made the World, and made it
in that full perfection which it still enjoys: and such as has before been
proved, could be none but GOD.

The matter in dispute amongst learned men, is not about the Power, by which,
but the time when they were created: In which as in a matter undetermined by
the word of God, every man takes the liberty of his own opinion; and for me
they may. Some think that their Creation is included in the first words of
Genesis, where God is said to have created the Heaven and the Earth Estius in
Genesis 1.
: others, when God said, Fiat lux, Let there be light, and that from thence
they have the title of the Angels of light. Some will not have them made till
the fourth day, when the Sun and Moon, and others of the Stars were made, whose
Orbs they say are whirled about by these Intelligences: Cum ab omnibus
receptum sit ab illis Coelos torqueri, says Peter Martyr Loc. Com. Class. 1.
c. 12.
. But that they were created in one of the six days, is the received opinion
of all late Divines, whether they be of the Pontifician or the Protestant
party. If so, I would fain know the reason why Moses writing purposely of the
Worlds Creation, should pretermit the Masterpiece of that wondrous work: and
not as well take notice of the Creation of the Angels, as of the making of the
Heavens, and the Sun, and Moon, or of the Earth, and other sublunary Creatures.
I know the common answer is, that Moses did therein consult the frailty of the
Jews his Countrymen; who having been very well acquainted with the Idolatries
of Egypt, might easily have been induced to the worship of Angels, had they
found any thing in Scripture of that noble subject; or else because being
acquainted with the things of God, he would not trust them with a secret of so
high a nature. Angelorum non meminit, quia scribebat rudibus Judaeis, illius
secretioris doctrinae parum capacibus, says Estius the Jesuit for the
Pontificians. That he did purposely omit it, Peter Martyr grants, but says
that it was propter hominum proclivitatem ad Idololatriam, because of their
inclination to Idolatry. For my part I confess these answers do not satisfy
me. For neither were the Jews so untaught a people, as not to have been told of
those Ministering Spirits, which did so frequently appear to Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob. And if they were so prone unto Idolatry, as they say they were, I
cannot see but that the pretermission of the Creation of Angels, might rather
give them some occasion to commit Idolatry, then any way divert them from it.
For when they found by reading in the book of Genesis, that not only Lot bowed
himself down before the Angels which appeared unto him Genesis 19.1.
, but that the same reverence or worship (call it which we will) had been
performed unto them by their Father Abraham Genesis 18.2.
; and yet could not meet with nothing touching their creation: might not they
probably conclude, that sure the Angels were no creatures, but rather a nature
so divine and excellent that it were no impiety to worship them with religious
worship. There must be therefore somewhat else which did occasion this
omission, whatsoever it was. And why that reason may not be, because it did not
fall within the compass of the six days work (which Moses only undertook to lay
down before us) I must confess for my part I can see no reason. That they were
made before the fourth day, is most plain in Scripture. Where wast thou when I
laid the foundations of the Earth, said God to Job, when the morning stars sung
together, and all the Sons of God shouted for joy Job 38.4, 7.
? St. Augustine hereupon infers, Iam ergo erant Angeli quando facta sunt
sydera, facta autem sunt sydera die quarto August. de Civit. dei. l. 11. c. 9.
. Therefore (says he) the Angels were created before the stars; for other Sons
of God there were none but they to magnify and applaud that most glorious
work. Before the fourth day then, that is clear. And I am apt enough to think,
till I see better evidence to the contrary, that they were made before the
first. Certain I am the Tenor of the Greek Fathers went this way confessedly:
whose testimonies I would here produce to make good the assertion, but that I
have confitentem reum. For Estius himself does confess ingenuously, Quod multi
Patres Graeci tradunt Angelos aliquandiu creatos ante Mundum corporeum Estius
in Genesis 1.
; that many of the Greek Fathers were of opinion, that the Angels were created
for some space of time before this visible and corporeal World. And Estius
himself, for ought I can see, is of the same opinion also, who tells it for a
manifest truth in another place, that the Angels did not fall from the love of
God, in the first moment, as it were, of their Creation: Sed aliquanto tempore
in justitia stetisse Estius in Ezech. 28.
, but that they did abide awhile in the state of righteousness, though they did
not persevere therein, as the others did. Assuredly had they been created in
the six days work, their continuance in the state of Grace had been so short,
that it could hardly have been called Aliquantum temporis. But whether Estius
might so mean, I determine not. The Greek Fathers, as he says, for the most
part did; and so did many of the Latins. Lactantius I am sure was of this
opinion; and thereby answers the objection which Hortensius made, touching
the loneliness and solitude of Almighty God, before the making of the World.
Tanquam nos qui unum esse dicimus, desertum ac solitarium esse dicamus. Habet
enim Ministros quos vocamus nuncios Lact. l. 1. c. 7.
. How far this satisfyeth the objection we have shown before; but certainly it
does sufficiently declare his judgment, that the Angels were created before the
World. The old Hermit Cassianus is more plain and positive; and he a Latin
writer too, of approved antiquity, Ante conditionem hujus visibilis Creaturae,
spiritales coelestesque virtutes Deum fecisse, etc. nemo fidelium est qui
dubitat Cassian. Collat. 8. c. 7.
. That God before the making of this visible World, had made those heavenly and
spiritual powers (so he calls the Angels) there is not any of the faithful who
so much as doubts. In which it is to be observed that Cassian does not only
speak this as his own opinion, but the opinion of all Orthodox and faithful
Christians; and an opinion grounded on the words of Job before remembered, by
him alleged and applied for the proof hereof. Finally having cleared the
received opinion, from being any way derogatory to the honor of Christ, by
whom and for whom all things were created, he does again repeat what he said
before, though he differ somewhat in the words, saying, Ante istud Geneseos
temporale principium, omnes illas Potestates Coelestesque virtutes Deum creasse
non est dubium. This then was the opinion of the ancient Church, and it stood
uncontrouled by any public authority till the Lateran Council, about 30. years
ago; in which indeed it was declared, Omnipotenti Dei virtute mundum et
Angelos simul ab initio temporis de nihilo esse condita Council. Lateran. l. 1.
c. 5.
, that by the Almighty God the Angels and the World were both created together
in the beginning of time. This was indeed determined then. But I ascribe not so
much to the Lateran Council, or the decrees and definitions which were therein
made (was not the point of Transubstantiation first established there?) as to
recede from the authority of the ancient writers, because Pope Innocent the
third did not like their tenets: especially when I have some advantage of the
holy Scriptures to rely upon. For when I find that David in marshalling the
works of the Creation, puts the Angels first; not only before the Sun and Moon,
but before all Heavens Psalm. 148.^.
; I cannot think that he observed only the order of dignity, but that he had an
eye especially on the order of time. And so the Angels being placed before
Heaven, must consequently be created before that beginning Genesis 1.1.
, in which as Moses tells us, Heaven and Earth were created.

But whenever they were made, it is out of question, that they were all
created by the word of God: and that they were created both for glory
excellent, and for their numbers almost infinite. Lactantius tells us in
general terms, that they were innumerable Lact. l. 1. c. 5
; and so no question but they were. For besides those many thousands which fell
from God, (of which we shall speak more anon) the Prophet does inform us of
the heavenly hosts; that thousand thousands ministered unto him, and ten
thousand times ten thousand stood before him Dan. 7.10.
. Not that he does intend by this to define their number (as if they were not
more in number then are there set down) but to put down such a vast number, Quo
majorem multitudinem humanus sermo explicare nequeat Hieron. in locum.
, says St. Hierome rightly; greater then which could not be cast up by man's
Arithmetic. The several ministries which they undergo, that numberless
number of persons whom they do attend on, were proof enough of this, were there
no proof else. But because commonly such vast and infinite multitudes are apt
to run into confusions, except they be restrained by some rule and order; it
pleased God to divide his Angels into several ranks to make them differing in
degree; that so there being a subordination in the Heavenly hierarchy, the
danger of confusion might be best avoided. Nine different orders there are
reckoned of these ministering spirits, the one superior to another; that is to
say, Angels, Archangels, Virtues, Powers, Dominations, Principalities, Thrones,
Cherubim, and Seraphim: which different names are not only or originally in the
works of Dionysius (the Areopagite, as it is most generally supposed) but in
the book of God. Of Angels we read often in the holy Scripture; of Archangels,
1 Thessalonians. 4 16. of the Churubims, Genesis 3.24. and of the Seraphims, Isa. 6.2. The
rest we find thus mustred in St. Paul's Epistles, first where he tells us,
that God has set our Savior Christ at his own right hand, far above all
Principality and Power, and Might, (the Latin reads virtutes, Virtues) and
Dominions, and every name that is named, not only in this world, but in that to
come, Ephesians. 1.21. And after where he reckons up the orders of the blessed
Angels amongst the works of the Creation, saying, that by him (CHRIST) all
things were created, that are in Heaven, and that are in Earth, visible and
invisible, whether they be Thrones, or Dominions, or Principalities, or Powers,
Col. 1.16. Out of which places I collect, First, that these several words are
not used by the Apostle to signify the same one thing, but are the several
names of some different things; why else should it follow after this recital,
Et super omne nomen quod nominatur, and above every name that is named? And
secondly, that these several names do serve to signify and distinguish those
several orders, into which God has ranked those Celestial spirits. Of this
says Cassianus briefly, Apostolus per ordinem numerans Cassian Collat. 8. c. 7.
, that the Apostle marshalled them in their proper order. But Hierom reckoning
up the particular orders, does resolve more fully, Sine causa diversitatem
nominum esse ubi non est diversitas meritorum Hieron. advers. Iovin. l. 2.
; i. e. that there is no reason why there should be such diversities of names,
if there were not some diversity also of estates and qualities. And thereupon
he does infer, Archangelum aliorum minorum, etc. that an Archangel must be
chief over other Angels, and that the Powers and Dominions must needs have some
subordinate unto their command, on whom to exercise that power and dominion
which is vested in them ^Id. ibid.
. Nay he compares them to an Army (and are they not in plain terms called the
Heavenly host, Lu. 2.13.) in which are Generals, Colonels, Captains, and
reliquus militiae ordos, and other officers and Soldiers of inferior note. If
any ask how St. Paul came to know the names of these different orders, (and it
seems some had asked the question in St. Hieroms time) he answers, De
traditionibus Hebraeorum Id. in Ephesians. 1.
, that he had it by tradition from the Hebrew Doctors; and possibly it might be
so, considering he was brought up at the feet of Gamaliel, one of the most
learned of the Rabbis. But in my mind it might be better answered thus, That
St. Paul being rapt up into the third heaven 2 Cor. 12.2.
, which never any of the holy penmen was but he, had opportunity to see more,
and to commit more to writing touching this particular, then any Prophet or
Apostle had before or since. More might be said in maintenance of this division
of the Angels into several orders, had I or list or leisure to insist upon it:
or purposed to make that the principal, which was intended for an Accessory
unto this discourse.

That which I mainly do intend, is to set forth the ministry of these blessed
spirits in reference unto the will of God, and the weal of Man. His Ministers
they are, Psalm. 104. and therefore called ministering spirits, Heb. 1.14. but
commonly sent out by Almighty God to minister unto the necessities of poor
mortal man, to those especially who shall be heirs of salvation, as St. Paul
has told us. His Ministers they are, and therefore to be used by him as he
sees occasion, in his affairs of greatest moment; in none more frequently then
such as do relate to the sons of men, either in point of punishment or of
preservation; whether it be in reference to their temporal or eternal being. In
both respects the Angels are the Ministers of the Court of Heaven, the ordinary
officers or (...) of the Almighty Judge, and bound to execute the mandates
which are issued thence, whether men's sins be ripe for vengeance, or that
affliction and repentance make them fit for mercy. First in the way of temporal
punishment, it is most clear and evident in the book of God, that he sent down
his Angels with a full commission to destroy Sodom 19.13.
and Gomorrah two rich populous Cities, after they had so long abused his
patience, and their own prosperities: and that he sent his evil Angels amongst
the Egyptians, when neither signs nor wonders would prevail upon them; Psalm.
78.49, 50.
by whom he gave their life over unto the pestilence, slew the first born in
all their dwellings, and finally overwhelmed them in the red Sea, or Sea of
Edom: Where note they are called mali Angeli, or evil Angels, not that they
were so in themselves, but ab effectit, from the evils which they brought on
that perishing people, as Bellarmine and Lorinus two very learned Jesuits,
have right well observed. Thus do we also read of a destroying Angel, by whom
according to the will and command of God 2 Samuel 24.15.
, no fewer then 70000. Israelites were consumed in an instant, when once they
boasted in their numbers, and did presume too much on the Arm of flesh: and of
another which went out and smote in the Camp of the Assyrians no less then
185000. persons 2 King. 19.35.
, after they had blasphemed the Lord, and put a scorn upon the holy one of
Israel. Not to say any thing of Herod, who when he had beheaded James,
imprisoned Peter, and troubled certain of the Church; was miserably smitten by
an Angel, and consumed by worms. It pleased GOD to employ them in those acts
of vengeance, though well affected in themselves to the good of mankind; and a
necessity was laid upon them to obey his pleasure. Nec quicquam est in Angelis,
nisi parendi necessitas Lact. l. 2.17.
, said Lactantius truly. And so far we have all things clear from the holy
Scriptures. But if we will believe the learned (as I think we may) there is no
signal punishment of ungodly people, ascribed to God in the old Testament, but
what was executed by the ministry of these blessed spirits, except some other
means and ministers be expressly named. That great and universal deluge in the
time of Noah, was questionless the work of Almighty God; I, even I, do bring a
flood of waters upon the Earth, Genesis 6.17. But this was done by the ministry
and service of the holy Angels, Ministerio Angelorum, says Torniellus
Torniell. in A. M. 1556.
: whom he employed in breaking up the fountains of the great deep, and opening
the cataracts of Heaven, for the destruction of that wicked unrepenting people.
Thus when it is affirmed in the 14. of Exodus that the Lord looked into the
host of the Egyptians through the pillar of fire, and overthrew them in the
midst of the Sea, v. 24.27. Non intelligendum est de Deo, sed de Angelo qui
erat in nube, we must not understand it of the Lord himself, as Tostatus has
it Tostat. in Exodus 14.
, but only of the Angel or ministering spirit, of whose being in the cloud we
had heard before. And when we read that in the battle of the five Kings
against the Israelites, the Lord cast down great stones upon them from Heaven,
Josh. 10. it is not to be thought (says he) Quod Deus mitteret, Id. in Josh.
10. qu. ^.
sed Angelus jubente Deo, that this was done by Gods own hand, but by the holy
Angels at the Lords appointment. The like may be affirmed of those other acts
of power and punishment, whereof we find such frequent mention in the book of
God; which though they be ascribed to God as the principal Agent, yet were
they generally effected by his holy Angels, as the means and instruments.

But the most proper office of the holy Angels, is not for punishment, but
preservation; not for correction of the wicked, but for protection of the just
and righteous person. That Is the chief part of their employment, the office
which they most delight in; and God accordingly both has and does employ them
so from time to time. For by the ministry of his Angels did he deliver Ismael
from the extremity of thirst, Daniel from the fury of hunger, Lot from the
fire, and trembling Isaac from the sword: our infant Savior from one Herod,
his chief Apostle from another; all of them from that common prison, into the
which they had been cast by the Priests and Pharisees. But these were only
personal and particular graces. Look we on such as were more public, on such
as did concern his whole people generally: and we shall find an Angel of he
Lord incamping between the host of Egypt and the house of Israel Ex. 14.19.
, to make good the passage at their backs till they were gotten on the other
side of the Sea: another Angel marching in the front of their Armies, as soon
as they had entered the land of Canaan Josh. 5.15
; and he the Captain of the Lords hosts, Princeps exercituum Dei, as the
vulgar reads it; but whether Michael, Gabriel, or who else it was, the
Rabbis may dispute at leisure, and to them I leave it. Moreover, that wall of
waters which they had upon each side of them, when they passed through the Sea
as upon dry ground, facta est a Deo per Angelos exequentes, that was the work
of Angels also directed and employed by Almighty God, as the learned Abulensis
notets it Tostat. in Exodus 14.
. Which also is affirmed by the Jewish Doctors of the dividing of the waters of
Jordan, to make the like safe passage for them into the promised land, the land
of Canaan Id. in Josh. 3.
. The like says Peter Martyr a learned Protestant touching the raising of the
Syrians from before Samaria, when the Lord made them hear the noise of Cariots,
and the noise of horsemen, that it was, ministerio Angelorum Peter Mart. in 2.
Reg. 7.6.
, effected by the ministry of the holy Angels, whom God employed in saving
that distressed people from the hands of their enemies. And by an Angel, or at
least an angelical vision, (...) by a dream or Oracle delivered to them in
their sleep, as Eusebius tells us Eusebius. Eccl. hist. l. 3.5.
, did he forwarne the Christians dwelling in the land of Palestine, to remove
thence to Pella, a small town of Syria, and so preserved them from the spoil
and fury of the Roman Armies. This was Gods way of preservation in the times
before us, and it is his way of preservation in all ages since. GOD is the same
God now, as then: his holy Angels no less diligent in their attendance on us
then they have been formerly. Let us but make our selves by our faith and
piety, worthy to be accounted the Sons of God, and the heirs of salvation: and
doubt we not of the assistance of these ministering spirits, in all essaies of
personal or public dangers. It Is true the apparitions of the Angels in these
late times have been very rare; not many instances to be found in our choycest
Histories. But then it is as true withal, one of the most eternal truths of
holy Scripture; that the Angel of the Lord, encampeth about all them that fear
him, and delivers them Psalm. 34.7.
. Whether we see, or see them not, it comes all to one; and so resolved by
Clemens of Alexandria, an old Christian writer, (...) Clem. Alex. Stron. l. 6.
. The Lord, says he, does still preserve us by the ministry of his holy
Angels, though we behold them not in any visible shape, as the ancients did.

And to say truth, this general protection of the Angels is a point so clear,
so undeniable in true Divinity, that he must needs renounce the Scripture which
makes question of it. Some difference indeed has been about Angel-gardians,
and the particular protection which we have from them to whom God has
committed the tuition of our several persons. And yet even this, if we make
Scripture to be judge, according to the exposition of the ancient Writers, will
prove a point as clear and as undeniable, as that of the protection which we
have in general. For Origin who lived in the third century from our Saviors
birth, reckons it for a tenet of undoubted truth, and generally embraced in
the Christian Church long before his time; that all Gods children from their
birth, or at least their Baptism, had their angel-keepers Origin. tract. 6. in
Mat.
. Lactantius speaks more generally as of all mankind, ( Ad tutelam generis
humani misit Angelos Lact. l. 2.15.
) though possibly he might mean no otherwise then did the other Catholic
writers of the times he lived in, and those who followed close in the age
succeeding. St. Basil in Psalm. 33. and Psalm. 58. St. Chrysostom. on the 18. of
Matthew. The Author of the Imperfect work, Hom. 40. Theodoret in l. 5.
divinorum Decretorum, do all agree upon this point. But I find none more
copious nor more positive in it then St. Hierome, who does not only say it, but
urge Scripture for it. He says it in the general first, Magna est dignitas
animarum, ut unaquaeque habeat ab ortu nativitatis in custodiam suum Angelum
delegatum. Great, says he, is the soul of man, (he means Christian men) that
every one from the very birth has a special Angel appointed for his defense
and custody Hier. in Mat. 18.
. He says it in particular next, of the Lady Paula, Testor Jesum et sanctos
ejus, ipsumque proprium Angelum, qui Custos suit et comes admirabilis foeminoe
Id. in Epi^: Paul. ad Eustoch.
: calling to witness CHRIST, and his blessed Saints, yea and the very Angel
himself, who was the guardian and companion of that admirable woman. And
finally he does not only say it as a positive truth, but does refer us to the
Scripture for the proof thereof; Quod unusquisque nostrum Angelos habent, multa
Scripturae loca docent Id. in Isa. 66
. The Scriptures he refers us to, are chiefly Mat. 18. and Act. 12. That in
the 18. of St. Matthew, is this saying of CHRIST, Take heed that ye despise not
one of these little ones, for I say unto you that in Heaven their Angels do
always behold the face of my Father which is in heaven. Touching which text,
first it is generally agreed by all sorts of writers, that by the name of
Parvuli, he means not little children in age or stature; but rather the just
and righteous man: which howsoever he be great in the eye of God, is little in
esteem of the wicked World, and less in the opinion which he has of himself.
And secondly, it is as generally agreed on by all ancient writers, that by
their Angels are meant those who had the charge or custody of their several
persons. The saying of St. Augustine is well known in this, Parum est fecisse
Angelos tuos, fecisti et custodes parvulorum tuorum. It did not seem enough to
God to have made the Angels, but that he made them also to be guardians of his
little ones. The same, or to the same effect say almost all the ancient writers
which expound this text. That in the Acts, is the result of a discourse amongst
the Disciples about St. Peter, whom they conceived to be in prison. But when a
Danosel of the house did affirm for certain, that she left him standing at the
door, they then resolved with one consent that it was his Angel, v. 15. that is
to say, his angel-keeper, Qui Petro ab ortu nativitatis datus est in custodiam
Estius in Act. 12.
, to whom the safety of his person had been committed from his very birth. St.
Hierom, as we saw before, so applies the text; so does St. Basil also in his
first book against Eunomius, Cassian Collat. 8. c. 17. and diverse others of the
Ancients. Nor does this place conclude only for Angel gardians of Gods people
since the times of the Gospel; but that it was the general opinion of those
also who lived under the Law; from whom these Disciples must needs have it. And
that it was his angel-keeper of which Jacob spoke, saying, The Angel which
redeemed me from all evil, bless these lads Genesis 46.16.
; is the opinion of Tostatus, and many learned men of the Roman Schools. And
hitherto I think the point is so clear and evident, that we may safely say with
Vasquez, Sine gravi temeritatis nota negare non licet, it cannot be denied
without very great rashness: especially considering that this tenet of
Angel-gardians, finds testimony also from the pen of Plato, and others of
the ancient and more learned Gentiles, but darkened and mistaken by them under
the notion of such Demons whom they blindly worshipped. For Apuleius speaking
of two sorts of Demons, the one superior to the other, then adds. Ex hac
sublimiori Daemonum copia autumat Plato singulis hominibus in vita agenda
testes et custodes singulos additos, that out of the highest rank of Demons,
Plato conceived that there was a several guardian to each several man. That
Socrates in particular had his Daemonium as they called it, (but his
angel-gardian as I take it) was affirmed often by himself, of which I shall
speak more anon. But that each man whatsoever he was, should have the like
assistance as Socrates had without relation to the piety of his conversation,
or the soundness of his judgment in celestial matters; was a mere error of
Platos (were it his originally) and never countenanced by the Church of the
Primitive times, which did restrain this privilege unto Gods elect. It Is true
indeed that our great Masters of the Church of Rome do enlarge it further, and
will have every man how wicked and unjust soever, whether he be Jew or Gentile,
Turk or Infidel, to be provided by the Lord of an Angel-guardian. In which they
do not only go beyond the Scripture, but also absolutely desert the Fathers,
and more then so, the dictate and determination of Peter Lombard, whose
authority they so much stand unto in other cases: For he conceives no otherwise
of the point then thus, Vt unusquisque electorum habeat Angelum ad sui
protectum adque custodiam specialiter deputatum Pet. Lomb. l. 2. did. 11.
, i.e. that every one of the Elect (none else) had their Angel-keepers. And
this perhaps might be the reason, why Maldonat, though he follow the general
current of their Schools, in giving unto every man his Angel-Guardian: does yet
ingenuously confess, majores esse parvulorum Maldon. in Matthew. 18.
, that the Angels of the little ones of Gods dearest children, are greater and
of more esteem with Almighty God, then those which are appointed unto other
men. Leaving this therefore as a matter of no ground in Scripture, I must
confess that I am thoroughly satisfied in this point touching the
Angel-guardians of Gods Elect. Nor can I think it any way derogatory to the
mercies of God, or restrictive of them, that every child of God should have
one Angel in ordinary to attend upon him: considering it may very well stand
(which I marvel Calvin either did not, or would not see) with that protection
which God gives us by his Angels generally, in extraordinary exigences and
occasions which require their aid. As for the other point which depends on
this, viz. whether Communities of people, several States and Kingdoms have not
their Angel-Guardians also; I shall not meddle at the present: though there be
ground enough for me to build upon out of Dan. 10.20, 21. and the authority of
S. Hierom, and some other Ancients, who are plainly for it.

Suffice it that each Christian man has his Angel-keeper, appointed by the
will and command of God to take the charge and care of his preservation; and to
give God account when he shall be called to it, how faithfully he has
performed the trust committed to him. Which as it is a special Act of Gods
favor to us, so all the honor of it does belong to him: and to him therefore
must we sue and address our prayers, as often as we stand in need of his help
and succor, either in stirring up the diligence of our own proper Angels, or
sending us such for their succor as the case requires. The Angels are his
Ministers, but not our Masters, our Guardians at the best, but by no means our
Patrons. Therefore we must not pray to them in our times of danger, but to God
that he would please to send them. Not unto them, because we know no warrant
for it in the holy Scripture; nor any means (might it be done without such
warrant) to acquaint them ordinarily with our present need, by which they may
take notice of our distresses, and come in to help us. It Is true, the Demons
or evil Angels in the state of Gentilism were honored both with Invocation and
with Adoration; and the Colossians being newly weaned from their Idolatries,
thought it no great impiety to change the subject, and to transfer that honor
on the Angels of light, which formerly they had conferred on the Angels of
darkness. But does St. Paul allow of this? No, he blames them for it. Let no
man says he, beguile you of your reward in a voluntary humility, and
worshipping of Angels Col. 2.18.
. Not in a voluntary humility, as if we thought our selves unworthy to look up
to God, and therefore must employ the Angels for our Mediators. For this was
formerly alleged, as it seems by Zonaras, by some weak Christians in the
infancy and first days of the Church. Of whom he tells us that they were
verily persuaded, (...) Zonar. in Can. 35. Conc. Laodic.
, that is to say, That we ought not to invocate Christ to help us, or to bring
us to God, but to desire that favor of the Angels rather: immediate address to
Christ being a thing too high for our great unworthiness. Nor in the
worshipping of Angels, which being an effect of their former Gentilism, (Of
which consult St. August. Confess. l. 10. cap. 42. De Civit. Dei. l. 8, 9, 10.
Theodoret upon the Text, Clemens of Alexandr. Strom. l. 3. and Can. 35. Council.
Laodicensis) was therefore by St. Paul condemned and forbidden as a thing
plainly derogatory to the honor of Christ, whom they did hereby rob of the
glorious Office of being the Mediator between God and man. It Is true that there
were some in the Primitive times who were called Angelici, who intermingled the
Worship of God with the adoration of Angels, and lived about the end of the
second Century. But then it is as true withal, that they were reckoned
Heretics for so doing; both by Epiphanius in his Pannaion, and by St.
Augustine in his 39. chap. ad quod vult Deum. And not the adoration only, but
even the invocation of Angels also ( invocation being an act of Divine worship)
is by the same Epiphanius condemned for heresy, Haer. 38. where he speaks of
it as a thing in usual practice amongst the Heretics called Caini. Nor was
this worshipping of Angels condemned only by them, but by all the Fathers of
the Council of Laodicea, Canon. 35. nor by them only who were guided by a
fallible spirit, nor by St. Paul only, though directed by the Spirit of God,
but by the very Angels themselves, who constantly have refused this honor,
whenever by mistake or otherwise it was offered to them. For when Manoah in
testimony of his joy and thankfulness would have offered a Kid unto that Angel,
which brought him news from Heaven of the birth of his son; the Angel did
refuse it, saying, If thou will offer a Burnt-offering, thou must offer it unto
the Lord Judge. 13.16.
. By which modest and religious refusal of so great an honor, Manoah knew (as
the Text has it) that he was an Angel. And if we may not offer to them the
sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving; then certainly they do as little expect
our incense, or the oblation of our prayers. And therefore it was both piously
and acutely said by divine St. Augustine, that if we would rightly worship
Angels, we must first learn of them that they will not be worshipped August. in
Psalm. 69.
. The like we also find in the Revelation. Where when St. John astonished at
the sight of the Angel, fell down at his feet to worship him, the Angel did
refuse it, saying, See thou do it not Apoc. 19.10 and 22.9.
, for I am thy fellow servants, and of thy Brethren. Concerning which we have
this memorable passage of the same St. Augustine, Quare honoramus eos, etc. We
honor (says he) the angels with love, not service, neither do we build
Temples to their honor; for they will not so be honored by us, because they
know that we our selves are the Temples of God. And therefore it is rightly
written, that a man was forbidden by an Angel that he should not worship him,
but one God alone, under whom he was a fellow servants with him. They then which
do invite us to serve and worship them as Gods (and so do all which do invite
us to pray unto them) are like to proud men, who would be worshipped if they
might: though to say truth to worship such men is less dangerous then to
worship Angels August. de vera Reli. c. 55.
. Finally, he resolves it thus, and with his Resolution I shall close this
point, (though much more might be said in the prosecution) Let Religion
therefore bind us to one God Omnipotent, because between our minds, or that
inward light by which we understand him to be the Father and the truth, there
is no creature interposed. Pray to them then we may not, we have no ground for
it. But pray to GOD we may to send them to our aid and succor, when the
extremity of danger does invite us to it. And having made our prayers, we may
rest assured that God will send them down from his holy hill, from whence comes
Salvation, and give them charge to succor us as our need requires. Calvin
himself allows of this, and gives it for a Rule or Precept, Vt in periculis
constituti a Deo petamus protectionem Angelorum, and confidamus eos ex mandato
Dei praesto fore Calvin. Institur.
. But behold a greater then Calvin here. For our most blessed Mother the Church
of England, not only does allow of so good a rule, but has reduced his rule to
as good a practice. By whom we are taught to pray, in the Collect for St.
Michael the Archangels day, that God who has ordained and constituted the
service of all Angels and men in a wonderful order; would mercifully grant that
they who always do him service in Heaven, may by his appointment succor and
defend us on earth, through JESUS CHRIST our Lord. Amen. Further then this we
may not go, without entrenching deeply upon Gods Prerogative; which as these
blessed spirits expect not from us, so neither will they take it if it should
be offered. Non nobis Domine, non nobis, is the Angels song.

But so it is not with the Devil, or the Angels of darkness, who do not only
accept of those prayers and offerings which are made unto them by that
miserable and infatuated people, whom they have captivated in the chains of sin
and ignorance; but they look for it at their hands, and threaten most severe
punishments if it be neglected. The Devil is still sick of his old disease, of
being like to God both in power and greatness. And being still possessed of his
old ambition, no marvel if he stand on Temples, Altars, Sacrifices, both upon
Invocation and on Adoration, and whatsoever else is requisite to the Worship of
God. It was the pride and vanity of this glorious humor, which made them
incapable of long stay in Heaven; and has since plunged them in the depths of
disconsolation. They were at first created by Almighty God in the state of
perfection, as were the blessed spirits, who still stand in Grace; endued with
a most excellent understanding, and a conformity of will to the Will of God.
Good they were made (as all the rest of Gods creatures were) but not good
unchangeably. That was the privilege and Prerogative of the Lord most high.
But made so good, that they were also capable of doing evil, if they would
themselves; and put into a power or liberty of condition, either of placing
their whole comforts in the service of God, or by falling off from that
felicity, to make themselves the authors and the servants of sin. Which power
or liberty of their will (call it how you please) some of them did abuse so far
unto Gods dishonor, that they were presently removed from that glorions
dwelling, banished for ever from the presence of Almighty God, and kept in
chains of darkness to the day of Judgment. So witnesses the holy Scripture
both old and new. Behold, he put no trust in his servants, and his angels he
has charged with folly Job 4.18.
, or rather, in his Angels he found wickedness, In Angelis invenit pravitatem,
says the Vulgar Latin. Which though they were the words of Eliphaz the
Temanite, a man not altogether Orthodox in points of Divinity; yet that which
he intends thereby is countenanced by other passages of Canonical Scriptures.
For if by finding wickedness, or folly, in the Angels themselves, be meant no
more then this, (as indeed there is not) quod illi a Deo propria voluntate
discesserunt, that by the impulsion of their own will they fell off from God,
as the learned Estius well obsereth: then does this Temanite say no more in the
Book of Job, then what St. Peter and Jude have also said in their two Epistles,
God spared not the Angels which sinned (as St. Peter has it) but cast them
down to Hell, and delivered them into chains of darkness to be reserved unto
judgment 2 Pet. 2.4.
. St. Jude affirms the very same, The Angels (says he) which kept not their
first estate, but left their own habitation, he has reserved in everlasting
chains under darkness, unto the judgment of the great day Jude v. 6.
. By both it is as clear as day that the Angels sinned, and that the punishment
due unto their transgression, was inflicted on them: but what the particular
sin was which they did commit, and in what state they stand in regard of the
punishment; we shall crave leave to look into with some further search, as
being necessary to be known in reference to the fall of man, the incarnation of
our Lord and Savior, and his last coming unto Judgment. For being fallen
themselves from the love of God, they have practiced ever since on Adam and his
whole posterity, to make them also liable to the same damnation. In solatium
calamitatis suae non desinunt perditi jam perdere, says Minutius Felix. And
this calamity of man induced the ever gracious and most merciful God, to send
his only begotten Son into the World Gal. 4.4, 5.
, to redeem such as were under the law of sin, that so they might receive the
adoption of sons.

First for their sin, the general opinion of the Church has been, that it was
an ambitious pride to be equal with God. For being made by God of so pure a
substance, of such an excellent comprehension and so rare abilities, they
thought themselves too glorious and sublime an essence to obey a superior; and
that it was sufficient honor to the Lord their God, if they admitted him for
an equal, and let him be half sharer with them in the Supreme power. Just like
some proud ambitious favorite in the Courts of Princes, who being raised from
nothing to be next in dignity to their Sovereign Lord, are not content with
those preheminences which their King has given them, but are resolved to
strike at all, and either get the Regal Diadem, or perish in the glory of their
undertaking. But being this could not be the hope of all those Angels who
forsook their God, it is supposed to be the aim of some chief amongst them, of
him, who in the Scripture is called sometimes Satan Luke 10.18.
, and sometimes Luc^fer Esa. 14.12.
, and sometimes Beelzebub the Prince of Devils Mat. 12.24.
. The rest of the apostate Angels were drawn into the plot, either upon a hope
of having a supreme Lord of their own nature, which should bear rule over them,
or fancying to themselves a more moderate reign, by living under a Prince of
their own Election. Now that it was ambition which caused Lucifers fall, it is
expressly said by the Prophet Esaias, How art thou fallen from Heaven O Lucifer,
son of the morning! How art thou cast down to the ground which did weaken the
Nations! For thou have said in thine heart, I will ascend above the height of
the Clouds, I will be like the most High Esai. 14.12, etc.
. Yet shall thou be brought down to Hell, to the sides of the pit. Upon which
words S. Hierom gives us this short Gloss, Qui per superbiam dixerat, In
Coelum ascendam, and ero similis altissimo, non solum ad infernum sed ad
Inferorum ultimum detrahitur Hierom. in locum.
. He that said through the pride of his heart, I will ascend above the height
of the Heavens, and be like the most High, is not only brought down to Hell,
but to the lowest pit of that dreadful Lake. And to this fall of Lucifer, as I
conceive, our Savior does allude in St. Lukes Gospel, saying, I saw Satan as
lightning fall from Heaven, 10.18. Upon which passage take this short note from
the pen of Theophylact, Marvel not that the Devils are made subject to you,
(...), for their Prince is long since fallen from Heaven, and has no power
left: which although mortal men beheld not, (...), yet was it visible to me who
see things invisible Theophyl. in Luc. 10.
. The like Ezekiel says, as of Lucifers fall, under the name and notion of the
King of Tire. Thus says the Lord God, Thou have been in Eden (or Paradise, as
the Vulgar reads it) the Garden of God, thou art the anointed Cherub that
coverest, thou wast upon the holy Mountain of God, and perfect in thy ways from
the day that thou were created, till iniquity was found in thee. Thy heart was
lifted up because of thy beauty, thou have corrupted thy wisdom by reason of
thy brightness. I will cast thee to the ground, I will lay thee before Kings
that they may behold thee Ezekiel. 28.12, etc.
. S. Hierom hereupon gives this note or descant, Quo sermon demonstrat
nequaquam hominem esse de quo scribitur sed contrariam fortitudinem quae
quondam in Paradiso Dei commorata sit. By which, says he, the Prophet does
demonstrate plainly that he means not this of any man, but of that opposite
power the Devil, which had heretofore his abode in Paradise. And as for the
iniquity which was found in him, it was that, says he, quae per superbiam and
abusionem potestatis quam acceperat, which lying hidden in his heart, had at
the last discovered it self by pride, and the abuse of that power which he had
received. These texts not only Cassianus Cassian. Collat. 8. c. 8.
and others of the Ancient writers, sed aliorum fere omnium Commentarii de
Principe Daemonum exponunt, but generally all Commentators, as Estius tells
us Estius in Esai. 14.
, expound it of Lucifer or Beelzebub the Prince of Devils. I know indeed that
in the literal sense of Scripture those Prophecies were intended of
Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon, and the then King of Tire whosoever he was. But
then I do observe withal, that many things are spoken in the course of those
Prophesies, especially the words which I have selected, that cannot possibly be
applied in a literal sense to either of the Princes before remembered. And it is
a good rule which St. Augustine and others of the Fathers give us in expounding
Scrippture, that those places which cannot piously and congruously be
understood in the literal or historical sense, ea ad sublimiorem intelligentiam
referantur, are to be understood in a mystical meaning; and so the places must
be here. But that it was an ambitious pride, which first brought sin into the
world, besides these two Prophetical Scriptures, and the general consent of
Writers which do so expound them, there are other reasons to evince. For first
the Devil, being still tainted with this plague of pride, went the same way to
work in seducing Adam. To tempt him with the beauty of a glorious Apple, had
been a bait too much below those most rare endowments, wherewith God had
invested him at his first Creation. But to inflame him with an hope of being
like unto God, to tell him Eritis sicut Dii Genesis 3.5.
, that there should be no difference between God and him; that was the way most
like to take, and that way he went. By that sin which occasioned his own just
damnation, was he resolved to draw all mankind into the same perdition with
him. And next it is a good rule in Physic, Contraria contrariis expelluntur,
that one contrary does expel and remove another. And this I take to be one
chief reason, why our most blessed Lord and Savior, being God of God, and the
very brightness of his Father, did take upon himself the form of a servant
Phil. 2.7.
, and conversed here with man in so great humility; that he might make amends
for the sin of pride, by which the Angels who by nature were created Servants,
(for what else is a Minister or a Ministering Spirit?) aspired unto the
greatness of Almighty God. And unto these I add by way of surplusage, the
saying of the son of Syrach, initium peccati omnis superbiam esse Ecclus. 10.15.
, that pride was the beginning of all sin. And this S. Augustine calls perversam
Celsitudinem August. de Civit. Dei. l. 14. c. 13.
, a perverse ambition, by which forsaking God whom they ought to have loved
above all things, they would needs be their own Creators, as it were, out of a
self-love to themselves. If it be asked, how Lucifer and the rest of the
Apostate Angels, being of such clear and excellent understandings could
possibly affect a matter which they knew impossible: Aquinas makes this ready
and Scholastical answer, Hujusmodi peccatum non praeexigere ignorantiam, etc.
That pride (for of that sin he speaks) does not so much presuppose ignorance
as inconsideration Aquin. part. 1. qu. 63. Art. 1.
, Et hoc modo peccavit Angelus convertendo s^. ad proprium bonum, etc. And in
this wise (says he) did the Angels sin, turning themselves by the abuse of
their free will to their own proper good, without consideration of the will of
Almighty God. And here I should conclude this point of the sin of the Angels,
but that there comes into my mind the Poetical fiction of the aspiring of the
Giants to the Kingdom of God, which certainly was raised on those grounds of
Scripture (or the tradition of the Jews which was built upon it) wherein these
Angels stand accused of the like ambition. Of which Gigantine folly thus we
read in Ovid Ovid. Met. l. 1.
.

Never foret terris securior arduus Ether,
Affectasse ferunt Regnum coeleste Gigantes,
Altaque congestos struxisse ad sydera montes.
Which may be Englished in these words, And that the Gods their safety might
suspect,
The Giants did the Heavenly Throne affect.
Who to attain the height of their design,
Heap hills on hills, and so to Heaven they clime.


Next for the punishment of these Angels, though fully denounced against them
on the first offense, and in part inflicted at the present; yet the full
execution of it was by God deferred until the general day of judgment: that
CHRIST might have the honor of their condemnation, and his humility triumph
over their ambition. That which was presently inflicted, besides the grief,
terror, and torment of that inward confusion which they shall always bear about
them, it consists first in the diminution of those excellent abilities, with
which they were by God endowed in the day of their Creation: the clearness of
their understanding being dulled with such clouds of darkness, that though they
still exceed in knowledge all the sons of men; yet they fall very short of that
which before they had; the Devils not knowing any thing of Christ's incarnation,
until it was proclaimed by a voice from Heaven Mat. 3.17 and 4.1.
; whereas the good Angels knew him at the very time of his birth, and did not
only know him, but adore him also Heb. 1.6.
. And as their understanding has lost its brightness, so for their wills, they
have not only lost that primitive integrity which at first they had, but are so
obstinated in mischief, so settled in their hatred against God and his CHRIST,
that they neither can nor will repent, and are therefore called perverse
spirits in the holy Scriptures. And for the other part of their punishment
which is poena sensus, they are under an arrest already, reserved in chains
like prisoners to the day of judgment, and in some part of Hell as their Iayl
or Prison: though many times by the patience and wisdom of God, they are
permitted to wander in the air, and compass the earth, that they might tempt
the wicked, and try the godly, express their power upon the creatures, and
exercise their malice against Gods Elect. That they do compass the earth to
seduce poor man, we have it in the book of Job Job 1.7.
, where he is said to go to and fro in the earth, to walk up and down in it:
and that he wandereth in the air, we are told by St. Paul Ephesians. 2.^*
, by whom he is called the Prince of the power of the air. But that he was cast
down into Hell, besides those places of the Old Testament produced before, we
are assured by St. Peter 2 Pet. 2.4.
; and that they are reserved there in chains like prisoners, is affirmed
expressly by St. Jude Jude 6.
. Not in material chains, we conceive not so: but that they are restrained by
the power of God, and are so bridled and tied up by his mighty hand, that they
are neither masters of their own abilities, nor have the liberty of acting what
they would themselves, but only so far forth as he shall permit, as is most
clear and manifest in the case of Job. And from thence came, no doubt, this
Proverbial speech, that the Devil cannot go beyond his chain. And though they
feel some part of that dreadful torment to which they are reserved in the house
of darkness, yet is it but initium dolorum, or the beginning of sorrows,
compared with those they are to suffer in the world to come. In this regard,
the Devils did not only cry out against Christ our Savior, that he was come to
torment them before their ^ime, Mat. 8.29. but they did so abominate the
conceit of the bottomeless Pit, that they most earnestly besought him, Ne
imperaret ut in Abyssum irent, not to command them down to that deep Abyss,
Luke 8.31. Praesentia Salvatoris est tormentum Daemonum; Our Saviors presence,
says St. Hierom Hieronym in in Matthew. 8.
was the Devils torment, who seeing him upon the earth when they looked not for
him, ad judicandos se venisse crederent, conceived that he was come to bring
them to judgment.

And to say truth, it is no marvel that they were so afflicted at the sight of
our Savior, considering that they knew full well, that howsoever he might
bring Salvation to the sons of men; yet for themselves, they were incapable of
that mercy, and were to have no part in the Worlds Redemption. The reasons of
which so great difference, as the Schoolmen think, are these especially Dr.
Field of the church, l. 1. c. 3.
. First, because the Angels fell of themselves, but man at the suggestion or
persuasion of others, Et levius est alienamente peccaffe quam propria, as S.
Augustine has it. 2. The Angels in the height of their pride fought to be like
God in Omnipotency, which is an incommunicable property of the Divine Nature,
and cannot be imparted unto any other: but man desired to be like him only in
Omniscience, or in the general knowledge of things created, which may be
communicated to a creature, as to the humane ^oul of Christ. Thirdly, the
Angels were immaterial, intellectual Spirits, inhabiting in the presence of God
and the light of his countenance, and therefore could not sin by error or
misperswasion; but with an high hand and affected malice, which comes nearest
to the sin against the holy Ghost, and so irremissible: but man was placed by
God in a place remote, left to the frailty of his own will, and wanted many of
those opportunities for persisting in Grace, which the others had. Fourthly,
because the Angels are not by propagation from one another, but were created
all at once, so that of Angels some might fall, and others might stand; and
that though many did apostate, yet still innumerable of them held their first
estate: but men descend by generation from one stock or root, and therefore the
first man falling and corrupting his nature, derived the same corruption upon
all his race; so that if God had not appointed a Redemption for man, he had
utterly lost one of the most excellent creatures that ever he made. Fifthly, the
Angels have the fullness of intellectual light, and when they take view of any
thing they see all which does pertain unto it, and thereupon go on with such
resolution, that they neither alter nor repent: but man who finds one thing
after another, and one thing out of another, dislikes upon consideration what
before he liked, and so repents him of the evil which he had committed.
Sixthly, because there is a time prefixed both to men and Angels, after which
there is no possibility of bettering their estate, and altering their condition
whether good or bad: which is the hour of death in man, and unto Angels was the
first deliberate action either good or evil, after which declaration of
themselves, unto them that fell, there was no hope of grace or of restitution.
For hoc est Angelis Casus quod hominibus mors; that which in man is death, was
this fall to the Angels, as most truly Damascene Damasc. de fide Orth. l. 2. c.
4.
. Finally, the Angels had all advantages of nature, condition, place,
abilities, and were most readily prepared and fitted for their immediate and
everlasting glorification: whereas man was to pass through many uncertainties
to tarry a long life here in this present World, and after to expect till the
general Judgment, before he was to be admitted to eternal Glories. In some or
all of these respects, Christ did not take upon him the nature of Angels Heb.
2.16.
, nor effect any thing at all toward their Redemption, but he took on him the
seed of Abraham, that so the heirs of Abraham's faith might be made heirs also
of the Promises of eternal life. So that these Angels being desperate of their
own Salvation, and stomaching that a creature made of dust and ashes should be
adopted to those glories from which they fell, have labored ever since to
seduce poor man to the like apostasy, and plunge him in the gulf of the same
perdition. Et solatium perditionis suae perdendis Hominibus operantur Lactant.
l. 2.15.
, says Lactantius truly.

This to effect, as the same Lactantius there affirms, per totam terram
vagantur, they have dispersed themselves over all the World: and as mankind
did increase and propagate, so had they still their Instruments and Emissaries
to work upon the frailty of that perishing creature, by all means imaginable.
The principal and proper Ministry of these evil Angels, (whom we will
hereafter call by the name of Devils) is to tempt men to sin; and to this end
they improve all their power, and those opportunities which sinful man is apt
to give them. And to this trade they fell as soon as the World began; working
upon the frailty of Eve by a beautiful fruit, but more by feeding her with a
possibility of being made like to God himself; and by her means corrupting the
pure soul of Adam to the like transgression. In this regard, from this foul
murder perpetrated on the soul of Adam, which he made subject by this means to
the death of sin, and consequently to the death of the body also, our Savior
calls him Homicidam ab initio, a murderer from the beginning, Ioh. 8.34. And
as he did begin, so he has continued, there being almost no sin committed
which he tempts not to. For though it be possible enough that men may sin
without the temptation of the Devil, by reason of the infirmity of the flesh,
and the concupiscences of several lusts which they bear about them: yet
commonly the Devil has a part in all temptations, and either finds matter in
us to work upon, or stirs up the dead seeds of sin, which do lie raked up in
our hearts like embers, or fire in ashes. For out of the heart proceed evil
thoughts, murders, adulteries, fornications, the^is Mat. 15.19.
, and the like foul acts, as Christ himself has told us in S. Matthews Gospel.
And every one is tempted, as St. James affirms, when he is enticed and drawn
aside of his own concupiscence Jam. 1.14.
. So that the matter of sin lies within our selves, the Devil does but actuate
and inform that matter, and reduce the powers thereof into overt act:
cooperating to the sin, but causing directly the temptation. Between the
temptation of the Devil and the act of sin, there must go a consent of heart,
and an inclining of the will to the sin presented; and this is man's own act,
who is free to evil, and is not necessitat^d to consent to the evil motion (the
overruling of man's will being Gods Prerogative) though possibly he have not
present grace enough to foil the temptation. The Devil may present to us such a
pleasant object, though under other notions, then that of sin, which he knows
like enough to work on our humane frailty, and work upon us as he does, by all
subtle suggestions to consent unto it. And though he cannot force us unto such
consent, yet in regard he seldom fails by his cunning practices of gaining
that consent which he cannot force; not only the temptation, but the sin it
self is often times ascribed unto him in the holy Scripture. Thus it is said,
that Satan provoked David to number Israel, 1 Chronicles. 21.1. that the Devil put
it into the heart of Judas to betray his Master, Ioh. 13.2. that Satan had
filled the heart of Ananias, to lie against the holy Ghost, Act. 5.3. And in
the same respects it is, that he is so often called the Tempter, as Matthew. 4.3.
1 These. 3.5. And the Apostle speaking unto married people, advises them not to
be long asunder, but to come together again* that Satan tempt them not for
their incontinency, 1 Cor. 7.5. Upon this diligence of Satan to tempt men to
sin, and his well husbanding of all advantages which are presented to him to
promote that work: it was not only the opinion of some learned Gentiles, but of
some of the ancient Christians also, that every man had his evil Angel, which
did continually attend upon him to tempt him to the works of sin, and the deeds
of darkness. For the Christians Cassianus tells us, quod unicuique nostrum
duo cohaereant Angeli, i. e. bonus and malus Cassian. Collat. 8. cap. 17.
, that is to say, that unto every one of us there adheres two Angels, a good
and an evil. For the good Angel he brings proof indeed from the holy Scripture;
but for the adhaesion of the evil Angel he relyeth principally on the Book
called Pastor: which always counted an Apocryphal book in the judgment of the
Catholic Church, makes me suspect the Tenet for Apocryphal also. And yet some
think that St. Paul does allude unto this opinion, where he tells us of an
Angelus Satanae that lay heavy on him, a messenger of Satan (as our English
reads it) which was given to buffet him. But for the Gentiles it is clear that
they so opined: Lactantius reporting it as their opinion, quod singulis
hominibus adhaereant Lactant. l. 12.15.
, that every one had his Demon or his evil Angel attending on him, whom they*
worshipped by the name of their proper Genii. And for his general affirmation I
consent unto him. In his particular proof I must needs dissent. For amongst
others of his proofs he has that of Socrates, qui circa se assiduum Daemona
Ioquebatur, qui sibi puero adhaesisset, cujus arbitrio and nutu vitae (...)
regere^ur; who used to speak of a certain Demon who was always about him, and
had accompanied him from his childhood, by whose direction and appointment his
whole life was ordered. The same Tertullian tells us of him, Apologet. c. 37.
and Minutius Felix in his Dialogue. But notwithstanding the authority of these
learned men, I rather think that this Angel whom they call Daemonium was his
Angel-Guardian, then any of the damned and malignant crew, such as were
properly called Demons: the life of Socrates being too full of moral virtue,
to be directed by the counsels of an evil Angel. For though I cannot grant, as
before I said, that every man, how wicked and unjust soever, whether he be Jew
or Gentile, Turk or Infidel, has his Angel-Guardian; which is the now received
opinion of the Roman Schools: yet that few selected ones among the Gentiles,
such as Socrates was, who led their lives according to the Rules of Virtue, and
died as he did in defense of the only God against those many Idols which the
Heathen worshipped, might by Gods special grace have their Angel-Guardians; I
am not willing to deny.

And now I am fallen upon these Demons, I must take notice of another of the
Devils practices, which did as much promote his Kingdom of darkness, as any
temptation unto sin, of what kind soever: I mean the raising of these Demons
into the rank and reputation of Celestial Deities, and speaking by them in the
mouths of the Heathen Oracles. For by this means they gained on earth, what
they lost in Heaven: and though they could not make themselves equal to God in
power and greatness, while they continued in the Heavens; yet they found ways
to be adored as God, by poor ignorant people, whose souls they had seduced to
that wretched blindeness. Of these Lactantius tells us that they were called
Daemones, i. e, peritos and rerum scios Lactant. l. 12.15.
, from their general knowledge, which the word Demon does import in the Greek
Original; that they had a Sovereign Prince amongst them, whom they called
(...), or the Prince of Devils; that counterfeiting first the persons of
deceased Kings, they aim to be worshipped in their Statua's, and became so
impudent at last, Vt Dei nomen sibi, and deorum cultum vendicabant Id. cap. 17.
, that they challenged to themselves the name of God, and the divine worship
which of right did belong unto it. And to train up the people in this blind
Idolatry, having first taught them to adore the images of some famous men, whom
they had caused to be entitled by the name of Deities, sub statuis and
imaginibus consecratis delitescunt, they shrouded themselves within their
consecrated shrines and Images, and from thence gave out Oracles touching
things to come; and sometimes so possessed the breasts of their Priests and
Votaries, that they did seem to be inspired with the Spirit of prophecy, as
Minutius Felix Minut. Fell.
well observes. Nay being spirits as they are, of an excellent knowledge, and
either by a foresight which they have of some things in future, or by
conjecturing at events out of natural causes; or coming by some other means to
be made acquainted with the will of God: they took upon them to effect what
they knew would follow, and to be the Authors of those public blessings which
were hard at hand: so that indeed it was no wonder, Si sibi Templa, si honores,
si sacrificia tribuuntur Lactant. l. 2.17.
, if thereupon the people would erect them Temples, and offer sacrifice unto
them, and yield them other Divine honors fit for none but Gods. By means
whereof they did not only raise themselves into the Throne and Majesty of
Almighty God, and captivated almost all the world in a blind obedience to
their will and commands: Sed very ac singularis Dei notitiam apud omnes gentes
inveteraverunt, as the same Lactantius rightly notes, but in a manner had
defaced the knowledge of the true one and only God over all the earth. And in
this blindeness and Idolatry did the world continue till the birth of CHRIST:
the Idols of Egypt falling down flat before him, when he was carried into that
country in his Mothers arms, as Palladius tells us Palladius in hist.
Lansiac.
; and all the Oracles of the Gentiles failing at the time of his death, as is
collected out of that work of Plutarchs inscribed De defectu Oraculorum. Which
preparation notwithstanding, these Devils or Demons, call them which you will,
had gotten such possession of the minds of men, that the Apostles and
Evangelists found it a far easier matter to cast the Devils out of their
bodies, then out of their souls: and long it was before the rising of the Sun
of righteousness was able to dispel those thick clouds of darkness wherewith
they had thus overspread the whole face of the Earth. Which with their power
and influence in the acts of sin, occasioned the Apostle to make this
expression, that he wrestled not against flesh and blood, but against
Principalities and Powers, against the Rulers (not of this world, but) of the
darkness of this world, and against spiritual wickednesses in high places
Ephesians. 6.12.
. By which words as he means the Devils and infernal spirits, against which the
man of God is to combat daily, so by those words he gives me a just ground to
think, that the Angels which did fall from the primitive purity, and have since
labored noithing more then the ruin of man; were chiefly of those Orders of
A^gels, which are called Principalities and Powers in the holy Scriptures. And
this I am the rather induced to think, because I find them called by those
names in another place, where the Apostle speaking of Christ's victory over Hell
and Satan, describes it thus, that having spoiled Principalities and Powers, he
made a show of them openly and triumphed over them. But of this argument
enough. It is now time that we proceed to the Creation and fall of man as that
which more immediately conduces to the following Articles of the Incarnation,
death and passion of our Lord and Savior.

And first for man's Creation, it was last in order, though first in Gods
intention of the six days work: it being thought unfit in Gods heavenly wisdom
to create man into the world, before he was provided of a decent house, and
whatsoever else was necessary both for life and comfort. For it we look unto
the end for which God made many of the inferior creatures, reper^^mus eum non
necessitati modo, sed and oblectamento voluisse consulere Calvin. Institut.
, as Calvin rightly has observed, we shall find that he not only intended
them for the necessities of man's life, but also for the convenience and delight
in living. And whereas all the rest of the six days work, were the acts only of
his power, the creating of man does seem to be an act both of power and
wisdom. In all the rest, there was nothing but a Dixit Deus Genesis 1.
, he spoke the word and they were made Psalm. 148 ^.
says the Royal Psalmist. But in the making of man there was somewhat more, a
Faciamus hominem, a consultation called about it; each Person of the Trinity
did deliberate on it, and every one contributed somewhat to his composition.
For God the Father, as the chief workman, or the principal agent, gave him form
and feature in which he did imprint his own heavenly Image: The Son, who is the
living and eternal Word, gave him voice or speech, that so he might be able to
set forth Gods praises; and the holy Ghost, the Lord and giver of life, as the
Nicene Fathers truly call him, did breath into his nosthrils the breath of
life. Or if we look upon it, as one act of all, we shall find man agreeing
with many of the creatures in the matter out of which he was made, but very
different from them all both in form and figure. For though God pleased to make
him of the dust of Earth, to humble him and keep him from aspiring thoughts, as
often as he reflected on his first Original: yet did he make him of a straight
and erected structure, advanced his head up toward the Firmament, and therein
gave him the pre-eminence over all creatures else, which had been made before
of the same materials. And this is that which Ovid the Poet thus expresses
Ovid. Met. l. 1.
, Pronaque cum spectant animalia caetera terram,
Os homini sublime dedit, coelumque videre
Iussit, and erectos ad sydera tollere vultus.
That is to say, And where all Creatures else with down cast eye
Look toward the Earth, he raised man's Head on high,
And with a lofty look did him indue,
That so he might with ease Heavens glories view.
A thing of principal moment, if considered rightly, not only to the being,
but well being of man; who is hereby instructed by the Lord his God, that in
the settling of his desires and affections he should take counsel of his
making; so to advance his meditations as God does his head: and not by fastening
both his looks and thoughts on the things below him, to disgrace as much as in
him is, the dignity of his creation, and consequently merit to have had the
countenance even of those very beasts whose mind he carries. For I am verily
persuaded, that if the worldly minded man, and such as are not well instructed
in the things of God, did but consider of the figure of his body only; that
very contemplation would promote him in the way of godliness, and rectify such
errors and misperswasion wherewith his soul has been misguided in the way of
truth. Certain I am that Lactantius, whom I have so often cited in this present
work, examining the Original and growth of Atheism, with which the world had
been infected in the former times, makes this amongst some other causes to be
one of the principal; that men had formerly neglected to look up toward
heaven. Desierunt homines vultus suos in coelum tollere Lactant. l.
. And thereupon it followed, as perhaps it did, that being once besotted with
earthly pleasures, they came in time to be infected with gross and earthly
superstitions. And no less sure I am that on this Contemplation, Anaxagoras a
wise man amongst the Gentiles, being demanded for what cause he thought he was
born; made an answer, (...), to behold the Firmament Diog. Laert. in Anaxag.
. So right a use did the Philosopher make of his bodily structure, as to
conceive the World and the pleasures of it, to be so unfit an Object for his
mind, that it was not worthy of his eye.

Next for the form or soul of man, it differs more from that of all living
Creatures, then he does differ from them in his bodily figure. For whereas the
soul of all other living creatures, did rise out of the matter out of which
they were made: the soul of man had a more excellent, sublime, and divine
original, and was not either made with the body, or out of the same dust
whereof the body was made; but infused immediately by God, after the body was
first framed, and organized in every part to receive the same. Of other
animals, it is said, that God made the beast after his kind, and the cattle
after their kind Genesis 1.25.
; that is to say, matter and form at once, without any distinction. But when he
comes to the creation of man, it is first said that God formed man of the dust
of the ground; and after, that he breathed into his nostrils the breath of life
Genesis 2.7.
, whereby he became a living soul. And though I will not enter here upon that
dispute, whether the rational soul of man be a thing ex traduce, whether
begotten by his Parents, or infused by God: yet I confess, that the very order
which God used in man's creation, is of it self sufficient to make clear that
point, and to evince thus much, that the soul of man is of a more noble
extraction then the souls of beasts; and not as theirs, potentially in the seed
of their generation. Or if this be not sufficient to evince it, then I conceive
that he that was the best Divine and the greatest Philosopher of any of the
sons of men, even Solomon and all his wisdom, has so determined of the point
as to make all sure: affirming that the bodies of men being generated of gross
and earthly matter are in the end dissolved into that dust out of which they
were primitively made, but that the soul returns into the hands of God, by
whom at first it was inspired Eccl. 12.7.
. Then (says he) i. e. at the time of our death, the dust shall return to the
earth, as it was, and the Spirit shall return to him that gave it. A Text so
clear and evident to the point in hand, that he who writ the Pamphlet called
Man's mortality, printed 1643. did very well and wisely to pass it over, and
not to put it in the number of those Objections which might be made against him
from the word of God; as being utterly destructive of that monstrous Paradox
which he takes upon him to defend for true Catholic doctrine. And if the
Fathers may be suffered to come in for seconds, where the authority of
Scripture is so plain and pregnant; we have a cloud of witnesses of
unquestionable credit to confirm the same. For the Greek writers first, it is
said by Clemens Alexandrinus, (...), Clem. Alex. Strom. l. 6.
that the principal faculties of the soul, by which we have rational discourse,
is not engendered by projection of humane seed. Theodoret does not only say as
much as he, but brings good proof for it from the word of God. The Church
(says he) believing the divine Scriptures, teaches us that the soul was (and
is) created as well as the body; not having any cause of its creation from
natural seed, but from the will of the Creator, after the body of man had been
perfectly made. For the divine Moses writes that Adams body was first made,
and afterward his soul was inspired into him; and also tells us in the Law,
that the body was first made, then the soul infused Theod. divin. Decret. l. 5.
. The same he also proves from a text in Job, and so concludes, that this
confession touching the soul and body of man, the Church had learnt from holy
Scripture. Next for the Latin Fathers, it is said by Hilarie, Hilar. de
Trinitate. l. 10.
Animam nunquam ab homine gignentium originibus praeberi; that the soul never
comes from the generation of men: by Ambrose Ambros. de Noah, et Arca. c. 4.
, Ex nullo homine generantur Animae, that the souls are not generated by the
seed of man: by Leo Leo Epi. 93. ad Taribium. c. 10.
, that the Catholic Church does truly teach, that the souls of men were not,
(or had not any being at all) before they were inspired into their bodies; Nec
ab alio incorporentur, nisi ab opifice Deo, neither are incorporated with the
body, but by God alone. St. Hierome glossing on those words of Solomon before
produced, thus declares himself, Hieron. in Eccles. c. 12.
Ex quo satis rid^ndi sunt, qui putant animas a corporibus seri, et non a Deo
sed a Corporum parentibus generari. Cum enim caro revertatur in terram, et
Spiritus redeat ad Deum qui dedit illum, manif^stum est Deum patrem Animarum
esse, non homines. I have laid down his words at large, because they are a full
and perfect exposition of that Text of Solomon's, on which I principally ground
my self for Catholic doctrine, though there be diverse other places one might
build upon. But for S. Hieromes words they are thus in English, How worthily
(says he) are they to be derided, who think the soul to be sown together with
the body (in the Mothers womb) and to be generated by our Parents, not to come
from God? For being it is said (by Solomon) that the flesh returns to the
earth, and the Spirit unto him that gave it; it is most manifest, that God is
the Father of our souls, not man. It Is true, Ruffinus made some scruple whether
the soul did come by propagation from Man, or infusion from God: by which as he
gave very great scandal to all Christian people Id. in Apol. advers. Ruffin.
, so was he very sufficiently scorned and confuted by S. Hierome for it. It Is
true, Tertullian sometime thought as this Pamphetler does, that the soul either
was a kind of body, or was ex traduce, that is to say, derived and propagated
by traduction of humane seed: but then it is as true withal, that for this and
other of his Heterodox tenets August. de haeres. in Tertul.
, he is put into the Catalogue of Heretics composed by Augustine. And for S.
Augustine himself, though to avoid the difficulty which lay hard upon him,
touching the manner how the soul comes to be infected with original sin, made
question whether the soul were infused by God, or derived (he knew not how)
from the soul of the Parent; yet he rejected the opinion as absurd and gross,
that is should be derived from the natural seed of the body; Quo quid
perversius dici potest Id. Epist. 157.
? then which there could not any thing be said which is more perverse. He that
would see the judgment of the Protestant writers, and how they do accord with
the holy Scriptures expounded and applied by consent of Fathers; let him
consult Calvin, in his Comment on the Hebrews, cap. 12. Bullinger, Decad. 4.
Sermon. 10. Beza in lib. quaestion. et Respons. Zanchius de operib. dei, part. 3.
l. 2. cap. 4. and Vrsin Tract. Theolog. de peccato. And for the opinion in this
point of the old Philosophers, that received maxim of theirs, Creando
infunditur, and infundendo creatur, sufficiently declares it without further
search. But see how I am carried into this dispute, ere I was aware; besides my
first meaning I am sure, though not impertinently to the business of man's
creation; which is the work I have in hand.

For the accomplishing of which work (being indeed the Masterpiece of the
whole Creation) God did not only form the body, and infuse the soul; but he
imprinted in him the impresse or character of his Heavenly image. For it is
said of man, that God created him in his own image Genesis 1.27
: (and that again repeated for our more assurance) in the image of God created
he him, Genesis 1.27. About this Image of God thus imprinted in him, there has
been much debate amongst learned men, some placing it in Man himself, others in
somewhat adventitious and extrinsecal to him. Of this last sort are they who
place this Image of God in that dominion which God gave him over all the
Creatures. For so it follows in the Text, Let us make Man in our image, after
our likeness, and let them have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over
the fowls of the air, and over the Cattle, and over all the earth Genesis 1.26.
. And unto this the Poet does allude in his Metamorphosis, saying, Sanctius
his, et quod dominari in caetera posset, natus homo est Ovid Met. l. 1.
, that man who was to have dominion over all the rest of the Creatures, was not
made till the last. But this, if I conceive it rightly, is rather a
communication of some part of his Power, then an impression of his Image;
unless perhaps their meaning be, that God imprinted so much of his Heavenly
Image in the face of man, as to make all other Creatures stand in awe to him.
And if their meaning be no more, then they come up to those of the other
opinion, who place this image of God in Man himself, in something which is
natural and essential to him, which must either be in his body, or his soul, or
both. In one of those it must be, there is no doubt of that; and little doubt in
which of the two to find it. For certainly they look for it in a very wrong
place, who expect to find it in man's body, though of a gallant composition and
erected structure. The Heathen Orator was able to inform some erroneous
Christians, one of whose many divine dictates this is said to be, Ad divinam
imaginem propius accedit humana virtus quam figura Cicero de Not. Deorum.
, that man approached more near to the image of God, in the virtues of his
mind, then the figure of his body. I know a great dispute has been also
raised about this image of God in the soul of man, that is to say, in what it
specially did con^ist, and whether it were lost or not in the fall of Adam. For
stating of this controversy, we will take some hints from the decisions of
Aquinas, who first declares that the image of God consists in that eminent
perfection which is found in men, expressing the nature of God in an higher
degree, then the chief excellencies found in all other creatures; and secondly
that this perfection is principally to be had in the soul of man Aquin. 1. pt.
qu. 93. Art. 4.
. Then he distinguishes this perfection into these three conditions,
Creationis, Recreationis, et Similitudinis, that is to say, of nature, grace
and endless glory: of which the first is to be found in all men, and can never
be lost; the second is the portion of the man regenerated; and the third is the
reward of a soul in bliss. The first consists in the largeness of the
natural faculties of understanding and will, not limited to the apprehension or
desire of some certain things only, but extended to all the conditions of being
and goodness, whose principal object is God; so that they never rest satisfied
with any other thing, but the seeing and enjoying of his blessed vision. And
this is that which is more briefly couched in those words of Augustines,
Fecisti nos ad te, et irrequietum est cor nostrum donec requiescat in te
August. Confess. l. 1.
. O Lord, says he, thou made us only for thy self, and our hearts are
restless and unquiet till they rest in thee. The second kind of this
perfection in which the image of God is said to consist, is supernatural, when
the soul actually, or at lest habitually, knows and loves God aright, though
not so perfectly as he may, and shall be known and loved hereafter. And such
was that perfection of the great Apostle, who reckoned all but as dung so he
might gain CHRIST; who was so far inflamed with a strong desire of being united
unto God, that he desired to be dissolved, without longer stay: and such was
the perfection of the holy Father, who thought himself dead when he was alive,
out of a zeal of seeing the most blessed face of Almighty God: Moriar ne moriar
ut faciem tuam videam August. Confess. l. 1. c. 5.
; he dyed because he could not die to behold that vision. The third and last
degree of the said perfection is when the soul both knows and loves the Lord
her God in the fullness of happiness. And this is that whereof St. Paul has
told us, saying, that now we see darkly as through a glass, but then we shall
see face to face 1 Cor. 13.12.
. Now know I but in part (says he) but then shall I know even as I also am
known. These are the several perfections or degrees thereof, in which Gods
image printed in the soul of man does consist especially, according to the
doctrine of the Roman Schools, and most pure antiquity: and of these three the
second is that only which was lost in Adam, but partly though imperfectly
renewed in the state of grace; there being no man since the fall, who either
does so perfectly know, or so sincerely cherish the love of God in his soul, as
Adam did before it, in his first integrity.

For when the Lord made Man in his first Creation, he gave him such a clearness
of understanding, as was not darkened either with the clouds of error or the
mists of ignorance; and such a rectitude in his will, as was not biassed unto
evil by corrupt affections. Perfectly good God made him, but not good
unchangeably: for he was left in the counsel of his own hands Wisd. 15.14.
as the wiseman has it, that if he would he might continue in Gods grace and
favor, and attain all the blessedness which he could desire; or otherwise
might fall from both, and so deprive himself of that sweet contentment, which
is not any where to be found but in God alone. A greater liberty then this, he
had not given unto the Angels a more glorious creature. (...), says Justin
Martyr Just. Mart. Apol. 1.
. And he, as some of them before, abused this liberty so given to his own
destruction. For being placed by God in the garden of Eden, in Paradiso
voluptatis, as the vulgar reads it; he had free power to eat of every tree but
one, in that glorious place: and that tree only interdicted, that God might
have some trial of his free obedience, the interdiction being seconded with
this commination, that whenever he did eat of it, he should surely die. What
less could God have laid upon him, unless he had discharged him of all
obedience to his will and pleasure; and left him independent of his supreme
Power? Father (said the wise servant unto Naaman) if the Prophet had commanded
thee a great thing would thou not have done it? how much more then, when all
he says unto thee is no more then this, that thou should wash and be clean
2 King. 5.3.
? Had God commanded Adam some impossible matter, he might have been excused
from the undertaking, because it was a matter of impossibility. Or had God
bound him to the fruit of one tree alone, and debarred him from the taste of all
the rest, he might have had some more excusable pretense for his flying out,
and giving satisfaction to a straightened appetite. But the commandment being
small makes his fault the greater; the easiness of the one much aggravating the
offense of the other. For so it was, that either out of unbelief, as if God did
not mean to sue him for so small a trespass, or that he had a proud ambition
to be like to God, or yielded to the lusts of intemperate appetite; or that he
was not willing to offend his wife, by whom he was invited to that deadly
banquet: he took the forbidden fruit into his mouth, and greedily devoured his
own destruction, and so destroyed himself and his race for ever. Not himself
only, but his race, even his whole posterity. For being the root and stock of
mankind in general, which is descended from the loins of this wretched man:
what he received of God in his first creation, he received both for himself,
and them who descended from him; and what he lost, he lost like an unthrifty
Father, for the child unborn. And as the Scriptures say of Levi, that he paid
tithes in Abraham to Melchisedech, because he was in the loins of his father
Abraham, when Melchisedech met him Heb. 7.9, 10.
: so may we say of the posterity of this prodigal father, that they were all
undone by his great unthriftiness; because they were all of them in his loins
when he lost Gods favor; when he drew sin upon them all, and consequently
death, the just wages of it. And so says Gregory Nazianzen, surnamed the
Divine, (...), etc. Nazianz. Orat. 42.
We were so made, says he, that we might be happy; and such we were, being
made when first placed in Paradise, in which we might have had the fruition of
all kinds of happiness, but forfeited the same by our own transgression. If any
ask, (St. Augustine makes the question, and the answer too) what death God
threatened unto man on his disobedience, whether the death of the body or of the
soul, or of the wholeman which is called the second death, we must answer, All
August. de Civit. l. 13. c. 12.15.
. For if (says he) we understand that death only by which the soul is forsaken
of God, surely in that all other kind of deaths were meant, which without
question were to follow. For in that a disobedient motion rose in the flesh,
for which they covered their privy parts, one death was perceived, in which God
did forsake the soul. And when the soul forsook the body now corrupted with
time, and wasted by the decaies of age, another death was found by experience
to ensue upon it: that by these two deaths, that first death of the whole man
might be accomplished, which the second death at last does follow, except Man
be delivered by the grace of God.

And by the grace of God was poor man delivered from this body of death. For as
there is no deep valley but near so me high hill; so near this vale of misery,
this valley of the shadow of death, as the Psalmist calls it, was an hill of
mercy: a remedy proposed in the promised seed, to Adam, and the sons of Adam,
if with unfeigned faith they lay hold upon it. God looks upon them all at once
in that woeful plight, and when he saw them in their blood Ezekiel. 16.6.
, had compassion on them: and out of his mere love and mercy, without other
motives, offered them all deliverance in a Mediator, in the man CHRIST JESUS;
and that too on conditions far more easy then that of works: the condition
and reward being this in brief, that whosoever did believe in him should not
perish but have life everlasting Joh. 3.15, 16.
. And this I take to be the method of Election unto life eternal, through
CHRIST JESUS our Lord. For although there be neither Prius or Posterius in the
will of God, who sees all things at once together, and wills at the first
sight without more delay: yet to apply his acts unto our capacities, as were
the acts of God in their right production, so were they primitively in his
intention. But Creation without peradventure did foregoe the fall; and the
disease or death which ensued upon it, was of necessity to be, before there
could a course be taken to prescribe the cure; and the prescribing of the cure
must first be finished, before it could be fitted to particular persons. And
for the Fall, which was the medium as it were between life and death, the great
occasion of man's misery and Gods infinite mercy: God neither did decree it as a
means or method, of which he might make use to set forth his power in the
immortal misery of a mortal creature; nor did he so much as permit it, in the
strict sense of the word, in which it differs little from a plain command.
Quam long quaeso est a jubente permittens Salv. de gubern. l. 8.
? How little differs permitting from commanding? says devout Salvian;
considering he that which does permit, having power to hinder, is guilty of the
evil which does follow on it. God did not then permit the fall of unwary man,
as Moses did permit the Israelites a bill of divorce, which manner of
permission carries an allowance with it, or a toleration at the least: but so
permit it only, as the father in our Saviors parable, permitted his younger
Son to see strange Countries Luke 15.12, 13.
; and having furnished him with a stock on which to traffic, suffered him to
depart, and make up his fortunes, whether good or bad. The ill success that
followed the young Prodigals journey, was no part of his fathers purpose, of
his will and absolute decree much less; no nor so much as to be ascribed unto
his permission, which was but causa sine qua non, as the Schools call it, if
it were so much. Only it gave the Father such an opportunity, as Adams fall did
GOD in the present case, of entertaining him with joy at his coming home, and
killing the fa^ted Calfe for his better welcome. It Is true, that God to whose
eternal eye all things are present and foreseen as if done already, did
perfectly foreknow to what unhappy end this poor man would come, how far he
would abuse that natural liberty, wherewith he had endowed him at his first
Creation. Praescivit peccaturum, sed non praedestinavit ad peccatum Fulg. ad
Monim.
, said Fulgentius truly. And upon this foreknowledge what would follow on it,
he did withal provide such a sovereign remedy as should restore collapsed man
to his primitive hopes, of living in Gods fear, departing hence in his favor,
and coming through faith in Christ unto life eternal, if he were not wanting
to himself in the Application. For this is a faithful saying, and worthy of
all acceptance, that CHRIST JESUS came into the World to save sinners 1 Timothy
1.15.
, of whom every man may say as St. Paul once did, that he is the chief. And it
is as worthy of acceptance, which came though from the same Spirit, from a
worthier person, that God so loved the World (the whole world of mankind) that
He sent his only begouten Son into the World, to the intent that whosoever did
believe in him, should live though he dyed, and whosoever lives and believes
in him should not die for ever Joh. 11.25, 26.
; but have (as in another place) everlasting life Id. 3.15.
. But what it is to believe in him, and what a Christian man is bound to
believe of him: as it is all the subject of the six next Articles, so must it
be the argument of another book; this touching our belief in God the Father
Almighty, Maker of Heaven and Earth, and all things therein, with most of the
material points which depend upon it, beginning now to draw to a final period.

Chap. VI. What Faith it was which was required for Justification before, and
under the Law. Of the knowledge which the Patriarchs and Prophets had touching
Christ to come. Touching the Sacrifices of the Jews; the Salvation of the
Gentiles; and the Justifying power of Faith.
ANd yet before we pass to the following Articles, there are some points to be
disputed in reference to the several estates of the Church of God, as it stood
heretofore under the Law, and since under the Gospel; the influence which Faith
had in their justification, and the condition of those people which were Aliens
to the law of Moses, before Christ's coming in the flesh. For being that the
Patriarchs before the time of Moses, and those holy men of God that lived after
him till the coming of Christ, had not so clear and explicit a knowledge of
the particulars of the Creed which concern our Savior, or the condition of the
holy Catholic Church and the Members of it; as has been since revealed in the
writings of the Evangelists and Apostles: it cannot be supposed that they
should have universally the same object of faith which we Christians have, or
were bound to believe all those things distinctly touching Christ our Savior,
and the benefits by him redounding to the sons of men, which all Christians
must believe if they will be saved. And then considering that there is almost
nothing contained in Scripture touching God the Father, his Divine Power and
Attributes, the making and government of the World, and all things therein,
which was to be believed by those of the line of Abraham, but what has been
avowed and testified by the learned Gentiles: it will not be unworthy of our
disquisition to see wherein the differences and advantages lay, which the
Patriarchs and those of Judah had above the Nations; or whether the same light
of truth did not shine on both through diverse Mediums, for the better fitting
and preparing of both people to receive the Gospel. In sifting and discussing
of which principal points, we shall consider what it is in faith it self, which
is said to justify: of what effect the Sacrifices both before and under the
Law were, to the satisfying of Gods wrath and expiating of the sins of the
people, by whom they were offered to the Lord; and the relation which they had
to the death of Christ, the Lamb of God which takes away the sins of the world:
and finally what is to be conceived of those eminent men amongst the Gentiles,
who not extinguishing that light of nature which was planted in them, but
regulating all their actions by the beams thereof, came to be very eminent in
all kinds of learning, and in the exercise of Justice, Temperance, Mercy,
Fortitude, and other Acts of Moral virtue. Some other things will fall in
incidently on the by, which need not be presented in this general view. And the
mature consideration of all these particulars I have reserved unto this place,
that being situate in the midst, between the Faith we have in God the Father
Almighty, and the belief required of us in his Son Christ Jesus: it may either
serve for an Appendix to the former part, or a Preamble to the second; or be in
stead of a bond or ligament for knitting all the joints of this body together,
in the stronger coherence of discourse.

And first, Faith being (as appears by the definition before delivered) a
firm assent to supernatural truths revealed: we cannot but conceive in reason
that the Object of it is to be commensurable to the proportion and degree of
the Revelation. For as our Savior said in another case, that to whom much is
given, of him the more shall be required Luke 12.48.
; so may we also say in this, that to whom more divine supernatural truths have
been revealed, of him there is a greater measure of belief expected. Till the
unhappy fall of Adam, there was no faith required but in God alone. For without
faith it is impossible to please God Heb. 11.6.
, says the Apostle; which Adam by the Law of his Creation was obliged to
endeavor. Nor could he come before the Lord, or seek for the continuance of
his grace and favors, had he not first been fitted and prepared by faith. For
he that comes unto God must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of
them that diligently seek him, as in the same text says the same Apostle.
Which words we may not understand of Faith in Christ, at least not primarily,
with respect to Adam, of whom such faith was not required in the state of
Innocence; for where there was no sin, there was no need of a Savior: but only
of a faith in Almighty God, the steadfast confession and acknowledgement of
whose being and bounty, was to speak properly, the fundamental act and radical
qualification of the faith of Adam. But after he had fallen from his first
integrity, and that the Lord out of mere pity to his frail and perishing
creature, was pleased to promise him some measure of reparation in the woman's
seed Genesis 3.15.
, then did the bruising of the Serpents head by the seed of the woman become a
partial object of the faith of Adam, and of all those who afterward descended
of him in the line of Grace. And yet this was but in a general apprehension of
the mercies of God and of his constancy and veracity in fulfilling his word: no
distinct Revelation being made till the time of Abraham, so much as from what
branch of the root of Adam this promised blessing was to come. A pregnant
argument whereof I think is offered to us in the error of our Grandam Eve: who
on the birth of Cain, her firstborn but most wicked son, conceived that he
should be the man in whom the promise made by God was to be fulfilled: and
therefore said, I have gotten a man from the Lord Genesis 4.1.
, as our English reads it, but rather possedi virum ipsum JEHOVAH, I have
gotten a man even the Lord JEHOVAH P. Fagius Com. in Genesis 4.
, as Paulus Phagius a very learned Hebritian does correct that reading. And as
for Abraham himself, though it pleased God to tell him more particularly then
before was intimated, that in his seed should all the families of the Earth be
blessed Genesis 12.3.
: yet so unsatisfied was he as concerning Sarah, or that this general blessing
was to come of a son by her, that when GOD promised such a son from that barren
womb, by whom she was to be a Mother of Kings and Nations; instead of giving
thanks to God he returned this answer, O that Ishmael might live before thee
Genesis 17.18.
. And though upon the duplicate of this gracious promise that in Isaac should
his seed be called Genesis 21.12.
, he was sufficiently instructed, and believed accordingly, that the great
mercy which God promised to our Father Adam, was to descend in time from the
loins of Isaac: yet that he should be born of an imaculate Virgin, that he
should suffer such and so many indignities, and at the last a bitter and most
shameful death, by the hands of those, who seemed to boast so much in nothing,
as that they were the children of this faithful Abraham: as it was never, that
we read of revealed unto him, so have we no reason to believe that it was any
part or object of his faith at all. The like may be affirmed in general of the
house of Israel, till God was pleased to speak more plainly and significantly
to them by the mouth of his Prophets, then he had done unto their Fathers in
dreams and visions. For having nothing further revealed unto them touching
Christ to come, then what was intimated first in generals to our Father Adam,
and more particularly specified to their Father Abraham: the primary and
principal Object of their faith was God alone (conceive me still of God the
Father Almighty) in whom they looked for the performance of those gracious
promises which he had made unto their Fathers: though of the time when, the
manner how, and other the material points which the Creed contains, they were
utterly ignorant, and consequently could not ground any faith upon them.

In after times, as GOD imparted clearer light to the house of Jacob, (for the
nearer we are to the Sunrising, the more day appears) so were they bound to
give belief to such Revelations (or supernatural truths revealed, call them
which you will) which he vouchsafed to make unto them by his holy Prophets.
Which howsoever they contained in them a sufficient light to guide them to the
knowledge of many particular points and circumstances, which were to be
accomplished in the time and place of Christ's Nativity; his course of life, and
sufferings, and most shameful death, which every one could see when they came
to pass, that whatsoever had been done by, or concerning him, did come to pass
according as had been sore-signified in the holy Scriptures: yet this great
light of prophecy which did shine amongst them, was but like a Candle in a
dark Lanthorn, or hid under a bushel, and rather served to convince them of
incredulity when he was ascended, then to prepare them to receive him when he
came unto them. He came unto his own, and his own received him not Joh. 1.11.
, says St. John expressly. And for the Prophets themselves, it is true that
they have in them many positive and plain predictions, of the Incarnation,
Nativity, and Circumcision of Christ, of his Passion, Resurrection, and
Ascension; as also of the most remarkable passages and occurrences in the whole
course of his life. And yet a question has been made amongst learned men,
whether they did always distinctly foresee, or explicitly believe whatsoever
they did foretell or fore-signifie concerning Christ. Nor can I find but that
this question is resolved to this effect, that though they had a right
apprehension of the truths by them delivered, and a foresight of all those
future events of which they prophesied, according to the accomplishment and
sense thereof, by themselves intended: yet that this foresight of theirs
extended not to all branches of divine truth contained in their writings, or to
that use and application which was after made of them by CHRIST himself and his
Evangelists and Apostles, with this mark of reference, that such and such
things came to pass that the sayings of the Prophets might be fulfilled. For
many things are extant in the Prophetical writings, either by way of Typical
prefigurations, or positive and plain predictions, applyable to the life and
actions of our Lord and Savior, and the success and fortunes of his holy
Church; which in all probability was never so intended by those sacred Penmen.
For who can reasonably conceive, that Moses in the story of the commanded
offering up of Isaac, the only son of his Father, intended to typifie or
fore-shadow the real offering up of CHRIST the only begotten Son of God, near
the self same place: or that this Ceremony in the ordering of the Paschal Lamb
Exodus 12.46.
, ye shall not break a bone thereof, did look so far (in the first institution
of it) as to the not breaking of our Saviors legs in the time of his passion
Joh. 19.33.36.
: or that the setting up of the Brazen Serpent was by him meant to signify and
foreshew the lifting up of the Son of God upon the Cross, to the end, that
whosoever believed in him should not perish, but have eternal life Joh. 3.14.15.
, as himself applies it in St. John? The like may be affirmed of David, to whom
the Lord had promised that of the fruit of his body there should one sit upon
his Throne for evermore, Psalm. 132. that God would set his King upon his holy
hill of Sion, Psalm. 2. with many other predictions to the same effect. And yet
it may be questioned upon very good reason, whether he understood those
Prophesies which himself delivered, of a spiritual Kingdom in the souls of
men, such as our Savior Christ erected in his holy Church: in whom the said
predictions were accomplished, and of whom intended: and not rather of the
flourishing and continuance of his temporal Kingdom; the Royal seat whereof
was by him settled on Mount Sion, and the renown of his magnificence and
personal valor had made so formidable to the Nations which were round about
him. And may it not be questioned also (if not out of question) whether that
famous Prophecy, Behold, a Virgin shall conceive, had any reference in the
intention of the Prophet Isaiah to the Virgin Mary and the birth of Christ? But
of this more hereafter in another place. The like whereof might be made good in
most of the rest of the Prophets, if one would put himself to the trouble of
searching into all particulars which might be disputed; or rather if our
Savior CHRIST himself had not already put it beyond all disputes: when he thus
said to his Disciples, that many Kings and Prophets have desired to see the
things which ye see and have not seen them, and to hear those things which ye
hear and have not heard them Luke 10.24.
; upon which words we may infer that the Evangelists and Apostles being bound
to teach no other things in the Church of CHRIST, then what had been foretold
by Moses and the holy Prophets; both knew and taught others also to believe
many things of CHRIST, which the Prophets, no not David himself the Kingly
Prophet, although they very much desired it, did not see, nor hear of: and
therefore that they did not distinctly apprehend the meaning of the holy Ghost
in all those things which he was pleased to utter by their mouths, or express
by their pens, touching CHRIST to come. For otherwise they must have seen all
that the Evangelists saw, and have known all the mysteries of the Kingdom of
Heaven, which the Apostles after our Saviors resurrection either knew or
taught: which is directly contradictory to our Saviors words, and to the truth
of his assertion: When therefore it is said so often in the holy Gospel that
some things were either done or suffered that the sayings of the Prophets might
be fulfilled; we must not understand it in that sense alone whereof the
Prophets did intend it, or of that natural, proper, and immediate end to which
the Prophets did direct it: but of some further mystical or mysterious meaning,
reserved in the intention of the holy Ghost; and in the fullness of time
accomplished by our Lord and Savior according unto that intention; though no
such meaning was imparted to the Prophets themselves, whose mouths he made the
pen of a ready writer.

But then perhaps, it will be said, that if the Prophets had not a distinct and
explicit apprehension of every thing by them delivered in the way of
Prophecy, but either knew not what they spoke, or spoke what they did not
understand: they differed little, if at all, from the Heathen Soothsayers, who
foretold many things which did come to pass, but without any apprehension of
the truth thereof. For satisfying of which scruple we may please to know, that
when the evil spirit did intend to foresignifie any thing to come by the mouth
of the Soothsayers or Diviners amongst the Heathens: he used to cast them into
a trance or ecstasy, so that they used to rave, or speak in those sudden fits,
that which they neither understood at the time they spoke it, nor could
remember when they came to their sense again. These they called Arreptitii in
the Latin, as being snatched up as it were from the use of their senses, to
move divine and immaterial contemplations: but generally both in Greek and
Latin they were called Ecstatici, from the Greek word (...), which Hierome
rightly renders excessus mentis, an exilience or transport of mind, adding,
that he can tell of no other word, by which to express it in the Latin Hieron.
ad Iun. and Fretel. Io. 3.
. Aliter enim Latinus sermo (...) exprimere non potest, nisi mentis excessum.
Tertullian does not only make it a transport of mind, but such as is conjoined
with a spice of madness. Extasin dicimus excessum sensus and amentiae instar
Tertul. lib. de Anima c. 45.
. And such an ecstasy he thought had been fallen on Peter Id. adv. Marc. l. 4.
c. 22.
, when saying on the sight of his Masters glorious transfiguration, Bonum est
nobis esse hic, that it was good for them to continue there: the Evangelist
gives this character or censure of him, Nesciens quid diceret, that he
understood not what he said, Luke 9.33. But this was only a device or conceit
of his, being now fallen into the heresy of Montanus to countenance by the
like frenzy of St. Peter, the raving follies or plain madness of Maximilla,
Prisca, and such other Prophetesses, to whom that wretched and infatuated man
had given up himself. Of those, or one of them he tells us in his Book De
Anima, that in those ecstasies which she suffered by the Spirit of God, she had
the grace of Prophecy imparted to her Id. de Anima cap. 9.
. Est hodie soror apud nos Revelationum charismata sortita, quas in Ecclesia
inter Dominica solemnia, per Extasin in Spiritu patitur: and this he plainly
calls in another place, Spiritalis extasis, i. e. amentia Id. adv. Mar^i. l.
5. c. 8.
, a spiritual ecstasy or madness. Whereof he gives this reason in another of
his Books against the Marcionites, In spiritu enim homo constitutus, praesertim
quum gloriam Dei conspicit, vel quum per ipsum Deus loquitur, necesse est ut
excidat sensu, obumbratus scilicet virtute divina Id. adv. Marc. l. 4. c. 22.
, that is to say, a man being ravished in the Spirit, especially when he
beholds the glory of God, (which he took to be S. Peter's case) or when God does
please to speak by him, (which was the case of Prisca and her fellow
Prophetesses) must needs be ravished from his senses, being so fully
over-shadowed by the Spirit of God. His exposition of the word we allow well
of, and doubt not but it was a plain spirit of madness which fell on Maximilla
and her fellow Prophetesses as well as on any of the Heathen Soothsayers at the
time of their prophesying: whom for this cause the Latins called Furentes, or
Furiosos, men besides themselves. Hi sunt and Furentes quos in publicum videtis
excurrere; vates and ipsi absque Templo sic insaniunt, sic bacchantur, sic
rotantur Minut. Fell. in Octavio.
, as Minutius has it. In which we do not only find their name, but those
frantic and absurd gesticulations, which they did commonly express in the time
of those ecstasies, to signify what an heavy burden of the Spirit did then lie
upon them. But so it was not with the Prophets inspired by God, who very well
understood what they said and did, and did not only prophecy what should come
to pass, but did it in a constant and coherent way of expression, and with a
grave and reverent deportment of themselves in the act thereof. St. Hierom who
gives us a very good description of these Arreptitious or Extatical spirits,
affirming of them, Nec tacere nec loqui in sua potestate habent Hieron. in
Prolog. in Hab.
, that they could neither hold their peace, nor speak when they would
themselves, but as they were compelled by the evil spirit, has given a
different character of the holy Prophets. Of whom he says, Intelligit quod
videt, nec ut amens loquitur, he understands the Vision which he does behold,
and speaks not like a madman, one besides himself, nor like the raving women of
the sect of Montanus. And in another place, Non loquitur in (...), ut Montanus,
etc. sed quod prophetat liber est Visionis intelligentis universa quae loquitur
Id. in Prolog. ad Nahum.
. The Prophet of the Lord (says he) speaks not in a trance, or besides
himself, as Montanus, Prisca, Maximilla, spread abroad their dotages: but that
which he foretells is surnamed a Vision, (the Vision of the Prophet Nahum.
chapter 1.) because he understands what he does deliver. The like difference
Epiphanius makes betwixt the Prophets of the Lord, and those of Montanus,
against whom he purposely disputes Haeres. 48. And long before them it was
said by Lactantius truly, of the Prophets of God whom the Gentiles had been
pleased to accuse of madness, and called them Furiosi, as they did their own,
that the accomplishment of their predictions, their consonancy or unanimous
consent in the things foretold, and the coherency of their words and sentences,
did very sufficiently free them from that imputation. Impleta in plerisque
quotidie illorum vaticinia videmus, and in unam sententiam congruens divinam,
docet non fuisse furiosos Lactant. de falls. Rel. l. 1. c. 4.
. Quis enim mentis emotae, non modo futura praecinere, sed etiam cohaerentia
loqui possit? as he most excellently answers so foul a calumny. So then the
Prophets of the Lord having a true intention to foretell what should come to
pass, and being able not to make a good construction of what they spoke, but
also to give assurance to the people in the name of God, that every thing
should come to pass which they had foretold; were nothing like the Heathen
Soothsayers, who used to speak they knew not what in their Divinations. And yet
it will not follow upon this distinction, that they did explicitly and
distinctly comprehend the fullness of those holy mysteries which the holy Ghost
was pleased to make known and fore-signifie by them: the knowledge of which
mysteries, as St. Paul has told us Ephesians. 3.4, 5.
, was not made known in other Ages to the sons of men, as in his time it was
revealed to the holy Apostles and Prophets by the self same Spirit.

Which being so, and that the knowledge of CHRIST JESUS and him crucified, was
not communicated to the Jews which lived under the Law, or the Patriarchs which
did live before it, in so distinct and clear a manner as it has been since: I
dare not confidently say that any explicit faith in the death of CHRIST, was
required at their hands as necessary to their justification; or that they
actually did believe more in it then Gods general promise, concerning the
redemption and salvation of the world by the woman's seed, with some
restrictions of that seed to the stock of Abraham, and the house of David,
which had not been delivered in the first assurance. Certain I am, that of all
the Clowd of witnesses mentioned by St. Paul, amongst all those examples of
faith and piety, which he has laid before us in the 11. to the Hebrews, there
is no mention made at all of faith in Christ, nor any word so much as by
intimation, that Noah, Abraham, Moses, or the rest there spoken of, did look
upon him as an object of their faith, at all. The total and adaequate object of
their faith, for ought I can find, was only God the Maker of Heaven and Earth:
on whose veracity and fidelity in making good his general and particular
promise they did so rely, as not to bring the same under any dispute. For what
faith else does any Text of Scripture give to Abel or Enoch, then that they did
believe that there was a God, and that he was a rewarder of all those that seek
him Heb. 11.4, 5, 6.
? What Faith else was it that saved Noah in the midst of the waters, but that
he did believe what God said unto him touching his intention of bringing a
flood of waters upon the earth to destroy all flesh: and thereupon did build
thn Ark, as the Lord commanded Genesis 6.17, 22.
? Or what else was the faith of Isaac when he blessed Jacob and Esau; or of
Jacob when he blessed the sons of Joseph; or of Joseph when he gave
commandment as concerning his bones, Heb. 11.21, 22, 23. but a reliance on the
promise which God made to Abraham, of giving to him and his seed the whole land
of Canaan Genesis 13.15, 16.
? But because Abraham is proposed in the holy Scripture, as the great example
of the righteousness which comes by faith, or of justification by faith, call
it which you will, we will consider all those Texts which do look this way, to
see what was the object of that faith of Abraham, to which the Scriptures do
ascribe his justification. Now the first act of Abraham's faith, which stands
commended to us in the Book of God, is the belief he gave to the promise of
God, to bless him and make him a great Nation; and his obedience thereupon unto
Gods command in leaving his own Country and his Fathers house, and go unto the
land which the Lord should show him Genesis 12.1, 2.
. Which promise being afterward confirmed by God, and believed by Abraham, it
is thus testified of him in the book of Genesis, that he believed in the Lord,
and he (that is to say, the Lord) counted it unto him for righteousness Genesis
15.6.
. Here then we have the Justification of our Father Abraham; ascribed unto his
Faith in the Lord JEHOVAH; to faith in God (as the proper and full object of
it) as the word is varyed by St. Paul, Romans 4.3. Thus also when the promise was
made of the birth of Isaac, without considering of the deadness of Sarahs womb,
or the estate of his own body then as good as dead: he staggered not at the
promise of God through unbelief, but faithfully believed that God was able to
perform what he pleased to promise Romans 4.19, 20, 21, 22.
. And this says the Apostle was imputed to him for righteousness. Of which of
these two acts of faith the Apostle speaks in the third of the Galatians,
where Abraham's faith is imputed to him also for righteousness, it is hard to
say: but sure it is, that there is no other faith there mentioned but his Faith
in God Gal. 3.6.
. For it is said, Even as Abraham believed God, etc. And last of all, as to the
imputation of his faith for righteousness, when God commanded him to offer up
Isaac his only begotten Son, even him of whom it had been said that in Isaac
shall thy seed be called: Abraham was ready to obey him upon this belief that
God was able to raise him again from death to life, and that Gods Word
concerning him would not fall to ground Heb. 11.17, 18, 19.
. What says St. James to this great trial of the Patriarchs faith Jam. 2.21.
? Abraham (says he) believed God, and it was imputed to him for righteousness.
In all those Texts where the Apostles speak of his Justification, or where the
principal acts of his Faith are recited severally; there is no intimation of
his Faith in Christ, nothing that seems to look that way, more then that Gods
first promise which was made in general to the Woman's seed, may seem to be
restrained unto his particularly. Whether these several imputations of the
faith of Abraham, do necessarily infer such an access of Justification as is
defended and maintained in the Schools of Rome; I will not meddle for the
present. But in my mind Origin never spoke more pertinently then where he
gives this resolution of that doubt (though not then proposed) Quum multae
fides Abrahae praecesserint, in hoc nunc universa fides ejus collecta esse
videtur, and ita in justitiam ei reputatur Origin. in Romans l. 4. c. 4.
. Whereas (says he) many faiths of Abraham, (that is to say, may acts of
Abraham's faith) had gone before; now all his faith was recollected and summed
up together, and so accounted unto him for righteousness. And if no other faith
but a faith in God without any explicit relation to the death of CHRIST,
concurred unto the justification of the faithful Abraham; the like may be
concluded of the house of Israel, that they were only bound to believe in God
the Father Almighty, till by Christ's coming in the flesh, and suffering death
upon the Cross for the sins of man, all that concerns his death and passions,
with all the other specialties in the present Creed, made up together with our
faith in God the Father, the full and entire object of a Christian faith. For
this is life eternal, says our Lord and Savior, to know the only true God and
Jesus Christ whom he has sent Joh. 17.3.
. Not God alone, but God and Jesus Christ together, are since the Preaching of
the Gospel, made the object of faith. So that it is not now sufficient to
believe in God, unless we also do believe in the Son of God, whom God has set
forth to be a Propitiation through faith in his blood, to declare his
righteousness for the remission of sins Romans 3.25.
, as St. Paul has told us.

But here perhaps it will be said, that though we do not read expressly in the
holy Scriptures, that the Patriarchs before Moses, and the Fathers afterward
did believe in Christ: yet that the same may be inferred by good and undeniable
consequence, out of the frequent Sacrifices before the Law, and the Mosaical
offerings which continued after it: all which together with the rest of the
Levitical Ordinances were but shadows of the things to come, the body being
only CHRIST Col. 2.17.
. That God instructed our first father Adam in the duty of Sacrifice, I shall
easily grant: there being such early mention of them in the Book of God in the
several and respective offerings of Cain and Abel. And I shall grant as easily,
that GOD proposed some other end of them in that institution, then to receive
them as a Quit-rent from the hands of men, in testimony that they held their
estates from him, as the Supreme Landlord: though by Rupertus this be made the
chief end thereof, Dignum sane est, ut donis suis honoretur ipse qui dedit
Rupertus de Operibus S. Trin.
, as that Author has it; which possibly may hold well enough in those kind of
Sacrifices which they called (...), gratulatory, Eucharistical, that is, the
Sacrifices of praise and thanksgiving for those signal benefits, which GOD had
graciously vouchsafed to bestow upon them. But then there was another sort
which they termed (...), expiatory, or propitiatory, ordained by God himself
as the Types and figures of that one only, real, and propitiatory sacrifice,
which was to be performed in the death of CHRIST, who through the eternal
Spirit was to offer up himself, once, without spot to God for the redemption of
the world Heb. 9.14.
: yet were they not bare Types and figures, and had no efficacy in themselves,
as to the taking away of the filth of sin (for the Apostle does acknowledge,
that the blood of Bulls, and of Goats, and the ashes of an Heifer sprinkling the
unclean, did sanctify as to the purifying of the flesh, Heb. 9.13.) but that
such efficacy as they had was not natural to them, but either in reference to
the Sacrifice to be made of CHRIST, or else extrinsecal and affixed by the
divine Ordinance and institution of Almighty God. And that they might be so in
this last respect there want not very pregnant reasons in the Word of God Genesis
2.17.
. For whereas God, considered as the Supreme Lawgiver, had imposed a
commandment on man under pain of death: although it stood not with his wisdom
to reverse the Law, which with such infinite wisdom had been first ordained:
yet it seemed very suitable to his grace and goodness to commute the punishment,
and satisfy himself with the death of Beasts, offered in sacrifice unto him by
that sinful Creature. Which kind of Commutations are not rare in Scripture. It
pleased God to impose a command on Abraham, to offer up his only son Isaac for
a burnt offering to him upon one of the mountains: and after to dispense with
so great a rigor, and in the stead of Isaac to send a Ram Genesis 22.2.13.
. It pleased God to challenge to himself the first born of every creature, both
of man and beast Exodus 13.2.
; but so, that he was pleased in the way of exchange, in stead of the first
born of the sons of men, to take a Lamb, a pair of Turtle Doves, or two young
Pigeons Lev. 12.6.
. Now that these commutations were allowed of also in the case of punishment,
is evident by many Texts of holy Writ. And this not only in sins of ignorance,
the Expiation of the which is mentioned, Levit. 5.17, 18. but in those which
were committed knowingly, and with an high hand of presumptuous wickedness.
Lying and swearing falsely, deceiving our neighbor, and taking away his goods
by violence, are sins of high and dangerous nature against both Tables; and
therefore in themselves deserved no less punishment then eternal damnation: yet
was God pleased to accept of the blood of Rams, in commutation or exchange, for
the soul of man. If a soul sin and commit a trespass against the Lord, and lie
unto his neighbor in that which was delivered him to keep, or in fellowship,
or in a thing taken away by violence, or has deceived his neighbor, or has
found that which was lost, and lies concerning it, and swears falsely; in
all these he does sin, and that greatly too, there is no question of it Lev.
6.2, 3.
. And yet of these it is ordained, that having made compensation to his
neighbor for the injury done, he shall bring his trespass offering to the
Lord, a Ram without blemish out of the flock, And the Priest shall make
atonement for him before the Lord, and it shall be forgiven him Ibid. v. 5, 6,
7.
. In which we find that satisfaction for the wrong in regard of man was to be
made by restitution: but the forgiveness of the sin in regard of God, to be
procured by the sacrifice of the blood of Rams. But what need search be made
into more particulars, when the atonement for their sins, and sanctifying them
to the Lord their God, is generally ascribed to the sacrifices and blood of
beasts; as if the burden of men's sins had been laid on them. For thus says God
by Moses to the sons of Aaron, Wherefore have ye not eaten the sin-offering in
the holy place, seeing it is most holy, and God has given it you to bear the
iniquity of the Congregation, to make atonement for them before the Lord Lev.
10.17.
? Thus when he does restrain that people from eating blood, he gives this
reason of the same, because I have given it to you upon the Altar to make
atonement for your souls, for it is the blood, that makes an atonement for the
soul Lev. 17.11.
. Thus also says S. Paul, that both the Book and all the people, the
Tabernacle and all the vessels of the Ministry, and almost all things by the
Law were purged with blood, and that without shedding of blood there was no
remission Heb. 9.19, 21, 22.
. If without shedding of the blood of beasts there was no remission, then
certainly it follows by St. Paul's illation, that by shedding of their blood
there was. Or that the sacrifices both before and under the law, may seem to
have the same effect in remission of sins, which is conferred on Baptism in the
time of the Gospel: A power not natural to either ex natura sua; for naturally
it is as impossible for water, as for the blood of Bulls and Goats to take away
sins: but Ex vi divinae institutionis, conferred upon them by the Institution
of Almighty God; who being the Physician of the soul of man, might choose what
medicines he thought fittest for the Patients ease. And possibly enough it is,
that besides this Expiatory power affixed to these legal Sacrifices, they might
occasionally produce repentance in the hearts of the people, when they beheld
the innocent dumb beasts brought unto the slaughter; and brought unto the
slaughter for no other reason but to make reconciliation for the sin of man.
For if a generous young Prince that sees his negligences punished on the back
of another, according to the usage of former times, does thereby both grow more
industrious in his course of studies, and more conform and regular in his
course of life: why may we not conceive so favorably of the people of Israel,
that seeing the brute beasts punished for man's offenses, they might repent with
shame and sorrow of their former wickednesses, and cry out passionately and
afflictedly in the words of DAVID, It is I that have sinned and done wickedly,
but what have these sheep done 2 Samuel 24.17.
, that they should be slaughtered? Me, me, adsum qui feci, in me convertile
ferrum Virg. Aeneid. lib. 9.
; Let thy hand be against me that have done this wickedness. So that for ought
appears unto the contrary, the Sacrifices both before and under the Law, had
in themselves a power of Propitiation by virtue of the ordinance and
justification of Almighty God; and not a relative virtue only in reference to
the All-sufficient sacrifice of our Savior CHRIST.

But then admitting that those Sacrifices were ordained but as types and
figures of that which Christ was in the fullness of time to make for the sins
of mankind: yet is this to be understood of Gods mind and purpose, and not of
any such respect which the people had of them. For that the people when they
brought their sacrifices before the Altar, had any such relation to the death
of CHRIST, as to conceive the same to be represented in the slaughter of
beasts: is no where to be found, I dare boldly say it, in all the Volume and
context of the book of God. Or if the people in their sacrifices had respect to
CHRIST, or looked upon them but as types and figures of that perfect sacrifice
which he was afterward to offer unto God the Father: think we that God would
have rejected or disliked them, profess himself to be full of the burnt
offerings of Rams and the fat of fed beasts Isa. 1.11.
, that he delighted not in the blood of bullocks, or of lambs and goats; and
more then so, that their sacrifices were become such an abomination to him,
that he who sacrificed a lamb was as if he had cut off a dogs neck, and he that
sacrificed an Ox as if he had killed a man Isa. 66.3.
. Assuredly God could not entertain such a vile esteem of the Jewish
sacrifices, however they might have some mixture of impure affection, had they
been offered only in relation to the death of Christ. Morn. de verit. Rel.
Christ. c. 27.
And though the Lord Du Plessis seem to be of opinion, that the sacrificing of
men and women was first taken up, upon some knowledge that the blood of the son
of man, would prove a fuller expiation for their sins and wickednesses then of
all the sheep upon the hills, and the beasts of the forest; and therefore that
their sacrifices did relate to Christ, howsoever horribly mis-applyed in that
particular: yet is this only gratis dictum, without proof at all, there being
another cause, as bad, of such humane sacrifices, which we shall touch upon
hereafter. If it be asked in the mean time, how CHRIST is said in Scripture to
be the end of the Law, Romans 10.4. or how the Law is said to be our
Schoolmasters to bring us to Christ, Gal. 3.24. except the sacrifices of the
Law were as types and figures of the sacrifice which was made by Christ: I
answer, that the Law had other and more proper means to bring men to Christ,
then to conduct them by the hand of such types and figures, in case the
sacrifices of the Jews had been only such. For CHRIST is therefore said to be
the end of the Law, for righteousness unto those that believe, (for so it
follows in the Text) because he does perform that unto those which believe,
which the Law propounded for its end, but could not attain, that is to say, the
Justification of a sinner. (...) Chrysostom. in Romans Homil. 17.
: what did the Law aim at, says St. Chrysostom? to make man righteous, but
it could not, because man will not keep the Law. To what end served the feasts,
and ordinances, the sacrifices, and the rest of the Mosaical institutes, (...),
but that they might contribute to man's Justification? Which when they could not
bring to pass, then was CHRIST fain to undertake it, and so became the end of
the Law for righteousness. Theophylact following him in this, as in other
things. (...) Theophyl. in Romans 10.
. Christ is the end of the Law, says he, because the justifi^ation of man,
which the Law undertook but could not accomplish, was perfected and made good
by Christ. And secondly, both Christ may be said to be the end of the Law, and
the Law to bring men unto Christ, because, as Musculus well observes, the Law
convincing men of sin, exacting a righteousness of them which it does not
enable them to perform, and again threatening and condemning them for the want
thereof, Nihil aliud, agit quam quod ad Christum ducit, per quem justificemur
gratis Muscul. in Romans 10.
, does lead them as it were by the hand to Christ, by whose grace they are
freely justified. In a word, our Savior Christ is said to be the end of the
Law, and the Law to be a Schoolmaster to bring men to Christ, because the
whole Mosaical oeconomie, which in one word is called The Law, was for that end
and purpose given unto the Jews, that it might instruct them touching the
Messiah who was then to come; and that in time they might be trained up and
prepared to receive him, and with him that more perfect form of life and
worship, which he should establish at his coming. And this is that which was
intended by the Writers of the Primitive times, when they tell us that the Law
was nothing else but the Gospel masked August. de Civit dei. l. 16.26.
, the Gospel nothing else but the Law revealed, or the vail taken away from the
face of Moses. Such passages in the books of the old Testament which relate to
Christ, before his coming in the flesh, were so dark and difficult, that those
who were well exercised in the law of God, and made it their study day and
night, might very well have asked this question, as the Eunuch did, Of whom I
pray thee speaks the Prophet this, of himself or of some other man Act. 25.34.
? But when the Gospel came to be preached and published, and that our Savior
had fulfilled all things which were spoken of him by the Prophets: then was it
easy to discern, even by vulgar wits, that the whole doctrine of the Gospel
was contained in the Law; and every thing concerning Christ either
fore-shadowed or fore-signifyed in Types and Prophesies. To bring this business
to an end, that both the Patriarchs and the Jews did rely on God for the
accomplishment of his promise touching their salvation, I do nothing doubt:
there being such evident testimonies of it from the first to the last. I have
waited for thy salvation O Lord, says the Patriarch Jacob Genesis 49.18.
, long before the Law. And almost at the expiration or last breath thereof it
is said of Simeon, that he waited for the consolation of Israel Luck. 2.25.38.
: of Anna the old Prophetess, that she spoke of CHRIST to all them that looked
for redemption in Jerusalem, but that they were acquainted with the means and
method which God did purpose to make use of in so great a work, or did rely on
Christ to come for their justification; as the Scripture no where says it, for
ought I can find, so is there no reason to believe it, for ought I can see.

What then perhaps will some men say, had the Jews no advantages of their
neighboring Nations in matters which pertained to eternal life? Yes certainly,
much every way. For to the Israelites (says St. Paul) pertained the Adoption,
and the Glory, and the Covenants, and the giving of the Law, and the service of
God, and the Promises Romans 9.4, 5.
. Theirs also were the Fathers, and of them according to the flesh was Christ
to come. The Psalmist has contracted these prerogatives of the house of Israel
into somewhat a more narrow compass. He shows his word unto Jacob, his
statutes and ordinances unto Israel Psalm. 147.19, 20.
. And then he adds, He has not dealt so with any Nations, neither have the
Heathen knowledge of his laws. Here was Prerogative enough, the communion of
his word, the publication of his Law, the Covenant made with those of the seed
of Abraham, and thereby their Adoption to eternal life: and most unquestionably
true it must be thought, that there was no Nation under heaven to whom the
ordinary means of salvation had been offered with so free an hand, as it been
to those of Judah. But yet the Psalmist does not say, that God was known only
amongst the Jews, or that he had not revealed so much of himself unto other
Nations, as to let them have a taste of his love and goodness; or that he had
not left them any knowledge of his Law at all, for their directions in the way
of life and godlyness. For first besides the light of nature whith is given to
every man that comes into the world, and by the which the most barbarous people
are instructed, that there is a God: they could not choose but know him in his
very works: The heavens declaring the glory of God, and the firmament showing
his handywork Psalm. 19.1.
, as the Psalmist has it. His power and goodness they had tasted in their
several times, in that he gave them rain from heaven, and fruitful seasons,
and filled their hearts with food and gladness Act. 14.17.
, as the Apostle pleaded it to them of Lystra. And for the Law the Apostle
tells us this expressly, that the Gentiles which have not the Law, do by
nature the things contained in the Law, and having not the Law, are a Law to
themselves; which shows the work of the Law written in their hearts, their
consciences also bearing witness, and their thoughts the mean while accusing,
or else excusing one another Romans 2.14, 15.
. But yet they had not such a knowledge either of God himself, or the Law of
God, or any such ordinary outward means to attain the same, as God had given at
the same time to the house of Israel. For they not only had the Law in writing,
which the Gentiles had not; but they had the writings of the Prophets as a
comment on it: and more then so, an ordinance or command from the Lord himself
for the public reading of the Law before them, once in every year Deuteronomy. 31.12,
13.
; that they might hear, and learn, and fear the Lord their God, and observe all
the things of the Law to do them. Greater advantages then these could no people
have to bring them up in the assurance of eternal life: which if all of them
did not attain unto, they had no reason to complain that God had been wanting
unto them (for what could he have done to his vineyard which he did not do?)
but that they were wanting to themselves, and made no profit by the Talent
which the Lord had given them. Reperies eos prius deseruisse quam desertos esse
Minut. Fell. in Octav.
, as in another case, but of the same people, said the Christian Advocate.

Yet notwithstanding the advantages which this people had, the Gentiles were
not left so destitute of all outward means to bring them to the knowledge of
God, as to be capable of excuse in their sins and wickedness: though by him
suffered, the generality of them at the least, to walk in their own ways Act.
14.16.
, and fulfill those lusts to which they naturally were addicted. And some there
were, who by conforming of their lives to the Law of nature, and cherishing
those good motions which they felt within them, attained unto so clear a
knowledge of the nature of God, and such an eminent height in all moral virtue:
that greater was not be found amongst those of Israel. For what could any Jew
say more of the nature of God, his divine Attributes, his Power and Providence,
the making of all things out of nothing by Gods mighty hand, and the sustaining
of the same by his infinite wisdom; then we have formerly declared to have
been believed by the most knowing men amongst the Heathens, whom they called
Philosophers. Insomuch as we may justly think as Octavius did, Aut nunc
Christianos Philosophos esse, aut Philosophos jam tunc fuisse Christianos
Minut. Fell. in dialogo.
; that in this point, Philosopher and Christian had been terms convertible.
Nor did they rest themselves contented with that general knowledge of his
eternal Power and Godhead, which they had studied and found out in the book of
nature: but they knew also very well, that God was to be worshipped by them in
their best devotions. (...), in the first place to worship God, is one of the
first counsels in the Grecian Orator Isocrat. Orat. ad Demonicum.
. And it was Catos first rule which we learnt at School, that God being as he
is, a Spirit, is to be worshipped by us with spiritual purity.

Si Deus est animus, nobis ut carmina dicunt,
Hic tibi praecipue sit pura mente eolendus.
Which may be Englished in these words; If God, as Poets say, a Spirit be,
Then with pure mind let him be served by thee.
Which principle of natural piety being planted in them, there is no point of
reverence whatsoever it be, either required of, or practiced by the people of
God, in his outward worship, which was not punctually performed by the ancient
Gentiles. Of Solomon it is said in the book of Kings, that when he had made an
end of praying all his prayers and supplication to the Lord, he rose from
before the Altar of the Lorld, from kneeling on his knees with his hands spread
up unto the heavens 1 King. 8.54.
. Where we find k^eeling on the knees, and lifting up of the hands, to be the
usual, as indeed the fittest posture, in the act of prayer. Find we not that
the Gentiles did observe the same, and went as far as Solomon, if not beyond
him? First for the lifting up of hands we find in Homer, (...): Virgil,
Duplices tendens ad sydera palmas; in Ovid, Vtraque Coelo brachia porrexit; and
finally, Tendere palmas ad delubra deum, in an old Latin Poet cited by
Lactantius Lact. l. 2.3.
. And as for kneeling on their knees, they so little scrupled it, that they
conceived themselves not to do enough in the adoring of their Gods, unless
they flung themselves prostrate on the ground before them. Of which Ovid thus
speaking of Deucalion and Pyrrha Ovid Met. l. 1.
: Vt Templi tetigere gradus, procumbit uterque
Pronus humi, gelidoque pavens dedit oscula saxo.


Which is thus Englished by G. Sandys: Then humbly on their faces prostrate
laid,
And kissing the cold stones, with fear thus prayed.
The like may be affirmed of lifting up the eye to the throne of grace, when we
petition God for his mercies toward us. Which as it is exemplifyed in that of
David, Early in the morning will I direct my prayer to thee, and will look up
Psalm. 5.3.
: so do we find it parralleled in that of Virgil Virg. Aeneid. l. 2.
, Illi ad surgentis conversi limina solis; which if it rather seem to speak of
turning to the East in the act of prayer, then of lifting up the eyes to
heaven; let us take that of Ovid which is plain enough, where speaking of poor
Io and her prayers to Jupiter, he says, that she looked up to Heaven Ovid Met.
l. 1.
, -- tendens ad sydera vultus, when she made her prayers. And lest it should be
thought, as perhaps some will be apt to think, that they stood more upon the
outward reverence of the body, then the inward purity of the soul, in the act
of worship: remember Catos pura mente, which before we had. And add to that the
memorable saying of the wiseman Socrates Socr. ap. Plat. l. de votis.
, that God regards not so much the perfumes which were used in sacrifices, as
the souls and virtues of mortal men; or that of Persius one of the Latin
Poets, who does require that in all their addresses to the Gods they should be
sure to take along with them, Compositum jus, fasque animi, sanctosque recessus
Mentis Pers. Sat. 2.
, i. e. a soul replenished with righteousness and religious thoughts. Upon
which words Lactantius who does cite them, gives this gloss or descant Lact.
l. 6.11.
, Sentiebat non carne opus esse ad placandam coelestem Majestatem, sed mente
sancta, that he conceived the sanctity of the mind to be more necessary for
the appeasing of the Gods, then any service of the body. But being that these
applications and addresses howsoever qualifyed, were made to those that were no
Gods, they cannot escape the censure which St. Paul gives of them; that knowing
God, they worshipped him not as God, but became vain in their imaginations,
changing the glory of the uncorruptible God into an image made like to
corruptible man; and to birds, and four-footed beasts, and creeping things Romans
1.22.23.
.

The like may also be affirmed of those frequent sacrifices wherewith they
sought to expiate their offenses, and appease the anger of their Gods. The
rites and reason of the which they received from Noah, and not from any
diabolical suggestion, as some men conceive; as Noah had them by tradition
from the elder Patriarchs. For being well enough persuaded that the Gods were
much offended at the sins of men, and finding many terrible effects of divine
vengeance to pursue them, they could not better study their own indemnity, then
to have recourse unto those sacrifices, which had been found effectual in the
former times, for the appeasing of Gods anger, and expiating those offenses
which they had committed. Examples of this kind in all ancient Authors Greek
and Latin, are obvious to the eye of every reader. It Is true, the Devil did
maliciously pervert this Institution, and caused it in tract of time to be so
altered in the object, that in stead of being offered to the God of Heaven,
they sacrificed to Idols made of silver and gold, even the work of men's hands:
worshipping and serving the creature, more then the Creator Romans 1.25.
, (as St. Paul says of them) whereby the truth of God was changed into a lie;
and that which first was instituted for a Propitiation, became to them a
manifest occasion of falling into greater and more heinous sin. And it is also
true, that the Devil not content with this first imposture, in drawing to
himself and his wretched Idols, the honor which was due to GOD: did in short
time possess them with this opinion, that if they did desire to make even with
God, and offer him such compensation, as might indeed absolve them from all
their crimes: they should no longer think to satisfy by the blood of beasts,
who in the dignity of their creation sell far short of men, and therefore could
not be a sufficient sacrifice to make atonement for their sins. As man had
sinned, and by his sins deserved the punishment of death, so was it requisite
that by the blood of men they should make atonement, and turn away the anger
of the heavenly powers. This was the ground they went upon for those humane
sacrifices. Pro vita hominum nisi vita hominum reddatur, non posse deorum
immortalium numen placari Caesar de Bell. Gallico.
, as Caesar tells us of the Gauls. But the Gauls were not the first authors
of this wretched custom. The Canaanites the progeny of accursed Cham, did
first give way to those suggestions of the Devil; offering their children unto
Moloch (which whether it were Saturn, as the learned think, or some Idol more
peculiar to that people, we dispute not now) that by the fruit of their bodies
they might satisfy for the sins of their souls. Of these oblations unto Moloch
we find much mention in the Scripture, as Levit. 18.20. and 20.2, 3, 4. 1
King. 11.7. and in other places: the Israelites being too apt to adore the
Idols of the nations whom they had subdued, and more inclined to this then to
any other. From the Phoenicians, or the Canaanites, (for Canaan was accounted
for a part of Phoenicia) did the Carthaginians bring this barbarous and
inhumane ceremony into Africa with them, the Carthaginians being a Phoenician
or Tyrian Colonie. Of whom the Historian does inform us, Homines ut victimas
immolabant, et impuberes Aris admovebant, pacem Deorum sanguine eorum
exposcentes Just. Hist. l. 18.
; that they offered men in sacrifice, and brought young youths unto the Altars,
that by their blood they might appease and satisfy the offended Gods. Which as
it was their general practice, so at one time, on a particular occasion which
Lactantius speaks of it, they sacrificed no fewer then two hundred children of
their chief nobility Lact. l. 1. c. 21.
. The sudden growth and spreading of this damnable custom, he that lists to
see, let him consult Lactantius de falsa Rel. l. 1. c. 21. Arnobius adv.
Gentes, Tertullian and Minutius Felix, in their Apologeticks. I will no more
defile my pen with these Barbarities. Nor had I said so much on this horrid
Argument, but only to declare the ground it was built upon: which was not (as
we see) in reference to that blessed Sacrifice which Christ was afterward to
make for the sins of mankind, (whereof the Canaanites as they had no notice, so
had they took but little consideration) but only thrust upon them by the Devil
himself, who thought he could not bind them surer by his own commands, or
alienate them more from God then by such Oblations.

But this was only in some Countries, and to some of their Gods, who were it
seems more hard to please then the gentler Deities: not to be charged on all
particular men whatever, though possibly some of all sorts of men had been
guilty of it. For certainly there were some amongst them, as before was said,
who by conforming of their lives to the Law of nature, and cherishing those
heavenly motions which they felt within them, not only came unto the knowledge
of the nature of God, and did abominate as much as any those inhumane
sacrifices, but did attain to such an eminent height of all moral virtues, that
greater was not to be found amongst those of Israel. The Justice of Aristides,
the magnanimity of Alexander, the temperance of Cato, the fortitude of Julius,
and the prudence of Augustus Caesar, are not easily paralleled; whether we look
into the times before them, or the ages following: not to insist on all
particular instances of a virtuous life, which the Heroes of those times have
given us in their lives and actions. And this they did not at a venture or by
special chance, as a blind man may hit the mark which he does not aim at: but
on such Principles of knowledge, and grounds of wisdom, as brought them to a
perfect habit of most virtuous actions. For knowing as they did, that God was
infinitely good, (...), self-goodness, as they sometimes called him: they could
not but conceive withal (as indeed they did) that he was (...) Plato in
Phaedonc.
, the only profitable good, the most desirable felicity: and therefore that
they were not capable of a greater happiness, quam conjungi et assimilari Deo
Id. ibid.
, then to be united with, and made like to GOD, which is (as Plato says) the
height and full accomplishment of all Beatitude. Iamblichus, one of Platos
School gives it for a rule, Quicquid faciendum aut non faciendum tibi
proponis, ad Divinitatem referri debet Iamblich. ap. Phil. Morn.
; that whatsoever we propose unto our selves either to be done, or left undone,
is to have reference to the Godhead: our life (says he) being given us for no
other end, quam ut Deum sequamur, then to conform our selves unto the wisdom
and virtue of God. Plotinus, another of Platos scholars, says as much as he,
first making God to be the supreme end of the life of man: and then inferring
thereupon, that he who is possessed of that infinite good, Non tantum
conjungitur Deo, sed fit quasi Deus Plotin. Enn. 6. l. 9. c. 9.10.
, not only is united to God, but in some sort a God himself. Nor was this
opinion of the Platonists only, but also of the Peripateticks, of the school of
Aristotle. For Aristotle himself rejecting all conceits of man's summum bonum,
which some had placed in honors, and some in pleasures, others more probably
on spiritual and divine Contemplations: does for his part affix it wholly to an
active life, directed by the rules of virtue Arist. Ethic. l. 1.
. And Syrianus writing upon Aristotle's Ethics, where this point is handled,
says that the end proposed by men in a virtuous life, is to be reconciled to,
and conjoined with God; Vt Deo conjungamur et conciliemur rursus, as my Author
has it. In this the Stoics did agree also with those other Philosophers, as
appears by this of Epictetus, Non pudet nos vitam inhonestam ducere, et cedere
adversis? Is it not a great shame (says he) for men to lead a lewd and
dishonest life, and to give way to adverse fortune Epictet. Artan.
? Why so? Dei agnati sumus, etc. because we are of kin unto God himself; from
him we came, and therefore let us do our best to return to him again. Galen for
the Physicians, goes as far as any, who tells us that our soul coming down
from Heaven, and being capable of knowledge, does evermore aspire unto Heaven
again, et ad substantiam similem et congenerem sibi Gal. lib. de Concept.
, to join it self with that di^ine and spiritual essence, which is of the same
nature with it. No marvel if men so well principled, and building on so good a
Basis (as it seems they did) came to be every way proportionable in their
superstructures: and did not only wean themselves from those common vices which
had defiled the age they lived in, but also from those vulgar errors and
superstitions, which had profaned the worship of immortal God. This last a
point in which the wiseman Socrates did proceed so far, that he publicly
opposed the Idolatries used amongst the Grecians, endeavoring to reduce them to
the service of the only God: and for that cause was sentenced to death by the
Judges of Athens, and made the first Martyr, as it were, in the cause of God,
amongst the Gentiles. And though the terror of this example did prevail so
far, as to afright others from opposing those many Gods, which the people
worshipped, it being grown into a Proverb, (...), that Socrates his cup was
ready for them Laert. in vita Socrat.
: yet did they secretly promote the knowledge of the supreme God, and taught
their followers to repose themselves on his goodness only. A pregnant evidence
whereof we have in Aristotle, who drawing nigh unto his end, after all his
labors, after his toylesome studies in the works of nature, is said to have
breathed out his soul with this expression, Ens entium miserere mei, that is to
say, Thou being of all being, have mercy on me. Upon which grounds Apulejus
either writ or translated a Book entitled, De Daemonio Socratis, or De Deo
Socrate: as of late times some of the Divines of Colin did set out a Tract
which they inscribed, De salute Aristotelis Pride. lect. de Sal. Ethnic.
: and some have been so favorable to the Gentiles generally (I mean the
Gentiles of those former and heroical times, who did conform their lives to
the light of nature) as not to shut them out of the Kingdom of Heaven. Certain
I am, that a Franciscan Friar preached to that effect before the Fathers of the
Trent Council, without being ever questioned or censured for it: save that upon
complaint made by some Protestants who were there attending, he afterward
forbear the Pulpit on pretense of sickness. Et destitit Franciscanus ille
praedicare, valeudinem excusans Sleidan. Com. An. 1552.
, as I find it in Sleidan. And I am no less certain also that Zuinglius, that
great Agent in the Reformation, in his Book entitled An Exposition of the
Christian faith, dedicated to Christiern King of Denmark, not only places
Adam, Enoch, Noah, Abraham, together with the rest of the Patriarchs and
Prophets, in the highest Heavens; but tells the said King Christier^ that he
shall there find the souls of Theseus, Socrates, Aristides, Nu^a, Camillus,
Cato, Scipio, and the rest of those old Heroes, whose virtuous acts are
registered in the Ancient Authors, whether Greek or Latin. And of this mind
Erasmus also has declared himself to be in his Preface to the Tusculan
Questions, of his setting out.

I know that in the general esteem of the Ancient Fathers (especially after the
rising of the Pelagian Heresies) the greatest virtues of the Heathens were
counted but splendida peccata, or illustrious sins; for so I think St.
Augustine calls them. The Ancients before Augustines time were more moderate in
it. But after he in his discourses against those Heretics had pronounced this
Aphorism, Omnis Infidelium vita peccatum est August. cited by Prosp. sem. 106.
, that the whole life of Infidels was nothing but sin: it was straight taken up
by Prosper Prosp. Epist. ad Ruffin.
, after him by Beda, and at the last by Peter Lombard, Anselm, and indeed who
not, that built on the authority of that reverend man. But then we must observe
withal, that as they kept themselves to St. Augustines Tenet; so did they also
build upon his Foundation: and if we seek into the groundwork or foundation
which S. Augustine built, it may perchance be found but a mere mistake. For
taking for his ground the Apostles words, that without faith it is impossible
to please God Heb. 11.^.
, and that whatsoever is not of faith is sin Romans 14.^3.
, they first conceive that the Apostle speaks in both places of faith in
Christ, and then conclude that faith in Christ is such a necessary
qualification of every good and virtuous action, that every thing we do without
it is sin, and consequently must needs be unpleasing to Almighty God. Pope Leo
also is of the same opinion, (but whether he took it from St. Augustine or not,
I am not able to say) affirming positively, Extra Ecclesiam Catholicam nihil
esse castum, nihil integrum, dicente Apostolo, Omne quod non est ex fide est
peccatum Leo. Sermon. 2. de jesu. Pentecost.
; that is to say, that out of the Communion of the Catholic Church, there is
nothing either pure or perfect, it being said by the Apostle, that whatsoever
is not of faith is sin. This is the ground they build upon. And if the ground
be faulty, as I think it is, the building must be very weak which is laid upon
it. For first that text of the Apostle in the 14. to the Romans, Whatsoever is
not of faith is sin, as it is generally interpreted by most Modern Writers,
(and to say truth, the literal sense of holy Scripture, was never so clearly
opened as in these our times) relates not unto faith at all, as it is an act
whereby we do believe in God, or his Son CHRIST JESUS: but only to that (...),
or firm persuasion, which every one ought to have in his own mind of the
lawfulness or unlawfulness of that which he goes about. And then the meaning
of the Text will be only this, that if a man does any thing on deliberation, of
which he is not verily persuaded that he does well in it, but does it with a
wavering and doubtful mind; he is guilty of sin. The words foregoing give good
strength unto this construction, where it is said, that he that doubts
(whether he does well or ill) is damned if he eat, because he does it not of
faith, that is to say, because he does it not of a right persuasion, that he
does well in eating what is set before him: which has no reference at all to
faith in Christ. No more has that which is alleged from the 11. to the
Hebrews, where it is said, that without faith it is impossible to please God.
Which is not to be understood only of faith in Christ, if of that at all: but
only of that act of faith in the general notion, by which (for so it follows
in the Text it self) Whosoever comes unto God, must believe that he is, and
that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him Heb. 11.6.
. Now that the Gentiles had this faith (conceive me still of the more noble
souls amongst them) is clear and evident, by that which they have said of God
in their public writings; of which we have produced as much in the former
Chapters, as may abundantly suffice to confirm this point. But then perhaps it
will be said, that though the things they did were good, ex genere and objecto
suo, good in their kind, and in relation unto those who received good by them;
as were the feeding of the hungry, clothing of the naked, and such like: yet
being looked upon ex fine and circumstantiis, with reference to the end for
which, and the circumstances with which they were done; they were both vicious
in themselves, and utterly unpleasing in the sight of God. And to this end this
passage is alleged out of St. Augustines works, Non officiis sed finibus
virtutes a vitiis discernendas August. contra Julian. l. 4. c. 3.
, that virtues are distinguished from vices, not so much by the work it self,
as the end proposed. This we acknowledge to be true, but we say withal, that
if the works of faithful men be so pryed into, it cannot be, but that there
will be either some obliquity in the action, or misapplication in the end:
there being no just action so accompanied with all manner of circumstances, as
to abide the judgment of Almighty God, if he should be extreme to mark what is
done amiss. Both Protestants and Papists do agree in this, although the last
do speak more favorably of the works of regenerate persons, then the former
do. The Protestants maintain that there is no work done by a godly man in the
state of grace, but that there is some sinfulness which does cleave unto it,
and in part does blemish it. But not so far as to make it lose the name of a
good work, or to put the doer of it into the state of damnation, by reason that
God for Christ's sake forgives the imperfections, and accepts that which is good
Whites Way sect. 40. n. 23.
. And for the Papists it is thus resolved by Andreas Vega, one of the great
sticklers in the Council of Trent, Ipsa etiam perfectorum opera, a bonitate
ipsa long deficere, qua deceret nos Deum colere, etc. Vega de Iustif. lib. 11.
c. 38.
. i. e. the very works of the best men are much defective in that goodness,
wherewith we ought to worship, serve, and honor God, because they are conjoined
with many imperfections whilst men live here: neither are they so pure, holy,
and fervent, as the measure of divine goodness and bounty toward us does
require at our hands. And thereupon he does conclude, that many good works are
done by us, without blot of sin, Quae tamen si districte vellet Deus nobiscum
agere, injustitiae essent; which notwithstanding, if God should deal strictly
with us would be counted wickedness. So that if virtue must be vice, and good
works a sin, because they fail in some of those many circumstances, which are
required unto the making of a work to be fully perfect: it is not like to go
ill with the Gentiles only, but even with the most righteous of Gods faithful
servants.

It Is true indeed, the Gentiles had not the assistance of Gods written Word, to
be a light unto their paths, and a lamp to their feet Psalm. 119.105.
, (and that is one of the Prerogatives which the Israelites had) for want
whereof they could not come so generally to the knowledge of God, nor walk so
knowingly in the ways of his laws and precepts. But then perhaps it may be
said, (if one would undertake the part of an Advocate in it) that God has
furnished them with some other means for the supplying of this want: which
wrought as powerfully on the affections of the learned Gentiles, as did the
letter of the law on the Vulgar Israelites. To this head I refer their Politic
laws and constitutions for punishing all violent and unlawful actions; but
principally the study of Philosophy, by which they were not only restrained
from all Criminal actions, which came within the compass of their positive
laws: but had their affections so composed, and their lusts so bridled, as to
advance them to an eminency in all sorts of virtues; not only doing all that
their laws required, but at some times more. And to this purpose was the answer
of the wise man Aristotle, who being asked what benefit the study of Philosophy
had brought unto him; made this reply, Vt ea facerem injussus, quae plerique
per legum metum faciunt Diog. Laert. in vita Aristot.
, that he thereby discharged those duties without any command, which others
were compelled to by the force of laws. A second means whereby GOD might supply
the defect of Scripture, was the cooperating of his Grace with that light of
Nature, which is implanted naturally in the soul of man: which light assisted
by the influence of Preventing Grace, was doubtless able to conduct them in the
ways of virtue, and make them do such things as were good and acceptable in the
sight of God. For if by Grace we understand (as Greg. Ariminensis says we may)
quod cunque Dei speciale adjutorium ad been operandum Greg. Arimin. l. 2. did.
28. q. 1.
, every special help which God gives unto us toward doing good: we have no
reason to conceive but that those Worthies of the Gentiles had such special
helps, or else they never had attained to such special eminence in all virtuous
actions. Though God restrained his written Word unto Israel only, yet find we
not that he confined his Grace to so narrow a compass; or that he could not
give a portion of his holy Spirit unto whom he pleased. Had it been so, what
had become of Job of the land of Vz, of Rahab a Canaanitish woman, of Ruth a
Moabite? How had the Ethiopian Eunuch been invited to see Jerusalem, or
Cornelius the Centurion found such favor of God, as to be warned in a Vision
touching his salvation; if God had given his Grace with respect of persons, or
thought no creature worthy of it but a Jew by Nation? For my part I have no
Commission to call any thing common or unclean that God has cleansed Act.
10.14, 15.
, or to shut the gates of Heaven against any of those that are renowned upon
record for a virtuous life, considering that I find in Scripture, that in
every Nation be that fears God, and works righteousness, is accepted of
him. Nor can I think it a dishonor to Almighty God, to be a rewarder of all
those who seek him diligently, according to that measure of faith and
knowledge, which is given unto them: or that it is derogatory to the written
Word, that men of riper years should be saved without it in extraordinary
cases, and of special grace. And I say men of riper years, because I find the
case of children to be very different; of whose salvation, although born of
Infidel parents, some principal and leading men of the Reformation make no
doubt at all of this opinion; amongst others, was Franciscus Iunius, as grave
and eminent a Divine as any which that Age offered; and a great stickler
against Arminius in the controversy of Predestination. The passage you may see
at large in his book de Natura and gratia, Number. 28. but the sum is this. Omnino
statuimus servatum iri etc. Iun. de Nature. and great. u. 28.
. He doubts not but that many of the children of Infidels are saved, partly
by virtue of the Covenant, and partly by Gods Election. By virtue of the
Covenant in regard they are descended of such Ancestors, as were themselves
within the Covenant, though it be long since, and that there be some
interruption in the whole succession, Gods mercy reaching (as he tells us Exodus
20.) unto a thousand generations. By Election, because God has not barred
himself from a power and right to communicate his Grace to those whose
Ancestors were not of the Covenant. For if he called those Adulti men of riper
years to be partakers of the Covenant, who were not within the same before; why
may he not in like manner, if he please, elect children also? Finally, as he
does believe that all who are elected, or within the Covenant, shall most
undoubtedly be saved: so he does charitably conceive that those whom God takes
out of this world in the state of infancy, servari potius secundum electionem
and providentiam ipsius paternam, quam a regno Coelorum abdicari, are rather
saved by Gods election and paternal providence, then utterly excluded out of
the Kingdom of Heaven. If the same charity make me hope the like of those
famous men among the Gentiles, who were not wanting to the grace of God which
was given unto them, why should I fear worse fortune then was found by Iunius,
who never yet was censured (for ought I have read) for that so charitable
resolution in the case of Infants, no not by those of the Reformed, who differ
in opinion from him as to that particular? And so far I conceive I may go with
safety, without opposing any text of holy Scripture, or any public tendry of
the Church of England. It Is true, St. Peter tells us in the 4. of the Acts,
that there is no name under Heaven given among men whereby they be saved, but
that of our Lord and Savior JESUS CHRIST, v. 12. But this is spoken with
relation to the times of the Gospel, when CHRIST had broken down the partition
wall, and that the Gentiles were admitted to the knowledge of the word of life:
a general command being laid by CHRIST on his Apostles to preach the Gospel to
all Nations Mat. 28.
. After this time the case was altered; and the Gentiles altogether left
without excuse, if they embraced not the ordinary means of their salvation,
which by the universal preaching of Christ crucified had been offered to them.
And so I understand that Article of the Church of England, by which all they
are to be accursed who presume to say that every man shall be saved by the Law
or Sect that he professes, so that he be diligent to frame his life according
to that Law and the light of nature. Act. 18. For certainly the Article relates
not to the times before Christ's coming, or the condition of the Gentiles in
those elder days, but only to the present condition of the Church of Christ as
it now stands, and has stood since his death and passion, H. Nicols Preface to
3.
in opposition both to Jews and Gentiles, unto Turks and Saracens; with
reference to the Familists, and such modern Sectaries, who made the external
profession of the faith of Christ but a thing indifferent, so they conformed
themselves by the light of nature. Of which opinion one Galcalus Martius also
is affirmed to be by Paulus Iovius in his Elog. doct: virorum. So that for
ought appears from that place of the Acts, and from this Article of the
Church, we may conceive the charitable hope of the salvation of some of the
more noble Gentiles, the great example of whose virtues is transmitted to us in
Classical and approved Authors.

But this was only in some extraordinary and especial cases, some Casus
reservati, as the Lawyers call them, which God reserved to his own Power and
dispensation, and not of any ordinary and common right. For generally the
Heathen people, as they knew not God, having extinguished that light of nature
which was given unto them: so having their understanding darkened, and that
light put out, their will forthwith became depraved, the affections of their
hearts corrupted, and their lusts exorbitant. And as they did not like to
retain God in their knowledge, so did God give them over to a reprobate mind,
to do those things which are not convenient Romans 1.28, 29.
, dishonouring their own bodies amongst themselves, and being filled with all
unrighteousness and uncleanness: Nay, even their greatest Clerks, men of wit
and learning, professing themselves wise did become fools, in that they sought
not after God, the true fountain of wisdom Id. v. 22.18, 20.
: and holding the truth which was revealed to them, in unrighteousness, as St.
Paul says of them, were thereby made without excuse. And as the light of
nature was thus generally extinguished amongst the Gentiles; so was the light
of Prophecy as much neglected amongst the Jews: who though they were Gods
chosen and peculiar people, had so degenerated from the piety of their
Predecessors, that there was hardly either faith or charity to be found amongst
them. Insomuch as all the world was now of the same condition, in which it was
before the flood. Of which God said, that all flesh had corrupted his way upon
the earth Genesis 6.12.5.
, the wickedness of man grown great, and all the imaginations of the thoughts
of his heart continually and only evil. Nothing could have prevented a second
deluge, but Gods gracious promise that there should never more be a flood to
destroy the Earth Genesis 9.11.
; nothing have respited the World from more grievous punishment, had not Christ
come into the World; and by his suffering on the Cross for the sin of Man,
appeased Gods anger for the present, and caused his Gospel to be preached unto
every nation, that so they might escape the wrath of the time to come. Nothing
required by him for so great a mercy, but that we would believe in him: that to
the faith, which every man was bound before to have in God the Father Almighty,
by whom we were created when we were just nothing; there might be added a
belief in JESUS CHRIST his only Son, by whom we were redeemed being worse
then nothing. He knew the frailty of our nature that we were but dust, that we
were utterly unable to observe the Law, which Adam either could not or would
not keep in the state of innocence: and therefore did not look so far as to the
Covenant of works to require them of us, but to the Covenant of faith as the
easier duty. God in the Covenant of works required of every man for his
justification, an absolute and entire obedience to the Law which he had
prescribed; and that obedience to the Law had it been performed, had justified
the performance of it in the sight of God. But finding man unable to fulfill
the Law, he made a second Covenant with that sinful Creature, and required
nothing of him for his justification but only faith in God and his gracious
promises for the redemption of the world till the coming of CHRIST; and after a
more explicit faith in Christ, when he had redeemed it, then had been pressed
before on the house of Jacob. CHRIST has redeemed us (says St. Paul) from the
curse of the Law, that the blessing of Abraham might come upon the Gentiles
thorough JESUS CHRIST Gal. 3.13, 14.
: that is to say, that as Abraham did believe in God, and that was imputed unto
him for righteousness, even so the Gentiles through faith in JESUS CHRIST might
be justified also. And yet faith does not justify, (conceive not so) out of
any property that is natural or essential to it, or any dignity or work
inherent in it above other Theological virtues; but out of somewhat that is
adventitious and extrinsecal merely, that is to say, the will, good-pleasure,
or appointment of Almighty God. This is the will of him that sent me (says our
Savior) that every Man that sees the Son and believes in him, should have
life everlasting Joh. 6.40*
. Where clearly he suspends the justifying property or power of faith, not upon
any quality or virtue that it has in it self, but only on the will and free
grace of God: which had it fallen in conjunction or cooperation with any other
of Gods graces, either hope, or patience; or any other whatsoever; that act of
grace, or the act rather of that grace so by God appointed, would have conduced
as fully to our justification as now the act of faith or believing does.

But now to trouble our selves with these speculations, suffice it that as God
was pleased to make choice of faith, so he made choice not of the habit, or the
object, but the act of faith, to be imputed to us for our justification.
Abraham believed God (says the holy Scripture) and it was counted unto him for
righteousness Genesis 15.6. and Romans 4.3.
. Nor is it thus with Abraham only, but with all the faithful, who if they do
believe on him that justifyeth the ungodly, that faith of theirs shall be
accounted unto them for righteousness also Romans 4.5.
. It Is the (...) Credere, the very act of faith it self, which God requires of
us for our justification, in stead of all the works of the Law: and if we do
believe, as we ought to do, that every act of our believing, without the help
of any of the works of the Law, shall be imputed to us for righteousness.
Seven times at least in the fourth Chapter of the Romans has the Apostle used
this phrase to account or impute faith for righteousness unto the believer. We
find the same phrase also used in the 3. Chapter to the Galatians verse. 5. and
in the 2. of St. James verse. 23. Scarce such another consonancy of expression
in the holy Scripture. Which certainly the holy Ghost had not stood upon, not
bound himself precisely to the words and syllables of: if he had not meant to
give this honor unto faith it self, but rather to some other thing which faith
lays hold of and applies for our endless comfort. And this, as it is most
agreeable to the Text and Context, where faith is put in opposition unto
works, that faith alone might have the honor of our justification: so has it
been the constant Doctrine of the ancient Writers, who do ascribe the same to
faith, and to faith properly so called, not as the word is taken tropically or
metonymically for the object thereof. For thus says Justin Martyr, first,
(...) Just. M. dial. cum Tryphon.
. Abraham, says he, had not from God the testimony or commendation of
righteousness, because of his circumcision, but because of his faith.
Tertullian next, How, says he, are we made the children of faith, or of whose
faith if not of Abraham's? For if Abraham believed God, and that was imputed
unto him for righteousness, and he deserved thereby to be made the Father of
many nations Tertull. advers. Marc. l. 5. c. 3
: Not autem credendo Deo magis, pro inde justificamur, sicut Abraham, we by
believing God more, (as having more things to believe then Abraham had, for
that I take it is his meaning) are therefore also justified as Abraham was.
Next to him, that of Origin which we had before, Cum multae fides Abraham
praecesserint, etc. Orig. in Romans c. 4.
Whereas many faiths, (or many acts of Abraham's faith) had gone before, now all
his faith was recollected and summed up together, and so imputed unto him for
his justification. St. Ambrose in fewer words says as much as any, Sic
decretum dicit a Deo, ut cessante lege, solam fidem gratia Dei posceret ad
salutem Amb. in Romans c. 4.
: God, says he, has so decreed, that the Law ceasing, the grace of God should
require only faith of man toward his salvation. Why was this writ (says St.
Chrysostom) of our father Abraham? (...) Chrysostom. in. Romans c. 4.
: but that we may learn that we are also justified as Abraham was, because we
have believed the same God? And in another place, What was Abraham the worse
for not being under the Law? To which he answers, (...), he was nothing the
worse; (...) Id. in Gal. 3.
, for his faith was sufficient for his justification. What says St. Augustine
of himself? In eum credo qui justificat impium, ut deputetur fides mea ad
justitiam August. in Psalm. 70.
; that is to say, I do believe in him that justifyeth the ungodly, that my
faith may be imputed to me for righteousness. What does the same Father say of
Abraham in another place, if at the least the work be his? Ecce sine opere
justificatur ex fide; et quicquid illi legali observatione potest conferri,
totum credulitas sua donavit Id. de Temp. sermon. 68.
. Behold, says he, Abraham is justified without works, by faith: and
whatsoever could have been conferred upon him by the observation of the Law,
that his believing only has wholly given him. Primasius somewhat after him in
the course of time, Tam magna fuit dono dei fides Abrahami, ut et pristina
peccata ei donarentur, et sola prae omni justitia doceretur accepta Primas. in
Romans c. 4.
, i. e. So great was Abraham's faith by the gift of God, that both his former
sins were pardoned, and this his faith alone was preferred in acceptance
before all righteousness. And finally thus Haimo B. of Halberstad, an Author of
the 9. Century, to descend no lower. Abraham believed God, and it was counted
to him for righteousness, that is, says he, unto remission of sins Haimo in
Romans c. 4.
; quia per ipsam fidem qua credidit justus effectus est, because by that faith
wherewith he believed, he was made righteous. By all which testimonies of the
ancients it is plain and evident, that faith is the (...) credere, or the very
act of believing, is that which is imputed to us for our justification: and
that this is no new interpretation excogitated by Arminius in these latter
days, as some please to tell us. Nor is this contrary to the Church of England
delivered in her book of Homilies, though at the first appearance it may so be
thought. When we affirm that We are justified only by faith in Christ, we
understand not Homil. of Salvat. pt. 2.
(says the Book) that this our own act to believe in Christ, or this faith in
Christ which is within us, does justify us, and deserve our justification unto
us, for that were to count our selves to be justified by ^ome act or virtue
that is within our selves: but that we must renounce the merit of faith, hope,
charity, and all other virtues as things that be far too weak, imperfect, and
insufficient to deserve remission of sins, and our justification, and must
trust only on Gods mercy in the blood of Christ. Where plainly it is not the
intent of the Book of Homilies to exclude the act of faith from being an
external and impulsive cause of our justification; but from being the
meritorious cause thereof in the sight of God, from having any thing to do
therein, in the way of merit: Or if they do relate to the act of faith, it is
not to the act of faith as the gift of God, but as to somewhat which we call
and account our own, without acknowledging the same to be given by him. And in
that sense, to say that we are justified by any thing within our selves, which
is so properly our own as not given by God, is evidently opposite to that of
the holy Scripture, viz. By grace ye are saved through faith, and not of your
selves; it is the gift of God Ephesians. 2.8.
: that is to say, that faith by which ye are saved is the gift of God. And
certainly it is no wonder, if faith in Christ should be acknowledged and
esteemed the gift of God, considering that we have Christ himself no otherwise,
which is the object of our faith, then by gift from God: who did so love the
world (as our Savior tells us) that he gave his only begotten Son; to the
end that whosoever believed in him should not perish but have life everlasting
Joh. 3.16.
. Of which great mercy of the Lord in giving his beloved Son, and of the
sufferings of that Son for our redemption, I am next to speak.

THE SUM OF Christian Theology, Positive, Philological, and Polemical;
CONTAINED IN THE Apostles CREED, Or reducible to it.

The Second Part.

By PETER HEYLYN.

1 Timothy 3.16. Without controversy great is the Mystery of godliness, God
manifested in the flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of Angels, preached unto
the Gentiles, believed on in the world, received up into glory.

LONDON, Printed by E. Cotes for Henry Seile, 1654.

ARTICLE III. Of the Third ARTICLE OF THE CREED Ascribed to St. JAMES. (...).
i. e. Credo et in Jesum Christum filium ejus unicum, Dominum nostrum. i. e. And
in JESUS CHRIST his only Son our Lord.
CHAP. VIII. Nothing revealed to the Gentiles touching Christ to come. The name
of JESUS what it signifies; and of bowing at it. Of the name CHRIST, and the
offices therein included. The name of Christians how given unto his Disciples.
THUS are we come to that part of the Christian Creed, which does concern the
Worlds Redemption by our Lord and Savior JESUS CHRIST. A part, to which we are
not like to find much credit from the stubborn and untractable Jews, except it
be to so much of it as concerns his sufferings under Pontius Pilate, of which
they made themselves the unhappy instruments: and very little help for the
proof thereof, from any of the learned Gentiles, who being taken up with high
speculations, would not vouchsafe to look so low as a crucified JESUS. The
preaching of Christ crucified (as St. Paul has told us) as to the Jews who
were a proud high-minded people, it became a stumbling block, so to the Greeks,
who boasted in the pride of learning and humane wisdom, it was counted
foolishness 1 Cor. 1.23.
. And if it were so counted a part post, when he that was the light to lighten
the Gentiles Luke 2.52.
, had shined so visibly amongst them, and countenanced the preaching of his
holy Gospel by such signs and wonders, as did in fine gain credit to it over
all the world; it is not to be thought that they had any clearer knowledge of
salvation by him, or by the preaching of his Gospel, a part ante. The Jews
indeed had many notable advantages which the Gentiles had not. For unto them
pertained the Adoption, and the glory, and the Covenants, and the giving of the
Law, and the service of God, and the promises Romans 9.4.
. They had moreover amongst them the Prophetical writings, or as St. Peter calls
it, the sure word of Prophecy 2 Pet. 1.19.
, which like a light shining in a dark place, might well have served to guide
them in the way of truth, to keep them in a constant expectation of their
Saviors coming; and when he came, to entertain him with all joy and
cheerfulness. Yet when he came unto his own, they received him not Joh. 1.11.
: that miserable obduration being fallen upon them, that seeing they did see
and not perceive, that hearing they did hear but not understand Mark. 4.12.
. But on the other side, the Gentiles wanted all those helps, to bring them to
the knowledge of their promised Savior; which were so plentifully communicated
to the house of Israel. For though the Lord had signified by the prophet
Isaiah, saying, There shall be a root of Jesse, and he that shall rise to
reign over the Gentiles, in him shall the Gentiles trust Isa. 11.10.
: yet this was more then God had pleased to manifest to the Gentiles
themselves, till they were actually called to the knowledge of CHRIST by the
ministry of St. Peter Act. 10.
, and the accomplishment of this prophecy made known unto them by the
application of St. Paul Romans 15.12.
. The light of natural reason could instruct them in this general principle,
that there was a God: for nulla gens tam barbara, said the Latin Orator
Cicero de Natura Deor.
, never was man so brutish, or nation so barbarous which in the works of nature
could not read a Deity. And the same light of natural reason could instruct
them also, that that God whosoever he was, was to be served and worshipped by
them with their best devotions. (...) Isocrat. ad Demonic.
, in the first place to serve and reverence the Gods, was one of the most
special Rules which the Greek Orator commended to his dear Demonicus. But that
it should please God in the fullness of time to send his son made of a woman,
made under the Law, to redeem such as were under the Law, that they might
receive the Adoption of sons Gal. 4.4.
: that CHRIST should come into the world to save sinners 1 Timothy 1.15
, and breaking down the partition wall between Jew and Gentile make one Church
of both Ephesians. 2.14.
: neither the light of nature, nor the rule of reason, nor any industry in
their studies could acquaint them with. This St. Paul calls a mystery not
made known in other ages to the sons of men Ephesians. 3.5.
, a mystery hidden from the generations Col. 1.26.
of preceding times: and if a mystery, a secret and an hidden mystery, we
should but lose time did we look to find it in any writings or records of the
ancient Gentiles. So that we may affirm of the knowledge of CHRIST as
Lactantiuss did in general of the ttue Religion: Nondum fas esse alienigenis
hominibus Religionem Dei very justitiamque cognoscere Lact. l. 4. c. 2.
; the time was not yet come in which the Gentiles should be made acquainted
with those heavenly mysteries, which did concern the Kingdom of our Lord and
Savior.

It Is true, the Sibylline Oracles cited by Lactantius Id. l. 4. c. 15.
, and others of great eminence in the Primitive times, speak very clearly in
some things concerning the life and death of CHRIST: in so much that they seem
rather written in the way of History, then in that of Prophecy. And though the
learned Casaubon Casab, Exerc. in Baron.
, and others of our great Philologers, conceive them to be pious frauds,
composed of purpose by some Christians of the elder ages, and added as a
supplement to the true Originals, the better to win credit to the faith of
CHRIST: yet dare I not so far disparage those good Catholic writers as to
believe they would support so strong an edifice with so weak a prop, or borrow
help from falsehood to evict the truth. Or if they durst have been so venturous,
how easy had it been for their learned Adversaries, Porphyrie, Julian, and the
rest of more eminent note, to have detected the Imposture, and silenced the
Christian Advocates with reproach enough. Letting this therefore go for
granted, as I think I may, that the Sibylline Oracles are truly cited by the
Fathers, and that they do contain most things which happened to our Savior in
his life and death: yet could this give but little light to the Heathen people,
touching CHRIST to come, because they were not suffered to be extant publicly,
and consequently came not to the knowledge of the learned Gentiles, till by the
care and diligence of the Christian Writers they were after published. For so
exceeding coy were the ancient Romans of suffering the Sibyls or their works to
go abroad, having got into their hands the best copies of them that those times
afforded: that they commanded them to be kept closely in the Capitol, under the
care and charge of particular Officers Fenestella de Sacerdot. c. 13.
, whom from the number of fifteen (for so many they were) they called
Quindecemviri, and to whom only it was lawful to consult their papers. Nec eos
ab ullo nisi a Quindecemviris f^s est inspici Lactant. l. 1. c. 6.
, as Lactantius notes it very truly. And it is also very true, that many of the
ancient and most learned Grecians had a confused notice of a second Deity, whom
they called (...), or the Word: making him aiding and subservient to Almighty
God in the Creation of the world, and therefore giving him the attribute of
(...) Id. l. 4. c. 6.
, or the worlds Creator. The several testimonies to this purpose he that lists
to see, may find them mustered up together in that laborious work of the Lord
du Plessis, entitled De veritate Religionis Christianae, cap. 6. So frequently
occurs this notion in the old Philosophers, especially in those of the School
of Plato, that Porphyrie an Apostate Christian, and a Platonic in the course
of his sect and studies, blasphemously averred that St. John had stolen the
first words of his Gospel, [ viz. In the beginning was the Word, etc.] from his
Master Plato. And though the affirmation of that vile Apostata, intended only
the disgrace of the holy Evangelist, and of the Gospel by him written for the
use of the Church: yet had it been a truth, as indeed it was not, it could have
been no greater a disparagement to St. John to borrow an expression from a
Greek Philosopher, then to St. Paul to use the very words of three Grecian
Poets. But the truth is, that both St. John and the Platonicks together with
the rest of those old Heroes, borrowed the notion from the Doctors of the
Jewish Nation; as Maldonate has proved at large Maldon. in Joh. 1. n. 22.
in his Comment on that Text of the blessed Evangelist: who withal gives it for
the reason why S. John made choice rather of this notion then of any other, in
the front or entrance of his Gospel, because it was so known and acceptable
both to Jew and Gentile, Philosophos non dubium est ab antiquis Hebraeis and
hausisse sententiam and vocabulum accepisse. Proinde voluit Johannes
accommodate ad usum loqui, says the learned Jesuit. But then withal we must
observe, that though we find such frequent mention of the Word, or (...), in
the writings of the ancient Gentiles; yet find we almost nothing of him but
the name or notion: nothing that does relate to the salvation of man, the
taking of our nature upon him, or being made a propitiation for the sins of
mankind. That, as before I noted, was a secret mystery, not to be manifested
to the sons of the Gentiles, till CHRIST himself was come to make one of both,
and call them to the knowledge of his grace and faith in him.

Being so called they were no longer to be differenced by the name of Gentiles,
but fellow-heirs and of the same body Epes. 3.6.
, whereof CHRIST is Head; and as the members of that body, to join in the
Confession of the self same faith; not only as to God the Father, in the
acknowledgement of which Article all the Nations meet, but as unto his only Son
JESUS CHRIST our Lord, from whence the faith has properly the name of
Christian. Now that which we believe touching CHRIST our Savior, and is to be
the argument of this present Book, is thus delivered by the pen of our Reverend
Jewel, in the name, and for the use and edification of the Church of England.
Credimus Jesum Christum filium unicum aeterni patris, etc. Jewel in Apol. Eccl.
Anglic.
. i. e. We believe that JESUS CHRIST, the only Son of the eternal Father, (as
it had been determined before all beginnings) when the fullness of time was
come, did take of that blessed and pure Virgin, both flesh and all the nature
of man, that he might declare unto the world the secret and hidden will of his
Father, and that he might fulfill in his humane body the Mystery of our
Redemption, and might fasten our sins unto the Cross, and blot out that
handwriting which was against us. We believe that for our sakes he dyed and
was buried, descended into Hell, and the third day by the power of his Godhead
rose again to life: and that the fortieth day after his Resurrection, whi^est
his Disciples looked on, he ascended into Heaven to fulfill all things, and did
place in Majesty and glory the self same body wherewith he was born, in which
he lived upon the earth, in which he was scornfully derided, and suffered most
painful torments, and a cruel death; and finally, in which he rose again from
the dead, and ascended to the right hand of the Father, above all
principalities and powers, and might, and dominion; that there he now sits,
and shall sit till all things be fully perfected. We believe also that from
that place he shall come again to execute that general Judgment, as well of
them whom he shall then find alive in the body, as of them that shall be
already dead. This is the main of that which is to be believed touching CHRIST
JESUS our Lord; but so that we divide not the man CHRIST JESUS from JESUS
CHRIST the Son of God. For though that note of Estius be exceeding true, that
all things contained in the Creed concerning Christ from his conception in the
womb of the Virgin to his last coming unto judgment inclusively, de Christo
dicuntur secundum humanam naturam Estius in Marc. cap. ult.
, are verified and affirmed of him in his humane nature: yet are we also bound
to believe this of him: that he was so truly and indissolubly the Son of God
(according to the Tenor of this present Article; that whilst this man was born
of the Virgin Mary, the Son of God was also born of the self same Virgin;
whilst the man CHRIST JESUS suffered under Pontius Pilate, the Son of God was
also crucified, dead and buried. Et sic de caeteris. For otherwise Tacitus, who
reports his sufferings under Pontius Pilate Tacit. Annal. l. 15.
; and Pontius Pilate who gave testimony to his Resurrection, in a Letter writ
on that occasion to Tiberius Caesar Eusebius. Eccl. hist. l. 1.
; or Nicolas, one of the Seven, the Founder of the Sect of the Nicolaitans
Apocal. 2.6.
, who beheld him at the instant of his Ascension; might pass for Orthodox
professors of the Christian Faith. Besides, a partial assent to one or to some
only of the Articles which relate to CHRIST, is not enough to give denomination
to a true believer. It must be uniform, and alike sincere unto every truth
recorded of him in the Scriptures, or summarily comprehended in the present
Creed; which qualifieth a man a right to deserve that title. So that unless we
fix our selves upon this Principle, that JESUS CHRIST our Lord is the Son of
God, (the only begotten Son of God, as the Nicene has it) and carry the same
with us through every Article, which has relation to his Person: our Faith
being partial only to some matters of fact, and not complete and perfect in
each several lineament, falls short of that assent to the Word of God, and all
those supernatural truths revealed in it, which is required unto the
constitution of salvifical faith.

Now for the better understanding of the present Article, which is so operative
and influential over all the rest: we will resolve it first into this
Proposition, that JESUS CHRIST our Lord is the Son of God, the only begotten
Son of God, as before we had it from the Nicene. And having so resolved it into
this Proposition, will take a view thereof in its several parts; and look upon
our Savior Christ first in his Person and his Office, next in his several
relations unto God and man. His Person we find represented in the name of
JESUS, his Offices in that of CHRIST; his reference or relation to Almighty
God, as he is his Son, his only Son; to man, as he is made our Lord. First for
his person or his nature, we find it represented in the name of JESUS (for
Christus nomen est officii, Jesus naturae and personae Maldonat, in Mat. c. 1.
, as the learned note) and that originally Hebrew, derived from the future
tense of the verb Iashang, which signifies Salvavit, i. e. he has saved; or
from the substantive Isshagnah, which is as much as salus ipsa, or salvation it
self. If from the first, it is the very same in Hebrew with that of Iehoshua,
(or Joshua as our English reads it) the son of Nun; who by St. Luke, Act. 7.45.
and by St. Paul, Heb. 4.8. is called plainly Jesus: and then the difference
betwixt him and the son of Nun, will consist rather in the manner of the
salvation which he has bestowed, then in the property of the name. If from the
second, we find more in old Simeons Nunc dimittis then has been generally
observed: who did not only praise the Lord, because his eyes had seen his
Savior, but (...), the salvation of God. And then those Texts of holy
Scripture, which speak so clearly of the Salvation of God, or where God is
called our Salvation, as Exodus 15.2. Esa. 12.1, 2, 3. and 49.6. and 52.10. and
56.1. and also Habak. 3.18. may possibly be intended of CHRIST our Savior. But
whether this be so or not, it can be no disparagement to the Son of God, to
have his name derived from the same Original, with Joshua the son of Nun, who
was so clear a type of the Lord himself, that scarce a clearer does occur in
the book of God. For as Moses the Lawgiver of the Jews, though he did bring
that people out of the land of Egypt, was not so happy as to settle them in the
land of Canaan, but left that work to be performed by the hand of Jesus the Son
of Nun: so neither could the Law, which was the School-mistris unto CHRIST Gal.
3.24.
, though it dispelled the clouds of Egyptian darkness, bring them that did live
under it into the Sanctum Sanctorum, but left the honor of the work to JESUS
the Son of God. And as Joshua (or Jesus) the son of Nun, having subdued the
heathenish Princes who possessed the land, estated the whole house of Jacob in
possession of it: so JESUS CHRIST the Son of the living God, having subdued
Sin, Hell, and Satan, who held the whole world of mankind under their
subjection, brought those who are the children of Abraham's faith, into a
peaceable fruition of the land of Promise, whereof the land of Canaan was a
Type or figure. The difference as unto the name, was in this especially, that
Joshua the son of Nun was at first called Oshea, Numb. 13.9. and had his name
changed afterward by Moses, verse. 16. on some presage perhaps of his future
greatness: but JESUS CHRIST the Son of God, received that name from God himself
in his first conception. For thus the Angel Gabriel to the blessed Virgin,
Behold, thou shall conceive in thy womb, and bring forth a Son, and shall call
his name JESUS Luke 1.31.
. The reason of which choice or appellation, is by another Angel thus given to
Joseph; Ipse enim salvum faciet populum suum, etc. Mat. 1.21.
. i. e. for he shall save his people from all their sins. Here then we have a
salvabit, or a salvum faciet, to manifest the true interpretation of this
blessed name, and therewithal the nature of a more blessed Person. And so
Ruffinus does resolve it, JESUS Hebraei vocabuli nomen est, quod apud nos
Salvator dicitur Ruffin. in Symb.
. JESUS, says he, is an Hebrew name, and signifies as much as Savior. Where
we may note, that the old Author keeps himself to the old Ecclesiastical word
Salvator; and was not so in love with the Roman elegancies, (as Beza for the
most part is in his translation) as to obtrude Servator on us, in the place
thereof. Concerning which St. Augustine has this observation, that anciently
Salvator was no Latin word, but was first devised by the Christians to express
the greatness of the mercies which they had in Christ. For thus the Father. Qui
est Hebraice JESUS, Graece (...), nostra autem locutione Salvator. Quod verbum
Latina lingua non habebat, sed habere poterat, sicut potuit quando voluit
August. de Trinit. l. 3.10.
. Nay Cicero the great Master of the Roman elegancies does himself confess,
that the Greek (...) is a word of too high a nature to be expressed by any one
word of the Latin tongue. For showing how that Verres being Praetor in
Syracusa, the chief town in Sicily, had caused himself to be entitled by the
name of (...), he adds immediately, hoc ita magnum est, ut Latino uno verbo
exprimi non possit Cicero Act. 2. in Verrem.
. And thereupon he is compelled to use this Paraphrase or circumlocution, Is
est nimirum Soter, qui salutem dedit, i. e. He properly may be called Soter,
who is giver of health. So that the Latin word Servator being insufficient to
express the Greek word (...), and consequently the Hebrew JESUS, the Christians
of the first times were necessitated to devise some other, and at last pitched
upon Salvator: which to this purpose has been used by Arnobius, l. 1. adv.
Gentes, Ambros. in Luke c. 2. Hieron. in Ezekiel. c. 40. August. de doctr. Chr. l.
2. c. 13. contr. Crescon. l. 2. c. 1. besides the passages from Ruffinus and
the same St. Augustine before alleged.

So then the name of Jesus does import a Savior; and the name of JESUS given
to the Son of God, intimates or implies rather such a Savior, as shall save
his people from their sins. This differenceth JESUS our most blessed Savior,
from all which bare that name in the times foregoing. Jesus, or Joshua the son
of Nun, did only save the people from their temporal enemies; but JESUS CHRIST
the Son of the living God, does save us from the bonds of sin, from our ghostly
enemies. JESUS the son of Iosedech the Priest, of the Order of Aaron, did only
build up the material Altar Ezra. 3.2.
, in the holy Temple; but JESUS the High Priest for ever after the Order of
Melchisedech, not only builds up the spiritual Temple, but is himself the
very Altar which sanctifies all those oblations which we make to God. Jesus
the son of Sirach has no higher honor, but that he was Author of the book
called Ecclesiasticus, a book not reckoned in the Canon of the holy Scripture;
but JESUS CHRIST the Son of God and the Virgin Mary, not only is the subject of
a great part of Scripture, but even the Word it self, and the very Canon, by
which we are to square all our lives and actions. I am the way, the truth and
the life Joh. 14.6.
, as himself tells us in St. John. Look on him in all these capacities he is
still a JESUS, a Savior of his people from their sins and wickednesses; a
builder of them up to a holy Temple, fit for the habitation of the holy Ghost;
a bringer of them by the truth, and way of righteousness unto the gates of life
eternal; a true JESUS still. So properly a JESUS, and so perfectly a Savior to
us, that there is no salvation to be found in any other Act. 4.12.
, nor is there any other name under Heaven given amongst men, whereby they must
be saved, but this name of JESUS. A^ name, if rightly pondered, above every
name Phil. 2.9, 10.
, and given him (to this end) by Almighty God, that at the Name of Jesus every
knee should bow, of those in Heaven, and earth, and under the earth. And there
may be good reason besides Gods appointment, why such a sign of reverence
should be given to the very name: not only a name above other names, and
therefore to be reverenced with the greater piety; but as a pregnant testimony
of that exaltation, to which God has advanced him above all other persons. We
bow the knee unto the persons of Kings and Princes. And therefore Pharaoh when
he purposed to honor Joseph above all the Egyptians, appointed certain
Officers to cry before him Genesis 41.43.
, saying, bow the knee. CHRIST had not been exalted more then Joseph was, had
bowing of the knee been required to his Person only: and therefore that there
might appear some difference betwixt him and others, the Lord requires it at
his name. And though the Angels in the heavens, and the Spirits beneath, have
no knees to bow (which is the principal objection of our Innovators against the
reverent use of bowing at the Name of Jesus used and enjoined to be used in the
Church of England), yet out of doubt the spirits of both kinds both in Heaven
and Hell, as they acknowledge a subjection to his Throne and Scepter; so have
they their peculiar ways, such as are most agreeable to their several natures
of yiedling the commanded reverence to his very Name. Certain I am St. Ambrose
understood the words in the literal sense, where speaking of the several parts
of the body of man he makes the bowing at the name of JESUS, the use and duty
of the knee Ambr. Hexaem. l. 6. c. 9.
. Flexibile genu, quo prae caeteris Domini mitigatur offensa, gratia
provocatur. Hoc enim patris summi erga filium donum est, ut in nomine JESU omne
genu curvetur. The knee is flexible, faith the Father, whereby the anger of the
Lord is mitigated and his grace obtained. And with this gift did God the Father
gratify his beloved Son, that at the Name of JESUS every knee should bow. Nor
did St. Ambrose only so expound the Text, and take it in the literal sense, as
the words import, but as it is affirmed by our Reverend Andrews B. Andr. on the
Resur. Sermon. 9.
, there is no ancient Writer upon the place (save he that turned all into
Allegories) but literally understands it, and likes well enough that we should
actually perform it. Conform unto which Exposition of the Ancient Writers, and
the received us^ge of the Church of Christ, it was religiously ordained by our
first Reformers, that Whenever the Name of JESUS shall be pronounced in any
Lesson, Sermon, or otherwise in the Church, due reverence be made of all
persons young and old with lowness of cur^esie, and uncovering of the heads of
the mankind, as thereunto does neces^a^ily belong, and heretofore has been
accustomed. Which being first established by the Queens Injunctions Queen
injunction 1559. n. 52.
, in the year 1559. was afterward incorporated into the Canons of King James
his reign Can. 18. of the year 1603.
. And if of so long standing in the Church of England, then sure no Innovation
or new fancy taken up of late, and b^t of la^e obtruded on the Church by some
Popish Bishops, as the Novators and Novatians of this present age, the Enemies
of Iesu-Worship H. Burton, and alii passim.
, (as they idly call it) have been pleased to say. And should we grant that
this were no duty of the Text, as I think we need not, yet might it give the
Church a justifiable ground of commanding such a duty to all Christian people:
To the end that by those outward ceremonies and gestures their inward humility,
Christian resolution, and due acknowledgement that the Lord JESUS CHRIST the
true and eternal Son of God is the only Savior of the world, in whom alone all
the graces, mercies and promises of God to mankind for this life and the life
to come are fully and wholly comprehended. Which is the end proposed and
published by the Church of England, as appears plainly by the 18. Canon, An.
1603.

As JESUS is the name of our Lord and Savior, his personal and proper name, by
which he was distinguished from the rest of his Fathers kindred; ^o CHRIST is
added thereunto both in the holy Scriptures and the present Creed to denote his
offices. Christus non proprium nomen est, sed nuncupati^ potestatis and regni
Lact. l. 4. cap. 7.
. CHRIST (says Lactantius) is no proper name, but a name of power and
principality. It signifies properly an anointed, and is derived from (...),
which signifies to anoint, and was used by the old Grecians, for (...), which
is a word of the same signification but more common use. And so the word is
used by Homer, the Prince of the Greek Poets, saying (...) i. e. they washed,
and then anointed themselves with oil. The Hebrew word Messiah corresponds to
this, as appears evidently by that passage in St. John's Gospel, where Andrew
tells his brother Simon this most joyful news, viz. We have found the
Messiah, which being interpreted is the CHRIST Joh. 1.41.
. And '^is no wonder if Andrew ran with so much joy to acquaint his brother
with the news, for by the name of the Messiah, the Jews had long expected the
performance of the promise which God made to David, that of the fruit of his
body there should one sit upon his Throne for evermore Psalm. 132.11.
. But the word CHRIST implies more yet then a name of Sovereignty. For though
Kings anciently were anointed, as is plain by examples of the Saul, 1 Samuel
10.1. and 2 Samuel 2.4. yet not only they. The High Priest also was anointed; For
it is said of Moses, that he powered the anointing oil upon Aarons head, and
anointed him to sanctify him Lev. 8.12.
. And so the Prophet seems to be in the Book of Kings, where Elijah is
commanded to anoint Elisha the son of Shaphat to be the Prophet in his room 1
King. 19.16.
. Vngebantur Reges, Sacerdotes, Prophetae, says a learned Writer: and each of
these respectively in their several places might be called Christus Domini, the
Lords anointed, or the Lords Christ; but our Redeemer, after a more peculiar
manner, was Christus Dominus, the Lord Christ, or the Lord anointed. And
certainly there was good reason why the Name of CHRIST should be applied to him
in another manner, then it had been to any in the times before: he being the
one and only Person in whom the Offices of King, Priest, and Prophet, had ever
met before that time. Although those Offices had formerly met double in the
self same person* M^lchisedech a King and Priest, Samuel a Prophet and a
Priest, David a Prophet and a King: Yet never did all three concur but in him
alone, and so no perfect CHRIST but he. A Priest he was after the order of
Melchisedech, Psalm. 110. verse. 4. A Prophet to be heard when Moses should hold
his peace, Deuteronomy. 18.18. A King to be raised out of David's seed, who should
reign and prosper, and execute judgment and justice in the earth, Ier. 23 5.
By his Priesthood to purge, expiate and save us from our sins, for which he was
to be the Propitiation 1 John 2 2.
. By his Prophetical Office to illuminate and save us from the by-pathes of
error, and to guide our feet in the way of peace Luke 1.79.
. By his Kingdom or his Regal power to prescribe us laws; protect us from our
enemies, and make us at the last partakers of his heavenly Kingdom. Ieremies
King, David's Priest, Moses Prophet; but in each and all respects the CHRIST.
Not that he was anointed with material oil as were the Kings and Priests in the
Old Testament: but with the Oil of gladness above his fellows, Psalm. 45.7. but
with the Spirit of the Lord, wherewith he was anointed to preach good tidings
to the meek, Esai. 61.1. which he applied unto himself, Luke 4.18.21. anointed
with the holy Ghost and with power, as St. Peter tells us, Act. 10.38.
Anointed then he was to those several Offices, and in that the CHRIST. But how
he does perform these Offices, and at what times he was inaugurated to the
same, shall be declared in the course of the following Articles, which relate
to him: save that we shall refer the Execution of the Prophetical function to
the Article of the holy Ghost, by the effusion of whose gifts on the Pastors
and Ministers of the holy Church it is most powerfully discharged.

The Name of CHRIST as it is commonly added unto that of JESUS to denote his
Offices: so in a sort it is communicated unto those whom he has chosen to
himself for a royal Priesthood, a chosen generation, a peculiar people 1 Pet.
2 9.
; and for that reason honored with the name of Christians. And the Disciples
were called* Christians first at Antioch Act. 11.26.
, says the book of the Acts. Called Christians, what by chance? I believe not
that. The word (...) used in the Original, has more in it then so. We have the
same word in the second of St. Matthews Gospel, (...), speaking of the Wise men
that came from the East to worship CHRIST; and there we render it, that they
were warned by God Mat. 2.12.
, warned by him in a dream, not to go to Herod: (...) then in this place of
the Acts, must have some reference to God; and seems to intimate at least, if
not fully evidence, that they took not this name upon themselves, but by Gods
direction. The Jews had formerly called them Nazarites (as the Mahometans do
still) in the way of reproach. And though the Disciples were neither ashamed
nor afraid of any ignominy which was put upon them for the sake of their Lord
and Master: yet they conceived it far more honorable to him, into whose
heavenly house and family they were adopted, to own themselves by that name
which might most entitle them to all those privileges which did acrew uuto
them in the right of Adoption. A caution to which God more specially might
incline their hearts, that his dear CHRIST might look upon them as his own, to
whom he gave the unction or anointing of the holy Spirit. The anointing which
ye have received of him (says the beloved Disciple) abides in you, and ye
need not that any men teach you 1 John 2.27.
: That God had a directing hand in it the word (...) does persuade me, which
intimates at least some secret influence in the work, if not a public and
Oracular admonition. And that it was not done but upon serious consultation had
amongst themselves, and a devout invocation of the name of God, the greatness
of the business, the piety of the first Professors, and other good authorities
do most strongly assure. For if upon the naming of John the Baptist there was
not only a consultation held by the friends and mother, but the dumb father
called to advise about it Luke 1.62.
: and if we use not to admit the poorest child of the parish into the
Congregation of Christ's Church by the door of Baptism, but by joint invocation
of the Name of God for his blessings in it: with how much more regard of
ceremony and solemnity may we conceive that the whole body of Christ's people
were baptized into the name of Christians? But besides this we have an evidence
or record sufficient to confirm the truth of our affirmation. For Suidas, and
before him Johannes Antiochenus an old Cosmographer, first tells us, that in the
reign of Claudius Caesar, ten years after the Ascension of our Lord into
Heaven, Euodius received Episcopal consecration, and was made Patriarch of
Antioch the great, in Syria, succeeding immediately to St. Peter the Apostle
Cited by Gregory in his Observe. 36.
. And then he adds, (...), etc. i. e. And at this time the Disciples were
first called Christians, Euodius calling them to a solemn conference, and
putting this new name upon them. For before they were called Nazarites, and
Galileans. Some of the Heathens not knowing the Etymon of the name called them
Chrestiant: and our most blessed Savior by the name of Chrestos. For thus
Tertullian of the Christians, perperam a vobis Christianus appellatur Tertul.
Apol c. 3.
: and thus Lactantius for our Savior, qui eum immutata litera (...) solent
dicere Lact. l. 4.7.
. But this was only on mistake, not on studied malice, Et propter ignorantium
errorem, as Lactantius has it: the very name of (...) or Chrestianus,
intimating nothing else but meekness and sweetness, as Tertullian very well
observes. And though Suetonius following the errors of the times, calls our
Savior CHRIST by the name of Chrestos Sueton. in vita Claudii.
, yet Tacitus who lived in the same age with him, hits right as well on
Christus, as on Christianus. Quos vulgo Chrestianos appellabat. And then he
adds, Auctor nominis ejus Christus, qui Tiberio imperitante per Procuratorem
Pontium Pilatum supplicio affectus erat Tacit. Annal. l. 15.
. Having thus rectified the name and asserted it to its true Original, we may
do well to have a care that we disgrace not the dignity of so high a calling by
the unworthiness and uncleanness of our lives and actions. In nobis patitur
Christus opprobrium, in nobis patitur lex Christiana maledictum Salvian de
gubern. Dei.
; that Christ and Christianity were ill spoken of, by reason of the wicked
lives of Christian people; was the complaint of Salvians time. God grant it be
not so in ours. And God grant too, that as we take our name from CHRIST, so the
like mind may be in us as was also in him Phil 2.5.
, that is to say, that we be as willing to lay down our lives for the brethren
(especially in giving testimony to his Faith and Gospel) as he was willing to
lay down his life for us: and that as his Fathers love to him, brought forth in
him the like affections toward us, and to his Commandments; so his affection
unto us may work in us the like love toward our brethren, and to all his
precepts. For hereby shall men know we are his Disciples, if we abide in his
love and keep his Commandments, as he has kept his Fathers Commandments, and
abide in his love Joh. 15.10.
. But see how I am carried to these practical matters, if not against my will,
yet besides my purpose. I proceed now to that which follows.

ARTICVLI 3. Pars 2da. (...). i. e. Filium ejus unicum, Dominum nostrum. i. e.
His only Son our Lord.
CHAP. II. That JESUS CHRIST is the Son of God; why called his only or his only
begotten Son. Proofs for the Godhead of our Savior. Of the title of Lord.
THat which next follows is the first of those two Relations in which we do
behold our Savior in this present Article; his only Son; i. e. the only Son of
God the Father Almighty, whom we found spoken of before. That God had other
sons in another sense, there is no question to be made. All mankind in some
sense may be called his sons; The workmanship of his creation. Have we not all
one Father? has not one God created us Mal. 2.10.
? says the Prophet Malachi in the Old Testament. Our Father which art in
Heaven, says Christ our Savior for the New Matthew. 6.9.
. The Saints and holy men of God are called his sons also in the more peculiar
title of adoption. For who else were the sons of God in the 6. of Genesis, who
are said to take them wives of the daughters of men Genesis 6.2.
, but the posterity of Seth, the righteous seed, by and amongst whom hitherto
the true worship of the Lord had been preserved? More clearly the Evangelist in
the holy Gospel; To as many as received him gave he power to become the sons of
God, even to them which believed in his Name Joh. 1.12.
. Most plainly the Apostle saying, As many as are led by the Spirit of God are
the sons of God, having received the Spirit of Adoption, whereby they cry to
him Abba, Father Romans 8.14, 15.
. And in this sense must we understand those passages of holy Scripture, where
such as are regenerate and made the children of God by adoption of grace, are
said to be born of God, (...) Joh. 1.13. and 1 John 3.9.
, as John's phrase is, both in his Gospel and Epistle. Not that they have the
Lord God for their natural Father, (for so he is the Father only of our Lord
Jesus Christ) but because being begotten by immortal seed, the seed of his most
holy Word, they are regenerate and born again unto life eternal. This is the
seed of God spoken of by St. John, which remains in us; by which we are
begotten to an inheritance immortal, undefiled and that fades not away,
reserved for us in the Heavens 1 Pet. 1.4.
, as St. Peter tells us. In neither of these two respects can we consider Christ
as the Son of God. For if he were the Son of God in no other respect, then
either in regard of Creation or Adoption only: he could not possibly be called
Gods only Son, or his only begotten Son, but at the best, multis e millibus
unus, one of the many thousands of the sons of God.

There is a more particular title by which some more selected vessels both of
grace and glory, have gained the honorable appellation of the sons of God:
that is to say, by being admitted to a clearer participation and fruition of
eternal bliss; or made more intimately acquainted with his secret will. In the
first of these respects the blessed Angels have the title of the sons of God.
Where wast thou (says the Lord in the book of Job) when I laid the foundation
of the earth, when the morning stars sang together, and all the sons of God
shouted for joy Job. 38.4.6.
? The sons of God, that is to say, the holy Angels Per filios Dei, Angeli
intelliguntur, says the learned Estius on the place. And so St. Augustine does
determine, who hereupon infers that the Angels. were created before the
stars; and not after the six days were finished, as some it seems had taught in
the times before him: Iam ergo erant Angeli quando facta sunt sydera, facta
sunt autem sydera die quarto, Aug. de Civ. dei. l. 11. c. 9.
, as he most rationally concludes from this very text. In this respect also the
Saints in glory are called the sons or children of God, and said to be equal
to the Angels in St. Lukes Gospel Luke 20.36.
: not that they have all the prerogatives and properties which the Angels have;
sed quod mori non possunt, says the text, but because they are become
immortal, and no longer subject (as before) to the stroke of death. In the
last meaning of the word, though all the Saints and holy men of God may be
called his children, because they are adopted to the right of sons, and made
co-heires with CHRIST their most blessed Savior: yet is the title more
appliable to the Prophets of God, at least appliable unto them after a more
peculiar manner, then unto any others of the children of men. I have said,
says David, ye are Gods, and ye are all the children of the most High Psalm.
82.6.
. Of whom here speaks the Psalmist, of Gods people generally, or only of some
chosen and select vessels? Not of Gods people generally, there is no doubt of
that, though both St. Augustine and St. Cyril seem to look that way; but of
some few particulars only, as Euthymius, and some others with more reason
think. And those particulars must either be the Princes and Judges of the
earth, who are called Gods by way of participation, because they do participate
of his power in government: or else the Prophets of the Lord, who are called
Gods, and the sons or children of the most High, by way of communication,
because God does communicate and impart to them his more secret purposes, that
they might make them known to the sons of men. Them he called Gods, as Christ
our Savior does expound it, (then whom none better understood the meaning of
the royal Psalmist) ad quos sermo dei factus est, i. e. to whom the word of the
Lord came Joh. 10.35.
, as our English reads it. And what more common in the Scripture then this
form of speech, factum est verbum Domini, etc. The word of the Lord came to
Isaiah, Isa. 38.4. The word of the Lord came to Jeremiah, Ier. 1.2. The word of
the Lord came to Ezekiel, Ezekiel. 1.3. et sie de caeteris. If then such men to
whom the word of the Lord came, might justly be entitled by the name of Gods,
and called the sons of the most High; assuredly there was not any of the
children of men which could with greater reason look to be so called, then the
holy Prophets. And yet in none of these respects abstracted from an higher
consideration, is CHRIST our Savior here called by the name of the Son of God,
or so intended in this Creed. For Angel he was none in the proper signification
of the word; though called the Angel of the Covenant in the way of Metaphore.
Nor did he take the nature of Angels, but the seed of Abraham Heb. 2.16
, as St. Paul tells us to the Hebrews. We may not think so meanly of him, as to
rank him only in the list of the Saints departed: it being through the merits
of his death and passion, that the Saints are made partakers of the glories of
heaven, and put into an estate of immortality. It Is true indeed he was a
Prophet, the Prophet promised to succeed in the place of Moses Act. 7.37.
that Prophet, in the way of excellence, in the first of John v. 21, 25. But
then withal, as himself tells us of John the Baptist, he was more then a
Prophet Mat. 11.9.
, that word which came unto the Prophets in the times of old, and to whom all
the Prophets did bear witness, for the times to come. A King indeed he is, even
the King of Kings, though not considered in that notion here upon the earth,
nor looked on in that title in the present Article. Or if we could reduce him
unto any of these; yet take him as an Angel, or a Saint departed, or a King, or
Prophet, every of which have the name of Sons in the book of God: he could not
be his only Son, the only begotten Son of God the Father Almighty, who has so
many Saints and Angels, so many Kings and Prophets, which are called his Sons.

It must needs follow hereupon that JESUS CHRIST our Lord is the Son of God, by
a more divine and near relation, then has been hitherto delivered. And
hereunto both God and Man, the Angels and internal spirits, give sufficient
testimony. The Lord from heaven procliamed him at his Baptism Mat. 3.
, and Transfiguration 17.5.
, to be his well beloved Son, in whom he was well pleased: And Peter on the
earth, having made this acknowledgement and confession, saying, Thou art Christ
the Son of the living God 16. v. 16, 17.
; received this confirmation from our Saviors mouth, that flesh and blood had
not revealed it unto him, but that it came from God the Father which is in
Heaven. The Angel Gabriel when he brought the news of his incarnation,
foretold his mother that he should be called the Son of God Luke 1.35, 32.
, the Son of the most High, in a former verse. And a whole Legion of unclean
Spirits in the man possessed, joins both of these together in this
compellation, JESUS thou Son of God most high Luke 9.28.
. A thing not worthy so much noise and ostentation, had he not been the Son of
God in another and more excellent manner, then any of the sons of men who
either lived with him, or had gone before him: had there not been something in
it extraordinary, which might entitle him unto so sublime and divine a
privilege. Though John the Baptist were a Prophet, yea and more then a
Prophet, yet we do not find that the Devils stood in awe of him, (for John the
Baptist did no miracles Joh. 10.41.
) or looked upon him in the wilderness, as the Son of God. To which of all the
holy Angels (as St. Paul disputes it) did the Lord say at any time, Thou art my
Son, this day have I begotten thee Heb. 1.5.
? And who can show us any King but him that was the Son of God as well as of
David, whom God the Lord advanced to so high an honor, as to cause him to sit
down at his own right hand, till his enemies were made his footstool Psalm.
110.1.
. Though Angels, Kings and Prophets were the sons of God, by a communication of
more special Grace, then had been granted generally to the sons of men: yet
none but CHRIST our Lord is honored with those high prerogatives, of being
called his own Son Romans 8.32.
, his only Son Mar. 3.17.
, his only begotten Son Joh. 3.16.
, the first born of every Creature Col. 1.15.
, the first born from the dead Col. 1.18.
, and the heir of all things Heb. 1.2.
, that so in all things he might have the pre-eminence. Which glorious
attributes and titles being laid together, do put a very signal and material
difference between the sons of God by adoption, and grace, and JESUS CHRIST our
Lord and most blessed Savior, who is his son by nature, his begotten Son,
begotten by his Father before all times, generatione (...), by an unspeakable
manner of generation without help of woman* and yet made of a woman in the
fullness of time, generatione (...), by a supernatural kind of generation
without help of man. In terris sine Patre, in coelis sine Matre, as it is in
Origin, Without a Father on the earth, without a Mother in heaven; the very
true Melchisedech which has no descent Heb. 7.3.
who neither had beginning of days, as the Son of God the Father alone; nor
shall have any end of life, as he is the Son of God and the Virgin Mary.

Now of this twofold generation of the Son of God, we will first speak of that
which is last in Order, his generation in the womb of the Virgin Mary, in which
he was incarnate by the holy Ghost, and was made flesh and dwelt amongst us
Joh. 1.14.
for a season, that we might live with him for ever. For being begotten and
conceived in the Virgins womb, after such a supernatural and wonderful manner,
by the Almighty power of God, he is in that regard (if there were no other)
Gods own Son, or his son by nature, his only and his only begotten Son, take
which phrase we will. The Angel Gabriel does affirm this twice for failing.
Behold, thou shall conceive and bring forth a Son, and shall call his name
Jesus; he shall be great, and shall be called the Son of the Highest Luke 1.31,
32, 35.
. And then unto the Virgins Quaere he returns this answer, The holy Ghost shall
come upon thee, and the power of the most High shall overshadow thee; therefore
also that holy thing which shall be born of thee shall be called the Son of
God. What? called the Son of God only, and not be so really? Not so, but that
being really and truly the Son of God, he shall declare the same by such
several means, ut sic merito ab omnibus vocetur Estius in Luke 1.
, that so he shall be called and counted over all the world. For that he was
really and truly the Son of God, by this his generation in the fullness of
time, the miraculous manner of his conception, without any other Father then
the power of God, does most assuredly evince. A son begotten in that manner,
may very well be called, natura filius, non tantum beneficio filius Maldon. in
Luke 1.31.
, a son by nature, not by grace and indulgence only, says the learned
Maldonate. Quia non ex viro, sed ex solo Deo concipiendus, because begotten not
by man, but by God alone. Nay so peculiarly does this miraculous manner of his
generation entitle him to be the true and proper Son of Almighty God, that so
he might be justly called and accounted of, had he not been the Son of the
living God, by a preceding generation even before all times. And so does
Maldonate resolve it in his Commentaries on St. Lukes Gospel, though otherwise
a great assertor of the eternal generation of the Son of God: whose words I
shall put down at large for the greater certainty Id. in Luke 1.35.
: Etiamsi Christus Deus non fuisset, illo tamen modo genitus quo genitus fuit,
merito Dei Filius vocatus fuisset, non solum ut caeteri viri sancti, sed
singulari quadam ratione, quod non alium quam Deum haberet patrem, neo ab alio
quam ab eo generatus. So he, I think exceeding rightly to the point in hand.
His instance or exemplification in the case of Adam, who is called the Son of
God by the same St. Luke Luke 3.38.
, quia non a viro sed a Deo genitus erat, because he was begotten by God and
not by Man, I cannot by any means approve of: the production of our Father
Adam, not being to be reckoned as a generation, but to be esteemed of as a work
of Creation only. But to proceed, as Christ is properly and truly the Son of
God, by this his generation in the womb of his Virgin Mother: so in the same
respect is he called in Scripture, the only, and the only begotten Son of God
the Father. I know that generally the style or attribute of the only begotten
Son of God, is used for an argument or convincing reason to prove that Christ
our Savior is the Son of God by an eternal generation long before all worlds.
But by their favors I conceive, that he is called Gods only begotten Son,
either in reference to this his generation in the womb of the Virgin, because
the only Son of God which was so begotten; or else because he was most dearly
loved of his heavenly Father, as commonly an only Son is best and most
affectionately beloved of an earthly Parent. To the first sense I have the
testimony of Vrsinus, a Divine of the reformed Churches, who though he hold
that CHRIST is principally called the only begotten Son of God, secundum
divinitatem suam, according to his Divine nature: yet he concludes that
aliquatenus, after a sort he may be called so in his humane nature Vrsin.
Catech. pt. 1. q. 33.
. His reason is, Quia etiam secundum hane tali modo est genitus, quali nunquam
quisquam alius, ex Virgin nimirum incorrupta vi Spiritus sancti; that is to
say, because according to that nature he was begotten in such a manner as never
any had been before or since, as being conceived of a pure Virgin by the holy
Ghost. And to the second sense I have that of Maldonate, who on these words,
Hic est filius meus dilectus, in the 3. of Matthew, observes that filius
dilectus and filius unigenitus, are terms reciprocal Maldon. in Mat. 3.17.
: that not alone in Homer, but in holy Scripture, the best beloved Son, is
called the only begotten, and on the other side, that by only begotten in St.
John he means best beloved. God so loved the world that he sent his only
begotten Son; that is to say, his best beloved Son. For unigenitum posuit pro
charissimo, as his words there are. But what need Maldonate be produced in so
clear a case, which has so plain an evidence from the word of God? For read we
not that God commanded Abraham, to offer his only son Isaac, as our English
reads it Genesis 22.2.
, unigenitum filium tuum, the only begotten Son as the Vulgar has it. So the
Greek reads it also, (...) (which is the word used of Christ, in the present
Article) in the 11. Chap. to the Hebrews, verse. 17. And yet we know that
Abraham had another son, a son whom he had circumcised by Gods own command, of
whom twelve Princes were to come, and whom God promised to make a puissant
Nation Genesis 17.20.
. And therefore Isaac must be called his only son, because preferred before the
other in the love of his Father. Filius tuus unigenitus, i e. filius quem
diligis; Isaac thine only son, that is to say, the son whom thou only love,
as there the text, without the help of commentator does expound it self. And if
the name of unigenitus or Gods only Son, may warrantably be applied to Christ
in his humane nature, there is not much question to be made but that in the
very same capacity, he may be called filius proprius or Gods own Son Romans 8.33.
, (He spared not his own Son) by which name he occurreth in St. Paul to the
Romans.

Less question is there to be made, or indeed no question, but that according
to the same humane nature, and in relation to his being begotten in the fullness
of time, he is entitled in the Scriptures the first born of every Creature
Col. 1.15, 18.
the first born from the dead, and the heir of all things: though there be
something in those titles which does require a further consideration. For
first, his being called the first born of every Creature, gives no
encouragement at all to the Arian factions to make the Son of God a created
essence; no more then Kings may be called creatures of the peoples making,
because called an ordinance of man ( humana creatura 1 Pet. 2.13.
, in the Vulgar latin) in the holy Scripture. The reason why our Savior is
there called by the Apostle Primogenitus omnis Creaturae, or the first born of
every Creature, is neither to give him the precedence of all Creatures else, or
to rank his whole Person in the list of created substances: but either to
entitle him to the rights of Primogeniture, which were great amongst the sons
of men, or to denote that he supplied the place of the first begotten, and was
the general ransom or redemption for them. Concerning which we may take notice
that by the Law of Moses the first that opened the matrix of all living
Creatures, were holy and cousecrated to the Lord Exodus 13.1, etc, and v. 11, 12.
: if of clean beasts, then to be offered up in kind to the Lord their God, but
if of men or unclean Creatures, then either to be redeemed for a piece of
money, or some clean beast was to be brought unto the Lord in exchange for it;
as in the case of the first male child, a pair of Turtle doves, or two small
Pigeons. The reason was, because the Lord having slain the first born of Egypt
both of man and beast,had spared all the first born of the house of Israel; and
therefore he required the first male of every Creature to be offered to him in
sacrifice, that so the whole offspring might be sanctified and made useful to
them. But being the offering of a dumb Creature was really and of it self no
sufficient price for the redemption of the first male child which opened the
Matrix nor able to sanctify both male and female in every family to the Lord
their God (for he that sanctifyeth and they that are sanctified must be all of
one Heb. 2.11.
, as the Apostle does infer): therefore did CHRIST take upon himself the place
of stead of the first born, that being offered unto God, the clean for the
unclean, he might sanctify all things unto God, and make them acceptable in
the sight of their Lord and maker, which were of a nature capable of such
sanctification and acceptance as the Lord requires in his creature. Now as the
ransom of the first born was discharged by him; so was it just that all the
rites of Primogeniture should belong unto him; which were the Principality, the
Priesthood, and the double portion. Those Reuben having forfeited by his great
offense, were so distributed amongst his Brethren, that the Priesthood was
bestowed on Levi, the Principality on Judah, the double portion upon Joseph,
who thereupon was branched into the two tribes of Ephraim and Manasses. But
they were all again united in the person of CHRIST, that being thus made the
first born of every Creature, he might in all things have the pre-eminence. The
Principality he had, for the Lord gave unto him the throne of his Father David
Luke 1.32.
; the Priesthood, for he was a Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedech
Ps. 110.4.
; the double portion, for all power was given unto him both in heaven and earth
Mat. 28.18.
. In all respects the first borne of every Creature; but how the first born
from the dead, which is another of the titles given by the Apostle, considering
we find many examples of men that had been raised from the dead before his
resurrection, both in the old Testament and in the new. The answer to this
doubt is easy. For though those mentioned in both Testaments were for a time
raised from death to life; yet were they raised to die again, as in fine they
did. But to be primogenitus ex mortuis, the first born or first begotten from
the powers of death, includes an everlasting freedom from the jaws thereof: in
which regard the Scripture says of Christ, and of Christ alone, that being
risen from the dead he now dies not, death has no more power or dominion over
him Romans 6.9.
. But of this Privilege we shall speak more at large hereafter in its proper
place. That which remains is that he was heir of all things, Heb. 1.2. to the
intent that he might prove himself for the Son of Abraham, the promised seed,
in whom all the nations of the world are blessed. The promise which was made to
Abraham Romans 4.13.
, that he should be heir of the world, was never verifyed in his person, nor in
any of his posterity neither till the coming of CHRIST. Who being begotten by
the power of Almighty God on a daughter of the seed of Abraham, and having the
nations given him for his inheritance, as had been prophesied before by his
Father David: might properly be entitled the heir of all things according to
the rights of his humane nature, which nature he derived from David the son of
Abraham.

Thus have we shown how CHRIST is properly and truly the Son of God, his
natural and only begotten Son, according to his generation in the fullness of
time: without relating to his generation before all time was. But yet we must
not give off here. For by this generation in the fullness of time, he was not
only the Son of God, but so the Son of God, after such a manner, as that he was
also the son of man. But by his generation before all times, he was not only
the Son of God, but so the Son of God, after such a manner, that he was also
God himself, God for ever blessed; Deus in secula brnedictus, as St. Paul
calls him in the 9. Chap. to the Romans verse. 5. Deus in carne manifestatus,
God manifested in the flesh 1 Timothy 3.16.
, in the first to Timothy. St. John speaks home unto the point, and does more
puzzle the Socinian and Arian heretics then all the book of God besides. In
the beginning was the word, and the word was with God, and the word was God
Joh. 1.1.
In the beginning, when was that? When God created first the heaven and the
earth Genesis 1.1, ^.
; when the earth was without form and void, and darkness was upon the face of
the deep: then the word was, that is to say, it had a perfect actual being
when all things else did but begin to be; and having then an actual and a
proper being, it could not at that time, nor at any time since, begin to be,
but was, and is, and so continues without ending. In the beginning was the
word; what word? that word by which the worlds were made Heb. 1.2.
, as St. Paul has it; by whom all things were made, says St. John Joh. 1.3.
, and without which nothing was made, says the same Evangelist. The word which
after was made flesh, and did dwell amongst us, and by the brightness of his
glory did declare himself to be the only begotten Son of the Father, Ioh. 1.
The express image of his person, Heb. 1.3. the image of the invisible God,
Col. 1.15. That word in the beginning was, and was God the word: the Son of
God, not by communication of grace but nature: therefore the natural Son of
God, but so the Son of God, his begotten Son, as to be very God, for the word
was God. The Word was God, says the Apostle, not only by a participation of
power, or communi^ation of a more abundant measure of his graces, in which
respects some of the Sons of Men are called Gods in Scripture; Ego dixi, Dii
estis, says the royal Psalmist: but properly and truly God, (...), the very
true God, and the Son of God. We know that the Son of God is come, and has
given us an understanding that we may know him that is true. And we are in him
that is true, even in his son Jesus Christ, who is the true God and the life
eternal 1 John 5.20.
says the same Apostle. Here have we CHRIST the Son of God, and CHRIST the
true God both in one; and what need further evidence in a point so clear?

Such further Topics as are used for the proof hereof, from the names given
him in the Scripture, the attributes and mighty works ascribed unto him, and
the company of such texts in the book of God as being spoken of the Father in
the old Testament, are applied in the new unto the Son, I purposely forbear at
present: and shall content my self with such ample testimonies, which CHRIST
himself has given to his own Divinity. For though it be an unusual thing, to
admit a man's own testimony in his own cause, according unto that of our Lord
and Savior, If I bear witness of my self, my witness is not true Joh. 5.31.
; that is to say, it would not pass for current, or be taken for truth: yet
when a man lies under any accusation, he may then speak what he can in defense
of himself, and his testimony be allowed of toward his acquitment or
justification. And therefore Christ our Savior being challenged by the
Pharisees, who were apt to cavil at his sayings, for speaking in his own
behalf, returned this answer Joh. 8.14.
; Though I bear record of my self, yet my record is true. Upon this ground then
we proceed, and though it be the last in order of our Saviors life, yet we
will first allege that passage, which happened in the high Priests hall on the
day of his passion. The high Priest finding no sufficient testimony for his
condemnation resolved to put him to the oath of ex officio, and therefore did
adjure him by the living God, to tell them whether he were the Christ the Son
of God; Mat. 26.63.
to which our Savior answered, saying, Thou have said. Which though it be
equivalent to an affirmation, yet to make sure work of it and put it out of
doubt, St. Mark has given his answer in these positive terms, Jesus said I
am Mar. 14.62.
. In which it is to be observed, that when the high Priests put our Savior to
this dangerous question, he spoke not of the Son of God in that vulgar sense,
in which the just and righteous persons were called his sons, but of the Son of
God in the natural sense, in which he could not verify himself for the Son of
God, without including necessarily that he was also God. As in the 5. Chap. of
St. John, where our Savior having said, My Father works hitherto, and I also
work Joh: 5.17, 18.
; the incensed Jews intended him some present mischief, not only because he had
broken the Sabbath, but had said also that God was his Father, making himself
equal with God. And this appears yet further by the following words, where it
is said, that the high Priest rent his clothes, saying, he has spoken
blasphemy Mat. 26.65, 66.
; and thereupon pronounced him to be guilty of death: which vote, they after
prosecuted before Pontius Pilate, affirming that he ought to die by the Law of
Moses, because he had made himself the Son of God Joh. 19.7.
. Assuredly their meaning was, that he had made himself the true and natural
Son of God, and not the Son of God by especial grace: for otherwise they had
not voted him to be guilty of death. Nor had the high Priest rent his clothes,
if he had only taken upon himself the name of CHRIST, or of the Messiah,
because that could not come within the compass of Blasphemy. For they knew
well that the Messiah or the Christ was to come in the form of man; though
with more outward pomp and glory (as they supposed) then our Savior did: and
therefore though they might have condemned him of folly, in that being a man of
no reputation he had taken on himself the name of CHRIST; they had no reason in
the world to accuse him of Blaspheming the name of God. Now that the Messiah
was to come in the form of man, being he was to come of the woman's seed, was a
thing so perfectly resolved on, that Eve immediately on the promise made, that
her seed should bruise the Serpents head Genesis 3.15.
, supposed that Cain her first born was to be the man, and therefore said upon
his birth, I have gotten a man (or rather the man) from the Lord 4.2.
. Possedi virum ipsum Jehovah, I have gotten a man even the Lord Jehovah, as
Fagius the learned Hebrician (upon several revises) reads it Fagius in Genesis
4.
. The like conceit possessed the Parents of Noah, as many good Authors do
conceive; upon which ground they said, when they gave him that name, this same
(that is, this son of ours) shall comfort us concerning our work Genesis 5.29.
. Nor had the very Jews of our Saviors time sent to enquire of John the
Baptist, whether he were the Christ whom they did expect but that they knew he
was to come in an humane shape, and that it was no Blasphemy to own that title.

So then the quarrel which the Jews had against our Savior was, that he
called himself the Son of God in the literal and natural signification of the
word. And this appears more plainly yet, not only by a former passage where
they sought to slay him, because he said that God was his Father, making
himself thereby to be equal with God Joh. 5.1.
; but by a solemn conference which they had on the like occasion. In which our
Savior did not only own himself to be the CHRIST, and to claim God to be his
Father in the proper sense of the word Father Joh. 10.24, 25. and 29.30.33.
, but added further an expression more unpleasing to them, saying, I and my
Father are one. For which when the Jews took up stones to stone him, and were
demanded for which of his many good works they were so resolved; they answered
thus, For a good work we stone thee not, but for blasphemy, because thou being
a man make thy self God. It seems the Jews were of opinion that none could
properly and naturally be the Son of God, or so call himself, but he must make
himself to be also God: or else their accusation had been falsely grounded. And
if our Savior had not known himself to be very God, as well as his natural,
proper, and begotten Son, he ought so far to have consulted the honor of God,
as to have traversed the enditement, refelled the ill-grounded crimination, and
told them plainly this, that he was not GOD, but wronged exceedingly by them in
so false an inference; which the Logic of his discourse would by no means
bear. For if John Baptist, Joh. 1.20, 25.
being asked on the like occasion, denied himself to be the MESSIAH, and said
plainly, I am not the Christ Joh. 1.20.
: and if Paul and Barnabas, when the Lystrians would have offered sacrifice
unto them, rent their clothes, and said, Sir^ why do ye these things Act. 14.15.
? we are men of like passions with your selves: how much more was our Savior
bound to have done the like, and not to let the Jews run on in their
misperswasion? But our Redeemer does not so. He lets them peaceably enjoy their
opinion of him, that is to say, that by calling God his Father, he had made
himself God, and does not go about to persuade them otherwise. Only he
labors to take off the edge of their malice toward him, by telling them
that according to the grounds of their own Law, it was no such heinous or
unpardonable crime, for men to call themselves by the name of God Joh. 10.35,
36.
. And if they were called Gods in Scripture, to whom the word of God came, as
it did to the Prophets, and called so without any offense that was taken at it:
with how much better reason might he call himself the Son of God, even in that
sense wherein they understood his words, without incurring either the sin or
punishment of Blasphemy? This is the sum of the discourse between Christ and
the malicious Jews in the tenth of St. John: and this does evidently prove
that CHRIST did so affirm himself to be the Son of God the Father, as that he
would by no means deny himself to be God the Son. Add unto this, that in
another Dialogue betwixt him and the Jews, he took unto himself the name, I
am. (...), Antequam Abraham fieret, ^go^sum, says the Vulgar Latin, that is
to say, Before Abraham was (made or born) I am 1 John 8.58.
. Which being the very self same name by which God calls himself in the book
of Exodus, saying, Thus shall thou say unto the children of Israel, I AM has
sent me unto you Exodus 3.14.
, may serve for a concluding Argument, that as CHRIST was not ashamed to call
himself the son of man, so neither was he afraid to own himself for the Son of
God, and so to be the Son of God, as to be also true God, God for ever blessed.

Thus have I done with such Records and evidence of holy Scripture which are
intrinsecal to this cause, and have been chosen by me out of a greater number,
with reference to the limitations fixed to my design. Some other evidence there
is, which I count extrinsecal, because borrowed from the writings of Jews,
Greeks, and Romans; no friends unto the cause, if not open enemies. And first
beginning with the Jews, we find this testimony given to our Lord and Savior,
by Josephus the Historian, that it was hardly lawful to call him a man, and in
the close of all, that he was the CHRIST. Erat eodem tempore Jesus quidam, etc.
There lived (says he) one JESUS much about that time, a wise man, if at the
least it be lawful to call him a man; For he did many miracles, and was a
Teacher of those who do receive the truth with gladness; drawing many after
him, both Jews and Gentiles. This was the CHRIST. Joseph. Antiqu. Iud. l. 18.
c. 4.
. This said, he speaks in brief of his crucifying under Pontius Pilate, his
resurrection from the dead on the third day after, and then concludes, Et ad
hunc usque diem Christianorum gens ab eo cognominata non d^sinit, that the Sect
of the Christians being denominated from him, continue to this very day. Though
this be more then we have reason to expect from a Jew, yet that of Thedosius
which we find in Suidas, is more full then this. This Theodosius was a Jew,
living in the time of Justinian the Emperor, Justinian the Emperor having
some acquaintance with one Philip a Christian Merchant told him a story to this
purpose, viz. That there were in the Temple of Jerusalem 22 Priests in
ordinary attendance, and that as often as one died another was chosen in his
place: that JESUS in regard of his piety and learning was chosen into one of
the void places, and his own name together with the name of his Parents being
to be enrolled in the public Register, his Mother came to answer in that
behalf; who being interrogated of his Fathers name, reported the whole story of
his incarnation, as she had heard from the Angel; and thereupon his Name was
entered in these words, JESUS the Son of the living God and the Virgin Mary
Suidas in Lex. verb. Jesus.
. This Book or Register the same Theodosius does report to have been carefully
preserved in Tiberias a City of Galilee, after the destruction of Jerusalem;
and that he had often seen and perused it there, he being one of the principal
Citizens and of authority in that place. I know the truth of this relation has
been much disputed, in regard that our Redeemer was of the Tribe of Judah, and
so not capable of the Aaronical or Levitical Priesthood: Nor can I tell
whether it will help the matter to report out of Ranulph the Monk of Chester
Polychron. l. 3. c. 44.
, that Hismerias the Mother of Elizabeth which bare the Baptist, and Anna the
Mother of the Virgin Mary were sisters, and the daughter of a Levite whose name
was Isachar: This I am sure may be affirmed in defense of the story, that the
Jews were not then so punctual in keeping themselves unto their Tribes as they
had been formerly; that even the High Priesthood it self had been bought and
sold to persons both unworthy and incapable of so high an honor: that we find
JESUS to have preached in the Temple often, and to have done in it other
Ministerial Offices, which questionless the Priests and Pharisees would never
have suffered, had he not had some calling to it which might authorize him. And
if by (...) or Sacerdotes in the Text of Suidas we may have leave to understand
some inferior Ministers, and not the very Priests themselves, (as possibly
enough we may) the story may then stand secure, above all exceptions. Next let
us look amongst the Gentiles, and they will tell us that Augustus the Roman
Emperor, in whose time the Lord CHRIST was born, consulting with the Oracle of
Apollo touching his successor, received this answer Id. ibid.
.

(...)
(...)*
(...).
In English thus, An Hebrew child whom the blessed Gods adore,
Commands me leave these shrines, and back to Hell,
So that of Oracles I can no more:
In silence leave our Altars, and farewell.
Which answer being so returned Augustus built an Altar in the Roman Capitol,
with this Inscription, ARA PRIMOGENITI DEI, i.e. the Altar of the first
begotten of God. The general ceasing of Oracles much about this time, gives
some strength to this. And so does that which we find mentioned in Eusebius,
touching the falling of the Idols of Egypt Eusebius. de Them. Evangel. l. 9.
, upon our Saviors first coming into that country. St. Ambrose in his
Commentary on the 119. Psalm, does affirm as much. Nor is it yet determined to
the contrary by our greatest Critics, but that the Prophet Esaiah may allude
to this: where bringing in the burden of Egypts, he says, Behold the Lord
rides upon a swift clowd and shall come into Egypt, and the Idols of Egypt
shall be moved at his presence Esa. 19 1.
. But whether the Prophet do allude unto this or not, we have no reason to
misdoubt of the truth of the story, and the acknowledgement which the false
Gods of the Gentiles made to the Divinity of the true. In and about these times
lived the Poet Virgil, one of whose Eclogues, being a mere extract of some
fragments of the Sibylline Oracles Virg. Eclog. 6.
, has many passages which cannot properly be applied to any but our Savior
Christ; though by him wrested to the honor of Marcellus the Nephew and
designed Heir of Augustus Caesar. For example these; Iam redit and Virgo,
redeunt Saturnia regna,
Iam nova progenes Coelo demittitur alto,
Chara Deunt soboles, magnum Iovis incrementum.


Which may be Englished in these words, Now shines the Virgin, now the times of
peace
Return again, and from the Heaven on high
Comes down a sacred and new Progeny,
The issue of the Gods, Jove's blessed increase.
More testimonies of this nature might be added here; but these shall serve at
this time for a taste of the rest. And so we end with that of the Centurion of
Pilates guard, who noting all that happened in our Saviors passion, could not
but make acknowledgement of so great a Prophet, saying, Man. 27.54.
Surely this was the Son of God. And this was (...), as much as could possibly
be delivered in so few words.

Which being so, it is the more to be admired that such as take unto themselves
the name of Christians, should think and speak less honorably of their Lord and
Savior, then the Jews, Gentiles, and the Devils themselves: yet such vile
miscreants have there been in the former ages, and I doubt are still. And of
those Ebion was the first, who savouring strongly of the Jew, had made up such
a mixture of Religion, as might please their palates: and taught no otherwise
of CHRIST then that he was (...), an ordinary natural man, begotten in the
common course of generation Eusebius. Eccl. hist. l. 3. cap. 4.
. Eusebius so informs us of him. St. Hierome adds, that for the suppression of
this heresy, St. John at the request of some Asian Bishops, wrote his holy
Gospel, of purpose to assert the Divinity of CHRIST, ( ut divinam ejus
nativitatem ediceret, are St. Hieromes words) of which but little had been said
by the other Evangelists. After him there arose up Artemon, or Artemas in the
days of the Emperor Heliogabalus, who held the same opinion concerning CHRIST
as the Ebionites did, affirming him to be no other then a mere natural man;
saving that he was born of the Virgin Mary, after a more peculiar manner then
the rest of mankind, and was to be preferred before all the Prophets Niceph.
Eccl. hist. l. 4. c. 20.
. And against him there was a Book written, as Eusebius tells us Eusebius. Eccl.
hist. l. 5. c. 28.
, though the name of the Author came not to his hands. But that which is a
matter of most admiration, is that Paulus Samosatenus a Christian Bishop, and a
Bishop of one of the four Patriarchal Sees, even of the City of Antioch, should
not only set on foot again this condemned Heresy, but have the impudence to
affirm that it had been the ancient and approved Doctrine of the Church of
Christ Id. ibid.
. No wonder if the Prelates of the Church did best in themselves, when such a
foul contagion was got in amongst them: and therefore they assembled in the
City of Antioch, that by the authority of their presence, and the sincerity of
their doctrine, so dangerous a Monster might be quelled in the face of his
people Id. l. 7. cap. 26, 27. etc.
. This was about the time of the Emperor Aurelianus. Nor had there been a more
celebrious Council in the Church of Christ, from that of the Apostles mentioned
in the 15. of the Acts, unto that of Nice. The issue and success whereof was so
blessed by God, that from those times until these last and worst ages of the
Church, wherein Socinus, Osterodius, and their followers have again revived it,
this wretched heresy was scarce heard of but in ancient Histories. And on the
other side some of the ancient Writers, and the later Schoolmen, the better to
beat down the dotages of such frantic Heretics, as had impugned the Divinity
of our Lord and Savior: have so entangled the simplicity of the Christian
faith within the Labyrinth of curious and intricate speculations, that it
became at last a matter of great wit and judgment, to know what was to be
believed in the things of Christ. And of this nature I conceive are those
inexplicable and perplexed discourses about the consubstantiality and
coequality of the Persons; which how it can consist with the
School-distinction, that the Father does all things authoritative, and the Son
all things sub-authoritative, it is hard to say: that the Son is coeternal with
the Father, as in the Creed of At^anasius; and yet Principium a principio in
the Schoolmens language: that there should be two distinct natures in the
Person of CHRIST, and yet a communication of Properties (or Idioms as they call
them) of the one nature to the other: that CHRIST in one Person should have two
distinct wills, all who opined the contrary being branded and condemned by the
name of Monothelites. Not to say any thing in this place of those dark
expressions, in which the eternal generation of the Son of God, and the nature
of the Hypostatical Union have been delivered by some Writers: of whom a man
may say with a sober confidence that they hardly understood what they said
themselves. Assuredly that ancient diverb, Ingeniosa res est esse Christianum,
was not made for naught. The best way therefore is to contain our selves within
those bounds which are prescribed us in the Word of God, in which though all
things are not written which concern our Savior, yet those things which are
written are sufficient doubtless to make us wise unto salvation 1 Timothy
, that so we may believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, and that
believing we may have life through his Name Joh. 20.31.
.

And now, as far as I can go by the light of Scripture, I should proceed unto
the incarnation of the Son of God, but that we must first behold him as he is
our LORD, which is the last of those two relations in which he is presented to
us in this present Article. Of this as it belongs to God the Father, we have
already spoken in the first Article, under the title of Jehovah, the proper and
peculiar name of the Lord our God: a name so proper and peculiar to the Father
of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, that it is thought by very learned men not to be
understood of the Son of God, or of God the Son, in the whole Old Testament,
who is most usually expressed by the name of Adonai. Thus in that celebrated
place of the Psalms of David, whereas we read in English thus, the Lord said
unto my Lord Psalm. 110.1.
, it is in the Original thus, Jehovah said to Adonai, or the Lord Jehovah said
unto my Lord Adonai. Where clearly the name of Jehovah, does denote the Father,
as that of Adonai the Son, though both be generally Englished by the name of
Lord. Now the name Adonai is derived (as before was noted) from the Hebrew word
Eden, which signifies the basis or foundation on which the whole building does
rely: and therefore very fitly does express his nature, by whom as all things
were created in the first beginning, as St. John tells us in his Gospel Joh.
1.3.
; so does he still support the Earth and the pillars of it, as it is told us in
the Psalms. But for the name or style of Lord, both in Greek and Latin, it
seemed to be a title of such power and sovereignty, that great Augustus, though
the Master of the Roman Empire did forbear to use it. Nay which is more,
gravissimo corripuit edicto Sueton, August. Caesar. c. 52.
, as Suetonius has it, he interdicted the applying of it to himself by a
public Edict. The like by Dion is reported of Tiberius also Dion. hist.
; a Prince who cherished flattery more then any virtue, and in whose Court no
men were more esteemed of then the basest sycophants. This by the Statists of
those times imputed to policy or Kings-cra^t, ne speciem Principatus in Regni
formam converterent Sueton. hist. in Calig.
for fear they should be thought in that conjuncture of time, when their
affairs were yet unsettled, to affect the title of Kings as they had the power;
which was most odious to the Romans. But in my mind Orosius gives a better
reason, who thinks that this was rather done by Gods special Providence, then
on any foresight of those Princes. His reason is, because that Christ during
the reign of those two Emperors had took our flesh upon him, and did live
amongst us. Nor was it fit, says he, that any man should take upon himself the
name of LORD, ex eo tempore, quo verus totius gene^is humani Dominus inter nos
homines natus esset Oros. hist. l. 6. c. 21.
, whilst the undoubted Lord of all mankind, was conversant amongst us here
upon the Earth. And this we may the rather credit to have been done by Gods
special providence, because Caligula who next succeeded in the Empire (our
Savior Christ having then withdrawn his bodily presence) was not alone content
to admit this Title, but did command it to be given him by all the people. Et
primus Dominum se jussit appellari Vict. Roman. hist. Epitome.
, as it is in Victor.

But whether this observation of Orosius will hold good or not, certain it is,
that from the time and instant of the Resurrection, the style of LORD did
properly belong unto CHRIST our Savior. Therefore let all the house of Israel
know assuredly, that God has made that same. Jes^s whom ye have crucified,
both Lord and Christ Act. 2.36.
. Not made, that is to say, not declared LORD by his heavenly Father before
that time, when he had overcome the sharpness of death, and trampled on the
grave in his Resurrection; though called so sometimes before, in the way of
Anticipation, or of civil complement. Then only called, now made and publicly
declared the Lord of all things. And certainly it might seem to stand with
reason, that seeing all power was given to the man Christ Jesus, both in heaven
and earth (for now we look upon him only in that capacity) that with the power
he also should partake of the highest title, by which that power was usually
expressed and signified. From that time forwards unto this, there is not any
thing more ordinary in the Book of God, or in the Liturgies of the Church, or
in the common speech of good Christian people, then to entitle our Redeemer by
the name of the LORD; and to entitle him thereby in so clear a manner, as to
make it more peculiar to him then to God the Father. So that in all the ancient
Liturgies both Greek and Latin, when the name of God the Father and of God the
Son occur in the same Prayer, or Hymn, as they often do; the name of Lord is
constantly appropriated unto God the Son. And so we also find it in our
English Liturgy. According to thy promises declared unto mankind in Christ
Jesu our Lord; as in the general Confession: Almighty God, the Father of our
Lord JESUS CHRIST, in the Absolution; through Jesus Christ our Lord, who lives
and reigns with thee and the holy Ghost, as in some of the Collects. And this
the Church did learn, no doubt, from the like expression of St. Paul, who thus
gives the blessing; The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God
(and not of the Lord God) and the fellowship of the holy Ghost, (and not of the
Lord holy Ghost) be with you all, Amen 2 Cor. 13.14.
. And thus it also stands in the present Creed, in which the title of Lord is
appropriated only to the Son; and neither added to the Father nor the holy
Ghost.

Nor is he called LORD only in general terms, but Dominus nosier, our Lord,
the Lord of all that do confess his holy Name, and agree in the truth of his
holy Word. A title which accreweth to him in many respects; as first in regard
of our Creation. For if all things were made by him, and without him was
nothing made that was made Joh. 1.3.
, as St. John affirms; If by him all things were created both in Heaven and
Earth, visible and invisible Col. 1.16.
, as St. Paul informs us: good reason that he should have the Dominion over the
work of his own hands, and that we should acknowledge him for the Lord our
Maker Psalm. 95.6.
. In the next place he is our Lord in jure Redemptionis, in the right of
Redemption. Concerning which we must take notice (as before V. l. 1. c.
was said) that man was made by God in his first Creation, just, righteous, and
devoide of malice: (...), in the words of Damascen Damasc. de fid. Orth. l.
2.12.
. Created to this purpose after Gods own Image, Vt imitator sui autoris esset,
that so he might more perfectly imitate his Creators goodness. But falling from
this happiness in which he might have served the Lord with perfect innocence,
he made a new contract with the Devil, and became his servant, and put himself
directly under his dominion. Do ye not know (says the Apostle) that unto whom
you yield your selves servants to obey, his servants ye are whom ye obey Romans
6.16.
. If then they were the Devils servants, the Devil of necessity was their Lord
and Master; for Dominus and servus sunt relata, as our Logic teaches us. A
miserable and most wretched thraldom, from which there was no other way to set
mankind free, but by the death and passion of our Savior CHRIST: which he
being willing for our sakes to undergo, did by the offering of himself once for
all, become the propitiation for our sins 1 John 12.2.
, and obtain eternal* redemption for us Heb. 9.12.
, cancelling the bond or obligation which was against us, and nayling it to his
Cross for ever Col. 2.14.
. Nor were poor mankind only servants to this dreadful Tyrant, but for the
most part they had listed themselves under him and became his soldiers,
fighting with an high hand of presumptuous wickedness against the Lord God and
the Hosts of Heaven. And they continued in that service, taking part with the
Devil upon all occasions, till he received his final overthrow at the hands of
our Savior: who by his death overcame him who had the power of death Heb. 2.14.
, which is the Devil: and having spoiled principalities and powers, made a show
of them openly and triumphed over them Col. 2.15.
. By means whereof another title did accrue unto him of being the sole Lord
over all mankind, and that is jure belli, by the laws of war: that rule of
Aristotle being most unquestionably true, (...) Arist. Pol. l. 1. c. 4.
, that is to say, those which are taken in the wars, are in the power and at
the disposal of the Conqueror. And by the same right also of successful war,
men became servants unto him, whose service, as our Church has taught us, is
perfect freedom. For Servi are so called a servando, from being saved and
preserved in the day of battle. Vocabuli origo inde ducta creditur, quod ii
qui jure belli possint occidi, a victoribus conservabantur August. de civit. l.
19.
, as St. Augustine from the Lawyers Justin. Instit. l. 1.
has it; because although they might be slain by the Law of Arms, yet by the
clemency of the Victor they were saved from slaughter, and so made servants to
the Conqueror. And last of all he is our Lord jure Promotionis, by the right
of promotion, because we hold of him all those temporal and eternal blessings,
which we enjoy in this life, and expect in that which is to come. He is the
Lord of Life, as St. Peter tells us, Act. 3.15. the Lord of glory, says S.
Paul, 1 Cor. 2.8. the Lord of joy, Enter into the joy of the Lord, as St.
Matthew has it, 25.21. And he conferreth on us his servants life, joy, and
glory, out of the abundant riches of his mercy toward us; and whatsoever else
is his, within the title and power of Lord. For having thereto a double right,
first by inheritance as the Son, whom God appointed heir of all things, Heb.
1.2. and then by purchase as a Redeemer, (for therefore he dyed and rose again
that he might be Lord of all, Romans 14.9.) contenting himself with the first
alone he is well pleased to set over the latter unto us, and to advance us to
an estate of joynt-purchase in Heaven, of life, joy, and glory, and whatsoever
else he is owner of. For to that end it pleased him to come down from Heaven,
and be made man, and be incarnate by the holy Ghost of the Virgin Mary; which
is the first of those great works which were performed by him in order to our
Redemption, and next in order of the Creed.

ARTICLE IV. Of the Fourth ARTICLE OF THE CREED Ascribed to St. ANDREW. (...).
i. e. Qui conceptus est de Spiritu sancto, natus ex Virgin Maria. i. e. Which
was conceived by the holy Ghost, born of the Virgin Mary.
CHAP. III. Of Gods free mercy in the Redemption of Man. The Word why fittest
to effect it. The Incarnation of the Word why attributed to the holy Ghost. The
miracle thereof made credible both to Jews and Gentiles.
IT is a very ingenious conceit of Cameracensis Camerac. in 3. lib. sentent.
, that when God first created Adam, he gave him all precious and excellent
endowments; as truth to instruct him, justice to direct him, mercy to preserve
him, and peace to delight him: but that when he was fallen from God, and forgot
all the good which the Lord had done for him, they returned back to him that
gave them, making report of that which had happened on the earth, and earnestly
moving the Almighty, but with different purposes, concerning this forlorn and
unhappy creature. For Justice pleaded for his condemnation and called earnestly
for the punishment which he had deserved: Truth pressing for the execution of
that which God had threatened on his disobedience. But on the other side, Mercy
entreated for poor miserable man made out of the dust of the earth, seduced by
Satan, and beguiled under fair pretenses; and Peace endeavored to take off the
edge of Gods displeasure, and reconcile the creature unto his Creator. When
God had heard the contrary desires and pleas of those excellent Orators, there
was a council called of the blessed Trinity, in which it was finally resolved
that the Word should be made flesh, and take unto himself the nature of Man,
that he might partake of his infirmities, be subject to the punishments which
man had deserved, and so become the propitiation for the sins of the world. By
this means the desires of all parties were fully satisfied. For man was
punished according as Justice urged; the punishment threatened on man's
disobedience inflicted, as Truth required; the offender pitied and relieved, as
Mercy entreated; and God was reconciled to man, as Peace had desired. And so
that was fulfilled which the Psalmist speaks of, Mercy and truth are met
together, righteousness (or justice) and peace have kissed each other Psalm.
85.10.
. Arminius follows this conceit a little further, and adds that when the
different parties had pursued their interesses, Wisdom was called on to advise
what was best to be done, to give satisfaction to them all; whose advise was,
that the punishment due to the sin of man should be changed into an Expiatory
sacrifice, by the voluntary oblation of the which, justice might be appeased,
and place made for mercy Armin. in Orat. de Christi Sacerdutio.
. But then began a new debate, where they should find a Priest fit for such a
sacrifice; Angel it could not be, because it was not reasonable that an Angel
should suffer for the sin of Man. And Man it could not be, because being
terrifyed with the guilt of his own transgressions, he had not confidence
enough to draw near to God; nor had he any thing of his own which was held
worthy to be offered to so high a Deity. Wisdom was therefore called again, by
whom it was finally resolved that there must be some man begotten, who being
made in all things like unto his Brethren, might be the more sensible of their
infirmities; but so, that he should be free from sin, and not obnoxious to the
power and criminations of Satan. Holy he was to be, or rather holiness, and
therefore to be conceived only by the holy Ghost, by whose great power the
ordinary course of nature was to be supplied: and in this flesh the Word it
self to be incarnate, who offering up that flesh in sacrifice for the sins of
the world, might so perform the work of poor man's redemption.

But leaving these conceits, though indeed very ingenious, there is no question
to be made but God had other means to save us then by the incarnating the word,
and humbling his only begotten Son unto the death, even the death of the
Cross, if he had so pleased. But a better and more convenient way to
demonstrate his love and mercy toward us, to manifest his Power and wisdom,
and yet withal to show his justice against sin and Satan, the Scriptures have
not laid before us. The Fathers have resolved it thus, Et ^ine hoc holocausto
poterat Deus tantum condonasse peccatum, sed facilitas veniae peccatis laxaret
habenas effraenatis quae etiam Christi vix cohibent passiones Cyp. de Chr.
Passione.
. God (says St. Cyprian) was able to have pardoned this great sin without this
sacrifice; but the sacrifice of the pardon would have loosned the reins to
unbridled sins, which even the sufferings of Christ, are scarce able to
repress. The like says Nazianzen, It was possible for God (says he) to save
man by his only will without taking of our flesh upon him, as he did and does
work all things without help of a body Naz. Ep. 1.
Damascene to the same effect; He was not (otherwise) unable that can do all
things by his Almighty power and strength to take man from the tyrant that
possessed him Damasc. de fide Orth. l. 3.18.
. The like occurreth in St. Ambrose, St. Augustine, and Pope Gregory also. In
the dark ages of the Chrurch the same truth was held. For thus St. Bernard in
those times, Was not the Creator able to restore his work without this
difficulty? Able he was, but he chose rather to wrong himself, then the most
lewd and hateful vice of unthankfulness should find any colorable place in
man Bern. in Cant. Sermon. 11.
. And it holds also since the times of the reformation. Calvin affirms it in
plain terms, Poterat nos Dominus verbo, aut nutu redimere, nisi aliter nostra
causa visual esset Calvin in Joh. 15.13.
; the Lord (says he) might have redeemed us with a word or beck, but that for
our sakes he thought good to do otherwise. Zanchius comes very close to Calvin,
What (says he) could not mankind be delivered by any other means then the
death of Christ Zanch. in c. 2 ad Philip.
? No doubt but that he might have done it, solo nutu, et jussu, et voluntate
divina, by the only beck, commandment and will of God. Conform to which
expression of the ancient and modern writers, the Church of England has
declared in the book of Homilies, that it was the surest pledge of Gods love to
man, to give us his own Son from Heaven. For otherwise he might have given us
if he would an Angel or some other Creature; and yet in that his love had been
far above our deserts Homil. 2. of the Passion.
. They who conceive that God was not able otherwise to effect this work, or had
no other means to bring it to pass, then that which he made choice of to
effect the same, do wilfully entrench upon his Omnipotence, which is larger
then either his will or his works. For though his works be always measured by
his will, yet must his Power be limited unto neither of them; because God is
able to do many things which he never did, nor will do; as has been shown
before in the first Article. And in his works to bind him unto any necessity to
do as he did, and not to leave him at his own liberty to do what he pleases;
and in a way which seems most agreeable to his heavenly wisdom; were to
revive the accursed error of the Manichees. Against whom St. Augustine thus
resolves it, Nullam ergo necessitatem patitur Deus, neque necessitate facit
quae facit, sed summa et ineffabili voluntate ao potestate Aug. de fide con.
Man. c. 28.
. God (says the Father) is not bound by any necessity, nor is he necessitated
to do those things which he does, but does them by his supreme and unspeakable
power.

As then there was not any necessity on the part of God the Father Almighty, to
send his only begotten Son into the world, to take our humane nature on him,
and suffer an accursed death for the sins of the world: so neither was there
any necessity on the part of the word, by which he was enjoined or compelled to
take upon him the office of a Mediator, and be incarnate in our flesh. That it
was agreeable to the work in hand, that the word should be made flesh, and in
that flesh accomplish the whole mystery of our redemption, there are many
reasons to persuade. For who was fitter to be cast out into the Sea, to stay
the tempest of Gods anger against sinful man, then the Jonas for whose sake it
rose? Almighty God was first displeased for the wrong offered to the word, in
that man desired to be like unto God, and to know all things in such sort as is
proper to the only begotten Son of the Father. The sin was, caro verbum, then;
vile flesh aspired to be made like unto the word: therefore the remedy now must
be verbum caro, the word so farforth humbling it self as to be made flesh;
Verbum caro factum Joh. 1.14.
Who fitter to become the son of man, then he that was by nature the Son of
God? Patrem habuit in coelis, Matrem quaesivit in terris, as St. Bernard has
it Bern. de Advent. Domini ser. 1.
. Who could be fitter to make us the Sons of God by adoption and grace, then
the word by which we were to be begotten unto life eternal: or to repair the
image of God decayed in us, then he that was the brightness of his Fathers
glory Heb. 1.3.
, and the express image of his Person? Finally who more fit to settle the
minds of men in a certain and undoubted persuasion of the truth of such things
as are necessary to be believed, and thereby bring us into the way of life
everlasting; then he that was the way, the truth and the life Joh. 14.6.
, as himself tells us of himself in St. John's Gospel? Vt homo fidentius
ambularet ad veritatem, ipsa veritas, Dei filius homine assumpto, constituit et
fundavit fidem Aug. de Civ. 11.2.
as St. Augustine has it. That man (says he) might with more confidence
travel in the ways of truth; the truth it self, even the Son of God, taking
the nature of man upon him, did plant and found that faith which we are to
believe. By which it is apparent that it was most agreeable both to our
condition, and the nature of the word it self, that he should take upon himself
the office of a Mediator between God and Man: but so that he was bound thereto
by no necessity, but only out of his mere love and goodness to that wretched
Creature. The Scriptures and the Fathers are express in this. Walk in love
(says the Apostle) as Christ has also loved us, and has given himself for
us, an offering and a sacrifice to God, a sweet smelling savor Ephesians. 5.2.25.
. And anon after, Husbands love your wives, even as Christ also loved his
Church, and gave himself for it. And in pursuance of this love, he took upon
himself the form of a servant, and was made in the likeness of man Phil. 2.7, 8.
, and being found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself, and became obedient
unto death, even the death of the Cross. So that first out of his love and
goodness toward us he offered himself to serve and suffer in our places, and
after out of the same love submitted himself unto the punishment, which our
sins deserved: God not imposing this upon him, by necessity of any inevitable
decree, but mercifully accepting his compassionate offer, which did so
powerfully conduce unto man's salvation, and the most inexpressible honor of
his only Son. The sufferings of CHRIST in regard of man, do take their value
from his Person; the excellency of which did prevail so far, as to make the
passion of one available for the sins of all. But the merit of those
sufferings, in regard of himself, is to be valued by that cheerful freedom with
which he pleased to undergo them, and had not been so acceptable nor effectual
neither, if they had not been voluntary. For Fathers which affirm the same we
need take no thought, having both Reason and the Scriptures so expressly for it:
though this be universally the Doctrine of all Catholic wrirers: some of whose
words I shall recite, and for the rest refer the Reader to their Books. For the
Greek Church thus says Athanasius, CHRIST seeing the goodness of his Father,
and his own sufficiency and power, (...), was moved with compassion toward
man, and pitying our infirmities, clothed himself with the same Athanas. in
Passion. and cruc. Dom.
; (...), etc. and willingly took up his cross, and went uncompelled unto his
death. And thus St. Augustine for the Lat^ne. The Word (says he) was made
flesh by his own power, and was born, suffered, died, and rose again August. de
fide cont. Man. c. 26.
, nulla necessitate sed voluntate and potestate, by no necessity laid upon him,
but merely of his own good will, and that authority which he had to dispose of
himself. See to this purpose the same Augustine in Psalm. 8. de Trinit. l. 4. c.
10. Chrysostom. in Genesis Hom. 55. and in Ioh. Hom. 82. Amb. in Psalm. 118. Sermon. 6.
and De Fide, l. 2. c. 1. Hieron. in Isai. cap. 3. and in Psalm. 68. Not to
descend to those of the later Ages.

The passages being thus laid open, we now proceed to the great work of the
incarnation, wherein the holy Ghost was to have his part, that so none of the
Heavenly powers might be wanting to the restoration of collapsed man. That our
Redeemers Incarnation in the Virgins womb was the proper and peculiar work of
the holy Ghost, is positively affirmed in St. Matthews Gospel: first in the way
of an historical Narration. Before they came together, (as man and wise) she
was found with child of the holy Ghost, chapter l. 1. 18. and afterward by way of
declaration from an Angel of Heaven, saying, Joseph thou son of David, fear not
to take unto thee Mary thy wife; for that which is conceived in her, (...), is
of the holy Ghost, verse. 20. Nor wanted there especial reason (if at least any
reasons may be given in matters of so high a nature) why this miraculous
Conception was committed rather to the holy Ghost, then either acted by the
sole power of God the Father, or by the sole virtue of the Word, who was
abundantly able to have wrought his own Incarnation. For as the Word was
pleased to offer himself to take humane flesh, the better to accomplish the
great work of the Worlds redemption: and as God the Father knowing how unable
poor man must be to work out his own salvation otherwise then by such a
Savior, was graciously pleased to accept the offer: so it seemed requisite
that God the holy Ghost should prepare that flesh in which the Word of God was
to be incarnate. Besides the power of quickening and conferring fruitfulness, is
generally ascribed to the Spirit in the Book of God: who therefore in the
Nicene (or rather the Constantinopolitane Creed) is called the Lord and giver
of life. For thus says David for the Old Testament, Thou sendest forth thy
Spirit, and they are created Psalm. 104.30.
: and thus the son of David for the New Testament; Spiritus est qui vivificat,
i. e. It is the Spirit that quickneth. The holy Ghost then was the proper Agent
in the Incarnation. So St. Matthew tells us. But for the manner and the means by
which so wonderful a conception was brought to pass, that we find only in St.
Luke. The blessed Virgin as it seemed made a question of it, how she should
possibly conceive and bring forth a son, considering that as yet she had not
had the company of her husband Joseph. Quandoquidem virum non cognosco Luke
1.34, 35.
, that is to say, since as yet I do not know my husband, (for so I rather
choose to read it, then to translate it as it stands in our English Bibles,
seeing I know not a man.) For that both (...) in the Greek, and Vir in Latin,
do sometimes signify an Husband every Schoolboy knows: and so the words are
rendered in our English Bibles, Ioh. 4.16, 17, 18. and in other places. And this
objection she might make, not out of any disbelief of the Angels words; for
being then as faulty as old Zachary was, she had been as punishable, since God
is no respecter of persons: nor that she had vowed chastity, as the Papists
say, and Gregory Nyssen does report from an unknown Author, whose history he
does confess to be Apocryphal Genesis 2.6.
Greg. Nys. Orati. in Chri. Not.
, ((...), as his words there are), for then she had done very ill to betroth
herself unto an husband, the vow of Chastity being inconsistent with the state
of Matrimony. But this she did, because the Angel seemed to speak of her
Conception, as a thing instantly to be done, and then in fieri at the least, as
Logicians phrase it: and she, though then betrothed to Joseph, was a Virgin
still. (for the Text says it was before they came together); and more then so,
there was perhaps some part of the time remaining which usually intervened
amongst the Jews, betwixt the first Espousals and the consummation of the
marriage. But this bar was easily removed. For it follows, that the Angel
answered and said, The holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the
most High shall overshadow thee. The holy Ghost shall come upon thee, (...), as
the Greek Text has it, that is to say, the holy Ghost shall fall upon thee
like rain into a fleece of wool, or like the dew of heaven upon a barren and
thirsty land where no moisture is: and make thee no less fruitful without help
of man, then was the Virgin Earth in its first integrity, when no outward or
extrinsecal moisture had yet fallen upon it, but that there went up a mist only
out of the very bowels thereof, and watered the whole face of the ground Genesis
2. 6.
. And the power of the most High shall overshadow thee, (...) says the Greek,
and cover thee with the wings of his quickening virtue, as the Hen does Eggs,
when she brings forth young.

To make this matter plainer yet, we shall illustrate it by two Texts of holy
Scripture, equal to this both in the wonder and the agent Genesis 1.2.
. In the beginning (says the Text) God created the Heaven and the Earth, and
the Earth was without form, and void, and darkness was upon the face of the
deep. And in the second of the same Book we read that God created man out of
the dust of the earth, verse. 7. In each of these there is a subject some
matter, such as it was, to be wrought upon: that confused mixture of Earth and
waters to be disposed into a world; the dust and Atoms of that world to be
contrived into a man. The fashioning and accomplishment of which great works,
both of them seeming as impossible to sense and reason, as the Conception of
our Savior in a Virgins Womb, is in the Scripture attributed to the holy
Ghost. The Spirit of God (says Moses) moved upon the face of the waters Genesis
1.2.
. Hence the digestion of that matter, fashioned into that goodly fabric of
Heaven and Earth which we so visibly behold with such admiration. God breathed
into his nostrils the breath (or spirit) of life ( inspiravit in faciem ejus
spiraculum vitae Genesis 2.7.
, from whence the Animation and soul of man. This action then ascribed unto the
holy Ghost, which St. Luke calls a supervenience or a coming upon, and an
obumbration or over-shadowing, is likely to have been much of the same nature,
with that of moving in the first, and that of breathing in the 2. of Genesis.
Gods Spirit as it breaths where it lists, so can it quicken where it
pleases. Some there have been, if Maldonate do report them rightly, Qui turpe
aliquid hoc loco somniant Maldon. in Luc. 1.35.
, who have made some impure construction of this holy Text; most impudently
affirming, Spiritum sanctum ad modum viri cum Maria concubuisse Id. in Mat. c.
1. v. 18.
, I abhor to English it: but who they were, he either was afraid or ashamed to
tell us. No doubt but they were some of the Romish party. For had such a
blasphemous and ungodly saying dropped from the mouth or pen of a Protestant,
all Christendom had been told of his name and Nation. And therefore certainly
this quidam whom he spares to name, must be some such good fellow of the
Catholic faction, as Friar Albert of the frock, as they use to call him. Of
whom I remember I have read in some of their Authors, that being a great Votary
of the blessed Virgins, she appeared nightly to him in her bodily shape,
espoused her self to him by a ring, and suffered himself to converse with her
in familiar manner. Insomuch as he might say in the Poets language.
Contrectatque sinus, and forsitan oseula jungit,
He dallied with her Paps
And kissed her too perhaps.
But I do ill to mingle these impurities with this sacred argument, if the
unmasking of the obscoenities of those great Professors of vowed chastity do
not plead my pardon. And yet I cannot choose but add, that these lazy lives of
some of the Monks and Friars, have carried them so far into spiritual
fornications, or rather into contemplative lusts; that many of them have
fancied to themselves such unclean commixtures, (as that of Friar Albert) with
the blessed Virgin. To what end else served those large Faculties which were
given unto Tekelius a Dominican Friar, when he was sent to publish the pardons
or Indulgences of Pope Leo the tenth, in the upper Germany? Who spared not to
affirm even in common Alehouses, that by his Bulls he had authority to absolve
any man whatsoever, Etiamsi Virginem matrem vitiaverit, though he had vitiated
or deflowred the Virgin Mother Sleidam Comment.
, as Sleidan tells the story in his book of Commentaries. I know that in the
later Editions of this Author, (as in that of Colen, printed An.....) the words
are changed to Virginem aut matrein, a maid, or a mother; and so to mend the
matter they have marred the sense. For what need such large faculties as
Tekelius bragged of, for pardoning fornication or Adultery, for the deflowring
of a Virgin, or lying with another man's wife, which every ordinary Priest can
absolve of course. Besides in the first Edition of that Author, printed at.....
An..... it is plainly Virginem Matrem, the Virgin Mother. And so it is in an old
English Translation of him printed at London, and la Veirge Mere, as plainly in
a French Translation, printed at Geneva, An. 1574. Marvail it is, that
Maldonate has not undergone the like castigation, whose Quidam whatsoever he
was, offended more against the Majesty of the holy Ghost, then Tekel did (save
that the Popes authority was concerned in it) against the modesty and piety of
the Virgin Mary.

To return therefore where I left, as I abominate the impieties of these Romish
Votaries, so neither can I approve the conceit of Estius, (though otherwise a
very learned and sound Expositor of holy Scripture, where the interest of the
Church of Rome is not concerned) who by the power of the most High, understands
here the very person of God the Son, and by this over-shadowing of the blessed
Virgin, his voluntary Incarnation in her sanctified womb. His words are these,
Estius in Luc. c. 1. v. 35.
Per virtutem Altissimi intelligi ipsum Dei Filium ( qui est virtus and
brachium, and potentia Patris) quique obumbraturus significatur Virginem,
illapsu suo in uterum Virginis per occultum Incarnationis mysterium. But by his
leave I cannot herein yield unto his opinion; though Chrysostom and Gregory for
the ancient Writers, Beda and Damascene for the Authors of the middle times, do
seem to contenance it. For not St. Augustine only, as himself confesses, and
Euthymius a good writer also are against him in it, but the plain text and
context of the holy Scripture: which makes the quickening of the womb of this
blessed Virgin to be the work only of one Agent, though it be expressed by
different titles. Nor are such repetitions strange or extraordinary in the Book
of God, nor can it give any color to distinguish the power of the most High
from the holy Ghost; as if they were two different Agents: unless we can
distinguish the Lord our God from him that dweleth in the Heavens, because we
find them both together in the 2. Psalm, He that dwells in the Heavens shall
laugh them to scorn, the Lord shall have them in derision Psalm. 2 4.
. And though it cannot be denied, but that the Son of God is the very power and
strength of his Father: yet himself does give this very name of power to the
holy Ghost. For when he commanded the Apostles to abide in the City of
Jerusalem, donec induantur virtute ex alto, i. e. until they were ^ndued with
power from on high Luke 24.29.
, what else did he intend thereby, but that they should continue there until
they were endued with the holy Ghost? Of which see Act. 2.4. Besides if this
opinion should be once admitted, we must exclude the holy Gh^st from having any
thing to do in so great a mystery: and so not only bring the Creed under an
Expurgatorius Index but the Scripture too. Letting this therefore stand for a
truth undeniable, that the over-shadowing (as the Text calls it) of the
blessed Virgin, was the proper and peculiar work of the holy Ghost: let us next
see whether the nature of the miracle be not agreeable to the operatio^s of the
holy Spirit; or such as may not be admitted for a truth undoubted, by equal and
indifferent men, though they be not Christians, nor take it up upon the credit
of the Word of God. And first that of it self it is agreeable to the operations
of the Spirit, the course of his Divine power in the works of nature does
expressly manifest. For as in the spiritual regeneration, though it be Paul that
planteth, and Apollo that waters; yet it is God who gives the increase 1 Cor.
3.6.
; without whose blessing on their labors, their labors will prove fruitless
and ineffectual: so also in the act of carnal generation, though the man and
woman do their parts for the pro creation of children, yet if the quickening
Spirit of God do not bless them in it, and stir up the emplastick virtue of the
natural seed, they may go childless to their graves. It is the Spirit which
quickneth what the womb does breed. And therefore in my mind Lactantius noted
very well, Hominem non Patrem esse sed generandi Ministrum Lactant. l. 5. c. 19.
, that man was nothing but the instrument which the Lord did use for the
effecting of his purpose, to raise that goodly edifice of flesh and blood,
which he contemplates in his children. It is the Spirit of God, as the
Scripture tells us which first gave form unto the world; from whence that known
passage of the Poet, Spiritus intus alit, had its first Original, of which we
have made use in our former book. And if the chief work, or rather the
principal part in the work of nature in the ordinary course of Generation, and
first production of the Word, may be ascribed, as most undoubtedly it must,
unto the powerful influence of this quickening Spirit: with how much more
assurance may he be entitled to the Incarnation of the Word, to which one sex
only did contribute, and that the weakest, without the mutual help and
cooperation of the seed of man.

Nor is the greatness of the Miracle so beyond belief, but that there is
sufficient in the holy Scripture to convince the Jew; and in the writings of
the Poets to persuade the Gentiles, to the admission of this truth: and
consequently to confirm all good Christians in it. Out of the Virgin-Earth did
God first make Adam; and out of Virgin Adam he created Eve: Adam first made
without the help of man or woman; and Eve made after out of Adam, who had no
wife but this which was made out of him. Why might not then the blessed Virgin
be as capable of conceiving a Son by the sole power and influence of the holy
Ghost, without help of man; as Adam was, of being Father unto Eve, by the self
same power, without the use of a woman? Without a Mother, Eve; without Father
CHRIST; Adam without both Father and Mother: but all the handywork of God by
the holy Spirit. Equivalent in effect to the creation of Adam, and the
production of Eve was the birth of Isaac, conceived by Sarah when it had ceased
to be with her after the manner of women Gen 18.11.
; by consequence as indisposed to the act of conception, as if she had been
still a Virgin, or which is more then that, under years of marriage. The
strength that Sarah had to bring forth that Son was not natural to her, for she
was (...), past the age of childe-bearing, as the Text informs us: but a
strength supernatural given from God on high, and therefore called a received
strength, (she received strength to conceive seed, Heb. 11.11.) because not
naturally her own, but received extraordinarily from God. As Isaac was in many
things a Type of CHRIST; so in no one thing more exactly, then that he was the
only Son, or the dearly beloved Son of his Father, begotten on a woman past the
time of her age, whose dead womb could not but by such a miracle be revived
again. To this the Jews most cheerfully do give assent, boasting themselves to
be the children of Abraham by this very venture. What reason have they then not
to yield to this, but that they resolved not to yield to reason? Next for the
Gentiles, do we not find it in their Poets, that Venus was engendered of the
froth of the Sea, animated by the warmth and influence of the Sun; that Pallas
issued from Jove's brain, and Bacchus from the thigh of Jupiter? Do we not read
that most of their Heroes so much famed of old, were begotten by their Gods
upon mortal creatures, as Hercules on Alcmena by Jupiter; Phaeton on Clymene by
Phoebus; and Pa^ on Penelope by Mercury? And is it not recorded in their most
authentic Histories, that Romulus the first King and founder of Rome was
begotten by Mars upon the body of Rhea a Vestal Virgin? Romulus a Mart genttus
and Rhea Silvia Flor. hist. To. l. 1. c. 1.
, as Florus summarily reports it. Had not the Lusitanians a race of Horses
which they believed to be engendered by the wind; the fancy growing from the
knowledge of their excellent swiftness? At this Lactantius touches in his Book
of Institutes, and makes it a convincing Argument in this case against the
Gentiles; who might as easily believe the miracle of the incarnation, as give
faith to that, Quod si animalia quaedam vento and aura concipere solere,
omnibus notum est, cur quisquam mirum putet cum Spiritu Dei, cui est facile
quicquid velit, gravatam Virginem esse dicimus Lactans. l. 4. cap. 12.
? No question but the Spirit of God might be conceived as operative as the
wind or air.

But leaving these Romances of the ancient Heathens, though arguments good
enough ad homines (and beyond that they are not meant) let us next look a while
on the blessed Virgin, who questionless did somewhat to advance the work, and
left it not wholly to the managing of the holy Ghost. But what she did was
rather from the strength of faith then nature. For had she not believed, she
had never conceived. And thereupon it is resolved by St. Augustine rightly,
Feliciorem Mariam esse percipiendo fidem Christi, quam concipiendo carnem
Christi August. de Virginit.
, that she was happier by believing then she was by conceiving; though in that
too pronounced the most blessed amongst women. Now in the strengthening of this
faith many things concurred; as the authority of the Messenger, who coming from
the God of truth, could not tell a lie; the general expectation which the Jews
had about this time of the Messiahs near approach; the argument used by the
Angel touching Gods Omnipotence, with whom nothing was said to be impossible:
Luke 1.37.
and so not this; the instance of a like miracle wrought upon Elizabeth the
wife of Zachary almost as old, but altogether in the same case with Sarah, who
had conceived a son in her old age Ibid. v. 36.
, beyond the ordinary course of nature. And to say truth, these arguments were
but necessary to beget belief to so great a miracle, to which no former age
could afford a parallel, though that of Sarah came most nigh it. And if that
Sarah thought it such a matter of impossibility, then to conceive and bear a
son when it only ceased to be with her after the manner of women, as the Text
tells us that she did: how much more justly might the Virgin think it an
impossible thing, for her to be conceived with child, and bring forth a Son,
and yet continue still a Virgin? But at the last the strength of faith overcame
all difficulties; and by the cheerfulness of her obedience she made a way for
this great blessing, which was coming toward her. Behold the handmaid of the
Lord, Be it to me according unto thy word Ibid. v. 38.
. Which whether they were words of wishing that so it might be, as St. Ambrose,
Venerable Beda, and Euthymius think; or of consent, that so it should be, as
Ireneus and Damascen are of opinion: certain it is, that on the speaking of
those words she did conceive Celestial seed, and in due time brought forth her
Savior. As is affirmed by Irenaeus, l. 1. c. 33. Tertullian in his book De
Carne Christi; Athanasius in his Oration De Sancta Deipara, and diverse others.
A work, as of great efficacy unto our Salvation, so of especial esteem in the
Christian Church; the day whereof, called usually the Feast of the
Annuntiation, has anciently been observed as an holy Festival, as appears by
several Homilies made upon this subject, by Gregory surnamed Thaumaturgus who
lived in the year 230. and that of Athanasius in the time of Constantine. A day
of such high esteem amongst us in England, that we begin our year from thence,
both in the vulgar estimate and all public Instruments; though in our
Kalenders we begin with the first of January, according to the custom of the
ancient Romans.

But here it may be asked, why CHRIST should not be called the Son of the holy
Ghost, according to his humane nature, considering that not St. Luke only
ascribes unto him the work of the Incarnation, under the title of an
overshadowing; but that it is affirmed by St. Matthew in terms more express,
that she (the blessed Virgin Mother) was found to be with child of the holy
Ghost Mat. 1.18.
. And he, by whom a woman is conceived with child, is properly and naturally,
though not always legally, (for Pater est quem nuptiae demonstrant, as the
Lawyers tell us) the right Father of it. A consideration which prevailed so far
with some of St. Hieromes time, that they began to stumble upon this opinion:
but with no better reason in true Divinity, then Christ may be affirmed to be
the Father Almighty intended in the former Articles; because creation is the
work of the Father Almighty, and it is written by St. John, that by him (that
is to say the Son) all things were made Joh. 1.3.
. For all things were so made by the Word, as the Word was made flesh, or
incarnate by the holy Ghost: God, (I mean God the first Person here, as
generally the Scripture does where it speaks of God without limitation or
restrictions) acting by them those two great works which in the holy Text are
to them ascribed; yet by them not as Ministers subservient to him, but
co-working with him. God (says St. Paul) has in these last days spoken to us
by his Son, whom he appointed heir of all things, by whom also he made the
Worlds Heb. 1.2.
. God made the world, though he made it by his Son, to the end, that all things
being created by him, might be also for him Col. 1.17.
. And so it is also in the work of the incarnation; God by his Spirit
fructifying the Virgins womb, and sanctifying the materials with which the Word
(which in the beginning was with God) was to be invested; to the intent that
the Spirit might bear witness to us 1 John 5.6. and Joh. 1.33.
, that he was the beloved Son of God in whom his Father was well pleased. And
yet there is another reason why he should rather be called the Son of God, then
of the holy Ghost; because he had a pre-existence, before he was incarnate in
the Virgins womb, as he was the Word, the Word which in the beginning was not
only with God, but was also God; by an unspeakable way of emanation from the
Father only, as the Word is first conceived in the mind of man, before it be
uttered by the voice. For as the Son is to the Father, so is the Word to the
Mind. The Son proles parentis, the Word proles mentis, says the learned
Andrews B. Andrews Sermon. 6. on the Nativity.
. God therefore being an eternal, everlasting Mind, did before all beginnings
of time produce the Word, by which in the beginning of time all things were
created; By consequence when the Word was pleased to be incarnate, or to be
made flesh in St. John's own language: the person thus made Christ of the Word
and flesh, though he was incorporated into this flesh by the powerful influence
and operation of the holy Ghost, was properly to be called the Son of God, in
whom and of whom only he before existed: the holy Ghost not being the Author of
any new Person, but only betroathing to the Word the humane nature of CHRIST,
which had no actual existence before those Espousals. I know I cannot speak too
reverently of so great a mystery, or think too worthily of that wonderful and
miraculous Act of the Incarnation or Conception of our blessed Savior. And yet
I doubt that some by thinking that he was not formed and fashioned in his
Mothers womb, by those gradations to perfection, which are necessary to all
natural births, but make his body to be perfected all at once in the very
moment of his Conception, and at that instant the reasonable soul to be
actually infused into it: do unawares deprive him of a great deal of honor,
which his humiliation to our nature did confer upon him. Of this mind is
Maldonate for one, whose words take here together for our more assurance;
Maldon. in Luc. c. 1. v. 38.
Alios paulatim sensimque in utero formari, antequam Corpuscul^m animetur:
Christi vero corpus eodem momento quo conceptum est formari, and animatum
fuisse. Which were it so, our Savior CHRIST had not in all things been made
like unto us, contrary to the express words of holy Scripture; nor needed to
have lien so long time in his Mothers womb, his body being completely formed
and animated in the first conception. But I believe the Jesuit had a further
aim in it, then he pleased to discover. And possibly it might be an ingenuous
fear of arrogating or ascribing more to a common Priest, then had been granted
to be done by the holy Ghost. For needs it must seem harsh to most Popish ears,
that the Body of CHRIST should be nine months in forming in his mothers womb,
though supernaturally conceived by the Divine power and influence of the holy
Ghost: and yet upon the Priests saying, Hoc est Corpus meum, the self same body
and soul, with his Divinity* and all into the bargain, should instantly be made
of a piece of bread, without expecting nine minutes for so great a miracle.
Most happy men, who come so nere the power and Majesty of Almighty God, and the
prerogatives of CHRIST: that as the one could have raised children out of
stones to Abraham; and the other command stones to be made bread; so they can
out of bread raise a Son to God, and not a son to God only, but even God the
Son: which is more then was (I dare not say, or could be) done by the holy
Ghost, whose part in this great work we have spoke of hitherto.

ARTICVLI 4. Pars 2da. (...). i. e. Natus ex Virgin Maria. i. e. Born of the
Virgin Mary.
CHAP. IV. Of the birth of CHRIST. The feast of his Nativity. Why born of a
Virgin. The Prophecy of Isaiah. The Parentage and privilege of the Blessed
Virgin.
PRoceed we to the second branch of this present Article, from the Conception
to the Birth of our Lord and Savior; the most material part to us of the
whole mystery. It had been little to our comfort, though much unto the honor
of our humane nature, had the WORD been only made flesh, and with that flesh
ascended presently into heaven, and had not dwelt amongst us, and shown forth
his glory, as the glory of the only begotten of the Father, full of grace and
truth Joh. 1.14.
. It was not Gods being in the flesh, but his being manifested in the flesh;
which St. Paul calls, (...), the great mystery of Godliness 1 Timothy 3.17.
. For without that, although he might have been seen of Angels, yet had he not
been preached unto the Gentiles, nor been believed on in the world, as the
Savior of it. The end of his taking on himself our flesh, was to save poor
man. For this is an acceptable saying, (as St. Paul has told us) that JESUS
CHRIST came into the world to save sinners 1 Timothy 1.15.
; and come into the world he could not (in the sense he speaks of) but by being
born. I know some think, that though ADAM had never sinned, yet it had been
necessary for the exaltation of humane nature, that the WORD should have been
made man: and Bonaventure Bonavent. in 3 Sent. did. 4. qu. 2.
does approve it as a Catholic opinion, and consonant to natural reason. But
howsoever it may seem in his judgment to agree with reason, assuredly it is
more agreeable to the piety and analogy of faith, that the Son of God had
never appeared in our flesh but for the delivery of mankind from sin and
misery: neither the Scripture nor the Fathers speaking of the incarnation but
with reference to man's redemption. To this effect St. Augustine speaks most
divinely, Si homo non periisset, filius hominis non venisset; nulla causa fuit
Christi veniendi, nisi peccatores salvos facere. Toll morbos, toll vulnera,
et nulla est medicinae causa Aug. de. verb. Apostol. Sermon. 70.
. That is to say, If man had not perished, the son of man had not come (for
therefore came the son of man to save that which was lost Luke 19.10.
.): there being no other cause of Christ's coming but the salvation of sinners.
Take away diseases and wounds from man, and what need is there of a Physician?
So that resolving with the Scriptures and Fathers, that there was no cause for
the incarnation of the WORD, but that he should be born for our redemption; let
us proceed therein with that fear and reverence which justly does belong to so
great a mystery, as the manifestation of God in the flesh is said to be by the
Apostle. A mystery in which there is not any thing beneath a miracle. Nor can
it easily be resolved whether of the two be more full of wonder, either that
God the WORD should be born of Woman, or born of such a woman as was a Virgin.
The first and greatest of the two, that which indeed is (...), a miracle of
miracles, as man is somewhere called by Plato, was that the word was made
flesh, and did receive that flesh from a mortal womb. A wonder it seemed to
Nicodemus that a man should be born when he was old Joh. 3.4.
, or enter a second time into his mothers womb and be born again. A greater
wonder must it be for him to enter into the womb, and thence to find a passage
into the world, who was far older then all time, and had his being when the
world but began to be. A greater wonder must it seem for him to take a being
from a mortal creature, by whom all creatures had their being, and did himself
create the same womb which bare him. But such was his unspeakable love to the
sons of men, that he disdained not to submit himself for their sakes to those
low conditions, as to be made man and to have a Mother; a Mother which beyond
example did bring forth her God, and became the Parent of her Savior, Et matter
sine exemplo genuit autorem suum Lact. l. 2. c. 9.
, as Lactantius has it.

Born then our Savior was of a mortal womb. But the word (...) used in the
present Article tells us more then so, and tells us that he was not only born
of the Virgin Mary, but so born of her as to be made of her also. (...), And
the word was made flesh, Ioh. 1.14. God sent his Son, (...), made of a woman,
says St. Paul, Gal. 4.4. where the same word is used as here. Made then he
was, as well as born of the Virgin Mary. And made, not convertendo, not by
converting the Word into flesh, as Cerinthus; nor converting flesh into the
WORD, as Velentinus was of opinion: for the deity cannot be changed into any
thing, nor any thing into it. Nor was it made conciliando, as friends are made
one, or reconciled, so as they continue two persons still; and while the flesh
suffered, the WORD stood still and looked on only, as Nestorius taught; for
that were not to be made flesh, but made with the flesh, not caro, sed cum
carne, says my reverend Author B. Andrw. Sermon. 6. on the Nativ.
. Nor finally was he made componendo, by compounding two persons together, and
so a third thing produced of both, as Eutyches: for so he should be neither of
both, neither the word nor flesh, neither God nor man. But made he was, as St.
Paul tells us, assumendo, by taking the seed of Abraham, Heb. 2.16. His
generation before time, as verbum Deus, is as the enditing the word within the
heart. His generation in time, as verbum caro, is as the uttering it forth with
the voice. The inward motion of the mind takes unto it a natural body of
Air, and so becomes vocal. It is not changed into it, the word remains
still as it was; yet they two became one voice. Take a similitude from our
selves. Our soul is not turned into, nor compounded with the body; yet they two
though distinct in natures, grow into one man. So Athanasius in his Creed. For
as the reasonable soul and flesh is one man, so God and man is one Christ. So
into the Godhead was the manhood taken, the natures preserved without
confusion; the person entire without division. The fourth General Council so
determines also, Sic factum est caro ut maneret verbum, non immutando quod
erat, sed suscipiendo quod not erat. Nostra auxit, sua non minuit, nec
Sacramentum pietatis, detrimentum est Deitatis, i. e. He was so made flesh that
he ceased not to be the Word, never changing what he was, but taking that he
was not. We were the better, he was never the worse. The mystery of Godliness
was was no detriment to the Godhead, nor the honor of the creature wrong to
the Creator. No wrong indeed it was, no detriment to the divine nature of the
Word to be made flesh, and take upon him the infirmities of our humane nature;
but much to the advancement of our humane nature, which he took upon him: as
many Kings and sovereign Princes have been made free of some particular
Corporations under their commands, without diminution or impeachment of their
Royal Power, and highly to the honor of those Companies or Corporations.
Mortalis factus est non infirmata verbi divinitate, sed carnis suscepta
infirmitate, as divinely Angustine in his De Civit. dei. l. 9. c. 15. And
herein miserable man has a great advantage of the Angels, though made lower
then they in his creation, in that the WORD God for ever blessed, vouchsafed to
be made in such manner of our rank and order, as he is not of theirs.

From the manner pass we to the time when this work was wrought, which St.
Paul calls plenitudinem temporis Gal. 4.4.
, or the fullness of time, that is to say, when the time was come and fully
accomplished, which God in his eternal wisdom had fore-determined; which he
had also signified to the house of Israel by the mouth of his Prophets. In
reference to the civil Account, it was at the time when Herod a stranger to the
bloud-royal of David, was King of Iewry; and Augustus Caesar the sole Monarch
of the Roman Empire. The first having translated the Scepter from Judah, and
the Lawgiver from between his feet, made an apparent way for the coming of
Shiloh Genesis 49.10.
, to whom the gathering of the people was now to be. The latter having the
third time closed the Temple of Ianus, and settled an universal peace over all
the Empire, made it the most agreeable time for the birth of him, who being
called the Prince of peace by the Prophet Isaiah, proclaimed peace unto all the
earth at the hour of his birth, and left it to his Disciples as his last
Legacy at the time of his death. And it was also in the time of a general
taxing, as our English, or rather of a general enrolment ( cum universus orbis
describeretur says the vulgar very answerably to the Greek Originals) as the
Rhemists read it. A time when every subject of the Roman Empire was to repair
to the head City of his family, there to list his name; and to profess ( ut
profiterentur, says the Vulgar) or make acknowledgment of his fealty and true
allegiance to the Prince in being. A thing not done at random, or by humane
providence, that by this means the Emperor might come to know, quot civium
sociorumque in Armis Tacit. Annal. lib. 1.
, the strength and number of his Subjects, as the Statists tell us; but by the
special dispensation and appointment of Almighty God. Though Christ had been
conceived in Nazareth, a City of Galilee; yet was he to be born in Bethlehem
the City of David. And thither was Joseph to repair, to be taxed (or enrolled
rather) with Mary his wife Luke 2.4, 5.
, that she being there delivered of her blessed burden, the word of God
fore-signifyed by the Prophet Micah, might be fulfilled: viz. that out of
Bethlehem-Judah there should come a Governor Micah 5.2. Mar. 2.5.
, which should rule over the house of Israel. The shutting of the Temple of
Ianus, and this general taxing or enrolment under the President-ship of
Cyrenius point us directly to the 35. year of Augustus his Empire, in which
CHRIST was born. And if it were esteemed (as it seems to be) so great an honor
unto Cicero, that this Augustus was born when he was Consul; ( Consulatui
Ciceronis non mediocre adjecit decus, natus eo anno D. Augustus Vel. Paterc.
hist. l. 2.
, says the Court Historian): how great an honor may we count it unto this
Augustus, that CHRIST the Son of God, the very brightness of his Father, was
born when he was Emperor? And as the year, so is the very month and day of our
Saviors birth transmitted to us from the best and purest times of the
Christian Church; though not recorded in the Scriptures. Theophilus
Caesariensis, who lived about the latter end of the second Century, does place
it on the eight of the Calends of January (which is the 25. of December) as we
now observe it: and reckons it as a festival of the Christian Church long
before his time. Natalem Domini quocunque die VIII. Calend. Januar. venerit,
celebrare debemus, as his own words are. And Nyssen though he name not the day
precisely, yet calls it (...), the famous day of Christian solemnity Greg. Nyss.
hom. de Christ. Nativ.
; and places it in that point of time, ((...), as he tells us there) in
which the days wax longer, and the nights grow shorter: which is (we know)
about the time of the Winter Solstice. In an old Arabic copy of Apostolic
Canons, it is especially appointed that the Anniversary feast of the Lords
Nativity be kept upon the 25. day of the first Canun (which is the same with
our December) on which day he was born. A Persian Calender or Ephemeris does
place it on the same day also. The Syriack Churches do the like, and so do the
Egyptian or Coptick Churches, as Mr. Gregory has observed out of their
Records: not to say any thing of Johannes Antiochenus, the Author of an old MS.
Cosmography, who does affirm as much for the East parts of the Roman Empire. A
day so highly esteemed in the former times, that the Greeks called it generally
(...), or the feast of Gods manifestation in the flesh; Chrysostom, (...)
Chrysostom. in Orat. de Philog.
, the Mother or Metropolis of all other festivals: another of the Eastern
Fathers, (...), the festival of the worlds salvation. A day of such a solemn
concourse in the Christian Church, that the Tyrants in the 10. Persecution made
choice thereof as an especial opportunity for committing the greater slaughter
of poor innocent souls: and therefore on that day ( in ipso natalis Dominici
die Neceph. Eccl. hist. l. 7. c. 6.
, as my Author has it) burnt down the Church of Nicomedia, the then Regal City
of the East, with all that were assembled in it for Gods public service. I
know great pains have been unprofitably took to no other purpose, but to prove
that Christ was born at some other time of the year, at least not on the day
which is now pretended. But the Arguments on which the disproof is founded are
so slight and trivial, that it were loss of labor to insist upon them.
Suffice it, that the Church had far better reason to celebrate the birthday of
the Son of God, then any of the sons of men to suppress the same.

And this I call the birthday of the Son of God, because from this day
forwards he was so indeed, though not publicly proclaimed or avowed for such,
till the day of his Baptism Mat. 3.17. Luke 3.22.
, when it was solemnly made known by a voice from heaven. The Word before, In
the beginning was the Word, Ioh. 1.1. The Word made flesh, and born of the
Virgin Mary, and by that birth, the only begotten Son of God full of grace and
truth, said the same Evangelist, v. 14. For though we did not look upon him as
the word made flesh, his being born in such a miraculous manner of an untouched
Virgin, would of it self assert him for the Son of God. So said the Angel
Gabriel, the first Evangelist Luc. 1.35.
, Therefore also that holy thing which shall be born of thee shall be called
the Son of God. The Son of God, as soon as born of the Virgin Mary: because
conceived and born in so strange a manner, so far above the course of nature,
that none but God, the God of nature could lay claim unto him. For here the
great miracle of the incarnation does receive improvement, in that the WORD was
not only made flesh, and born of a woman; but born of such a woman as was a
Virgin. That so it was we have the warrant of the Scripture. In the sixth month
the Angel Gabriel was sent from God to a City of Galilee named Nazareth Id. v.
26, 27.
, to a Virgin espoused to a man whose name was Joseph, of the house of David;
and the Virgins name was MARY. So far the Text informs us in the present
business, giving her in one verse twice the name of Virgin, the better to
imprint the same in our hearts and memories. And certainly it stood with reason
that it should be so. For although Miracles in themselves are above our reason,
because beyond the reach of all natural causes: yet does it stand with very
good reason, that since the WORD vouchsafed to descend so low* as to be born of
a woman, he should receive that birth from the purest Virgin, and be fashioned
in a womb which was unpolluted. The pious care of his Disciples did conceive it
fitting that his dead body should be laid in a Tomb or Sepulcher, where never
man was laid before Joh. 19 41.
. And was it not as fit, or fitter, that his living body great with Divinity
and a soul (for in him dwelt the fullness of the Godhead bodily Col. 2.9.
) should be conceived in such a womb which had not been defiled with the seed
of man, in whose most chaste embraces and unblamable dalliances, there is a
mixture of Concupiscence and carnal lusts. Most fit it was his Mother should be
like his Spouse; Cant. 4.12.
of whom we find it written in the Song of Solomon, that she is as a Garden
enclosed, a spring shut up, a fountain ^ealed. Besides, the means and method
of man's redemption was to hold some proportion with the means of his fall:
that so that Sex might have the honor of our restoration, which had been the
unhappy Author of our first calamity; that as by woman the Devil took his
opportunity to introduce death into the world (for the woman being deceived was
in the transgression, says St. Paul to Timothy 1 Timothy 2.14.
); so by a woman, and a Virgin (such as Eve was then) did Gods foreknowing will
determine that life, even life eternal should be born into it. Eve the first
woman out of an ambitious desire to be like to God, coveted after the forbidden
tree of good and evil. The second Eve, if I may so call her (as Christ is
called the second Adam, 1 Cor. 15.45.) out of an obedient desire that God might
be as one of us, did gladly bear in her womb the tree of life, of which
whosoever eats he shall live for ever Joh. 6.51.
. Eve, as her name imports, was the Mother of all living, of all that live
this temporal and mortal life, the life of nature: and MARY in due time became
the mother of that living Spirit, by whom we are begotten to the life of grace.
So true is that of Gregory surnamed Thaumaturgus, (...) Greg. Thaum. Sermon. de
Annunc. Virg.
, that from the same Sex came our weal and woe. To drive this Parallel further
yet. Eve at the time of the transgression was an untouched Virgin, a Virgin
though betrothed to her husband Adam, (for she was a Virgin espoused from her
first creation) when she conceived sin and brought forth iniquity: and Mary was
an espoused Virgin (espoused to a man whose name was Joseph) when she conceived
the Son of righteousness, and brought forth salvation. And as the first woman
conceived death by believing an evil Angel, without consulting with her
husband till the deed was done: so the espoused Virgin of the present Article,
conceived in her body the Lord of life, by believing the words and message of a
good Angel, her husband being not made privy to it, till he perceived she was
with child. Some reasons then there were why it should be so, why Christ our
Savior should be born of the purest Virgin, though those reasons do not make
it to be less a miracle; for nothing but a miracle and the holy Ghost, could
have begotten such a child upon such a Mother.

That by this means the miserable fall of man was to be repaired, it pleased
God to declare unto our wretched Parents before they were exiled from the
garden of Eden. It was the first and greatest comfort which was given unto
them, that the seed of the woman should break the head of the serpent Genesis 3.15.
, and that the serpent should but bruise the heel of the woman's seed; that is
to say, that there should one be born of the woman's seed, who by the sufferings
of his body, his inferior part, should overcome the powers of Hell, and set
man free from that captivity in which he was held bound by Satan. And as it was
the first in the general promise, so was it (as I think) the cleerest and most
evident light to point us out to the particular of bringing this great work to
pass by a Virgin-birth. Though Adam was the root of mankind, and lost himself
and his posterity by his disobedience, yet was the promise made to Eve a
Virgin; and not to Adams seed at all, nor any to be procreated from the seed of
man. It is a common resolution of the Schoolmen, that if Eve only had
transgressed, Adamo in innocentia permanente, Adam continuing still in his
first integrity, neither the souls of their posterity had been tainted with
original sin, nor their body made subject unto death Aquin. 1.2. qu. 11. Art.
5.
. It was in Adam that all die, as St* Paul has told us 1 Cor. ^5.22.
. It is in Adam that all die, but 'twas in Eve, that all should be made alive:
not in Eves person but her seed. The promise made to Eve a Virgin, that her
seed should break the serpents head* fore-signifyed, that our redeemer should
be born of a Virgin Mother: such as Eve was, when this first publication of
Gods will was made. A clearer evidence then which as to this particular, I
think is hardly to be found in the book of God: that so much celebrated place
of the Prophet Isaiah, Behold, a Virgin shall conceive, not being primarily
intended of the birth of CHRIST, though in his birth accomplished in a more
excellent manner, then first intended by the Prophet. The estate of Ahaz King
of Judah at that time, stood this; A storm was threatened to his Kingdom from
the joint forces of Rezin King of Syria, and Pekah King of Samaria: which so
dismayed the hearts of Ahaz and of all his people, that they were as the trees
of the wood moved with the wind Isa. 7.2.
, as the text informs us, not knowing upon what to fasten, nor for what to
hope. In this great consternation comes Isaiah to them with a message from God,
assuring them of the speedy destruction of those Kings whom they so much
feared. But this when Ahaz durst not credit, nor would be moved to ask a sign
from God to confirm his faith, and to assure himself of a quick deliveranc^:
it pleased God to give him this by the mouth of the Prophet, Behold a Virgin
shall conceive and bear a Son, and shall call his name Immanuel. Butter and
honey shall he eat, that he may know to refuse the evil, and choose the good.
For before the child shall know to refuse the evil, and choose the good, the
Land that thou abhorrest shall be forsaken of both her Kings Id. v. 14, 15, 16.
. To say that this was literally and originally meant of the birth of CHRIST,
is not consistent with the case and circumstances of the present business. The
King and people were in danger of a present war, and nothing but the hope of a
present deliverance was able to revive their desparing hearts. And what sign
could it be to confirm that hope, that after 700. years and upwards (for so
long time there was between the death of Ahaz and the birth of Christ) a Virgin
should conceive and bring forth a Son. Cold comfort could there be in this to
that generation, who could not hope for so long life as to see the wonder. So
that the literal meaning of the Prophecy is most like to be, that before some
noted Virgin then of fame and credit, or else within that space of time that
any who was then a Virgin should conceive a child according to the ordinary
course of nature; and that that child should be of age to know good from evil,
the two Kings spoken of before should be both destroyed. That so it is, seems
very evident to me by the success of the business. For in the next Chapter we
find that Isaiah went unto the Prophetess, (perhaps the Virgin spoken of in
the former passages) and she conceived and bare a Son, whom the Lord commanded
to be called Maher-shalal-hash-baz Isa. 8.3, 4.
; and gives this reason for the name, being so unusual, that before the child
shall have the knowledge to cry my Father, and my Mother (which is the same
with that of refusing the evil and choosing the good) the riches of Damascus
and the spoil of Samaria shall be taken away before the King of Assyria. And
so it proved in the event. For before this Maher-shalal-hash-baz so conceived
and born, was able to distinguish of meats, or know his Father and Mother from
other people; was the word fulfilled which God had spoken by the Prophet
touching their deliverance: Pekah being slain by Hoseah the son of Elah, and
Rezin by Tiglath-Pilesar the King of Assyria, within two or three years after
the said sign was given. Of which see a King. 16.5, 6, 7, etc. and Chron.
17.1. But then we must observe withal, that this Prophecy being thus
fulfilled in the literal sense, according to the Prophets intent and purpose,
contained in it a more mystical meaning according to the secret purpose of
Almighty God: this temporal deliverance of Ahaz and the house of Judah from the
hands of two such potent enemies, being a type or figure of that spiritual and
eternal deliverance which he intended unto them and to all mankind from the
tyranny of sin and Satan. Which secret will and purpose of Almighty God, being
made known to the Evangelist by the holy Ghost, he might and did apply it to
the birth of Christ Mat. 1.22, 23.
, born of a most immaculate Virgin, as a more punctual fulfilling of that
sacred Prophecy, then what before had happened in the days of Ahaz.

But MARY as she was a Virgin, a Virgin and the heir of the promise which was
made to Eve, and made to Eve when she was yet a Virgin, though espoused to
Adam: so was she also a daughter, if not an heir to all those blessings, which
God had promised unto David; the heir as some suppose of the Royal Fami^y, and
thereby gave our Savior an unquestioned title to the Realm of Iewry. But this
I take to be a supposition so ill grounded (though I see great pains taken in
defense thereof) that I dare not lay any part of my building on it. It Is true,
the Jews, who knew of his descent from David, and greedily laid hold upon all
occasions for the recovery of their lost liberties, sought after him to make
him King Joh. 6 15.
. But this they did not on an opinion that he was the next heir unto the Crown,
but because they thought him best able to make good the Title. For having seen
him feed so many thousands of men with no more provision, then only a few Barley
loaves and two small fishes: they presently conceived that he was able to raise
victuals for a greater Army, then could be possibly withstood by the powers of
Rome. The text and context make this plain to a Vulgar Reader. For no sooner
had the people beheld the miracle, but presently they said, of a truth this was
the Prophet Ibid. v. 14.
, whom they did expect: and if a Prophet, and that Prophet whom they did
expect, then who more fit then he to be made their King? Nor to say truth, was
our Redeemer a Descendent of the Royal line, but the collateral line of David,
none of which ever claimed the Kingdom, or the title of King, or exercised any
special power, save Zorobabel only, and that but temporary for the better
settling of the people after the Captivity. The Crown being entailed on Solomon
and his posterity, ended in Ieconiah, the last King of that race: on whom this
curse was laid by the Lord himself, that no man of his seed should prosper Jer.
22.30.
. CHRIST therefore could not be of the seed of that wretched Prince, because we
know his work did prosper in his hands, and that he is the Author of all
prosperity both to Jew and Gentile. And more then so, the self same Prophet
tells us in the following chapter, that the Lord would raise unto David a
righteous branch, a King which should both reign and prosper; which is directly
contradictory to that before: whose name should be the Lord our righteousness
Chapter 23.6, 7.
; and must be meant of Christ and of none but him. Though Joseph might
naturally spring from this Ieconiah, (though it remain a question undecided to
this very day; whether Salathiel were his natural or adopted son;) yet this
derives no title unto CHRIST our Savior; who was not of the seed of Joseph,
though supposed his son. Our Saviors own direct line by his Virgin Mother was
not from Solomon, but Nathan, the son of David; of whom the holy Ghost says
nothing as concerning the Kingdom; for Mary was the daughter of Heli, the son
of Matthat, the son of Levi, and so forth ascendendo, till we come to Adam,
according as it is laid down in the third of Luke. And this I call the line of
Christ by his Virgin Mother, on the authority of St. Augustine in some tracts
of his, the Author of the Book called De ortu Virginis, extant amongst the
works of Hierome, and many late Writers of good credit: besides the testimony
of Rabbi Haccanas, the son of Nehemiah, a Doctor of great esteem amongst the
Jews: Cited by Speed in his Tract of Genealog. c. 7.
who tells us, that there was a Virgin in Bethlehem Judah, whose name was
Mary, the daughter of Heli, of the kindred of Zerubbabel the son of Salathiel,
of the Tribe of Judah, who was betrothed to one Joseph of the same kindred and
Tribe. Nor can I see, to what end St. Luke writing after St. Matthew, and
having, doubtless, seen his Gospel, should make another pedigree for Joseph
then was made already, and that so different from it in the whole composure
from Christ to David. I take it therefore for a certain and undoubted truth,
that St. Luke reckons the descent of our Lord and Savior, by the line of his
Mother the daughter of Heli, ( Ioachim he is called in our Vulgar stories) who
is said to be the Father of Joseph, because he married his said daughter, as
Joseph is there said to be the Father of Christ, because he was husband to his
Mother. Some other difference there is in these two Genealogies, as that St.
Matthew goes no higher then Abraham, and St. Luke follows his as high as
Adam: the reason of the which is both plain and plausible. For Matthew being
himself a Jew, and writing his Gospel originally in the Hebrew language, for
the instruction of that people: could not bethink himself of a better way to
gain upon them, then to make proof that Christ our blessed Savior was the Son
of Abraham, in whose seed the whole Nation did expect their blessedness. And on
the other side St. Luke being by birth a Gentile, of the City of Antioch, and
so by consequence not within the Covenant which was made to Abraham, carries
on the descent of Christ as high as Adam, who was the common Father both of
Jews and Gentiles: to show that even the Gentiles were within the Covenant
which was made in Paradise, touching the restoration of lost man by the
Promised seed.

For Mary's birth and parentage, I think this sufficient. A little more may
here be added of the title of Virgin; because called in this Article the
Virgin, as by way of eminency. The Virgin Mary, says the Article, and not a
Virgin known or called by the name of Mary. Somewhat there is in this, there is
no doubt of that: whether so much as many do from hence infer, may be made a
question. That she continued still a Virgin after Christ's nativity, I am well
resolved of: notwithstanding all the cavils made against it by the Ebionites,
Helvidius, Iovinian, and the Eunomian Heretics. For who can think that Joseph
after such a revelation from the God of Heaven, that she had conceived with
child of the holy Ghost, should offer to converse with her in a conjugal
manner: or that the blessed Virgin, if he had attempted it, would have
permitted that pure womb, which had been made a Temple of the holy Ghost, to be
polluted and profaned with the lust of man? The piety of both parties is a
forcible argument to free them from an act so different from all sense of
piety. And yet Helvidius and his fellows had some Scripture for it; for even
the Devil could come in with his Scriptum est Mat. 4.6.
, namely that passage in St. Matthew, where it is said of Joseph, that he knew
her not till she had brought forth her first born son Mat. 1.25.
. A first born son, say they, does imply a second; and his not knowing her till
then does tacitly import that he knew her afterward. And this they fortify
with that in the 6. of Mark* where not only James and Judah and Ioses and Simon
are called his Brethren, but his sisters also are affirmed to be then alive.
But the answer unto these Objections was made long ago, St. Hierome in his
tractate against Helvidius having fully canvassed them. For first, the first
begotten or first born, does imply no second; that being first, not which has
other things coming after it, but which has nothing going before it. Et primus
ante quem nullus Hieron. advers. Helvid.
, as the Father has it. And this appears most evidently by the law of Moses,
by which the first born of every creature was to be offered unto God Exodus 13.2.
. The first born not in reference unto those that are to come after, for then
the owner of a flock or herd of cattle might have put off the sacrifice or
oblation of the first born of his sheep or kine til he were sure to have a new
increase in the place thereof: which the Law by no means would permit. And thus
we say in common speech, that Queen Jane Seymour dyed of her first child, and
that King Edward the fifth was murdered in the first year of his reign: where
past all doubt neither Jane Seymour had more children, nor King Edward reigned
more years then the first alone. And for the argument from the word until, (or
donec peperit, in the Latin) it implies no such matter as is thence collected:
the word not having always such an influence as to imply a thing done after,
because not before. When Christ promised his Disciples to be with them always,
till the end of the world Mat. 28.20.
: think we his meaning was to forsake them then, that they should neither be
with him, nor he with them? I trow no man of wit will say it. And when the Lord
said unto his CHRIST, Sit thou on my right hand until I make thine enemies thy
footstool Psalm. 110.1.
: may we conclude, that when death, the last enemy shall be overcome, that he
shall sit no longer at the Lords right hand. I hope none dare think it. More
instances of this kind might be easily had, to show the weakness of this
inference, were not these sufficient. And for the Brothers and Sisters
mentioned by St. Mark, either they were Joseph's children by a former wife, as
Irenaeus Iren. adv. haer. l. 1. c. 25.
, and likewise all the Greek Fathers downwards, St. Hilarie and St. Ambrose
amongst the Latins are of opinion: or else his nearest kinsmen (as St. Hierome
thinks) which in the Idiom of the Jews were accounted Brethren Hieron. adv.
Helvid.
.

But on the other side our great Masters in the Church of Rome, will not only
have her to continue a Virgin, post partum, after the birth, as to the purity
of her mind; but also in partu* in the birth, as to the integrity of her body.
Durand one of their chief Schoolmen will needs have it so, not thinking it a
sufficient honor to her to be still a Virgin, non solum carentia experientiae
delectationis Venereae, not only by an inexperience of all fleshly pleasure,
sed etiam membri corporalis integritate Durand. l. 4. d. 44. qu. 6.
, but in the clausure of her womb, the dotres whereof (as they conceive) were
not opened by it. And unto this most of the great Rabbis of that Church do
full well agree. Assuredly these men with a little help might in time come to be
of the Turks opinion: who out of a Reverent esteem which they have of Christ
will not conceive him to be born or begotten, according to the course of
nature: but that the Virgin did conceive him by the smell of a Rose, and after
bare him at her breasts. But herein they run cross to the ancient Writers, who
though they constantly maintained the perpetual Virginity of the Mother of
Christ, yet such a corporal integrity in the act of Childbirth, as these men
idly dream of, did they never hold. Tertullian very aptly notes, that she was
Virgo a viro, non virgo a partu Tertul. de carn. Chri. in fine.
, a Virgin in respect that she knew not man, and yet no Virgin in regard of her
bearing a child: which though it were conceived in a wonderful manner, yet ipse
patefacti corporis lege, he came into the world by the open way. Pamelius in
his notes accounts this and some other passages to this purpose amongst the
Paradoxes of Tertullian. So does Rhenanus too Rhenan. in Arg. l. de Car. Chr.
, a more modern censurer, and yet confesses that St. Ambrose was of this
opinion; so was St. Hierome too in his second Book against the Pelagians, who
holds that Christ first opened those secret passages, though he after shut them
up again. According to the judgment of which ancient writers (for those which
followed them in time varyed somewhat from them) it is the common resolution of
the Protestant Schools, that though Christ when he was born of his Virgin
Mother, opened the passages of her womb, as all children do, yet she continued
still a Virgin, because her mind was free from the thoughts of lust, and that
she had conceived of the holy Ghost: nay that he may more properly be said to
have opened the womb of Mary his mother, then any other first born do, because
he found it shut at the time of his birth, which the first born of the sons of
men do not. And being it is confessed by the greatest Schoolmen, that there may
be an opening of the womb, without the loss of Virginity, as in the cure of
some diseases, or on such an accident of which St. Augustine speaks in his
first book De Civit. dei. c. 18. I should much wonder at the stiffenesse of the
Papists in it, but that I know they lay it for a ground work of their doctrine
of transubstantiation, and the local being of his body in more places at a time
then one, by taking from it all the properties of a natural body.

But to say truth, they well may free Christ's body from the bands of nature,
when they have freed his mother from the bands of sin: not from the sins only
of an higher nature, but even from slight and venial sins, as they use to call
them; nor yet from actual sins only, but original also. To what this great
exemption tends, we shall see anon. In the mean time we may take notice that
this exemption from the guilt of original sin, is but a new opinion taken up of
late, and not yet generally agreed on amongst them: there having been great
conflicts about this privilege, between Scotus and the Franciscans on the one
side, Aquinas and the Dominicans on the other. But in the end, the devotions of
the common people being strongly bent unto the service of our Lady, the
Franciscans carried it. Sixtus the 4. who had been formerly of that Order, not
only ratifying by his Bulls their doctrine of her immaculate conception, Ann.
1476. But for the further glory of it confirming a new festival on the 8* of
December, which in honor of her said conception the Canons of the Church of
Lions had of late begun. After when as the doctrine of original sin was
agitated and debated in the Council of Trent, this Controversy was as hotly
followed, as if the Pope had never determined it. Nor would the Council bring
it unto any conclusion, for fear of giving offense to the side condemned
Council. Trident. Sess. 5.
; and therefore very warily did so state the point, as neither to exempt the
Virgin from original sin, nor include her under the obnoxiousness and guilt
thereof. Declarat Synodus non sibi esse propositum decreto hoc (they mean the
Canons which they made touching that particular) B. Virginem comprehendere. For
my part, I am loath to rob this most happy instrument of our Redemption, of any
privilege or exemption, whatsoever it be, which may consist with the analogy
of faith, and the texts of Scripture. But when I find in holy Scripture, that
CHRIST came into the world to save sinners 1 Timothy 1.15
, and that the Virgin did rejoice in God her Savior Luke 1.47.
; either I must conclude that she was a sinner, (if guilty only of original
sin, it shall serve my turn) or else that she needed not a Savior. And when I
read it in Nicephorus that she dyed in the 59. year of her age, and was
attended to her grave by all the Apostles met together, not by chance, but
miracle Nicep. Histor. Eccl. l. 2
; I cannot but conclude her under the Law of sin, or else she had not been
subject to the stroke of death; which is the wages of sin Romans 6.23.
as St. Paul has told us. No Savior, if no sinner; if no sin, no death. It
must be either both or none, there is no question of it. But it is easy to
discern what this tends unto; I mean the great care taken by the Church of
Rome, to free this blessed woman from all manner of sin and humane infirmity.
Their meaning is to seat her in the throne of heaven, and place her in the
Mediatorship between God and man, whereof she were not capable, if she were a
sinner.

By what degrees they came at last unto this height is not hard to show. They
went it seems, on that old Philosophical maxim, that the way to make
straight a crooked stick, was to bend it quite the other way. This way was
followed first on mistaken zeal, and afterward pursued upon worldly prudence,
Helvidius and those other Heretics before remembered, would not allow her just
attribute, the Virgin Mary, affirming with an high hand of impudence, eam post
Christum natum viro suo fuisse commixtam, that after our Redeemers birth she
was known by Joseph. This was encountered presently with another extreme, the
writers of the following times not only making her a Virgin in all mental
purity, but in corporal integrity also, Durand. l. 4. d. 44. qu. 6.
contrary to the judgment of Tertullian, Ambrose, Hierom, before remembered, and
generally of the Greek Fathers, hardly one excepted: the Schoolmen thereupon
devising this trim distinction, to reconcile those ancients to their new
opinion, that Christ was brought into the world, non fractione aliqua
membrorum, sed dilatatione meatuum Maldonas. in Luke 2.
. The Antidicomaritani, an old brood of Heretics, divested her (as their name
imports) of all manner of righteousness, making her not more holy then another
woman Epiphan. advers. haeres.
. And on the other side the Collyridians in dislike of this peevish humor,
placed her above the reach of nature, afforded her divine honors, a dressing
up a four square Chariot, ((...), as my Author calls it) did thereon sacrifice
unto her as an heavenly Deity Id. ibid. haeres. 79.
. The Schoolmen treading in the steps of these Collyridians, and having little
else to do then to broach new fancies, first freed her from all mortal, then
from venial sins; from actual first, and after from original also. And this the
Champions of that Church have more hotly followed, because the Magdeburgians
and some other of the Protestant Doctors, have made a muster of many crimes (
infirmities they might have called them, had they been so pleased) with which
they do as hotly charge her. Nestorius once Patriarch of Constantinople, though
he allowed her the title of (...), or the Mother of Christ; would not allow
her to be called (...), or the Mother of God (and it is an expression I confess,
which at the first hearing does not sound so handsomely). In opposition unto
whom, Cyrill of Alexandria and the rest of the Prelates at that time (having
condemned his doctrine of the two natures in Christ, in the third General
Council) did heap upon her all those Attributes, which might manifest their
dislike of him and his cause together. Insomuch as Cyril does not stick to call
her in these early days Cyr. com. Nestor. Hom. 6.
, pretiosum totius orbis thesaurum, i. e. the most precious treasure of the
world, a lamp which cannot be put out, the crown of Chastity, the very scepter
of true doctrine, (sceptrum verae doctrinae) and not the scepter of the
Catholic faith as our Rhemists read it Annot. in Act. 1.14.
. And so far there was no harm done, as long as those of Rome would contain
themselves within the bounds prescribed by the ancient Fathers, whose pious
flourishes, devout meditations, and Rhetorical Apostrophe's, aimed at nothing
else, then the commemoration of her faith and piety. But let us look on the
extravagancies of the writers of succeeding times, and we shall find, that
Anselm gives this reason, why Christ, when ascended, left his Mother here, Ne
curiae coelesti veniret in dubium, etc. Anselm. de excel. B. Virg. ^. 17.
lest else the Court of heaven should have been distracted, whom they should
first go out to meet, their Lord, or their Lady. That Bernardin Senensis does
not stick to say, Mariam plura fecisse Deo, quam fecit Deus toti generi humano,
that she did more to Christ in being his Mother Bern. Senens. Sermon. 61.
, then Christ to all mankind in being their Savior. That Gabriel Biel a
Schoolman of good name and credit, has shared the government of the world
betwixt God and her; God keeping Justice to himself, Misericordia Virgini
concessa Biel in Canone Missae. Sect. 80.
, and left to her the free dispensing of his Mercies. That Petrus Damianus tells
us, that when she mediates with her Son for any of her special votaries, Non
rogat ut Ancilla, sed imperat ut Domina De Nativit. B. Mariae Sermon.
, she begs not of him as a handmaid, but commands as a Mistress: that
Bonaventure in composing our Ladies Psalter, has applied to her, whatever was
intended by the holy Ghost to the advancement of the honor of her Lord and
Savior Psalt. Bonavent. Edit. An. 1596.
: that she is called frequently in their public Rituals, Matter misericordiae,
Matter gratiae, Regina coeli, with other the like glorious title which she dares
not own: that in the vulgar translation made Authentic by the Council of
Trent, in stead of He shall break thy head Genesis 3.15.
which relates to Christ, they read it, Ipsa conteret caput tuam, she shall
break thy head, which many of their Commentators do refer to her: that
Bellarmine makes at all, no difference betwixt the Veneration which is due to
her, and that which does belong unto Christ, as man: and finally that the
vulgar sort in point of practice (for needs such practice must ensue on such
desperate doctrines) do use to say so many Ave Mary's for one single Pater
noster Relation of Sr. Edw. Sandys
, hear day by day so many masses of our Ladies, and not one of Christ's, adorn
her images with all cost and cunning which man's wit can reach, whilst his poor
Statues stand neglected as not worth the looking after. Wonder it is they have
not practiced on the Creed, and told us how the Apostles had mistook the matter
when they drew it up, and that it was not Jesus Christ but the Virgin Mary that
suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead and buried for the sins of
man. Such are, and such have been the most known repugnancies, which have found
entertainment in the Christian world, touching the Privileges and
Prierogatives of this blessed woman. Between these two extremes is the virtue
placed which I persuade my self, has been most happily preserved in the Church
of England, retaining still two annual feasts instituted in the best times to
her name and memory. We gladly give her all the honor which is due unto her,
account her for the most blessed of all women Luke 1.42.
, a choice and most selected Temple of the holy Ghost, and happiest instrument
of man's good, which has descended simply from the loins of Adam: but dare not
give her divine honor, by erecting Altars to her service, going in pilgrimage
to her shrines, or pouring forth our prayers unto her. Finally we resolve with
Epiphanius Epiphan. in haeres. 79.
, (...), etc. Let the blessed Virgin be had in reverence, but God only
worshipped; let her possess principal place in our good opinions, so she have
none in our devotions. But it is time to leave the Mother, and return again
unto the Son.

Now that which in this Article is expressed by the present words, Natus ex
Virgin Maria, that is to say, born of the Virgin Mary, in that of Nice is thus
delivered, and was made man. Some Heretics had formerly called this truth in
question, affirming that our Saviors body was not true and real, but only an
ayery and imaginary body, as did the Marcionites; others, that he received not
his humane being of the Virgin Mary, but brought his body from the heavens, and
only passed through her womb, (...), as through a Conduit pipe; as Valentinian
Epiphan. advers. Valent.
: as if our blessed Lord and Savior had only borrowed for a time the shape of
man, ther^in to act his woeful tragedy on the public Theater of the world, and
made the Virgins womb his trying house. And some again there were who did
conceive his body to be free from passion, maintaining that it was
impassibilis, and that he was not subject to those natural frailties and
infirmities, which are incident to the Sons of men by the ordinary course of
nature. To meet with these and other Heretics of this kind, the Fathers in the
Nicene Council, expressed our Saviors being born of the Virgin Mary, which
every Heretic had wrested to his proper sense, in words which might more fully
signify the truth and reality of his taking of our flesh upon him, in words
which were not capable of so many evasions, declaring thus, that being
incarnate by the holy Ghost of the Virgin Mary, factus est homo, he was made
man; and consequently was made subject unto those infirmities, which are
inseparably annexed to our humane nature. This, that which positively is
affirmed by the Apostle in his Epistle to the Hebrews Heb. 4.15.
, where it is said, that we have not such an high Priest which cannot be
touched with the feeling of our infirmities, but was in all points tempted like
as we are, yet without sin. The high Priest which God gave us in the time of
the Gospel, was to be such as those he gave unto his people in the time of the
Law; one who could have compassion on the ignorant, and on them* that are out
of the way, for that he himself is compassed also with infirmities Heb. 5.2.
. The difference only stood in this, that our Saviors passions and infirmities
were free from sin, and neither did proceed from sin or incline him to it, as
do the passions and infirmities of men merely natural; which is the meaning of
St. Paul in the place aforesaid, where he affirms of our high Priest, that he
was tempted, that is to say, afflicted, tried and proved in all things, like as
we are, save only that it was without sin, or sinful motions. And to this truth
the Catholic Doctors of the Church do attest unanimously. St. Ambrose thus,
CHRIST, says he, took upon him not the show, but the truth, and reality of the
flesh; what then? Debuit ergo et dolorem suscipere ut vinceret tristitiam
Ambros. in Luc. l. 10.
, non excluderet; he therefore was to have a sense of humane sorrows, that he
might overcome them, not exclude them only. Fulgentius goes to work more
plainly Fulgent. ad Thrasimund. 3.
, Nunc oftendendum est, says he, etc. Now must we show, that the passions of
grief, sorrow, fear, etc. do properly pertain unto the soul; and that our
Savior did endure them all in his humane soul, ut veram totam^ in se cum suis
infirmitatibus hominis demonstraret suscepti substantiam, that he might show in
himself the true and whole substance of man accompanied with its infirmities.
The fathers of the Greek Church do affirm the same Cyr. Thesaur. l. 10. c. 3.
When thon hear (says Cyril) that Christ wept, feared, and sorrowed,
acknowledge him to be a true man, and ascribe these things to the nature of
man: for Christ took a mortal body subject to all the passions of nature, sin
always excepted. Which when he had affirmed in thesi, he does thus infer, Et
ita singulas passiones carnis, etc. Thus shall thou find all the passions or
affections of the flesh to be stirred in Christ, but without sin, that being so
stirred up they might be repressed, and our nature reformed to the better. But
none of all the Ancients state the point more clearly then John Damascene, in
his 3. book De fide orthodoxa Damasc^n l. 3. c. 20.
, where he tells us this, We confess, says he, that Christ did take unto him
all natural and blameless passions: for he assumed the whole man, and all that
pertained to man, save sin. Natural and blameless passions are those which are
not properly in our power, and whatsoever entered into man's life through the
occasion of (Adams) sin, as hunger, thirst, weakness, labor, weeping,
shunning of death, fear, agony, whence came sweat with drops of blood. These
things are in all men by nature; and therefore Christ took all these to him,
that he might sanctify them all. With this agrees the distinction of the
latter Schoolmen, who divide the infirmities of the flesh into natural, and
personal Field of the Chapter l. 5. c. 17.
, calling those natural which follow the whole nature of man, as hunger,
thirst, labor, weariness, and even death it self; those personal which arise
out of some defect or imperfection in the constitution of the body, or disorder
of diet, or from some other outward cause, as Agues, Leprosies, and the like.
Then they infer, that all the frailties and infirmities (you may call them
punishments if you will, as indeed they are) that are from without, and are
common to the whole nature of man, were taken with our flesh by Christ, who
came to be a Savior of all men, without respect of persons; but such as flow
from sin dwelling within, or proceed from particular causes and are proper only
unto some, those he took not on him. And of these passions and infirmities
attendant on Christ's humane nature, I have spoke the rather in this place,
because it does so manifestly conduce to the better understanding of the
following Article, viz. his sufferings of all sorts under Pontius Pilate.

ARTICLE V. Of the Fifth ARTICLE OF THE CREED Ascribed to St. PHILIP. (...). i.
e. Passus est sub Pontio Pilato; crusifixus, mortuus, and sepultus. i. e.
Suffered under Ponce Pilate, was crucified, dead, and buried.
CHAP. V. Of the sufferings of our Savior under Pontius Pilate; and first of
those temptations which he suffered at the hands of the Devil.
FOr the finding out of the time of our Saviors Birth, St. Luke has given us
these two notes and characters, the Presidentship of Cyrenius over Syria Luke
2.1, 2.
, and the taxing of all the world by Augustus Caesar, in the time of his (
Cyrenius) government. And for the finding out the time of our Saviors
sufferings, he has given us most undoubted notes also, such as cannot fail us.
Luke 3.1, 2.
In the fifteenth year (says he) of Tiberius Caesar, Pontius Pilate being
Governor of Judaea, and Herod being Tetrarch of Galilee, his brother Philip of
Iturea, and Lysanias of Abylene, Annas and Caiaphas being High Priests, the
Word of God came unto John the son of Zacharias in the Wilderness: which was
the first year of our Saviors Ministry, and consequently of those sufferings,
whereof there has been any notice taken in the Book of God. Now in this
punctual list of names, that of most consideration in this present business is
Pontius Pilates; being only mentioned in the Creed: of whom we shall say
somewhat in the way of preamble, his name not being inserted here for nothing;
and then descend unto our Observations on the present Article. But first we
will remove a rub that has stumbled many, which is the making of Annas and
Caiaphas to be both high Priests at the same time, being a thing so plainly
contrary both to the law and practice of the Jewish state. Certum est duos
simul Pontifices eodem simul tempore Sacerdotium nunquam occupasse Calvin in
Harmon. Evangel.
. And so much is confessed by Calvin, though in the salving of the difficulty
he mistakes the matter: affirming contrary to the Evangelist, non esse eundem
ambobus titulum, that they did not both enjoy the Title, but that Caiaphas did
suffer Annas, who was his Father in law, to participate in the honor with him,
and be half-sharer as it were in that eminent dignity. As wide as this shoots
the great Cardinal Baronius Baron. Annal. Eccl. An. 31. n.
, who will have Annas be the high Priest properly, and Caiaphas to be called so
only, because he was one of the heads of those 24 Orders, into which David had
divided the sons of Aaron: whereas his own Vulgar could inform him, that those
heads are always called Primarii Sacerdotes, and Principes Sacerdotum, the
chief Priests as our English reads it, but Summi Sacerdotes, or the high
Priests, never. Nor does Eusebius shoot much nearer, (and I wonder at it) who
does salve it thus, Eusebius. Eccle. hist. l. 1. c 11.
(...), etc. i. e. that Christ began his Ministry under Annas, and ended it
under Caiaphas, about four years after: whereas it is manifest by Josephus whom
Eusebius cites, that Annas was removed from the high Priesthood by Valerius
Gratus Joseph. Ant. Iud. l. 18.3.
, being then Lord Lieutenant of the Province of Iewry, who left that Government
to Pontius Pilate in the twelfth year of Tiberius Caesar, being three years at
least before the beginning of our Saviors ministry. Others conceive that
Annas only was high Priest, and that Caiaphas was his Sagan, or the second high
Priest Ios. Scal. in Prolegom. ad Eusebius. Chron.
, i. e. his Coadjutor or Assistant, (which being he was his son in law, may not
seem unprobable); such an Assistant in dispatch of the public service, as the
Syncellus of late times was to the Patriarchs of Constantinople. But that which
seems most probable in my opinion, his, that Annas was high Priest de jure, and
Caiaphas, de facto. For howsoever Annas was put out by Valerius Gratus, yet
being once consecrated to that Office he was still high Priest de jure, as in
point of right, and so esteemed of by the Jews, to whom such innovations in
their forms of Government were not very pleasing; and that Caiaphas though high
Priest de facto, did yet ascribe so much to the right of Annas, as to let him
have a leading power in all great affairs. Which appears evidently in this,
that Christ was carried first to the house of Annas, and examined there Joh.
18. v. 13. and 24.
, and after sent by him to the house of Caiaphas, to which the chief Priests,
Scribes and Pharisees were convened together. And now to come to Pontius
Pilate, he was made Governor of Iudaea (as before was said) in the twelfth year
of Tiberius Caesar, upon the calling back of Valerius Gratus. A man he was of
an austere and rigid nature, Vir pertinaci duroque ingenio, as it is in Philo
Philo de legate, ad Caium.
, and for the first essay of his future Government, had caused the images of
Caesar to be secretly brought into Jerusalem, with an intent no doubt to place
them in the holy Temple Joseph. de bell. Iud. l. 2. c. 8.
. This caused a great tumult in the City, and the Country people joining with
them, they went altogether to him to Caesarea desiring Pilate to remove those
Images, and to preserve the ancient laws and liberties of their Country. Which
when he stiffly did refuse to give ear unto, and that the Jews as stoutly were
resolved not to be denied, they offered him with one consent their naked
throats, protesting openly (with great alacrity and consent) that they had
rather be all cut in pieces then permit the Law of God to be so defiled. At
sight whereof he did let fall his resolution, and in reward of such a brave and
noble courage, (especially not knowing otherwise how to quiet the people) he
was contented to remove them; which was done accordingly. Another time says
the same Josephus, he had a mind to rob the Corban, or the public treasure of
the Temple, under pretense of making Conduits in the City Id. ibid. and A^i. l.
18. c. 4.
. Which when the people understood, they rose up in a tumult, and being called
to appear before him, sitting in his Tribunal or Judgment Seat, he caused the
Soldiers of his Guard to fall upon them, not with swords but staves, who
wounded many, and killed some; and for the rest, falling on one another in an
hasty flight (as commonly men do in such affrightments) they came unto a
wretched and calamitous end. Such another wicked and ungodly act was the
slaughter of the Galileans, who being more tender conscienced then the rest of
the Jews, would not (as they did) offer sacrifice for the health of the Romans,
and therefore came not to the Temple, the place of sacrifice, but held their
Congregations, and performed their sacrifices by themselves apart Baron Annal.
Eccl.
. This coming unto Pilates ear, and notice being given withal when they met
together, he caused his men of war to fall upon them, and most cruelly put them
to the sword. And these were those poor Galileans which the Gospel speaks of
Luke 13.1.
, whose blood Pilate is there said to have intermingled with their Sacrifices.
This was not long before the time of our Saviors death, that is to say, about
the third year of his Ministry. So that being in himself of a barbarous and
cruel nature, and fleshed in a continual course of shedding blood, he was the
more like to serve the turn of those murderous Jews, whom nothing else would
satisfy but the death of the Savior, their crucifying of their long expected
Messiah. What became of him afterward, I shall let you know toward the
conclusion of this Article, when he had put an end, by death, to those many
temptations and afflictions which our Savior suffered, during the time of his
command. This is enough by the way of Preamble to give the reader a short touch
and character of him: and so to let him see with what truth and plainness S.
Austin tells us of the man August. Sermon. de Temp. 131.
, that he was put into the Creed or Symbol, not for the merit of his person, (
propter signationem temporis, non propter dignitatem personae, as the Father
has it) but for the pointing out of the time of our Saviors passion; which he
does also touch at in his Encheiridion to Laurentius, cap. 5. And so much
briefly shall suffice for this present time touching the life and manners of
this Pontius Pilate, under whom CHRIST suffered; let us next look upon Christ's
sufferings under Pontius Pilate.

Now for the sufferings of our Savior they may be principally divided into
internal and external; the inward or internal being either temptations or
afflictions, the outward or external, either shame or corporal punishments: and
these again may be considered either as being inflicted on him before his
crucifying, or in the act of crucifixion. Of these the first were those
temptations which were laid before him by the Devil, immediately upon his
Baptism, at the performance of which ceremony he was acknowledged by John
Baptist to be the Lamb of God which takes away the sins of the world Joh. 1.29
; anointed for his following Ministry by the unction of the holy Spirit,
descending visibly upon him in the shape of a dove; and publicly proclaimed by
a voice from heaven to be the beloved Son of God in whom he was well pleased
Mat. 3.16, 17.
. This is the first alarm which the Devil took, and it concerned him to betake
himself to his weapons presently. The Devil was an expert warrier, and was
resolved not to be set upon in his own Dominions, but to give the first blow,
as we use to say, and take the enemy whom he feared, at the best advantages
which were presented, and as unprovided as he could. And therefore he drew
after him into the Wilderness of Iudaea, into which our Savior had been led by
the holy Ghost. Mat. 4.1.
(...), He was led into the Wilderness by the Spirit, as St. Matthew has it,
that is to say, a Spiritu Sanctitatis, as the Translatour of the Syriack,
(...), by the holy Spirit, as we read in Chrysostom. And so no question but it
was. For by what spirit else but the Spirit of God could he be led into the
Wilderness, to whom all other spirits in the world were subject, as they
themselves confess in sundry places of the Gospel? especially considering that
the word is a word of violence, such as our Lord and Savior was not subject
to. For though (...) in St. Matthew be a word more gentle, and may imply a
peaceable and quiet leading; yet in St. Mark we find, (...), that he was
driven into the Wilderness by the Spirit: the holy Ghost or Spirit of God
conducting him into the Desert, half against his will; that is to say, with
such reluctance in his will (considering to what end he was carried thither,
which was ut tentaretur a Diabulo, that he might be tempted of the Devil) as
many of Gods Saints have found within themselves, distracted between hope and
fear, upon the undertaking of some dangerous enterprise. Of which St.
Chrysostom in his Homilies on St. Matthew Chrysostom. in Mat. 4.
gives us this good note, that we are not rashly and unadvisedly to thrust our
selves into temptations; which is a thing so contrary to Christ's example,
though we are bound by his example to resist temptations, as often as the Devil
does suggest them to us. In which it is a great part of our Christian duty to
call upon the Lord our God, that he would be pleased not to lead us into
temptation, or if he do, that he would graciously deliver us from the evil of
it: and doing so to be assured that no temptation shall be laid upon us 1 Cor.
10.12, 13.
, (...), but such as incident to man, and may well be born; that God will not
suffer us to be tempted beyond our power, but will make way for us to escape,
that being tried in this fiery furnace of temptation, we may receive that Crown
of life which the Lord has promised to all those which overcome it Jam. 1.13.
.

Now in this story of the temptations of our Savior, there are these three
parts to be considered, the place, the preparation, and the temptation it self.
The place or scene of this great action was the Wilderness of Iudaea, as before
we said: not the inhabited parts thereof (for there were many villages
interspersed therein, as commonly there are in all great Forests) but those
which were the furthest and the most remote from humane society. The spirit led
him not (says Chrysostom) (...), into the City or the Market place, but into
the Wilderness; and more then so, into the least frequented and most savage
part of it, where he conversed with none but Beasts, as St. Mark informs us
Mar. 1.13.
. And this was done on great and weighty considerations. First, he was led into
the Wilderness, the better to comply with the type or figure of the Levitical
Scapegoat, Levit. 16. v. 10.21, 22.
, of which it is thus said in Scripture, that the Goat on which the lot fell to
be the Scapegoat, shall be presented alive before the Lord, to make an
atonement with him: And Aaron shall lay both his hands upon his head, and
confess over him all the iniquities of the children of Israel, and all their
transgressions in all their sins, putting them upon the head of the Goat, and
shall send him away by the hands of a fit man into the Wilderness; And the Goat
shall bear upon him all their iniquities unto a land not inhabited, and he
shall let go the Goat in the Wilderness. A Type or Figure most punctually
agreeing with the Antitype, with our Redeemers going into the Desert, to a land
not inhabited. No sooner had he been declared by St. John the Baptist, to be
the Lamb of God which takes away the sins of the world; no sooner was the
burden of our iniquities laid upon his head; but presently he is led by the
holy Spirit, as by the hands of a fit man, into the midst of the Wilderness.
And though some of the ancient writers, as Justin Martyr In dialog. contr.
Tryph. Iud.
, and Tertullian Contr. Marcion. lib. 3.
, refer this figure of the Scapegoat to our Saviors passion; and some of
later times to his resurrection: yet in my mind Calvin has hit more happily
on the right application, then any of those which went before him. By whom it
is conceived, and rightly, that of the two Goats which were brought before the
Lord, the one was offered for a Sacrifice after the manner of the Law, the
other was sent forth alive to be the (...) or (...), as a thing devoted to
destruction for others Calv. Com. in Rentateuch.
. For though (says he) a more curious speculation may be brought, as that the
sending away of the Scapegoat was a figure of Christ's Resurrection: yet I
embrace that which is more plain and certain, that the Goat sent away alive and
free was vice piaculi, as a thing devoted to bear the brunt for others, that by
his departure and leading away into the Wilderness, the people might be assured
that their sins did vanish, and were carried away far out of sight.

A second cause of leading our Savior into the Wilderness, and to the parts
thereof most retired from company, was to the end (as the same Calvin is of
opinion) that he might undertake the Office of a public Teacher, and an
Ambassador from heaven with the more authority, Calvin in Ha^mon. Evangel,
tanquam magise Coelo missus quam assumptus ex oppido aliquo and communi
hominum grege, as being rather sent from heaven then taken out of any town or
place of ordinary commerce. For so was Moses taken up by God into Mount Sinai,
tanquam in Coeleste sacrarium, as into one of the revestries of the highest
heavens, before the promulgating of the Law: and so Elias in like manner, Qui
instaurandae legis Minister erat, whom God made choice of to restore his Law to
its primitive luster, was by the Lord withdrawn aside to the Mount of Horeb,
situate in the remotest part of this very Wilderness. In this particular both
Moses and Elias had been types of Christ, who was to be the Mediator of a
better Covenant Heb. 8.6.
, i. e. a Covenant established upon better promises; and therefore Christ to be
conform to them in this particular, lest he should seem in any thing to fall
short of them. The third and last consideration which occasioned the leading of
our Savior into the Wilderness, was to afford the better opportunity unto
Satan, to pursue his business, to tempt and try him to the purpose. For as St.
Chrysostom well observes, Chrysostom. in c. 4. Mat. Hom.
the Devil never is more busy to tempt men to sin, then (...), when he finds
them left unto themselves without help or company. This opportunity he took to
seduce poor Eve, when she was all alone, and without her husband; and speeding
then so well in that great attempt, has ever since made use of the like
advantages. He found our Savior in the Wilderness, and more then so (...) in
the most inaccessible places of it, says the same St. Chrysostom Id. Ibid.
; so that the loneliness of the place, seemed to concur with other
circumstances, (especially his beginning to be hungry after so long and great a
fast) to animate the old Tempter to give the onset, and to befool himself with
the hopes of Victory. But here the Devil was deceived in his expectation, and
gave himself the overthrow by his too much forwardness; falling into the hands
of that promised seed, Genesis 3.15.
of which he had been told in the beginning of time, it should break his head.

The second thing to be considered in this story of the Temptation of our
Savior, is the Preparation; which is thus laid down by the Evangelists, Matthew.
4.2.
And when he had fasted forty days and forty nights, he was afterward an
hungered. For then the Tempter came unto him; so St. Matthew has it. But Luke
4.1, 2, 3.
St. Luke thus, He was led by the Spirit into the Wilderness, being forty days
tempted of the Devil, and in those days he did eat nothing, and when they were
ended he afterward hungered; and the Devil said unto him, etc. St. Mark more
briefly, and with some difference from the other two. And he was in the
Wilderness forty days, and was tempted of Satan Mar. 1.13.
. Which different narration of these three Evangelists has produced a doubt
amongst the learned touching the very moment and point of time, when the Devil
first began his onset (whereof more anon) but they do all well agree in this,
that he fasted forty days, and forty nights, being the whole time that he
continued in the Wilderness. And herein diverse things are to be considered;
First, why our Savior chose this time for so great a work. Secondly, Why he
fasted forty days and forty nights, neither more nor less; And thirdly, what
was after done by the Church of God in reference to this great example. And
first it may be thought that he chose this time, because he then began to set
himself in more special manner to the great work of our Redemption; which was
not to be wrought but by humbling of himself for us, under the mighty hand of
his heavenly Father; and fasting is a special act of humiliation: in which
respect the Church has taught us thus to pray in her public Liturgies; O Lord
which for our sakes did fast forty days and forty nights, etc. Collection on
the first sunday of Lent.
, Secondly we may think that he chose this time, that by this exercise of
fasting he might prepare and fit himself for the discharge of the Prophetical
Office, the function of the holy Ministry, which he was pleased to take upon
him. Not that he needed in himself, to whom God had not given the spirit by
rule or measure Joh. 3.34.
, but partly to comply with the examples of Moses and Elias in the former
times, who had both betook themselves to fasting on the like occasions: and
partly to leave an example to his Church, which they were to follow, in calling
men unto the Ministry of the Gospel. Which Precedent as we find it followed
in the Ordination of Paul and Barnabas and other Presbyters of the Church, in
the best and Apostolical times Act. 13.3. etc. 14 v. 23.
: so gave it a fair hint to the times succeeding, to institute four solemn
times of public fasting, (which they called jejunia quatuor temporum, we the
Emberweeks to be the set and solemn times of giving Orders, in the Church, and
calling men unto the Ministry of the same; to the end that all the people might
by prayer and fasting apply themselves unto the Lord; humbly beseeching him to
direct the Fathers of the Church to make choice of fit and able laborers to
attend his harvest, as also to enable those who are called unto it, and give
them gifts and graces fitting for so great a business. Which ancient
institution of the Church of God, as it is prudently retained in this Church of
England, according to the 32 Canon of the year 1603. in which all Ordinations
of Presbyters and Deacons are restrained to those four set times: so were it to
be wished that the same authority would establish public meetings and set
forms of Prayer to be observed at those times, that so with one consent of
heart both Priests and people might commend that religious work to the care and
blessings of the Lord; according as it was directed in the Common Prayer Book
intended for the use of the Church of Scotland. There was another reason which
induced our Savior to make choice of this time for his fast; which was, the
better to draw on the Tempter to begin his assault, but this will better fall
within the compass of the third general point to be considered in this story,
that is to say, the main act of it, or the temptation it self.

In the mean time we may consider what might be the reason, why he fasted forty
days and forty nights, neither more nor less. In which it is first to be
observed that it is not only said that he fasted forty days, and no more then
so, but forty days and forty nights. Which caution was observed by St. Matthew
for this reason, chiefly left else it might be thought by some carnal
Gospellers that he fasted only after the manner of the Jews, whose use it was
to eat a sparing meal at night, having religiously fasted all the day before.
Si ergo diceretur quod Christus jejunaret quadraginta diebus, (without making
mention of the nights) intelligeretur quod per noctes comedebat sicut Judaeis
solitum erat Tostat. in Mat. 4. qu. 11.
, as Tostatus notes upon the Text (which also is observed by Maldonat,
Iansenius, and some other of the Romish Writers) and then there had been little
in it of a miracle, either to work upon the Jews, or confound the Devil. As
well then forty nights as forty days to avoid that cavil. And there was very
good reason too why he should fast just forty days and forty nights, neither
more nor less. Had he fasted fewer days then forty, he had fallen short of the
examples which both Moses and Elias left behind them on the like occasions;
(on like occasion, I confess, but on less by far) both which were by the Lord
enabled to so long a fast, that by the miracle thereof they might confirm unto
the Jews the truth of their doctrine. For seeing that they fasted longer then
the strength of nature could endure; it must needs be that they were both
assisted by the God of nature, whose service and employment they were called
unto. And though perhaps a longer and more wonderful fasting might have been
expected from our Savior considering both who he was, and of how much a better
and more glorious Ministry he was to be employed by the Lord his God: yet he
resolved not to exceed the former number, nor to make use of that assistance
which he might easily have had of those blessed Angels, who as St. Mark says,
ministered unto him Mark. 1.13.
. And this he did upon two reasons. First, to demonstrate to the world,
Evangelium non dissentire a lege and Prophetis, as St. Austin has it August.
Ep. 119. ad Ianuar.
, what an excellent harmony there was between the Law and the Prophets
(whereof Moses and Elias were of most eminent consideration) and that his own
most glorious and holy Gospel, of which he was to be the Preacher: and
secondly, lest peradventure by a longer and more unusual kind of fast, then
any of the former ages had given witness to, (...), as we read in Chrysostom
Chrysostom. hom. in Matthew.
, the truth of his humanity, his taking of our flesh upon him, might be called
in question. Of any mystery which should be in the number of forty, more then
in another, I am not Pythagorean enough to conceive a thought, no not so much
as in my dreams; as never having been affected with that kind of Theology, or
the like curious and impertinent nothings. Nor am I apt to think, as many of
the Papists do, that men are bound by any Precept of our Savior or of his
Apostles to observe the like fast of forty days, which we call commonly by the
name of Lent; ( Iejunium-Quadragesimale in the Latin Writers) or that his
glorious and divine example was purposely proposed unto us for our imitation,
as some others think. The silence of the Evangelical Scriptures which say
nothing in it, and the unability of our weak nature to imitate an action of so
vast a difficulty, are arguments sufficient to persuade the contrary: such as
have finally prevailed on Iansenius and other modest Romanists, to wave the
plea of imitation, and to ascribe the keeping of the Lent fast to such other
reasons, as shall be presently produced in maintenance of that ancient and
religious observance. And on the other side I will not advocate for Calvin, (as
I see some do) who being at enmity with all the ancient rites and Ordinances of
the Church of Christ, does not alone affirm that the keeping of it in imitation
of our Savior is mera stultitia, in plain terms, a flat piece of foolerie
Calvin, in Harmon. Evangel.
: but tells us also of the Fathers who observed this fast, that they did ludere
ineptiis ut simiae, play like old Apes with their own Anticks; charge them
with I know not what ridiculous zeal, or (...) as he calls it; and finally
affirms the whole fast so kept, to be impium and detestabile Christi ludibrium,
a detestable and ungodly mockage of our Savior Christ, whether with less
charity or wisdom, I can hardly say.

For (that I may crave leave to digress a little) most sure it is that the Lent
fast, according as it was observed in the Primitive times, was not alone of
special use to the advancement of true godliness and increase of piety; but
also of such reverend Antiquity that it has very good right and title to be
reckoned amongst the Apostolical Traditions, which have been recommended to the
Church of God. The Canons attributed to the Apostles, which if not theirs, (as
many learned men do conceive they are) are questionless of very venerable
Antiquity, do thus speak for Lent, Can. 69. Si quis Episcopus aut Presbyter, i.
e. If a Bishop, Priest, or Deacon, or of any other holy Order, kept not the
holy fast of Lent, let him be degraded, unless it be in case of sickness: Si
laicus sit, Communione privetur, but if a Layman do not keep it, let him be
debarred from the Communion. Ignatius one of the Apostles scholars, and one
who, as it is believed, saw Christ in the flesh; in his Epistle to the
Philippians does advise them thus. (...), Let none despise the Fast of Lent;
for it contains the imitation of our Lords example: which is full enough.
Tertullian the most ancient of the Latin Fathers whose works are extant in the
world Tertul. adv. Psychicos.
, speaks of it by the name of jejunium Paschatos, or the Easter fast, (because
it does immediately precede that solemn festival) and reckons it amongst
those public orders which the Church was bound to keep from the first
beginning; though then he was an enemy to all public orders, and an open
Montanist. St. Ambrose a most godly Bishop, accounts it as a special gift and
blessing of Almighty God Ambr. sermon. 40. in Feria 3. post. dominic. 2. Quadr.
, ( Hanc quadragesiman largitus est nobis Dominus, etc.) that he appointed Lent
unto prayer and fasting. And Leo, a right good and godly man too, though a Pope
of Rome, affirms positively, Leo Sermon. 4.4. de quadrages.
Magna divinae institutionis salubritate provisum esse, etc. that it was
ordained by divine Institution for the clensing and purging of the soul from
the filths of sin. Not that they thought there did occur any Precept for it,
delivered in the Volume of the Book of God, (we must not so conceive or
conclude their meaning): but that both for the time of the year and the set
number of days, they had a special eye to this fast of Christ's, as to the most
convenient direction which the Church could give them. St. Hierome though he
make it not a divine institution, yet reckons it for an Apostolical Tradition
(which is as much as the two former do affirm, rightly understood); saying
Hieron. ad Marcellum advers. Montan.
Nos unam Quadragesimam secundum traditionem Apostolorum, etc. that is to say,
We fast one Lent in the whole year; at a fit and seasonable time, according to
the tradition of the holy Apostles. Finally St. Augustine speaks thereof, as a
most wholesome and religious institution, of great antiquity and use in the
Church of Christ, not only in his 74. Sermon de Diversis, and the 64. of those
de Tempore, whereof some question has been made amongst learned men; but also
in his Epistle unto Ianuarius August. Epistola. 119. c. 15.
, of the authority whereof never doubt was raised. And here I might proceed to
St. Basil, Chrysostom, and other the renowned lights of the Eastern Churches;
but that sufficient to this purpose has been said already, especially for us
and for our instruction, who have been always counted for a Member of the
Western Church. Now as the institution of this Lent-fast is of great antiquity,
so was it first ordained and instituted upon such warrantable grounds, as kept
it free from all debate and disputation till these later times: save that
Aerius would needs broach this monstrous Paradox, (for which he stils stands
branded as a wretched Heretic) Non celebranda esse statuta jejunia August. de
haeres.
, sed cum quisque voluerit jejunandum; that no set fasts were to be kept,
neither Lent, nor others, but that it should be left to men's Christian liberty.
For whereas it is very fit Field of the Church, l. 3.19.
, (as a learned man of this Church very well observes) that there be a solemn
time at least once in the year, wherein men may call themselves to an account
for their negligences, repent them of all their evil doings, and with prayers,
fasting, and mourning turn unto the Lord: this time was thought to be the
fittest, both because that herein we remember the sufferings of Christ for our
sins, which is the strongest and most prevailing motive that may be to make us
hate sin, and with tears of repentant sorrow to bewail it; as also for that
after this meditation of the sufferings of Christ, and conforming of our selves
unto them, his joyful Resurrection for our justification does immediately
present it self unto us in the days ensuing, in the solemnities whereof men
were wont with great devotion to approach the Lords Table, and they which were
not yet baptized were by Baptism admitted into the Church. Thus then it was not
without great confideration, that men made choice of this time wherein to
recount all their negligences, sins, and transgressions, and to prepare
themselves by this solemn act of fasting, both for the better performance of
their own duties in those following days of joyful solemnity, as also to obtain
at the hands of God the gracious acceptance of those whom they offered unto him
to be entered into his holy Covenant; it being the use and manner of the
Primitive Church, never to present any unto Baptism, unless it were in case of
danger and necessity, but only in the Feasts of Easter and Whitsontide. Which
being the reasons moving them to institute a set and solemn time of fasting,
and to appoint it at this time of the year rather then another; they had an
eye, as for the limitation of the number of days to our Saviors fast of forty
days, in the dedicating of the new Covenant; not as precisely tied to that time
at all by the intent and purpose of the Lords example, but rather that by
keeping the same number of days, we may the better keep in remembrance his
fasting and humiliation for the sake of man, and thereby learn the better to
express our duty and affections to him. Some other reasons are alleged for
this yearly fast, of which some are Political Mason of fasting, c. 10.
, for the increase of Cattle in the Commonwealth, that being as we know full
well, the great time of breed; some Physical, for qualifying of the blood by a
slender diet of fish, herbs and roots, the blood beginning at that time of the
year to increase and boil; and some Spiritual, showing the use and necessity of
mortification at that time of the year, in which the blood beginning to be hot
and stirring as before was said, is most easily inflamed with the heats of
lust. And on these great and weighty reasons as the Church did institute, and
all the States of Christendom confirm the strict keeping of it: so has it
hitherto been retained in this Church of England, as far as the condition of
the times would bear: in which there is a solemn and set form of service for
the first day of Lent, which the Ancients called by the name of Caput jejunii,
as also for every Sunday of it, and for each several day of the last week of
it, (the holy week, as commonly our Fathers called it) and abstinence from
flesh enjoined from the first day thereof till the very last, according to the
usage of the purest times; and all this countenanced and confirmed by as good
authority as the Laws and Statutes of the Realm can give unto it. Which holy
time, had it been as carefully and conscionably observed by all sorts of
people, as it was prudently and piously ordained at first; we had no doubt
escaped many of those grievous plagues, with which the Lord of late has
scourged us, and even consumed us unto nothing by our own licentiousness.

But to proceed to the third general point contained in the story of the Lords
temptation, in which there is a doubt as before was said, touching the very
moment and point of time, which the old Tempter took to give the onset;
occasioned by the different narrations of the three Evangelists: that is to
say, whether the Devil tempted him all those forty days, and then gave him
over; or that he did not trouble him, and begin the business, until the forty
days were past, and his fast was ended. St. Matthews words do seem to intimate,
nay to say expressly, that the Tempter did not come unto him till his fast was
ended, and that afterward he was an hungered: and this more literally agrees
with the particulars of the following story. But on the other side it is said
in Luke, that he was led into the Wilderness, being forty days tempted by the
Devil, (...), as the Greek text reads it: and then how could the Devil set him
upon one of the Pinnacles of the Temple if he were all the time of his
Temptation within the bowels of that Desert? For resolution of which point
Eusebius. demonstr. Evang. l. 3. c. 2.
Eusebius and St. Cyril two Greek Fathers, though they keep the words, yet they
do point them otherwise then we read them now in our printed copies; referring
the forty days Cyril. de fide recta ad Regin. and de sacerdotio. lib. 2.
which are there spoken of not to his being tempted of the Devil, but to his
being in the Wilderness. And then the reading will be thus, (...). that is to
say, And he was led into the Wilderness forty days, being tempted of the Devil,
etc. And so it seems it stood in those ancient copies, which were consulted by
the Author of the Vulgar Latin, whosoever he was; in which we read, Et
agebatur in Spiritu in deserto diebus quadraginta, and tentatur a Diabolo.
Which reading if it be allowed of, as I see no reason but it may, then the
doubt is ended, and the appearing difference fairly reconciled. Otherwise we
may say, and no doubt, most safely, that he was tempted by the Devil all those
forty days, as is said by Luke, and after they were ended also, as we find in
Matthew: that is to say, as Euthymius Euthym. Zigubon. in Mat. cap. 4.
very rightly notes, the Devil tempted him in those days, (the said forty
days) as it were a far off, by sleep, sloth, heaviness, and the like, but after
he knew him once to be hungry, then he set upon him ( prope and manifest, as
the Author has it) more visibly, and hand to hand, namely in those three great
temptations which the story mentions. So then, the nick and point of time in
which the Devil did apply himself most closely to the work intended, was cum
esuriret, when he began to be an hungry. As long as our Redeemer kept himself
unto prayer and fasting, the Devil either did not trouble him, or it was either
with such trivial and light temptations as made no impression, and neither
interrupted him in his holy course, nor caused him to intermit the business he
was then upon, by making any necessary replies to his lewd suggestions. But
when he began to be an hungry, when his mind seemed to be upon his belly (if I
may so say) then did the Devil think it was time to work him. (...), as it was
notably well observed by Chrysostom Chrysostom. in cap. 4. Mat.
to this very purpose. So excellent is the force and efficacy of an holy fast,
that it keeps the Devil at a distance.

This difficulty thus passed over, we shall next look on the particular
temptations which those Gospels speak of. In which it is to be observed, that
whereas St. John makes mention of three kinds of lust, which mightily prevail
on the affections of us mortal men 1 John 2.16.
, viz. the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life: the
Devil tempted CHRIST in all, and in all was vanquished. He tempted him in the
first place with the lust of the flesh, when he found that after such and so
long a fast, he began to be hungry, and was reduced to such extremities as to
be forced to seek his bread even in desolate places: and said unto him, if that
thou be the Son of God, as the late voice from heaven did seem to signify,
command that these stones be made bread to appease thy hunger, and satisfy
that natural necessity which is now upon thee. An opportunity well taken, and
as strongly followed, had it been answered with success. For commonly when men
are in distress and want, they are then most apt either to distrust the Lord
their God as if he left them to themselves without hope of relief; or else to
use unlawful means to relieve themselves, which was the point the Devil thought
to bring him to by this first temptation. But when he failed of this design, he
pressed him in the next place with the lust of the eye, taking him up upon an
exceeding high mountain, showing him all the Kingdoms of the World, and the
glories of them Matthew. 4.8.
; and offering to bestow them all upon him, if he would only yield so far as to
fall down and worship him. Impudent wretch, thou worst of all wicked spirits,
says Ignatius Ignat. Epist. ad Philip.
, how was it that thou did not fear, (...), to utter such a saucy voice to
the Lord of all things? And yet a far more impudent braggart, to make an offer
of those things which he had no power of, the Kingdoms of the earth, and the
glories of them being holden of no other Lord, then the Lord our God. And here
it is to be observed, that whereas in the former onset which only did relate
unto Christ himself, he only did reply upon him with a Scriptum est; in this,
wherein the glory of his heavenly Father was concerned so highly, he adds an
Apage, or rebuke, Get thee hence thou Satan. So that the Devil failing at the
two first weapons, betakes himself unto the last, the pride of life, setting
him on a pinnacle of the holy Temple, saying, if thou be the Son of God, as
credulous men are made believe by the late great miracle of a voice supposed to
be from heaven, do somewhat to confirm them in that belief, teque assere coelo
Ovid. M^tan. l. 1.
, somewhat which may indeed make manifest that thou art from heaven, and
answerable to the testimony which that voice gave of thee: and a more sure and
easy trial thou can never meet with then by casting thy self down from
hence, knowing so well how all the Angels are at hand to attend upon thee, and
carry thee upon their wings that thou take no harm. This was the Devils last
attempt, and he failed in this too; our Savior keeping still to his old ward,
and beating off all his blows with a Scriptum est: to teach us that the Word of
God is the best assurance we can have to rest our selves upon in the day of
Temptation; and that there is no readier way to quench the fiery darts of
Satan, then to be always furnished with the waters of life. This done, the
Devil finding him impregnable, and that he did but lose his labor in those
vain assaults, gives him over presently; He left him to himself, as St.
Matthews Mat. 4.11.
tells us, and thereby made that good in fact which is recorded of him by St.
James the Apostle Jam. 4.7.
, Resist the Devil and he will fly from you. And yet he left him so as to come
again; He departed from him for a season Luke 4 13.
, as St. Luke informs us; and he that goes away for a season only, has animum
revertendi, a purpose of returning when he sees occasion; and when he meets
with those occasions, we shall find him at it.

In the mean time, there are some doubts to be resolved touching these
temptations, which we will first remove and then pass forwards. For first a
question may be made, how the Devil could so suddenly take our Savior up, and
set him on a pinnacle of the holy Temple, being a place so remote from the
heart of the Wilderness. But the answer to this doubt is easy, would there
were no worse. Read we not how a good Angel laid hold on Habacuc Dan. 14.33.
, and took him by the hair of the head, and carried him with his dinner in a
moment of time from the land of Iewrie unto Babylon. And then why may we not
conceive but that the Devil, though an evil Angel (yet an Angel) might take up
Christ into the air, and carry him to the top of the Temple, and arrest him
there? especially our Savior making no resistance, but rather giving way unto
it, and perhaps facilitating the attempt. For that the Devil could do nothing
against him, without, much less against his will, is a truth past questioning.
But then there is a greater difficulty occurring in the story of the second
temptation; where it is said (which seems impossible to be comprehended, that
having taken Christ unto the top of the mountain, he showed him all the
Kingdoms of the world, (...) says St. Luke, in a moment of time Luke 4.5.
. For resolution of which doubt we must first premise, that those words (...),
which we render in the English, in a moment of time, are a Proverbial kind of
speech, as Erasmus notes Erasm. in cap. 4. Luc.
, by which the Grecians use to signify a short space of time: as where
Plutarch says, Plutarch. de liberis educand.
(...), our whole life is but a short time, and yet far longer then a moment.
Agreeably whereto the Translator of the Syriack does thus read the words,
(which Translation is of great and approved Antiquity). He, i. e. Satan, showed
him all the Kingdoms in a very small time. And this premised, the doubt may
easily be resolved by those two answers, or by which of them the Reader
pleases. Some think that Satan gave him not a particular inspection of every
place, but a general direction to the coasts and parts of the earth where those
Kingdoms lay, the rest being supplied by speech and not by sight; and of this
mind is he that made the Expositions on St. Matthew ascribed to S Chrysostom.
Satan (says he) did not so show those Kingdoms unto Christ, that he saw the
very Kingdoms themselves, or the Cities, people, gold, and silver in them, but
the parts of the earth in which every Kingdom and the chief City of it stood
Homil. 5. in cap. 4. Matthew.
. And then it follows (to the same purpose and effect which before we spoke
of). For Satan might most directly point with his finger unto every place, and
then relate in words express the state and glories of each several Kingdom.
With whom agrees Euthymius Zigabenus amongst the Ancients Euthym. Zig. in.
cap. 4. Matthew.
, and Musculus a man of no mean learning amongst later Writers. Others conceive
that as the Devil can transform himself into an Angel of light, so he is able
also to make specter, or false shows of any thing, (when he is suffered so to
do by Almighty God) to deceive men's eyes: as the Magicians of Egypt turned
their rods into Serpents, and changed the rivers into blood, and brought frogs
upon the land of Egypt. Experience of all Ages does confirm this truth. And
therefore it may be believed to be no hard thing for him, to frame the
appearances of Kingdoms and Cities, and show the similitudes of them from
every part of the earth. And to this Calvin does incline, though very modestly
he leaves every man to his own opinion In Harmon. Evangel.
. A most learned Prelate of our own likes a third way better B. Bilson in his
survey p. 309.310.
, and thinks that Satan might show, and Christ might see all those places
themselves, with all the pomps and glories of them, for that Satan being an
Angel had another manner of sight, even in the body which he assumed, then we
mortals have; and Christ when it pleased him, could see both what and whither
he would, notwithstanding all impediments which were interjected, as appears
by his own words unto Nathaniel, (for which Nathaniel did acknowledge him for
the Son of God) Before Philip called thee, when thou were under the fig tree, I
saw thee Joh. 1.48.
. In such variety of Answers, each of them being satisfactory to the doubt
proposed, and all agreeable to the analogy or rule of faith, I leave the
Reader to his own choice, and to rely on that which he thinks most probable.

And now to draw unto an end of that part of our Saviors sufferings, which
consisted in diversity of strong temptations; although the Devil left him for a
season as before was said, yet he resolved within himself not to give him over;
but to make use of other means, and try other ways, for the effecting of his
enterprise. And to this end he seeks to tempt him to ambition, by offering him
the crown of his own Country, in the way of a popular election, working upon
the common people to come and take him by force and to make him King Joh. 6.15.
. He tempts him also to vain glory, by the shouts and acclamations of the
Vulgar, Nec vox hominem s^nat Virg. Aen. 1.
, Never man spoke as this man speaks. He tempts him also to self-love, to
have a greater care of his own preservation then of doing the will of him that
sent him: and therein he makes use of Peter one of Christ's dom^stick^, his
principal Secretary as it were, one of counsel with him. And Peter in pursuance
of the dangerous drift, took him aside, advised him to have more care of
himself then so, Let this be far from thee O Lord Ma.. 16.22.
, and was rejected for it in the self same terms, Get behind me Satan,
wherewith the very Devil was repulsed before. Finally during the whole time of
his earthly pilgrimage, of his conversing in our flesh, the Devil never failed
in his endeavors, sometimes himself, and sometimes by the means of others,
either by flatteries or by contumelies to prevail upon him; though always to
his own loss, and to the greater ruin of that Kingdom of darkness, which he
had founded on this earth. And these we reckon for the first part of those
inward sufferings which our Redeemer did endure under Pontius Pilate: not by
exciting in his heart any evil motions, in which respect we men are said most
commonly to be tempted inwardly; but by presenting to his senses such
continual objects, as he conceived most like to work on the inward Man. For
otherwise it cannot be affirmed of CHRIST that he was tempted inwardly, that is
to say, by any motions rising from within, without manifest Blasphemy. And to
this, all sound Orthodox Christians have agreed unanimously. Thus Gregory
amongst the Latins Gregor. in Evang. hom. 16.
, Omnis illa tentatio Diabolica foris non intus; all that temptation of the
Devil was not inward but outward. And thus Theophylact for the Greeks Theop.
in c. 4. Mat.
, The Devil, said he, appeared to Christ in some visible shape, (...); for
thoughts (that is to say, any thoughts of sin) Christ admitted not. The Lord
forbid we should conceive such a wicked fancy. Thus Calvin finally for the
latter writers Calv. in Harm. Evang.
, It is, says he, no error or absurdity to think that CHRIST should be
tempted of the Devil, modo ne intus, hoc est in mente et anima quicquam
putemus passum fuisse, so that we do not hold that he suffered any thing in his
mind or soul. So to make the thoughts and cogitations of the heart of Christ
to be inwardly moved with pride, presumption, infidelity, and Idolatry, as some
men have done Of whom see B. Bilson in his Survey. p. 305, 310, 311
, the better to find out the pains of hell in our Saviors soul; were to be
guilty of their sin, who to that end have vented most blasphemous figments and
pernicious impostures, to the seducing of the simple, the hurt of their own
souls, and the dishonor of Christ. But of this we shall speak more at large in
the following Article, of Christ's descending into hell: for the misconstruing
of which Article, or rather for the total expurgation of it, it was first
invented. We now proceed to those afflictions which assalted inwardly, which
wrought upon his soul only, on the inward man; and then to those which were
inflicted also upon his Body, so far forth as they did precede his Crucifixion,
which shall come after by it self.

CHAP. VI. Of the afflictions which our Savior suffered both in his soul and
body under Pontius Pilate, in the great work of man's Redemption.
THat CHRIST our Savior was tempted in all things Heb. 4.15.
, as we are, yet without sin, (that is to say, without the least internal
motion and provocation of the heart to sin) as we are not; has been abundantly
discovered in the former Chapter. We now proceed to those affictions which he
suffered for us in his mind or soul, those griefs of heart and anguish of the
Spirit which did fall upon him, in reference to the great work of man's
redemption; for as for those which seized upon him out of particular
affections, as his groaning in the Spirit over the grave of his dead friend
Lazarus Joh. 11.33.
, or the lamenting those calamities which he foresaw would shortly fall on his
native Country; they do not come within the compass of this disquisition. And
these we purpose to examine with the greater industry, because there is a sort
of men, as before I said, that to elude the true and genuine meaning of Christ's
descent into hell, have fancied to themselves and proclaimed to others, that
they have found the pains of hell in our Saviors soul; and that there was no
other descent of Christ into hell then the extremity of those hellish and most
dismal pains, which he suffered in his humane soul here upon the earth. And
first to take those texts in, order in which those sorrows and afflictions are
most plainly met with, in the first place we find him in the garden of
Gethsemane, the place designed for the great combat betwixt him and Satan:
where taking with him Peter, and the two sons of Zebedee, it is said Mat. 26.37.
, that he began to be sorrowful, and very heavy; (...), as the Greek text
has it. St. Mark Mar. 14.33.
with the alteration of one word only does deliver it thus, (...), he began to
be sore amazed and very heavy; coepit contristrari and verementer angi, says
the translatour of the Syriack. This was it seems with him the beginning of
sorrows, for it is said that he began to be sorrowful and sore amazed: which
though it was a sad beginning, yet it was mastered in the end. For though he
began to be afraid and sore amazed upon the apprehension of those bitter pangs
of death which he was to struggle with: yet he no further did submit to this
passion of fear and this discomfiture of amazement, then to express the
natural horror which he had of that deadly cup whereof he was presently to
drink; not suffering it to possess him wholly, or to bear dominion over him,
or to work in him any such corruptions, as we frail men are subject to in the
like extremities. And this is that and only that which is meant by Origin
Origin in Mat. tract. 35.
, where he affirms, Coepit pavere vel tristari, nihil amplius tristitiae vel
pavoris patiens, nisi principium tantum. No such amazement, no such sorrow as
might make him lose either speech, or sense, or memory, as some men imagine;
much less to pray he knew not what B. Bilsons Survey. p. 440, 477.
, but least of all to pray expressly against the known will of his heavenly
Father. Nor will the words in the Original admit any such meanning. For (...)
in the Scripture ^ignifies no such amazement, as takes away men's senses from
them: which appears evidently in this, that when he descended from the
mountain where he was transfigured, the people which saw him were amazed
((...), says the text) Mar. 9.15.
and yet they came unto him, and saluted him, as the Gospel tells us. So when
they saw him cast out Devils by his word alone, (...), they were all amazed
Mark. 1.27.
, and yet they asked of one another what strange thing that was: and when the
two Apostles had healed the poor old criple at Solomon's porch, the people were
amazed Act. 3.12.
, ((...)) and yet flocked all unto the place to behold the miracle. And for the
word (...), it signifies no such heaviness in the book of God, as draws with
it all or any of those distractions above remembered: St. Paul affirming of
Epaphroditus, that he was (...) Phil. 2.26.
exceeding pensive, because the Philipians who most dearly loved him had heard
he was sick, and that he knew not how to comfort them with the joyful news of
his recovery. Sorrow, and grief, and anguish, and disconsolation, our Savior
did begin to feel, there is no doubt of that: though not in such a high degree
as to make him fall into those extremities of passion, as neither to know what
he did, nor for what he prayed. He that could come to his Disciples in the
midst of his anguish, and reprove them for their sloth and sleepiness, had
neither lost the use of his speech nor senses. And if his prayers were full of
faith, as no doubt they were Heb. 7.5.
, for the Scriptures say that he was heard, in that he prayed for, (which could
not be without a perfect measure of faith) assuredly, however he was heavily
oppressed under the burden of afflictions, he knew full well both what he
prayed for, and to whom.

But this was only the beginning of his sorrows, as before was said. It
follows in the text both in Matthew and Mark, My soul is exceeding
sorrowful even unto the death: (...), my soul is compassed round with
sorrows, such as do seem to threaten me with no less then death, and yet no
way to escape them, as in both Evangelists. And certainly it stood with reason
that it should be so. For as an eminent Prelate of our own B. Bilsons Survey.
p. 387.
does observe right well, The whole work and weight of our Redemption, was now
before Christ's eyes and apprehension, in a more exact and lively manner (he now
appearing before the judgment seat of God) then we in this body can discern.
For as all things needful shall be present and patent to us when we are
brought to Gods tribunal, so Christ presenting himself before the judgment of
God, to the end that man might be redeemed by the ransom which he was to pay
for him, and Satan ejected from prevailing against his members by his
mediation, did fully and perfectly behold the detestation which God had
conceived against our sins, and the power of his wrath provoked by our
defection and rebellion; as also the dreadful vengeance prepared and ordained
for sin, and our dull and careless contempt of our own misery, together with
the watchfulness and eagerness of the common adversary, the brunt and burden
of all which he was to bear, and to avert them from us by by that satis ^action
which the justice of God should then require at his hands, as a just price and
full recompense for the sins of men. The due consideration and intuition
whereof being in Christ more clear then we can conceive, might worthily make
the manhood of Christ both to fear and tremble, and in his prayers to God to
stir and inflame all the powers and parts both of soul and body (as far as man's
nature and spirit were able) with all submission and deprecation possible to
power forth themselves before his God. Here was full cause undoubtedly to make
him sorrowful, and sorrowful unto the death. How could it otherwise be
conceived when the just and full reward of our iniquities was thus presented to
his sight, when he beheld the greatness and the justness of Gods wrath
against it; and therewithal considered within himself how dear the price must
be and how sharp the pain which should free us of it? And on the other side
considered how precious his own person was, how infinite his obedience, how
pure his life; and yet how that most precious life must be taken from him, that
by one death, and that death only of the body, he might deliver us from the
death both of body and soul. So then his soul was ^ull of sorrow, there was
good cause for it; but not oppressed with any pains, much less tormented and
inflanted with the pains of hell, as some would fain gather from the text; for
neither tristitia in Latin, nor (...) in Greek, either amongst divine or
humane writers, signify any such impression of pain and torment, but an
affection only which afflicts the mind, rising upon the apprehension of some
evil either past or instant, (...) in Greek amongst the choycest humanitians,
is (...) Tusculan. quaest. l. 4.
, which Cicero translates opinio recens mali praesentis, a fresh opinion of
present or impendent evil. And Austin tells us for the Latins In Psalm. 42.
, that grief and anguish when it is in the soul is called tristitia, that is,
sorrow; but when it is in the body, then it is molestia, pain or trouble. Thus is
the word taken also in the holy Scripture, where St. Paul says, I would not
come again unto you, (...), in sorrow or heaviness 2 Cor. 2.
, for fear he should have sorrow of them, of whom he did expect to be received
with joy: and where it is affirmed of the rest of the servants when they
perceived how cruelly their fellow servants which was pardoned so great a sum,
dealt with one of his debtors, (...) Mat. 18.31.
, they were very sorry. And certainly they might be very sorry on so sad an
accident, out of a fellow-feeling of their Brothers misery, we have no reason
to conceive them to be full of pain.

Hitherto we have met with such griefs and sorrows in our Savior, as never man
endured before; but yet they prove not to be such as either did confound all
the powers of his soul, or astonish all the senses of his body B. Bilson p.
480, 481.
or brought him into such amazement that he considered neither what he said or
did. Some have endeavored to infer this as before was noted, out of the texts
and words foregoing, but with ill success: and therefore they are fallen at
last on an other Scripture, which they think makes for them. How is my soul
troubled Joh. 12.27.
, says our Savior, and what shall I say? Father save me from this hour, but
for this cause came I unto this hour. Here they observe a contrariety or
contradiction in our Saviors words, which could not possibly proceed but from
a soul distracted and a mind confounded: and what could work so strange and
sensible a confusion in him, but the pains of hell which were within him. But
whatsoever they observe, the most eminent men for parts and learning in the
times before them, could see no such matter. Erasmus in his Paraphrases gives
this gloss upon them Erasm. et Bulling. in locum.
, which Bullinger a learned Protestant writer does extol most highly, and
calls an excellent explication. I find my soul troubled for the day of my
death approaching; and what shall I say? For the love of mine own life shall I
neglect the life of the world? By no means; I will apply my self to the will of
my Father. Man's weakness troubled with the fear of death may say unto him,
Father if it be possible save me from this hour, from this danger of death
which is now so near me. But love desirous of man's salvation shall presently
add, Nay rather if it be expedient, let death which is desired, come; for as
much as wittingly and willingly by the leading of the Spirit, I have offered my
self unto the same. And thus Theophylact Theop. in 12. Joh.
, following the constant current of the former writers; For this cause came I
unto this hour, that I might suffer death for all; by which he very plainly
tells us, that though we be troubled and perplxed at it, we must not fly death
for the truth. For I (says Christ) am troubled as you see being a true and
innocent man, and cannot but permit man's nature to show it self: yet do I not
say unto my Father that he should save me from this hour; but that he glorify
his name. Finally, thus St. Chrysostom for the ancient Fathers (out of whose
garden Theophylact collected his best flowers) Therefore came I unto this
hour, i. e. as if the Lord had said Chry. Hom. 66. in. Joh.
, (in terms more particular and express) though we be moved and troubled, yet
we flee not death, for this I say not as my resolution, Father deliver me from
this hour, but Father glorify thy name. So that these words of Christ being
thus expounded according to the true intent and full meaning of them, import
not such a contrariety or contradiction as these dreamers fancy; but only do
import a consultation and deliberation held within himself; though such indeed
as might and did proceed from a troubled soul. And therefore Epiphanius notes
exceeding well, that our Redeemer spoke these words Epiphan. l. 2. haeres. 69.
in the way of preparation or dubitation, as being scarce thoroughly resolved
what he had to do. For howsoever the inclination of nature induced him to avoid
death as much as might be, in this debating with himself what was best to be
done: yet he did presently reject and repel those inclinations, saying, for
this cause came I unto this hour; and absolutely resigned them in the words
next follwing, Father glorify thy name.

But it is time I leave these triflers, and return back into the garden of
Bethsemane, where I left my Savior, sorrowing and lamenting under the most
calamitous burden of our sins and miseries: whom I find first kneeling on his
knees Luke 22.41.
, but after prostrate on the ground Mark. 14.35.
, on his very face Mat. 26.39.
, and calling earnestly and passionately on the Lord his God, and saying,
Father, if it be possible let this cup pass from me. It seems God looked upon
him now, or on the sins of man which were laid upon him, with a wrathful
countenance, holding his lightnings in his hands, and all the vials of his
anger to be powered upon him. He had not else broak out into these expressions,
which were indeed the true effects and signs of a soul astonished. And yet not
so astonished neither as some men would have him, who make him pray in this
confusion and astonishment against Gods known will B. Bilson p. 397.
: which is an irreligious and most dangerous dotage. For does not CHRIST submit
immediately to his fathers will? does he not say in terms express, not my
will but thy will be done? And call you this a praying against Gods known will?
How much more orthodoxly is the point resolved by Chrysostom Apud Theod. dial.
3.
, where we read as follows; If this were spoke, says he, of Christ's
divinity, then were it a contradiction indeed, and many absurdities would
thence follow; but if it were spoken of the flesh, then was there good reason
for these words, and nothing in them to be blamed. And this the Father presses
in the following words, For (says he) that the flesh would not willingly die,
is not a thing to be condemned, because proper to nature; the properties
whereof he showed in himself, yet without sin, and that very abundantly,
thereby to stop the mouths of Heretics. When then he says, If it be possible
let this cup pass from me, and not as I will but as thou will, he declares
nothing else, but that he was invested with true real flesh, which feared the
inevitable stroke of death, that showing the infirmity thereof he might
confirm the truth of his humane nature, yet sometimes covered those fears and
other infirmities (from being visibly discerned) because he was not a bare man.
Here then we see an easy way to salve that contrariety to the known will of
God, imputed by these men to our Saviors prayer: which yet the Schoolmen have
expressed in a clearer and more significant manner Field of the Church. l. 5.18.
. There was say they, a double apprehension of reason in Christ, the one termed
the superior, which looks into things with all incident circumstances; the
other the inferior, which presents to the mind some circumstances, but not
all. Then they declare that in Christ every faculty, power and part was
suffered (notwithstanding the perfection found in some other) to do that which
properly pertained to it. And thereupon infer that thence it is easy to
discern how it came to pass, that he should desire and pray for that which he
knew would never be granted, as namely that the Cup of death might pass from
him. For the sense (say they) of nature and inferior reason presented death and
the ignominy of the Cross unto him as they were evil in themselves, without
any consideration of the good to follow, and so caused a desire to decline
them, which he expresses in that prayer. But superior reason considering them
with all the circumstances, and knowing Gods resolution to be such that the
world by that means should be saved, and by no other means whatsoever,
persuaded to a willing acceptance of them: so that between these desires and
resolutions there was a diversity but no contrariety, a subordination but no
repugnance. There was no contrariety, because they were not in respect of the
same circumstances; for death as death is to be avoided: neither did the
superior reason ever dislike this judgment of the inferior faculties, but
showed further and higher considerations, whereon it was to be accepted and
embraced. And there was no repugnance nor resistance, because the one yielded
to the other. For even as a man that is sick, considering the potion of the
Physician to be unpleasant to his taste, declines it whiles he stays within the
bounds and confines of that consideration; but when he is showed by the
Physician the happy operation of it, and the good that is in it, does receive
it willingly, in that it is beneficial to him in the way of his health: So
CHRIST considering death, as in it self it is evil, and contrary to the nature
of all mankind, shunned and declined it whilst he staid within the bounds of
that consideration; and yet did joyfully accept it as the only means of man's
salvation, embracing what he had refused, and refusing what he had embraced.
Again, There is a thing (says Hugo de Sancto Victore) which is bonum in se,
good in it self, and the good of every other thing: there are somethings good
in themselves, and yet good but to certain purposes only; and some there are
which being evil in themselves, are to some purposes good. Of these the two
first sorts are to be desired simply and absolutely for themselves; the other
in respect only unto certain ends. And of this kind (says he) was the death of
the Cross, with all the woeful torments concurring with it: which simply
Christ shunned and declined, but respectively to the end proposed, did embrace
it cheerfully. So far, and to this purpose and effect, the said Reverend and
Learned Doctor.

This being declared, and the point thus stated by the Schoolmen, we will next
see how this agrees with the sense of all the ancient and orthodox writers,
who have delivered us their conceptions of this prayer of Christ's. And first
says Origin Origin in Mat. Tract. 35.
, CHRIST taking to him the nature of man's flesh retained all the properties
thereof, according to which he prayed in this place that the cup might pass
from him. It is the property of every faithful man to be unwilling to suffer
any pain, especially that tends unto death, because he is a man, and has
flesh about him; but if God so will, then to be content even against that will
of his own, because he is faithful. There is also another exposition of this
place, which is this, If it be possible that all these good things may come to
effect without my passion, which otherwise shall come by my death, then let
this passion pass from me, but not otherwise. And Athanasius thus Athan.
Orati. 4. Contr. Arian.
, As by death Christ abolished death, (...), and all humane miseries by
suffering them as a man; so by his fear he took away our fear, and made men no
longer to fear death. But Cyril of Alexandria next Cyr. Thesaur. l. 10. c. 3.
, Quando formidasse mortem videtur, ut homo dicebat, etc. When Christ seemed to
fear death he said as a man, Father let this cup pass from me; for though as a
man he abhorred death, yet as a man he refused not to perform the will of his
Father, and of himself being the word of God. Then Beda thus Beda in 14. cap.
Mark.
, agreeably to the sense of his Predecessors; if death may die without my death
in the flesh, let this cup pass from me; but because this will not otherwise
be, thy will be done, not mine. Then Damascen Damasc. Orthod. fid. l. 3. c. 18.
, (...), These words, says he, proceeded from a natural fear, for as a man
CHRIST would have had the cup to pass. Next him Euthymius Zigabenus thus Euth.
Zig. in Mat. 26.
, As a man Christ said, if it be possible, i. e. so far as it is possible: and
in saying, yet not as I will but as thou will, he teaches that we must follow
the will of God though nature reclaim. And in the close of all Theophylact
Theop. in 26. Mat.
, (...), it is incident to the nature of man to fear death; for death entered
besides (or against) nature, and therefore nature flies death. And in another
place Id. in Luke 22.
, The common fear of man's nature Christ cured, (...), consuming it in himself,
and making it obedient to the will of God. In which concurrent testimonies of
the ancient writers, we have not only the full grounds of that distinction of
the Schoolmen touching the superior and inferior Reason, and the several and
adequate acts of each; but also of the observation of Hugo de Sancto Victore,
and of those several respects and reasons in which Christ may be said both to
decline death, and to embrace it. But being there is so much speech amongst
them of a natural fears, or the fears incident to nature, we will once more
repair unto the Schoolmen, and enquire of them, both what his natural fear was,
and in what respect it was he feared, as also how this fear of his may be
reconciled both with the will of God and his knowledge of it. First then they
say Field of the Church. l. 5. c. 18
that natural fear arises in these three respects, that is to say, first in
respect of things that cannot be avoided neither by resistance and encounter,
nor by flying from them; secondly, in respect of such things as may be escaped
or overcome with a kind of uncertainty of event, and danger of the issue;
thirdly, in respect of such as may be escaped or overcome without any
uncertainty of the event or issue, but not without great conflict and extremity
of labor. Then they declare what things they were which Christ did fear, and
in what sort he feared them. For first (say they) he feared death, and the
stroke of the justice of God his Father sitting on his tribunal or judgment
seat to punish the sins of men, for which he stood forth that day to answer;
and secondly, he feared also that everlasting destruction, which was due to
mankind for those sins. And finally, they resolve it thus, that the former of
these two he feared as things impossible to be escaped in respect of the
resolution and purpose of his heavenly Father, which was, that by his
satisfactory death and sufferings, and no other way, man should be ransomed and
delivered from the power of Satan: and that he feared the latter, that is to
say, declined it as a thing he knew he should escape without all doubt or
uncertainty of the event, though not without conflicting with the temptations
of the Devil, and the enduring of many bitter and grievous pangs which in that
conflict might befall him. Which resolution of the Schoolmen, not only shows
the reasons of CHRIST'S natural fear; but adds withal another reason, why he
was so amazed and sorrowful; and also why he prayed so long and with so great
fervencie, that the cup which was prepared for him, might have passed over him.

And to say truth, it must be somewhat more then the consideration and
apprehension of a bodily death, which could so much work upon our Savior,
considering with how much gallantrie so many of the primitive Martyrs have
defied their torments, and mounted on the scaffold with so clear a confidence
as if they had not been to have suffered death, but behold a Triumph. And
therefore first it may be said, that besides the natural fear of death which is
incident to the Saints of God (however gallantly resolved to contemn the force
of it by the assistance and support of the holy Spirit) which he could not
avoid; and the avoidable fear of everlasting destruction, which might be for a
season presented to him: he was to undergo the whole wrath of God for the sins
of mankind. A wrath so infinite and just, so far exceeding the strength and
reach of man's nature to endure; that our earthly infirmity to which for our
sakes he submitted himself, cannot conceive nor comprehend the greatness of
it, nor think upon the power thereof without fear and horror. CHRIST, says a
reverend and learned Prelate of this Church B. Bilson. p. 376.
, was not only to suffer that which in his Person should be thought sufficient
in the righteous judgment of God to appease his anger, and purge our sins, but
he was further to see and behold from what he delivered us, even from the wrath
to come. For how should the price and force of his death be known unto him, if
he were ignorant what dreadful and terrible vengeance was prepared for sin,
should he not redeem us? Since therefore he was at this time to bear the
burden of our sins in his body, and to have the chastisement of our peace laid
upon him, and did withal behold the fierceness of Gods wrath against sinful
man, how could he choose but fear the effects thereof, and pray against them?
For though he were assured that this wrath of God would not proceed against him
unto condemnation; yet he knew well that God had infinite means to press and
punish humane nature above that which it was able to bear. And therefore he
addressed himself to his heavenly Father, being sure that God at his most
earnest and fervent prayer would proportion the pain he was to suffer according
to the weakness of that flesh which he bare about him, that neither his
obedience might be staggered, nor patience overwhelmed and swallowed up in
despair. Besides there might be somewhat else in the cup provided for him, then
the wrath of God with all the fears and terrors which depend upon it: which
might make him so unwilling to taste thereof, so earnestly desirous to decline
the same. For many of the Fathers think, that Christ did pray more vehemently
to have that cup pass from him, because he saw the Jews so eagerly inclined to
force it on him; and knew that if he drank thereof, and took it from their
murderous and bloody hands, it could not but draw down upon them such most
grievous punishments as the dispersing of their nation, and the rejection of
them from the Covenant and grace of God. For thus says Origin Orig. in Mat.
tract. 35.
, for those men then, whom he would not have perish by his passion he said,
Father if it be possible let this cup pass from me, that both the world might
be saved (which was the principal matter aimed at) and the Jews not perish by
his suffering. St. Ambrose thus Amb. in Luke l. 10. c. 22.
, Therefore said Christ, take this cup from me, not because the Son of God
feared death, but for that he would not have the Jews though wicked to perish,
Ne exitialis esset populo Passio sua quae omnibus esset salutaris; lest his
passion should be destructive to them, which was to be healthful unto all. Of
the same mind is Hierome also Hier. in Mat. 26.
. Christ said not, let the cup pass from me, but let this cup pass from me,
i. e. this cup provided by the Jews, which can have no excuse of ignorance if
they put me to death, considering that they have the Law and the Prophets which
foretell of me. So that Christ makes not this request as as fearing to suffer,
but in mercy to the former people, Sed misericordia prioris populi, ne calicem
ab illis propinatum bibat, that he might not drink the cup which was offered by
them. Whose judgment in this point is so well approved by venerable Bede Beda
in 26. Mat.
our Countryman, that he is loath to change the words. And certainly this
consideration of those worthies stands on very good reason B. Bilson. p. 356*
357.
, For if he so much pitied the ruin of the City and desolation of their land
by the hands of the Romans, that he wept upon the thought thereof; what sorrow
and disconsolation shall we think he took to think of the perpertual
destruction of so many thousands and their posterities for ever, through their
own madness in thirsting after his blood? What grief and anguish must it be
unto him to foresee the rejection of that people from the favor of God, by
their rash and wicked desire to have his blood upon them and upon their
children at his arraignment before Pilate? For if Moses and Paul so vehemently
grieved at the fall of their Brethren according to the flesh, that for their
sakes the one wished to be wiped out of the book of God, the other most
sacredly protested the great heaviness and continual anguish which he felt for
them in his heart: how much more might it grieve the Savior of the world, who
much exceeded both the other in compassion and mercy, to see himself who came
to bless them and to save them, to be the rock and stone of offense that
should stumble them and their children, striking them with perpetual
blindness, and bruising them with everlasting perdition, through their
unbelief?

But whether this was so or not (as it may be probable) most sure it is that
many things concurred together to make up the measure of those sarrowes, fears
and terrors, which were then upon him; and against which he prayed so
fervently, and with such prostration. Insomuch that having offered up his
prayers and supplication to him that was able to save him from death with
strong crying and tears Heb. 5.7.
; to him who was able had he pleased to take away that cup from him, but
howsoever able and willing both to mitigate the sharpness of it and abate the
bitterness; the Lord thought fit to send him comfort from above by his
heavenly Ministers. And there appeared an Angel unto him from heaven,
strengthening him Luke 22.43.
; (...) says the Greek, which by the vulgar Latin is translated confortans
eum, comforting him* by the translatour of the Syriack, confirmans eum,
strengthening or confirming him, as our last translation. The word in the
Original will bear both constructions, both being of especial use in the
present business. For if we look upon our Savior in the midst of his
anguish, praying unto the Lord, that if it were possible, that cup might pass
from him; the Angel may be thought to be sent unto him with a message of
Comfort, touching the mitigation of his sorrows, the speedy end they were to
have, and the inestimable benefit that by his sufferings should redound unto
all the world: and then it is confortans e^m, as the vulgar Latin. But if we
look upon him as resolved to submit himself to his Fathers pleasure, (not my
will but thy will be done) and patiently to endure whatever he should lay upon
him; the Angel may be thought to be sent unto him, to strengthen and confirm
him in that resolution: and then it is confirmans eum, as the translatour of
the Syriack reads it. But which soever of the two it was, certain it is, that
the appearance of the Angel had some special end. God does not use to send
about those heavenly messengers, but on businesses of great importance. And
though there be no constat in the book of God, what this business was, on
which the Angel was sent down by the Lords appointment, yet we may probably
conceive, that it was to give him this assurance that his prayers were heard;
whether they tended to the mitigation of his present sorrows, or the accepting
of his death and passion, as a full, perfect and sufficient satisfaction for
the sins of the world. For the Apostle having told us in the fifth to the
Hebrews, that when in the days of his flesh he had offered up prayers and
supplications with strong crying and tears, unto him that was able to save him
from death; he adds in the very next words, that he was heard in that he
feared: that is to say, the prayers and supplications which he made to God were
not ineffectuall, but he obtained that of the Lord for which he prayed so
earnesly and devoutly to him, in regard that his said prayers proceeded (...),
says the text, from a godly and religious fear, such as the School men call by
the name of the fear of reverence. Now that the matter of these prayers might
be in reference to his offering of himself for the good of mankind, many of
the Fathers say expressly. St. Paul here says (as Ambrose writes) that
Christ offered prayers and supplications Ambros. in Heb. 5.
, non timore mortis, sed nostrae causa salutis, not so much for the fear of
death, as for man's salvation; and thereupon Paul says in another place, that
the blood of Christ cried better things for us, then the blood of Abel; so
says Primasius Primasius in Heb. 5.
, Totum quicquid egit Christus in carne, etc. All that Christ did in the flesh
were prayers and supplications for the sins of mankind; and the shedding of
his blood was a strong cry, in which he was heard of God his Father in regard
of his reverence, i. e. for his voluntary obedience and most perfect charity.
The like says Haymo on the text Haymo ibid.
, a writer of the middle times, but of very good worth, who keeps himself in
the particular to the words of Primasius. But above all Sedulius comes most
home to the point in hand, a writer of good credit under Theodosius the 2. Ann.
430. or thereabouts. Christ, says he, prayed with tears] not shed for fear of
death, but for our salvation; and was heard] of God the Father, when the Angel
did comfort him; for his reverence] either his with his Father, or else his
Fathers toward him. So that if either the mitigation of those fears and
terrors which were then upon him, or the acceptance of his death in ransom for
the sins of the world, were any part of those prayers which he made in the
Garden, as in all likelihood they were: it could not but be most comfortable
news unto him that his prayers were granted, and the Angel a most welcome
messenger by whom such comfortable news was sent. And this we may the rather
think to be the message which the Angel brought, in regard that after this we
find no more mention of those fears and sorrows which formerly had seized upon
him; but that he cheerfully prepared himself for the stroke of death, and
called up his Disciples to go forth to meet it. So careful was his heavenly
Father of his dearest Son, as not to hold him in suspense; but to impart unto
him upon all occasions how grateful his obedience was, how infinitely he was
pleased with that zeal, constancy, which he had manifested in his greatest and
most fiery trials. In which regard no sooner had he driven away the Devil, in
that great temptation which at first he suffered in the Wilderness, but behold
the Angels came and ministered unto him Mat 4.11.
; as St. Matthew tells us. And here, no sooner had he overcome the
difficulties which flesh and blood and humane frailty had proposed unto him;
and called upon the Lord for strength to go through with so great a work, and
for the acceptance of that offering he was then to make: but straight an Angel
came from Heaven, to strengthen him in his sufferings, and comfort him in his
afflictions. No mention after this of those fears and sorrows which formerly
had seized upon him; and of the which he had complained so sensibly unto his
Disciples.

But then perhaps it will be said, If on the coming of the Angel he received
such comforts, what then could bring him to that Agony which the Gospel speaks
of, and speaks of in the very next words to those of the appearance of the holy
Angel: an agony so sharp and piercing, that his sweat was as it were great
drops of blood Luke 22.44.
? I know indeed, that many do impute this Agony to that extremity of grief
which our Savior suffered, and others to those hellish and infernal torments
which they conceive (according to the new devise) to have been within him; and
that the bloody sweat which the Scriptures speak of, was an effect or
consequent of those griefs and torments. But on a further search into the
business we shall find it otherwise: the Agony into which he fell proceeding
not from the extremity of pain or sorrow, but from a greater vehemence in
prayer. (And being in an agony says the Text* he prayed more earnestly,) in
which he was so zealously inflamed against sin and Satan, that he powered forth
not only the strength of his soul, but the very spirits of his body. For though
the word Agony be sometimes improperly taken for fear, yet properly it is
affirmed (...), of him that is ready to descend to any combat or conflict, as
Etymolog. Magnum ex Orion.
Orion a most ancient Grecian observes: in which regard Damascen gives this
exposition of the word, (...), standing in doubt, or fearing lest we fail in
our undertakings, we are said to be agonized, or to be in an agony. And hereto
Aristotle that great and wise Philosopher agrees also, where he shows not
only that an agony may be where there is no fear, as when we attempt things
honest and commendable, though difficult to be attained, (...) Aristot. Rhetor.
l. 1. c. 9.
, for which men strive and are agonized without fear: but also that sweating in
an agony proceeds not from fear, but rather from zeal and indignation. An agony
says he is not the passing of the natural heat from the higher parts of the
body to the lower, as in fear; but rather an increase of heat, as in anger and
indignation: and he that is in an agony is not troubled with fear or cold Id.
in Problem. sect. 2. qu. 26.
, (which crosses ex diametro this new devise) but with expectation of the
event. So that an agony (to speak properly) infers neither fainting fear nor
deadly pain, as some misconceive it, but notes a contention or intension of
body or mind, whereby men labor to perform their desires, and strive against
the dangers which may defeat them of and in their enterprise. And for this
agony of Christ's, if we compare it with those circumstances which attend the
text, we shall plainly see, that it proceeded not from the extremity of grief
or sorrow, against both which he had received strength and comfort by the hands
of the Angel, but from that fervency of zeal and contention of mind to prevail
in that which he desired, and to remove all rubs and difficulties which were
set before him. The Devil as we know did attempt our Savior, at the first
entrance on his Ministry, when he was first proclaimed to be the Son of God;
though then he had no more quarrel to him, then to find out the truth of that
proclamation, whether he were the Son of God or not, which the voice from
heaven proclaimed him openly to be. But since that time there had been many
bickerings between them, in which the Devil always went away with the loss: his
Ministers disgraced and their crimes laid open, even in the sight of all the
people; his Kingdom in the souls of men in danger to be lost for ever, by the
preaching of that Gospel which our Savior taught; and as a preparative
thereunto himself ejected violently out of many of his strongest holds and
fortresses, I mean the bodies of those men which he had possessed. And then why
may we not conceive that either to revenge himself on his mortal enemy, in a
desperate hope to prevail against him, he had now mustred all his forces for
another onset, and was resolved to put the whole fortune of his affairs upon
the issue of this combat; and by the issue and success thereof (of so great a
battle) to decide the title which he pretended and laid claim to in the souls
of mankind? Why may not this be thought the conflict, in which our Savior was
engaged, or willingly had engaged himself on the appearance of the Angel; for
the success whereof he prayed so earnestly, (...), as in the Greek, with
greater earnestness of mind and fervency of zeal, then he did before? For my
part I can see no reason but it might be so. Certain I am that (...) is derived
from (...), which signifies a race, a wrestling, or some such solemn public
exercise, and that (...) in the plural number, denote such things as appertain
to those games and exercises. Thus read we in the book of Maccabees, (...), Cum
quinquennalis Agon Tyro celebraretur, i. e. Maccab. l. 2. c. 4. v. 18.
when the games of every fifth year were kept at Tire: and in the first to the
Corinthians, (...), nam qui in Agone contendit, etc. i. e. Every man that
striveth for the mastery, as the English reads it 1 Cor. 9.25.
. And it is plain to any who is conversant in the Greek, not only that (...),
does signify to be solicitous and in anguish, but also to contend or strive
about the victory, but also that (...), (the word here used by the Evangelists)
though it does generally denote a dismaying sorrow, yet is used sometimes to
express, Luctantis angustias difficillimas, the straights which Wrastlers are
reduced to in those public exercises.

But whether this conjecture be approved or not (for I leave it arbitrary)
there is no question to be made, but that the bloody sweat which the Scripture
speaks of, proceeded not from fear but fervency; not from the anguish of his
heart, but from that heat of zeal and strong intension of mind which was then
upon him. It could not come from fear, that is certain; for fear, as Galen has
observed, does presently drive the blood and spirits toward their Fountain
Galen de causis Symptom. l. 2.
and contracteth them together, by cooling the uttermost parts of the body. For
on the apprehension of any imminent danger, the blood and spirits which are
naturally diffused through all the parts of the body, repair immmediately unto
the heart as the principal fortress for the strength and preservation of the
whole; repercussis spiritibus atque in intimos cordis sinus receptis, as we
read in Scaliger Scaliger de subtilitate.
. So that the blood and spirits being drawn back to the heart, or toward their
fountain as Galen says, as usually they are in the case of fear; it cannot be
that any extremity of fear should be the cause of such an unusual kind of
sweat, as that which did befall our Savior: And on the other side, it is no new
thing that fervency of zeal, and a vehement contention of the mind, being they
heat and thin the blood (and not cool and thicken it, as we are told by Galen
that fear does most commonly) should produce such a strange effect as a bloody
sweat. For the Physician (whosoever he was) who writ the Book De utilitate
respirationis, amongst Galens works Inter opera Galeni. Tom. 7.
does affirm for certain, Contingere poros ex multo aut fervido spiritu adeo
dilatari ut etiam exeat sanguis per eos, fiatque sudor sanguineus, that is to
say, it sometimes happens that abundant or fervent spirits do so dilate the
pores of the body, that blood issues out by them, and so the sweat may be
bloody. Which observation being true (as no doubt it is) we may well think if
we look to the order and sequence of the Gospel, that the fervent zeal of our
Redeemer extremely heating the whole body, melting the spirits, rarifying the
blood, opening the pores, and so coloring and thickning the sweat of Christ,
might in most likelihood be the cause of that bloody sweat. Does not the Gospel
say expressly, that being in an Agony (or dangerous and dreadful conflict) he
prayed more earnestly Luke 22 44.
, and his sweat was as it were great drops of blood falling down to the ground?
and was not then that bloody sweat a natural and proper effect of that fervency
and zeal of prayer, of which it is made a consequent in the holy Gospel?
Certain I am that Zuinglius one of the first men that labored in the present
Reformation of the Church did conceive it so: Zuinglius in histor. Passi^.
Non lacrymas modo oculis sed and sanguinis guttas e corpore exprimit seria and
devota oration, etc. Serious and fervent prayer (says he) does not only draw
tears from the eyes, but a bloody sweat also from the body, as we see in
Christ's agony. And does not Bernard say to the same effect Bern. in ramis Psalm.
ser. 3
, that Christ falling into an agony, and praying the third time, seemed to
weep, not only with his eyes, but with all the parts of his body? Nor does it
hinder us at all that the drops are said to be great, ( great drops of blood,
as in the English) such as the Greeks call (...), and the Latins Grumi; but
does rather help us. (...) indeed does sometimes signify the congealed parts
of that which is liquid, and the compacted pieces of that which is powdered.
But it stands very well with reason, that Christ's sweat might be thick, by
reason it issued from the inmost parts of his body, and was mixed with blood,
or might break out in great and eminent drops, as coming from him violently and
abundantly; and being colored with blood, and congealed with the coldness of
the air, might trickle down like strings, or great drops of blood, to the very
ground. The greater those drops seemed to be, the greater was that fervency of
Spirit in which he prayed unto the Lord, the greater the occasion he had to
power sorth those prayers. He was now in his great encounter with the powers of
darkness, the safety and salvation of all mankind depended on the issue and
success thereof; Angels, and Archangels, and all the hosts of heaven were
gathered as it were together, to behold the combat. And then what marvail can
it be, says our learned Prelate B. Bilson, p. 384.
, if the glory of Gods judgment and the power of his wrath, the number of our
sins, and neglect of our own state; the sharp and eager malice of Satan (whom
he had to do with) made Christ with all possible fear of the great might and
Majesty of the Judge, all passionate sorrow for the crimes and contempts of the
Prisoners; all earnest and zealous intention of prayer against the impugner and
impediment of man's deliverance, to agonize himself into a bloody sweat? But if
this sweat of our Redeemer proceeded not from natural causes, but was rather
supernatural and miraculous, as Hilarie, Rupertus, Beda, and others do conceive
it was: neither the fear of Hell pains, nor the sense of sorrow could be the
cause thereof, as some think it was: for being supernatural and miraculous, it
could not have a natural and proper cause. Rather it might be wrought by Gods
mighty power, as a preparative to that Priesthood which he was to execute, and
to that all-sufficient Sacrifice which he was to make Id. p. 399.
. For in the oblations of the law which prefigured the death of Christ, it was
ordained that not only the sacrifice was to be slain by the shedding of blood,
but that the person of the Priest was sanctified, as well as the sinner
presented by the Priest to God, with earnest and humble prayer to make
atonement for the trespass. And since the Truth must have some resemblance with
the Figure, CHRIST in the Garden might perform some points required to the
Priesthood, as the sanctifying of himself with his own blood, and the
presenting of himself to be the redemption and remission of our sins, with
instant and intensive prayer for the Transgressors. Either of these may be
admitted as agreeable to the rules of piety, though for my part I incline
rather to the former, as having such a firm foundation in the Text it self.

Thus have we taken a full view of those templations and afflictions which our
Savior suffered in his soul, (without any participation which the body had in
them) under Pontius Pilate. In which though there were nothing like to the
pains of Hell, (which shall be specified hereafter in a place more proper) yet
there was in him such an accumulation of fears and sorrows, and
disconsolations, as might entitle him most properly to be Vir dolorum, a man
compounded as it were of nothing but griefs and sorrows. Next let us take a
brief survey of those afflictions which he endured in his body, and suffered
nor in soul at all but by the means and apprehension of the outward senses, as
it participates with the body in all weal and woe. And first no sooner had he
ended his devotions, and gathered together his Disciples, but behold a great
multitude arm^d with swords and staves came to apprehend him, and carry him
before the high Priests and Elders; amongst whom he was sure to find no mercy;
and but little justice. Judas Iscariot one of the twelve had sold his Master to
them for a piece of money Mat. 26.15.
, a most contemptible piece of money too; no more then thirty pieces of silver,
which in our money (reckoning each (...) or piece of silver at 2 s. 6 d)
Brerewood de Ponder. c. 1.5.
comes but to 3 l. 15 s. And though they had obtained their purpose at so cheap
a rate, yet they resolved that now they had him in their hands nothing should
save him but a miracle. To this end they suborned false witnesses to come in
against him, and if he did but offer to defend himself and refell their
calumnies, they have their servants in a readiness, to smite him on the face
and deride him, saying, Answerest thou the high Priest so Joh. 18.22.
? Whether he speak or hold his peace, it comes all to one; his silence being
counted a contempt, and his speech a scandal. If he pass only for a man, how
durst he say, that he was able to destroy the Temple, and in three days to
build it again Mar. 26.61, 66.
? If he declare himself for the Son of God, he is presently condemned of
Blasphemy; and contrary to the Laws both of God and man, which would have no
man punished more then once for the same offense; he is first made a scorn and
laughing stock to the standers by, and after hurryed to the Judge to receive
his sentence. No sooner had the Priests and Elders who had bargained for him,
pronounced him to be guilty of death Mar. 14.65.
, but presently they cause him to be blind-folded, that he might not see the
insolences which they meant to practice: next with a joint consent they spit
on his most sacred face, and buffet him, and smite him with the palms of their
hands; and then say to him in derision, that if he were the Christ of God, he
should prophecy unto them who is was that stroke him Mat. 26.68.
. Having thus pleased themselves with their own wickedness, they blind him
like a common Malefactor, and lead him away bound unto Pontius Pilate, to have
him formally condemned, and executed. The land of Iewry at that time was a
province of the Roman Empire; and none had power of life and death but the
Roman Presidents, or such to whom they delegated part of their authority, for
the ease of the subject. This made them say, it was not lawful for them to put
any man to death Joh. 18.31.
, as indeed it was not; not that they did forbear it or do it in regard of the
Passover, or that it was unlawful only in respect of the time. Assuredly that
bloody people who made no scruple of transgressing the whole moral law in such
an execrable murder, would very easily have dispensed with the ceremonial, had
that stood only in the way to their main design. But there was in it a divine
providence which had so disposed it, to make him every way conform to those
ancient types, which were given of him by the Lord in the Law and Prophets. Had
they proceeded with him by their own old Laws, (as question^esse they would
have done had it been in their power) they must have stoned him to death; that
being the punishment ordained for blasphemers, by the Law of Moses. But he had
signified before what kind of death he should die Joh. 1^.32.
, in the alluding of himself to the brazen Serpent, which was not in the power
of any to inflict upon him, but those who did proceed upon him according the
Laws of the Roman Empire.

Well then, to Pilate he is carried, and that too early in the morning Id. v.
28.
by the break of day. So swift their feet were to shed innocent blood, that the
Governor must be wakened before his hour, to hearken to their clamorous
accusations: and more then so, he must be won with fair words (if not bought
with money) to come forth unto them: for fear (good souls!) lest if they came
themselves into the judgment-hall they should be defiled, and consequently
debarred for that time from the holy Passover. Notable hypocites, that made no
conscience of committing a most wilful murder; and yet would make the world
believe that they stood upon the mint and cumin, the very niceties of the Law!
But here they were to fit their Compass to another wind. The crime of
Blasphemy, whereof they had convicted him amongst themselves, would not work on
Pilate: who questionless had rather that the Jews had been of any, or of no
religion, then of what they were. That which amongst the Romans was accounted
holy, was by the Jews esteemed an abomination Taci^. hist. l. 5.
; Profana illic ^^^^a qu^ apud nos sacra, as it is in Tacitus. They must find
somewhat else wherewithal to charge him, then that he called himself the
CHRIST, or the Son of God, if they expect that Pilate should condemn him for
them. And to this end they do impeach him of high treason, raising sedition in
the State, and setting up another King to oppose the Romans Luke 23.2.
; We found, say they, this fellow per^^^ting our nation, forbidding tribute to
be paid to Caesar, and calling himself Christ, ^ King: and whosoever makes
himself a King, speaks against Caesar at the least, and disputes his title to
that Kingdom. This last was it which more persuaded with the Governor, then
all the other branches of the accusation, which he knew well proceeded only
from the malice of that headstrong people: and yet he was resolved to try all
ways to appease their fury, at least not to emb^ue his own hands in the blood
of the innocent. He labored first to satisfy the people in it, tells them he
found no fault at all in the man Joh. 18.38.31.
accused; that if they had a law which declared him guilty, they might do well
to take him back, and try him according unto that. And when that would not work
upon them, but that they cried out Crucify him, crucify him, with the greater
violence, he caused him to be sent to Herod as being esteemed a Galilean, and
consequently belonging to his jurisdiction Luke 23.7, 10.
. Thither the chief Priests also followed him, and accused him vehemently; but
could prevail no more with Herod, then before with Pilate, save that the men of
war which belonged to Herod despised him as a man of no consideration, exposed
him to contempt and scorn, and returned him back. Pilate then seeing how
things went, and that somewhat must be done to content the Jews, fell on a
resolution to chastise him; ((...), i. e. by stripes and whipping, says
Theophylact Theop. in Luke 23.
,) and so let him go. And this accordingly he did, for the Text says, that
Pilate took Jesus and scourged him Joh. 19.1.
. And more then so, the unruly Soldiers were permitted to abuse him in what
sort they listed. They stripped him of his own clothes and arraied him in a
scarlot robe, they platted a crown of thorns which they set on his head, and
put a reed into his right hand Mat. 27.18, 19, 20.
: which done they ^owed the knee before him and mocked him, saying, Hail King
of the Jews; some of them in the mean time spitting on his face, some striking
him with their hand, and others smiting on the head with that very reed Joh.
19.3.
, which they had put into his hands in stead of a scepter. Never did innocent
man endure such a world of contumelies; yet this was not all: for in this
dress they bring him forth unto the people, that they might recreate
themselves with that woeful spectacle: and Pilate like those fellows which
show fights and motions, ushereth it in with Ecce homo, or Behold the man; and
yet declares before them all that he found no fault in him. A most just Judge;
first to pronounce him innocent, and then to scourge him; then to expose him to
such scorn and misery, and after that again to pronounce him innocent: to
absolve him of all crime which deserved death at the tribunal of his own
conscience, and presently to give him up to the peoples fury by an order and
determinate sentence from the judgment seat, in foro judicii; and in
conclusion, when he most wickedly and wilfully had given him over to be
murdered, whom by all laws of God and Men he was bound to save, to play the
open Hypocrite before all the world, washing his hands and saying in the
hearing of all the multitude, that he was innocent from the blood of that
righteous person Mar. 27.19.
. Never was innocent man accused more falsely, prosecuted more maliciously, nor
condemned more unjustly, then our blessed Savior.

And now to make a brief recapitulation of our Saviors sufferings under
Pontius Pilate, (taking in some of those which are yet to come) tell me if on a
due consideration of them, they were not beyond measure grievous and
unsupportable; yea such as would have made any mortal man to sink under the
mere burden of them to the bottom of hell: if he suffered not most bitter
things from heaven, earth, and hell, and in all that any way pertained to him.
He suffered at the hands of God his Father, and of men; of Jews and Gentiles,
of enemies insulting and of friends forsaking, (being betrayed by one of his
chief followers, forsworn by another, and abandoned by all the rest). He
suffered from the Prince of darkness, and all his merciless and cruel
instruments, from all the elements of the world, the Sun denying to him light,
the Air breath, and the Earth supportance. He suffered in all things that
pertained to him: that is to say, in his name, being condemned as a Blasphemer,
an enemy to Moses, the Law, the Temple, and the worship of God, to his own
nation also, to Caesar, and the Romans; traduced for a Glutton, a companion of
Publicans and sinners, a Samaritan, one that had a Devil, and finally did all
his miracles by the power of Beelzebub: next in the things which he possessed,
when they stripped him out of his garments, and cast lots upon his seamlesse
coat: in his Friends, greatly discomforted and dismayed at the ^ight of so many
miseries and afflictions, as were laid upon him: in his soul compassed round
with sorrows, and distressed with fears besetting him on every side, and that
even to death: in his body, when his cheeks were swollen with buffeting, his
face defiled with being spit on, his back torn with the whip, his head pierced
with the crown of thorns, his eyes offended with beholding the behavior of
his most proud insulting enemies, his ears with hearing their most execrable
Blasphemies, his taste with the myrrh and gall which they gave him to drink,
his smell with the stench and horror of the place wherein he was crucified,
being a place of dead men's souls: and to consummate the extremity of his pains
and sorrows, his hands and feet dug through with those nails which fastened
him unto the Cross, his side boared through with a spear; and during all the
time of his Crucifixion, his naked body publicly exposed to the view of all
spectators. So that we see his sufferings under Pontius Pilate deserve to have
a special place in this short compendium, this abstract of the Christian
faith, of our whole religion: and that it had not been enough to have expressed
his being crucified, dead, and buried, unless his sufferings under Pontius
Pilate had been mentioned also. Of which three points, viz. his crucifying,
death, and burial, being the consummation of his sufferings, and the last acts
of his humiliation, for the accomplishing of man's Redemption, we are next to
speak.

ARTICVLI 5. Pars 2da. (...). i. e. Crucifixus, mortuus, and sepultus. i. e.
Was crucified, dead and buried.
CHAP. VII. Of the Crucifying, death, and burial of the Lord JESUS CHRIST; with
Disquisition of all particulars incident thereunto.
HItherto have we spoken of those afflictions which our Redeemer suffered under
Pontius Pilate, in his soul and body, precedent to his Crucifixion; We are now
come to speak of those which he suffered on the Cross it self, together with
his death and burial, being the last acts of his Humiliation: for being dead
and buried once, he could fall no lower. But being his death upon the Cross,
was that only all-sufficient Sacrifice, made for the satisfaction of Gods
justice, and the redemption of all mankind from the powers of darkness,
typified in so many acts and figures of the Old Testament, whereof some relate
unto his death, and others to the manner of it: I shall first speak a word or
two, of those rites and sacrifices, and other figures which might or did relate
in Gods secret purpose to the coming of the promised Seed, and all the benefits
redounding to the world by his death and passion. First for those types which
might fore-signifie and represent the Messiahs death, they did consist
especially in those legal sacrifices, which God himself had instituted in the
Jewish Church, for the expiation of the sins of that people, and their
reconciliation to their God, yet so that even before the law there wanted not a
type and figure of it, every way as proportionable to the substance signified,
as any of the Legal, and commanded sacrifices. No sooner had God raised up seed
to Adam, thereby to give him hopes of the accomplishment of his deliverance and
redemption by the seed of the woman; but he was taught to represent the same in
a solemn sacrifice: as soon at least as his sons were come to age to assist him
in it. And in process of time it came to pass Genesis 4 3, 4.
that Cain brought of the fruits of the ground an offering to the Lord; and
Abel brought of the firstlings of his flocks and the fat thereof. An offering
from the hands of Cain, to show that even the wicked owe an homage to the Lord
God Almighty, from whose hands they receive all their temporal blessings, and
therefore were to pay back something in the way of a quit-rent, or
acknowledgment. Donis suis honorandus Rupert. de Operi. S. Trinit.
est ipse qui dedit, as Rupertus has it. A Sacrifice from the hands of Abel,
of righteous Abel, as our Savior did vouchsafe to call him; who not long after
was made a Sacrifice himself by his wicked brother. As if the Lord intended in
this double sacrifice to represent the death and passion of his Son Christ
Jesus: in that of Abel by his brother, the bloody and most barbarous fact of
the wretched Jews, upon their countryman, their brother of the house of Jacob;
in that of Abels lamb, the sacrifice of the Lamb of God, slain from the
beginning of the world Apoc. 5.9.
: as the Apostle in the Revelation. Now for the Legal sacrifices prescribed the
Jews, and those which had been offered by Gods faithful servants, before the
giving of the Law; they do so far agree in one, as to be comprised in the same
general definition. For generally a sacrifice may be defined to be, the
offering of a creature to Almighty God by the hands of a lawful Minister, to be
spent or consumed in his service. Which definition I desire the Reader to take
notice of, because we shall relate unto it when we come to speak of the
Christian sacrifice, or the Commemoration of this sacrifice in the Church of
Christ. Bellarmine in more words says no more then this Bellarm. de Missa. l.
^. c.
. His words be these, Sacrificium est externa oblatio soli deo facta, qua per
Legitimum ministrum creatura aliqua sensibilis and permane^s ad agnitionem
Divinae Majestatis and infirmitatis humanae, ritu mystico consecratur and
transmutatur. Only the last word transmutatur was put in of purpose, to
countenance the change or transubstantiation of the outward Elements into the
natural body and blood of Christ: which notwithstanding he is fain after to
expound by the word destruitur, i. e. consumed or destroyed, to make his Mass
as true, as proper, and as real a Sacrifice of Christ our Savior on the Altar,
as that which he himself once offered on the accursed Cross. But all the
Sacrifices of Gods people before the Law, were principally (if not only) (...),
such as were offered unto God by way of thankefulness, and due acknowledgement,
for all his benefits conferred on their souls and bodies. Of which kind also
were the peace offerings, Levit. 3. v. 1. the sacrifice of thanksgiving, Levit.
7.12. and the free will offering, verse. 16. in use amongst the Jews when the Law
was given: in celebrating which they were left at liberty to offer either male
or female Lev. c. 3. v. 1.6.
, as they would themselves; God giving his increase of their flocks and herds
by both the sexes, male and female, and pouring on both sexes, man and woman,
both temporal and spiritual blessings. Under the law the case was otherwise.
For then besides the Eucharistical sacrifices before remembered, (which for the
substance and intent were before in use amongst their Ancestors the holy
Patriarchs, though not accompanied with so many ceremonies) they had sacrifices
of another kind^, which they called (...), that is to say, expiatory or
propitiatory, for the taking away of their sins. In which as they did signify
by the death of the beast, the wages due to their iniquities, (for the wages of
sin is death Romans 6.
, says the great Apostle) so by the shedding of his blood did God please to
intimate that they should have the pardon and forgiveness of their sins, and
acceptance of their service, by the blood of Christ. These then, and only
these were Typi venturae victimae, the types and shadows of that great and
perfect Sacrifice which Christ our Savior was to offer for the sins of
mankind: and were called expiatorie and propitiatory, non proprie sed
relative; not properly, and in themselves, as if there were in them any power
or virtue, either to expiate our offenses, or be a Propitiation for our sins,
(for the blood of Bulls and Goats cannot take away sins Heb. 9.
, says the same Apostle) but relatively in relation to the Ordinance of
Almighty God by whom they had been instituted to that end and purpose, as
Baptism after was in the Church of Christ. And for that cause the people in the
celebrating of these ^olemn sacrifices, used to confess their sins to the Lord
their God; and by that means did make the Sacrifice more acceptable, and their
atonement with the Lord more assured and certain; but expiate ^ins those
Sacrifices of their own nature neither did nor could. In which sense Chrysostom
said well, (...) Chrysostom. hom. 17. in H^b.
. The LEGAL SACCRIFISE, says he, was rather an accusation then an expiation; a
confession rather of their weakness then a profession of their strength. Now
there are many things observable in these Legal Sacrifices, which were
performed and really made good in our Lord and Savior. For first the Sacrifice
or Beast sacrificed was to be a male, Levit. 1.3. and to be a male also without
spot, or blemish, or any corporal defect: And so it was with Christ our
Savior, the son of David, in whose lips there was found no guile, in whom
there was no sinful blemish, no defect of righteousness. The man who brought
the sacrifice was to present it at the door of the Tabernacle, and to lay his
hand upon the head of it, (in testimony that he laid all his sins thereon) that
it might be accepted as an atonement for him, Levit. 1.3, 4. And so CHRIST took
upon him our infirmities, and bare our sicknesses, Matthew. 8.17. and bare our
sins in his own body on the Tree, 1 Pet. 2.24. The Sacrifice being brought
before the door of the Tabernacle was after bound with cords, ( Bind the
Sacrifice with cords to the horns of the Altar, Psalm. 118.) slain by the
Priest, and his blood sprinkled round about upon the Altar, and then burnt with
fire Levit. 1.6.
. So the Redeemer of the world was led bound to Pilate, Matthew. 27.2. and after
fastened to the Altar of the Cross with cords of iron, employed in this, that
they crucified him, Matthew. 27.35. i.e. they nailed him to the Cross. The
Sacrificer was himself, Ipse enim and Sacrificium and Sacerdos August. Confess.
lib. 10 c. 43.
, for he himself was both the Sacrifice and the Priest, as St. Austin has it;
offering his body to the Lord, that by the hands of wicked and unrighteous men
it might be crucified and slain; and the whole Cross, the Altar upon which he
suffered, besprinkled round about with his precious blood issuing from his
hands and feet, and wounded side. As for the burning of the sacrifice, which
was usual in their whole burnt offerings, what could it signify but those
pains and sorrows, that bitter cup and all the terrible pangs thereof, which
even burnt up his heart and consumed his spirits, in the whole act of his
crucifixion? unless perhaps the ascending of the flames on high, might signify
the the gracious acceptance of the sacrifice by the Lord their God, as in that
of Noah Genesis 8.21.
, which carried up a sweet savor to the God of Heaven. In which regard, a
sweet savor, and an offering made by fire, do seem to be Synonymas in the
Book of God, as Exodus 24.41. Levit. 3.5. And what more pleasing savor could
ascend to God, what could he smell more acceptable from the sons of men, then
the oblation made unto him of the Son of God, reconciling the world unto his
Father? Finally, as the bodies of those beasts which were brought into the
Sanctuary by the high Priest for sin, (which was a differing kind of Sacrifice
from the whole burnt offering) were burnt without the Camp: so Jesus also
(says St. Paul) that he might sacrifice the people with his own blood suffered
without the Gate, Heb. 13.11, 12. And of this sort of Types and Figures were
both the Anniversary Sacrifice of the Paschal lamb, and the daily sacrifice of
the two lambs, one for the morning, and the other for the evening, Exodus 29.
both of them shadowing or prefiguring in Gods intention, though not in the
intent of the ignorant Jews, that all-sufficient Sacrifice of the Lamb of God,
which really and truly takes away the sins of the world Joh. 1.29.
. How far they are applyable in their other circumstances, we shall see
elsewhere.

As for the manner of Christ's death and passion, there were also some Types and
figures of it, as well before the Law, as after. What else was that of Isaac
the promised seed, the only and beloved son of his Father Abraham, from whom
the blessing promised by Almighty God to all the Nations of the world Genesis
18.18.
, was to be derived; commanded by an order from the Court of Heaven, to be
offered to the Lord for a burnt offering Genesis 22.2.
? What did it signify or prefigure but the offering of our Savior CHRIST the
dearly beloved Son of God, in whom his Father was well pleased, the expectation
of the Gen^iles, conceived so miraculously beyond hope and reason, above the
common course of nature, more then Isaac was? The mountain on which that
sacrifice was to be performed ibid.
, what did it signify, but that CHRIST should be offered up to God on a
mountain also, even the mount of Calvarie? Luke 23.33. What else the laying of
the wood upon Isaacs shoulders, wherewith himself the sacrifice, was to be
burned; but the compelling CHRIST to take up that Cross Joh. 19.17.
whereon himself was to be crusified, till Simon the Cyrenian came that way by
chance Mar. 15.10.
; to ease him of that heavy burden? The calling of the Angel out of heaven to
Abraham, bidding him stay his hand and not strike the blow, by means whereof
poor Isaac was reprieved from slaughter Genesis 22.11.
: does it not clearly signify the sending of an Angel from heaven to CHRIST
our Savior, to comfort him in the midst of his fears and troubles Luke 22.43.
, and to deliver him from those fears and terrors which make death dreadful
unto mankind, that he might undergo it with the greater cheerfulness? And when
the Devil had tried all ways imaginable to prevail upon him, out of a confident
presumption to effect his ends, and work some ^inful and corrupt affections to
have power upon him: what got he at last but a breathless carcass, a short
dominion of his body? The Ram, the fleshy part of CHRIST was all, which fell
unto his share, in that bloody sacrifice; and that he was to take, or nothing,
in stead of the Son, the Son of the eternal everliving God, whom he expected as
a prey, and in hope had swallowed. And yet this Type though full of clear and
excellent significancies, comes not so home to my purpose, unto the manner of
Christ's death, as does the Type and story of the Brazen Serpent. The people
journeying in the Wilderness, and murmuring (as they did too often) against God
and Moses, had provoked the Lord Numb. 21.5, 6.
. And the Lord sent fiery Serpents amongst the people, and they bit the people,
and much people of Israel died. No remedy for this but upon repentance. And
when the people had repented, the Lord said to Moses, Fac Serpentem aeneum,
etc. i. e. Ibid. v. 8.
Make thee a Brazen Serpent, and set it upon a pole, and it shall come to pass
that every one that is bitten, when he looks upon it he shall live. What use
makes CHRIST the Lord of this? As Moses lifted up the Serpent in the Wilderness
Joh. 3.14, 15
, even so must the son of man be lifted up; that whosoever believes in him
should not perish but have eternal life. Never was type more perfect and exact
then that. Man by his sins committed against God the Lord, had provoked his
anger; and the Lord gave him over to the hands of the old Serpent the Devil,
who pierced them with his fiery darts, consumed them with the heats of lust,
and drew them into everlasting danger both of soul and body. No way to cure
them of those wounds which the sting of sin and Satan had occasioned in them,
no way to quench those flames of natural concupiscence which were kindled in
them; and setting them at liberty from the powers of hell; but by fastening
Christ upon the Cross, as was the Brazen Serpent on the top of the pole: that
whosoever looked on him with the eyes of faith, might have the world crucified
unto them, and they themselves unto the world. The Ancients August. in Ioh. 3.
and in Gal. 3. and contr. Adimant. and Leo de Passi. Sermon. 10. etc.
generally did thus interpret and apply our Redeemers words, as being most
agreeable to the scope of the place, and to another of his Prophecies
concerning himself, saying, that he should be delivered unto the Gentiles, to
be mocked, scourged, and crucified Mat. 20.19.
, and thereby signifying what death he should die, Ioh. 18.32. Calvin indeed of
late days will not have it so, affirming that this application of our Saviors
words, nec textui quadrat, nec instituto, is neither agreeable to the Text, nor
our Saviors purpose: and that the plain and genuine meaning of the words is no
more then this, Quod Evangelii promulgatione erigendus sit Christus Calvin in
Ioh. c. 3.
, that the name of Christ should be advanced by the preaching or promulgating
of the Gospel. But whether this agree with our Saviors purpose in making a
comparison of himself, (or rather of his lifting up, as Moses lifted up the
Brazen Serpent) any which has eyes to see, and is not wilfully blind with
prejudice or prepossession may discern most easily! Compare the fifth and sixth
verses of the 21. of Numbers, with the 14. and 15. of the third of John, and
tell me, any man that has not absolutely captivated his own judgment to
another man's sense, if ever Type and Antitype did agree more punctually. The
parallel goes further yet, but beyond this purpose. For as the Brazen Serpent
of a remedy did become a disease, and was made an Idol of an Hieroglyphick, the
Children of Israel (in the times succeeding) burning incense to it 2 King. 18.4.
: So was it also with the Cross or Crucifix, in these later ages. For who
knows not how impiously it has been abused to Idolatry in the Church of
Rome, how grossly it has been adored by all sorts of people; and with what
impudence the greatest and most learned men have bestirred themselves in
defense of that most palpable and gross Idolatry: Bellarmine Bellarm. de sanct.
cult. l. 2.25.
sparing not to say, (though he hope to save himself by a strange distinction
of his own) that the same honor which is due to Christ crucified, is to be
also given to the Cross or Crucifix. But this is only by the way, if it be not
out of it, I return again.

These passages premised, we now proceed unto the story of our Saviors
passion. We left him last in Pilates Hall. The Priests and people of the Jews
cried out to have him crucified according to the Roman fashion. No death but
that which was accounted the most shameful and most ignominious of all manner
of deaths, and was pronounced to be accursed, ( He is accursed of God that
hangs on the tree Deuteronomy. 21.23.
,) by the Law of Moses; would content their malice. And Pilate gave sentence
(says the Text) that it should be as they required Luke 23.24.
; and delivered him to them to be crucified Matthew. 27.26.
. CHRIST had not else redeemed us from the curse of the Law, (for cursed is he
that abides not in all the words of this law to do them, Deuteronomy. 27.26.) had he
not been made a curse for us Gal. 3.13.
, that is to say, had he not willingly submitted to that death of the Cross, of
which the Lord thus said by the mouth of Moses, Cursed is every one that is
hanged on a tree, Deuteronomy. 21.23. the curse and rigor of the law being laid upon
him. Christ was no otherwise made a curse then so, by enduring this most
shameful death of the Cross, this mortem autem Crucis Phil. 2.8.
, for the sins of man. God says St. Ambrose made Christ a curse after the same
manner, as a sacrifice for sin in the law is called sin, Ambros. in Gal. c. 3.
Bropterea pro maledictis oblatus factus est Maledictum; and therefore being a
Sacrifice for those who were accursed, he became a curse. CHRIST (says St.
Chrysostom) was not made subject to the curse of transgression (which is the
greatest curse a man can fall into, and that which makes him most detested and
hated of God) but admitted in himself another curse, Chrysostom. in Gal. c. 3.
that is, the punishment of sin, or the curse for sin: and this, says he, is
(...), another curse but not the same. CHRIST then was made a curse for us, not
that he was detested of God, or deprived of blessedness, (which was the curse
denounced by Moses against those who kept not the words of the law to do them):
but that he was adjudged to this shameful and inglorious death, which God and
man did hold accursed; abolishing one curse and undergoing another, Et vincens
maledictum de maledicto August. in Gal. 3.
, as St. Augustine has it. But to go on, our Savior being condemned to this
cursed death, a death which none but Thieves and Murderers, and false Bondmen
were condemned by the laws of Rome; they hale him to the same with as cursed a
violence: sparing no cruelty or disgrace as they led him to it, which a
barbarous people could inflict, or an innocent suffer. They made him carry that
Cross at first, on his own shoulders, which after was to carry his whole body.
And when they eased him of that burden, and laid it upon Simon the Cyrenians
back, it was not out of pity, but upon design; that coming more fresh and
lively to the place of suffering, he might the longer be a dying, and they the
longer glut their eyes with that pleasing spectacle. It was the custom of the
Jews as of other people, to give wine to those who were condemned, and led to
their execution, to comfort and revive their spirits, the better to enable them
for the stroke of death. Even this humanity shall be corrupted to increase his
miseries, and add unto the scorn which which were put upon him. In stead of
wine, some of them gave him vinegar mixed with Gall Matthew. 27.3, 4.
to drink, and thereby literally fulfilled in him, that which was
metaphorically said of himself by David, in some time of his troubles, when he
was fed with the bread of sorrow and the waters of affliction: viz. Psalm. 69*21.
they gave me gall for meat, and in my thirst they gave me vinegar to drink.
They stripped him of his garments which they shared amongst them, and lifting
up his naked body (a lamentable spectacle of reproach and shame) extended him
upon the Cross, stretched him in all his joints till the sinews cracked, and so
nailed him fast: thereby accomplishing that in him, which was foresignified by
David, (but literally executed upon Christ, not David) they have pierced my
hands and feet, Psalm. 22.16. Nor staid they here, but to add shame and infamy
to his other sufferings, they cause him to be crucified between two
Malefactors, to make the world believe, if it had been possible, that they were
equally involved in the same guilt, because involved alike in the same
condemnation. Nay more then that, vinegar and gall which they gave him to
drink, was but a taft of that extremity of gall and bitterness, which they had
in their hearts; which they did vomit out in blasphemous words, exposing him to
contempt and scorn, not only with the bystanders, but the passers by; the very
malefactors joining with them to increase his sorrows, as if thereby they could
have mitigated and removed their own. So that he might most justly have cried
out and said, Lam. 1.12.
Consider and behold all ye that pass by the way, if ever there were sorrow
like my sorrow which was done unto me, wherewith the Lord afflicted me in the
day of the fierceness of his wrath. Never so true a man of sorrows. In which
extremity of pain and grief of heart, no wonder if nature made a start, and
seemed to tremble at the apprehension of so many miseries, especially
considering that the most bitter draught of that deadly CVP was to drink off
yet. And in this anguish and distress it was that he cried aloud, Mat. 27.46.
Eli, Eli, Lamasaba^hthani, that is to say, My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me? Which words, because they seem to some to be an argument o^ proof
for those hellish pains, which they have fancied to themselves in the soul of
Christ; by others are conceived to proceed out of desperation B. Bilsons
survey, p. 289.
, which is indeed one of the greatest torments in the pit of hell: we will the
rather look into them, to see whether any such constructions can be gathered
thence.

Now for the clearer exposition of this text of Scripture we will lay these
grounds, 1. That dereliction and forsaking do no where throughout Gods book,
import damnation, but are applied always to the judgments of this present
life. 2. That in wicked and udgodly men, it argues reprobation from grace, and
despair of glory, which to imagine of CHRIST were rather a most furious
blasphemy then an erroneous folly. 3. That in the godly, (as in David whose
words they were) they either note destitution of help, or diminution of
comfort; but neither in David nor in Christ the true pains of the damned: and
4. That no construction must be made of these words which may decrease in
Christ the fullness of truth and grace, which never wanted in his soul, or draw
him within the compass of mistaking or mistrusting Gods favor toward him. For
how could he be tainted with any distrust of Gods mercy and purpose toward
him, who with such confidence commended his pure Spirit into the hands of his
Father Luke 22.46.
; who in the midst of his extremities did promise to invest the penitent Thief
in the joys of Paradise Verse. 43.
; and finally, who in the height of his afflictions, when he spoke these words,
had such an interest in God as to call him his own God. My God, my God, and not
God only, as the text informs us. Which grounds so laid, we may the better
understand the meaning of the words before us, and what construction they will
bear, agreeable and conform to the rule of faith. And first I know that many of
the ancient Fathers were of opinion, that as Christ took upon him at this time
the person of all mankind, so he made this complaint not in behalf of himself,
but of his members; as when he said to Saul in another case, Saul, Saul, why
persecutest thou me Act. 9.4.
, he did not mean it of his person which was then in heaven, but of his Church
militant here on earth. Thus Cyprian for the Latin Fathers, Quod pro iis
voluisti intelligi, qui deseri a Deo propter peccata meruerant Cyprian. de
passione.
; this complaint of being forsaken, thou would have understood (as spoken) of
them who had deserved to be forsaken of God in regard of their sins. To the
same purpose Augustine, Epistola 120. and Leo in his 16. Sermon de Passione.
Thus also venerable Beda, Quare dereliquis^i me, i.e. meos, etc. Beda in Ps. 21.
. Why, says he, have thou forsaken me, i. e. mine; because sin (says he) did
keep them back from saving me, that is mine. It is plain then, that the head
does not speak here in his own Person; for how could he be possibly forsaken,
or out of hope of salvation? Thus Athanasius for the Greeks At hanas. de in
carnat. Chri.
(in fewer words, but as significantly as the others) Christ spoke these words
in our person, for he was never forsaken of God. And to this purpose speaks
Theodoret in Psalm. 21. and Euthymius on the same place also. Thus also
Damascene, Christ says he, having put on our person, and appropriated the same
unto him, prayed on that sort; Damas. de fide Orthod. 3.24.
as when a man does put on another person out of pity or charity, and in his
stead speaks such words sometimes, (...), as do not agree unto himself.

But this construction of the text, though both pious and profitable, is not so
generally received but that some others of the Fathers do expound them
otherwise, who think that this complaint was poured out by Christ, because he
saw himself left helpless to the rage of the Jews, and that he seemed so long
forsaken of his heavenly Father, not in regard of inward grace and comfort, but
of outward help. An exposition so agreeable to the text in all the
circumstances of it, that some of those, who did expound the same of Christ's
not speaking in his own person, but in the person of his members, do approve
thereof. For thus St. Hierom Hieron. in Matthew. 27.
.

Marvail not at Christ's complaint of being forsaken, when thou see the
scandal of the Cross. St. Ambrose thus, Ambros. de fide l. 2. c. 3.
He speaks as a man, which was no shame for him to do, because that we our
selves when we are in danger, do think our selves forsaken of God. Which words
Venerable Bede, Rabanu^ Maurus, and Aquinas in their Expositions of this
Scripture do repeat and follow. And this St. Augustine well approves of, Quare
me dereliquisti, tanquam dicere^, relinquendo me, etc. August. Ep. 120.
. Why have thou forsaken me, as if he should have said, by leaving me in the
time of my trouble; because not hearing me when I call upon thee, thou art far
off from my salvation, praesenti scilicet salute hujus vitae, that is to say,
in reference to this present life. And Lyra also says the same, though of
later date, Lyra in Mat. 27.
Dixit Christus se derelictum a Deo Patre, quia dimittebat eum in manibus
occidentium; i. e. Christ says, he was forsaken of God his Father, because he
was left in the hands of them that slew him. And so Theodoret for the Greeks
Theodoret. Psalm. 21.
, CHRIST (says he) calls that a dereliction (or forsaking of God) which was
a permission of the Godhead, that the humanity might suffer. With these agree
some Doctors of the Protestant Churches of great name and credit, as Bucer and
Bullinger in their Comments on the 27. of S. Matthew, and Munster in his
observations on the 21. Psalm. Other forsaking, other dereliction, more then
the leaving of him in the hands of his enemies, they acknowledge none: sure I am
no withdrawing from him of the divine presence and assistance of God. For so
Tertullian does affirm, that God was said to have forsaken him (in a sort) dum
hominem ejus tradidit in mortem, Tertul. adv. Praxeam c. 30.
whilst he delivered him in his humane nature to the hands of death; but that
he did not leave him (altogether) in that it was into the hands of his Father,
that he commended his Spirit. Fulgentius says as much, or more; saying, that
though in the death of Christ his soul was to forsake his dying body Fulgent.
ad Thrasimund. l. 3.
, Divinitas tamen Christi nec ab anima nec a earne potest separari suscepta;
yet the Divinity could not be separated from his soul, nor from the body
neither, which it had assumed: And how far Christ was then from thinking that
he had either lost the favor of Almighty God, or his own interest in disposing
of the heavenly glories, does evidently appear by that of Hilari^: derelinqui
se ad mortem questus est, sed tunc Confessorem suum secum in regno Paradisi
suscepit Hilarious de Trinitate l. 10.
. CHRIST, says he, does complain of his being forsaken, or left unto the
powers of death; and yet even then he received the Thief that did confess him
into the assured hopes of Paradise: Where by the way, all the forsaking, which
this Father does take notice of, was derelictio ad mortem, a leaving of our
Savior to the hands of death. The Schoolmen also say the same, who make six
kinds of dereliction or forsaking, according as I find them in our Reverend
Field Dr. Field of the Church, l. 5. c. 18.
. 1. By disunion of person, 2. by loss of grace, 3. by diminution or weakness
of grace, 4. by want of the assurance of future deliverance and present
support, 5. by denial of protection; and 6. by withdrawing all solace, and
destituting the forsaken of all present comfort. Then they declare, that it is
an impious thing to think that Christ was forsaken any of the four first ways,
in that the unity of his Person was never dissolved, his graces neither taken
away nor diminished; no possibility that he should want assurance either of
present support or future deliverance. But for the two last ways, he may be
rightly said (say they) to have been forsaken, in that his Father had denied to
protect and keep him out of the hands of his cruel, bloody, and merciless
enemies, no way restraining them, but suffering them to do the uttermost of
that which their wicked malice could invent; and that nothing might be wanting
to make his sorrows beyond measure sorrowful, had withdrawn from him also that
accustomed solace which he was wont to find in God, and removed from him all
those things which might any way assuage the extremity of his pain and misery.
The Master of the Sentences gives it thus more briefly; Pet. Lomb. Sent. l. 3.
c. 21.
Separavit se divinitas quia substraxit protectionem; separavit se foris, ut
non esset ad defensionem; sed non intus defuit ad unionem. All the forsaking
then that the Lord complained of on the Cross, was, that he had been left to
the hands of his enemies, and that his heavenly Father had forborne all this
while to show any open sign of love or favor toward him in the sight of the
Jews, by whom he had been so afflicted, and reproached, and indeed blasphemed.
This is the most that can be said of this bitter and compassionte cemplaint
which our Savior made, whether in reference to himself, or to all mankind, or
perhaps to both; unless it may be further added, that he desired in these
words, as some think he did B. Bilson. p. 420.
, that God would please to manifest by some public sign, what an esteem he had
of that sacred Person whom both the Jews and Gentiles had so much oppressed and
despised, and of whom he had seemed all this while to make little reckoning.
And this is that which Athanasius has observed Athanas. cont. Arian. Oration.
4.
in his fourth Oration or Discourse against the Arians who stood much upon it;
Lo (says he) upon Christ's speech (why have thou forsaken me) the Father
showed himself to be even then in Christ, as ever before. For the earth knowing
her Lord to speak did straightway tremble, and the vail rent in twain, and the
Sun did hide himself, and the rocks clave in sunder, and the graves were
opened, and the dead men rose. And that which was no less mavelous indeed,
the standers by which before denied him, confessed him to be the Son of God.

To proceed then, this exclamation being made, and gaining no more from the
standers by, but addition of scorn to misery, and contempt to scorn, the people
mocking him, as if he had called upon Elias to come and help him; he cried out,
I thirst Joh. 19.28.
: and even the matter of that cry, gives them another opportunity to put a
scorn upon him, and increase his griefs. One of them, says the Scripture, ran
and took a sponge, and filled it with vinegar, and put it on a reed, and gave
it him to drink Matthew. 27.48. Where mark the malice of the man, (if he may so
be called, which had no humanity). Our Savior called for drink to assuage his
thirst; the wicked fellow gives him vinegar, not to accelerate his death, or
send him out of hand to the other world, for fear Elias indeed should come to
help him, as Theoph. in Mat. 27.
Theophylact thinks, but rather to continue him the longer in those terrible
pains. It is the quality of vinegar, as we read in Pliny, that it stancheth the
effusion of blood. Sanguinis profluvium sistunt ex aceto Plin. Hist. Not.
, as that Author has it. And therefore I concur with them, who think this
vinegar was given him to no other end, but out of a most barbarous purpose to
prolong his torments, for fear least otherwise he might bleed to death, and put
too speedy an end to their sports and triumphs. But contrary to the expectation
of this wicked man, no sooner had our Savior took a taste thereof, but the work
was finished. He cried out with a loud voice (Matthew. 27.50.) It is finished,
(Joh. 19.30.) and presently he bowed his head Joh. 19.30.
and said, Father into thy hands I commend my Spirit, and having thus said, he
gave up the ghost Luke 23.46.
. In which it is to be observed that Christ now seeing all was finished, which
God required at his hands to the satisfaction of his justice for the sins of
man, and having fulfilled all those things which were spoken of him by the
Prophets; did voluntarily of his own accord, deliver up his soul into the hands
of his Father. He had before told us of himself, that he was the good
Shepherd, which gives his life for the sheep, Ioh. 10.11. that no man had
power to take it from him, (Si nemo, utique nec mors, and if none, then not
death, as we read in Chrysostom Feria 5. Passion. Sermon. 6.
but that he laid it down of himself, verse. 18. and that he gave his life as a
ransom for many, Matthew. 20.28. And the event showed that he was no braggard,
or had said more then he was able to perform. For the Evangelists declare that
he had sense and speech, and voluntary motion to the last gasp of his breath;
all which do evidently fail in the sons of men, before the soul parts from
the body. Which breathing out of his soul so presently, upon so strong a cry,
and so loud a prayer, seemed so miraculous to the Centurion who observed the
same, that without expecting any further Miracle, he acknowledged presently,
that truly this was the Son of God. And this St. Hierom noted rightly Hieron.
ad Hedib. qu. 8.
, The Centurion hearing Christ say to his Father, Into thy hands I commend my
Spirit, and statim sponte dimisisse spiritum, and presently of his own accord
to give up the ghost, moved with the greatness of the wonder, said, Truly this
man was the Son of God. The Fathers generally do affirm the same, ascribing
this last act of our Saviors Tragedy, not to extremity of pain, or loss of
blood, to any outward violence, or decay of spirits, but as his own voluntary
deed: and that though God the Father had decreed he should die, yet he did give
him leave and power to lay down his life of his own accord; that his obedience
to the will and pleasure of his heavenly Father might appear more evidently,
and the oblation of himself be the more acceptable. And to this purpose says
St. Ambrose, Ambros. de incarnat. c. 5.
Quasi arbiter exuendi suscipiendique corporis emisit spiritum, non amisit, i.
e. he did not lose his soul though he breathed it forth, as one that had it in
his own power, both to assume his body and to put it off. Eusebius to the same
purpose also, When no man had power over Christ's soul, he himself of his own
accord laid it down for man Eusebius. de them. Evang. l. 1.8. and lib. 3. c. 6.
, (...), and so being free at his own disposing, and not overruled by outward
force, he himself of himself made his departure from the body. The judgment of
the rest of the Fathers touching this particular, he that list to see, let him
consult St. Augustine, lib. 4 de Trinit. c. 13. Victor Antiochen. in Marc. c.
15. Leo de Passione Dom. sermon. 16. Fulgentius lib. 3. ad Thrasimundum, Sedulius
in Opere Paschali lib. 5. c. 17. Beda in Matthew. c. 27. Bernard in Feria 4.
Hebdom. poenosae. And for the Greeks, Athanasius, Orat. 4. contra Arianos.
Origin in Ioh. Hom. 19. Gregory Nyssen, in Orat. 1. de Christi Resurrectione;
Nazianzen in his Tragedy called Christus patiens. Chrysostom in Matthew. 27.
Homil. 89. Theophylact on the 27. of Matthew. and the 23. of Mark. and the 23. of
Luke. And for late Writers, Erasmus on Luke 23. and Mark. 15. Musculus on the
27. of Matthew, and Gualter Hom. 169. on John; all which attest most punctually
to the truth of this, that the death of Christ was not merely natural,
proceeding either from any outward or inward causes, but only from his own
great power, and his holy will. And to what purpose note they this, but first
to show the conquest which he had of death, whom he thus swallowed up in
victory 1 Cor. 15.
, as the Apostle does express it: and secondly, to show that whereas natural
death was the wages of sin, which could not be inflicted on him in whom no sin
was; he therefore did breath out his soul in another manner, then is incident
to the sons of men, to make himself a free will offering to the Lord his God,
and make himself a sacrifice for the sins of mankind, by yielding willingly to
that death which their sins deserved? And to this death, this voluntary, but
bodily death of the Lord CHRIST JESUS, and to that alone, the Scriptures do
ascribe that great work of the worlds redemption. For thus St. Paul unto the
Romans, When we were enemies we were reconciled to God, by the death of his
Son, Romans 5.11. to the Hebrews thus, For this cause he is the Mediator of the
New Testament, that by means of death for the redemption of the transgressions
which were under the first Testament, they which are called might receive the
promise of eternal inheritance, Heb. 9.15. if by Christ's death, it must be by
his bodily death, by effusion of his blood, and by no other death or kind of
death of what sort soever. And to this truth the Scriptures witness very
frequently. For thus St. Paul, we have redemption through his blood, Ephesians.
1.7. By his own blood has he entered into the holy place, having obtained
eternal redemption for us. Heb. 9.12. St. Peter thus, Forasmuch as ye know that
ye were not redeemed with corruptible things, as with silver and gold, but with
the precious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb without blemish, and without spot. 1
Pet. 1.18, 19. Finally, thus the Elders say unto the Lamb in the Revelation,
Thou wast slain, and have redeemed us to God, by thy blood, Apocal. 5 9. Which
being so, it is most certain that Christ abolished sin and Satan, by suffering
his body to be slain, and his blood to be shed unto the death or the sins of
the world; and not by any other way or means coordinate with it, as some
lately fable.

Yet so it is, that some men not content with that way of Redemption which is
delivered in the Scriptures, have fancyed to themselves another and more likely
means for perfecting that great work of the death of Christ, and teach us that
the shedding of his blood to the death of his body had not been sufficient for
the remission of our sins, if he had not also suffered the death of the soul B.
Bilsons Epistle to King James.
, and thereby wholly ransomed us from the wrath of God. Calvin first led the
dance in this, affirming very desperately (that I say no worse) Nihil actum
esse si corporea tantum morte defunctus fuisset, that Christ had done nothing
to the purpose, if he had dyed no other then a bod^ly death Calvin. in Harmon.
Evangel.
. He must then die the death of the soul, seeing that his bodily death would
not serve the turn; and they who pretermit this part of our Redemption (never
known before) and do insist so much externo carnis supplicio in the outward
sacrifice of his flesh, are insulsi nimis, but silly fellows at the best, be
they what they will; neither the Fathers nor Apostles, no nor Christ himself
(for ought I can see) to be excepted. Which error being thus sprung up, did in
an Age so apt to novelties and innovations, meet with many followers; and some,
too many indeed in this Church of England: some of them teaching, as it is
affirmed by their learned Adversary, that Christ redeemed our souls by the
death of his soul, B. Bilsons Survey, p. 132.
as our bodies by the death of his body. Now whereas the soul is subject to a
twofold death, the one by sin prevailing on it in this life, which is the
natural depriving, or voluntary renouncing of all grace; the other by damnation
in the world to come, which is the just rejecting of all the wicked from any
fellowship with God in his glory, and fastening them to everlasting torments in
hell fire: I would fain know which of these deaths it was, the first or second,
which our Savior suffered in his soul. I think they do not mean the last, and
am sure they cannot prove the first: for to talk, as some of them have done,
that there may be a death of the soul, a curse and separation from God Id.
ibid. p. 365.
, which of it self is neither sin, nor conjoined with sin, is such a Monster in
Divinity, as was never heard of till this Age. Certain I am the Scripture only
speaks of two kinds of death, the first and the second, both which we find
expressed in the Revelation: where it is said Apoc. 21.8.
the fearful and the unbeleeving, and the abominable, and murderers, and
sorcerers, and whoremongers, and Idolaters, and all liars, (all which no doubt
are under the arrest of the first death, whereof he speaks, chap. 2. verse.
11.) shall have their part in the lake which burns with fire and brimstone;
which is the second death. And sure I am, the Fathers, if they may be credited,
are contrary in terms express to this new device; not only acknowledging no
death in Christ but the death of the body, but also utterly disclaiming this
pretended death of the soul. In quo nisi in corpore, expiavit populi peccata?
Ambros. de fide l. 3. c. 5.
in quo passus est nisi in corpore? Wherein (says Ambrose) did he expiate the
sins of the people, but in his body? wherein did he suffer (death) but in his
body? St. Austin to this purpose also, Sacerdos propter victimam, quam pro
nobis offerret, a nobis acceptam; August. in Psalm. 109.
that Christ was made or called a Priest, by reason of that sacrifice which he
took of us, that he might offer it for us; which could be nothing but our body.
More plainly and exclusively, Fulgentius thus, Fulgent. ad Thrasimund. l. 3.
Moriente carne, non solum deitas, sed nec anima Christi potest ostendi
comm^rtua; that when Christ dyed in the flesh, neither his Deity nor his soul
can be demonstrated to have dyed also with it. The greatest Doctors of the
Greek Churches do affirm the same. Christ (says Theodoret) was called an high
Priest in his humane nature Theodoret Dialog* 1.
; (...), and offered none other sacrifice but his body only. And thus
Theophylact; A Priest may by no means be without a sacrifice; It was necessary
then that Christ should have somewhat to offer Theop. in Heb. 8.
: Quod autem offerretur praeter ejus corpus nihil quippiam erat; and there was
nothing which he had to offer but his body only. Athanasius in his third
Oration against the Ari^ns, and Nazianzen on that text, When Jesus had finished
all those sayings, do affirm the same; but not so clearly and exclusively as
the others did. Now as here is no death of the soul which possibly may be
imagined to have happened to Christ, if we will be judged by the Scriptures;
and as the Fathers Greek and Latin do so significantly and expressly disclaim
the same: so is it such an horrid speech, such a pang of blasphemy, as should
not come within the heart, nor issue from the mouth of any Christian. But this
I only touch at now. We shall hear more of it in the next Article touching the
descent into hell, where it shall be presented to us in another color. I end
this point at this time with that of Augustine Aug. Sermon. 161.
, There is a first death, and there is a second. The first death has two
parts, one whereby the sinful soul by transgressing departs from her
Creator; the other whereby she is excluded from her body as a punishment
inflicted on her by the judgment of God. The second death is the everlasting
torment of the body and soul. Either of these deaths had laid hold upon every
man, but that the righteous and immortal Son of God came to die for us, in
whose flesh because there could be no sin, he suffered the punishment of sin
without the guilt of it. And to that end admitted (or endured) for us the
second part of the first death, that is to say, the death of the body only, by
which he ransomed us from the dominion of sin, and the pain of eternal
punishment which was due unto it.

But yet there is another argument which concludes more fully against this new
device of theirs, then any testimonies of the Fathers before produced; mamely,
the institution of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, by the Lord himself: in
which there is a commemoration to be held for ever, both of the breaking of his
body, and of the effusion of his blood, by which his bodily death is
represented and set forth till his coming again 1 Cor. 11.26.
; but no remembrance instituted or commanded for the death of his soul. Which
if it were of such an unquestionable truth, as these men conceive; and of such
special use and efficacy to the worlds redemption, as they gave it out; would
doubtless have been honored with some special place, in that commemoration of
his Sacrifice which himself ordained. Who in the same night he was betrayed
took bread, and when he had given thanks he brake it and said, Take eat, this
is my body which is broken for you; this do in remembrance of me Ib. v. 23, 24.
: and likewise after the same manner also he took the cup, when he had supped,
saying, this cup is the new Testament (sealed) in my blood (which is shed Luke
22.30.
for you); this do as often as ye drink in remembrance of me. In which (and more
then this we find not in the book) there is not one word which does reflect on
the death of his soul, or any commemoration or remembrance to be held of that.
Only we find, that as our Savior by his death which was then at hand, did put
an end to all the legal rites and sacrifices of the old Testament, which were
but the shadows of things to come, as St. Paul calls them, Coloss. 2.17. So
having fulfilled in the flesh all that had been fore-signifyed and spoken of
him in the Law and Prophets, he did of all ordain and institute one only
Eucharistical sacrifice, for a perpetual remembrance of his death and passion,
to his second coming. And thus St. Augustine does inform us, saying Aug. de
Civ. dei. l. 17. c. 2.
, Id enim sacrificium est quod successit omnibus sacrificiis quae immolabantur
in umbra futuri; that this one sacrifice succeeds in the place of all those,
which were offered in relation unto Christ to come. But before him St. Ireneus
did more plainly affirm that same; who living in the next age to the Apostles,
is able to instruct us better in the mysteries of the Christian faith, then any
other more remote, and of less antiquity. And he tells us this, viz. that as
God caused his Gospel to be preached over all the world, in stead of the
innumerable ordinances of the Law of Moses: so he ordained that for those
several sorts of sacrifices which are there prescribed Iren. l. 4. c. 18.
, simplex oblatio panis et vini sufficiat, the offering of bread and wine only
should be held sufficient. More plainly yet, as plainly as he could express
himself by words and writing, he does thus deliver it, Sed and suis Discipulis
dans consilium, etc. Christ, says he Ibid. c. 34.
, giving his Disciples charge to offer the first fruits of every creature to
the Lord their God, not that God stands in need of their oblations, but that
they might not be esteemed to be either unfruitful or ungrateful, took
ordinary bread (eum qui ex natura panis est) and having given thanks said, This
is my body; and taking the cup into his hands, such as we use to drink of the
fruit of the vine, acknowledged it to be his blood. What then? for this we know
already. It follows, Et novi testamenti novam docuit oblationem, quam
Ecclesia ab Apostolis accipiens in universo mundo offert Deo. By doing which
(says that old Father) he taught us the new sacrifice of oblation of the new
Testament, which the Church receiving from the Apostles, does offer unto God
over all the world. So that the holy Eucharist was ordained by Christ, not only
as a Sacrament, but a sacrifice also; and so esteemed and called by the most
ancient writers, though many times by reason of several relations it has
either several names, or several adjuncts: that is to say, a sacrifice, a
commemorative sacrifice, an eucharisticall sacrifice, a spiritual sacrifice,
the Supper of the Lord, a Sacrament. A sacrifice it is, and so called commonly,
in reference unto the oblation or offering of the bread and wine, made unto God
in testimony and due acknowledgment that all which we possess is received from
him, and that we tender these his creatures to him as no longer ours, but to be
his, and to be spent in such employments, and for such holy uses, as he shall
please to put it to. In this respect it is entitled, Oblatio panis et vini,
the offering or oblation of bread and wine, as before we saw from Irenaeus
Ibid. c. 18.
; the sacrifice offered by us Gentiles, ( hostia quae ipsi a nobis Gentibus
offertur) of the bread and wine presented in the holy Eucharist, as in Justin
Martyr Just. Mart. in dialog.
; Sacrificium panis and vini, the sacrifice (in plain terms) of bread and wine
Fulg. de fide ad Petrum.
, as Fulgentius has it. For clearing of which point we may please to know,
that anciently it was the custom of the Primitive Christians, to bring their
bread and wine to the Church of God, and offer them to the Lord by the hands of
the Priest or Minister; part of the which was consecrated for the use of the
Sacrament, the rest being usually given to the poor and needy, as having a
letter of attorney from the Lord of heaven to receive our bounties. For thus we
read in Justin Martyr, who lived the next door also to the Apostles: Prayers
being done (says he) we salute one another with an holy kiss Just. Mart.
Apolog. 2.
.

Then do we offer to the Bishop, (for such is the (...) whom he speaks of
there) bread and wine mixed with water, (as the use then was) which he
receiving, offered to God the sacrifice of praise and glory, etc. And thus St.
Cyprian speaking of a rich but covetous Widow, who came not with her offering
to the Church as her poor neigbours did, charged her that she came into Gods
house without her sacrifice, and eat of that which had been offered (or
sacrificed unto God, by far poorer folk Cyp. se^m. de Ele^mosyna.
. Locuples et dives, Dominicum celebrare te dicis (but there dominicum
signifies the Lords day plainly) qui corbonam omnino non respicis; qui in
dominicum (there it is the Church) sine sacrificio venis, qui partem de
sacrificio quod pauper obtulit sumis, are his words at large. Where sacrificium
in both places signifies the bread and wine, which they used to offer to the
Lord, to be consecrated and employed in celebrating the memorial of our
Saviors passion. It is called next a commemorative sacrifice, (a Sacrifice
commemorative and representative by Dr. Morton Of the Sament. l. 6. c 5.
Ld. B. of Durham in his book of the Sacrament) in regard that it was
instituted by our Savior Christ, for a perpetual memory of that one perfect
and all-sufficient sacrifice, which he offered of himself upon the Cross. And
to this end it was that Chrysostom having called the Sacrament of the Lords
supper by the name of a Sacrifice; adds presently, not by way of correction or
retractation, (as I know some think) but by way of explanation only Chrysostom.
in Heb. 9.
; (...), that it was the remembrance rather of a sacrifi^e, or a commemorative
sacrifice as some others call it Chem. Exa. conc. Trid. par. 2.
. Which word commemorative, as I take it, detracts not from the nature of a
sacrifice, (as if it were the less a sacrifice because commemorative) but only
signifies the end to which it is specially directed. For as the sacrifices of
the old law were true and proper sacrifices in respect of the beasts or ^owles,
or other things which were offered, although prefigurative of that sacrifice
made upon the Cross, which was then to come: so are the sacrifices of the
Gospel true and real sacrifices, in reference to the oblation made of bread and
wine for the service of God, although commemorative of the same great sacrifice
now already past. It was called thirdly a spiritual and Eucharistical
sacrifice, by reason that Gods servants therein make profession of their due
acknowledgements for all the blessings which he has vouchsafed to bestow on
their souls and bodies, especially for the redemption of themselves and of all
mankind by the death of Christ; and therewith offering up themselves, their
souls and bodies, as a pleasing and most acceptable sacrifice to the Lord their
God. For thus we find in Justin Martyr, that the Bishop or President of the
Congregation having received the bread and wine from the hands of the faithful,
offered, by them Just. Mart. Apolog. 2.
, the sacrifice of praise and thanks to God the Father of all things in the
name of the Son and the holy Ghost, for all those blessings which he has
graciously from time to time bestowed upon them. And thus Irenaeus Iren.
advers. ^aeres. l. 1. c. 34.
, Oportet nos oblationem Deo facere, et in omnibus gratos inveniri fabricatori
Deo, etc. It becomes us (says he) to make oblations unto God, and to be
thankful in all things to our heavenly maker, offering to him the first
fruits of his own creatures, with a right belief, and faith without hypocrisy,
in hope assured, and fervencie of brotherly affection: which pure oblation, the
Church alone does offer to the maker of all things, out of his own creatures,
with praise and thanksgiving. And last of all, it is called the Sacrament,
sometimes the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, sometimes the Sacrament of the
Altar Aug. de Civ. dei. l. 10. c. 6. and alii.
, by reason that the bread and wine thus dedicated to the service of Almighty
God, and righly consecrated by his Ministers, are made unto the faithful
receiver the very body and blood of Christ our Savior, and do exhibit to us
all the benefits of his death and passion. Of which it is thus said by the old
Father Irenaeus, that the bread made of the fruits of the earth, and sanctified
according to Christ's ordinance Iren. adv. haeres. l. 1. c. 34.
, jam non communis panis est, sed Eucharistia ex duabus rebus constans, terrena
and Coelesti, etc. is now no longer common bread, but the blessed Eucharist,
consisting of two parts, the one earthly, and the other heavenly: that is to
say, the outward elemental sign, and the inward and spiritual grace. In which
respect it was affirmed of this bread; by Cyprian, (if at the least the work be
his, which is somewhat doubted) non effigy sed natura mutatum Cyprian de coena
Domini.
, that though it kept the same shape which it had before, yet was the nature of
it changed: not that it ceased to be what before it was, (as the Patrons of the
Romish Mass Bell. de Missa.
do pervert his meaning) but by being what before it was not: just as an iron
made red hot, retains the proportion and dimensions which before it had, and
is still iron as at the first, though somewhat of the nature of fire, which is
to warm, and burn, be now added to it. And this was anciently the doctrine of
the Church of Christ touching the sacrifice of the Lords supper, or the blessed
Eucharist, before that monstrous Paradox of Transubstantiation was hammered in
the brains of capricious Schoolmen; or any such thing as a Propitiatory
sacrifice for the quick and dead, affabulated to the same by the Popes of Rome.
Now such a sacrifice as this, with all the several kinds and adjuncts of it, we
find asserted and maintained by the Church of England: though it condemn the
sacrifices of the Masses Articles of 1562. Art. 31.28.
, in which it was commonly said, that the Priest did offer Christ for the quick
and the dead, to have remission of pain or guilt, as dangerous deceits and
blasphemous fables, and censureth Transubstantiation as repugnant to the plain
words of Scripture, destructive of the true nature of a Sacrament, and to have
given occasion to much superstition. For if a true and proper sacrifice be
defined to be the offering of a creature to Almighty God, to be consecrated by
a lawful Minister, to be spent and consumed to his service; as Bellarmine, and
the most learned men of both sides do affirm it is; then is the offering of
the bread and wine in the Church of England a true proper sacrifice: for it is
usually provided by the Churchwardens at the charge of the people Rubric
after the Communion.
, and being by them presented in the name of the people, and placed on the
Altar or holy table before the Lord, is now no longer theirs, but his; (and
grant that we receiving these thy creatures of bread and wine) and being
consecrated by the Priest, is consumed and eaten by such as come prepared to
partake thereof. The whole prayer used at the consecration, does it not plainly
manifest that it is commemorative, and celebrated in memorial of that full,
perfect, and sufficient sacrifice, oblation, and satisfaction for the sins of
the whole world, which our Savior made upon the Cross, for our Redemption?
And when the Priest or Minister does call upon us in the Exhortation, above all
things to give most humble and hearty thanks to God the Father, the Son, and
the holy Ghost, for the redemption of the world by the death and passion of our
Savior Christ: and that we do accordingly entirely desire his fatherly
goodness, mercifully to accept that our sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving;
and therewith offer and present unto him our selves, souls, and bodies, to be a
reasonable, holy, and lively sacrifice unto him; do we not thereby signify as
plainly as may be, that it is an Eucharistical and spiritual sacrifice?
Finally, that it is a Sacrament, I think none denies; and that thereby we are
partakers of the body and blood of CHRIST, I think all will grant; the people
giving thanks to Almighty God, for that he has vouchsafed to feed them with
the spiritual food of the most precious body and blood of his Son our Savior
Jesus Christ; and calling upon him to grant, that by the merits and death of
his Son Christ Jesus, and through faith in his blood, both they and all his
whole Church may obtain remission of their sins, and all other benefits of his
passion Prayer after the Participation.
. Nor does the Church of England differ from the Ancients as concerning the
change, made in the bread and wine on the consecration: which being blessed and
received according to Christ's holy institution, become the very body and blood
of Christ, by that name are delivered with the usual prayer, into the hands of
the people, and are verily and indeed (says the public authorized Catechism)
taken and received of the faithful in the Lords Supper. The bread and wine,
though still the same in substance which before they were, are changed in
nature, being made what before they were not: according to the uncorrupted
doctrine of the purest times, and the opinion of the soundest and most learned
Protestants. I add no more, but that if question should be asked with which of
all the legal sacrifices this of the Church of Christ does hold best
proportion: I answer that it it best agrees with those Eucharisticall
sacrifices of the Law which were called peace offerings, made unto God upon
their reconciliation and atonement with him. In which as the creature offered a
sacrifice to the Lord their God, might be indifferently either male or female,
to show that both sexes might participate of it; so being offered to the Lord,
the one part of it did belong to the Priest toward his maintenance and
support, as the skin, the belly, the right shoulder, and the breast, etc. the
rest was eaten in the way of a solemn feast, by those who brought it for an
offering before the Lord. And in the feast, as Mollerus Moller. in Psalm. 116.
very probably conjectureth, the man that brought this offering did use to take
a cup of wine and give thanks over it to the Lord for all his benefits: which
was the Calix salutis whereof the Psalmist speaks, saying, I will take the
cup of salvation, and ^all upon the name of the Lord, Psalm. 116.13. But I
crave pardon for this digression (if at least it be one) and pass from the
commemoration to the thing remembered.

To return back therefore unto Christ our Savior, whom we left hanging on the
Cross; and who by yielding up his soul into the hands of his Father, had put a
final period unto all his sufferings: it could not be, but that his death
being of so great consequence to the sons of men, though most unjustly brought
about by these sons of Belial) must be accompanied with some great and signal
testimonies from the God of heaven. And so accordingly it was. For the text
tells us Mat. 27.45, 51.
, that the sun was darkened from the sixth hour to the nineth, that the vail of
the Temple was rent in twain from the top to the bottom, and the earth did
quake, and the rocks were rent. It could not otherwise be supposed, but that
the whole fabric of the world would be out of joint, and the course of nature
suffer interruption, when he by whom the world was made, and nature put into an
ordinary course, did suffer such a dissolution of his body and soul, and took
his farewell of the world in so strange a manner. Which wondrous accidents,
together with the circumstances of the time and place, being so necessary to
the knowledge of our Saviors passion, and to the clearing of some difficulties
which occur therein; shall be a little further enquired into, for the readers
satisfaction and mine one. And first beginning with those signs and wonders
which did accompany his death; some of them were so general, as to be observed
in parts far remote, and by men that had no reference unto Christ's affairs;
and other being of more private and particular nature, not taking notice of but
by those of Iewry, whom it most principally concerned. Of this last sort was
the renting of the vail of the Temple in twain from the top to the bottom.
Concerning which we may please to know that the Temple of Jerusalem consisted
of two parts (besides the Courts) that is to say, the body of the Church, which
they called the holy, and the quire or ch^ncell of the same, which they called
the Sanctum sanctorum, or the holy of holies, or the holiest of all, Heb. 9.3.
into which none might enter but the high Priest only, and that but once a year
neither Heb. 9.7.
, when he made offerings for himself and for the errors of the people. This
parted from the other by a very high wall reaching to the top, and glittering
with gold, and curiously engraved with the work of the carver Joseph. de bell^
Iud. l. 6. c. 6.
: having one only door which opened inwardly into it, before which hung the
vail here mentioned, (being made of silk and artificially embroidered with most
curious works) to hinder the people from looking into the inmost Sanctuary of
the Temple. Now for the renting of this vail, it either signified the discovery
and laying open of the Jewish rites, which before were hidden and concealed
from the eyes of the Gentiles Theop. in Mat. 27.
, as Theophylact is of opinion; or the abrogation of the Jewish ceremonies, by
the death of Christ, as Calvin thinks; or rather the breaking down of the
partition wall by which the Jews and Gentiles had before been separated, and
bringing both into one Church or Mystical body. And unto this, most probably
alludeth the Apostle Ephesians. 2.14, 16.
, saying of Christ, that he has made of both one, and has broken down (...),
that middle wall of partition which was between us, that he might reconcile
both unto God in one body by the Cross. As for the earthquake, and that
darkness which the speaks of, it was so general and remarkable over all the
world, that other writers of those times have observed the same, and left their
observations on record to confirm those truths; left the Evangelists might
have been suspected to have been partial in relating the affairs of Christ.
For Origin proves it out of Phlegon, an old Greek writer of those times, that
in the reign of Tiberius Caesar under whom Christ suffered Orig. contr.
Celsium. l 2.
, universum orbem tenebris offusum, the whole world was covered with a
prodigious darkness, and that many fatal earthquakes happened in the same times
also. Eusebius does observe the same out of Phlegon also Eusebius. in Chronice.
, adding withal, that the sun never suffered such a notable defect of light,
as was then observed; and that many Cities of Bithynia, but specially the City
of Nice, were miserably shaken with those earthquakes. Tertullian also speaking
of this present Eclipse, builds not alone on the Evangelists (whose credit he
conceived the Gentiles would not much rely on) but does appeal to the Records
and Archives of the Roman Empire Tertull. in Apologet. c. 21.
. A darkness or eclipse the more remarkable, because so plainly contrary to
the course of nature, and therefore by St. Augustine called mirabilis et
prodigtosus Aug. Epist. 80. ad Hesych.
, as being at the full of the Moon (for at that time the Jews did keep the
feast of the Passover) whereas all Eclipses of the sun do naturally happen in
the wane of the old moon, or the first quarter of the new.

Touching the time of our Redeemers being fastened to the fatal Cross, there
seems to be some difference between the Evangelists. St. Mark says, It was
the third hour, and they crucified him; Mark. 15.25. St. John, that it was
about the sixth hour when Palate delivered him unto them to be crucified, cap.
16. v. 14, 16. This has occasioned some to think that the text in one of the
Evangelists has received a change, and that the Copies differ from the first
original. The Commentaries on the 77. Psalm. ascribed to Hierome Hier. in Psalm.
77.
, is of opinion that the text in Mark has been corrupted by the carelessness
of the Transcribers, and the third hour put down in stead of the sixth; and
hereunto Cajetan on the place, Sixtus Senensis Biblioth. l. 6. Annotat. 131.
and Canus in the second of ^is Common places, cap. 18. do conform their
judgments. And on the other side Theophylact is of opinion that the corruption
lies in the text of John, which anciently had spoken of the third hour Theop.
in Johan.
in numeral figures not at length, and that by the like fault of the
transcribers, (...), as his own words are, the numeral figures were mistaken,
the sixth being there put down in stead of the third. And though it cannot be
denied but that some very ancient Copies do read (...) there as it is in Mark:
yet Beza Beza Annot. in Mar.
, who observes and approves the same, thinks it very unsafe to alter any thing
in the text, or depart only upon that authority from the usual readings; with
great both piety and prudence. So that the readings in both places (as they
stand now in our Bibles) being very ancient and extant in all the Fathers who
have written on them or otherwise discoursed occasionally of our Saviors
passion: it has exceedingly exercised the wits of judicious men, to atone the
difference. The general resolution is Lud. de Ten. Isagoge sacra. difficult.
6.. 5.
, (for this is neither time nor place to discuss it fully) that the whole day
amongst the Jews from sun to sun (which the Astronomers call the artificial
day) was commonly divided into four quaternions of hours; of which the first
three had the name of the third hour, the second three of the sixth hour, the
third three of the ninth hour, and the last three of the evening or sun set:
Then, that the sixth hour beginning where the third did end, the same thing may
be said to be done in the end of the third hour, which was done in the
beginning of the sixth; inchoative in the sixth hour, but completive in the
third. And so our Savior may be said to be crucified in the third hour as St.
Mark relates, that is to say, in the end of the third hour complete; and
about the sixth hour, as St. John delivers it, that is to say, about the sixth
hour coming on. Others conceive that Mark relates unto the time when Pilate
did pass sentence on him, and deliver him over to be crucified, which was in
the third hour of the day; and that John speaks as to the execution of the
sentence, which was done in the sixth. And if this could agree with the other
cicumstances it were undoubtedly the best, and of most probability, especially
considering what good ground it has from Ignatius Ignat. in Epist. ad Trall.
who lived in the times of the Apostles. By whom the whole story of the Passion
is thus distributed.

In the third hour Christ was condemned by Pontius Pilate, crucified in the
sixth, died in the nin^h, and was buried before sunset. And unto either of these
two I should sooner yield, then hearken to the new devise of Daniel Heinsius,
who will have the third hour mentioned in St. Marks Gospel to be the third
hour of our Saviors crucifying Heinsius Exercitat. sacrae in Mar. c. 6.
, with which the circumstances of the text can no way agree: and yet far sooner
unto him, then to an eminent Divine of great place and name, affirming openly
in a Sermon before the King (on the credit of some old Greek copies) that the
text in John had been corrupted. Less difficulty far there is about the place
of the Passion, in which all Evangelists do agree in meaning, though they use
diverse words. St. Matthew, Mark, and John, do call it Golgatha, according to
the Hebrew name, but St. Luke calls it Calvarie, 23.33. according to that Hebrew
name translated and made intelligible to the ears of the Romans. In every one
it signifies the place of a skul, and is so translated in our Bibles, Matthew.
27.33. Mark 15.22. Ioh 19.17. A name bestowed upon it as the Fathers say, in
regard that Adam was there buried, and his skul found there by the people many
Ages after. And though I dare not swear this for a Canonical truth, yet
certainly it has as good grounds to stand upon, as an old Tradition can
confer. For sure I am that such a Tradition there was in the time of Origin,
one of the most ancient Christian writers, whose works are extant. Origin. in
Mat. tract. 35.
Venit ad me talis traditio, quod corpus Adae primi hominis sepultum est ibi,
ubi crucifixus est Christus. There is a Tradition, says he, that the body of
the first man Adam was there buried, where Christ was crucified. Tertullian
does affirm the same amongst his verses. So does St. Basil also on Levit. 5.
Epiphanius contra haereses, n. 46. Chrysostom in his 84. Homily on John: St.
Augustine in the 71. Sermon inscribed de Tempore: St. Ambrose Epistola 3. lib.
5. Hierom on Matthew. 27. Theophylact in his Comments on the four Evangelists.
Nor do they only thus unanimously report the said Tradition, but they give
their reason for it too, viz. that because all men dyed in Adam, so by Christ
all might be also made alive; that so where sin took its beginning, it should
find destruction; and finally that ut super Adae tumulum sanguis Christi
stillaret Hierony. in Matthew 27.
, which was Hieroms conceit, that so the blood of Christ might fall upon Adams
tomb. And I remember I have seen a picture in an old piece of hanging in the
stals at Westminster (for we have our Testes fenestras too, especially in such
a case as this, as well as Campian Campian in Ratione 10.
in a greater,) in which we find the soldier piercing Christ's side with his
lance; water and blood issuing from the side ^o pierced; and Adam starting out
of his grave with a cup in his hand to receive the blood. Which fancy as it was
conform to the old Tradition, so did it hand somely express a good piece of
Divinity: the meaning of it being this, that as Adam being the root of all
mankind had forfeited for himself and his posterity all those most excellent
endowments of grace and nature, which God had given him at the first; so now he
did lay hold upon Salvation for himself and his, that all who were, and were to
be descended of him, should have their part in the redemption of the World by
the blood of Christ. And this I call a piece of good Divinity, howsoever
expressed; by reason that the universality of Redemption by our Saviors death,
was not alone the Doctrine of the Primitive times; but is the genuine and
confirmed doctrine of this Church of England, which teaches us to pray unto
God the Son In the Letany.
, as the Redeemer of the world, and every one of us to believe in the same God
the Son, who has redeemed me and all mankind In the Catechism.
; and finally to pray to God to have mercy upon all men, even upon all Jews,
Turks, Infidels, and Heretics Collect on Good Friday.
, that they may all be saved amongst the remnant of true Israelites, and be
made one fold under the same one Shepherd JESUS CHRIST our Lord. No truth more
rightly stated, more piously applied, nor more fully explicated.

It is now time we lay our Savior in his Grave, being the last degree of his
humiliation; taking along with us such preparatives, as lead unto the same in
the holy Gospel, in which the first passage which we meet with, is, how some
devout people repaired to Pilate, and begged the body of their Lord that they
might entomb it: Luke 23.50.53.
others in reference to the great festival ensuing, had desired of him that
their legs might be broken, and that they might be taken away Joh. 19.31.
, to the end that their bodies might not remain upon the Cross on the
Sabbathday. Which suit being granted, and that the soldiers coming to Christ
found him dead already, they omitted the breaking of his legs, (for so had God
disposed, who before had signified, that a bone of him should not be broken)
but yet to make sure work, it seemed good to one of them to pierce his side
with a spear; and forthwith (says the Text) came out blood and water, Ioh.
19.34. On this St. Augustine makes this gloss, that by the blood and water
issuing from the side of CHRIST, we are to understand the two Sacraments of
Baptism and the Lords Supper, commanded and ordained by him August. in Ioh.
tract. 15.
. De latere pendentis in Cruce, Lancen percusso, Sacramenta Ecclesiae
profluxerunt, as his words are briefly: and hereunto the Fathers and most
writers since have inclined generally. This was the last remakable thing
remembered in our Saviors passion; the draining of his blood to the last drop
as it were, which though it could not yet add to his former sufferings, being
dead before: yet served it as a confirmation of his death in the eyes of those,
who otherwise might have called the realty thereof in question; and was a
certain note to discern him by, after he was risen again from death to life, as
in the story of St. Thomas Joh. 20.25.
. No further difficulty, that I know of, does occur in this: the pleading of
this Text by the Canonists of the Church of Rome Durand. in Ration. Divin.
, in maintenance of their mingling water with the wine, in the blessed
Sacrament, being so silly a device, that it deserves not to be honored with a
confutation. But in the other passage, which the Gospel mentions, touching
the not breaking of his bones, perhaps a question may be made by some captious
men, how it can possibly agree with another text of holy Scripture, where it is
said, This is my body 1 Cor. 11.24.
which is broken for you; and to what use the breaking of the bread does serve
in the holy Eucharist, it not to signify the breaking of our Saviors body?
But the answer unto this is easy. For (...) which is the word used by St. Paul
in the Original, does not only signify to break in pieces, though Rob.
Stephanus in his Thesaurus expound the verb (...), by no other word then the
Latin Frango. Sometimes it signifies to strain, as in that of Aristotle
Aristot. Probl. sect. 5. number. 19.
, going up an hill (...), the knees are bent or strained backwards; and in that
also of Hippocrates Hippocr. l. 1. (...).
, where he observes that sometimes in holding the hand forth outright, (...),
the bowing of the joint (or elbow) is strained. Sometimes it signifies to cut,
Hesychius Hesych. in Lexico. in (...).
, an old Grammarian, expounding (...), which is cut; and Theophrastus calling
the cuttings of vines (...) De causis Plant. l. 3. c. 19.
: with whom Suidas, Phavorinus, and the Scholiast on Aristophanes do agree
also. And in this sense the bread is broken in the Sacrament, although cut with
knives; there being mention of a sacred knife in St. Chrysostoms Liturgy,
which was employed unto no other use then that of the holy Sacrament. And last
of all it signifies sometimes the tearing or bruising of the fleshy parts,
when the bones are neither broken nor so much as touched: which is most clearly
witnessed by Hippocrates the Father of all learned Physic, giving this for a
Rule of Art, that the breaking of any of the bones is less dangerous, then
where the bones are not broken, (...) Hippocrat. l. 3. (...).
, but the veins and sinews adjoining are on every side bruised. So that
although the bones of our Savior were not broken, (that he might in all things
be agreeable to the Paschal lamb) yet were his joints strained to the utmost,
when he was stretched upon the Cross, his flesh most cruelly cut and torn with
scourges, his veins and sinews miserably bruised and broken with those outward
torments. All which as they are signified by this one word (...), which we
render broken; so does it very well agree with that meaning of the word broken
in our Engish Idiom: As when we say, a man has got a broken skin, or broken
head, when the flesh is only bruised, and the skin but rased. And hereto Beza
does agree in his Annotations on that Text Beza. Annot. in 1 Cor. 11.
.

By the word broken in St. Paul, is designed (says he) the very manner of
Christ's death; his body being torn, bruised, and even broken with most cruel
torments, though his legs were not broken as the thieves were: so that the word
has a mavelous express signification, making the figure to agree so fully
with the thing it self, the breaking of the bread representing to us the very
death and passion of our Savior Christ.

Now go we on, Pilates leave being thus obtained, and the certainty of Christ's
death assured by this second murder; they hasten all they could unto his
funeral: to which was used small preparation, but less pomp by far. It was the
day of preparation to the following festival, as two Luke 23.54. and Joh. 19.14.
of the Evangelists do affirm expressly; the Friday, or good Friday as we call
it now: in which it was not lawful for the Jews to do any work. A garden there
was hard at hand, and in the garden a new sepulcher, in which never man was
laid before: a Virgin-sepulchre for the son of a Virgin Mother; a Garden to
receive that great pledge of death which first found entrance by a Garden. So
that the labor was not much to take down his body, and carry it to the next
spot of ground, and there intomb it. No further cost bestowed upon his
funerals, who spared not his most precious blood to procure our happiness; but
a mixture made of Myrrh and Aloes: and had not Nicodemus been more valiant now
Joh. 19 39.
, then when he used to come unto his Savior, as it were by stealth, he had
wanted that. And this was done after the custom of the Jews, whose manner it
was to bestow that charge upon their dead; in sign of their belief of the
Resurrection unto life eternal: not out of any thought they had of his so
speedy a Resurrection at the three days end, though he had often told them that
he would so do. So far were they from looking to behold him again on the first
day of the week then following, that they did all they could to lay him up fast
enough till the day of judgment: and to that end not only wrapped him up in
sear-cloaths, (for such the linen clothes were which they wrapped him in, Ioh.
19.40.) but rolled a great stone to the door of the sepulcher Mat. 27.60.
, to make sure work with him. God certainly had so disposed it in his infinite
wisdom to make the miracle of his Resurrection, the more considerable and
convincing both with Jews and Gentiles. This is the sum of those particulars
that concern Christ's burial. Which though it seem of no more moment, then as a
confirmation of an unfaigned death, and a preparative to his Resurrection; and
consequently may be thought unnecessary to be here added in the Creed: yet upon
further search into it, we shall find it otherwise. Our Savior had not
overcome death, if he had not dyed; nor got the victory of the grave, had he
not been buried. His being restored unto life within three days of his death,
was a very great and signal miracle; but not so great, as that which had been
acted before on Lazarus Joh. 11.39.
, who had lain four days in the earth, and began to putrefie. His lying in the
grave was the way to bury it: the only means to weaken and unloose the bonds
thereof, that it should be no more a Prison, but a place of rest, wherein the
bodies of Gods servants were to wait his pleasure, in sure and certain hope of
a Resurrection to eternal life. But there was more in it yet then so. The
adding of these two words, and buried, seem unto me to have been done by the
spirit of Prophecy; for the preserving of a great part of the following
Article; which else had been in danger in these quarrel some times, to be lost
for ever. Great pains is taken by some men, and those of eminent parts and
reputation, to prove that nothing else is meant by Christ's descent into hell;
but either his lying Bucer in Matthew. 27.
in the sepulcher, or being made subject to the ignominy of the grave Olevian
ap. B. Bilson. p. 651.
, or his continuance for a while in the state of death B. Usher in his answer
to the Jesuits challenge.
; as we shall see at large in the chapter following: all which are fully
comprehended in these words, and buried. What an advantage think we would these
men have taken, to put their own erroneous sense upon that Article, had these
words been wanting; who have presumed to advance their own particular fancies
above the Catholic Tradition of the Church of Christ, notwithstanding these
two words stand still, to confute them in it? But of this anon. All I shall
add unto these Observations on Christ's death, and burial, and his continuance
in the grave, is, that in memory thereof, the Church has anciently appointed
that Friday and Saturday should be fasted weekly, the one in memory of the
death and passion of our Lord CHRIST JESUS, who on that day suffered for our
sins; the other in relation to the woeful and disconsolate condition of the
first followers of our Savior, who all that day distracted (between hope and
fear) did seem to fit in darkness and the shadow of death Platina in viz.
Innocent.
. And though the first Christians of the East did not fast the Saturday, for
fear of giving scandal to the Jews amongst whom they lived: yet they made up
the number of two days in the week, by adding Wednesday to the Friday Ignat.
Epist. ad Philipp. and Can. Apost. 69.
; that being conceived to be the day, on which he had been bought and sold by
the Traitor Judas. But that concerns not us of the Western Churches in which
the Friday and the Saturday fast are of such antiquity, that it is generally
believed by all moderate men, to be derived from Apostolical Tradition. Certain
I am, there is as much authority to keep those days fasting, as the Canons of
the Church can give them; and the Statutes of this Realm 5 and 6 Ed. 6. cap. 3.
can add to those ancient Canons: and were accordingly observed by all
Christian men, till these wretched times, in which the sons of the old Heretic
Arius, have turned all order out of doors, and introduced a most unchristian or
rather Antichristian licentiousnes, under the color and pretense of Christian
liberty.

Thus have we brought our Savior CHRIST unto the bottom of the grave, the
lowest step of his humiliation for the sons of men; for lower then the grave he
could hardly go. And here we should conclude this Article, but that as we began
with some Observations touching Pontius Pilate, under whom Christ suffered, as
also touching Annas and Caiaphas the High Priests, two of the principal actors
in this happy Tragedy: so we will close this Article with the relation of that
fearful and calamitous end which did most justly fall upon them, and on the
rest of their accomplices in this act of blood. But first we will begin with
Judas, the Architect and chief contriver of the the plot: of whom it is
recorded in the holy Scriptures, that being touched in conscience for so foul a
treachery as the betraying of the innocent blood of his Lord and Master, he
brought back his money to the Chief Priests and Elders, and finding that they
would not take it, threw it down in the Temple, and went out and hanged himself
Matthew. 27.3, 4, 5.
. S. Matthew there leaves off the story, unto which Luke adds, that falling
headlong Act. 1.18.
from the tree, (whether by the breaking of the rope, or by some other way,
that the Scriptures say not) he burst asunder in the midst and all his bowels
gushed out. And certainly it was but just, that he should lose his bowels, who
had so long before lost his compassion. If now a man should ask what death
Judas dyed, St. Matthew would make answer, that he hanged himself; (...), says
the Greek, and abiens laqueo se suspendit, as the Latin has it. Which words
lest they should seem of a doubtful sense, and not import as much as the
English makes them; we will see what is noted of them by the Ancient Fathers.
And first St. Hierom is express for this, that Judas laid violent hands upon
himself, and was the Author of his own death; adding self-murder to the heap of
his former crimes. Ad prius scelus proprii homicidii crimen addidit Hieronym.
in Matthew. 27.
; so that Father has it. St. Augustine goes more particularly to work, Et
laqueo vitam finivit Aug. quaest. No. Test. c. 4.
, and tells us in plain terms that he hanged himself. The Translator of
Chrysostom does affirm the same, saying, Projecta in Templo pecunia abiit, and
gulam laqueo fregit, Chrysostom in Matthew. 27.
that throwing down the wages of his iniquity upon the pavement of the Temple,
he went out, and broke his neck with an halter; which is the same with that of
Augustine, though in other terms. And finally Theophylact, (though many others
might be named) who doubtless understood his own language well, does resolve it
thus; (...) Theophyl. in Matthew. 27.
, etc. that putting his neck into the noose which himself had made, he fell
violently from off the tree, and so burst asunder in the midst. The general
tradition of the Church does run this way also. Nor had I took this pains in a
case so clear, but that I see the Fathers put to school again by our modern
Critics; who will not have (...) to signify, that he hanged himself Heinsius
in No. Test. Mat. c. 21.
, but that he fell into such an extremity of grief, with remorse of conscience,
that the anguish of it stopped his breath, so that falling flat upon the ground
he broke asunder in the middle. A death so much too good for so vile a Traitor,
and so improbable, if not impossible in the last part of it; that he is fain to
bring in the Devil Id. in Act. c. 1.
, (Diabolo operante) to pull out his bowels. But of this new devise enough,
look we next on Pilate; who having so unjustly condemned the Innocent, and
drawn upon himself the vengeance of a most just Judge; was not long after outed
of his Government by L. Vitellius Lord President of Syria, and sent back to
Rome Joseph. Antiq. Iud. l. 18. c. 5.
. Where being come, so many grievous complaints were made against him to the
Senate, that he was banished to Vienna, a City of France. The Roman Legends do
relate that he was prosecuted at Rome by Veronica (of whom they fable that our
Savior going to his Passion, gave her the print of his face in a linen cloth)
for the death of Christ; but the Greek Legends do ascribe this prosecution unto
Mary Magdalen (as being of more credit in those parts): and both true alike.
Certain it is, that in his hasty proceedings against CHRIST our Savior, he had
most wilfully broke an Edict of Tiberius, the then Roman Emperor; by whom it
was decreed, Vt supplicia damnatorum in decimum usque diem differrentur, as
Suetonius has it Suetonius in Tiber. c. 75.
; that the execution of the sentence upon men condemned should be deferred till
the tenth day. But I find not this laid unto his charge. He had guilt enough
besides of more public nature, then the murder of one innocent person:
Josephus telling of a great slaughter which he made of the Samaritans a little
before his calling home Joseph. Antiq. Iud. l. 18.4.
; and Philo accusing him to Caius of rapine, bribery, oppression, many cruel
murders of men uncondemned Philo de Legatione ad Caium.
; which were the things most likely to procure his banishment. Nor could he
live long quiet at Vienna neither; the vengeance of the Lord still following
after him, his guilty conscience still condemning, and Caius Caligula the Roman
Emperor putting so many indignities upon him: that he thought best to rid
himself at once out of all his troubles, and so slew himself; as both Eusebius
Eusebius. hist. Eccl. l. 2. cap. 7.
and Orosius Oros. l. 7. c. 5.
do report the story. For Caiaphas next, Josephus tells us that he was
deprived of the high Priesthood by the same Vitellius Joseph. de bello Iud. l.
18. c. 6.
, who removed Pilate from his Government: the infamy and disgrace of which
deprivation did so work upon him, that he grew weary of his life, and at last
laid violent hands on himself also, to save the Executioner a labor, as we
read in Clemens Constitut. Apostol. l. 8. c. 1.
. The like foul ends befell Annas, together with the rest of the Chief Priests,
and Scribes, and Pharisees, who had an hand in the conspiracy against our
Savior; of whom Nicephorus tells us, but in general only, Quod and ipsi dignas
variasque dederunt poenas Niceph. histor. Eccl. l* 2. cap. 10.
, that they all came to just but miserable deaths, as the wickedness of the
fact deserved. As for the whole Nation of the Jews, who were so bent upon the
death of their Messiah, that they cried aloud, his blood be upon us and our
children Mat. 27.25.
, what a miserable destruction fell upon them very shortly after, and how they
have been hunted since from one place to another, is a thing so well known,
that I need not tell it. All I shall note, is this particular passage of the
Divine justice, that they who bought their Savior for thirty pieces of silver,
were themselves sold at thirty for one piece of silver, in the open Market. A
true, but a most wonderful character of the finger of God. And so I leave them
to Gods mercy, and proceed unto the following Article.

ARTICLE VI. Of the Sixth ARTICLE OF THE CREED Ascribed to St. THOMAS. (...). i.
e. Descendit ad inferos; tertia die resurrexit a mortuis. i. e. He descended
into Hell; the third day he rose again from the dead.
CHAP. VIII. Of the local descent of Christ into hell. Hades and inferi what
they signify in the best Greek and Latin Authors; and in the text of holy
Scripture. An examination and confutation of the contrary opinions.
WE made an end of the Humiliation of our Lord Jesus Christ, in the former
Chapter; for to a lower condition then that of the ignominy of the grave, we
could not possibly expect that he should be brought. We must next look upon his
exaltation, the first degree or step to which, was his descent into hell. But
this perhaps may seem to some to be a very strange kind of preferment, a point
so far from being any part of his exaltation, that it may worthily be accounted
his very lowest degree of humiliation, a fall far lower then the Grave. And
so it had been out of doubt, had he descended down to hell to have felt the
pains of it, or to have been tormented though but for a moment in the flames
thereof. It Is not the place but the intent, not the descending but the business
which he went about which makes the difference in this case* and the intent and
purpose of his going thither was to begin his triumph over Satan and all his
Angels, to beat the Devil in his own strongest hold and fortress, and take
possession of that part of his kingdom, whereof God had given the keys unto
him. And to descend on such a business, is I presume no matter of humiliation
Does not the Scripture tell us in another place, that the Lord himself shall
descend from heaven 1 Thessalonians. 4.16.
with a shout, with the voice of the Archangel, and with the trumpet of God,
when he comes to judge the quick and the dead? yet that descent of his upon
that occasion, will be the highest step of his exaltation, there is no doubt of
that. To descend then, is no humiliation of and in it self, but in relation to
the business we descend about. And the intent or purpose of his descent was,
to spoil principalities and powers Col. 2.15.
, (that is to say, the Prince of the world, and the powers of darkness) and
having spoiled them to make a show of them openly, and triumph over them: to
show himself unto the Devils and infernal spirits, and to receive the homage
of the knee from them, as his slaves and vassals; that being reckoned as a part
of his exaltation, that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow Phil. 2.10.
, as well of things under the earth, as either of things upon the earth, or the
things in heaven. To this the Fathers do attest, and some Councels also; some
of which shall be here produced. Our Savior Christ had power, says Athanasius
Athan. de incarn. Christ.
, to show incorruption in the grave, and in his descent to hell to dissolve
death, and proclaim resurrection unto all. St. Cyprian thus Cyp. de Passione
Christ.
, When by the presence of Christ hell was broken open, and the captivity made
captive, his conquering soul being presented to the sight of his. Father,
returned again unto his body without delay. St. Augustine more plainly yet,
Reddunt inferna victorem, etc. Aug. Sermon. 138.131.
Hell returned back again her Conqueror; and whiles his body lay in the grave,
his soul triumphed over hell. And finally thus the fourth Council of Toledo,
CHRIST (say the Fathers there assembled) descended to hell Council. Tolet. 4. c.
10.
, and devicto mortis imperio, and having subdued the kingdom of death, rose
again the third day. More testimonies to this purpose might be here produced,
but that they are reserved to another place, when we shall come to speak of
those particular motives which did induce our Savior to make this descent; and
of the benefits redounding to the Church thereby. These are enough to let us
see that his descending into hell, is to be reckoned as a part of his
exaltation; which was the matter to be proved. To which we shall make ^old to
add this one reason more, that is to say, that not only in that Sermon of St.
Augustines before alleged in the beginning of this Tractate; but also in
Innocentius Innocent. de Missa. l. 2. c. 50.
, De Mysterio Missae, and Durandus his Rationale Divinorum Dur. Rat. l. 4. de
Symb.
, this clause of his descent is joined together with that of his Resurrection,
to make one Article between them: which certainly had not been joined together
in this manner; but that they were both taken to be parts or steps of his
exaltation, whereof this the first, and leading the way unto the rest.

Now in our Observations on this Article we will take this course. First, we
will look on the quid nominis, what (...) in the Greek, and inferi or infernum
in the Latin, are said to signify in the best and approved Authors: Secondly,
what the place or places are which are described under these names, not only
amongst the Heathen, but the best Christian writers; which is the quid rei, of
the business: Thirdly, we will show what is conceived to be the true meaning
of the Article, according to the Catholic exposition of the ancient Fathers.
Which done we will proceed unto the examination and confutation of all such
contrary opinions as have been raised against the doctrine of the Primitive
Church, and the established doctrine of this Church of England, (which herein
as in other things, does tread most punctually in the steps of the Ancient
Fathers); with answer unto such objections as are made against it. And first
for the Quid nominis of the Greek word Hades. St. Augustine gives this
Etymology of the name, that it is called Hades, ex eo quod nihil suave habeat
Aug. in Proem. l. 3. de. Trin.
, because there is nothing pleasant in it; and then must be derived from (...)
privative and (...), which signifies sweet or pleasing. And unto this agrees
Eustathius the learned Scholiast on Homer, who says that many derived Hades
without contraction, and did not subscribe iota under it, (...) Eutath. in
Homer Iliad. 1.
, but affirmed it to be derived from Hedo, by a kind of Antiphrasis, because no
man delights or rejoices in it. Hesychius also the great Grammarian
witnesses, that Ades in the Greek (without its aspirat) does signify (...),
unsweet or unpleasant Hes. Lexic. in (...).
, and has its aspiration from the Attick, not the Common Greek. Others derive
it from (...), that is to say, a Place where nothing can be seen for want of
light, a place of darkness. The Author of the great Etymologicon is of this
opinion Etym. Magn. in (...).
, saying, (...), i. e. 'Aeides is the place where nothing can be seen; for
Hades is the place of darkness. In this regard Sophocles Sophoc. in Oedipo.
gives it the attribute of (...), or black Hades; and Euripides calls it to
the same purpose but in other terms Euripid. in Alcestide.
, (...), the house which never sees the sun. Take it in which of these respects
soever you will, and derive it from what Etymology you list; yet shall we
find that by this word the most learned men amongst the Gentiles, and the
exactest Critics of the old Greek Schools, do either take it for the places
under the earth designed to reception of unhappy souls; or else for Pluto
himself the chief God of hell. Thus Lucian tells us of the Grecians, that
being thereunto persuaded by Hesiod and Homer, and the rest of the Poets, they
took Hades to be (...) Lucian de Luctu.
, a place under the earth, deep, large, and dark. Thus does Eustathius that
learned and renowned Bishop of Thessalonica, tell us of this Hades, (...)
Eustath. in Iliad. a.
, that is, a dark place under the earth; and Phavorinius the Grammarian, (...)
Phav. Lexic. in (...).
, a place void of light, and full of eternal darkness; Nicetas Choniates,
(...) Nicet. Cho^. in Ball.
, the dark and dreadful tabernacles of Hades; Nicephorus Gregoras the
Historian, (...) Nicepb. Gregor. hist. l. 8.
, we walked in gross darkness as they say of those that descended to Hades;
and Nazianzen the Divine, (...) Nazianz. in Chron. patient.
, coming unto the house of Hades full of mists and darkness. In which last
place, it may be, Hades is not taken for the place only, but for Pluto himself,
the Lord and Ruler of that place. And by this name we find him called also in
diverse Authors of good credit amongst the Ancients. For Diodorus Siculus
reports of the ancient Gentiles, that they took (...), the third son of
Saturn, (who was the Pluto which we speak of) to be the first inventor of
graves and funerals Diod. Sicul. hist. l. 5.
, and for that cause to be the God of the dead. And before him, the wisemen of
the Chaldeans, which they called their Magi, taught that there were two chief
authors of all things, a good and a bad; that the good was called Zeus (which
was the name of Jupiter amongst the Grecians) and Oromasdes; (...) Diogen.
Laert. in Proem.
, and that the other was called Hades, or Arimanios: and this says Plutarch
Plut. de Iside and Osirid.
, was the opinion of the most and wisest. According unto which opinion, himself
says of Hades, or Pluto, (...), that he is black, and the Master or Prince of
the dark night Id. (...) apud Delphos.
. And Homer speaking of the partition of the world between the three sons of
Saturn in which division Jupiter had the heavens, and Neptune the seas, tells us
of Hades, that for his share he had the dark mists to dwell in Homer in Iliad.
15.
, (...), as his words there are. Which region of dark mists so assigned to
Hades ( i. e. to Pluto the God of hell) he calls in another place, (...) Id.
Odyss. l. 24.
, the house of Hades under the dens or cavernes of the earth: in the same
sense and words almost as it is called in Theognis, (...) Theogn. in Gnomon.
, they go (says he) to the house of Hades under the dens of the earth.
Infinite are the instances which might be alleged to justify these two
significations of the Greek word Hades, and of the Place and Person therein
designed, from Aristophanes, Mimnermus, Orpheus, Diphilus an old Comicall Poet,
and indeed who not? but I conceive these few sufficient to make clear this
point. Now whether hell were called Hades from the Prince thereof, as many
countries have received denomination from their Kings and Chieftains; or
whether the Devil were called Hades from the chief seat of his Empire: as to
this day when we say the Persian and Tartarian, we mean the Emperor of Persia,
and the Cham of Tartary, it comes all to one. Certain I am they did acknowledge
the dominion of Hades to be seated in the lower and infernal Regions, and
generally conceived thereof as a place of torments. For Chrysostom showing the
general consent of all nations in this use of the word Chrysostom. in 2. Cor. hom.
9.
, adds that the Grecians, Barbarians, Poets and Philosophers are of this
opinion, (...), that there are judgment seats, (and consequently punishments)
in hell. With whom Theodoret consents, commending much the piety of the old
Philosophers, in that they sent all the souls of all those to heaven, who lived
well and virtuously Theod. de fine and judicio. Sermon. 11.
, (...), but those that did the contrary unto hell below: and saying
particularly of Plato, (...), that in many places he speaks of hell or Hades,
as a place of torments. In which it is to be observed that when the
Prepositions (...) or (...) are joined with the word Hades in the Genitive case
it is to be supplied with some other word to make up the Grammatical
construction; as (...), and (...), i. e. in the house or regions of Hades.

Let us next see what use the writers of the new Testament have made of Hades;
and in what sense and signification we shall find it there. And first we may
observe that it is sometimes used, not often, to signify the Prince of
darkness, the very Beelzebub himself, the king of Devils: as in the 20.
Chapter of the Revelation, v. 14. were it is said (according to the English
translation) that death and hell were cast into the lake of fire. But in the
Original it runs thus, (...), etc. that death and Hades, that is to say, the
Gonervours of death and the Prince of hell, received their final condemnation,
and were cast into the lake of fire and brimstone. And in this sense, as I
conceive, it is also used in a former place of the said book, in which we find
mention of a pale horse, death sitting on his back, and Hell Apocal. 6. v. 8.
, (or Hades says the Greek, that is to say, the Prince of hell) following
after. On which the ancient Expositer in St. Augustines works gives this Gloss
or Comment, Hell follows after, i. e. Expectantes devorationem multarum
animarum Homil. 6. in Apocalypse.
, expecting to devour the souls of many of those who are slain by death. And
this does very well agree with that of the Apostle, saying, that the Devil is
like a roaring lion walking up and down, and seeking whom he may devour 1 Pet.
5.8.
. But generally the word Hades is used in the new Testament, to signify hell
it self, or the place of torments, according to the meaning of the word in
common speech. Thus read we in St. Matthews Gospel, that the gates of hell Mat.
16.18.
, ((...) in the Greek, or the gates of Hades) shall not prevail against the
Church: and in St. Lukes Gospel it is said of the great rich glutton, that he
was in hell, (in Hades (...), says the Original) which in in the same verse is
affirmed to be a place of torments Luke 16.23.
. And in hell he lift up his eyes being in torments, says the text, v. 23. and
in the next verse he complains to Abraham, that he was tormented in those
flames. Now these two places are confessed on all sides to be so clearly meant
of hell, or the place of Devils, that there is no exception to be made against
them. May we not prove the like also of all the rest? I believe we shall. In
the 11. Chapter of St. Matthew, it is affirmed of Capernaum, that it was
exalted unto heaven, but should be brought down (...) to hell, or Hades Mat.
11.23, 42.
. What should the meaning of this be, but that whereas the Gospel of Christ was
now preached unto them, whereby that City was exalted above all the Cities of
Iewrie; their not receiving of the same being offered to them, made them
obnoxious to the righteous judgment of Christ, and liable to everlasting
damnation in hell, in the day of doom; which day should be more tolerable to
the Land of Sodom, then it would be to them. In the first Epistle to the
Corinthians we find this question, O death where is thy sting, (...), where is
thy victory O Hades 1 Cor.15.55.
? Here Hades in the new translation authorized by K. James, is, I know not why,
translated grave; O grave where is thy victory! But then you must observe with
all, that hell is added in the margin, to show that they abandoned not the old
Translation; where in plain terms we find it thus, Death, where is thy sting?
Hell, where is thy victory? and so it stands in the lesson appointed by the
Liturgy to be read at burials. And this translation of the word in that place
to the Corinthians, seems most agreeable to some Protestant Doctors of good
name and credit. Interim videas ordine quodam inimicos nostros recenseri,
infernum sive gehennam, mortem, peccatum and legem Pet. Mart. in 1 Cor. 15.
; In the mean time (says Peter Martyr) we may behold our enemies here mustred
in their rank and order; that is to say, hell (or gehenna) death, sin and the
law. With whom agrees Hyperius and Bullinger, in their Comment on the words in
question. So then by Hades is meant hell in that place of St. Paul, and so it
is no question in two more of the Revelation: in the first whereof, Christ does
appear unto St. John, saying of himself, that he had the keys of hell and of
death Apoc. 1.18.
, (...), where we find Hades englished hell by the new translators, and
nothing added in the margin, (as in that before) to show the place admitted of
a different reading. And that we may be sure to know that nothing is there
meant by hell, but the house of torments, the place allotted to the damned:
Andreas B. of Caesarea, an old Orthodox writer, gives this Scholie on it; I
have the keys of death and Hades And. Caesar. in Apocal. 1.
, (...), that is to say, of the death of the body, and of the soul. An other
old Latin writer to this purpose also; I have the keys of death and hell,
because he that believes and is baptized, is delivered both, from death and
hell: This writer whosoever he was is yet not resolved on, but it goes for
Augustines; and is extant in the ninth Tome of that Fathers works. With him
agrees Primasius, Haymo and Lyra, amongst the Authors of the middle and
declining times of the Church; of the late writers of the Protestant and
reformed Churches, Bullinger, Chytraeus, Osiander, Aretius, and Sebastian
Meyer. And last of all we have the word thus used in the 20. of the Revelation
Apocal. 20.13.
; where it is said, that death and Hell, (...), (says the Greek) delivered up
the dead which were in them. Where though we find the word grave added in the
margin, to show that the Translators did admit of that reading: yet by
retaining hell in the text it self, they showed withal that they preferred the
same before it. And they had reason so to do; so many of the ancient writers
expounding it of hell the place of the damned. For so it is interpreted by
venerable Beda, Primasius St. Augustines Scholar, and Haymo for the Latins; by
Aretas and Andreas Caesariensis for the Greeks; all of them in their several
Commentaries on the text saying the same thing though in diverse words. And
finally it is so interpreted by St. Augustine also Aug. de Civit. l. 20.15.
. Nec frustra fortasse non satis fuit ut diceret mors aut infernus, sed
utrumque dictum est, etc. that is to say, Nor happily without cause did he not
think it enough to say that death or hell, (divisively, had cast up their dead)
but he names both: death for the just, who might only suffer death, and not
also hell; hell for the wicked and unrighteous, who were there to be punished.

Thus have we looked over all those places where the word Hades does occur in
the new Testament (except that one which is in question, whereof more anon) and
find it constantly both englished and interpreted by that of hell; according
as we commonly understand the word, for the place of torments. It Is true, the
word admits of other notions amongst some Greek Authors. But that makes nothing
to us Christians, who are to use it in that sense, in which it is presented to
us in the book of God, interpreted and expounded by the Ancient Fathers, and
the tradition of the Church. For though the sacred Penmen of the new Testament
writing in Greek, were of necessity to use such words as they found ready to
their hands: yet they restrained them many times to some certain and particular
meaning, which they retain unto this day, as words of Ecclesiastical use and
signification. Of this kind are Ecclesia, Evangelium, Episcopus, Presbyter,
Diaconus, Martyr, and the like: which being words of a more general
signification in their first original, are now restrained to such particular
notions, as the first Preachers of the Gospel thought most fit to reserve them
for. Of this kind also is Diabolus, which properly and originally did signify
no more then an Accuser; but is now used by all writers both in Greek and
Latin, to denote the Devil. And of this kind is Hades also, which whatsoever
it might signify in some old Greek writers, more then the Place or Region of
hell, or the Prince thereof: is now restrained in general speech to signify
only hell it self, or the house of torments; the habitation of the Devil and
his Angels. But this we shall the better see, by taking a short view of the use
and signification of the word, amongst the best and most approved of the old
Greek Ecclesiastical writers. And first Josephus, though no Christian, yet one
that very well understood the difference between heaven and hell, tells us of
those whose souls were cleansed and favored of God, that they inhabit in the
holiest places of heaven Joseph. de bello. l. 3. c. 25.
: but that they whose hands wax mad against themselves (or who laid hands upon
themselves) (...), their souls were to be received in the dark vaults of hell
or Hades. Theophilus the sixth B. of Antioch about 170. years after Christ,
cites this verse out of the works of the Sibyls, (...), Theop. adv. Autolcum.
l. 2.
that they sacrificed to the Devils in hell or Hades. In the same times lived
Justin Martyr, who does thus inform us, Just. Mart. Resp. 75. ad Orthodox.
After the soul (says he) is departed from the body, straightwayes there is a
separation of the unjust from the just; both being carried by the Angels into
places meet for them: that is to say, the souls of the just into Paradise,
where is the fellowship and sight of Angels and Archangels with a kind of
beholding of Christ our Savior; (...), but the souls of the unjust to places
in hell or Hades, of which it was said in Scripture unto Nebuchadnezzar, (...),
that Hades below was stirred to meet him, Isa. 14. And to this purpose Id. in
exhort. ad Graecos.
he both cites and allows those words of Plato* where he affirms that when
death draws near to any man, then tales are told (...) of the things in
Hades, how he that here does deal unjustly shall there be punished, etc. Next
him Eusebius speaks thus in the person of Christ, (...), Eusebius. demonstr. l.
10. c. 8.
etc. I see my descent to hell (or Hades) approach, and the rebellion (against
me) of the contrary powers which are enemies to God. And that we may be sure to
know what he means by Hades, he tells us out of Plato in another place, that the
souls of wicked men departing hence Id. Praepar. Evang. l. 13.
, immediately after death, (...), endured the punishments of hell (or Hades) of
their doings here. After man was fallen, says Athanasius, and by his fall
death had prevailed from Adam to Christ, the earth was accursed (...), hell (or
Hades opened Athan. in illud, Omni. mihi traditae sunt.
Paradise shut up, and heaven offended: but after all things were delivered by
Christ, the earth received a blessing, Paradise was opened, (...), Hades or
hell did shrink for fear, and heaven set open to all believers. And in another
place he speaks of two several mansions provided by Almighty God for the
wicked man, (...) Id. de in carnat. Christ.
, the grave and Hades, whereof one is to receive his body, and the other his
soul. St. Basil thus, Death is not altogether evil, except you speak of the
death of a sinner; (...), etc. Basil. Hom. quod Deus non sit author. peccat.
because that their departure hence is the beginning of their punishments in
hell (or Hades): and besides (...), the evils which are in hell (or Hades) have
not God for their cause, but our selves, etc. And after showing that Dathan and
Abiram were swallowed up of the earth; he adds that they were never a whit the
better for this kind of punishment, (...) Id. ibid.
, for how could they be so that went down to Hades ( or hell) but they made the
rest wiser by their example? Infinite more might be alleged from the Fathers
of the Eastern Church, to show that when they spoke of Hades, they meant
nothing but hell; and should be here produced, were not these sufficient. Only
I shall make bold to add the evidence of two or three of the most eminent of
the latter writers, to show that in all times and ages, the word retained that
notion only which had been given it in the Scriptures, and the old Greek
Fathers. Thus then Cydonius, (...), etc. Cydon. de morte condemn.
that there is in Hades (hell) vengeance for all sins committed, not only the
consent of all wise men, but the equity of the divine justice does most fully
prove. Aeneas Gazaeus he comes next, and he tells us this Aen. Gaz. Theophrast.
, that he who in a private life commits small sins and laments them, escapes
(...), the punishments that are in Hades. And finally Gregentius thus, Christ
took a rod out of the earth Disput. cum Herb. Iudaeo.
, viz. his precious Cross, and stretching forth his hand struck all his
enemies therewith, and conquered them: (...), etc. that is to say, Hades, or
hell, death, sin, and that subtle serpent. So that we see that not alone the
sacred penmen of the new Testament, written first in Greek, but also all the
Ecclesiastical writers of the Greek Church when they speak of Hades, intend
not any thing thereby but hell, the place prepared for the Devils and the
damned souls. Let us next see whether the Fathers of the Latin or Western
Church have any other meaning when they speak of inferi, or infernum (for they
use both words) by which they do expound Hades, or translate it rather; as
often as they chance to meet it.

And first for the Quid nominis take it thus from Augustine. Inferi eo quod
infra sunt Aug. de Genesis ad liter. l. 12. c. 34.
, the inferi are so called (says he) because they are below, in the parts
beneath. And somewhat to this purpose says Lactantius also Lact. Instit. l.
2.2.
, Nihil terra inferius and humilius nisi mors and inferi, that there is nothing
lower then the earth, but death and inferi. From infra the root or theme the
Fathers do derive infernus, of which thus St. Hierome, Inferiora terrarum
infernus accipitur Hier. Epist. ad Ephesians. 4.
, the lower parts of the earth are called infernus, to which our Savior did
descend. Which as it shows that infernus was derived from inferius, and so by
consequence from infra, as the word inferi was before: so it directs us also
where to find the place. And this he does elsewhere also saying, Simul
discimus quod infernus sub terra sit Id. in Isa. 14. et ad Ephesians. 4.
; and in another place, quod autem infernus in inferiore part terrae sit: in
both that it is under the earth, and in the lowermost parts thereof. Tertullian
also says the same, as to the situation of it, Habes regionem inferum
subterraneam credere; we are to believe that the region of inferi is under the
earth Tertul. de Anima. c. 55.
: affirming also that it is in visceribus terrae abstrusa profunditas, a
bottomless pit in the very bowels of the earth. In this there is no difference
amongst the Ancients: in the nature or meaning of the word there is. For by
Tertullian the word inferi is taken for a place under the earth, whither the
souls of good and bad descend after death; the good to a kind of refreshing,
the bad to punishments: affirming for a certain truth, or rather pronouncing so
ex tripode (for so the word Constituimus imports) omnem animam apud inferos
sequestrari in diem domini Id. ibid.
; that the soul of every man is kept in Inferi, till the day of the Lord. Which
as it was a fancy private to himself, after his lapse into the heresy of
Montanus; so he received no countenance in it from the rest of the Fathers, by
whom it is unanimously agreed upon, that the souls of all good Christians are
received into Paradise. It Is true indeed, that Hierome seems to incline to
the same opinion; where speaking of the difference between death and inferi, he
says, that death is that whereby the soul is separated from the body Hier. in
Ose. c. 13.
: infernus, in quo animae includuntur, sive in refrigerio sive in poenis, and
that infernus is the place wherein the souls of men are kept, either in some
refreshments, or else in punishments. Which seems to be the same with that
which Tertullian had affirmed before; but it does but seem so. For when he
speaks of inferi or infernus, in this extension of the word, he relates only
to the times before the coming of our Savior, and his victory over death and
hell; and not at all unto the times of the Gospel. For thus he does explain
himself in another place; Solomon speaks thus, says he, because before the
coming of our Savior, omnia pariter ad inferos ducerentur Hier. in Eccl. 3.
, all were alike carried to the inferi, or the places below; and that thereupon
it was that Job complained, how both the godly and the wicked were detained in
inferno: (whereunto this expression tends, we shall see hereafter.) The same
he says in his notes or Comment upon another Chapter of the same book of
Solomon's, affirming plainly, ante adventum Domini omnes quamvis sanctos inferni
lege detentos Id. in Eccl 9.
, that before the coming of the Lord all men how just and holy soever were
detained under the Law of infernus. But then immedately he adds, that since
the resurrection of Christ the case is otherwise, and that the souls of
righteous men, nequaquam inferno teneantur, are by no means to be supposed to
be detained in infernus Id. ibid.
: and this he proves from that of the Apostle, saying, I desire to be
dissolved and to be with Christ; and he that is with Christ, says he, is not
held in infernus. So that whatsoever he conceived of infernus before Christ's
coming (the truth of which opinion we dispute not here) it is plain that since
the resurrection he leaves it for a place appointed to the wicked only, there
to be held in everlasting pains and torments. And so elsewhere he does define
it; Infernus locus suppliciorum and cruciatuum est, in quo videter dives
purpuratus Id. in Isa. 14.
: that is to say, infernus is the place of punishments and torments, where the
richman clothed in purple was seen (by Lazarus). Nay even Tertullian, though he
had made himself an inferi of his own devising, acknowledges the prison which
the Gospel speaks of, ( Mat. 5.24, 25.) to be no other then this inferi
Tertul. de Anima. c. 58.
; and therefore certainly not the receptacle both for good and bad, the just
and unjust. But none of all the Ancients states this point more clearly then
divine St. Augustine, who looking more judiciously into the business does
affirm expressly:

Frist, Of the inferi or place it self, nusquam scripturarum in bono appellatos
potui invenire August. in Epist. 99.
* that he could never find any place of Scripture, in which the word inferi was
taken in any good sense.

Secondly, that he could never find, that the place was called inferi (y), Id.
de Genesis ad let. l. 12. c. 33.
, ubi justorum animae requiescunt, where the souls of the righteous were at
rest.

Thirdly, that past all peradventure since the descent of Christ into hell,
boni and fideles prorsus inferos nesciunt Id. de Civ. l. 20. c. 15.
, the godly believers are acquainted with no such place.

And last of all, Non nisi poenalia recte intelligi (per) inferna Id. Epist. 57
, that infernus can be taken for nothing rightly but the place of punishments.
And in this sense, according unto these restrictions and explanations have the
words inferi and infernus been since used in most Orthodox writers: and in that
sense still used by the old translatour of the new Testament into Latin, as
often as he meets with the Greek Hades. And so St. Ambrose also does
interpret or expound the same; where saying that according to the Theology of
the old Philosophers, the souls of men severed from their bodies went unto
Hades; he gives this gloss upon the word, id est, locum qui non videtur, quem
locum latin infernum dicimus Amb. de bon^ mortis. c. 10.
, that is to say, a place unseen, which in Latin we do call infernus. But as
there is no general rule but has some exceptions; so this has one exception,
and but only one: there being one only place in the new Testament where Hades
is translated otherwise in the vulgar Latin; that namely 1 Cor. 15.55. where
it is rendered mors, or death. Of which no reason can be given, unless perhaps
he fell upon some such Greek copies as Eusebius did, wherein the word (...) was
twice repeated, (...); i. e. O death where is thy sting? O death where is thy
victory? To which I do incline the rather, because the reading of the Latin is
exceeding ancient, ubi est mors aculeus tuus? ubi est mors contentio tua?
(where we find also (...) for (...), i. e. strife for victory) occurring in
Tertullian Tertul. de resur. carn.
, Cyprian Ad Quirin. l. 3. c. 58.
, and others of the ancient writers. So that the word Hades being used
throughout the whole new Testament, to signify the place of torments; and
inferi or infernus by the old Latin translatour, to express that word: it
must needs be that inferi and infernus throughout the Testament, and with most
Ecclesiastical Authors since the translating of it, must signify the self-same
place, which we English, usually call the name of Hell.

These things premised we shall the better be enabled to discern what the
meaning is of Christ's descent into hell, whether the words import any local
descent or only something analogical and proportionable to it. That the
Apostles and Evangelists did first commit the sacred monuments of the faith
which they left behind them, to the Greek tongue, as being then of an extent
more universal then that of the Romans and the Jews, is a thing past question:
unless perhaps St. Matthews Gospel was first written in the Hebrew language,
as St. Jerome Hierom. de Eccl. scriptor.
, and some other learned men have been of opinion. And therefore it is more
then probable, that they delivered this brief Abstract of the Christian faith,
which we call the Creed, in the same tongue also, in which they did communicate
those Oracles of eternal life. Which granted, as I think no question will be
made thereof, what else can follow thereupon, but that the word Hades in the
Creed, must be taken in the self-same sense, in which we find it generally
used (not one place excepted) in the whole new Testament: those very men, whose
writings make up a great part of the said new Testament, contributing their
several Articles to make up the Creed? And then what else can be supposed to
be the meaning of Christ's descent into hell, but that he locally went down,
which is the ordinary meaning of the word descend; and went down to the place
of torments, which in the common course of speech is generally designed by the
name of hell? Or if the Creed were first compiled and published in the Latin
tongue, the same conclusion must needs follow from the former premises: the
Latin inferi or infernus, (as before was proved) signifying the very same with
the Greek word Hades, and that imparting nothing else, (according to the
Ecclesiastical notion) but the English, Hell. Besides the Apostles purposely
intended this (and whosoever else we shall please to think were the Authors of
it, did intend the same) to lay down plainly and methodically, according to the
understanding of the vulgar sort, that which they thought most fitting to
comprise in this short Compendium. Nor can it enter into the belief of any man
endued with ordinary sense and reason, that the Apostles having before made use
of those vulgar phrases, was crucified, dead, and buried, in the literal sense,
which every Artizan, and Ploughman, nay even women and children could not but
understand at the first hearing: should then come in with a descent into hell,
not to be understood in a literal sense, as the words usually import in common
speech; but in a meaning too abstruse and difficult for all vulgar wits, beyond
the reach of ordinary apprehensions. Assuredly it was never the Apostles
meaning that they for whose use principally they compiled the Creed, and in
whose language it was written (which soever it was) should not be able to
conceive the true sense of their words, without the help of a Lexicon, or
having diligent recourse unto the Critics and Philosophers of their several
Languages.

But because Arguments of this nature may perhaps be said not to be
demonstrative, and that men will not readily let go their hold-fast upon
probabilities, we will proceed another way, and setch the truth of this
assertion that Christ descended into hell, in a literal sense, from the
authority and text of holy Scripture. Most sure it is that there is nothing
comprehended in the Creed, but what is to be found in the book of God, either
in terms express, (as the greatest part of them are) or else by necessary and
undeniable consequence. And both these ways we doubt not but we shall be able
to assert this Article.

First, in the way of necessary undeniable consequence it may be pleaded from
that place of St. Paul to the Romans Romans 10.6, 7.
, where it is said, The righteousness which is of faith speaks on this wise,
Say not in thine heart, Who shall ascend up into heaven? that is to bring
Christ down from above; Or who shall descend into the deep? that is to bring up
Christ again from the dead; For the expounding of which words we first take
notice, that the two interrogatives are equivalent to these general negatives,
none can ascend up into heaven; none can descend into the deep. And then the
meaning will be this, that if none can ascend to heaven, nor descend down into
the deep, then not Christ himself: which to affirm, were plainly and directly
contrary unto the righteousness of faith. So that it is a main ground of the
Christian faith, that Christ descended into the deep, and into such a deep as
has some proportion to his ascension into heaven; which possibly can be no
other then the deeps of hell. And hereunto agree Interpreters both old and new.
For thus Theophylact, Stagger not says St. Paul, nor cast this doubtingly in
thy mind, how Christ descended from heaven, or how after death he arose from
the deep again Theophyl. in Romans 10.
, id est, ex abditissimo and profundissimo loco, that is to say, from the
deepest and most hidden place. And why was hell called Hades amongst the
Greeks, but quasi (...), dark, hidden, and unseen, as before was said? More
plainly Mart. Bucer for the late writers thus, The Apostle acknowledges this
question to be a denial of Christ, and that he draws Christ down from heaven
who admits this doubt Bucer in Romans 10.
. It is evident that the deep is taken pro infernis, Hell, and in this sense
the Apostle seems to use this word the deep; for he adds, that is to bring
back Christ from the dead, to wit, to account his descent to hell to be void,
and his victory over death, and hell, (Gehenna) of none effect. So then the
meaning of this text will be briefly this, that according to the Christian
faith, these actions which to men seemed so impossible, those namely ascending
up into heaven, and descending down into the deeps of hell, were performed for
us in the person of Christ: and therefore now to doubt of either, were nothing
else but to enervate and weaken the power of Christ, who most perfectly has
accomplished both, to save us from the one, and bring us to the other. Besides
the Reader may take notice, that that which our Translatours have rendered by
these words the deep, is called in the Greek Original by the name of Abyssus
which signifies a bottomless pit, and is so taken and translated in the
Revelation, Chap. 9.2. and 11.7. where it can probably meant of no place but
hell. In the next place we meet with that of the Ephesians Ephesians. 4.8, 9, 10.
, where it is said, When he ascended up on high he led captivity captive, and
gave gifts unto men. Now that he ascended, what is it but that he also
descended first into the lowest parts of the earth? He that descended is the
same also that ascended up far above all heavens, that he might fill all things.
Now in these words we may observe;

First, that before Christ's ascending by way of relation the Apostle puts
Christ's descending.

Secondly, that because descending and ascending must have contrary extremes,
from which and to which the motion is made; therefore St. Paul opposes the
lowest parts of the earth to which Christ first descended, unto the highest
heavens of all above which he ascended.

Thirdly, that these lowest parts of the earth could not be the grave, (as some
men would have it) which is seldom two yards deep, in the ground, and so not
opposite (in that respect) to the height of the heavens, according to the words
and inference of the Apostle.

And Fourthly, that the end of his descending was to lead captivity captive, to
beat them from the place of their chiefest strength; even as the end of his
ascending after he had led captivity captive, was to give gifts to men. For
what place fitter for the scene of so great an action, as the full conquest of
death, sin, and Satan, the final dissolution of the kingdom of darkness, then
the chief seat and fortress of their whole empire, which is hell it self,
situate in the lowest parts of the earth, as before was shown. And hereunto
agrees the exposition of the ancient Fathers. St. Irenaeus citing these very
words of the Apostle, that Christ descended into the lower parts of the Earth,
makes them equivalent with those words of David concerning Christ, viz. thou
shall not leave my soul in the neathermost Hell; saying, Irenaeus adv. haeres.
l. 5. c. 31.
Hoc and David in eum prophetans dixit, and so much David said of him by way of
prophecy. Tertullian alleging the same words of the Apostle, concludes
thence, Tertul. de Anima c. 35.
Habes ergo Regionem In^erum subterraneam, i. e. by this thou may perceive
that the place of Hell is under the earth. Chrysostom thus, Chrysostom. in Ephesians.
c. 4.
Christ descended to the lower parts of the earth, beneath which there are none
other; and he ascended above all, higher then which there is nothing. St.
Ambrose on these words of Paul, gives us this short gloss, Ambros. ibid.
After death Christ descended to Hell; whence rising the third day, he ascended
above all the heavens. St. Hierome on the same says thus, Qui descendit in
anima ad infernum, ipse cum anima and corpore ascendit in Coelum Hieron. in
Ephesians. c. 4.
, that is to say, he that descended to Hell in his soul only, ascended into
Heaven both with soul and body. Primasius does not only concur with Hierom in
his Exposition of the place Primas. ibid.
, but repeats also his very words. Oecumenius out of Photius thus, Oecumen. in
Ephesians. c. 4.
To the lower parts of the earth, he means Hell, beneath which place there is
no lower. Next Haymo Haymo ibid.
Christ descended first into the lower parts of the earth, that is into hell,
and after ascended into heaven. Which said, he gives this reason of his
Exposition, as Hierom and Primasius had done before, that by the lower parts of
the earth, he must needs mean hell, which is called infernus in the Latin,
because it is lower then the earth, or rather under it. And finally Theophylact
thus asks the question Theophyl. in Ephesians. 4.
, Quem in locum descendit, into what place did Christ descend? And presently
returns this answer, in infernum, etc. into hell, which St. Paul calls the
lowest parts of the earth, after the common opinion of men.

There is another part of this Text of Scripture touching the leading of
Captivity Captive, of which we have said nothing from the ancient Writers,
because I purposed to consider it with another Text, near of kin unto it; where
it is said, Col. 2.15.
that having spoiled principalities and powers, he made a show of them openly,
triumphing over them. In both which texts we must distinguish between the
taking of Captivity captive, and the leading of them as in triumph, being once
so taken; between the spoiling of those principalities and powers the Apostle
speaks of, and the open show or triumph which was made upon it. The first was
only the great work of Christ's descent into Hell; the other the chief pomp and
glory of his Resurrection and Ascension. For clearing of which point we may
please to know, that the Devil since the fall of man laid a claim to mankind,
and held him like a captive in the bonds of sin: by means whereof as he drew
many after him into the pit of torments, so he presumed to have the like
advantages over all the rest. And though Christ's over-mastering Satan began
here on the earth, when he cast him out of such as he had possessed: yet his
full and final conquest could not be accomplished, till he had followed and
pursued him over all the world, driven him at last into the very heart and seat
of his Dominion, which was Hell it self, and there, in the presence of his
Angels and other instruments of mischief, destroyed his power, dissolved his
Empire, and put a period to his tyranny over the sons of men. And this is that
to which the Fathers do attest both with heart and hand; but none more clearly
to this purpose then St. Athanasius, Athanas. in passion. and cruc.
The Devil, says he, was fallen from Heaven, he was cast from the earth,
pursued through the air, every where conquered, and every where straightned; in
which distress (...), he determined to keep Hell safe, which was all that was
left him. But the Lord a true Savior would not leave his work unfinished, nor
leave those which were in Hades as yielded to the enemy: so that the Devil
thinking to kill one, lost all; and hoping to carry one to Hell (or Hades) was
himself cast out Id. ibid.
. By means whereof Hades (or Hell) is abrogated, death no more prevailing, but
all being raised unto life; neither can the Devil stand any more against us,
but is fallen, and indeed creeps on his breast and belly. Which said, he adds
this of the Saints, (...), that thus in fine they saw Hell spoiled. Epiphanius,
in this order marshalleth the acts of Christ, He was crucified, buried, (...),
he descended to places under the earth, he took captivity captive, and rose
again the third day Epiphan. in Anacephal.
. By which we see, that the taking of captivity captive, was one of the effects
of his descent into Hell; and that both his descent and victory over Hell and
Satan, are placed between his burial and Resurrection. In the Homili^s which
Leo the Emperor made for the exercise of his style and the Confession of his
Faith, wherein no doubt he had the judgment and advice of the ablest men that
were about him, he does thus deliver it; (...), etc. Christ is risen (says he)
bringing Hades ( or the Devil) prisoner with him, and proclaiming liberty to
the Captives Leo Imp. Hom. 2. de Resurrect.
. He that held others bound is now bound himself, (...), Christ is now come
from Hell, ( or Hades) with his ensign of triumph; as appears by the sour
and heavy looks of those which were overthrown, that is to say, of Hades
(meaning there, as first, the old Satan himself) together with Death also, and
the hateful Devils. Dorotheus in his Book de Paschate, very plainly thus, What
means this that he led captivity captive Doroth. de paschate. c. 12.
? It means, says he, that by Adams transgression the Enemy had made us all
captives, and had us in subjection; and that Christ took us again out of the
Enemies hand, and conquered him who made us captive. And then concludes, Erepti
igitur sumus ab Inferis ob Christi humanitatem, that we were then delivered
from the power of Hell by the manhood or humanity of Christ our Savior. St.
Cyprian though more ancient, and not so clear as he in this particular, does
yet touch it thus; Descendens ad inferos captivam ab antiquo duxit
captivitatem, that Christ descended into Hell brought back those captives which
had before been captivated Cyprian de unctio. Chrysm.
. And in another place which we saw before, Id. de passione Christi.
When in the presence of Christ Hell was broken open, and thereby captivity
made captive, his conquering soul being first presented to his Father, returned
unto his body without delay. But to look back again to the old Greek Fathers
who are far more positive and express in this, then the Latins are, we are
thus told by Athanasius in another place Athanas.
that the Lord rose the third day from the dead, (...), having spoiled hell,
trodden the enemy under foot, dissolved death, broken the chains of sin with
which we were tied, and freed us which were bound from the chains thereof. St.
Cyril of Alexandria thus, Cyril de recta fide l. 2.
Our Lord (says he) (...), etc. having spoiled death, and loosed the number of
souls which were detained in the dens of the earth, rose again the third day
from the dead. Which words of Cyril are repeated and approved in the Council of
Ephesus, and afterward confirmed in the fifth General Council holden at
Constantinople Council. Constant. Seff. 6.
. St. Hierom finally on the parable of the strong man which was bound and
spoiled, Mat. 12. gives this observation (which I had almost pretermitted) viz.
that this strong man was tied and bound in Hell Hieronyn. in Matthew. 12
, and trodden under the Lords feet, and the Tyrants house being spoiled
captivity also was led captive. In which quotations from the Fathers, we must
take this with us, that when they speaking of spoiling Hell, and vanquishing
the powers thereof, they do allude as evidently to the spoiling of
principalities and powers mentioned in that to the Colossians; as they insist
upon the taking of captivity captive, expressed in that to the Ephesians. In a
word, take the sum of all which by the Ancients is delivered upon those two
Texts, in these words of Zanchius, a very learned Writer of the Reformed
Churches. The Fathers (says he) for the most part are of this opinion Zanchius
ad Ephesians. c. 4.
, that Christ in his soul came to the place of the damned to signify not in
words but with his presence that the justice of God was satisfied by his death
and bloodshed; and that Satan had no longer power over his Elect, whom he held
captive, etc. As also that he might carry all the Devils with him in a triumph,
as it is Coloss. 2. He spoiled powers and principalities, and made an open show
of them, leading them (as captives) in a triumph by the virtue of his Cross, by
which he had purged away sins and appeased the justice of God. So Zanchius.

But the most clear and pregnant place of holy Scripture, for proof of Christ^
descent into Hell, is that of the 2. of the Acts: where the Apostle citing
those words of David Psalm. 16.9.
, Thou will not leave my soul in Hell, nor suffer thine holy One to see
corruption; applies it thus unto our Savior, that David seeing this before,
spoke of the Resurrection of Christ, that his soul was not left in Hell,
neither did his flesh see corruption Act. 2.31.
. In which particular words, (those before recited) it is clear and manifest,
that the soul and body of Christ were by God appointed to be superior to all
contrary powers, that is the soul to Hell, and the flesh to the grave; and that
from both, Christ was to rise an absolute conqueror that he might sit on his
heavenly Throne as Lord over all, not by promise only, as before, but in fact
and proof. But for the whole Sermon of St. Peter made on this occasion, it may
be summed up briefly to this effect Bilsons survey, p. 623.
that is to say, that the Prophecy of David neither was nor could be fulfilled
in any, no not in David himself, but only in the promised Messiah: for that his
soul should not be left in Hell (or Hades) nor his flesh see corruption, but
was fulfilled in that Christ whom ye cruelly crucified. He it is that is risen
Lord of all in his own person, the sorrows of death being loosed before him: he
is ascended up to Heaven, as David likewise foretold of him, and there sits
on the right hand of God, until all that be his enemies in the rest of his
Members be made his footstool: and thence has he shed forth this which you
now see and hear, even the promise of the holy Ghost received of the Father for
all his. And therefore know ye for a surety, that God has made him both Lord,
and Christ, i. e. Lord over all in Heaven, Earth, Hell; and Christ even the
Anointed Savior of all his Elect. And to this purpose says St. Augustine,
Quamobrem teneamus firmissime, etc. August. Epist. 99.
Wherefore let us most firmly hold that which is comprehended in our Faith (or
the heads thereof) confirmed by most sound authority, namely that Christ dyed
according to the Scriptures, and was buried, and according to the Scriptures
also rose again the third day, with the rest of those things which are most
clearly testified of him in the written Word. In quibus etiam hoc est quod apud
Inferos fuit, etc. Amongst which this is one point also, that he was in Hell,
and loosed the sorrows of the same, of which it was impossible that he should
be holden. In which last words, the Father plainly does relate to the 24.
verse, being the beginning almost of St. Peter's Sermon. Where though the Copies
of the Testaments which are extant now, read not as Augustine does, Solutis
doloribus inferni, having loosed the pains of Hell, but the pains of death: yet
many of the ancient Copies were as St. Augustine reads it. For Athanasius
sometimes uses (...), he loosed the pains of Hell Athanas. in passi. and
crucem.
, and sometimes (...), the sorrows of death. Epiphanius in two places In
Aneorat. and haeres. 69.
reads it thus, (...), that it was impossible for Christ to be holden or
detained in Hell. And the same Copies as it seems were followed also by
Irenaeus l. 3. c. 12. by Cyprian in his tract de Passione Christi, by
Fulgentius, l 3. ad Thrasimundum, and by Bid also in his Retractations on the
Acts. Which strong agreement of the Ancients, with the sight perhaps of some of
the ancient Copies did prevail so far on Robert Stephans the famous Printer of
Paris, that in the New Testament in Greek of the larger volume, of the year
1550. he caused this word (...) to be put in the margin as a different reading,
remaining still in diverse copies. But this is only by the way, not out of it;
as that which did afford another argument unto the Ancients, for proof of
Christ's descent into hell, and his short stay in it; by the pains or sorrows
whereof it was impossible that he should be holden. Nor did it only serve as a
good argument for them, in their several times, and is to be of no use since
the Text went otherwise. I believe not so. For since both readings have been
found in the ancient Writers, and neither can be rejected as false: the word
death, must be so expounded where it is retained, as that it may not contradict
that of Hell or Hades. For being that death has a double power, place, and
subject, upon the body here on earth, and on the soul in Hell hereafter: the
Text may not unfitly be understood of the later death, the pains and sorrows
whereof were loosed by Christ, because it was impossible they should fasten on
him. But to return unto the not leaving of Christ's soul in Hell, (the tricks
and shifts for the eluding of which Text we shall see hereafter) it could not
be intended of the grave only, as some men would have it; or to relate only to
the Resurrection, as Ap. B. Bilsons survey, p. 622.
they give it out. For to rise simply from the grave was not sufficient to show
the sovereignty of Christ as the Lord of all, Heaven, Earth, and Hell, being
made subject to his Throne; nor to express and signify the eternity of it,
which was to last till all his Enemies were made his footstool. Some had been
raised from death to life by the two famous Prophets in the Old Testament; some
by our Savior in the New: none of which could lay claim under that pretense to
the Throne of David, or to be Lord of all things as our Savior was. Besides
this passage being recorded by St. Luke, who in his Gospel uses the same word
Hades for the place of torments, Lnk. 16.23.
, as before was shown: it is not probable that he should use it here in another
sense, or if he did, that none of all the Latin Fathers, and Interpreters
should ever observe it, who render it by Infernus, Hell, as often as they have
occasion to speak thereof. I close this point with that of Augustine, who
speaking of this Prophecy of David concerning Christ, he says, it is not to
be contradicted, nor otherwise to be expounded then it is there interpreted by
St. Peter himself Aug. Ep. 99.
: and then adds this for a conclusion of the whole, Who but an Infidel will
deny Christ's descent into Hell?

So far the light of holy Scripture, interpreted according to the general
consent and Exposition of the Ancient Fathers, has directed us in this
enquiry: and we have found such good assurance in the cause, that the addition
of more evidence would but seem unnecessary: yet that the Catholic Tradition
of the Church of Christ may be found to incline the same way also, we will draw
down the line thereof from the very times of the Apostles to those days of
darkness, in which all good learning was devoured and swallowed up in the night
of ignorance. For first Thaddaeus whom St. Thomas sent to preach the Gospel to
Abgarus the King or Prince of Edessa, taught him and his, amongst other
Catechetical points contained in the Apostles Creed, that they must believe
Eusebius. hist. Eccl. l. 1. c 13.
, (...), etc. that is to say, that Christ descended into Hell, and broke the
wall which had been never broke before since the world began, and rose again,
and raised the dead, some of the which had slept from the first creation. I
know this story of Thaddaeus has been called in question, in these later
days: nor have I time and leisure to assert it now. All I shall say, is that
Eusebius who relates it, refers himself unto the monuments and Records of the
City of Edessa, out of which he had it: and it is well known Eusebius never was
reputed either to be a fabulous or too credulous Author. Next to Thaddaeus
comes Ignatius the Apostles scholar, who speaks of Christ's descent into Hades,
in the same terms as before: adding withal Ignat. Epist. ad Trallian.
, (...), that he went down alone (to Hades) but ascended with a great multitude
unto his Father. And this he says, after he had made mention of his death and
burial in a former passage of the same Epistle. St. Irenaeus he comes next, and
he tells us this, that David prophesied thus of CHRIST Irenae. adv. haeres. l.
5. c. 31.
, thou shall not leave my soul in the neathermost Hell. After him Origin,
Christ says he, having bound the strong man, and conquered him by his Cross,
went even unto his house, to the house of death, and unto Hell Orig. l. 5. in
Romans c. 6.
; and thence took his goods, that is, the souls which he possessed. Then comes
Eusebius next in order, To him only (says he, speaking of Christ) were the
gates of death opened, and him only the keepers of Hell-gates seeing, shrunk
for fear Eusebius. de Demonst. l. 10. c. 8.
; and the chief Ruler of death (the Devil) knowing him alone to be his Lord,
rose out of his Throne and spoke unto him fearfully with supplications and
entreaty. Next him another Eusebius, surnamed Emisenus Eusebius. Emis. hom. 6. the
Pasc.
, The Lord (says he) descending, darkness trembled at the sudden coming of an
unknown light, and the deepness of the dark mists of Hell saw the bright star
of Heaven. Deposito corpore imas atque abditas Tartari seeds, filius hominis
penetravit; and the Son of man laying by his body, penetrated to the lowest and
most secret seats of Tartarus (or the dungeons of Hell). Then comes the
Renowned Athanasius Athanas. de in carn. Chri.
, There are (says he) no other places but the grave and Hell, out of which man
was perfectly freed by Christ. And this appears not only in us, but in the
death of Christ also, the body going to the grave, (...), etc. and the soul
descending unto Hell, being places severed with a very great distance: the
grave receiving his body, for there it was present, and Hell (or Hades) his
soul. Else how did Christ present his own soul to the souls in bands, (...),
that he might break in sunder the bands or chains of the souls detained in
Hell. St. Basil next Basil. in Psalm. 48.
, When David said, God will deliver my soul from the power of Hell, he does
plainly prophecy, (...); the descent of the Lord to Hell, (or Hades) to redeem
the Prophets souls with others, that they should not be detained there. So
Nazianzen Nazianz. Orat. Dei de fill.
, Christ dyed, but he restored to life, and by his death abolished death; he
was buried, but he rose again; (...), He descended into Hell, but he brought
back souls and ascended into Heaven. Macarius Nazianz. Orat. Dei de fill.
, to the same purpose also Macarius homil. 11.
. When thou hear that Christ delivered souls, (...), out of hell and
darkness, (...), and that the Lord descended to Hell, and performed an
admirable work; think that these things are not far from thine own soul. St.
Chrysostom, then being one of the Presbyters of the Church of Antioch Chrysostom.
hom. 2. in symbol.
, composed two Homilies upon the Creed, in one of which, after he had spoken of
the death and burial of our Savior, he adds this, descendit ad infernum, that
he descended unto Hell, that this also might not want a wonder. Epiphanius
though in other points his Enemy, does agree with him in this particular,
touching the descent of Christ into Hell, though he differ both from him and
others in making the Deity of Christ to be united with his soul in the
performance of that action, to the end that Hades Epiphan. l. 2. haeres. 69.
, (so he calls the Devil) the chief Ruler thereof thinking to lay hands on a
man, and not knowing that his Deity was united to his sacred soul, Hades
himself might be surprised, and death dissolved, and that fulfilled which was
spoken, Thou shall not leave my soul in hell. To this agrees St. Cyril of
Alexandria Cyril. de fide ad Theodos.
thus; The soul which was coupled and united to the Word, (...), descended into
hell (or Hades) and using the power and the force of the Godhead showed it self
to the spirits there. For we must not say that the Godhead of the only
begotten, which is a nature incapable of death, and no way conquerable by it,
was brought back from the dark caverns of the earth. To the same also says
John Damascene Damasc. de fide Orth. 3.22.
, (...), etc. i. e. The deified soul of Christ descended to Hades, that as to
those upon the earth, the Sun of righteousness was risen, so to those who sat
under the earth, and in shades and darkness light might also shine.

Next look we on the Fathers of the Western Church, and we shall find as
general consent amongst them for proof of Christ's descent into hell; as before
we had amongst the Fathers of the Eastern. And first beginning with Tertullian,
the most ancient of the Latin Writers, he does not only tell us in plain
terms Tertull. de anima c. 55.
, Christum inferos adiisse, that Christ went into hell; but adds this reason
of it also, ne nos adiremus, that we might not go thither. St. Cyprians
judgment in the point we have seen before, where he declares that Hell had
been broken open in the presence of Christ when he led captivity captive, etc.
Spolians inferos and captivos praemittens ad superos Cyr. de resurrect. Chri.
, first spoiling hell; and then sending the captives before toward Heaven.
Arnobius thus; Postea vidit inferos, etc. in Abyssi profunda descendens.
Arnobius in Psalm. 137.
After (his Passion) he visited hell, and not only became far off from heaven,
but even from the earth it self, descending into the depth of the bottomeless
pit. Lactantius, if the verse be his, showing how the darkness of hell vanished
at the brightness of Christ Lactant. in Carminibus.
, then adds, Hinc tumulum repetens post Tartara, carne resumpta, etc. that
after his being in hell, he returned to his grave, and resuming his body, went
to heaven like a noble Conqueror. St. Hilarie of Poictiers next, The powers of
heaven Hilar. de Trinitate l. 3.
(says he) do incessantly glorify the Name of God for conquering death, and
breaking the gates of hell; for in hell he conquered death. Christ Hieronyn. in
Job c. 12.
(says St. Hierom) destroyed and brake open the enclosed places of hell, and
put the Devil which had power over death, out of his Kingdom and Dominion. And
in another place more plainly Id. in Esai. cap. 14.
, Hell (says he) is the place of punishments and torments, ad quem descendit
and Dominus ut vinctos de carcere dimitteret, to which the Lord descneded to
release those from prison who were therein bound. St. Ambrose to the same
effect Ambros. de mysterio Pasch. cap. 4.
, Expers peccati Christus cum ad Tartari ima descenderet, etc. Christ (says
he) being void of sin when he descended to the lowest pit of hell, destroying
the Dominion of death, recalled out of the Devils jaws to eternal life, the
souls of those who there lay bounden for their sins. St. Austin living in those
times, though he assert as much as any, the descent into hell; yet gives a more
unquestionable reason for it Aug. Ep. 57.
. Quaeri solet, si non nisi poenalia intelligantur inferna, etc. It is demanded
if Infernus (Hell) be taken for no other then the place of punishment, how we
may safely believe that the Soul of our Lord Christ descended thither. But it
is answered, ideo descendisse, ut quibus oportuit subveniret, that he descended
into hell to succor those that were to be succored. And in another place more
clearly as unto the reason, Id. in Ps. 85.
There is (says he) a lower hell, whither the deceased use to go, from whence
God would deliver our souls by sending his Son thither. Ideo enim ille usque ad
infernum pervenit, ne nos in inferno maneremus; for therefore went Christ even
unto hell, that we should not remain in hell. Vigilius showing how our Savior
could be both in Hell and in the grave, does resolve it thus Vig. cont.
Eutichet. l. 2. c. 3.
, Dicimus ergo Dominum jacuisse in sepulchro sed in solo corpore, and
descendisse ad infernum sed in sola anima; viz. that the Lord lay in the grave
as to his body alone, but descended down to Hell in his soul only. Ruffinus
commenting on this Article of the Creed Ruffin. in Symbol.
, gives it briefly thus, Quod in Infernum descendit audenter pronunciatur in
Psalmis, that Christ's descent into hell is evidently foretold in the Psalms;
and then, eo usque ille miserando descendit, usque quo tu peccando dejectus es;
that is to say, Christ out of his mercy descended to that very place unto which
man was fallen by sin. Petrus Chrysologus in the next Age thus Chrysolog. in
Symbol.
, To suffer death and to conquer it, intraffe inferos and rediisse, to enter
into hell and return back again, to come within the jaws of the dungeon of
hell, and to dissolve the laws thereof, is not of weakness, but of power.
Fulgentius states the point more fully Fulgent. ad Thrasimun. l. 3.
, It remained (says he) to the full accomplishment of our Redemption, that the
man whom God took unto himself without sin, should descend even thither,
whither man separated from God fell by desert of sin, that is to hell, where
the soul of a sinner uses to be tormented; and to the Grave, where the body of
the sinner uses to be corrupted: yet so that neither Christ's flesh might rot
in the grave, nor his soul be tormented with the sorrows of hell. To omit
Arator and Prudentius who affirm as much as those before, but may be thought to
have spoken out of Poetical liberty; we will next look upon the Fathers of the
fourth Council of Toledo, An. 630. after the birth of our Savior; by whom it
was declared that Christ descended to hell Council. Tole^. 4. c. 10.
, to deliver the Saints which there were held (captive) and subduing the
kingdom of death rose again. Which after was repeated and confirmed in the
Council of Orleance, holden in the 46. year of Charles the Great. Finally to
descend no lower, Venantius Fortunatus once Bishop of Poictiers, does resolve
it thus: Venantius in Symbol.
first, that Christ did descend to hell; and secondly, that his descent into
hell was no disparagement unto him, for that he did it with relation to his
infinite mercies; as if a King should enter into a Prison, not to be there
detained himself, but to release and loose all such as were guilty.

Thus have we seen the suffrages of the ancient Writers in their times and
ages, touching the descent of Christ into hell, with such a general consent and
unanimity, that a greater is not to be found in all or any of the Articles of
the Christian faith. And we have also seen the reasons which (as they thought)
induced our Savior unto that descent, the benefits which did accrue to the
Church thereby. Now these being principally three, that is to say, the
vanquishing of the powers of hell. Secondly, the securing of his faithful
servants from coming under the dominion thereof: And thirdly, the deliverie of
the souls of those righteous men, which lived under the law, and were held
captive for a time by the powers of darkness, till he released them by his
coming: two of the three, I hold to be undoubtedly true; and the other I
consider as a matter questionable.

And first I take it for a truth, an undoubted truth, that our Savior Christ
by his descent into hell, did utterly suddue and overthrow the Kingdom of
Satan, and gave him his last blow in his own Dominions, and that thereby he
took this captivity captive Ephesians. 4.9.
, and having spoiled those principalities and powers Col. 2.15.
, (which do there inhabit) did make a show of them openly; and triumph over
them. The Scriptures explicated by the Fathers do most abundantly confirm me in
the truth of that. To which add here (which was before omitted in its proper
place) those words of Cyril Patriarch of Alexandria, saying, Cyril. in Levit.
c. 9.
The powers, principalities, and rulers of the world, (which the Apostle speaks
of there) none other could conquer and carry into the Deserts of hell, but only
he who said, Be of good hope, for I have overcome the world. Therefore it was
necessary that our Lord and Savior should not only be born a man amongst men,
but also should descend to hell, that he might carry into the Wilderness of
hell, the Goat which was to be led away; and returning thence, (that work
performed) might ascend to his Father.

And I do also hold for a truth undoubted, that Christ by his descent into
hell, has secured all his faithful servants since that time from coming under
the power and dominion of it. Which as it was the doctrine of the eldest times
of Christianity, as appears by the objection of Tertullian, At inquiunt,
Christus inferos adiit ne nos adiremus Tertul. de anima c. 55.
, that they, i. e. the Orthodox Professors against whom he writ, affirmed that
Christ went into hell to hinder us from going thither: so was it constantly
maintained in the times succeeding, by all the sound members of the Church.
This appears yet more evidently by that of Athanasius, saying, Athanas. in
illud, Omnia mihi tradita sunt. and alibi.
Christ descending to hell (or Hades) (...), brought us back, so loosing our
detention there. In which it is to be observed that he speaks this of himself
and others which were then alive, and not them in hell, but yet both might and
must have come there, if he had not freed them from it by his descent. And so
we must interpret that of Hierom also, Hieronyn. in Ose. c. 13.
Liberavit omnes Dominus, quando anima ejus descendit in infernum; the Lord
delivered all his servants (both dead and living) when his soul descended into
hell: and that of Hilarie, Hilar. de Trinitate l. 2.
Christ, descending into hell, nostra salus est, is our salvation: and that of
Ambrose Ambros. in Galat. c. 3.
, descendens ad' inferos genus humanum liberavit, that Christ descending into
hell delivered mankind, i. e. as well from coming thither, as from tarrying
there. Fulgentius goes to work more clearly then any of the rest before
recited, and does not only tell us this, that and descendentem ad infernum
animum justi, etc. the sorrows of hell were loosed by the descending thither of
Christ's righteous soul Fulgent. ad Thrasimund. l. 3.
; but adds, that having so loosed the sorrows or pains of hell, omnes fideles
ab iisdem liberavit, he delivered all the faithful from them. But above all St.
Augustine is most clear and positive in this particular, as may appear in part
by that which was said before in the last Section; but far more fully in the
passages which are yet to come. In all those miseries, says he, August. in
Psalm. 85.
though we were not then, yet because our deserts were such that we should have
been in them, if we had not been delivered from them; it may be rightly said we
were thence delivered, Quo per liberatores (nostros) non permissi sunt perduci,
whither we were not suffered to come, by our deliverers. And who these were
whom he delivered in this manner, that is to say, by not permitting them to
come thither at all; he tells us in another place Id. de Genesis ad literam l.
12.33.
, where we find it thus; that it is believed not without good cause that
Christ's soul came into that place in which sinners are miserably tormented, Vt
eos solveret a tormentis quos solvendos esse, occulta nobis sua justitia
judicabat, that he might deliver them from torments, whom in his secret justice
unknown to us, he thought fit to deliver. In a word thus most fully says that
Reverend Prelate, Id. de Civi. Dei. l. 20. c. 15.
Si enim non absurd credi videtur, etc. If (says he) it may seem to be
believed without absurdity that the Saints of the Old Testament which believed
in Christ to come, were in places most remote from the torments of the wicked
(in locis tormentis impiorum remotissimis) and yet amongst the Inferi in the
lower places, until the blood of Christ (and ad ea loca descensus) and his
descent unto those places did deliver them thence: then certainly the godly
believers now redeemed with the price of that bloodshed, prorsus inferos
nesciunt, shall never come into that place where those inferi are, (that is to
say, within the mansions below) to the time that recovering again their bodies,
they do receive the blessings prepared for them. So far, and to this purpose he.

Now by this last passage cited from the works of Augustine it is clear and
evident, that in those times it was an opinion generally received in the
Christian Church, and such as might be well believed (as himself acknowledges)
without any absurdity, that the Patriarchs and others of the Saints of the Old
Testament, were detained in some lower places amongst the Inferi, but without
any sense of those infinite torments which were endured by the wicked: and that
they were detained there till the coming of Christ, till he by his descent
thither did release them thence. Which opinion, as he did not very well approve
of, so in regard it was so generally received, he was very tender in confuting
it. All he thought fit to say was no more then this, Id. de Genesis ad lit. l. 12.
c. 33.
Illud me nondum invenisse confite^r, inferos appellatos ubi justorum animae
requiescunt, that he had no where found as yet (in holy Scripture) that the
place where the souls of the just did rest, was called by the name of Inferi.
So wary was that Reverend and learned Prelate from pronouncing rashly in a
point, wherein the general current of the Church ^eemed to be against him: and
the like wariness I hope I may have leave to observe here also. For though this
be the reason (as before I said) which I am to consider as a matter
questionable; yet I shall consider it as a matter questionable only; I shall
not dare to say it is false or impious. The joint consent of such and so many
of the Ancients both Greek and Latin, which have been formerly alleged,
besides others Cyril. Hieros. Catech. 4.
as considerable, but not here alleged, who have in terminis and expressly
affirmed the same; make me hold off my hand from that presumption. The rather
in regard it carries no impiety with it, nothing derogatory to the Gospel or
Kingdom of Christ: but rather seems to add much luster to our Saviors
Person, and much conduces to the honor of the Faith and Gospel. For what can
be more honorable to the Person of Christ, then that the Patriarchs and other
holy men of God who dyed under the Law, were kept from being admitted into a
participation of the joys of heaven; till he by his Divine power took them by
the hand, conducted them into the blessed gates of Paradise: and having
overcome the sharpness of death, set open the Kingdom of Heaven unto all
believers In Cantico. Te Deum.
? What could add more unto the dignity and reputation of the Gospel of Christ,
then that all such as faithfully believe the same, and frame themselves to live
thereafter, should have a greater privilege then their Father Abraham, and all
the rest who dyed in the fear of God before the coming of our Savior; and be
admitted presently to the joys of Paradise? And this is that which is affirmed
by St. Hierom and some other Fathers, Ante Christum Abraham apud inferos, post
Christum latro in Paradiso Hieron. in Epitaph. Nepot.
: that before CHRIST, Abraham (and the bosom of Abraham) was in the lower
regions in some parts of the Inferi, but after Christ the penitent thief was
admitted presently admitted into Paradise. For this, says he, Id. ad Dardanum.
de terra vivent.
is the land of the living (in which the good things of the Lord are prepared
for meek and holy men) to which before the coming of our Lord and Savior in
the flesh, neither Abraham nor Isaac nor Jacob, nor the Prophets, nor other
just men could attain. With whom accords St. Chrysostom also, in his Homily on
the Parable of the rich man and Lazarus, Luke 10. But here perhaps it will be
said, that being both the Greek Hades and the Latin Inferi, have been before
declared to be hell; and the place of torments; how can the Patriarchs and
other holy men of God, be said to be in or amongst the Inferi, and not
participate of the torments of that wretched place? In answer whereunto it may
be replied, that there might be some part or region of the Inferi, wherein the
greatest, or rather the only punishment was poena damni, a want of those
Celestial comforts which were reserved for them in the land of Paradise, which
to a soul that longed for the sight of God, could be no small infelicity. And
secondly it may be said, that though the Inferi, in it self were a place of
punishment, yet God was able to command the fire that it should not burn them,
and to the torments of the pit that they should not touch them. That God who so
preserved the three Hebrew Salamanders in the middle of a fiery furnace Dan.
3.27.
, that the hairs of their head were not ^indged, nor the color of their coats
changed, nor so much as the smell of the fire passed upon them; and did so shut
the mouths Id. c. 6. v. 22.
of the ravenous Lions that they could not hurt his servant Daniel, though he
was cast amongst them into their den: is also able to afford his people such a
proportion of refreshing as to him seems meet, even in the middle of the
flames, and in the dens of those roaring Lions who day and night have had an
expectation to devour them. Nor is this all that may be said in justification
and defense of those ancient Writers which have looked this way, if one did
seriously set about it. For possibly they might mean no more by those
expressions, of bringing back the souls of the just from Hades, then that by
the descent of Christ into hell, all claim and challenge which the Devil could
pretend unto them, were utterly made void and of none effect: and that our
Savior by subduing the whole forces of hell, and spoiling the powers and
principalities Coloss. 2.15.
thereof, communicated the benefit and effect of so great a triumph, as well to
those who went before, as to us that come after; assuring both, that neither
hell it self nor the Rulers of it have any interest in either, or should be
able from thenceforth to disturb their rest. But I pronounce not this way
neither, but shall still look upon it as a matter questionable. And so I leave
this point with these words of Bullinger, a man of eminent note in the
Protestant Churches; Sinus Abrahae nil aliud est quam portus salutis, etc. The
bosom of Abraham is naught else but the Port of Salvation; which whether it
were formerly in the heavens above (an apud Inferos) or in the places under the
earth, I determine not. Yea I had rather be still ignorant of it, then rashly
to pronounce of that which I find not expressed in the Scripture. In these
things as I will not be too curious, so neither will I define any thing
therein; nor will I contend with any man about this matter. It shall suffice me
to understand and confess, that the godly of the Old Testament were in a
certain place of rest, and not in torments, before the Ascension of Christ,
although I know not what (nor where) it was. So he, with great both piety, and
Christian modesty; and with him I shut up this dispute.

CHAP. IX. The Doctrine of the Church of England touching Christ's descent into
Hell, asserted from all contrary opinions; which are here examined and
disproved.
THus have we seen the doctrine of the Primitive Church touching the Article of
Christ's descent into hell, so much disputed, or indeed rather quarrelled, in
these later times. Let us next look upon the Doctrine of of this Church of
England, which in this point, as in all the rest which are in controversy,
does tread exactly in the steps of most pure Antiquity. And if we search into
the public monuments and records thereof, we shall find this doctrine of
Christ's local descent into hell, to have been retained and established amongst
many other Catholic verities, ever since the first beginning of her
Reformation. For in the Synod of the year 1552. being the fourth year of King
Edward the sixth, it was declared and averred for the public doctrine of this
Church to be embraced by all the members of the same, that the body of Christ
Articul. an. 1552. Art.
until his Resurrection lay in the grave, but that his soul being breathed out
was with the spirits in prison, or hell, and preached to them, as the place of
Peter does witness, saying, For Christ also has once suffered for sins, the
just for the unjust, that he might bring us to God, being put to death in the
flesh, but quickened by the Spirit; By which also he went and preached to the
spirits in prison, etc. 1 Pet. 3.18, 19. But being the Articles of that year
were set out in Latin, take them according as they stand in the Original; Nam
corpus usque ad Resurrectionem in sepulchro jacuit, Spiritus ab illo emissus
cum spiritibus qui in Carcere sive in Inferno detinebantur, fuit; illisque
praedicavit, ut testatur Petri locus, etc. So also in the year 1562. When Q.
Elizabeth was somewhat settled in her state she caused her Clergy to be called
together in a Synodical way, to the intent they might agree upon a Body or Book
of Articles, for the avoiding of diversities of opinions, and for the
establishing of consent touching true Religion. Who being met and having agreed
upon the two first Articles Articl. of 1562. Art. 1.2.
, touching Faith in the holy Trinity, and the Word or Son of God which was made
very man, and having declared in this second, that Christ who is very God and
very man, did truly suffer, and was crucified, dead and buried, to reconcile us
to his Father; adds for the title of the third, of the going down of Christ
into hell. Which being an entire Article of it self runs thus in terminis, viz.
Arti. 3.
As Christ dyed for us, and was buried; so also it is to be believed that he
went down into hell. Which Article with the rest being publicly agreed upon,
and passed in the Convocations of both Provinces, and confirmed under the broad
Seal as the law required, became the public authorized Doctrine of this Church
of England: and afterward received such countenance in the high Court of
Parliament, that there was a statute made unto this purpose, Statute 13.
Elizab. c. 1.
that all who were to be admitted unto any Benefice with cure of souls, or unto
any holy Orders, should publicly subscribe the same in the presence of the
Bishop or Ordinary. The like care was also taken after, for subscribing to it
Canon 36. of the year 1603.
, by all such who were matriculated in either of the Universities, or admitted
into any College or Hall, or to any Academical degree whatsoever; and so it
stands unto this day, confirmed and countenanced by as high and great
authority, a^ the power of the Prince, the Canons of the Church, and the
Sanctions of the Civil State can give it. Nor stands it only on Record in the
Book of Articles, but is thus touched in the Book of Homilies, specified and
approved of Artic. 35. of the year 1562.
for godly and wholesome Doctrine by those Articles, and ratified and confirmed
together with them. Thus has his Resurrection (says the Homily) Homily of
the Resurrection.
wrought for us life and and righteousness; He passed through death and hell,
to the intent to put us in good hope, that by his strength we shall do the
same; He paid the ransom of sin that it should not be laid to our charge; He
destroyed the Devil and all his tyranny, and openly triumphed over him, and
took away from him all his captives, and has raised and set them with himself
among the heavenly Citizens above. So far the Homily. There was also published
in the beginning of the said Queens Reign a Catechism writ in Latin by Mr.
Alexander Nowel, Dean of Paul's, and publicly authorized to be taught in all
the Grammar Schools of this kingdom, (though not by such a sacred and supreme
authority as the books of Articles and Homilies had been before): in which the
doctrine of Christ's descent into hell, is thus delivered, viz. Cathechism.
Alex. Nowel.
, That as Christ's body was laid in the Bowels of the earth, so his soul
separated from his body, descended (ad inferos) to hell, and with all the force
and efficacy of his death so pierced unto the dead, atque inferos adeo ipsos,
and even to the spirits in hell, that the souls of the unfaithful perceived the
condemnation of their infidelity to be most sharp and just; ipseque inferorum
Princeps Satan, and Satan himself the Prince of hell saw all the power of his
tyranny and of darkness, to be weakened, broken, and destroyed; and
contrariwise the dead, who whilst they lived believed in Christ understood the
work of their Redemption to be performed, and felt the fruit and force thereof,
with a most sweet and certain comfort. So that the doctrine of Christ's descent
into hell being thus positively delivered in the Articles, and Homilies, and
Catechism publicly authorized to be taught in Schools; and being thus
solemnly confirmed and countenanced both by Laws and Canons, and by the
subscriptions of all the Clergy and other learned men of this Realm of
England: how great must we conceive the impudence to be of the Romish Gagger
Gag. for the Gospel.
, who charged this upon this Church, that we deny the descent of Christ into
hell. Nor do I wonder less at the improvidence of those who were then in
authority, in licensing Mr. Rogers comment on this Book of Articles, and
suffering him to put it forth with the glorious title of being published by
authority; considering that he permits all people in this Church and State, to
put what sense they will upon the Article, so they keep the words. Which as it
gives a great advantage to the Papists, in making them report with the greater
confidence, that this Church allows not of a local descent into hell,
contrary to the doctrine of the primitive times; so have they charged it on us
in some solemn Conference with Fisher, etc.
conferences more then once or twice.

Nor does the Church of England stand alone in this interpretation of the
Article, according to the literal and Grammatical sense, but is therein
countenanced and backed by the most eminent Doctors of the Protestant and
reformed Churchs. And first we will begin with Luther, who speaking of those
words of the royal Psalmist, Thou shall not leave my soul in hell, and of those
foolish glosses which were made upon them in those times; advises thus Luther
in Psalm. 16.
, that despising all such frivolous and impious trifles, we simply understand
the words of the Prophet, (of the being of Christ's soul in hell) as they were
simply and plainly spoken; and if we cannot understand them, that howsoever we
do faithfully believe the same. Pomeranus commenting on the same words of the
Prophet, thus infers thereon Pom. in Psalm. 16.
, Here have thou that Article of our faith, Christ's descent into hell. If thou
ask what he did there? I answer, that he delivered thence not the Fathers
only, but all the faithful, from the beginning of the world to the end thereof;
nor out of Limbus only, but out of the lowest and neathermost hell, to which
all were condemned. David Chytreus to this purpose Dav. Chyt. in Symbol.
, that we are to understand this Article of the Creed, plainly and simply as
the words do seem to import, and to resolve that the Son of God truly descended
into hell to deliver us thence, to which place we were condemned for sin in
Adam; as also from the power and tyranny of the Devil, which held us captive
in the same: and for the proof hereof he refers himself to Hierome,
Augustine, and Fulgentius, whose words he quoteth. Vrbanus Regius says the
same Vrb. Regi. in Catechis. minore.
, The Church (says he) delivers out of holy Scripture, that Christ after he
was dead on the Cross, descended also into hell, to suppress Satan and hell,
to which we were condemned by the just judgment of God, and to spoil and
destroy the kingdom of death. More plainly Henricus Mollerus thus, Moller. in
Psalm. 36.
The descent of Christ to hell, being one of the Articles of the Creed, we
understand simply without any allegory, and believe that Christ truly descended
to the lower parts of the earth, as St. Paul speaks Ephesians. 4. It is enough
for us to believe, which Austin affirms in his Epistle to Dardanus, that
Christ therefore descended that he might help those which were to be helped. Of
the same mind as touching the true and real descent into hell, are Westhmerus
in Psalm. 16. Hemingius in Coloss. c. 2. Wolfgangus Musculus in Psalm. 16. and
the whole body of the Lutheran Divines in their book of Concord, Artic. 9. But
none more positively and significantly then Zacharias Scilterus, though perhaps
of less eminent note then those before, who informs us thus Zach. Scil. de
regno Christ.
, The descent of Christ to hell, whereof mention is made in the Apostles Creed
after the death and burial of Christ, is to be understood simply and without
Allegory, according to the literal sense, of the manifestation and declaration
of Christ's victory no less glorious then terrible made to the Devils in hell,
or in the place of the damned; and of Christ's expugning, spoiling, disarming,
captivating the power of Satan, and of his destroying hell, and everting the
whole kingdom of darkness, and of his delivering us from the pains of death
and eternal damnation, and out of the pains of hell. Nor is this only the
opinion of the Lutheran Doctors, but of those also which in matter of the
Sacrament and some other points, adhere rather to the Doctrine of Zuinglius,
Calvin, and those other Churches, who commonly do call themselves the reformed
Churches.

And first we will begin with Peter Martyr, not only because first in time, but
because purposely sent for hither by Archbishop Cranmer, to travel in the
great work of reformation, which was then in hand. As touching Christ's soul
(says he) Pet. Mart. Exposit. Symbol.
as soon as it departed from the body it rested not idle, but descended ad
inferos unto hell; and certainly both the one and the other company as well of
the godly as the damned found the presence of it. For the souls of the faithful
were much comforted, and gave God thanks for delivering them by the hands of
this Mediator, and performing that which had so long before been promised: and
those which were adjudged to everlasting damnation, animae Christi adventum
praesenseru^t, perceived the coming of Christ's soul (with as much discomfort).

Aretius next, declaring that the Article of Christ's descent into hell Aret.
Problem. loco. 16.
, is delivered in plain terms in holy Scriptures; and then repeating many
other senses which had been obtruded on the Article, he rejects them all, and
thus produces, Quare mea sententia est, etc. It is therefore mine opinion that
Christ descended into hell, after he had yielded his soul on the Cross into
the hand of God his Father; and hell in this place we affirm to be the very
place appointed for the souls of the damned, even for Satan and all his members.

Finally, Zanchius Zanch. in Coloss. c. 2.
does not only hold for his own particular, that though the powers and
principalities spoken of Coloss. 2. were vanquished and conquered on the Cross
by Christ; yet that the triumph there also mentioned was not performed till
Christ in his soul entered the kingdom of hell as a glorious Victor, bringing
them out of their infernal Kingdom, and carrying them along in the air in the
sight of all the Angels and blessed souls: but does affirm that the Fathers
for the most part were of that opinion, Et ex nostris non pauci neque vulgares,
and of their own Expositers not a few, and those no mean persons. So that in
him, we have not only his own judgment and opinion, but the agreement and
consent of almost all the rest of the considerable Divines of the reformed
Churches.

Yet notwithstanding this agreement and consent both of the Ancient Fathers and
the Later writers, this Article of Christ's descent has not wanted those, who
have endeavored with all care and diligence either to make it of no authority
by expunging it out of the old received Creeds, or to dispute as well the
possibility, as the use and pertinencie of the said descent, by pressing it
with many studied Objections to that end and purpose; or finally to put such a
sense upon it, as is utterly inconsistent with the meaning of it, and as
destructive in a manner as the first attempt, of making it no part of the
ancient Creeds. And first it is objected out of Ruffinus that this clause of
Christ's descent into hell, was not in his time in the Creed of the Church of
Rome, nor in those of the Eastern Churches. His words are these Ruffinus in
Symbol.
, Sciendum est quod in Ecclesiae Romanae Symbolo non habetur additum [descendit
ad inferos], sed neque Orientis Ecclesiis. This we acknowledge to be true; what
then? Therefore, say they, it needs must follow, that it was not in the Creed
at all, until some time after. But this by no means can be gathered out of
Ruffines words: who is not to be understood in the sense they dream of; or if
he be, shall presently confute himself without further trouble. And first
Ruffinus could not say that the clause of Christ's descent into hell, was
neither in the Apostles Creed before his time, nor reckoned for a part thereof
by the Church of Rome, or by any Churches of the East. For long before the
times he lived in, Ignatius Bishop of Antioch the most famous City of the East,
repeated it as a part of the Creed Ignat. Epist. ad Trallian.
; the like did Chrysostom Chrysostom. Hom. 2. in Symb.
one of the Presbyters of that Church, and Cyril Cyril in Catechism. 4.
Bishop of Jerusalem, both living in the same time that Ruffinus lived in.
Nyssen, and Nazianzen, and Basil, his contemporaries, or not long before him,
do reckon it amongst the Articles of the Christian faith; and give us the true
orthodox sense thereof, as before was shown: all of them very famous Bishops of
the lesser Asia, one of the most considerable parts of the Eastern Church. The
like does Epiphanius Epiphan. haeres. 69.
for the Isle of Cyprus, and Cyril Cyril de recta fide. l. 2.
for the Patriarchate of Alexandria: whereof this last was the great ruler of
the Egyptian, Ethiopian, and Arabian Churches; the other though within the
Patriarchate of Antiochia, yet was sui juris Council. Ephesians. Can. 8.
, an Independent as it were, and of equal privilege at home. So also for the
African and other Churches of the Western world, it is most evident by that
which has been cited from Fulgentius, Augustine, Ambrose, Tertullian, Cyprian,
and all the rest of note and eminency, that this of the descent into hell, was
reckoned for an Article of the Creed in those parts and times, in which they
severally and respectively did live and flourish. And so it was esteemed in
Rome it self when Ruffinus lived, and in the Church of Aquileia not far from
Rome, where he was a Presbyter. For otherwise neither he himself had so reputed
it, nor commented thereupon as upon the rest: nor had St. Hierome being at that
time a Presbyter of the Church of Rome, so ^ar avowed this Article of the
descent into hell, or given us so much help and furtherance to the right
understanding thereof, had it been reputed by that Church for no part or
Article of the Common Creed, as we see he did Vid. Chapter 6.
. Thus then Ruffinus did not mean, and indeed he could not, that this Article
of the descent into hell, was not accounted for an Article of the Apostles
Creed, either by those of Rome, or the Eastern Churches. No such matter verily.
His meaning is, that whereas in those times diverse several Churches, and many
times particular persons of rank and quality, did use to publish several Creeds
to serve as testimonies of their right belief upon occasion of some new
emergent heresies: the Creed or Symbol made for the Church of Rome, and some of
those which were in use in the Eastern parts, did omit this Article. For well
we know it was omitted both in the Constantinopolitan and Nicene Creeds, which
were of so much reputation in all parts of Christendom; as being a point about
the which no stir or Controversy had been raised. Nor does Ruffinus say, if we
mark him well, that the Church of Rome denied this clause to be part of the
Apostles Creed (which he must either say or nothing which will do them good)
but that it was not in Ecclesiae Romanae Symbolo, in the Creed or Symbol, made
for the use of the particular Church of Rome, for some particular occasion;
such as was that of Damasus in St. Hieromes works, where indeed it is not. So
that the omitting of this Article in the Creeds of those particular Churches,
which Ruffinus speaks of, shows rather that it was received in all parts of
Christendom with such a general consent and unanimity, that it was needless
to insert it in those Creeds, because no controversy or debate had been raised
about it. For otherwise it must needs follow by this Argument, that being there
is no mention of Christ's death in the Nicene Creed, nor of his burial in the
Creed of Athanasius, nor of the Communion of the Saints in the
Constantinopolitan, nor of many of the last Articles in the Creed of Damasus
(not to descend to more particulars) therefore those Articles and clauses were
not to be found in such copies of the Apostles Creed, as were commended to the
use of Gods people, within the Patriarchates of Rome, Constantinople,
Alexandria, or the City of Nice, or any of those numerous Churches over all the
world, where those particular Creeds were received and welcomed.

This project therefore failing, as we see it does, the Devils next great care
has been to dispute down the authority and effect thereof, such a descent as
is delivered and maintained by the Church of England, being neither possible
nor pertinent, as is objected. And first, say some, it is not possible. Why so?
Because say they Luke 23.43.
, our Savior promised the penitent Thief, that the same day his soul should be
with him in Paradise. What then? Therefore Christ's soul being to go that day
to Paradise, could neither go to hell that day, nor the two days after. An
argument which has as many faults almost as it has words. For first our
Savior was not of such slow dispatch as these men would have him, but that he
might carry the theefs soul to Paradise, and yet show himself the same day to
the fiends in hell. That both were done on the same day, Vigilius one of the
ancients does affirm expressly Vigil. cont. Eutych. l. 2.
, Constat dominum nostrum Jesum Christum sexta feria crucifixum, etc. It is
most manifest, says he, that our Lord Jesus Christ was crucified on the sixth
day, that on the same day he descended into hell, on the same day he lay in the
grave, and ipsa die latroni dixisse, and on the same said to the Thief, This
day thou shall be with me in Paradise. All this might very well be done by our
Lord Christ Jesus, within less time then the compass of a natural day,
unless we measure his omnipotence by our own infirmities. But yet to take away
all scruples which may hence arise, St. Augustine and some others of the
Fathers have resolved it thus; viz. that when Christ said unto the Thief, This
day thou shall be with me in Paradise, he spoke not of his manhood but of his
Godhead Aug. Epist. 57. ad Dardan.
. And this says Augustine does free the Article from all ambiguities. But this
he does declare more plainly in another place, saying, that he who said unto
the Thief hanging on the Cross Id. in Johan. Tract. 3.
, This day thou shall be with me in Paradise, according to his manhood (or
humane nature) had his soul that day in hell, and his flesh in the grave, but
according to his Godhead, was most undoubtedly in Paradise. Titus Bostrenus
says the same, an Author not of such authority, but of more antiquity then St.
Augustine: How (says he) did our Savior perform this promise made unto the
Thief, Hodie mecum eris in Paradiso Titus Bost. in Luke 23.
? And thereunto he answers thus, Christ taken down from his Cross was in
hell according to his soul, and nevertheless by the power of his divinity he
brought the thief into Paradise. Thus Damascen also for the Greek Fathers
Damas. in Homil. de sancti. sublato.
, The same Christ is adored in Heaven as God, together with the Father and the
holy Ghost. And he as man lay in the Sepulcher with his body, and abode in hell
with his soul, and gave entrance to the Thief into Paradise by his divinity,
which cannot be comprehended in any place. Or if we think the journey from the
Cross to Paradise, and from thence to hell, to be too great for our Redeemer
to dispatch in a day, (which by the way were a fine piece of infidelity) what
hinders it, but that having for a day refreshed his wearyed soul in the joys
of Paradise, he might afterward go down to hell to pursue his Conquest. For
though the great Cardinal affirm Bellar. de Anima Christi. l. 4. c. 15.
, Animam Christi triduo esse in cord terrae, that the soul of Christ continued
as long in hell as his body lay in the grave; yet herein he deserts those
worthies of the former times, whose dictates he would fain be thought to adhere
unto. For Anselm, once Archbishop of Canterbury, though a Post-natus in regard
of the Ancient Fathers, yet far more ancient and of no less abilities then
Bellarmine, was persuaded otherwise. Who asking in the way of discourse or
dialogue Ansel. in Elucidario.
, Whither Christ's soul went after his death, he answers, to the heavenly
Paradise, as he said to the Thief, This day, etc. When then to hell? He
answers at midnight before his resurrection; at which hour as the Angel
destroyed Egypt, so at the same Christ spoiled hell, and made their darkness
as bright as day. But lest the Cardinal should think it a disparagement unto
him to be counterballanced by a writer of so late a date, let him take this of
Augustine Aug. cont. Felician. c. 15.
for a farewell, and so much good do it him. Si igitur mortuo corpore ad
Paradisum anima mox vocatur, quemquamne adhuc tam impium credimus, qui dicere
audeat quod Anima Servatoris nostri triduo illo corporeae mortis custodiae
mancipetur? If then the body of the Thief dying, says that reverend Father,
his soul was presently taken into Paradise; shall we think any man so wicked
(ware that Sr. Cardinal) as to dare say, that the soul of our Savior during
the three days that his body was dead, was restrained in the custody of hell?
So that we see there is no such impossibility, as has been objected, but that
our Lord and Savior might descend into hell, though he was the same day with
the thief in Paradise. As little does it follow from their other argument Ap.
B. Bilson. p. 548.
, that Christ commended his soul into the hands of his Father; and therefore it
could not be in hell. For certainly these men must think the hands of God to be
very short, and the power of the Devil over great, if any part of hell should
be out of Gods reach, or that he could command nothing there but by Satan's
leave. Christ's soul wheresoever it was, was in Gods protection, and so by
necessary consequence in the hands of God, there being no place in heaven or
hell exempted from the power of the Lord Almighty. David had else deceived both
himself and us, in saying that if he went down to hell, he should find God
there. And therefore we need say no more unto this Objection, but that which
Gregory Nyssen said in former times, as by way of prevention; viz. Nyssen in
illud, Exivit sanguis and aqua.
that the soul of Christ, commended into his Fathers hands, went down to hell,
quum ita illi bonum and commodum visum esset, when it seemed convenient to
himself that it should so do; that he might publish salvation to the souls in
hell, and be Lord over quick and dead, and spoil hell, and might prepare a way
for man to return to life, after he himself had been the first fruits, the
first born from the dead. And this (says he) may be perceived and proved by
many places of Scripture.

And I the rather have made use of those words of Nyssen in answer unto that
Objection (if it may be called one) because it satisfyeth in part another of
their doughty Arguments touching the use and pertinency of Christ's descent* For
if, say they, there be no certain benefit redounding to the godly by Christ's
going to hell, then out of doubt he went not thither Ap. E. Bilson. p. 666.
: so far they say exceeding well. But then they take (without proof) as a
matter granted, that no such benefit redounded to the godly by it; and
therefore they conclude what they list themselves. This is the sum of what
they say as to^ching the impertinency of Christ's descent into hell; and this is
as easy to be answered, as that of the impossibility which we had before.
Three special motives which induced our Savior unto this descent, we showed
you from the Fathers in the former Chapter; that is to say, the full and final
overthrow of the powers of Satan, the bringing thence the Ancient Patriarchs
and others which dyed before the preaching of our Saviors Gospel: and finally
the delivering us from the holds thereof that we go not thither. And do they
think that none of these are any matter of certain benefit to the godly man? Or
do they think the publishing of salvation to the souls in hell, the making of
our Savior to be Lord over quick and dead, the spoiling of hell, and the
preparing of a way for man to return to life, which we find in Nyssen,
administreth no use of consolation to the godly mind? Besides there were some
other ends of Christ's descent into hell, then the procuring of some certain
benefits to the godly only: which if they should deny, as perhaps they may,
they will condemn therein the best Protestant writers. Aretius, one of name and
credit in the reformed Churches, gives us three reasons of the Lords descent
into hell, whereof there is but one which concerns the godly Aretius Problem.
loco 16.
. The first (says he) is for the Reprobates, that they might know he was now
come, of whose coming they had so often heard, but neglected it with great
contempt. The second is, that Satan might assuredly know that this Christ whom
he had tempted in the desert, and delivered unto death by the hand of the Jews,
was the very Messiah, and the seed promised to the woman. And the third was in
reference to the Elect, that Satan might see he had now no right, no not so
much as to their bodies, which Christ hereafter would be pleased to restore to
life. Mr. Nowel, as before we saw, gives three other reasons, that is to say
Nowel in Catechism.
, First, that the souls of the faithless might perceive the condemnation of
their unbelief to be just and righteous. Secondly, that Satan the chief Prince
of hell, might see all the power of his tyranny, to be weakened and broken, nay
utterly ruined. And thirdly, that the dead who in their life time believed in
Christ, might perceive the work of their Redemption to be now finished, and
find the force and fruit thereof with most certain comfort. But against this
it is objected, that Christ obtained this victory against hell and Satan, and
all the benefits redounding to the godly by it, by his death and passion on the
Cross; and therefore it was needless that on those occasions (which seem most
considerable in this business) he should make a journey unto hell. To which it
is replied two ways, First, that it belongs not to us to know the depth of
Gods counsels B. Bilson.
, and the reasons of Christ's doings in every thing, as if we were to call him
to a strict account of all his actions: and that considering how the Scriptures
do so clearly testify that his soul was not left in hell, we are not to reject
this clause either as superfluous or impertinent, although we cannot tell
precisely the main end and purpose, why he was pleased to descend thither. And
secondly, that though the victory against Hell and Satan was perfected upon the
Cross, yet the manifestation of the same to the souls of the damned, and the
triumph which was due upon it, over Satan and all the powers of darkness, was
not, and could not be performed but in hell alone. We showed you this before
from Zanchius, a moderate and learned man, where he affirms Zanch. in Coloss.
2.
, according to the mind of the best interpreters, that though those enemies
were vanquished on the Cross by Christ, yet the triumph for the same was not
performed until he (forced and) entered the kingdom of hell as a glorious
Conqueror. Nay more then so, Christ's victory over death and hell, if
Athanasius may be credited, as I think he may, was of too great moment and
importance, to be dispatched in one place, and by one act only. Therefore says
he, Athanas de incarna^.
As Christ performed the condemnation of sin on the Earth, the abolition of the
curse on the Cross, and the redemption of corruption in the grave; so he
accomplished the dissolution of death in hell; omnia loca permeans, that going
unto every place, he might in every place work man's salvation. So that Christ's
victory not being complete, as this Father thinks; and the triumph due upon
the victory not to be celebrated any where so properly as in hell it self: the
ancients did not hold his descent into hell to be very necessary for the godly,
but much unto the honor and glory of our blessed Savior; and to that end
joined it together with the Article of his resurrection, as being the first
part of his exaltation. For as George Mylius a learned Lutheran very well
observes, there are two things to be considered in the Article of Christ's
descent into hell Geo. Mylius in Aug. Confess. Art. 3.
. First, that it was no metaphorical, but a true and real descent, whereby our
Savior did descend to the lower parts of the earth, Ephesians. 4. ipsasque
damnatorum seeds, even to the mansions of the damned: and secondly, that this
Article is no part of his passion and humiliation, but of his victory and
triumph.

So then, the Article standing as it did in all ancient Copies notwithstanding
all these vain assaults; and the doctrine in the same contained being neither
impossible or impertinent, as it was pretended: the next attempt made by the
Adversaries of the same, was to put such a sense or senses on it, as might make
it either useless to the Church of Christ, or inconsistent with that meaning in
which it had been taken generally by the Catholic Church. And though the
Cardinal would very fain impose this project on the Protestant Doctors Bellarm.
de Anima Christi. l. 4. c. 7, 8, 9.
, and make them the first Authors of those devises, by which the true meaning
of this Article has been impugned, and the Article it self as good as cast out
of the Creed: yet by his leave, he must ascribe this practice (if it were a
practice) to his great Masters and Dictators in the Schools of Rome. For sure
it is, Durandus one of their great School men before Luthers time, denied
expressly Durand. in 3. d. 22. q. 3.
that the soul of Christ descended into hell, secundum substantiam suam, really
and according to the substance of it; but does restrain the same ad effectus
quosdam, according to some certain effects and influences, as the illuminating
and beatifying of the Saints in Limbo. Thus much the Cardinal himself does
confess ingenuously Bellarm. de Anima Christi. l. 4. c. 15.
; and against that opinion of Durandus does put up this Thesis, viz. Animam
Christi proprie and reipsa descendisse ad inferos, that is to say, that the
soul of Christ really and in very deed did descend into hell; which he
confirms by many strong and weighty reasons. And sure it is that before him
Aquinas himself the great Master of the Roman Schools did put such a sense
upon the Article, as utterly disagreeth with that of the Ancient Fathers, whose
doctrines they would make us weak men believe, they do so tenaciously, if not
pertinaciously, embrace and defend. For whereas the Fathers do maintain a
descent into hell, and do expound themselves that they mean by hell, the place
and mansions of the damned; Aquinas Aquin. part. 3. qu. 52. Art. 2.
states the question thus, that Christ descended only unto Limbus patrum,
according to a real presence, secundum realem praesentiam, as his words there
are, and to all other places of the infernal pit, secundum effectus tantum,
only according to the influence and effects thereof. And in this point he has
been so close followed by the most part of the Schoolmen, that Bellarmine
conceived it neither fit nor safe to run directly and expressly against the
stream: and therefore goes no further then probabile est Bellarm. de Anima
Christi. l. 4. c. 16.
, that in most likelihood our Saviors soul descended really to all parts of
hell. So that although the current of Antiquity run an other way, and that the
Fathers do deliver it for a Catholic verity that the soul of Christ did really
and locally descend to all parts of hell, even to the mansions of the damned,
as before was said: yet if Aquinas and the Schoolmen like their own way better,
it is but probable at the most, a matter of probability only, and no more then
so. Such is the great respect they bear, after all their brags, to the
traditions of the Fathers. Which being so, the Cardinal had but little reason
to impose it on the leading men of the reformed Churches, that they perverted
the true meaning of the Article by their corrupt glosses and interpretations;
since the first wrestling of it from the native sense, came principally and
originally from the Church of Rome. But far less reason had he to impose upon
them a more gross absurdity; in making Calvin and Brentius both to deliver
this interpretation of it, that to descend into hell was nothing else, but to
be utterly annihilated, and extinct ^or ever Id. ibid. c. 7.
. A folly shall I call it, or a frenzy rather, which never came within their
dreams, for as much as does appear by their works and writings, from whence the
Cardinal must collect it. Nor was the scene so well contrived as it should have
been for the acting of this grand Imposture, the book of Calvin's which it cited
for the proof thereof being that entitled Psychopannychia purposely written
(as appears by the Preface of it) against the Anabaptists of those times, by
whom indeed that monstrous Paradox had been lately published.

This therefore being flung aside as a fraud or slander, the first of those
three new constructions, which have been made of this descent into hell by the
writers of the reformed Churches; is that thereby the Authors of the Creed
whosoever they were, meant nothing but our Saviors burial. Bucer, I take it,
was the first, (though otherwise a moderate man, and one not very apt to follow
any new devise) that puts this sense upon the Article. Ad infernum descendere,
nil aliud est quam recendi corpus sub terra Bucer. in Mat. 27.
: to deseend into hell, (says he) is nothing else but for the body to be
buried under the ground. And presently he gives this reason why he so expounds
it, Sheol enim pro quo in scripturis nos fere infernum legimus, sepulchrum
significat, that the word Sheol in the Hebrew, which in the Scriptures we
interpret commonly by that of hell, does properly signify the grave. What the
word Sheol signifies in the Hebrew tongue is not now the business, but what
was meant by the Apostles in the Greek word Hades, by which St. Peter did
translate it: and that we proved before in the former Chapter to be meant
literally of hell, of the place of torments. Or were it so that the word Hades
might be used in some places to express the grave, yet were it very
improbable, that descendere in infernum, in this place of the Creed, should
signify no more then to be buried. And in my mind Calvin does reason very
strongly against this construction, where he affirms that what an unlikely
thing it must needs be thought, that in so short an Abstract of the Christian
faith, that of our Saviors burial should be twice expressed: First in plain
terms, and after by a figurative Metaphorical speech Calv. Instit. l. 22. c.
16.
. Non est verisimile irrepere potuisse superfluam ejusmodi battologiam, in
compendium hoc, ubi summatim quam fieri potuit paucissimus verbis, praecipua
fidei capita notantur, So he, judiciously and to the purpose. But then withal
I needs must say, that though Calvin did reject this interpretation, as
inconsistent with the nature of so short a Summary; having indeed a new devise
of his own to set up in stead of it: yet gave he much encouragement to others
to expound it so, who were too apt to learn from so great a Master. For whereas
in the old translation of the Psalms of David, which has so long been
generally received in the Western Church, the words ran thus, Non derelinques
animam meam in inferno, i. e. thou shall not leave my soul in hell: Calvin in
his translation was so bold as to change it thus Id. in Ps. 16.
, Non deseres animam meam in sepulchro, thou shall not leave my soul in the
grave or sepulcher: and then by soul, expounds himself to mean the whole person
of David. Which coming unto Bezas hands, he saw no reason (as indeed there was
not) but that he might make as bold with St. Peter in the book of the Acts, as
Calvin did with David in the book of Psalms. And therefore when he first put
out his new translation of the new Testament, he thus translated Peter's words
into Calvin's meaning, and made the passage to run thus in Terminis, without any
disguise, Non relinques corpus meum in sepulchro, i. e. thou shall not leave my
body in the grave, nor suffer thine holy one to see corruption. But after
finding how great clamor he had raised thereby, in the next edition of that
work he retained in words the old translation, Non relinques animam meam in
inferno, but in his Notes or Annotations on the same did declare expressly
Beza in Act. 2.27.
, that by infernus there he did mean sepulchrum, and by anima the whole person
whether Christ's or David's: and then the gloss upon the text must in brief be
this, Non relinques animam meam in inferno, i. e. Non relinques corpus meum in
sepulchro. A gloss like that of Orleans, which corrupts the text: and brings
into my mind that with which we use sometimes to jeare the old glossary on the
Canon-laws, Statuimus, i. e. abrogamus, that is to say, we do ordain, that is,
we annul or abrogate. A gloss not much unlike unto that of Bellarmine; and
hard it is to say which of the two is most absurd: who being asked this
question by some Protestant Doctors, viz. to whom the Pope should make
complaint when offense is given him, if he be so supreme in the Church of
Christ, as they say he is, returns this answer thereunto, Papa potest dicere
Ecclesiae, i. e. sibi ipsi Bellarm. de Romans Pont. l. 2. c. 19.
, the Pope may tell the Church, that is, himself. And indeed this
interpretation of the Article seemed as absurd as either of these two fine
glosses; insomuch that Beza lived to see it every were deserted, in some parts
exploded. And now, and long before these times, (as Aretius very well
observes) Tota Ecclesia ubique terrarum, etc. Aret. Problem. loco. 16.
The whole Church thoughout the world does receive this Article (all opposition
notwithstanding) Et diversum a sepultura recitat, and does recite it as a
different point from that of the burial.

Now that which Calvin said in the former case, touching the unlikelyhood and
improbability that in so short a Summary of the Christian faith, the same thing
should be twice repeated, first in plain terms, and presently in the very next
words in a figurative speech: the same may be returned to a second
construction, made by some late Divines on the present Article. Who willing to
be singular, and in a way by themselves, and finding that it would not down
amongst knowing men, that Christ's descent into hell should be all one with his
burial: have ransacked all the Hebrew Rabbines to find out their conceptions
on the Hebrew Sheol; and all the old Greek Philosophers and ancient Poets, to
find what they intended by the Greek word Hades. And having made a general
muster of collections out of several Heathenish and Jewish writers, extracted
out of them this sense of the present Article; that is to say, that by Christ's
descending into hell is meant nothing else Field. of the Chapter l. 5. c. 19. et
multi alii.
but his going down into the Chambers of death, and his continuance in the
state of separation from his body for the space of three days under the power
and dominion of death. Which though it came after the conceit of Calvin who
makes the descent of Christ into hell, to be the sufferings of hell pains in
his soul, in his Agony, and upon the Cross; yet we have joined it to the
former, as being at the furthest cousin german to it, if not the same device
clothed in other words. For what else is it to be dead and buried, but to
descend down into the chambers of death? and what else to go down to the
chambers of death, but to be dead and buried, as our Savior was? What need was
there that when the Creed had specifyed his death and burial, and his lying in
the grave three days, in as plain terms as possibly the wit of man could
devise to put it in: there should a clause be added in the next words
following, to signify his going down to the Chambers of death, a three days
separation of his soul and body; and that in words so figurative and
Metaphorical, that all the Lexicons and Grammars of both the languages must be
searched and studied, before we can find out what we are to trust to.
Assuredly it was not the Apostles purpose to set men's wits upon the rack to
find out their meaning; or to make the Creed, which they intended for the use
of the simplest sort, tormentum ingeniorum, a torture to the brain of the
ablest Scholar; or to express themselves in such difficult terms that men
must go to School to the old Greek Poets, and the late Jewish Rabbis, before
they can attain to the meaning of them. As if there were no way to become a
Christian, but to be first an exact Critic, a professed Philologer. Yet this
has been the Helena of our greatest Clerks, of none more preciously beloved
then by the Bishop of Meuth, who in his Answer to the Jesuits challenge has
spent a great deal of unfortunate pains to no other purpose, but to cross the
current of Antiquity, together with the authorized doctrine of the Church of
England. Concerning which I shall not need to say more now, then what was
touched upon before, touching the unliklyhood of improbability of using such
obscure and figurative expressions in so plain a form, in the which all things
else must be understood in the literal sense; and the repeating of the same
thing twice in so short an Abstract, not capable of a Tautologie though in
diverse words. And as for the far fetching of Theological and Ecclesiastical
notions, out of the works and writings of old obsolete Authors; it is a devise
not known nor heard of in the Christian Church, till these Critical times; nor
very well approved in this neither by judicious men. And therefore for a full
and final answer to this last conceit, I shall use this caution of Aquinas
Aquin. 2.2 d. qu. 92. Art. 1.
, viz. Aliud est etymologia nominis, and aliud significatio nominis, etc. that
is to say, that in words we must not so much look upon their original, exact
and precise signification, or derivation, as that whereto they are by ordinary
use applied. And unto this shall add the counsel and advise of a grave Divine,
a late learned member of the Church D. Iackson on the Creed. l. 7.3.
, viz. That he who hops to attain the true knowledge of the principles of the
Christian faith, must either use the help of some Lexicon peculiar to Divinity,
or make one of his own: it being an easier thing (says he) to learn the terms
of Law or Physic out of Thomasius or Riders Dictionaries, then to know the
true Theological use and meaning of many principal terms in the old or new
Testament, out of Stephanus or Pagninus his Thesaurus, though both of them most
excellent writers in their kind. Which I conceive to be as fit and full an
answer unto this second exposition of the descent into hell, drawn from the
Greek Hades, and the Hebrew Sheol, as the merit of it does require. Only take
here the substance of my former answer in these words of Calvin Calv. Instit.
l. 2. c. 16 8.
. Quantae oscitantiae fuisset rem minime difficilem verbis expeditis and claris
demonstratam, obscuriore deinde verborum complexu indicare magis quam
declarare? How great a folly must we think it (in the compilers of the Creed
whosoever they were) to lay down that in difficult and intricate phrases, which
had been formerly delivered in most clear and significant terms; especially
considering that when two several forms of speech are joined together to
express one thing, the latter commonly does use to explain the former.

We now proceed to that interpretation of this part of the Creed which has
found most followers, and has been most insisted on by some late Divines, as
the undoubted sense and meaning of the present words: though to attain unto
this meaning they must allow themselves both Metaphors and other figures; which
(as before was shown) this short form admits not. And this interpretation
found the better welcome, not because any way more probable then the rest of
the new devices, but in regard it came from Calvin, whose reputation was so
high, and his authority so great amongst them, that (as one Hooker in his
Preface. n. 2*
very well observes) they were esteemed to be the most perfect Divines who
were most skilful in his writings, which were almost grown the very Canon by
which both Discipline and Doctrine were to be judged. Now Calvin seeing how
absurd and inconvenient it must needs be thought, to make the descent of Christ
into hell, to be nothing else but his burial; and that of his descent into the
chambers of death, and his continuance of separation from his body, being then
found out: fell on a fancy which might seem to have more affinity to his
descent unto the very place of torments, the habitations of the damned, though
to say truth, it was not so much properly a descending of his soul to the
torments of hell, as an ascending of the torments of hell, to find a place in
his soul. To bring this in, he first declares that Christ had done nothing for
us in the way of redemption if he had died no other then a bodily death; and
therefore that it was necessary he should undergo divinae ultionis severitatem
Calv. Instit. l. 2. c. 16.
, the severity of the divine vengeance? Then he inferres, that to this end he
was to struggle cum inferorum copiis, aeternaeque mortis horrore, with the
infernal powers of hell, and the horrors that attend on eternal death, and to
submit himself unto all those punishments which the most wicked souls are
condemned to suffer, the eternity thereof excepted only: that in this sense he
may be truly said to descend into hell, in regard he suffered all those
torments, nay that death it self, which are by God inflicted upon wicked men;
dirosque in anima cruciatus damnati and perditi hominis pertulerit, and felt
most sensibly in his soul those miserable torments of a man utterly forlorn
and damned to the pit of hell: that being thus forsaken and estranged from the
sight of God, he was so cast down, as in the anguish of his spirit to cry out
afflictively, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me; as finding in himself
omnia irati and punientis Dei signa, all the sure tokens of an angry and
avenging God: finally, that the fear and sorrow which did overwhelme him in the
Garden, his fervent prayer, his Agony and bloody sweat, were nothing but the
signs and evidences of those horrid and unspeakable torments (those diros and
horribiles cruciatus, as he calls them there) which he then suffered in his
soul. And what could all this be, but the pains of hell? This he resolves to be
the meaning of the Article, condemning all exceptions which are or may be made
against it, either as frivolous and ridiculous ( Sect. 10.) or to proceed ex
malitia magis quam imscitia Id. ibid. 11.
, rather from malice then from ignorance, and all that has been said unto the
contrary to be nothing but mere slander and calumniations; and being most
extremely pleased to see how those who did oppose him knew not where to fasten,
but were compelled to fly from one thing to another. This is the sum of his
dispute, the substance of that dangerous innovation in the Christian faith,
which was by him first published for a truth undoubted, and after taken up upon
his Authority without further questioning or debate. Which as it generally
prevailed in most places else, so did it no where find more fast friends and
followers, then in this unhappy Church of England: where it became in fine to
be accounted the sole Orthodox Doctrine, vented in Pulpits and in Catechisms B.
Bilson in his Epistle to King James.
, that the death of Christ upon the Cross, and his blood shed for the remission
of our sins were the least cause and means of our Redemption; but that he did
and ought to suffer the death of the s^ul, and those very pains which the
damned souls in hell do suffer, before we could be ransomed from the wrath of
God; and that this was that descent into hell which in our Creed we are taught
to believe. A doctrine so directly contrary unto that of the Church of England,
delivered in her Articles and Books of Homilies, solemnly authorized and
ratified as before was said, that Dr. Bilson the Reverend and learned Bishop of
Winton then being, thought himself obliged as well to undeceive the people, as
to assert the ancient doctrine of the Church: And to that end, delivered in a
Sermon at St. Paul's Cross London, what he conceived to be the tenet of the
Scriptures in this particular, according to the Exposition of the holy Fathers.
Which as it first occasioned some unsavory Pamphlets, and afterward some set
discourses to be writ against him: so it necessitated him in his own defense to
set out that laborious work entitled, Printed at London, 1604.
The survey of Christ's sufferings for man's Redemption, and of his descent to
Hades or Hell for our deliverance; I must confess my self indebted for the most
part of those helps which I have had in the true stating both of this and the
former Article. Thus having shown who was the Author, what the progress, of
this so much applauded Exposition of Christ's descent into hell; we next proceed
to the examining and confutation of the same.

And first the Reader may take notice that all the outworks to this Citadel,
esteemed so invincible and inexpugnable, have by us been taken in already in
the two former chapters: where we have proved that neither the extreme fear or
sorrow which did seize upon him in the Garden of Gethsemane, nor any of his
fervent prayers either there or on the Cross it self, no nor the Agony it self,
nor the bloody sweat, were any signs or arguments of those hellish pains, which
they have fancied to themselves in our Saviors soul. And we have also proved
in the last chapter of all, not only that our Savior did not die the death of
the soul, (as these men blasphemously pretend) but that the work of our
Redemption was completed fully, by that bodily and bloody sacrifice which he
made of himself upon the Cross. So that there now remains no more but to prove
this point (which is indeed the main of all) namely, that Christ neither did
nor ought to suffer the pains belonging to the damned, or endured so much as
for a moment the torments of hell. And for the proof of this it is fit we know
both what those pains and torments are which the damned do suffer, and of what
nature are those fires which the Scriptures declare to be in hell; what
punishments belong to the soul alone, and what unto the soul and body being
joined together. And first of all the torments which the damned suffer in their
souls only, though infinite and unexpressible in themselves, may be reduced to
these three heads: 1 remorse of conscience, 2 a sense of their rejection from
the favor of God, and 3 a despair of ever being eased of that consuming misery
which is fallen upon them. Remorse of conscience, that is the first, and one of
the most heavy torments suffered by those wretched souls who in their life time
wholly renounced the Lord their God to enjoy their pleasures, by which they are
kept in a continual remembrance of that madness and folly wherewith they
rebelled against the Lord, and of the contumacy wherewithal they refused his
mercies: God punishing the souls of such wicked men with the evidence and
conscience of their own uncleanness, and with the sight and most infallible
assurance of their now everlasting wretchedness. Whether or not this be the
Worm our Savior speaks of Mark 9.44.
, and of which he tells us in his Gospel, that it never dies, we shall speak
more at large hereafter. In the mean time, observe we what the Fathers say
touching this particular. Quae poena gravior quam interioris vulnus
conscientiae Ambros. de Offic. l. 3. c. 4.
? what pain more grievous, says St. Ambrose, then the wounds of a convicted
conscience? Magna poena impiorum est conscientia August. in Psalm. 53 and 45.
; the conscience of the wicked, says St. Augustine, is one of their greatest
pains or punishments. And more then so, amongst all the afflictions of man's
soul (says he) there is none greater then the conscience of sin. How think
thou (says St. Chrysostom Chrysostom. Homil. 15. in Act.
) shall our conscience be bitten (alluding to the Worm spoken of before) and is
not this worse then any torment whatsoever? With whom agrees Eusebius also, in
his Apology for Origin, published under the name of Pamphilus Pamphil. Apolog.
pro Origin.
, saying, tunc and ipsa conscientia propriis stimulis agitatur, that then the
conscience of a wicked man shall be pricked and pierced with the stings of
their own proper sins. The second torment which the damned suffer in the soul
alone, is the sense of their rejection from the favor of God, pronounced
against them in that day by the dreadful Judge, in the word Discedite, depart
ye cursed: by which they are not only excluded from the Kingdom of God, but
utterly confounded with the grief and shame of that rejection, which they shall
suffer at his hands before men and Angels. This is that curse our Savior
speaks of in his holy Gospel, where he affirmed unto the Jews Luke 13.28.
, that there should be weeping and gnashing of Teeth, when they should see
Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and all the Prophets in the Kingdom of God, and
themselves thrust out. Of this it is St. Augustine tells us, Aug. Encherid.
c. 112.
that to be banished for ever from the Kingdom of God, to want that plentiful
abundance of the sweetness of God, which he has abundantly laid up in store
for those that fear him; tam grandis poena est, ut ei nulla quae novimus
tormenta possint comparari; is such a grievous pain or punishment that no
torments which we know can compare unto it. St. Chrysostom is more express,
where he speaks of those, who seem to make it their only desire to escape the
miseries of hell Chrysostom. ad Theodor. laps. Epist. 5.
, whereas I (says he) am of opinion, that to fall or be rejected from the
glories of heaven, multo durius est tormentum quam gehena ipsa, is a far more
insupportable torment then hell it self. Nor do I think, says he, that we
ought so much to grieve at the evil of hell, as at the loss of heaven and the
glories of it, Qui nimirum cruciatus est omnium durissimus, the sense whereof
will be more grievous then of all the rest. And so much says St. Basil briefly
Basil. de Regul. fuse disputat. 2.
, affirming, that the estranging or rejecting from God is a more intolerable
evil, then any that is to be feared or expected in hell. And yet these torments
might be borne with the greater courage, if there were any hope of release in
time, if their damnation were not so confirmed in the Court of Heaven, that
they are utterly deprived of all expectation of having any favor from God in
the times to come; if there were any end to be expected of those unsufferable
torments which are laid upon them. Hope makes an heavy burden light; whereas
despair of being eased makes a light burden insupportable. And this despair is
that which does most afflict them, when they are once condemned to the pit of
torments. Omni tormento atrocius desperatio condemnatos affliget: No torment
(says the same St. Basil) Id. in Psalm. 33
afflicts the damned like despair. So much the more, by reason that to hope
that Gods irrevocable judgment shall be altered, or his counsel changed, were
to hope that God would be false in his word, or wavering in his will so
publicly and solemnly pronounced: which were a sin that would deserve an
heavier punishment, then they suffer yet. The punishment of the damned shall be
everlasting; no hope that ever it will end. And it shall be an everlasting
fire, as the scriptures tell us, a fire which shall prey upon the body, and
torment the soul; and yet neither devour the one nor consume the other. I know
some late Divines do persuade themselves that the fire of hell is allegorical;
that there is no such real fire to be found therein, as the world has hitherto
been made believe. But when I hear our Savior Christ pronounce this sentence,
sitting in his most dreadful Court of Judgment, when there shall be but little
use of tropes and figures, Mat. 25.41.
Depart ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels:
I must crave leave to tie my faith to express words of Scripture, rather then
to the quaint conceits of deceitful men. Of this I shall speak more at large in
another place; but whether in the Article of Christ's coming to judgment, or in
that of everlasting life, is not yet resolved. In the mean time, I take it for
a good rule which we find in Augustine, August. de doctrine. Christ. l. 3. c.
10.
that in expounding of the Scriptures, we fly not unto Tropes or Figures
unless the proper signification of the words in any place, be either against
the truth of faith, or against the honestly of manners, (as in these it is not).

Which grounds thus laid, I would fain know of Calvin, or any of his followers,
whether that all or any of these punishments, which belong properly to the
damned, and may be truly and directly called the pains of hell; were suffered
by our Savior in his soul and body, or his soul alone. It could not be remorse
of conscience; for where there is no sin, there is no Compunction. Christ might
be sorrowful, and afflicted for the sins of man, upon a knowledge of those
miseries which attended on them. Remorse there could be none where there was no
guilt; and guilt there could be none where there was no sin. And he alone it
was who could do no sin, and in whose mouth was found no guile 1 Pet. 2.22.
, as St. Peter tells us. Rejected he was never from the favor of God, it were
indeed an hellish blasphemy to conceive so of him. The sentence of rejection is
denounced against those alone, who have provoked God unto anger by their sins
and wickednesses; and made him of a friend and Father to become an Adversary.
But God was neither angry with, nor adversary to his Son CHRIST JESUS; his well
beloved Son, at first, in whom he was well pleased to the very end. And so much
Calvin does confess. Nec tamen innuimus unquam Deum fuisse adversarium illi vel
iratum Calv. Institut. l. 2. c. 16. sect. 11.
. And yet (says he) we do not intimate hereby, that God was either set against
him, or offended with him. Nor does he say it only, but gives reason for it.
For how, says he, could God be angry with his beloved Son, in whom only he was
well pleased? or with what confidence could Christ intercede for us with
Almighty God, si infensum haberet ipse sibi, with whom he stood in need of a
Mediator to reconcile him to himself? As for despair, if he were neither
touched for remorse of conscience, nor fallen from the love and favor of his
heavenly Father, there was nothing that he could despair of, but a release in
time from the fires of hell; which though they might afflict his body, could
not hurt his soul. And Calvin takes it for a grievous calumny which was charged
upon him Id. sect. 12.
, Me desperationem ascribere filio Dei quae fidei contraria sit, that he
ascribed to Christ any such despair, which was not consistent with true faith.
For wiping off such stain, he declares expressly, that though our Savior did
complain of his being forsaken, ne tantillum quidem deflexit a bonitatis and
ejus fiducia, yet he did never start nor waver in that confidence, which he had
in the goodness of the Lord: and uses this for an especial argument to confirm
the same, (as indeed it is) that whilst he did complain that he was forsaken,
Non desinit vocare Deum suum, he ceased not for all that to call God his own.
It was still Deus meus, Deus meus, to the very last gasp. And he that has the
confidence as to say my God, to appropriate God unto himself as his own God, is
far enough off from being in despair, there is no question of it. Nothing can
then be left but the fires of hell, and they could work no further then upon
his body, or the outside only of his soul, if I may so call it; the inward man
being senseless of the heats thereof, since it was neither subject to rejection
or remorse at all: though to say truth, he suffered not the fires of hell,
neither in body, nor in soul, nor in both united. Not in his Person in this
life, nor his soul singly by it self whilst he lived amongst us. For hell fire
is not to be found but in hell it self, and neither soul nor body were in hell,
when he was alive. Not in his body after his death and burial, for that lay
quiet in the Grave, neither touched nor troubled. Nor in his soul neither when
he went to hell; for none do suffer hell torments in the place of torments; but
they which are sentenced to DAMNATION: and I have so much confidence of their
Christianity, as to believe they dare not say, (and as yet they do not) that
Christ was damned. No Christian could endure such an horrid blasphemy;
especially if it were delivered in terms express. Yet I must tell you by the
way, that some come very near it, to a tantamont; whose doctrine it is, (and
it is a doctrine built upon Calvin's principles) that Christ did locally descend
to the place of torments, and ibi quoque poenas nostris peccatis debitas
luisse, and did there suffer the very pains which are due to us for our sins.
For otherwise say they, (which is Calvin's reason) non plena fuisset ipsius pro
nobis satisfactio, his satisfaction for our sins had not been sufficient. Which
were it true (as Beza very well observes) Ne corpori quidem parcendum erat, he
was not to have spared his body, but was to have descended into hell both in
body and soul, in regard that death eternal is the wages of sin, and that not
of the soul only, but the body also. Such horrible absurdities do men fall
into, if once they stray aside from the paths of truth. If then he neither
suffered remorse in conscience, nor rejection from the fight and favor of God,
nor had any reason to despair of Gods love to him, which are properly the
punishments or torments which do belong unto the damned; if he suffered not so
much as for a moment the very fire of hell in the place of torments: assuredly
he tasted no more of hell pains in his soul, then his body in the grave did of
grief and sorrow. But then they say, that he did struggle hard with the powers
of darkness, and trembled at the horror of Gods dreadful judgments Calvin
Institut. l. 2. c. 16.
. This we acknowledge to be true, but this is short I trow of the pains of
hell. He struggled hard, no doubt, with the Prince of darkness, both in his
Temptation in the Wilderness, and all those conflicts which he had with the
powers of hell both in the Garden and on the Cross. He trembled also, it is
probable; upon the apprehension of Gods anger against sinful man, whose person
he had taken on him; and on the fight and knowledge of those dreadful
punishments even eternal death, which God in his just judgment did denounce
against wilful and impenitent sinners. If Calvin mean no more then this, by his
Oportuit eum cum inferorum copiis, aeternaeque mortis horrore, quasi consertis
manibus luctari Id. ibid. s. 11.
; we assent unto him. But who knows not, that has but common sense and reason,
how much the greatest conflict with the powers of Satan, the greatest
apprehension that a man can have of Gods wrath and anger against sin, the
greatest trembling that can possibly invade him on that apprehension; falls
short of all the least of those infinite torments which are prepared in hell
for the damned souls.

But then the question will be asked, whether Christ did not suffer all those
punishments for the redemption of man; which man himself must needs have
suffered, had not Christ come to redeem him: if yea, he must then suffer also
the pains of hell, which can be understood in no other sense then in that they
take it; if not, there wanted somewhat to make up the scale for satisfaction of
Gods justice. To this I answer first in the way of negation, in plain terms he
did not, for he neither was nor could be damned, and what else but damnation is
the final punishment belonging to impenitent sinners? I answer secondly, with a
limitation, that he did suffer all those things which either were beseeming
him, or behooful for us; all kind of punishments whatsoever, which did
neither^ prejudice that plenitude of sanctity or science which was vested in
him. For further clearing of which point, we must distinguish with the
Schoolmen Dr. Field of the Church, l. 5.17.
of three sorts of punishments: whereof the first is called culpa, which is
plainly sin, as when God punishes one sin with another, as the proud with
envy, the covetous man sometimes with miserable parsimony, sometimes with
ambition; the second is ex culpa and ad culpam, something proceeding from sin,
and inducing to it, as natural concupiscence, an inclination to do evil, a
contrariety in the faculties of the soul, etc. The third is ex culpa, sed nec
culpa nec ad culpam, as they phrase it, that is to say, that which proceeds
from sin, but neither is sin in it self, nor does incline him unto sin in whom
it is. As hunger, thirst, weakness and death it self, which are the consequents
of sin since the sin of Adam. Of this sort only are the punishments which our
Savior suffered, and they are likewise of two sorts: for they are either
suffered for sin imputed, or for sin inherent; a man being sometimes punished
for his own offenses, and sometimes for another fault imputed to him. He that
is punished for his own faults has remorse of conscience, condemning himself
of drawing such guilt upon his soul, and with that guilt such miseries both on
soul and body: but he that suffers for the fault of another man, of which he
is no cause at all, either by persuasion, help, consent, or example; has no
such remorse. Now our Redeemer suffered for the sins of other men, and not for
any of his own; and consequently was not touched with remorse of conscience,
though it be generally found in all men at one time or another, and be neither
sin, nor inducement to sin. Lastly, these punishments which are punishments
only, and not sin, such as are common to the whole nature of man, and suffered
for the faults of another man, are of two sorts also: either the punishments of
sin eternally remaining in stain or guilt; or ceasing, at the least broken off
by unfaigned repentance. Those of the first sort according to the rules of
Divine justice, must be eternal in regard of duration, and by consequence
accompanied with desperation, which is always found where there is an
impossibility of ever coming to enjoy a better estate: whereas it is not any
way necessary, nor does the justice of God require it, that the punishments of
sin which is repented of, ceasing and forsaken, should be either everlasting,
or joined with despair. For as in every act of sin, on the aversion from God
who is objectively infinite and incommutably good, there follows poena damni,
or the loss of God, which is an infinite loss; and as to the inordinate
conversion of the sinner to things transitory, which must needs be finite,
there answers poena sensus, which though violent and bitter for a time, is
yet finite also: so to the eternity of sin remaining everlastingly in s^ain or
guilt, answers the eternity of punishment which follows on it; so to sins
intermitted, ceasing and repented of, a suffering also for a time proportioned
to it. So that though every sinner sins in suo aeterno, as St. Gregory
speaks Gregor. in Job. l. 34. c. 10.
, in that he would sin ever might he live for ever: and thereby casts himself
into an impossibility of giving off in himself, and consequently into an
eternity of punishment which is due to him for the same: yet if he make such
use of the grace of God as to cease from sin, and turn from his iniquities to
the living Lord, Gods justice may require extremity of punishment
proportionable to the sin committed, but the eternity of punishment it
requires not. And therefore seeing our Savior suffered for such sins (and for
such alone) as might be broken off by grace and the benefit of true repentance,
it was no way necessary to the satisfaction of the Divine justice of God, that
he should endure eternal punishment. Which being summed together make a perfect
answer to the question formerly proposed, that is to say, Whether Christ ought
to suffer all those punishments for the redemption of man, which man himself
must needs have suffered had not Christ come to redeem him. The sum of which
is briefly this, that Christ suffered the whole general punishment of sin, that
only excepted which is sin, or consequent on the inherence and eternity of it,
as remorse of conscience and despair: and that although he did not suffer the
pains of Hell, or any punishment of the damned, either in specie, or in loco:
yet did he undergo some punishments conformable and answerable to them in
extremity, as the apprehension of the wrath and anger of the Lord avenging
himself upon the sinner, but neither infinite nor eternal, as the rejection of
a sinner from the sight of God.

Against this truth thus stated and determined by us, there remain only two
objections: the one relating generally to the doctrine of Christ's descent into
hell, the other to it as it stands established in the Church of England. And
first as to the Doctrine generally it is thus objected, that if there were no
more in the sufferings of Christ, then the submitting of himself to a bodily
death, and to the anger of the Lord for so short a season; it could not
possibly occasion such a consternation, such a fear and horror, as he
expressed both in the Garden and upon the Cross: or if he did, how infinitely
short must he fall of that magnanimity, which is found in ordinary Thieves and
Robbers Calv. Instit. lib. 2. c. 16. sect. 12.
, which is Calvin's argument; or of the gallantry of the Primitive Martyrs ap.
B. Bilson survey, p. 388.389.
, as other more modestly infer, who most courageously both did and do go forth
continually to meet their deaths, and satisfy the fury even of partial Judges?
For answer unto which though it may be said that those particulars of whom they
speak endure a stronger conflict with the powers of death, then we are
conscious of which look on at random, and are not sensible at all of the pains
they feel, or the extremities in the last act of their Tragedy: yet we shall
give a more particular and punctual answer. And first we say for Malefactors,
that God does many times give them over to a reprobate sense, so that they
carelessely seem to contemn Gods judgments in this present world, and so
prepare themselves more fully for the judgments of the world to come. As for
the Martyrs they know well that the wrath of God toward them is appeased by
Christ; that they shall feel no more but the hands of men; and that as the
cruelty of men increases toward them, so God does give them strength and
comfort to undergo what ever shall be laid upon them: whereas CHRIST was to
satisfy Gods wrath for the sins of mankind, to undergo the punishment which
was due unto them (according to the Rules and limitations before laid down) and
not alone to fall into the hands of men, but to endure a bitter conflict with
the powers of hell, which did on every side assault him; which never any Martyr
was marked out to do. Next in relation to this doctrine as now it stands
established in the Church of England, it is objected, that howsoever the
Articles of Religion in King Edwards days, might seem to intimate a local
descent into hell, according to the sense of the Ancient Fathers: yet no such
thing could be inferred from the present Article, established in the form and
manner declared before. Their reason is, because that allegation of St. Peter's
words touching Christ's preaching to the spirits in prison, which was contained
in the Book of King Edwards time, to show what manner of descent it was they
meant, is totally left out in the present Article established in the reign of
Queen Elizabeth Ap. eund. ibid.
. This they conceive to be an evident declaration that the Church does not now
understand that Article, as at first it did: and therefore since it does not
mean such a local descent, as has been hitherto maintained in this discourse,
it may be construed in that sense which they put upon it. To which we need but
answer this, that the words alleged from St. Peter in the former Article,
were omitted by the Synod in the late Queens times, not because they did not
so understand the Article, as both their Predecessors and the Fathers did: but
either because Christ's preaching to the spirits in prison, seemed to be set
down for the sole reason of his descent into hell: or that they thought not fit
to impose that for the meaning of St. Peter's words, to be believed of necessity
by all good people in the Church of England. As for the putting their own sense
upon it (as indeed they do) I will but add this declaration or Injunction of
his Sacred Majesty; that is to say, that no man shall hereafter either print or
preach to draw the Articles aside any way, but shall submit unto it in the
plain and full meaning thereof: and shall not put his own sense or comment to
be the meaning of the Article, but shall take it in the literal and Grammatical
sense. With which expression I conclude this long dissertation.

ARTICVLI 6. Pars 2da. (...). i. e. Tertia die resurrexit a mortuis. i. e. The
third day he rose again from the dead.
CHAP. X. Of the Resurrection of our Lord and Savior, with a consideration of
the circumstances and other points incident to that Article.
IT was the observation of the Ancient Father, that the incredulity of St.
Thomas did much conduce unto the confirmation of the Christian faith in this
great Article of the Resurrection. Quam felix incredulitas quae omnium
seculorum fidei militavit August. in Ioh.
! as St. Augustine has it: The rest of the Apostles who had seen the Lord, had
made this their Colleague acquainted with so great a miracle: too great indeed
for one of so weak faith to assent unto. And therefore he requires a more ^ull
and perfect demonstration of it, then any of his fellows had before exacted.
Unless (says he) I put my finger into the print of his wounds, and thrust my
hands into his side, I will not believe Joh. 20.25.
. See here the stubbornness of incredulity. The same man who had seen Christ
raise up Lazarus, after three days resting in the grave, will not believe he
had ability to work the like miracle upon himself. Our gracious Savior
thereupon permits his body to be handled by this unbeliever. And Thomas
sensibly convicted of his infidelity, breaks out into this divine ejaculation,
MY GOD AND MY LORD Ibid. v. 28.
. Prae caeteris dubitavit, prae caeteris confessus est, said the Father
rightly. Here was a miraculous generation of belief indeed. Faith came not here
by hearing, but by believing only: And by this way of generation of belief in
him, the Christian Church became the more confirmed and settled in this present
Article; this trial and experiment of St. Thomas having clearly manifested,
that Christ assumed not a body in appearance only, neither one of a spiritual
essence or a new created one; but that he rose again in the same numerical
body, in which he suffered on the Cross and paid the price of our Redemption.
So that of all that glorious company there was none more fit to testify the
truth of this point then he; and to deliver it to the world for his part of
this Common Symbol; as it was anciently Aug. Sermon. 125. de T^mp.
conceived he did. And unto this St. Gregory may possibly relate where he tells
us, saying, Dum in Magistro suo palpat vulnera carnis, in nobis sanat vulnera
incredulitatis: whilst Thomas feels the wounds in his masters body, he healed
the wounds of incredulity in his followers souls.

And certainly some such experiment as this was exceeding necessary to satisfy
the wavering and doubtful soul in so high an Article; which by reason of the
seeming impossibility, and unexampled strangeness of the matter has been more
called in question and opposed, both by Jew and Gentile, then any other of the
Creed. It was indeed a work both of weight and wonder, not to be wrought by any
which was simply man. To man, mere natural man, it was no less impossible to
give a resurrection to the dead, then to grant a dispensation or indulgence not
to die at all. How could it be expected that one merely moral should be of
strength sufficient to destroy death, and to bury the grave; to raise himself
first from the jaws of death, and receptacles of the grave, and by the power
thereof to restore poor man to his lost hopes of immortality? Most justly may
it be presumed that had so great a work been possible to mortal man; man being
proud enough to attempt great matters, would first have took the benefit of his
own abilities, and so more easily have possessed the incredulous world with the
truth and real being of a resurrection, by the powerful Rhetoric of example.
In cases where the issue may be doubtful, and the trial dangerous, we
commonly make trial and experiment (as ignorant Empericks do their potions)
upon other men. But where the issue or event is known and certain, likely to
yield honor to our selves in the undertaking; we use not willingly to let
others rob us of the glory of it, or be beholding unto others for that which we
conceive we can do our selves. He then which was to be the first fruits of the
resurrection 1 Cor. 15.20.
, must have something in him more then ordinary, something to raise a doubt in
his greatest adversaries (as in Josephus a Jew but a very modest one Joseph.
Antiq. jnd. l. 18.4.
) whether it were lawful or not to call him man, to reckon him amongst the
natural sons of Adam. Tantae ejus res gestae, quantas audere vix hominis,
perficere nullius nisi Dei Velleius Paterc. hist. l. 2.
; was spoken in the way of flattery by the Court Historian; but may be truly
verifyed of the acts of Christ. Those Miracles of his upon true record, as they
could hardly be attempted by a mortal man, so could they be performed by none
but a powerful God. For who but he, who both in name and power was the God of
nature, had power not only to suspend some acts of nature, but absolutely to
overruled the whole course thereof. Of which great works above the ordinary
reach of man and nature, if we account the resurrection as the principal, we
shall rightly state it. It is within the power of Art and the rules of Physic
to repair the ruins of decayed nature, and perhaps prolong the number of a
few miserable days. He only could restore life to the dead, who first gave it
to the living. He only can restore our bodies to our souls in the last day, who
did at first infuse our souls into our bodies. Which miracle before it could be
wrought on us, he must first work it on himself; and thereby raise an hope and
be- belief in us to expect our own. The head being raised, gives good assurance
to the body, that though it do not rise at the same time with it, it shall in
due time be raised by it. What other uses may be made of Christ's resurrection
we shall see anon. This is enough to show the reasons or necessity thereof by
way of preamble; to let us see that all the hopes we have of our own
resurrection, depends upon the certainty and truth of this. Which though it be
a principle of the Christian faith, by consequence, of common course, to be
confessed and not disputed ( Oportet enim discentem credere, as the old rule
is): yet sithence that the truth thereof has been much suspected by the Jews,
and the possibility debated by the Gentiles: it will be necessary for the
settling of a right belief to satisfy the one, and refell the other. Which
done it will be easily seen, that there is reason and authority enough to
confirm this truth, were it not left us for a principle.

And first beginning with the Jews who first and most maliciously opposed this
part of holy Gospel, we purpose to proceed with them by the authority of
Scripture and of reason both. To the old Testament and our proofs from thence,
we shall challenge an obedience from them, because by them confessed for
Scripture, and reverenced as the Oracles of Almighty God. And for the new, the
writings of the holy Evangelists, we shall expect submission to the truths
thereof, so far forth as it shall appear to be built on reason and unavoydable
Demonstration. Now the old Testament consists in that part thereof which does
reflect upon the birth and actions of our blessed Savior, either of types and
figures, or else of Prophecies and examples, and the first type which looks
this way is that of Isaac Genesis 22. per tot.
, the only son, the only beloved son of a tender father: a type both of his
death and his resurrection. In which observe how well the type and truth do
agree together. The Altar was prepared, the fire kindled, Isaac fast bound and
ready to receive the blow; the knife was in his Fathers hand, and his arm
stretched out to act the bloody part of a Sacrificer. And yet even in the very
act and so near the danger, God by his holy Angel, and a voice from heaven
delivered the poor innocent from the jaws of death, and restored him back unto
his father when all hopes had failed him. How evidently does this fact of
Abraham's stretching out his hand to strike the blow, and being withholden by
the Angel from the blow it self, fore-shadow those sacred fundamental truths
which we are bound to believe concerning the true bodily death, and glorious
resurrection of our Lord and Savior? The Jews themselves in memory of this
deliverance, did celebrate the first of Tisri (which is our September) usually
called the Feast of Trumpets, with the sound of Rams horns or Corners P.
Phagius in Levit. 23.
, and counted it for one of the occasions of that great solemnity: which shows
that there was somewhat in it more then ordinary, somewhat which did concern
their nation in a special manner. Needs therefore must the Jews of our
Saviors time be blind with malice, at the least with prejudice, that look
upon this story of Isaac the child of promise, only as the relation of a matter
past, not as a type and shadow of the things to come: this only son of Abraham,
this child of promise, the only hope or pledge of that promised seed which was
expected from the beginning, being to come thus near to death, and yet to be
delivered from the power thereof, that so the faith of Abraham, touching the
death and resurrection of his son the heir of promise, might be tried and
verifyed, or rather that by experiment our Saviors death and resurrection
might be truly represented and foreshadowed in Isaacs danger and delivery. And
this is that to which St. Paul alludeth saying Heb. 11.17, 18, etc.
, By faith Abraham when he was tried offered up Isaac, and he that had received
the promises offered up his only begotten son, of whom it was said, that in
Isaac shall thy seed be called; accounting that God was able to raise him up
even from the dead, from whence also he received him in a figure, i. e. a
figure of the resurrection of Christ, the promised seed, represented by it,
though Abraham probably looked no further then the present mercy.

Isaac then was the true representation and foreshadowing of our Saviors death
and resurrection. And so the wonderful increase of Isaacs seed (in whom all
the nations of the world were to be blessed) was as full an emblem of our
Saviors seed and generation, which cannot be numbered: he having begotten unto
God since his resurrection more sons and daughters throughout all nations, then
all the children of Abraham or Isaac according to the flesh, though like unto
the sands of the Sea for multitude. But the circumstances of our Saviors
selling and betraying his cruel persecution both by Priests and people, the
whole story of his humiliation unto death and exaltation after his
resurrection, are more perfectly foreshadowed by the cruel persecutions of
Joseph procured by his brethren, by his calamity and advancement in Egypt. The
story is so well known it needs no repeating Genesis 37. and 41.
. And the afflictions laid on both by the sons of Jacob, in a manner parallel
themselves. Both of them were the firstborn of their several Mothers, both of
them the best beloved sons of their Fathers; and for this cause both of them
envied and maligned by their wicked and ill natured brethren, by whom they were
both severally betrayed and sold for a contemptible piece of money. So far the
parallel holds exactly; go we further yet. The pit whereinto Joseph's brethren
cast him, as also the pit or dungeon unto which he was doomed by a corrupt and
partial Judge Genesis 39.20.
, on the complaint of an imperious whorish woman without proof or witness;
what was it but the picture of our Saviors grave, to which he was condemned in
the sentence of death, by as corrupt a Judge as Potiphar, on the bare
accusation and complaint of an Adulterous generation (as the Scripture calls
them) without proof or evidence? And the deliverance of Joseph from both pit
and dungeon, his exaltation by Pharaoh over all the land of Egypt, and his
beneficence to his Brethren, whom he not only pardoned, but preservation from
famine; what were they but the shadows and resemblances of Christ's
resurrection, his sitting at the right hand of God the Father, by whom all
power was given him both in heaven and earth: and finally his mercy to the
sons of men, whose sins he does not only pardon, but preserve them also from
the famine of the word of God? The Kings ring put on Joseph's hand Genesis 41.42.
, the gold chain put about his neck, and the vesture of fine linen or silk
wherewith he was arraied by the Kings command: what were they (as the Ancients
have observed before) but the resemblances of those glorious endowments with
which the body or Humanity of Christ our Savior has been invested or
apparelled since his resurrection? More then this yet, The name of Zaphnath
Paaneah Ibid v. 45.
given to Joseph by the Kings appointment, and the Proclamation made by Pharaoh
that every knee should bow before him: what is it but a model or a type of
that honor, which God the King of Kings has ordered to be given to Christ: to
whom he has given a name above every name Phil. 2.9, 10
, that at the name of JESUS every knee should bow of things in heaven, and
things in earth, and things under the earth? Where by the way, (and that adds
something farther to the parallel also) the name of Zaphnath Paaneah as the
Hebrew reads it, but (...), Psonthem Phanech as the Septuagint, is naturally
(as the learned Mr. Gregory Observations on the Scrpt. c. 16.
very well observes) a Coptick or Egyptian word: and signifies an Interpreter
of hidden things, or a revealer of secrets. And so not only the Babylonish
Targum and others of the Rabbis do expound the word, but we find the same
exposition in Theodoret also, (...); What (says he) means Pspothomphanech?
To which he answers, (...), etc. An interpreter of hidden things. Which also
very well agrees to our Lord and Savior, to whom all hearts be open, all
desires known, and from whom no secrets can be hidden: Come (said the woman of
Samaria) and behold a man that has told me all the things that ever I did,
Ioh. 4.29. The Jew which thorough this thin vail on the face of Joseph, does
not behold the portraiture and lineaments of Christ our Savior, is not so
properly to be termed blind because he cannot see, as because he will not.
Such also was the type of the Prophet Daniel, cast by the malice of his enemies
(the King unwillingly consenting) into the den of ravenous cruel Lions, the
door sealed up with the Kings Ring, nothing but death to be expected. And yet
behold a resurrection in the person of Daniel, exactly typifying that of Christ
our Savior, in each of the particulars before remembered.

But of all types, especially as to the circumstances of time and place, that
of the Prophet Jonas does come nearest home; and it comes close home too, as to
the occasion. Jonas Jonah 1*
went down into the Sea, and put himself into a Ship to fly from the presence
of the Lord; but a great tempest overtook him, a tempest of extraordinary
violence, that neither art nor strength could prevail against it; insomuch that
the Mariners although Heathens did conclude aright, that it was of Gods
immediate sending, and that there was some heinous sinner got aboard amongst
them, which drew down vengeance from above upon all the rest. To Lots they went
Jonas was found to be the party; who willingly and cheerfully submitting to the
will of God, to save the rest, in danger to be cast away, said frankly without
opposition or repining at it, Tollite me, take me and cast me into the sea;
Better one perish then so many. Accordingly cast in he was, and drowned as the
poor men thought, that had cast him in. But the Lord prepared a great fish to
swallow up Jonah Jona. 1.17.
, and Jonah was in the belly of the fish three days and three nights: which
time expired, the Lord spoke unto the fish, and it vomited out Jonah on the dry
land Chapter 2.10.
. This is Historia vera, a true relation of the story in respect of Jonah, but
it is Sacramentum magnum a very great mystery withal in regard of Christ. For
Ecce plusquam Jonas hic Mat. 12 41.
, behold a greater then Jonas is presented here. It was but signum Prophetae V.
39.
, the sign of the Prophet Jonah, as our Savior calls it, in respect of the
history; but it was Res signata too, in regard of the mystery. And so it is
affirmed by Christ whose death and resurrection it foreshadoweth to us V. 40.
: viz. As Jonas was three days and three nights in the Whales belly, so shall
the son of man be three days and three nights in the heart of the earth Mat.
12.40.
. Never did type and truth correspond more perfectly. For who knows not how
usual a thing it is to compare the world unto a ship or argosie wherein all
mankind is embarked, all the sons of Adam; and amongst them the son of man, as
he calls himself. But all the sons of Adam being sinners from the very birth, no
wonder if the tempest of Gods anger fell upon them all, and made them all in
danger to be cast away. In which amazement and affright, only the son of man
(like Jonah Jonah 1.
in the sides of the ship) slept it out securely Mat. 8.24.
: who though he knew no sin, was made sin for us, by taking our iniquities upon
his account, and in that sense the greatest sinner in the vessel. So that the
high Priest did not prophecy amiss when he said this of him, It is expedient
that one man do die for the people Joh. 11.50.
, that the whole nation might not perish. Never was doubtful Oracle fulfilled
more clearly. For Christ no sooner found what their purpose was, but he was at
his tollite too, as willing to be thrown in as Jonas was: and therefore said
to those who came out against him, Sinite hos abire, let those go their way
Joh. 18.8.
. I only am the man that must stay this storm, and pacify the wrath of
Almighty God. And so accordingly it was done, Gods wrath thereby appeased, poor
mankind saved: and Christ, like Jonas, having lain three days and three nights
in the heart of the earth, did on the third day rise again; and by so doing
vanquished death, and swallowed up the grave in victory. But this particular we
shall hereafter meet with, and more fully speak of when we are come unto the
Circumstances of the resurrection; of which this of the time the third day, is
the most material. I add this only for the present in respect of the Jews, who
being by Christ foretold of his resurrection, and in so evident a type thereof
as this Signum Prophetae, this sign of the Prophet Jonas, as himself entitles
it, could look with an Historical faith on the resurrection of the Prophet out
of the belly of the Whale, and yet give no belief unto that of Christ out of
the bowels of the earth; though testified and confirmed unto them by such
pregnant evidence. And yet I shall crave leave to add, that if Jonah was the
Widow of Sereptas son, he whom Elias raised from death to life, 1 King. 17. as
many of the Jewish Doctors do affirm he was: the parallel will yet come closer
then before it did. For Jonas in the Whales belly was but dead putative, in the
esteem and eye of men; but in the Widows Chamber he was dead realiter, and so
more perfectly resembling him whose sign he was.

This leads me on to the next way of evidence in regard of the Jew, which is
that of example. Themselves had read in holy Scripture, and believed
accordingly, that Elias 1 Kings 17.
had restored from death to life the son of the Sareptan woman, whosoever he
was: and that Elisha did not only work the like wonder on the dead child of the
Shunamite 2 King. 4.34, etc.
, but that his dead body did revive a man, and raised him also from the grave 2
King. 13.21.
. And to this head we may reduce the more then wonderful deliverance of Daniel
from the Lions den, and the three Hebrew Salamanders from the fiery furnace;
all of them putative dead, all of them ransomed by the Lord from the merciless
fury of the grave and jaws of death; and that miraculous deliverance no less
to be esteemed then a Resurrection. To each of these the Jews most readily give
assent. How then can they deny it unto this of Christ? Assuredly it was as
possible to God to raise our Savior from the dead (if we consider him no
further then a mortal man) as to raise dead bodies by the prayers of the
Prophets, and by the dead carcass of Elisha; or as it had been to reprieve
Daniel and the three children from the hands of death. Why then do they deny
it unto this of Christ? Not because they did not think it possible, but because
they would not have it believed. It stood not with their interesse and private
ends to have it pass for current with the common people. Our Savior Christ
had been too diligent, as they thought, in the discharge of his great office,
in the discovery and anatomizing of their corruptions and impieties: and they
were loath to have his doctrine justified by so great a miracle. Rather then
so, to save their superstitions they will lose themselves, Non tam de suis
Religionibus been meriti, quam de se male Lact. l. 1. c. 1.
. Now as the Jews believed the Scripture relating the occurrences of the ages
past; so gave they as full credit to them foretelling things which were to
come; which is our last sort of proofs delivered from the old Testament, in the
way of Prophecy. And first we meet with that of David in the book of Psalms,
viz. Thou shall not leave my soul in hell Psalm. 16.10.
, neither shall thou suffer thy holy One to see corruption. A privilege which
did not appertain at all to David, who was dead and buried, and had seen
corruption; his Sepulcher which continued till our Saviors time being nothing
but a glorious emptiness: therefore by him (or rather by the holy Spirit
speaking in him) intended to our Lord and Savior, the fruit and glory of his
loins. A matter in it self so clear and evident, that when St. Peter pressed
it home as a proof and evidence relating to the resurrection of the son of
David Act. 2.27.
; those very Jews who had so wilfully cried down this truth, had nothing to
oppose against it. Thus also did Isaiah prophecy concerning him Isa. 53.10.
, that the Lord would break him and make him subject to infirmities, making his
soul to be an offering for sin; but yet withal, that notwithstanding this he
would prolong his days, and the work of the Lord should prosper in his hands;
as the Jews could not but perceive that indeed it did. But most exactly that of
Hosea, in whom we do not only find the substance of this resurrection
prophesied, but the very Circumstances. Come (says the Prophet) Let us return
unto the Lord Hos. 6.1, 2.
for he has spoiled us and he will heal us, he has wounded us and he will
bind us up. After two days will he revive us, and the third day will he raise
us up, and we shall live in his sight. A text so plain and evident to the
present purpose, (though possibly intended by the Prophet of some speedy
deliverance which by his mouth the Lord was pleased to promise to the house of
Judah) that as it clearly does foretell of a Resurrection, so the
accomplishment thereof in the man Christ Jesus might serve abundantly to
convince the most stubborn Jew, that it was principally meant and foretold of
him. Impleta in plerisque Prophetarum vaticinia, etc. Lact. l. 1.4.
The undeniable fulfilling of so many Scriptures might very well persuade men
not possessed with prejudice, first that our Savior CRRIST did rise again
according to the holy Scriptures; and secondly, that because he rose again
according to the holy Scriptures, that therefore he was CHRIST the Savior.

We come next in order to this miracle, not as foreshadowed in types, or
foretold in Prophecies, or otherwise exemplifyed in the book of God; but as
accomplished in its time, and left upon record in the Evangelists. And here we
will not beg the Jews to assent unto our Gospel, but our proofs. Themselves
had seen our Savior raise his dead friend Lazarus from the stench of the grave
Joh. 11.39.
, after he had been dead four days, and began to putrify. They also knew, as
well as any of his own Disciples, that he had formerly restored from death to
life, the widows son of Naim Luke 7.12, etc.
, and the daughter of Iairus Luke 8.55.
. How then can they deny him power to work the like miracle on himself? At
least why might not God be able to restore him unto the benefit of life again,
by whose ministry, if not also power, the benefit of life was restored to
others? True it is, that had this mighty work of wonder been done in a corner,
or in some dark and solitary descent, there might have been suspicion of
imposture conceived against it. But God well knew with what a wilful
generation he had to do; what opposition he was like to find in the
promulgation of this Gospel. For this cause, as he made choice of a great and
mighty City for the stage or Theater, whereon to act this work of wonder; so
did he also take a time in which that mighty City was most full and populous,
even the feast of the Passover. A time in which not only those which were Jews
by birth resorted thither, for the solemnizing of that festival; but even such
Proselytes of every nation under heaven, as were daily added to the Covenant.
Once I am sure that Cestius a Roman President numbering the people which came
thither to observe this Feast Joseph. de Bello Iudaic. l. 2.
, found them to be two millions and 700000 souls, all clean and purifyed, fit
for the legal eating of the Paschal Lamb. God certainly had thus disposed it
in his heavenly wisdom, that so the tidings of the resurrection might with a
swifter wing fly over all the parts of the world (then known) and with more
ease prepare the people for salvation. Which circumstance considered rightly as
it ought to be, were of it self sufficient to convince the Jews of a most
obstinate incredulity; who seeing could not choose but see, yet would not
perceive. Ampla civitas, ampla persona, rem quaerentes latere non sinit De Civ.
dei. l. 22. c. 10.
, as St. Austin has it.

But the malice of that people will not so be satisfied. For when the Lord was
risen as he had foretold them, the Soldiers must first be corrupted to accuse
the Disciples of Felony; and when that failed, themselves are ever forwards to
condemn them of folly. The Lord had often signified unto them that the third
day he would be raised from the dead; that the Temple of his body should be
destroyed, and in three days built up again: and they were resolute, if
strength and cunning could prevail to defeat him of the glory of his
resurrection. Upon this ground they had a warrant from the Governor to make
sure the Sepulcher, to place a watch about it, and to seal the stone. But when
the dawning of the third day, and the relation of the Soldiers had proclaimed
the miracle, they then gave money to the Soldiers to say, and if need were to
swear, that his Disciples came by night, and stole him away whilst they slept
Mat. 28.13.
. Dormientes testes adhibent, as said St. Augustine of them in the way of
scorn. This is the most they have to trust to, and this report as it seems
clearly by the text did hold long amongst them: but this, if well considered,
is both false and foolish. Never was accusation worse contrived then this. For
first it is not to be thought that his Disciples would adventure to come by
night; a few weak men, and those too much dejected in their Masters passion, to
stir abroad in so unseasonable a time and so full of danger* Or grant that his
Disciples might come by night, in expectation of the issue, to see what would
become of their Masters promises; yet certainly it could not be with an intent
to steal his body. The Monument (they knew) was too well guarded, to be forced
by them: for what could they poor men, unexpert and unarmed, and but few in
numbers, against a guard, a guard of choice and able fellows, culled out and
well appointed for the present service. Nor was it likely that the body was
took thence by stealth either by them or any others whatsoever. The body had
been wrapped in sear clothes, quae non minus quam pix corporis linteamina
conglutinat Chrysostom. in Mat. c. 28.
, is the Fathers note, which did stick as close unto his skin as it had been
pitch. And they that came to steal his body, would questionless have stolen
him with his shroud and all, and not have took the pains to strip him in a
place so dangerous. Or grant that too, it is not to be thought that they had
either so much leisure, or so strong a confidence, or so little care of their
own safety, as to spend their time in curiosities, or take the pains to wrap up
the kerchief which was upon his head, and lay it in a place by it self Joh.
20.7.
, as St. John records it. It is a timorous kind of trade to be a thief, much
more to violate the Sepulchers of those that sleep, and rob the grave of its
inhabitants, and seldom have such vain capricios as to spend their time in
needless and superfluous complements. Non enim fur adeo stultus fuisset, ut in
re superflua tantum laboraret Chrysostom. in locum.
, said the Father rightly. Let us proceed a little further, and grant this
also, that his Disciples came by night, and that they came to steal his body;
yet certainly it was not while the soldiers slept. For if they were asleep* as
they say they were, how could they justify their tale, that his body was taken
thence by stealth, or that the Felony had been committed by his Disciples? yes
certainly it must needs be as they relate it, for they were fast asleep all
night, and neither heard the tongues, or saw the looks of them that stole him.
Admit this also for this once that his Disciples stole his body, and that they
stole him while the soldiers were fast asleep: yet could not they restore the
dead body unto life again. And it was a thing too well known to be denied, that
our Savior was not only seen by his Apostles, with whom he did converse, and
eat, and drink, and performed other acts of a living man, but showed himself to
more then five hundred 1 Cor. 15.6.
at one time together, which was perhaps the time and hour of his Ascension. A
thing which passed so current for a truth undoubted, that Josephus, one of the
most learned and discerning men, which have been of that Nation since the times
he lived in, relating only on the by some passages touching Christ our Savior,
and of his being put to death by Pontius Pilate, adds also this, (...),
Joseph. de Antiq. Iudaica. l. 18.4.
, viz. that he showed himself alive again on the third day, and conversed with
men.

It seems the Priests and Pharisees, and other leading men of the Jewish
Nation, were conscious to themselves of this conspiracy, and of the weakness of
the practice. Their next art therefore is to condemn the followers of our Lord
of too much credulity, and when they could not condemn them of felony, to
accuse them of folly. They grant indeed that on the third day his body was
missing in the Sepulcher: yet that himself had raised himself from the grave
again, had never entered into the hearts of men of wisdom; if any did believe
it, as some such there were, they either were poor silly women, or men of the
inferior sort, a company of poor contemptible persons, Fishers and Publicans,
and the like. Men who had left their trades to attend on him, as heretofore
some did on Theudas Act. 5.37.
, who boasted of himself to be some great body, in hope to raise their fortunes
by him: and finding how they were deceived in their expectation, were willing
to lay hold on any thing which might keep them up in reputation amongst
ignorant and credulous men. Nec difficile sane fuit persuadere Pastoribus Lact.
l. 1. c. 22.
, and commonly such men are most easily befooled into belief of any strange
thing which is told unto them. This is the last refuge which the Jews found
out, but this will never save them harmless in the day of judgment. For the
belief of our Redeemers Resurrection stopped not here, but by degrees was
entertained by the most eminent men both for wit and learning over all the
world: thousands of which have been so confident herein that they bare witness
of this truth to the last drop of their blood; and rather chose to give their
own bodies over unto death, then to make doubt of, and therefore much more to
deny the Resurrection of his. A truth which became credible at first by the
confident asseverance of them that saw it, then by the constancy of those that
died for the Confession of it, and finally by the vast multitudes of those who
have since believed it. The Father so resolved it, saying. Quod credibile
primum fecit illis videntium certitudo, post morientium fortitudo, jam
credibile mihi facit credentium multitudo. And which adds most unto the
wonder, the men by whom this Gospel was thus propagated over all the world,
were (as the Jews objected) both unlearned and simple, devoid of Rhetoric to
persuade, and Logic to convince by the strength of argument; but furnished by
the Lord with great powers from heaven, speaking with tongues, and working
miracles, as occasion was to confirm their doctrine. Eloquia in persuadentium
mira fuerunt facta, non verba Aug. de Civitate dei l. 22. cap. 5.
, as St. Austin has it. Such was the infinite wisdom of Almighty God, that he
made use of simple men, to confound the wise, and of ignorant men to confute
the learned, lest else the enemy might say, that they prevailed rather by their
wit and Artifices then by the truth of that which they preached and published.

Thus have we brought unto the trial what ever has been quarrelled by the Jews
in this present Article. We must next look upon the Gentile, to whom the
doctrine of the Resurrection did seem at first a matter of such impossibility,
that the Athenians thought it folly, and the Romans frenzy. What would this
babbler have Act 17.32.
, said the wise men of Athens, when Paul enforced this point unto them;
Learning had made him mad Act. 26.24.
, said Festus, when he affirmed the same before his Tribunal. But yet as
foolish and phrenetical as it seemed to be, it proved a matter of no great
difficulty to answer all objections which were brought against it. Where first
it is to be confessed that the Jew has eased us of much care in this
particular: the satisfying of their cavils having cleared the history, and left
it less suspected to the other adversary, whether Greek or Roman. Nor need we
press them further then to gain this of them, that they would not think those
points impossible in the Christian Faith, which in their own Authentic stories
are accounted possible. The Grecian Writers has recorded it of Ae^^ulapius,
that he restored a man to life by the power of Physic Lact. 1.10.
, and for that cause has been enrolled ever since amongst their gods. And the
best Authors of the Romans do affirm of Romulus, that being murdered by the
Senate he was seen in a more stately form then usual to ascend up into the
Heavens Livie. l. 1. and Florus l. 1. etc.
. Which lest it should not pass for current with the common people, Proculus is
suborned to testify it on his corporal Oath. Et pejurante Proculo deus
ROMULUS, says Minutius Felix In Octavio.
. The truth of these reports I dispute not here; Only I make this use thereof,
that by the credit and report of their own best Writers it is neither to be
thought impossible, that a dead man should be restored again to life, which was
the case of Aesculapius amongst the Grecians; or be advanced unto the top of
heavenly honor, which was the case of Romulus in the Roman stories. Should
they require more proof then they use to give, we then refer them to the secret
closets of Tiberius Caesar, there to peruse a letter writ by Pontius Pilate, in
affirmation of this miracle. Which wrought so far into the faith of that mighty
Prince, that he proposed it once in the open Senate Eusebius. hist. Eccles. l. 2.
c. 1. Tertul. Apologet.
, to have CHRIST enrolled and registered amongst the other Deities of the Roman
Empire. And certainly it was a point in which the wisest men both of Greeks and
Romans did quickly alter their opinion; who as they were of excellent
understanding in the works of nature, so were they with less difficulty fitted
for the acts of Grace, then were the Jews whom prejudice and prepossession had
so wholly blinded, that they would not see the Sun of Righteousness when he
shined most clearly. And such assuredly is the condition of humane learning, in
those who have attained it in a full degree, that it not only does advance them
above other men in the exercise of all moral virtues, but brings them forwards
on the way unto life eternal. So from the substance of the Resurrection, or the
Quod sit, of it, which we have fully vindicated from the opposition both of Jew
and Gentile; we next proceed unto the circumstances which attend upon it: one
of the which has given as much occasion of dispute amongst the Christians, as
did the main body of the Article to the Jews and Gentiles. But this indeed is
such a circumstance as comes exceeding near the substance, if it be not of it.

For whereas it is generally agreed on by all sorts of Christians, that our
Savior rose again the third day according to the Scriptures; yet there appears
to be some difference amongst the Evangelists as unto the time of the day in
which this wondrous work was wrought, and no small difficulty amongst the
learned Christian Writers, how to find out three days precisely, upon good
account, in which he was to lie in the grave of death, for the fulfilling of
those Scriptures. The third day was the time of his Resurrection, that is agreed
on all hands; and that as well to hold compliance with the sign or figure of the
Prophet Jonah; as to keep pace with the prediction of the Prophet Hosea. Before
that time he did not, and he would not rise, because perhaps some captious
people might have doubted, whether he had been really and truly dead, if he had
raised himself with more celerity: Nor longer would he put it off, ne
Discipulorum fides labasceret, so to consult the wavering and unsettled hopes of
his Disciples, not yet improved into a Faith. The business is how to
accommodate the time of his being in the grave to the three days and three
nights of the Prophet Jonah, according to the intimation which himself had
made; how to find out those three days which the Scripture speaks of. For
being that our Savior was interred on the sixth day (or Friday) about
Sunsetting, and rose again the first day ( Sunday) about the rising of the Sun
or a little before it: the longest time of his imprisonment in the grave can be
but thirty six or thrice twelve hours, which comes exceeding short of three
days and nights. To salve this sore there has been many several plasters made
by the learned Writers and Interpreters of holy Scripture: every one thinking
best of that which himself prescribes, and finding some exceptions against
those, which have, perhaps, as happily been devised by others. Some do conceive
our Saviors lying in the womb of the earth may be most clearly resolved by
that construction, which Lawyers sometimes make in Favorabilibus, for the
greater part of three days and nights: so that if he continued in the heart of
the earth but an hour or less, above the six and thirty hours before
accounted, he then made good the sign of the Prophet Jonah, according to the
Legal construction of it. And some there be (and those indeed the most in
number) which think they have resolved the doubt by that Synecdoche which is
allowed in common cases, where the part is reckoned for the whole: as if a man
should make an Affidavit (as we use to call it) that he had attended in the
Court three days together, it could not be intended nor interpreted that he
attended three whole days from morning to evening, but only at such competent
hours in every day, as my Lords the Judges use to sit. The reason of which
Legal allowances and Rhetorical Synecdoches is grounded upon this
unquestionable rule of Logic, i. e. Ad veritatem indefinitae Propositionis
astruendam sufficit veritas unius vel alterius particularis. And then according
unto this Synecdoche or just allowance, our Savior both in a Logical and a
Legal construction may be truly said to be three days and three nights in the
bowels of the earth, that is to say, some part of Friday, all Saturday, and
some part of Sunday. And this has generally been entertained for the clearest
and most expedite solution of the present difficulty Estius in Matthew. 12.40.
. Who also add this note of Leo, De Resurrect. Domini. Sermon. 1.
That though our Savior had fore-signified that he would rest in the grave
three whole days and nights, or the far greater part at least: yet to revive
the drooping souls of his Disciples, Denunciatam tridui moram mira celeritate
breviavit, he cut off a great deal of the time, taking the last part only of
the first day, and the first part only of the last, that he might both
abbreviate the time and make good his reckoning.

But against this it is objected, not without good reason, that this solution
of the doubt without some further ground first laid, comes not home enough, but
leaves it as unsatisfied as before it was. For though this may be good as unto
the days in which our Saviors blessed body was interred in the grave, yet
neither by a Logical nor a Legal allowance can it reach at all unto three
nights: he being in the grave two whole nights indeed; but not the least part
of any third night, as is plain in Scripture. Therefore to bring the business
home, they who dislike the former Exposition, do it on this reason, that
contrary to the account and computation of the ancient Jews, the night is
distinguished from the day; whereas indeed according to their Calculation, the
night is but a part of the day ensuing, ( And the evening and the morning were
the first day, Et sic de caeteris) both of them making up together but one
natural day. So that when Christ said unto the Jews, that the Son of man should
be three days and three nights in the heart of the earth; he only meant three
natural days, reckoning according as the Jews did, unto whom he spoke, who
began their natural day at the Sunsetting. Which ground so laid, the former
Legal allowance or Synecdoche serves exceeding fitly, our Savior being in the
grave part of the sixth evening and morning, or the sixth night and day conjunct,
which was the Friday, or the day whereupon he suffered; the whole seventh
evening and morning, or the seventh night and day which was the Sabbath of the
Jews, or Saturday; and the first evening and morning or the first day and
night, which is our Saturday night and Sunday morning. Dr. Iackson on the
Creed, lib. 9. c. 40.
Maldonate a very learned Jesuit was the first who went this way to work, in
which he has been followed or rather countenanced, by that great Magazine of
learning Bishop Andrews, Dr. Iackson the late Dean of Peterburgh, and diverse
others. To verify his being there three days, (says that Revend Prelate Sermon.
12. of the Resurrection.
), it is enough if he were there but a part of every one of them; for it is not
three whole days. As in common phrase of speech, we say the Sun shone, or it
rained these three days past, though it did not so all day long, but some part
only of each. And if it rained at all in every one of them, we say true; It is
enough there, and it is so here. To verify the three nights; that do we,
reckoning as did the Jews, and that by warrant out of Genesis 19. the evening and
morning but for one; so drawing still the precedent night, and counting it with
the succeeding day. So do they still the night past with the day following, as
in Greece they are taught to do; and we doing so it will fall out right. Nor
stays that learned Father here, but thus compares the Type and the Truth
together, and makes the case of Christ thus come home to Jonah. Id. ibid.
The first day of the three, Jonas was in the Ship, and Christ upon the Cross,
till Friday, somewhat before the Sunset. All the second day Jonas was in the
Whale, and Christ in his Sepulcher. The third day, Jonas came out of the Whale,
and Christ out of his Grave, as it might be about the Sunrising; for this day
both Suns rose together. A fuller and more perfect Parallel betwixt Christ and
Jonas, he that lists to see, shall find it excellently done in the prosecution
of that notable Sermon.

Some other ways have been found out to salve this doubt, and such as seem more
handsomely to decide the Controversy, then any of the three before delivered.
But whether they do so indeed, or rather do not leave the matter more perplexed
and difficult, I will not take upon me to determine in it; but leave the matter
wholly to the Readers judgment. But amongst these I must profess that I can by
no means reckon that of Gregory Nyssen (be it spoken with due reverence to that
holy man) who to make up the three days and the three nights which our Savior
speaks of, makes that to be the first night in which he kept the Passover with
his Disciples, and in the instituting of his holy Supper, (...) offered
himself in sacrifice for the sins of man. The second night he makes to be that
terrible darkness, which continued from the sixth hour unto the ninth, and
divided that day into two, the first beginning at Sunrising, and ending at the
sixth hour when that darkness began; the other beginning at that ninth hour
(about three of the clock in the afternoon) and holding on until Sunset. The
third night which was indeed the very first) he makes to be the night which
preceded the Sabbath (or Friday night in our account:) and so conceives that he
has found three days and three nights which our Savior rested in the grave,
fixing his Resurrection in the evening of the Sabbath day, which after their
Calculation was the beginning of the first day of the week, by us called
Sunday. So he iu his Oration de Christi Resurrectione. Which resolution of the
doubt, (if I may so call it) the good Father does not offer as a Demonstration,
but leaves it to the Readers judgment, ((...)) and so do I. The first of those
I shall first lay down is Dr. Alabasters, who with a great deal of good Greek
and Hebrew, had many whimseys in his Brain, as may appear to any one who has
read the book, which he entitled Ecce Sponsus venit. And his opinion is, that
the three days and three nights which our Savior speaks of, are to be
interpreted Secundum universas Coeli plagas Ecce sponsus venit. c.
, according to the latitude and condition of the several Hemispheres, it being
night always in the one when it is day in the other. Et sic e contra. By this
compute, the three days and three nights must be reckoned thus. From six of the
clock on Friday night (upon our account) till six of the clock on Saturday
morning, it was night in all the land of Iewrie, and day with their Antipodes
in the other Hemisphere, which makes the first night and the first day. From
six of the clock on Saturday morning, till six that night, was night with the
Antipodes, and day in Iewrie; which makes the second day and the second night;
and then from six of the clock on Saturday night till six next morning, which
was about the time of our Saviors rising, it was night again amongst the Jews,
and day again with their Antipodes, which makes the third night, and the third
day. This if you take for a Capricio, as indeed the Doctor has too many
throughout that Book; Let us next look on that of Paulus Semproniensis, Bishop
of Friuli, according as by him laid down in his Book, de Die Passionis Domini,
where he states it thus; Paulina Pauli, etc. l 2. cap. 2.
The Jews (says he) being spoiled and plundered of their books, during the
Babylonian Captivity, and thereby disabled from finding out the true course of
the Moon, otherwise then by such conjectures as the Eye and their observations
did afford them; and consequently failing oftentimes in celebrating of the
Passover at the time appointed by the Law; ordained that that festival should
be kept two whole days together, that if they chanced to err in the one, they
might hit right in the other. And these two days they reckoned but for one
alone, as do the Romans at this time in the observation of the Bissextile or
Leap-year, (as we use to call it) who according to the Calculation of Julius
Caesar, reckon the two days of the Bissextile but for one alone, (and so it is
also in the estimate of the Laws of England to this very day). Insomuch that
February for that year, by the decree of the said Julius Caesar, is to have no
more then 28 days, (as in other years) because the day added unto that month,
(or the dies intercalaris, as the learned call it) is to be reckoned for the
same day with the day before, both of them being called the sixth of the
Calender of March, in which respect the name of Dies Bissextilis was first
given unto it. And on this ground it was resolved by Celsus that famous Lawyer,
that if a man was born on the sixth of the Calends of March, (which is our 24.
of February) it mattered not whether he were born on the first or second day of
the two (that year) because both days were counted in the Law for one. So says
he, in like manner did the Jews reckon those two days in which they solemnized
the Passover, but for one day only, both of them passing in their computation
for the fifteenth day of the month, in which that feast was to be celebrated by
the law of Moses. This he confirms not only by the practice of the modern Jews,
who for the most part hold themselves to this observation, fathering it on Ezra
the Scribe as ordained by him; but also by the testimony of Rabbi Rava, one of
the most famous Doctors of that Nation, for the times he lived in, advising
them Ne deserant consuetudinem a Patribus observatam, not to forsake the old
Tradition left them by their Ancestors of keeping the great festivals two whole
days together, according as Ezra had commanded. And this they also did (says
he) if the Passover fell upon the Sabbath, in which case at the instance and
persuasion of Gamaliel, a man both learned in the laws, and skilful in
Astrological supputations, they did not only double or re-iterate the feast of
the Passover, but that of the weekly Sabbath also. Which gave (says he)
occasion to that phrase of speech used by S. Mark where he calls the first day
of the week una Sabbatorum, that is to say the first day after both the
Sabbaths. He adds as in the way of super-aboundance, that it was affirmed in
the writing of Theophilus Caesariensis (a man exceedingly well skilled in the
Paschal Cycles) that our Redeemer suffered on the eleventh of the Calends of
April, (which is to us the 22. day of March) and rose again March 25. being the
8. day of the Calends of April; which make up three days and three nights in
all): but that his words were altered by Beda, in his Translation of that
piece, to make it more conformable to the Tradition of the Church of Rome. This
is the sum of his discourse, with which I must confess my self to be much
delighted. And were I as well satisfied in the Allegation of Theophilus
Caesariensis, and the alteration made by Beda, as I am in the residue of the
proofs by him produced, I might perhaps prefer this way before any other. But
being this depends on no other grounds then the bare ipse dixit, or conjecture
of my Author only; I know not how to part with the Synecdoche commended to us
by St. Augustine Aug. Epistol. 49.
, Hierome Hieron. in locum.
, and others of the Ancient Fathers, and still retained and countenanced by so
many men of eminence in all kinds of learning. The Reader has here choice
enough, and may use his pleasure.

As for the difference which seems to be between the Evangelists touching the
time of the day in which this wondrous work was wrought; we will first lay down
their several words, and then see what is to be said for the reconcilement. St.
Matthew says it was in the end of the Sabbath, as it began to dawn toward the
first day of the week, that Mary Magdalen and the other Marie came to see the
sepulcher Mat. 28.1.
. St. Mark that when the Sabbath was past, they came very early in the morning
the first day of the week at the rising of the Sun Mar. 16.2.
. St. Luke, that having bought their spices on the Eve of the Sabbath, they
came very early in the morning upon the first day of the week Luke 24.1.
. And finally St. John, that it was early on the first day of the week when it
was yet dark Joh. 20.1.
. In which we have not only an appearing difference between St. John, who
tells us that it was yet dark, and those who that say it was in the morning,
as the Sun was rising; but a seeming contradiction also in Matthew, who makes
it to be on the end of the Sabbath, which was Saturday Eve, and yet upon the
dawning of the first day of the week, which is Sunday morning. To reconcile St.
John to the other Evangelists, St. Ambrose Ambros. in Lucae cap. 24.
and Eusebius Eusebius. ap. Anastas.
were of opinion, that there were two Mary Magdalens of our Saviors
acquaintance, whereof one came unto the Sepulcher in the night, and the other
in the morning: But then assuredly the Scriptures would have given us some mark
of difference, as in the case of Simon Peter, and Simon the Canaanite; Mary the
Mother of JESUS, and Mary the Mother of James and Ioses; Judas who wrote the
Epistle extant in his name, and Judas Iscariot who betrayed him. Others Vide
Maldonat. in Mat. 28.1.
conceive that St. Marks text has received some alteration in setting down
the time of his Resurrection, as before we saw it was supposed in the time of
his passion: and that in stead of (...), at the Sunrising, it should be read
(...), the Sun not being risen. But such corrections, as we said in the former
case, are not only unwarrantable, but unsafe. And if such Criticizing on the
Text of Scripture might be used with safety, the alteration were more easy if
in stead of (...), in the second Aorist, St. Mark might be supposed to say in
the present tense, (...), as the Sun was rising; when first his beams began to
dispel that darkness, which we find mentioned in St. John. But leaving this
correction also as matter dangerous, the safest and most probable way to atone
the difference is, that the women did begin to set forwards toward the holy
Sepulcher, whilst it was yet dark, as St. John has it, or very early in the
morning, at the breaking or dawning of the day, as St. Matthew tells us; but
that they came not to the Sepulcher till the Sun was risen. Or else we may
resolve it thus, and perhaps with greater satisfaction to the text and truth,
that Mary Magdalen whose love was most impatient of a long delay, went first
alone (for St. John speaks of her alone) when it was yet dark; but having
signified to Peter what she had discovered, she went to make the other women
acquainted with it, and then came all together, as the Sun was rising, to
behold the issue of the business. As for the seeming contradiction in St.
Matthews words, we shall best see the way to discharge him of it, if passing by
the Vulgar Latin, from whence the contradiction took its first Original, we
have recourse unto the Greek. In the Vulgar Latin it is Vespere Sabbati in the
Evening of the Sabbath, and that according to the Jewish computation, must be
on Friday about six of the clock, for with them the Evening did begin the day
as we saw before. But in the Greek it is (...), which we English in the end of
the Sabbath, and then it is the same with St. Marks expression, (...), when the
Sabbath was past. And this construction comes more near to the Greek word (...)
which points unto a thing which is long since past, as (...), the hour being
now a good while spent, and (...), you lost your opportunity by your tardy
coming. And so the word is here interpreted by Gregory Nyssen Greg. Nyss. in
Resurr. Orat. 1.
, by birth a Grecian, and therefore doubtless one that well understood the
Idiotisme of his own language: in whom the (...) in St. Matthew is made to be
(...), the very hour and moment of the resurrection. Which ground so laid, let
us subjoyne these words in St. Matthews Gospel, Chap. 18. to the last words of
St. Lukes Gospel, Chap. 23. and then this seeming contradiction will be brought
to nothing. St. Luke informs us of the women who had attended on our Savior
at his death and burial, that having bought spices to imbalme his body, they
rested on the Sabbath day according to the Scripture, v. 56. And then comes in
St. Matthew to make up the story (as all the four Evangelists do make but one
full history of our Saviors actions) which (...), that when the Sabbath was now
past, and that the first day of the week did begin to dawn, they went unto the
Sepulcher as they first intended.

We have not done yet with the time of his resurrection, although the
difficulties which concern that time, have been debated and passed over. We
find it generally agreed on by all four Evangelists, that the resurrection was
accomplished (...), upon the first day of the week; and (...), about the
dawning of the day, as St. Matthew has it; or (...), about the rising of the
Sun, as St. Mark informs. About the dawning of the day; for certainly it was
not fit that the Sun of Heaven should shine upon the earth before the heavenly
Sun of righteousness. Nay therefore did our Savior prevent the sun by his
early rising, to teach us that the whole world is enlightened only by the beams
of his most sacred Gospel; and that he only is the light to lighten the
Gentiles, and to be the glory of his people Israel Luke 2.32.
. And there was very good reason also why he should choose the first day of the
week to be the day of the resurrection more then any other: that as God the
Father on that day did begin the creation of the world, in which we live the
life of nature; so God the Son should on the same day also begin the creation
of a new heaven and a new earth in the souls of men, by which they live the
life of grace here, and are thereby prepared for the life of glory in the world
to come. The sixth day in which our father Adam did begin to live, was the same
day in which the second Adam did begin to die. And the seventh day on which God
rested from his labors in the great work of our Creation, was also rested by
our Savior, in the far greater business of our Redemption. Rested I say by
him, not sanctified. For Christ did therefore pretermit and sleep out as it
were, the Jewish Sabbath, that from thenceforth the observation of that day
should be laid aside; and that in that neglect of his, there should no further
care be taken of the legal Ceremonies. And as God sanctified that day in which
he rested from the work of the worlds Creation; so the Apostles first, as it
was conceived, and afterward the Church of Christ by their example, did
sanctify and set apart that day for religious offices, in which our Savior
cancelled the bonds of death, and finished the great work of our Redemption.
The Israelites were commanded by the Lord their God, immediately on their
escape from the hands of Pharaoh, to change the beginning of the year Exodus
12.2.
, in a perpetual memory of that deliverance. With very good reason therefore
did the Church determine, to celebrate the Christian Sabbath (if I may so call
it) upon a day not used before, but changed in due remembrance of so great a
miracle, as that of our Saviors resurrection from the power of the grave, and
our deliverance thereby from the Prince of darkness. The Parallel of the
worlds Creation and the Redemption on all mankind by Christ our Savior; with
the change which followed thereupon in the day of worship, is very happily
expressed by Gregory Nyssen in his first Sermon upon Easter or the
Resurrection; where speaking of Gods rest of the Sabbath day, he thus
proceeds Orat. 1. in Christ. Resurr.
, (...), etc. By that first Sabbath (says the father) thou may conjecture
at the nature of this, this day of rest, which God has blessed above all
days; For on this the only begotten Son of God (or (...), as his own words
are) who out of a divine purpose of restoring mankind, did give his body rest
in the house of death, and afterward revived again by his resurrection; became
the resurrection and the life, the dayspring from on high, the light to them
that sit in darkness and the shadow of death. Finally, to insist upon this
point no longer, three days our Savior set apart for the performance of this
work and wonder of the resurrection: and answerably thereunto the Church did
anciently set apart three days for the commemoration of that work, and wonder
which was then performed. In which respect the feast of Easter is entitled by
the said Gregory Nyssen (...), or the three days festival.

The next considerable circumstance of the resurrection is, that he pleased to
work that miracle upon himself in a terrible and fearful earthquake Mat. 28.2.
, an earthquake so extreme and so truly terrible, that the graves did vomit up
their dead Id. c. 27.52.
, whose ghastly apparitions wandered up and down Jerusalem Ibid. v. 53.
, and were seen by many of their friends and old acquaintance. Which as it was
an extraordinary dispensation, and far above the Common law and course of
nature, so was it done by him for a special end: and did not only verify the
resurrection of our Lord and Savior, ut Dominum ostenderent resurgentem
Hieron. in locum.
, as St. Hierome has it; but also served to assure Gods faithful servants of
the resurrection of their bodies, (...), as we read in Chrysostom Chrysostom. in
locum.
. So that the Earthquake of it self being great and terrible, and made more
terrible by the rising of so many dead men from the bonds of death; no marvel
if the Soldiers of the guard were amazed and terrifyed, and in that fright
betook themselves unto their heels, and forsook their charge. At first indeed
the affright and astonishment was so great upon them, that they seemed even as
dead men, as the text informs us Mat. 28.4.
. But the first terrors being over, we find them presently in the City with
the chief Priests and Elders, declaring the sad news of their ill success, and
publishing the glorious wonder of the resurrection. So wonderful was the
providence of Almighty God, that those means which were projected for an
hinderance of the resurrection, should add unto the fame and glory of so great
a miracle; and that those very Soldiers which were hired to guard the
Sepulcher, should be the first Evangelists (if I may so call them) by whom that
miracle was signified to that stubborn nation. And yet God had a further end
then this in the great have made by the affrighted Soldiers to the Priests and
Elders; which was by their departure from the holy Sepulcher, to give the safer
opportunity to his Disciples (who were to be the witnesses of his resurrection
both to Jew and Gentile) to satisfy themselves in the truth thereof. For
though the women might presume on the Soldiers gentleness, (who commonly are
fair conditioned to that sex) yet for the Apostles to adventure thither till
the Soldiers of the guard were removed from thence, had been to run themselves
in the mouth of danger, and make themselves obnoxious to the accusation of the
Priests and Pharisees. And this was a remote cause of the honor which befell
that sex, in being first acquainted with the news of the resurrection; and is
another of the circumstances which attends the action. God certainly had so
disposed it in his heavenly wisdom, that as a woman was first made the Devils
instrument to persuade man to sin, and consequently unto death: so the same sex
also should become the instruments of publishing this glad news that the Lord
was risen; and the assurance thereby given of a resurrection to all mankind
from the hands of death. Withal observe the power of Almighty God, never so
clearly manifested in the sight of men as in the weakness of his iustruments:
and that although it was a work sufficient for the ablest Prophet to foretell
the resurrection of the Messiah, yet was it so easy when accomplished, that
ignorant and silly women, and more then so, that women laden with sins, should
be the first that did proclaim it. And there was somewhat in that too, that
Christ first showed himself unto Mary Magdalen Joh. 20.16.
, a woman so infamous for her former life, that she is branded in Scripture by
the name of Peccatrix Luke 7.37.
, as one who had deserved to be so entitled; and first of all men unto Simon
Peter 1 Cor. 15.5.
, as great a sinner in his kind as Mary Magdalen. For this he did (no doubt)
to let mankind know, that there is no sinner so great whosoever he be, to whom
(if he repent him of his former sins) the fruit and benefit of Christ's
resurrection ought not to be extended and applied: though some restrain the
same to some certain Quidams, men more of their election, then Almighty Gods.
Whereas the Scriptures plainly tell us, that as in Adam all dyed, so by Christ
all men shall be restored to life 1 Cor. 15.19, 20.
; who being risen from the dead is become the first fruits of all them that
slept.

But here perhaps it will be said, How can our Savior Christ be called the
first fruits of them that sleep, considering how many several persons had been
raised from the dead before, both in the old Testament and in the new? The
answer unto this is easy and the difference great between them and Christ,
their being raised from the dead, and his resurrection. For first, our Savior
rose again from the dead, virtute propria, by his ownproper power and virtue,
but they were raised again to life, virtute aliena, by the power and ministry
of some other. In which regard, we read notin the story of his resurrection,
that he was raised from the dead, as if he had been wholly passive in the
business, and did contribute no more to it then did the Shunamites child or
the daughter of Iairus: but resurrexit he was risen, or had raised himself,
which shows him to have been the principal Agent. Nor let it stumble any one
that in some places of the holy Scripture the Father is said to raise him, as
in Act. 11. V. 25.
Both will stand well enough together. For by the same power that the Father is
said to have done it, by the same was it done also by the Son. I and my Father
are one Joh. 10.30.
, but one power of both; and therefore whether it were done by both or by
either of them, it comes all to one. Secondly, Christ our Savior did so rise
from the dead, as to die no more, to have an everlasting freedom from the
power of death; whereas others have been raised from death to life, but to die
again. Christ being raised from the dead (says the great Apostle) dies no
more; death has no more dominion over him Romans 6.9.
. He is not only free from death, or the act of dying, but from the pains,
perils, and the fears of death, and all those sicknesses and sorrows which make
way unto it. But so it was not with the son of the widow of Sarepta, or of the
widow of Naim, no nor with Lazarus his most dear friend neither, who though
they were restored again to this mortal life, yet it was still a mortal life
when it was at best; and that mortality was to them as the Prisoners chain, by
which he is pulled back again though he chance to escape. He only did so rise
again as by his rising to destroy death, and to cloth himself with
immortality. Thirdly, though some were raised before under both Testaments, yet
that was but a private benefit to themselves alone, or perhaps unto their
Parents or some few of their friends; yet the fruit and benefit thereof did
extend no further. But by the resurrection of our Lord and Savior, there came
a signal benefit unto all the world, which else had been fast bound for ever
in the bonds of death, without any hope of rising to a better life. For being
risen in our nature, then our nature is ri^en; and if our nature be, then our
persons may be: especially considering that he and we are (...) Romans 6.4.
, (as St. Paul has told us) so graffed into one another, that he is part of
us, and we part of him. And therefore very well said Bernard, Resurrexit solus,
sed non totus. Though he be only risen, by his own proper power, yet as yet he
is not risen wholly, nor will be until we be raised together with him. He is
but risen in part by this resurrection; and that he may rise all of him, he
must raise it is also. In this respect our Savior is entitled Primogenitus
omnis Creaturae Col. 1.15.
, the first born or first begotten of every creature: viz. first in the order
of time, he being the first that was ever raised from death unto life
immortal; and first also in the order of causality, all others which have
been, or shall be raised or begotten to immortal life, being so raised and
begotten by virtue of his resurrection. And in the same respect he is called
Primitiae dormientium, or the first fruits of them that sleep; because his
rising is not only the pledge and earnest of our rising also, but that we shall
be raised to the same state of happiness and eternal glory, which he has
attained since his rising. The offering of the first fruits drew a blessing
upon all the rest. For if the first fruits be holy, the lump (says the
Apostle) is also holy Romans 11.16.
. If then the first fruits of the dead be offered to Almighty God, in Christ
our Savior; no question but the after-fruits, or the whole increase will be
very acceptable, and laid up in the barn of that heavenly husbandman Mat. 13.30.
, according to the scope of our Saviors Parable. And yet perhaps St. Paul
might have a further aim in calling our Savior the first fruits of them that
sleep, then has yet been spoke of: it happening so by the sweet disposition of
Gods special providence, that the day of his glorious resurrection did fall
that year upon the second day of the feast of unleavened bread, or the morrow
after the Sabbath of that great solemnity: upon which day, the first fruits
were to be offered unto God by his own appointment. Of which see Levit. 23.10,
11.

Here then we have the principal effect and fruit of Christ's resurrection, the
resurrection of our own bodies from the power of death, the resurrection both
of soul and body to eternal life. And yet there are some other intermediate
benefits which redound to us, some other motives and inducements which relate
to him. For his part first, had he not risen from the dead, he had still lain
under the guilt of that imposture Mat. 27.63.
, wherewith the Priests and Elders charged him, when he was interred. And who
would then have preached his Gospel, or embraced his doctrine, or yielded
belief to any thing he had said before? For if Christ be not risen from the
dead again, (as St. Paul reasons very strongly) then were our faith in vain;
and their preaching vain 1 Cor. 15.14.
. Had he not risen from the dead, and manifested it by such signs and wonders,
he never had attained to the reputation of being generally accounted and
believed in, for the Son of God: or such a God at best who does die like men
Psalm. 82.6.
, and fall like others of the Princes; some earthly Magistrate at the most, and
no great one neither. Nor was it necessary to his glory only, but to our
justification. For how could we assure our selves of salvation by him, or of
redemption in his blood; had he been swallowed up in death, and not appeared
alive again for our consolation? Manens in morte peccata non expiasset, mortem
non vicisset, as the Father has it Hierom.
: and then how could we hope to be saved by him, qui se ipsum servare non
potuit, who was not of ability to save himself? How could we Christians, of all
men most miserable, be possibly assured of this saving truth, that Christ was
delivered for our sins, if he had not risen again for our justification Romans
4.25.
, that is to say, if by his rising from the dead, he had not settled and
confirmed us in that assurance? The reason is, because the resurrection of our
Lord and Savior, was as it were, his actual absolution from those sins of ours
for the which he dyed; and his deliverance from that death, which as the wages
of sin we had all deserved. Calvin has very Orthodoxly resolved it so,
Resuscitatio Christi a mortuis ejus est actualis absolutio a peccatis nostris,
pro quibus mortuus est Calv. Inst.
, as he there determines. And he determines it according unto that of the
great Apostle, saying, if Christ be not risen, your faith is vain, ye are yet
in your sins 1 Cor. 15.17.
, that is to say, still under the command and the guilt of sin, from which you
have no other assurance to be absolved and quitted in the day of judgment, then
only by the virtue of his resurrection. How wretched then is the condition of
the Jews and those other Heretics, who either utterly deny the resurrection,
as did Simon Magus Epiphan. de haeres.
, and the Maniches Aug. contra Faust. l. 4. c. 16.
, or post it off, as not yet past, till some further time, which was one of the
heresies of Cerinthus Philastr.
, or make it but an allegory, no true real action, as do the Family of love
Display. in Allens Confession.
? Assuredly the least we can affirm of them and the like vile miscreans, is
that they have no inheritance in the house of Iesse, nor any portion at all in
the son of David: that they who wilfully deny his resurrection, shall never
find other resurrection but to shame and torment.

But on the contrary, the Orthodox Professors in the Chrrstian Church, not only
have believed this Article, and stood up in defense thereof to the last drop of
their blood, as often as the Princes of the earth have conspired together
against the Lord and his anointed: but for the better imprinting of it in the
souls of simple and unlearned people, and for perpetual commemoration of so
great a mercy, did institute the feast of Easter. A festival of all others the
most ancient in the Christian Church, ordained and celebrated in the purest
ages of the same, while some of the Apostles were yet living. A feast received
with so unanimous affection throughout the world, that though some difference
happened about the time when it should be celebrated; yet there was never any
question made of the feast it self. All of them kept an Easter, though not all
at a time: some of the Eastern Churches in compliance with the Jews amongst
whom they lived, keeping it on the 14. day of the Moon, as the Jews did the
Passover: ^ll other Churches keeping it on the Sunday after, in memory of the
day of the resurrection. Nor was there ever any sect or body of Heretics, but
they kept the festival: no not so much as the Novatians (or Cathari as they
call themselves) but they kept an Easter Socrat. hist. Eccl. l. 5. c. 20.
, though they left every one at liberty to keep it when he would, so he kept it
at all, and therein differing from the Sect of the Quartodecimani, who urged it
as a matter necessary, to celebrate it on the 14. day of the moon, and upon no
other. The sharp contentions raised in the Primitive times about this point,
and the great care took by the Prelates of those times to compose the
difference, are proof sufficient for the estimation which they held it in, and
the antiquity thereof, were there no proof else. And yet to set it clear above
opposition, we find it upon good record, that it was not celebrated by the
Church, not only during the lives of the Apostles, but also by some of them in
person. For Polycarpus who conversed with the Apostles, and was made Bishop of
Smyrna by them, (as Irenaeus Iren. l. 3. c. 3.
, and Tertullian de Praescrip. c. 3.
do expressly say) affirms that he kept his Easter (...), with St. John the
Disciple of the Lord, and others of the Apostles in whose times he lived and
conversed with them Eusebius. hist. Eccl. l. 5. c 14.
; St. John by name, the rest of the Apostles but in generals only. And so
Polycrates the Metropolitan of Ephesus does as plainly say, that St. Philip the
Apostle kept it: and he not only was a Bishop of most eminent note, but a most
famous Martyr also; and so not likely to sophisticate or report a falsehood.
This makes it clear and evident that the feast of Easter is of Apostolical
Institution, though possibly not ordained or instituted till toward the latter
end of the first Century, if perhaps Philip lived so long as John doubtless
did. To go a little higher yet, it was received for a truth in the time of
Constantine, that Easter had been kept, ((...)) from the first day of our
Saviors passion, until the very time that good Emperor lived in Id. de Vit.
Constantini l. 3.
: and more then so, that they received it from our Savior, that Christ
delivered it unto them. So that the institution of the feast of Easter is not
only of Divine Apostolical right; but in the opinion of those times (and those
the happiest of the Church both for peace and purity) of a divine right in the
highest degree. Whether that so it were or not, I dispute not here, though
possibly the high estimation which the Ancient Fathers held it in, and the
honorable attributes which they give unto it, may seem to intimate some such
matter. For St. Ignatius who lived near the Apostles times (if he lived not
with them) calls it expressly (...) Ignat. Epist. ad Magnesianos.
, the Lady and Queen of all the feasts; and that too in his Epistle ad
Magnesianos, against which no exception has been made as yet in this captious
age. By Constantine it is called, the most holy feast, and that four times (for
failing in one Epistle Apud E^seb. de vita Constable. l. 3.
): By Epiphanius, (...) Epiphan. in Panar. prope finem.
, the great solemnity. By Nazianzen, (to wander through no more particulars) it
is not only termed the Queen and Sovereign of days in Oratione funebri.
, which it seems he borrowed from Ignatius; but thus set out and beautifyed in
a fuller manner Id in Orat. de Paschate.
, Easter day is come (says he) Gods own Easter day, and again I say Easter day
is come, in honor of the blessed Trinity; the feast of feasts, the solemnity
of all solemnities, as far surpassing all other feasts holden not only by or
for men, but even in honor of Christ himself, as the sun the stars. Nor was
this great festival only solemnized in the world abroad, but of as high an
estimation also within this Island: the error of the Quartodecimani being
condemned, and the custom of the Western Church asserted in the Council of
Arles, (a Council of more antiquity though of less authority perhaps then
that of Nice): to which subscribed amongst others Tom. 1. Council. Gall. a
Sirmundo edit.
, Euborius B. of York, Restitutus B. of London, and Adelfus B. of Colchester.
And for the Scots, they did receive the observation of this Festival, together
with the faith it self: Sedulius a learned man of that nation, who flourished
not long after the conversion of it, writing a Poem which he entitled Opus
Paschale, and did thus begin, Paschales quicunque dapes, etc. In fifteen
hundred years and more from our Saviors Passion never did man oppose or cry
down this feast but Aerius only; who for this and other of his dotages was held
to be an heretic and a madman too: his folly in this point being held so
gross, that he had never any followers for ought I can find. So that the
marvel is the greater, that after so long a tract of time, some people under
color of reformation, should put down this feast, and for the better and more
effectual obtaining of their end therein, either extend the time of their Lent
so far, as to bring it within the compass of that public fast; or else (as
some have also done) forbid the Sacrament of the Lords supper to be administered
on that day, under pains and penalties, to make it looked upon no otherwise
then a common day. And yet the wonder is the more, that the same men who
practice to beat down this feast with such heat and violence, being kept upon
the very day of the resurrection, and consequently opus diei in die suo; should
withal labor with the utmost of their power and cunning to cry up the Sunday
(and scrue it to as high a pitch as the Jews did their Sabbath) which is but
the Epitome or the Abstract of it. Of very congruity at the least, it is to be
regarded more then an other Sunday; as was most notably observed by his sacred
Majesty. Who asking whether they that preached at Holdenby house on Easter day,
did preach according to the day of the resurrection; and being answered that
they did not, he next desired to know what reason the new reformers had to put
down Easter, and continue Sunday. For being both instituted by the same
authority ( viz. the authority of the Church of Christ) they might as well
refuse to observe the weekly Sunday, as not keep this feast. The Numb. Iii. p.
103.
Moderate Intelligencer tells us of the Question, but I never yet could hear any
Answer to it (though his Majesty gave it them in writing) and I believe I
never shall.

ARTICLE VII. Of the Seventh ARTICLE OF THE CREED Ascribed to St. BARTHOLOMEW.
(...). i. e. Ascendit ad Coelum, sedet ad dextram Dei, Patris Omnipotentis. i.
e. He Ascended into Heaven, and sits on the right hand of God the Father
Almighty.
CHAP. XI. Of the Ascension of our Savior; with a Discussion of the points and
other Circumstances, which are most considerable in the same.
THE next great Festivals after Easter, (which is the Anniversary feast of the
Resurrection are those of the Ascension of our Lord and Savior, and the coming
of the holy Ghost, or the Feast of Whitsuntide. Which method of the Church in
these great solemnities, seems to be borrowed from the method of the Creed
which we have before us: wherein unto the Article of the Resurrection, is
presently subjoyned, that he ascended into Heaven, there sits at the right
hand of God the Father Almighty, and there shall tarry and abide until he come
to judge both the quick and the dead, and after that the Article of the holy
Ghost. And there was good reason for this too. For therefore did our blessed
Savior raise himself from the shame and obloquie of the grave, that he might
ascend in glory to the Heaven of Heavens: that being gone from thence and
ascended thither Joh. 14, 15*16. and 16.7.
, he might send them (as he had foresignified) another Comforter, that should
abide with them for ever. And as it seems, the Royal Psalmist, the sweet singer
of Israel, foresaw the near conjunction of those two great Festivals; the
necessary dependence which the coming of the holy Ghost had on Christ's
Ascension. Thou art gone up on high (says he) thou have led Captivity Captive,
and received gifts for men, that the Lord God might dwell amongst them Psalm.
68.18.
. So that the Text begins with the ascending of CHRIST, and ends with the
descending of the holy Ghost. For if a man should ask, as the Eunuch did, of
whom does the Prophet speak this; of himself or of some other man? we must
needs answer with St. Philip, and say that it relates unto Jesus Christ. That
so it is, we have St. Paul to be our warrant, who thus cites the Text with
reference unto Christ the Lord; When he ascended up on high Ephesians. 4.8.
, he led captivity captive; and gave gifts to men. He received gifts for men
says the Psalmist, he gave gifts to men says the Apostle, He did re^eive them
of his Father, that he might give them unto us. Well then, what gifts are they?
that he tells us after, Ver. 10, 11.
And he gave some (to be) Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists,
and some Pastors, and Teachers, to the gathering together of the Saints, to the
work of the Ministration, and to the edifying of the Body of Christ. These were
the gifts which Christ conferred upon his Church by the holy Ghost, first by
his first descent or coming upon Whitsunday, when he gave Apostles and
Evangelists, falling upon their heads in likeness of cloven tongues Act. 2.3.
, and ever since by furnishing the Pastors and Teachers of it with those gifts
and graces of the Spirit, which are expedient for their Calling. And this is
evident enough from the Psalmists words, where it is said, that He received
gifts for men that the Lord God might dwell amongst them. Which cannot be
applied unto Christ himself: for then it must not have been said that he had
ascended up on high, and was parted from us; but that he tarried here below, to
be always with us. Therefore God here, must needs he God the holy Ghost, who
came not down till after Christ was gone up, and then came down no^ only to
remain among us, but to be in us, says our Savior, and to abide with us for
ever Joh. 14.17.16.
: So that this Text containing (as you see it does) the substance and occasion
of these two great Festivals; we will begin first with the holy Thursday, part
thereof, which is Christ's Ascension, according as the method of the Creed does
lead me. Where by the way, the Feast of holy Thursday, of the Lords Ascension,
is of as great Antiquity as eminency in the Christian Church, it being
reckoned by St. Augustine August. Epistola 118.
amongst those feasts: and there were but four of them in all, which had been
generally received in all ages past, and thought to be of Apostolical
Institution.

Now for this great act of the Ascension, St. Mark delivers it in brief, that
When he had spoken unto them, he was received into heaven, and sat him down on
the right hand of God Mar. 16.19.
: St. Luke, a little more fully, in his Gospel thus, that he led them out into
Bethany, and blessed them Luke 24.50.
, and it came to pass that as he blessed them, he departed from them and was
carried up into Heaven. But in the Acts the story is laid down at large, and
with more particulars. There we are told that from the time of his Resurrection
he continued forty days upon the earth Act. 1.
, appearing many times in that space or Interim unto his Apostles, and speaking
to them of the Kingdom of God; that on the fortieth day he led them to a Mount
which is called Olivet, being from Jerusalem a Sabbath days journey, (which
some conceive to be a mile, or but two at most) that being there, and speaking
unto his Apostles about the Kingdom of Israel, while they beheld he was taken
up on high, and a Cloud received him out of their sight; And finally that as
they followed him with their eyes toward Heaven, behold two men stood by them
in white apparel, which also said, Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing up
into Heaven, This same JESUS which is taken up from you into Heaven, shall so
come, even as ye see him go into Heaven. This is the substance of the story; in
which we have some passages to be further looked on, and others to be
reconciled with the Creed, from which they seem in words to differ. For first
whereas it is said, that he appeared unto them forty days Act. 1.3.
, which is not to be so interpreted, as if he showed himself unto them every
one of those days; but that in the said forty days from his Resurrection,
frequenter se eis vi^d^^dum exhibuerat Estius in Act. 1.
, he had offered himself to them oftentimes to be by them, and to discourse
with them of the things of the Kingdom of God. In the next place, St. Luke who
tells us in the Acts, that our Savior made his ascent from the Mount of Olives,
informs us in the Gospel, that it was at Bethany. Which difference is easy to
be reconciled, would there were no worse. For Bethanie was a village near unto
Jerusalem, about fifteen furlongs from it Joh. 18 18.
, as the Text instructs us; and seated at the foot of the Mount called O^ivet:
In which respect it is called Bethanie at the Mount of Olives, Mark. 1.1. So
that whether Mount Olivet was esteemed to be within the limits and precincts of
the Village of Bethanie, or Bethanie was reckoned for the lower part of the
Mount of Olives, it comes all to one. But the main point to be considered is
the seeming difference, which is between the words of the Creed and the words
of the Gospel. Ascendit ad Coelum, says the Creed, he ascended into Heaven,
it is his own act here. Assumptus est in Coelum, says St. Mark, ferebatur in
Coelum, says St. Lukes Gospels, elevatus est, says the Book of the Acts, he
was carried up into Heaven, or taken up on high, as our English reads it, it
was Gods act there. And so it was indeed, it was Gods and his: the Persons
having such an interest in one another, that what was done by the one is
ascribed to the other without wrong or prejudice to either: as it is also in
the case of the Resurrection; in which although we find it to be his own act,
his Resurrexit only in the holy Gospels; yet is it quem Deus suscitavit a
mortuis Act. 3.1^.
, him has God raised from the dead in St. Peter's Sermon. Or else it may be
answered thus, that though our Savior did ascend by his own power and virtue,
yet he may properly be said to be assumptus, taken or carried up into Heaven in
three regards; that is to say Estius in Mark. 16.
, either as taken up on the wings of Angels (whereof we shall say more anon) as
Lazarus was carried into Abraham's bosom; or because he seemed to be wrapped up in
a cloud, and so taken up out of their sight; or finally that the man CHRIST
JESUS was taken up into Heaven by the power and virtue of the Godhead in
separably united to him. Either of these constructions will atone the
difference, and reconcile the Creed with the words of the Text: though we may
further add, and ex abundanti, that St. Luke does not only say ferebatur in
Coelum, or he was carried up into Heaven, as if he were passive in it only; but
that Recessit ab iis first Luke 24.51.
, he left them of his own accord, gave the first rise to his Ascension, and
after ferebatur (for so it follows) suffered himself to be assumpted, taken
or carried up into Heaven, either by the Cloud or by the Angels, or how else he
pleased. Lastly, it is to be observed, that he ascended into Heaven, videntibus
illis says the Text, whilst his Apostles looked on: to signify that he did
ascend by little and little, that he might feed their eyes, and refresh their
souls, and by his leisurely ascent, make them more able to attest it, as
occasion served. For had he been caught up into Heaven as Elias was 2 King.
2.11.
, who had but one witness to affirm it, or rapt up into Heaven, as St. Paul was
afterward, without any witness but himself, and scarce that neither, (for
whether it were in the body, or out of the body 2 Cor. 12.3.
, he could hardly tell): the truth thereof had wanted much of that estimation,
which the mouths of so many witnesses as beheld the mir^^le, were able to
afford unto it.

And yet it was strange that many witnesses should need to confirm that truth,
which had so clearly been fore-signified both by Types and Prophecies, that
none who did believe the Scriptures could make question of it. For if we look
upon the Substance or the quod ^it of it: or on the circumstances of the time,
the place, the cloud, the pomp and manner of the same; or finally on the
consequent or effect thereof as to Christ himself; we find all signified
beforehand in the Book of God: and that so fully and expressly as must needs
convince the Jews of the greatest obstinacy, that ever had been entertained in
the hearts of men: first in the way of Type or Figure, we have that of Enoch
before the Law, and that of Elias under the Law. Of Enoch it is said in the
holy Scripture, that he walked with God Genesis 5.24.
, that is to say, as the text does expound it self in the case of Noah, he was
a just man, and perfect in his generation Genesis 6.9.
, for the times he lived in. So righteous was he as it seems in the sight of
God, that we find no mention of his death. Only the Scriptures say, that he
was not found, because God took him: i. e. because God took him to himself,
translating him both body and soul to his heavenly Kingdom. And so St. Paul
expounds it, saying, Heb. 11.5.
By faith Enoch was translated that he should not see death, neither was he
found, because God had taken him. And of Elijah it is said, that being talking
with Elisha, one of his Disciples, there appeared a Charet of fire, and horses
of fire 2 King. 2.11.
, and parted them asunder, and that Elijah went up in a whirlwinde into Heaven.
Here then we have two Types or figures of the Lords Ascension, the one
delivered in the person of a righteous man, who was unblameable in his
conversation; walking in the commandments of God without reproof; the other of
a Prophet mighty both in WORD AND WORK, who did not only reprove sin, and
foretell of things which were to come, but did confirm his Doctrine with signs
and miracles. And being that the Jews cannot but confess, as Josephus did, that
Christ was not only a wise man, a Teacher of the people in the ways of truth,
one that wrought miracles Joseph. de Antiq. Iudaic. l. 18.4.
, and had gained many both of the Jews and Gentiles to adhere unto him; being
they cannot but acknowledge of our Savior Christ, as the good Theif did, ille
autem nil mali fecit Luke 23.42.
, that he had done nothing amiss; or as Pilate, that there was no fault to be
found in him Luke 23.4.
: they have no reason but to think that Enoch and Elijah were the Types of the
Lords Ascension, as well as of his life and doctrine. But here perhaps it will
be objected, that either Enoch and Elijah were not taken up into Heaven, and so
no Types and figures of the Lords Ascension: or if they were, then was not
Christ the first which opened the gates of Heaven, and ascended thither in his
body, to make a way for others in due time to follow; as all Antiquity in a
manner do affirm he was, grounding their judgment on the evident and plain
texts of Scripture. For does not the Apostle expressly say, that the way into
the Holiest of all was not yet manifest, while the first Tabernacle was yet
standing, Heb. 9.8. And does not Christ our Savior as expressly say, that no
man had ascended into Heaven, but he that came down from Heaven, even the Son
of man, Ioh. 3.13. How then were Enoch and Elijah Types of Christ's Ascension,
if they were not taken up into Heaven? or how was Christ the first, if they
there before him? Our Savior Christ himself makes answer unto this objection,
where he says, that in his Fathers house there were many mansions Joh. 14.2.
: that is to say, several degrees of happiness and estates in glory, though all
most glorious in themselves. To some of which degrees of happiness, and estates
in glory, unto some one or other of those heavenly Mansions, both Enoch and
Elijah were by God translated, there is no doubt of that; the Scripture is
expressly for it. But that they were in Coelosummo, in the highest Heaven,
that unto which the Lord ascended, and where he now sits at the right hand
of God the Father, that as the Scriptures do not say, so there is no necessity
why we should believe it. Our Savior was the first who ascended thither; that
place of supreme glory being typified in the Sanctum Sanctorum, and by that
entitled, as before we saw, unto which none might enter but the High Priest
only.

From Types proceed we next unto the way of Prophecy, and there we find
assured proof not only for the Substance of the Lords Ascension, but for every
Circumstance. First for the substance, thus says the Prophet David, Psalm. 24.
Lift up your heads O you gates, and be you lift up you Everlasting doors, and
the King of Glory shall come in. Who is the King of Glory? the Lord strong and
mighty, the Lord mighty in battle. Which Psalm as it was framed by that sweet
singer of Israel, on the reduction of the Ark to the City of David, and
literally meant of the Gates of the Tabernacle, through which the Ark, the
glory of the Lord of Hosts, was to have its entrance; so was it mystically and
Prophetically spoken of our Savior Christ, who in a mighty battle had subdued
all the powers of hell; and afterward by his Ascension did set open the Gates
of Heaven; as all the Fathers generally down from Justin Martyr, do expound the
place. The Gates were lift up in the Psalm, for the King of glory, and opened
in the Gospel for the Lord of glory 1 Cor. 2.8.
, as the Apostle with some reference to the Psalmist calls him. Where by the
way, I think we need not go much further to resolve a doubt, which has been
made by some in the Church of Rome; that is to say, whether the Heavens did
open to make way to our Saviors passage, an vero sine diversione eos
penetravit Estius in Mar. 16.
, or that he pierced or passed through the Celestial bodies, as they conceive
he came unto his Disciples when the doors were shut. The reason of this querie
we know well enough, It is to help them at a pinch when they are put to it, in
maintenance of that monstrous Paradox of Transubstantiation, which utterly
destroys the being of Christ's natural body. But unto this, the lifting up of
the Gates gives a ready answer, and such an answer as has countenance from the
Gospel also. For if the Heavens were opened to make way for the Spirit of God
to descend upon him at his Baptism Mat. 3.16.
, as we know it was: with how much greater reason must they then be opened,
when he ascended into Heaven not in Spirit only, but also in his body, in his
humane nature? Next for the circumstances which occur in the Lords Ascension,
we have the time thereof, the fortieth day precisely from his Resurrection,
prefigured in the forty days of respit which God gave to Nineveh, before he
purposed to destroy it. The correspondence or resemblance does stand thus
between them, that as God gave the Ninivites forty days of Repentance, after
the miraculous deliverance of Jonah from the belly of the Whale, had (in all
probability) been made known unto them to confirm his Preaching: so he gave
forty days to the Jews also after Christ's Resurrection, to see if they would
turn from their sins, or not; before he did withdraw the presence of their
Savior from them, and lay them open to that desolation, which he had denounced
against them for their wickedness. And this I am the more confirmed in by
another passage of this kind, in the Book of Ezekiel, where it is said, Thou
shall bear the iniquity of the house of Judah forty days Ezekiel. 4.^.
, I have appointed thee each day for an year. Which Prophecy what ever it
might aim at, at that present time in which it was declared by the mouth of the
Prophet; was questionless most punctually fulfilled in those forty days, which
Christ continued on the earth until his Ascension. For having born those forty
days the iniquities of the house of Judah, and kept off by his presence all
those plagues and punishments, which were due unto them for the same: he left
them unto that destruction, which at the end of forty years, (reckoning each
day for an year, as the Prophet bids us) befell both their Temple, and their
Nation. For the place next, we find it on record in the Prophet Zachary, in
these words, Zach. 14.4*
His feet shall stand in that day upon the Mount of Olives, which is before
Jerusalem on the East, and the Mount of Olives shall cleave in the midst
thereof. Which part of the Prophecy concerning the feet of God, which were to
stand on the Mount of Olives, was never before so literally verified, as in the
day of o^r Saviors Ascension: his sacred feet making such an impression on the
ground where he took his rise (if I may so say) as seemed to cleave the ground
in twain, and there continued for the space of four hundred years, if the
Tradition of the Ancients be of any credit. Certain I am that so it is affirmed
by Paulinus, no fabulous Writer, but of a very great esteem for piety in the
best times of the Church; and he tells it thus. Paulinus Epist. 11. ad Severum.
Mirum vero inter haec, quod in Basilica Ascensionis locus ille tantum, de quo
in nube susceptus ascendit, ita sacratus divinis vestigiis dicitur, ut nunquam
tegi marmore, aut paviri receperit, semper excussis, se respuente, quae manus
adornandi studio tentavit apponere. Itaque in toto Basilicae spacio, solus in
sui caespitis specie virens permanet, and impressam divinorum pedum
venerationem calcati Deo pulveris perspicua simul and irrigua venerantibus
conservat. I have put down the words at large on the Authors credit, and so
commit them to the censure of the learned Reader. Then for the cloud in which
our Savior made his Ascent to Heaven, we have it thus fore-signified by the
Prophet Daniel. Dan. 7.13, 14*
Behold (says he) one like unto the Son of man, came in the Clouds of Heaven,
and approached unto the ancient of days, and they brought him before him. And
he gave him Dominion, and honor, and a Kingdom, that all people, Nations, and
languages should serve him; his Dominion is an everlasting Dominion which shall
never be taken away, and his Kingdom shall never be destroyed. Where, by the
way, we have a full description of that power and honor, which God conferred
upon our Savior; and by St. Mark is intimated in that form of speech Mar.
16.19.
, and sat down on the right hand of God. But this I touch but on the by;
referring the full disquisition of it to the next branch of this Article, to
which it properly belongs.

In the mean time let us behold the pomp and ceremony of the Lords Ascension,
which David has described in the words before, that is to say, When he
ascended up on high, he led captivity captive, and received gifts for men; He
gave gifts to men, says the great Apostle; which how they do agree was before
delivered. In which it seems to me, that the sacred Penmen have made the
course and order of the Lords Ascension, like to the pomp and glory of the
ancient Triumphs. It was, we know, the custom of the ancient Romans, when any
of their Generals did return victorious against a powerful and considerable
enemy, to honor him with a Triumphant reception into the City of Rome. The
pomp and manner of which was, that the General apparelled in a garment of state
called Trabea, or Vestis Triumphalis, and having on his head a garland of
laurel, and sometimes a Crown of gold which the Senate had bestowed upon him,
was carried in a rich and open Chariot: the Senators, and others of the
principal Citizens going forth to meet him, and conduct him, in the spoils and
treasures gotten in the war passing on before; the soldiers with their
Coronets, their bracelets and other military rewards following next the
General, and in the Rere of all, those miserable men whether Kings or others,
whom the unlucky chance of war had now made Captives. Examples of this kind in
the Roman stories are obvious to the eye of every Reader. And such as this, (if
I may safely venture upon such comparisons) is the Ascension of the Lord
described to be by the Royal Psalmist. He made a chariot of the clouds and so
ascended up on the wings of the wind; apparelled in the Robe of his own
righteousness, more glorious then a Raiment of needlework, wrought about with
diverse colors; and having on his head that Crown of eternal Majesty, which the
Lord God his Heavenly Father had conferred upon him, in testimony of that
Sovereign power over Heaven and Earth, which he since has exercised. But of
this we shall speak more anon. To make his entrance into Heaven the more
magnificent, the Blessed Angels those great Citizens of the new Jerusalem did
attend upon him: conducting him into the place of endless glories, as erst they
had done Lazarus into Abraham's bosom. St. Austin so affirmed it, saying
August. in Psalm. 90.
Sublatus est Christus in manibus Angelorum, etc. The Lord was carried up by
the hands of Angels, when he ascended into Heaven; not that he would have
fallen had not they supported, but that they might serve him in that work; so
says St. Athanasius for the Greek Church also, (...) Athanas. contra Arianos.
, etc. that being carried up by Angels, he ascended thither as man, and took
our flesh upon him into Heaven. Cypri. de Asc. Christi.
St. Cyprian says, that though he did not need the Angels to support or carry
him, yet that they did attend him in that glorious triumph; and praecedentes
and subsequentes applaudebant victori: And thereto Nazianzen agrees also; if
Christ ascend (says he) to Heaven, ascend thou with him, and join thy self
unto the Angels, which did accompany him or receive him. Take which of these
you will, and we find the Angles to have no small part in our Saviors
Triumph. And certainly it stood with reason, that they who had ministered unto
him in the whole course of life, when he did seem to be in disgrace and
poverty, should have the honor to attend him in the time of his glories: and
if we do observe it well, we shall find no special passage of our Saviors
life, in which the blessed Angels did not do him service. An Angel served to
usher in his incarnation Luke 1.28.
, to proclaim his birth unto the Shepherds Luke 1.10.
, to join in consort with the rest of the Quire of Heaven, and sing the Anthem
of Gloria in excelsis Deo. No sooner was he born, but all the Angels of the
Lord did adore and worship him Heb. 1.6.
, says St. Paul to the Hebrews, when he had overcome the Devil in the
Wilderness, the Angels came and ministered unto him Mat. 4.11.
, as St. Matthew has it; and being at his last conflict with him in the garden
of Gethsamene, an Angel of the Lord did come down to comfort him Luke 22.43.
. To testify unto the truth of his resurrection, we have two Angels clothed
in white Joh. 20.12.
, proclaiming this glad news that the Lord was risen; and here we have two men
in white, (which were Angels doubtless) assuring the Apostles of their Lords
ascension. Not that there were no more then two, because no more spoke of; but
that two only staid behind to testify unto the truth of so great a miracle
Who as they also certifyed them, in the way of prediction, that in the same
manner as he went from thence into heaven, he should return again in the day of
judgment; so in that day they shall not only wait upon him, but have their
special place and ministry, as we shall see hereafter in the following Article.

But in our Saviors train there were more then Angels. To make this triumph
answerable to the former Platform, there must be Soldiers also to attend his
Chariot, which must receive their several rewards and crowns, for their well
deservings; and captives there must be to be led in triumph, and to be made a
spectacle unto men and Angels. And so there was, Ignatius tells us in plain
terms Ignat. Epist, ad Trallian.
, (...), that he went down (to hell) alone, but he ascended to his father with
a great train after him. And before him Thaddeus, whom St. Thomas the Apostle
sent to the Prince of Edessa, used the self same words Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. l. 1,
c. 13.
. More company there was then, than the holy Angels, of more sorts at least:
(for those of whom Thaddeus and Ignatius spoke, were such as did ascend from
the parts below) but who these were, has been a matter much disputed in these
latter times. Shall we affirm, as generally the Papists do, that they were the
souls of the Fathers who died under the Law, whom our redeemer brought from
Limbo when he went down into hell? I think we need not be reduced into that
straight neither. And as for my opinion in that point, it has been shown
already in another place See Chap. 8. of this second part.
. All I shall add now in brief is this, that they which did ascend in our
Saviors train, and made up a great part of his glorious triumph; were either
his Soldiers, or his Captives. His Soldiers I call those of the Saints
departed, whose graves were opened at the time of his resurrection, who being
united to their bodies rose, and came out of the their graves Mat. 27.53.
, and went into the holy City, and appeared unto many. It was not probable that
they were raised from the dead, to die again; much less to be left wandering
up and down the earth, as if they had no certain ubi to repair unto. Nor could
they ascend into the heavens before our Savior; who as in all things, so in
that also was to have the preeminence. They must then ascend with him as a part
of his train; and go in with the Bridegroom, as the wise Virgins did, when the
doors were open. For my part I can see no reason why, being made partakers of
his resurrection, they should be rejected, or cast off at his ascension. That
they were Saints, whose bodies had been raised by so great a miracle, is
affirmed expressly in the text; and therefore were in some possession of the
heavenly glories. And that their bodies had been putrefyed, and some of them
perhaps reduced to their primitive dust, is more then probable, for the text
speaks of them as of men which had long been dead. Now why a glorified soul
should be reunited to a corrupt and putrefyed (although new raised) body,
unless it were to raise that body also to a share of glory; I plainly must
confess I can see no reason. Some of the Saints then, as his Soldiers, did
attend this Pomp; I take that for granted: And I conceive it probable (for I
go no further) that every Saint or Soldier had his Crown or Coronet bestowed
upon them by their General, in testimony that they had fought a good fight
against sin and Satan. For though in common course the Saints and servants of
the Lord shall not have their Crowns until the general day of judgment; yet
here in this particular case it might be otherwise, by special privilege and
extraordinary dispensation.

Next to the Saints and Soldiers look we on the Captives, of whom the Psalmist
and St. Paul both do expressly speak, Duxit captivam captivitatem. He led
captivity captive, says the holy Scripture. But who these captives were, and
what this captivity, will ask a little more pains to declare aright; though
somewhat has been said in this point before. We showed you in our Commentaries
on the former Articles, that by the unanimous consent of all the Fathers, our
Savior spoiled the Principalities and powers of hell, when he went down
thither; and there took captive both the Devil and his evil Angels. The
showing of them openly, and triumphing over them, the leading of them captive
when they were so taken, that doubtless was the work of another day, that was
the work of the Ascension. When he ascended up on high, then, not before, he
led them captive; and when he led them captive, then he triumphed over them.
The victory he obtained before, now he made his triumph. The great Battle which
Paulus Aemilius won of Perseus the Macedonian, did shrewdly shake the main
foundations of his power and Empire; the victory was not perfected, nor the
Realm subdued, and made a Tributary Province of the state of Rome, until the
King himself was taken, in the Isle of Samothrace, to which he had retired as
his strongest hold, immediately on his defeat near the City of Pidna. The
triumph followed not till after when he made his entry into Rome, the
imperial City: the miserable King and all the flower of his Nobility, being
led like Captives in their chains, and doomed unto perpetual prison. And this
says the Historian was interpulcherrimos L. Florus hist. l. 2. c. 12.
, the happiest and most stately triumph that the Roman people ever saw, the
victory having also been of the greatest consequence. So in this case. The
first main Battle (after some previous skirmishes and velitations) which our
Redeemer sought with Satan, was upon the Cross, in which he seemed for a time
to have had the worse. But it was only for a time. For by his death (says the
Apostle) Heb. 2.4.
he overcame him which had power of death, which was the Devil. That was the
first great blow which the Devil had. But the victory was not perfected, nor
the Empire of the Prince of darkness broke in pieces, and brought under the
command of the Son of man; till he mastred hell it self, and forced the Devil
and his Angels in their strongest hold. Then came he to demand his triumph at
the hands of God, who received him into heaven with the greatest glory, that
ever had been seen by the heavenly Citizens: the Devil and rest of the powers
of hell being led bound in chains in triumphant wise; whom he flung off as
soon as he approached near the gates of Heaven, and has ever since reserved in
chains under darkness, to the judgment of the great and terrible day Jude v. 6.
. If you will see this triumph set down more at large, we have it in the 13. of
the Prophet Hosea, and out of him in St. Paul's first to the Corinthians 1 Cor.
15.55.
: death led captive without his sting; Hell, broken and defaced, like the
picture of a conquered City; the strength of sin, (the Law) rent, and fastened
to his Cross ensigne-wise; the Serpents head broken, and so born before him,
as was Goliahs head by David when he came from the victory. Never so great a
victory, such a glorious triumph; as that of Christ in his Ascension, when
having spoiled the Principalities and powers of hell, he led this captivity
captive in his march to Heaven, making a show of them openly unto men and
Angels, and triumphing over them in semet ipso, in his own person, says the
vulgar. Reddunt inferna victorem, and superna suscipiunt triumphantem Sermon. de
tempore. 138.
, Hell restored him back a Conqueror, and Heaven received him a Triumpher, as
faith St. Angustine happily, if the work be his.

But there were other Captives which adorned this triumph, besides the Devil
and his Angels, even the sons of men. The Devil first began the war with our
Father Adam, foiled him in Paradise, and made him of a Prince to become a
Prisoner, a slave to his own lusts and and loose affections. And he prevailed
so far upon his posterity, that he brought all mankind in a manner under his
dominion; their sins and wickednesses being grown unto such an height, that God
repented him at last of man's creation; It angered him, says the text, at the
very heart. David complained in his time, that there was none that did good, no
not one Psalm. 14.3.
; and when the son of David came upon the Theater, he found the seed of Abraham
so degenerated, that they were become the slaves of Satan, at best the children
of the Devil, as himself affirmed. In this estate we were, the whole race of
man, when with a mighty hand and an outstretched arm, our Savior Christ
encountered with the powers of darkness, and subdued them all. By this great
victory of Christ over sin and Satan, the Devil was not only taken and made a
Captive, but all mankind, even that captivity which was captive under him,
became his Prisoners jure belli, even by the common law of war; as being before
part of the Devils goods, of his train and vassalage. So true is that of
Aristotle, in his book of Politics, (...) Pol. l. 1. c. 4.
, those which are taken in the wars are in the power, and at the pleasure of
the Conqueror. The Fathers, many of them, look this way directly, but none
more plainly to this purpose then Dorotheus an old Orthodox writer, and he
states it thus, What means (says he) the leading of captivity captive? And
then he answers Doroth. de Paschate. c. 12.
, It means that by Adams transgression, the enemy had made us all captives
and held us in subjection, and that Christ took us again out of the enemies
hands, and conquered him who kept us captive. So that the case of mankind in
this double captivity, was like that of Lot, whom the five Kings when they
took Sodom carried Prisoner with them, Lot was then Captive to those Kings. But
presently comes Abraham Genesis 14.16
, falls upon the Victors, takes the five Kings, and with them Lot also Prisoner;
by means whereof both Lot and they became Abraham's captives, to be disposed of
as he pleased who had got the mastery. So was it with the sons of men, till
they were rescued from the Devil by this son of Abraham. We were the miserable
children of this captivity. They to whom we were captives were taken captive
themselves, and we with them. So both came into Christ's hands, were both made
his Prisoners; and both accordingly led in triumph on this glorious day. Both
indeed led in triumph, but with this great difference. Their being led in
triumph) was to their confusion; they were condemned also, as we saw before, to
perpetual prisons, there to expect the torments of the day of judgment. We by
this new captivity were released of our old, restored unto the glorious liberty
of the sons of God. And this was felix captivitas capi in bonum, a fortunate
Captivity that fell out so happily. And yet it did not end so neither, as if
the giving of us our lost liberty had been all intended; though we perhaps had
been contented well enough, had it been no more.

One part of this great triumph does remain behind, the dona dedit of the
Psalmist, the scattering of his gifts and Largess amongst his people, (
Missilia the old Romans called them) to make his conquest the more acceptable
to all sorts of men. And this he could not do until his Ascension, till he had
took possession of the heavenly palaces; Every good and perfect gift coming
from above Jam. 1.17.
, as St. James has told us. I speak not of those gifts here which concern the
Church, the body collective of the Saints, the whole Congregation; The giving
of those gifts was the work of Whitsuntide, when the Apostles received gifts
for the public Ministry, and for the benefit of the Church in all times
succeeding. I speak of such gifts only now, as concern particulars, which he
conferreth upon us with a liberal hand, according to our wants, and his own
good pleasure. Are we in danger of our enemies? By being ascended into heaven
he is the better able to deliver us from them; for standing on the higher
ground he has got the vantage, from whence he can rain down fire and brimstone
on them Psalm. 11.6.
, if he think it necessary. Ascensor Coeli auxiliatur, He that rid upon the
Clouds to Heaven is our help and refuge, says Moses in the Book of
Deuteronomy. Are we in want of necessaries to sustain our lives? He shall send
down a gracious rain upon his inheritance Psalm. 68.^.
, the former and the latter rain, as the Prophet calls it. Are we unfurnished of
such graces as are fit for our Christian calling? Out of the fullness (of his
treasure) shall we all receive Joh. 1.16.
, and that too grace for grace, says the great Evangelist: that is to say, not
all of us one and the same grace, but diversi diversam, to every man his
several and particular grace, as Maldonate (and I think very happily) does
expound the Text. For unto one is given by the Spirit the word of wisdom, and
to another the word of knowledge by the same Spirit: To another working of
miracles, to another prophecy, to another discerning of spirits, to another
diverse kinds of tongues 1 Cor. 12.8, etc.
. To one a superemin^nt faith, to another an abundant charity; to every man
some gift or other, the better to prepare him for his way to Heaven, and make
him the more welcome at his coming thither. And this indeed is the main gift we
are to look for, the greatest benefit we can receive by Christ's ascensun. All
other gifts are but in order unto this, to provide heaven for us. In that he is
ascended into heaven in our humane nature, he lets us know that heaven is to be
ascended, and that our nature is made capable of the like ascension; if we have
ascensiones in cord Psalm. 84.5.
first, and ascend up to him in our hearts by says and piety. Nay therefore
did our Savior ascend into heaven, that he might show us the way thither,
bespeak our entertainment for us, and prepare our lodging. I go (says he) to
prepare a place for you, Ioh. 14.3. And so perhaps he might do and we never
the better; he might prepare the place, and we not come at it. He tells them
therefore in plain terms, If I go and prepare a place for you, I will come
again Joh. 14.3.
, and receive you unto my self, that where I am there ye may be also. This is
indeed the greatest fruit and benefit which redounds to us by Christ's Ascendit
in altum, by his ascending up on high. He overcame the sharpness of death by
his resurrection; by his ascension he set open the Kingdom of heaven unto all
believers, that where he is we may be also. Such other of the fruits and
effects hereof, as be in ordine to this, will fall more fitly under the
consideration of the next branch of this Article, his sitting at the right hand
of God the Father, and till then we leave them.

In the mean time it will be fitting for us to take up that Psalm of David,
and sing Non nobis Domine, non nobis, that this great work was not wrought for
our sakes alone Psalm. 115.1.
. There is a Nomini tuo da gloriam to be looked on too; somewhat which Christ
acquired thereby unto himself, that must be considered. He was made lower then
the Angels in his humane nature; not to be crowned with immortality and glory,
till in his humane nature he ascended into heaven. All power had formerly been
given him, both in heaven and earth Mat. 28.18.
. He had a jus ad rem, then when he sojourned here. The exercise of this
authority, or the jus in re, at least the perfect manifestation of it in the
eyes of men, was not till he had took possession of the heavens themselves, the
Palace royal of his kingdom. Jesus he was, a Savior from his very birth;
acknowledged by St. Peter for the Christ of God, and in his mouth by all the
rest of the Apostles. Yet find we not that they looked otherwise on him then
as some great Prophet; or at the most, a Prince in posse, if all things went
well with him. They never took him for their God and Lord, (though many times
they did for their Lord and master) nor did they worship and adore him, until
his ascension. Then the text says indeed they did it, but before that never.
And it came to pass, says St. Luke Luke 24.51, 52.
, that while he blessed them he was parted from them, and carried up into
heaven; and they worshipped him, and returned to Jerusalem with great joy. The
Papists make a great dispute about this question, An Christus sibi aliquid
meruerit, i. e. Whether Christ merited any thing for himself, or for mankind
only. In the true meaning of the word, and not as they mean merited, it is
plain he did. For properly mereri is no more then consequi, to obtain or
procure; and in that sense the word is generally used in ancient writers; of
which we may see more hereafter, in a place more proper. Take this of Tacitus
once for all, where speaking of Agricola he gives this Item, Illis virtutibus
iram C. Caesaris meritus est Tacit. in vita Agricol.
, that by those virtues he procured the displeasure of Caius Caesar. That
Christ did merit for himself in this sense of the word, I take to be a matter
beyond all controversy. For first, he merited or procured, to be adored by his
Apostles with religious worship; (the word is (...), in the Greek Original)
which he never could procure at their hands before. Maldonates note upon this
Text and the reasons of it, are in my mind exceeding apposite; but then his
inference thereupon is like mors in olla, an herb that poysoneth the whole
pottage. His note is this Maldonat. in Luke 24.
, Non legimus nisi hoc loco, Christum a discipulis suis ado^atum, we do not
read, says he, but in this place only, that Christ was worshipped or adored by
his Disciples. His reason of it is this, because whilst he conversed amongst
them, they looked upon him only in his humane nature, as one made of the same
mould that themselves were of. Nunc demum adorant cum in calum eum ferri
vident, etc. But when they saw him taken up into heaven, they could not but
acknowledge that he was a God also, and therefore was to be adored, which they
did accordingly. So far the Jesuit has done well, none could do it better.
His inference is, if I rightly understand his meaning, that the Eucharist is to
be adored, though they of Rome are for so doing quarrelled by the modern
Heretics. Assuredly were Transubstantiation an Article of the Christian faith,
as that of Christ's ascension is well known to be; or could I see Christ in the
the Eucharist with my bodily eyes, as the Apostles saw him when he went up into
heaven; none should be forwarder then my self to adore the Eucharist. But our
great Masters in that Church do affirm unanimously that there is nothing to be
seen but the outward elements, the accidents of bread and wine, as they please
to phrase it. And Suares, one of the greatest of their Clerks, does affirm in
Terminis Suares in Thomam. 3. disp. 50.
, Hoe tantum pendet ex principiis Metaphysicis and Philosophicis, and ad fidei
doctrinam non pertinet, that Transubstantiation does depend only on
Metaphysical and Philosophical principles, and is not de fide, or a matter of
faith. Nay in the Church of Rome it self, neither the Pastors nor the people
were bound to believe it till Innocent the third defined it in the Lateran
Council, about 400 years ago; upon whose definition it does wholly rest, as
many of their Schoolmen Scotus. Biel. Durand. alii.
cannot choose but grant, it being free till that time (says the learned
Tunstal once Ld. B. of Durram) to follow their own conjecture, concerning the
manner of the presence De verit. Corp. et Sangu. p. 46.
. How all this doctrine does agree with the Lords ascension, and how one
overthrowes and destroys the other, we shall more fully see in the close of
this Chapter.

Now therefore leaving these disputes, let us follow Christ in his Ascension,
and see what he did further merit or procure for himself thereby. That he
obtained to be adored by his Disciples, we have seen already; the next point
that he gained was this, to be acknowledged by his followers for their Lord and
King. So witnesses St. Peter in his first Sermon Act. 2.^6.
, saying, Therefore let all the house of Israel know assuredly that God has
made the same Jesus whom ye have crucified, both LORD AND CHRIST. Made him both
Lord and Christ, but when? After his ascension, after he had exalted him, and
placed him at his own right hand, as the foregoing verses balanced and
compared together do most clearly evidence. What then? was he not Lord and
Christ before? No not in fact, but only in the way of designation, as first
begotten Son of God, and his heir apparent. Him he made heir of all things Heb.
1.2.
, from the first beginnings; but being as he was in the form of a servant, he
was to do his Fathers business, and attend his leisure. Who having raised him
from the dead Act. 5.36, 31.
, exalted him (but not before) with his own right hand to be a Prince and
Savior, to give repentance unto Israel, and forgiveness of sins. Shall we
have more? then to the Apostle of the Jews add we him of the Gentiles, and he
will tell us more at large Ephesians. c. 1. v. 20, 21, 22.
, how first God raised him from the dead, then set him at his own right hand in
the heavenly places, far above all principality and power, and might and
dominion, and every name that is named, not only in this world, but also in
that which is to come: lastly, that having so exalted him, he did put all
things under his feet, and gave him to be head over all things to the Church
which is his body. Now as he gained this power and Empire from the hands of
God; so he obtained or merited obedience at the hands of men, the reverence of
the knee in their adoration, the tribute of the tongue in their acclamations.
Christ, says the same Apostle, humbled himself, and became obedient unto
death, even the death of the Cross Phil. 2.8, 9, 10, 11.
. Which being suffered and subdued, God also highly has exalted him, and given
him a name above every name, that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow of
things in heaven, and things in earth, and things under the earth: And that
every tongue should confess that JESUS CHRIST is the Lord, to the glory of God
the Father. But here I must be understood of speaking all this while of the man
CHRIST JESUS; as he appeared in our likeness Ibid. v. 7, 8.
, and was found in the fashion of us men; in which nature as he only suffered,
and humbled himself unto the death, even the death of the Cross, for the
remission of our sins: so in that nature only was he capable of an Exaltation,
of being raised from the dead, and carried up into heaven, and placed there at
the right hand of the Father almighty. Which sitting at the right hand of the
Father Almighty, though it be another of those high preheminences, which Christ
did merit for himself in his humane nature, yet being he was not actually
possessed of it until his ascension; shall be considered by it self in the
following Chapter, which is designed particularly to that branch of the
Article. In the mean time, to show that all the steps of Christ's exaltation,
are spoken and intended of his humane nature (whereof we shall speak more anon
on the like occasion) take this of Ruffine as a taste of what others say, as
well concerning this point of the Lords ascension into heaven, as that of
sitting there at the right hand of God, both which he understands as the
ancients did, of the manhood only, Ruffin. in Symbol.
Neque enim ulli incorporeae naturae convenienter ista absque assumptione
carnis aptantur: nec sedis coelestis perfectio Divinae naturae sed humanae
conquiritur.

It was then in his natural body that Christ ascended into heaven, in it he
has acquired, and for it, all those high preheminences, which have been
formerly expressed: not altering thereby the nature which before it had, but
adding a perfection of that glory which before it had not: and making it,
though a natural body still, yet a body glorified. And this is generally agreed
upon by all the fathers, affirming with a joint consent this most Catholic
truth, that notwithstanding the accessions of immortality and glory to the body
of Christ; yet it reserved still all the properties of a natural body. Christ
(says St. Hierome) ascended into heaven, and sits at the right hand of the
Father Hieron. in Symbol.
, manente ea natura carnis, the very same nature of his body remaining still,
in which he was born, suffered, and did rise again. And then, Non enim
exinanita est humanitatis substantia, sed glorificata. The substance of his
body was not done away, but only glorified. St. Augustine as fully, but in
fewer words, Christum corpori suo majestatem dedisse, naturam tamen corporis
non ademisse; that Christ by giving majesty to his body, did not destroy the
nature of it Aug. Epist. ad Dardanum.
. As plainly, but more fully in another place, Huic corpori immortalitatem
dedit, naturam non abstulit. Christ, says the Father, has apparelled his
flesh with immortality, but he has not taken from it the nature of flesh. And
therefore it concerns us to take good heed, ne ita divinitatem astruamus
hominis, ut veritatem corporis auferamus, not to maintain his divinity, on such
faulty grounds, as utterly ruin his humanity; or so advance the man, as to
spoil his body. Pope Leo to this purpose also Leo Sermon. de Resur. Domi.
, Caro Christi ipsa est per essentiam, non ipsa per gloriam, The flesh or body
of Christ in substance is the same it was, in glory it is not the same. Others
might be produced to the same effect, were not these three sufficient to
confirm a point so little subject to dispute amongst men of reason. And to say
truth, the quarrel is not of the Thesis or the point it self, that the body of
Christ retained still the properties of a natural body which before it had; but
in the Hypothesis or supposition which is built upon it. For if our Saviors
body still retain the properties of a natural body, it must be circumscribed in
a certain place, and have a local being as all bodies have. Otherwise by St.
Augustines rule it will be no body. For toll ipsa corpora qualitatibus
corporum, etc. Aug. Epist. ad Dardanum.
Take away from bodies the properties of bodies, and there will be no place or
ubi for them to be in, et ideo necesse est ut non sint, and then the same
bodies must needs be no bodies. It follows then upon this rule of that
learned Father, that the body of Christ though glorified is a natural body, and
consequently circumscribed in some place of heaven; and yet because a glorified
body though a body natural, is so restrained to heaven and the glories of it,
that no place else is capable of him. St. Augustine shall make good the first
proposition, and St. Cyril the second; and then let Gratian make the Syllogism
by adding a conclusion to the former premises. St. Augustine tells us for the
first, Ne dubites Christum esse in aliquo loco coeli, doubt not, says he, but
that the body of Christ is in some place of heaven Id ibid.
. Not doubt it, Why? Propter very corporis modum, because it is agreeable unto
the nature of a true body, that it should be so. St. Cyril for the second thus,
Non poterat Christus cum Apostolis versari in carne, etc. Cyril in Ioh. l. 11.
c. 3.
Christ could not converse with his Apostles in his body or flesh, after he had
ascended to his heavenly Father. The inference shall be made by Gratian, though
in Augustines words, Corpus in quo resurrexit in uno loco esse oportet Great. de
Consecrat. Did. 1.
, The body in which Christ rose, must needs be in one place like to other
bodies. Nor is this more, although it seem too much to the Pontificians, then
what St. Peter said before in a Sermon of his, Oportet illum coelos capere Act.
3.21.
, viz. that the heavens must contain him till his coming again, till all things
be restored and perfected in the day of the Lord. Which being so, it was
unseasonably done of Pope Nicolas, to labor the introducing of the new article
of Transubstantiation into the Creed, before he had expounded that of Christ's
ascension; being so plainly contrary to that new devise, that they cannot both
stand together in the same belief. And when Pope Pius the fourth did publish a
new Creed of his own Bulla Pii. IV. in Act. Council. Trident.
, and therein did requre this, amongst other Articles, that we believe that in
the Sacrament of the Eucharist there is made a conversion of the whole
substance of the bread into Christ's body, and of the wine into his blood, which
conversion the Catholic Church calls Transubstantiation: he considered
neither how repugnant his new Creed would be to that which the Apostles had
before delivered, nor how destructive to the works of Gods Creation. For first,
if Christ our Savior be ascended in his natural body, and that the heavens
are to contain him till his coming to judgment, as both the Scriptures and the
Creed do expressly say: how can we have his body here upon the earth, as often
as the Priest is pleased to offer, Hoc est corpus meum, without confuting both
the Creed and the text together? Secondly, if the bread be transubstantiated
into our Saviors body, so that it becomes forthwith to be whole Christ, both
body and soul, and his divinity too into the bargain, as they say it does;
mark what most monstrous paradoxes and absurdities will ensue upon it. For
first, we have a new Divinity of a Creatures making; and secondly, our Savior
Christ must have as many natural bodies, as all the Priests in Christendom say
several Masses, which is to make him far more monstrous then the Giant Geryon,
and not to have three bodies only, but three hundred thousand. Or else this
natural body of Christ must be entire and whole both in heaven and earth, and
on the earth in as many several places at the self same time, as there are
daily Masses said in the Church of Rome; which is to take away the Properties
of a body natural. For toll spatia locorum corporibus and nusquam erunt, and
si nusquam erunt, nec erunt ipsa Aug. Epist. ad Dardanum.
, as St. Augustine has it: Take away from a body limitation of place, and it
will be no where; and if no where, then it is no body. And next we shall have
bodies made of flesh and blood, and bones and sinews, and all things requisite
to the being of a natural body, which yet is neither high nor low, nor thick
nor thin, nor broad nor narrow, not visible unto the eye, nor perceptible unto
any other of the senses: which is to faign a body without all dimensions, which
never any body was supposed to be; and make it neither subject unto sight nor
touch, though Christ was subject unto both, and evidenced to be so in St.
Thomas his case. Add next, that this most glorious body made of flesh and
blood, endued with a reasonable soul, and having a Divinity superadded to it,
must be devoured, and eaten, and perhaps worse used: which is to make all
Christians to be Anthropophagi, yea and worse then so; not to be man-eaters
only, but God-eaters too. And last of all, for this conversion of the bread
into the very body of Christ, the same which was once born of the Virgin Mary,
they know not what to call it, nor on what to ground it. A total conversion
they would have it Bell. de Euchar. l. 3. c. 18.
, and yet the taste and color of the bread does remain as formerly; a
substantial conversion it must also be, and yet it is sine sui mutatione
Bonavent. cited by Bell.
, without a change at all, says Bonaventure. Such a conversion it is, that they
know no name for it; for it is neither productiva nor conservativa, as
Bellarmine himself confesses. And therefore he is fain to devise a name and
call it conversio adductiva; (a notion which neither Divinity nor Philosophy
ever knew before) and has been quarrelled since by the Pontificians, as
himself confesses in the book of his Recognitions. And as they knew not how to
call it, so neither can they tell upon what to ground it. Suares affirms as
before, that it depends ex Mathematicis and Philosophicis Principiis Suares in
3. Thomae did. 50.
, on Philosophical and Mathematical principles; and then, as the Archb. of
Spalato said in defense thereof, it may be an error in Philosophy, but not in
Divinity. The most part ground it only on the Churches authority, by which it
was determined in the Council of Lateran; and yet both Scotus Scotus in Scrip.
Oxon. 4.
and Durandus Durand l. 4. d. 12. qu. 1.
, two learned Papists, condemn the Church of unadvisednesse for so defining it,
by reason of those inextricable plunges and perplexities which it puts them to.
Some would fain ^ound it in the Scriptures, and have tugged hard for it: but
after all their pains they are told by Cajetan, that there is nothing in the
Gospel to make good the matter. Their best way were to let our Savior be in
heaven at the right hand of God, and not to bring him down by their new
devices. Of which his sitting at the right hand of God I am next to speak,
having thus cleared my way unto it by this Dissertation.

ARTICVLI 7. Pars 2da. (...) i. e. Sedet ad dextram Dei, Patris Omnipotentis.
i. e. And sits on the right hand of God the Father Almighty.
CHAP. XII. Of sitting at the right hand of God; the proper meaning of the
phrase; and of the Privileges which accrue thereby to our Lord and Savior.
THey which consider our Redeemer in his several Offices do look upon him as a
King, a Priest, and a Prophet; A Priest to offer prayers and sacrifices for the
sins of his people, a Prophet to instruct them in the ways of righteousness, a
King to govern and direct them by the rules of justice. And unto every one of
these, they do design some branch or Article of the Creed, in which it either
is expressed, or else may easily be fitted and reduced unto it. That of his
Priesthood they refer wholly to this last branch of the present Article, the
sitting of our Savior at the right hand of God: where he makes intercession
for us Romans 8.34.
, which is the most proper duty of the Priestly function. That of the Kingly
Office they refer partly unto this, but chiefly to the Article following, where
he is represented as the Judge both of quick and dead. But first before we come
to that, we must enquire into the meaning of the phrase or form of speech,
Sedere ad dextram Dei, this sitting at the right hand of God; then show how
this is verified in Christ our Savior. Which done, we will consider the
effects and benefits which do redound unto us men by that great advancement
which Christ has merited or acquired in our humane nature. And first, this
phrase or form of speech, viz. the sitting on the right hand of God the Father
Almighty, is borrowed from the guise of great Kings and Potentates, amongst
whom it is an usual thing, to place the man whom they intend to honor in the
sight of the people, at their own right hand. So did King Solomon with his
Mother in the Book of the Kings, when she came to him as a suitor in behalf of
Adonijah 1 King. 2.19.
. Whom when the King saw, he rose up to meet her, says the Text, and bowed
himself unto her, sat down on his Throne, and caused a seat to be set for the
Kings Mother, and she sat at his right hand. A greater honor to a subject,
(for a Queen Mother is no more by the law of Nations) the King could not do
her: and he made known by this unto all his people, that he would have his
Mother honored in the next place to himself. So read we in the Book of Psalms,
upon thy right hand did stand the Queen in gold of Ophir Psalm. 45.9.
; Which whether it were meant of David's own, or Solomon's wi^e, shows plainly
that she was to be accounted of as the second person in the Kingdom, next in
degree and honor to the King himself. Of which St. Hierom gives this reason,
Est enim Regina regnatque cum eo Hieronym. ad Princip. Virg. Tom. 3.
, because she was the Queen, and in her conjugal right reigned together with
him. And this appears yet further by the suit or motion, which the mother of
Zebedees children made in behalf of her sons; when she came unto him, saying,
Grant me that these my two sons might sit, the one on thy right hand, and the
other on thy left in thy Kingdom Mat. 20.21.
. The good woman (as it seems) conceived, as generally the Apostles and
Disciples did, that Christ should be invested one day with the Crown of Israel;
and she desired to have her sons advanced to the highest places of trust and
reputation about their Master. She did not doubt, but they should be of good
esteem with him upon all occasions. Our Savior Christ had as it were, assured
them of that before, when he took them and Peter out of all the rest, to be
present at the miracle of his Transfiguration Mat. 17.1.
, and the raising of the Rulers daughter Luke 8.51.
. That which she aimed at, was of an higher nature, ut ipsi primi essent, and
caeteros omnes praeirent in regno ipsius Estius in
; to have them made the chief, above all the rest; the one to hold the first,
and the other the second place about him. That was her meaning, in the placing
of them, the one at his right hand, and the other on his left, when he came to
his Kingdom. Sedere ad dextram alicujus, est proximam ab eo dignitatem; sedere
autem ad sinistram, secundum dignitatis locum obtinere, as Estius states it
very rightly. So that by sitting at the right hand in the holy Scriptures, we
are to understand the next place of power and dignity, to him upon whose right
hand they are said to sit; and intimates the same or the like authority as
Pharaoh gave to Joseph in the Book of Genesis Genesis 41.43.
, when he made him ride in the second Chariot that he had, constituted him the
Ruler of all the land of Egypt. But then this sitting at the right hand, is to
be understood, as before I said, of sitting at the right hand of great Princes
only: for it is otherwise with men of inferior quality, and that according to
the custom of several Countries. For anciently amongst the Romans, when two
only me^ or sat together, the more unworthy person sat or stood on the right
hand of the other, as Antonius Nebrissensis very well observes. The reason, as
I take it was, because that in the rites of Augurie, the flying or appearing of
the birds of divination on the left hand, did signify good luck and prosperous
success in their intendments. Hence that of Tully, A sinistra cornice ratum and
firmum Augurium fieri Cicero de divinat. l. 1.
; and that of the twelve Tables to the same effect, Ave sinistra populi
Magister est^. And it is the custom at this day in some parts of Italy, for the
more worthy person to go on the left hand of the other, because thereby he is
made master of the other man's sword. But if there were more then two in
company, the best man always used to place himself in the midst; that he might
seem to be protected on all sides from the hands of his enemies. And this
Minutius witnesses in his elegant Dialogue, where seating himself in the midst
betwixt Octavius and Cecilius, he said he did it to this end, (as the use then
was) ut me ex tribus medium ambitione lateris protegerent Minut. Felix. in
Octavio.
. So Salust tells us of Hiempsal, that he placed himself on the right hand of
Adherbal, Ne medius ex tribus, quod and apud Numidas honori ducitur, Jugurtha
foret Salust de bello Iugurthino.
; because he would not leave Jugurth in the middle place, which in that Country
was esteemed for the highest honor.

But leaving other Countries, and inferior persons to their own customs and
conditions, certain it is, that it was otherwise with great Princes, and
amongst the Jews: in whose esteem the right hand was the better and more worthy
place: the sitting at the right hand of a Prince or Potentate, accounted for
the greatest favor. How much an higher honor and a greater favor must it
then be thought to sit on the right hand of God the Father Almighty, the King
of Kings, and Lord of Lords, from whom all Princes of the earth had received
their Scepters? Which honor that we may the better estimate, and put no less a
value then it ought to have; we will consider in the next place what is meant
by the Right hand of God; and then proceed unto the honor done to our Lord and
Savior, in his advancement to a place so great and glorious. And first I take
it for a thing granted by all Orthodox Christians, that the word is not to be
taken literally, that God has any hands either right or left. That were to
fall into the Heresy of the Anthropomorphites Prateol. de haeres.
, who because they found it written in the book of Genesis, that God made man
after his own Image, would needs make God to be after the image of man; and
gave him hands, and mouth, and eyes, and all other members. But therein of the
two, the Heathen was the better Christian, who told us, Cicero de nature. deor.
ad divinam imaginem propius accedere humanam virtutem quam figuram; that men
resembled the Divine Image of God more then in their virtues then their making,
more in the endowments of the mind, then in the structure of their bodies. So
that as often as we meet with such expressions in the Book of God, we must
conceive that God does frame his speech unto our capacities, and speaks unto
us after the manner of men; that so we may the easier apprehend his meaning.
Which being premised once for all, the right hand of God will be found to
signify either his power and dignity, or his love and goodness. That the right
hand is the hand of strength, will I think be granted. And that it is the hand
of love, besides the ordinary form of salutation, by taking and giving the
right hand with those whom we affect most cordially; is evident in holy
Scripture. For in the Old Testament the Patriarch Jacob called that son whom he
loved most tenderly, by the name of Benjamin, that is the son of his right hand
Genesis 35.18.
. And the same Jacob, when he intended to bestow the more excellent blessing on
Ephraim, Joseph youngest son, he laid his right hand upon his head, and his
left hand on the head of Manasseh, which was the elder Genesis 48.14, 19.
. And this he did wittingly, says the Text, to signify, that though Manasseh
should become a great people, yet that his younger brother should be greater
then he. Thus also in the New Testament, we meet with dextra societatis Gal.
2.9.
, the right hand of fellowship, which the three chief Apostles gave to Paul and
Barnabas. Which whether it was to testify by that outward sign the mutual
correspondency and good consent which was between them; or to establish the
agreement then at that time made, that Paul and Barnabas should preach the
Gospel to the Heathen, and the others unto those of the Circumcision; is not
much material: though possibly it might be in both respects; for the right hand
was anciently as well the pledge of truth and fidelity, as of love and
friendship: the joining of the right hands in the making of Leagues, ( Iungamus
foedera dextra, as one Poet, and data dextera quondam, as another has it)
being of ordinary use amongst most Nations. To bring this home unto our
purpose, the right hand being of it self and of common usage, the hand of power
and love, the hand of friendship and fidelity; it follows that by the right
hand of Almighty God, we must mean some or all of these, either his mighty
power, or his eminent goodness, or his fidelity in performing of his word and
promises. That the right hand of God is used to denote his power, is evident by
many several passages in the Royal Psalmist; The right hand of the Loud, says
he, has the pre-eminence, the right hand of the Lord brings mighty things to
pass Psalm. 118.1^.
: And in another of the Psalms, With his own right hand and with his holy arm,
has he gotten to himself the victory. Assuredly those victories and great acts
he speaks of, were all of them acheived by the power of God; the right hand of
the power of God, as our Savior calls it, Luke 22.69. And as the right hand
is applied to God as the hand of power, by which he rules all things both in
heaven and earth, so is it sometimes also ascribed unto him, (and not to him
alone, but to Christ nor Savior, as the hand of love, by which he cherishes
and protecteth his faithful servants. For what else is the reason why the sheep
in the day of Judgment shall be placed at the right hand Mat. 25.33.
of the King of Heaven, but to show that they are his beloved ones, his
Benjamins, the children of his right hand (as that name does signify)? And for
what reason is it said, that he does embrace the Church his Spouse with his
right hand Cant. 2.6.
, but to show that ardour and sincerity of affection wherewith he does cherish
and protect her? Cant. 2.6. and 8.3. Be it the power of God, or his fidelity
and love, it is the right hand st^ll.

There is another word to be looked on yet, before we shall find out the full
meaning of this branch of the Article* which is the word S^det, which we render
sitting. In which we must not understand, as I think some Protestant Writers
do, any constant posture of the Body of Christ, at the right hand of God. For
he who in the Creed, and in diverse places of the Old and New Testament, is said
to sit at the right hand of God the Father Almighty, is by St. Stephen, who saw
him with a glorified eye, affirmed to stand. Behold (says he) I see heaven
opened, and the Son of man standing Act. 7.56.
at the right hand. Sitting and standing then, for both words are used, denote
not to us any certain posture of our Saviors body; but serve to signify that
rest and quiet, which he has found in Heaven after all his labors. For what
was our most blessed Savior in the whole course and passages of his life and
death but a man of troubles; transported from one Country to another in his
very infancy, and from one City to another when he preached the Gospel:
compelled to convey himself away from the sight of men to save his life;
exposed to scoffs and scorns at the hour of his death? Noah's Dove and he were
both alike. No rest for either to be found on the face of the earth; no ease
till they were taken into the Ark again, out of which they were sent. And this
St. Paul does intimate, where he tells us of him, that for the joy which was set
before him he endured the Cross, and despised the shame, and is set down at the
right hand of the Throne of God Heb. 12.2.
; And unto this construction of the word Sedere, St. Ambrose very well agrees,
saying, Secundum consuetudinem nostram illi consessus offertur, qui aliquo
opere perfecto victor adveniens, honoris gratia promeretur ut sedeat Ambr.
Sermon. 60.
. It is, says he, our usual custom, to offer a chair or seat to him, who
having perfected the work which he had in hand, does deserve to sit. And on
this ground the man CHRIST JESUS having by his death and passion overcome the
Devil, and by his Resurrection broken open the gates of Hell, having
accomplished his work, and returning unto Heaven a Conqueror, was placed by
God the Father at his own right hand. Thus far and to this purpose he. The like
may be affirmed of standing, or of standing still, which doubtless is a great
refreshment to a wearied Traveller, a breathing bait, as commonly we use to
call it; and many times is used in Scripture for a posture of ease, as Quid
statis toto die otiosi Mat. 20.6.
? Why stand you here all the day idle? But to proceed a little further in this
disquisition, there may be more found in the words then so. For standing is the
posture of a General or man of action, ready to fall on upon the Enemy, Oportet
Imperatorem stantem mori Dion. in Vespasiano.
, said the Roman Emperor. And it is also the posture which the Jews used in
prayer, as appears Matthew. 6.5. Luke 18.10.13. From whence they took that usual
saying, Sine stationibus non subsisteret mundus, that were it not for such
standings, the world would not stand. And sitting is, we know, the posture of a
Judge or Magistrate in the act of Judicature; of Princes, keeping state in the
Throne Imperial. And this appears as plainly by our Saviors words to his
Apostles, saying that they which followed him in the Regeneration, should when
the Son of man did sit in the Throne of his glory, sit upon twelve Thrones
judging the twelve Tribes of Israel Mat. 19.28.
. And so the word is also used in Heathen Authors; as, Consedere duces,
cons^ssique ora tenebant, in the Poet Ovid Ovid. Meta. l. 13.
, when the great cause was to be tried for Achilles armor. When therefore St.
Stephen beheld our Savior Christ, and saw him standing at the right hand of
God the Father; he found him either ready as a Chief or General, to lead on
against the enemies of his persecuted and afflicted Church; or as an Advocate,
( Habemus enim Advocatum; for we have an Advocate with the Father, 1 John 2.1.
JESUS CHRIST the righteous) pleading before Gods Throne in behalf thereof, or
offering up his prayers for the sins of his people. And when St. Paul and other
texts of holy Scripture do describe him sitting, they look upon him in the
nature of a Judge or Magistrate; the Supreme Governor of the Church: and then
sedere is as much as regnare, Hieronyn. in Ephesians. 1.
as St. Hierome has it, to reign or rule. And to this last St. Paul does seem
to give some countenance, if we compare his words with those of the Royal
P^almist. Sit thou at my right hand, says the Psalmist, till I have made thy
enemies thy footstool, Psalm. 110.1. Oportet eum regnare says the Apostle, For
he must reign (or it behooves him to reign), till he has put all enemies under
his feet, 1 Cor. 15.25. Of this mind also was Sedulius an old Christian Poet
Sedul. Carm. l. 5.
.

Aethereas evectus abit sublimis in auras,
Et dextram subit ipse Patris, mundumque gubernat.
Ascending into Heaven, at Gods right hand
He sits, and all the World does there command.
This said, we will descend to those Expositions, which have been made by
several men on this branch of the Article; and after pitch on that which we
think most likely: Some think this sitting at the right hand of God to signify
the fame with that which was said before of his ascending into Heaven; which
opinion Vrsin does both recite, and reject. And he rejects it as I conceive
upon very good reason; it being very absurd, as lie truly notes, in tam brevi
Symbolo (...) committi Vrsin in Caetech. praet. 2.
, that a tautologie should be used in so short a summary. It had been very
absurd indeed, and yet more absurd, if they should intimate the same thing in a
figurative and metaphorical form of speech, which they had formerly expressed
in so plain a way as was familiar to the apprehension of the weakest
Christians. Others and those the greater part both of the Protestant Churches,
and the Church of Rome, do so expound Christ's sitting at the right hand of God,
as if thereby he were made equal to the Father in Majesty, and power, and
glory. And this way many of the Ancients have gone before them. But Maldonat.
in Marc. 16.
Maldonat not content with this, goes a strain yet higher, a stra^t above Elah
at the least, and thinks that CHRIST by sitting at the right hand of God, is
somewhat more then equal to him, Et majorem prae se dignitatem ferat, and
carries a resemblance of the greater dignity, as being placed in the more
honorable and more worthy seat: For this he gives us a rule and an instance
too, both alike, false and faulty, if examined thoroughly. His rule is this, Cum
sedent duo, qui honoratior est sedet ad dextram; that when two persons sit
together, the most worthy of them sits on the right hand of the other. But this
is only true amongst private persons, and that but in some Countries, and at
some times neither. Between a King and Subjects of what rank soever, the case
is otherwise; and most ridiculous and absurd would the consequents be, if it
were not so: Next let us look upon the instance which he gives us of it out of
his abundance, to see if it does either mend or mar the matter; and we shall
find both that and his inference on it, to be more ridiculous then his rule.
His instance is that of Bathsheba before remembered, whom Solomon, says he, did
place on the right hand of his Throne, ut eam superiorem agnosceret, thereby
acknowledging his Mother to be his superior. Assuredly the Jesuit must be very
blind when he made that inference, and did not see how ill it did cohere with
the truth of story; or else he must be thought to have a further aim in it then
he would be know of. All that can logically be deduced from that act of
Solomon's, is that he bare a filial duty to his Mother, though he were her
Sovereign; and did desire to have her honored by his people in the next place
to himself. For had she been Superior to him, or so thought herself, she would
not have petitioned him 1 King. 2.21.
, as we see she did, to bestow Abishag the Shunamite upon Adonijah; but would
have done it freely of her own authority. Or had the King conceived her to be
Lady Paramount, and to have the Sovereignty or Superiority, as the Jesuit
says; he would not have returned her back with a flat denial, especially
considering that she had descended so much beneath herself as to move him in
it, and that too in an humble and petitioning way. Qui Rex est, Regem maxim
non habeat, said the Poet Martial, if Bathsheba was Supreme unto Solomon, and
confessed to be so; then was he no King. Or if we grant it to be so in the case
of Bathsheba, we must allow it to be so too in the Kings wife, Psalm. 45. placed
at the Kings right hand by David Psalm. 45.9.
, in a very ill time. For whether we understand it literal^y of the Kings wife,
the Queen, whose wife soever she was, whether his or Solomon's; or mystically of
the Church, the Spouse of Christ: it must needs follow by his rule and his
reason both, that the Queen wore the breeches, and did rule the King, and the
CHVRCH Lord it over CHRIST; neither of which I think the learned Jesuit had
the face to say. And therefore I am easily induced to think that Maldonate
being a man of great reach and reading, had a further aim in it; and laid his
line a far off for some other fish. For Solomon being, as he was, a Type of
Christ, and though a King, yet publicly acknowledging his Mother for Superior
to him: why may not then the Virgin Mary take the like authority, why must not
Christ submit to her as to his Supreme? If so, then Iure Matris impera
Redemptori Cited by B. Jewel in the defense of his Apology.
, will be no longer Popish superstition, but good Christian piety; and
Bonaventures Psalter a new piece of Scripture: then the dividing of the
Kingdom of God betwixt Christ and his Mother, leaving to him the Kings Bench
Gab. Biel. de Canone Missae.
, and to her the Chancery, justice to him, but mercy to his Lady Mother; will
be sound Divinity; and the Idolatrous title of Regina Coeli In Ritual. and
Officiis B. Virg.
, or the Queen of Heaven, which they so often give her in their public
formulas, will be no longer Courtship, (or a spiritual kind of daliance, as
Harding Defense of the Apology. cap. 18.. 1.
calls it,) but her own just right. Nay God must be beholding to her if she stop
at that, and put not in for the Supremacy over him and all, as by the Jesuits
grounds she may, for ought I can see. For since that Christ by sitting at the
right hand of God the Father, has not only an equality with him both in power
and Majesty, but majus quiddam says the Jesuit, something more excellent then
so: and seeing that the Virgin Mary's case is like that of Bathsheba, (and it is
a ruled case, that of Bathsheba, if we mark it well): it must needs follow
thereupon, for ought I can judge, that God the Father must content himself with
the third place only, and be glad of that too. Adeo argumenta ex absurdo petita
ineptos habent exitus, said Lactantius truly.

Let us consider in the next place, whether this sitting of our Savior at the
right hand of God, does give him an equality with God the Father, which is the
more received opinion, and more likely far: or if not that, then what our
Savior gains by his sitting there, and what we take to be the meaning of that
form of speech. And first, I see no reason strong enough to persuade me to it,
that sitting at the right hand is a sign of equality, the case being rightly
laid, as it ought to be, betwixt a King and his Subjects, betwixt God and man.
For I conceive this Article to relate only to the man CHRIST JESUS; and that
the note of Estius is exceeding good, that is to say, that all the Articles of
the Creed concerning Christ, from his being conceived by the holy Ghost, to
that of his coming unto judgment inclusively, de Christo dici secundum humanam
naturam Estius in Mar. 16.
, are spoken of him only in his humane nature. For in that only he was born of
the Virgin Mary, in that alone did he suffer under Pontius Pilate, in that was
crucified, dead and buried, descended into hell, rose again from the dead; and
finally in that, and in none but that, did he ascend into the Heavens, and
there does sit at the right hand of God the Father Almighty. And if his humane
nature in it self considered, will not give him an equality with God the
Father, as he himself affirms it did not, acknowledging that his Father was
greater then he Joh. 14.28.
, and that he knew not all things which the Father did Mar. 13.32.
: then certainly this his sitting at the right hand of God will not do it for
him. For building on the grounds which before we laid, though sitting at the
right hand of a Prince or Potentate, were a great honor to the man that sat
there, and gave him the next place to the Prince himself: yet that it gave him
an equality of power and Majesty, neither the nature of Sovereignty which can
brook no equals, nor any of the instances before remembered, can evince or
evidence. Not that of David and his Queen if of her, he means it, for David was
too well acquainted with his own authority, as to divide it with his wife, and
become joint Tenant with her to the Crown of Israel. Nor that of Solomon and
his Mother, which the Jesuit stands on, for then the King had done her wrong
to reject her suit; and more then so, to put his brother to the sword, for whom
and in whose cause she came a suitor. Though Solomon was then very young, and
as much indebted to Bathsheba for the Crown of Israel, as a son could be unto a
Mother: yet he knew how to keep his distance, and preserve his power. Young
Princes have their jealousies in point of State, as well as those of riper
years, and can as ill endure or admit a Rival. Omnisque potestas impatiens
Lucan. Phars. l. 1.
consoriis erit, as the Poet has it. Their hearts are equally made up of
Caesar and Pompey, as unable to endure an equal, as admit a Superior. Though
Nero was advanced to the Empire of Rome by the power and practices of Agrippina
his Mother; and came as young unto the Crown as King Solomon did: yet would he
not permit her to be partner with him, no not so much as in the outward signs
and pomps of Majesty. And therefore when he saw her come into the Senate, with
an intent to sit down with him, as he thought, in the Throne Imperial; he
cunningly rose up to meet her: Atque ita specie pietatis obviam itum est
dedecori Tacit. Annal. lib. 13.
, says the wise Historian, and under pretense of doing his duty to her, did
prevent the infamy. So then, the sitting of our Savior at the right hand of
God, importing neither an equality with him, nor any superiority at all above
him; the phrase being measured, as it ought, according to the standard of the
Jewish Idiom, and the received customs of that Nation: we must enquire a
little further to find out the meaning.

Most like it is, that by these words, And sits at the right hand of God the
Father Almighty, is meant the exaltation of the man CHRIST JESUS, our blessed
Lord and Savior in his humane nature, to the next degree of power and glory
unto God himself; whereby he was made Lord and Christ Act. 2.36.
, the Prince and Savior Ephesians. 1.22.
of his people, as St. Peter calls him, the head over all things unto his
Church, as St. Paul entitles him: that to enable him the better to discharge
those Offices wherewith by God he is entrusted, he has received withal a
participation of Gods Almighty power and most infinite goodness, for the
defense and preservation of the Church committed to him, with all those other
powers and faculties, which are in Scripture called the right hand of God; and
finally, that sitting there in rest and quiet after all his labors, he is
continually intent on his Churches safety, which he stands ready to defend
against all its enemies, to govern and direct it in the ways of godliness, and
to reward or punish as he sees occasion. Which exaltation of our Savior in his
humane nature, I can no better liken then to that of Joseph, when Pharaoh made
him Ruler over all the land of Egypt Genesis 41.40, 41.
, and placed him also over his house, that according to his word they might all
be ruled; and made him to ride in the second Charet that he had, with an
Officer to cry before him, Bow the knee Ibid. v. 43.
. All he reserved unto himself was the Regal Throne in which he could not brook
an equal; Only in the Throne, said he, will I be greater then thou Verse. 40.
. So stands the case, as I conceive it, between God the Father and his Christ.
Christ by his exaltation to the right hand of God, has gained the nearest
place both of power and glory unto God himself; a participation of Gods divine
power and goodness, an absolute command over all the Church consisting both of
men and Angels. Only the Divine Throne, the Supreme transcendency, the Lord God
Almighty reserves unto himself, not to part with that. And if we look into the
Scriptures with a careful eye, we shall find Christ standing near the Throne
of Almighty God; but not sitting on it. St. Paul informs us to that purpose,
where he says of Christ, that he sat down at the right hand of the Throne of
God Heb. 12.2.
. And St. John tells us in the Book of the Revelation, that he saw in the
right hand of him that sat upon the Throne (which was God the Father) a Book
written within, and on the backside Apoc. 5.1, 6, 7.
; And the Lamb which had been slain came and took the Book out of the right
hand of him that sat on the Throne: A matter which the strongest Angel
mentioned in the second verse, did not dare to meddle with; knowing his
distance from the Throne, and how ill it became him to attempt too near it. For
though the Angels of themselves are of a more excellent and glorious nature,
and far surpassing all the children of the loins of Adam: yet in this point
they fall short of those infinite glories, which CHRIST acquired in his person
to our humane Nature. First, in his birth, God did in no wise take the Angels
Heb. 2.16.
, says the great Apostle, but the seed of Abraham he took: the meaning is,
that when God was to send a Savior to redeem the world, and that both men and
Angels stood, at once, before him; both coveting to be advanced to so high a
dignity: he did confer that honor on the seed of Abraham, on one descended
from his loins, and not on any of the Angels of what rank soever. Who being
born into the world was honored presently with the name of the Son of God, the
first begotten Son of the Lord most high: and therein was much better and more
excellent then the Angels were, in that he did inherit a more excellent name
Ibid. 1.45.
. That Is the first point in which our Savior had the better of those glorious
creatures. For unto which of the Angels, (that is to say, none at all) said he
at any time, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee? Though he was made
lower then the Angels, of inferior metal, and for a while of less esteem in
the eyes of men: yet did they worship him at his birth, by Gods own command,
and cheerfully proclaimed the news to the sons of men. Now as God honored him
with a name above all the Angels, so he advanced him to a place at his own
right hand, which never any of the Angels was thought worthy of. For unto which
of the Angels said he at any time Ibid. v. 13.
, Sit thou on my right hand until I make thine enemies thy footstool. But this
man being the brightness of the glory, and the very Image of the substance of
God, upholding all things with the Word of his power, and having by himself
purged away our sins, has sat down on the right hand of the Majesty on high
Ibid. v. 3.
, says the same Apostle. And this is that which the same Apostle means in
another place, saying, that God has set him at his own right hand in the
heavenly places, far above all principalities and powers, and might and
dominion, and every name that is named Ephesians. 1.21.
. Where plainly he relates to the holy Angels, whom he distinguishes there, as
elsewhere Col. 1.16.
, by their several Orders: but makes all subject and subordinate to the Son of
man. Nor has he only the advantage of those blessed spirits in place and
title, and no more; but also the greatness of that power and authority, which
sitting at the right hand does present unto us. He does not only sit there, and
no more but so, but sits there, till his enemies be made his footstool, as
before was said: all things what ever being put in subjection under his feet
Heb. 2.8.
. Which as it is one of the effects or consequents of sitting at the right hand
of God the Father Almighty; so is it such an height of honor, such a point of
Sovereignty, as never any of the Angels could attain unto. For unto the Angels,
says St. Paul, has he not put in subjection the world to come Ibid. v. 5.7.
, nor made them to have dominion over the works of his hands. And all this is
(...), and (...), no, not in any wise, not at any hand. These privileges and
preheminences are for none but Christ, reserved for him from the beginning
before the foundations of the world were laid.

These then are the Preheminences and Prerogatives Royal, which Christ our
Savior does enjoy above Angels and Men, at the right hand of God the Father;
where he sits crowned with honor and eternal glory. And why this sitting at the
right hand of God, may not be taken in the literal and Grammatical sense,
according to the plain meaning of the words without tropes and figures; and all
these several Preheminences and Prerogatives Royal, for the effects or
consequents of his exaltation: I must confess I know no reason to convince me.
Some things there are which very much incline me to be so persuaded, which I
shall briefly offer unto consideration, and offer them no otherwise then
considerations; and so leave them there. First, I consider with my self, and
desire all learned men and Orthodox believers to consider with me; why all the
other Articles of the Christian faith, even that of the descent into Hell, as
before was proved See chap 8. of this second part.
, should be delivered in plain words, and generally received in all times and
Ages according to the literal sense; this only, being of such moment for our
Consolation, should be wrapped up in Tropes and figures, and have another meaning
then the words import: or why the Apostles, when they made this Creed to be the
summary or abstract of the Christian faith, and therefore to be fitted to the
capacity of the weakest Christians, who must be fed with milk 1 Pet. 2.1.
, as St. Peter tells us, (and he was one of those that composed this Symbol)
should use a phrase of such a dark and doubtful interpretation, as does
distract the greatest Clerks to find out the meaning. Assuredly they had but
ill provided for the vulgar Christian, who must be fed with milk, and not with
stronger meats Heb. 5.13, 14.
, as St. Paul advises, should they have set before them meats of hard
digestion, and feasted them with figurative, and Metaphorical speeches, which
none of them did understand, or could hope to do it. In which respect, I am not
of the Doctors mind, though I much reverence the man for his parts and
learning, who tells us Dr. Iackson, on the Creed, part. 9. cap. 39.
, that we are bound to believe distinctly and explicitly, all other Articles
of the Creed concerning Christ according the plain literal and Grammatical
sense of the words, wherein the Evangelists and Apostles have expressed them,
without the vail of any Rhetorical Trope or Allegory: but for the place
whither he Ascended, and for the manner of his sitting at the right hand of
God, these cannot so distinctly he conceived by us, because they are not in
such proper terms expressed by the holy Ghost, but are wrapped up in a vail of
Legal shadows and Representations. I say, I cannot be in this of that Doctors
judgment, because me thinks the reason which he gives to confirm his opinion,
does incline me very strongly to the contrary: For if our belief or knowledge of
the other Articles, be literally required (as he says it is) seeing the matter
contained in them is sensible and comprehensible to reason sanctified by Grace:
I cannot see, but that his sitting at the right hand of God, in the literal
sense, may be as sensible and comprehensible to a sanctified reason, as his
Conception by the power of the holy Ghost, or being born into the World of the
Virgin Mary. To make this probable and comprehensible, I shall consider in the
next place, that though Almighty God in his own Divine Nature be infinite,
immensurable, and incomprehensible, not circumscribed in any place, or confined
unto it; but equally in all places by his Omnipresence, according to that of
the Prophet Jeremy Jer. 23.24.
. Do not I fill Heaven and Earth, says the Lord Almighty? Yet we are to behold
him in another notion, when we speak of our Redeemers sitting at the right hand
of God, though we abstract him not from that Omnipresence, nor that from him.
For look on God in his infinite nature, equally present in all places, and
contained in none; and then place CHRIST. our Savior upon Gods right hand: it
must needs follow thereupon, that Christ's natural body, in which he sits at the
right hand of God the Father Almighty, must have a local being in all places
also, which is a thing not possible to a Body natural. And what can follow
after that, but that we either fall into the error of the Vbiquitarians who
under color of the personal union, and communication of the properties of
either nature in CHRIST, have utterly destroyed the being of his natural body,
by making it present in all places by an Omnipresence: or salve it by a miracle
as the Papists do, in giving him a multipresence, (a thing as utterly
inconsistent with a body natural) making him to be present in as many places at
once, as all the Popish Priests in the world can say several Masses. And
therefore I consider in the third place, that though God the Lord be present in all places at once; If I climb up into heaven thou art there, if I go down into
Hell thou art there also, as the Psalmist has it Psalm. 1.3^.9.
: yet take him in perfecta gloriae suae exhibitione, in the full and perfect
manifestation of of his glorious Majesty, and then he may be said most truly,
to have his habitation in the Heaven of Heavens. For thus the Prophet Moses in
the Book of Deuteronomie, Look down from Heaven thy holy habitation; 26.15.
Thus David in the Psalms, The Lords seat is on high, from the place of his
dwelling he beholds all things, Psalm. 112. Thus Solomon the Son of David,
Hear thou from Heaven thy dwelling place, 1 King. chap. 8. Finally thus the
Prophet Isaiah, Look down from Heaven, the habitation of thine happiness and of
thy glory, Chap. 63. He is no Christian, I dare say, who will stick at this*
And this b^ing granted, I consider, that in a place of such immensitie as the
Heaven of Heavens, in a large house wherein there are so many Mansions, as our
Savior tells us, the Lord has chosen one place above all the rest in which
to fix his Throne, and advance his Scepter; and show himself in all the Majesty
of his Glory to the Saints and Angels. For as the Lord was present in all parts
of the Temple, but most effectually in the Sanctum Sanctorum, where the Ark was
kept, and into which none entered but the High Priest only was thought fit to
enter: so though his dwelling be in Heaven, in all parts thereof, all which may
properly be called his Court or Imperial Palace: yet has he placed his Throne
in that part of Heaven, which the Apostle by allusion calls the Holy of
Holies Heb. 9.12.
, where the Ark of his incomprehensible Majesty is most conspicuous to be seen;
and into which none but our High Priest JESUS CHRIST was permitted to enter. Of
all the Apostles only two were so highly favored as to be carried in the
Spirit into Heaven above, where they not only heard (...), such things as are
impossible for a man to utter 2 Cor. 12.4.
, though he could speak with all the tongues both of men and Angels; but saw
(...) even the invisible things of God Rom 1 20.
, which never mortal man had beheld before: and both of them describe God
sitting on a Throne. St. John most copiously thus, Apoc. 4.2.
Immediately (says he) I was in the Spirit, and behold a Throne was set in
Heaven, and one sat on the Throne, Ver. 2. About the Throne were four and
twenty seats for the four and twenty Elders, verse. 4. and out of it proceeded
Lightnings, and Thunderings, and Voices, verse. 5. And when the time came and
the Q. was given, the four and twenty Elders fell down before him that sat on
the Throne, and worshipped, and cast their Crowns before the Throne, saying,
Thou art worthy O Lord our God to receive glory, and honor, and power, because
thou have created all things, and for thy pleasure sake they are and were
created, verse. 10, 11. more to this purpose does occur in the following
Chapter. And last of all I do consider, that though the Throne Imperial of
Almighty God, has neither a right side or a left, as indeed it has not: yet
seeing that our Savior is ascended in his natural body, and has his left hand
and his right hand, like to other bodies: it will be logically inferred, that
our Redeemer sitting by the Throne of God with his left hand next unto the
Throne, in true propriety of speech without Trope or figure, may be said to sit
at the right hand of God, or on the right hand of the Throne of God, which
comes all to one. St. Paul who had been rapt up into the third Heaven 2 Cor.
12.2.
, and had a glimpse at least, if not a full and perfect sight of the heavenly
glories, has it so expressly: where he affirms that our Redeemer, the Author
and finisher of our faith, having endured the Cross and despised the shame, is
set down on the right hand of the Throne of God Heb. 12.2. and 8.1.
. And St. John intimates as much when he tells us, as it were, from the mouth of
Christ, in these very words, To him that overcomes, I will grant to sit with
me in my Throne, Apoc. 3.21.
even as I overcame and have sitten with my Father in his Throne. Where plainly
Christ our Savior sitting in the same Throne wi^h Almighty God, as St. John
expressly says he does; may properly be said to sit at the right hand of God,
in regard that the left hand of his natural body was in site nearest to the
splendor of his heavenly Majesty; for otherwise God must be said to sit on the
right hand of Christ. The like may be affirmed of St. Stephen also, where it is
said, that being full of the holy Ghost, that is to say, transported from
himself by the holy Spirit, he looked steadfastly into Heaven, and saw the glory
of God, and Jesus standing at the right hand of God Act 7.55.
. In which we have the glory of God conspicuo^sly manifested in his Royal
Throne, and Jesus standing at the right hand of the Throne, or at the right
hand of God, take which phrase you will: and standing either as an Advocate to
plead for his afflicted servants, or as a suitor in behalf of the Proto-martyr;
or as General in chief, ready to march against the enemies of his best beloved.
So far we may consider of the literal sense of this branch of the Article,
without any derogation from the Majesty of God the Father; and much unto the
honor of our Lord and Savior; and without any prejudice unto faith and piety.
And in such Cases, as I take it, the best way is to stand to this good old
Rule, that where the literal sense of holy Scripture does hold an analogy, and
correspondence with the Rule of Faith, it is to be preferred before any other.

But whether this be so, or not (for I propose it only as a consideration) I
have delivered freely my opinion in it; and have delivered it no otherwise then
as my opinion, to which I never was so wedded, but that a clearer judgment
might at any time divorce me from it. My opinions as they are but opinions, so
they are but mine. As mine, I have no reason to impose them upon other men, or
seek to captivate their understanding, and make it subject to my sense. And as
opinions, I am not bound to adhere to them my self, but lawfully may change and
vary, according to that light and evidence of holy truth, which either shall or
may be given unto me. In matters doctrinal, concluded and delivered by the
Church my Mother, I willingly submit my self unto her Decisions. Where I am
left at large to my own election, I shall as willingly take leave to dissent
from others, as others I am sure will take (and on Gods name let them) to
dissent from me. This was the amicable temper of the Fathers in the Primitive
times, which more preserved the Church both in peace and unity, then all the
Canons of Councils, and Edicts of Princes to that purpose, were of power to do.
Non tam stultus sum ut diversitate explanationum tuarum me laedi putem, quia
nec tu laederis si nos contraria senserimus August. Epist. 13.
. This was St. Hieromes resolution to St. Augustine in a point between them;
equally full of piety and Christian courage. And of this temper was also Pope
Sixtus the fifth, as stout and resolute a Prelate as ever wore the Triple
Diadem, and one who lived in the worst Ages of the Church of Rome, when most
engaged in self-interresses and maintaining factions. Of whom it is
notwithstanding said by Cicarella, non multum pugnare, ut sua vinceret
sententia, sed potius ab aliis (si ita res ferret) facile passus est se vinci.
And to this blessed temper, if we could attain, diversity of opinions, and
interpretations, so they hold the analogy of the faith; may add as much to the
external beauty of the Church of Christ, as it did ornament and luster to the
Spouse of Christ, that her clothing though of pure gold, was wrought about
with diverse colors Psalm. 45.10, 14.
, or wrought with curious needlework, as it after follows. But it is time
that I look back upon our Savior sitting at the right hand of God, in
whatsoever sense we conceive the words; and sitting there to execute the
Sacerdotal or Priestly function: and so much of the Regal also, as is to be
discharged and exercised by him, before his coming unto judgment. Of which two
functions, by Gods grace, I am next to speak. The Attribute or Adjunct of the
Father Almighty, which we find added to this branch of the Article, has been
already handled in its proper place; and therefore nothing need to be said here
of it.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Priesthood of our Lord and Savior which he executes
sitting at the right hand of God; wherein it was fore-signifyed by that of
Melchisedech; in what particulars it consists; and of Melchisedech himself.
WE told you in the beginning of our former Chapter, that they which do
consider Christ in his several offices, and did reduce each several office to
some branch or other of the Creed; did generally refer his office of high
Priest, unto this branch of sitting at the right hand of God the Father
Almighty. For being advanced to such a place of nearness to the throne of God,
he has, no doubt, the better opportunities (as a man may say) of interceding
with God in behalf of his people, and offering up the peoples prayers to the
throne of grace; which are the two main parts of the Priestly function. And yet
this sitting at the right hand of God is not precisely proper and peculiar to
him as he is our Priest: but that he claims the place also as he is our King,
and there does execute so much of the Regal office, as does consist in
governing his holy Church, until the coming unto judgment. Certain I am that
David finds him sitting on the right hand of God, in both capacities, as well
King as Priest; and so does represent him to us. The Lord, says he, said unto
my Lord, sit thou at my right hand Psalm. 110.1.
till I make thy enemies thy footstool. That David by those words, My Lord,
means, Christ our Savior, is a thing past question: We have the truth it
self to bear witness to it; the Lord himself applying it unto himself in his
holy Gospels. And that he means it of Christ both King and Priest, is no
less evident from the rest of the Prophets words, which do immediately follow
on it. For in the very next words he proceeds thus, The Lord shall send the
rod of thy strength out of Zion; Rule thou in the midst of thine enemies V.
2, 3.
; Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power. In which assuredly he
looks upon him in his regal function. And no less plainly it does follow for
the Priesthood also. The Lord has sworn, says he, and shall not repent, thou
art a Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedech V. 4.
. Touching the Regal office, though here also executed, we shall more fully and
more fitly speak in the following Article, that of his coming to judge the
quick and dead: the power of judicature being the richest flower of the regal
diadem. The Priesthod we shall treat of now; It Is the place most proper:
Christ's Priesthood and his sitting at the right hand of God, being often joined
together in the holy Scripture. Nay therefore does he sit at the right hand of
God, that so he might with more advantage execute the Priestly office. Every
Priest (says the Apostle) stands daily ministering, and offering oftentimes
the same sacrifices, which can never take away sins Heb. 10.11, 12.
: But this man (that is Christ our Savior, the high Priest of the new
Testament) after he had offered one sacrifice for our sins, is set down for
ever at the right hand of God; From hence forth tarrying till his enemies be
made his footstool. And in another place to the same purpose thus Heb. 8.1.
, We have such an high Priest that sits on the right hand of the throne of
the Majesty in the heavens; A Minister of holy things, and of the true
Tabernacle, etc. Being therefore in this place to speak of the Priesthood of
CHRIST, we will consider it in all those particulars, which may make the
calling warrantable to himself, and comfortable unto us. To make it warrantable
in respect of himself, we must behold him in his calling, in his consecration,
and finally in the order it self, which was that of Melchisedech, to which he
was so called and consecrated. To make it comfortable in regard of us, we will
behold him in the exercise of those three great duties, wherein the Priesthood
did consist, viz. the offering of sacrifice for the sins of the people, the
offering of prayers in behalf of the people, and lastly in the act of
benediction or of blessing the people. To these heads all may be reduced which
concerns this argument; and of all these, according to the method now
delivered which I think most natural, a little shall be said to instruct the
reader.

First, for his calling to the Priesthood, it was very necessary, as well to
satisfy himself, as prevent objections. For Christ our Savior being of the
line of Judah, he could not ordinarily and of common right intermedle with the
Priestly function; which was entailed by God, to the house of Aaron; and
therefore he required a special and extraordinary warrant (such as God gave
Aaron, and the sons of Aaron) to authorize him thereunto. No person (whatsoever
he was) was to take this honor to himself, but he that was called of God, as
Aaron was Heb. 5.4.
, as St. Paul averreth. Now such a calling to the Priesthood as that of Aaron,
our blessed Savior had, and a better too; for he was called [to be] an high
Priest after the order of Melchisedech V. 10.
. Where this word called imports more then a name or title, as if he were
called Priest, but indeed was none; but a solemn calling or designement unto
that high office, a calling far more solemn and of better note then that which
Aaron had to the Legal Priesthood. For of the calling of Aaron it is only said,
(...), that he was called by God, is a common word, and therefore like enough
'twas done in the common way. But the calling of Christ, it is (...), which is
a more solemn and significant word; and intimates that he was solemnly
declared and pronounced by God to be a Priest after the order of Melchisedech.
Now as the calling was, so was the consecration; in all points parallel to
Aarons, and in some beyond. Aaron was consecrated to the Priesthood by the hand
of Moses, but Christ our Savior by the hand of Almighty God; who long before,
as long before as the time of David Psalm. 110.4.
, had bound himself by oath to invest him in it. Aarons head was anointed only
with material oil; Christ's with the oil of gladness above all his fellows
Psalm. 45.7.
. The consecration of Aaron was performed before all the people, gathered
together for that purpose at the door of the Tabernacle Levit. 8.3.
; That of our Savior was accomplished in the great feast of the Passover, the
most solemn, public, and universal meeting that ever any nation of the world
did accustomably hold, besides the confluence and concourse of all sorts of
strangers. In the next place the consecration of Aaron was solemnized with the
sacrifices of Rams and Bullocks Exodus 29.1, 15.
: of which that of the Bullock was a sin-offering, as well for Aarons own sins,
as the sins of the people; and of the Rams, the one of them was for a
fire-offering or a sacrifice of rest, the other was the Ram of consecration, or
of filling the hand. And herein the pre-eminence runs mainly on our Saviors
side, who was so far from needing any sin-offering to fit him and prepare him
for that holy office, that he himself became an offering for the sins of
others, even for the sins of all the world. And as he was to be advanced to a
more excellent Priesthood then that of Aaron, so was he sanctified or prepared
(if I may so say) after a far more excellent manner, then with blood of Rams.
For he was consecrated, says the text, (...) Heb. 9.12.
, with his own blood; and with this blood not only his hands or ears were
spinkled, as in that of Aaron, but his whole body was anointed: first being
bathed all over in a bloody sweat; next with the blood issuing from his most
sacred head, forced from it by the violent piercing of the Crown of thorns,
which (like the anointing oil on the head of Aaron) distilled unto the lowest
parts of that blessed body; and lastly with the streams of blood flowing
abundantly from the wounds of his hands and feet, and that great orifice which
was made in his precious side. Though our Redeemer were originally sanctified
from the very womb, and that in a most absolute and perfect manner; yet would
Almighty God have him thus visibly consecrated in his own blood also, that so
he might become the author of salvation to all those that obey him, Heb. 5.9.
, and that he having washed our robes in the blood of the Lamb, might be also
sanctified and consecrated to the service of our heavenly father. Finally the
consecration of Aaron, and of all the high Priests of the law which succeeded
him, was to last seven days Exodus 29.30.
, that so the Sabbath or seventh day might pass over him: because no man, as
they conceived could be a perfect high Priest to the Lord their God, until the
Sabbath day had gone over his head. The consecration of our Savior lasted
seven days too, in every one of which although he might be justly called an
high Priest in fieri, or per medium participationis, as the Schoolmen phrase
it, yet was not he fully consecrated to this Priestly office, till he had
bathed himself all over in his own blood, and conquered the powers of death by
his resurrection.

That so it was will evidently appear by this short account, which we shall
draw up, of his actions, from his first entrance into Jerusalem in the holy
week, till he had finished all his works, and obtained rest from his labors.
On the first day of the week (which still in memory thereof we do call Palm
Sunday) he went into the holy City, not so much to prepare for the Jewish
Passover, as to make ready for his own: and at his entrance was received with
great acclamations, Hosanna be to him that comes in the name of the Lord Mat.
21.9.
. And on the same day, or the day next following, he purged the Temple from
brokery and merchandising, and so restored that holy place to the use of
prayer, which the high Priests of the Law had turned or suffered to be turned
(which comes all to one) to a den of Thieves. The intermediate time betwixt
that and the day of his passion, he spent in preaching of the Gospel,
instructing the ignorant, and in healing of the blind and lame which were
brought unto him* in the performance whereof and the like works of mercy, he
was more diligent and frequent and more punctual far then Aaron or any of his
successors in the legal Priesthood, in offering of the seven days sacrifice
for themselves and the people. On the fifth day, having first bathed his body in
a bloody sweat he was arrained and pronounced to be worthy of death, in the
high Priests hall: And on the sixth (according to the Jewish account, with whom
the evening is observed to begin the day) he went into his heavenly sanctuary
to which he had prepared entrance with his precious blood, as Moses at Aarons
consecration did purify and consecrate the material Sanctuary, with the blood
of Bullocks and of Rams. Not by the blood of Goats, and Calves, says the
Apostle, but by his own blood, has he once entered into the holy place, and
obtained eternal redemption for us Heb 9.12.
. Which Sacrifice of the Son of God on the accursed Cross, although it was the
perfect and full accomplishment of all the typical and legal sacrifices offered
in the law: yet was it but an intermediate, though an especial part of his
consecration, to the eternal Evangelical Priesthood which he was to exercise,
and not the ultimum esse or perfection of it. That was not terminated till the
day of his resurrection, until a Sabbath day had gone over his head; which was
more perfectly fulfilled in his consecration, then ever it had been in Aarons,
and the sons of Aaron. For then, and not till then, when God had powerfully
defeated all the plots of his enemies, did God advance him to the Crown, to the
regal Diadem, setting him as a King on his holy hill, the hill of Sion, and
saying to him as it were in the sight of his people Psalm. 2.6, 7.
Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee. And then, and not till then,
when he had glorified him thus in the eyes of his people, did he establish him
in the office of the high Priest, saying, Thou art a Priest for ever after the
order of Melchisedech Heb. 5.10.
. That so it was in his advancement to the throne of his father David, shall be
made evident in the course of these present Commentaries; when we shall look
upon him as invested with the regal power: And that it was so in his
establishment, in the Sacerdotal, shall be made evident by the testimony of the
great Apostle, whose words here presently ensue. Christ, says he, glorified
not himself to be made the high Priest Ibid. v. 5, 6.
, but he that said unto him, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee,
did confer it on him: As he says also in another place, Thou art a Priest for
ever after the order of Melchisedech; that is to say, that from the day and
moment of the resurrection at what time the first of the two Prophecies were
fulfilled, which God delivered by the mouth of the Psalmist saying, Thou art my
Son, this day have I begotten thee, was our Redeemer to begin the execution of
the high Priests office, after the order of Meschisedech. And this appears to
be the meaning of the Apostle in the present place, by the words ensuing. For
presently on the recital of the words before recited, viz. Thou art a Priest
after the order of Melchisedech, he adds of Christ, that in the days of his
flesh he offered up prayers and supplications, to him that was able to save him
from death Heb. 5.7.
, if he had so pleased. But finding his Fathers resolution to the contrary, he
learned obedience though a Son by that which he suffered Ibid. v. 8.
; and finally that being perfect, or rather consecrated (for so the word (...)
does import most properly) he was made the Author of eternal salvation, unto
all those that obey him Ibid. v. 9, 10.
; and was called (or publicly declared, (...)) of God an high Priest after the
order of Melchisedech. And to say truth, had not the Scriptures been so clear
in the proof hereof, yet necessary consequence grounded upon comparing of one
text with another, and that applied according to the principles of natural
reason; would evince it for us. The Priesthood of Melchise^ech, as the
Scripture tells us, was an everlasting or eternal Priesthood, Thou art a
Priest for ever, for no shorter term: and therefore of necessity to be
exercised and enjoyed by one, who must be as eternal as the office is: and yet
a man, and taken from amongst the Sons of men, to offer gilts and sacrifices
for the sins of the people. But such our Savior was not, take him as a man,
though otherwise more qualifyed and prepared then any for so high an office;
until he had so crushed and broken all the powers of death, that death had now
no longer title to him, or dominion over him Romans 6.9.
: which doubtless was performed at the resurrection. And therefore then, and
not before, when all the ceremonies of his consecration were fulfilled in
order, did he begin to exercise the function of an endless everlasting
Priesthood, after the order of Melchisedech.

The order of Melchisedech, that comes after next. And touching that we will
examine these three things; 1. Who Melchisedech was. 2. Wherein his high
Priesthood did consist. 3. In what the Parallel does stand between Christ and
him. Concerning the first point, who and what he was, has been a great dispute
amongst learned men: some thinking that he could not be a mortal man, and
therefore must needs be either the holy Ghost, or else the Son of God then
appearing to Abraham, in the likeness and similitude of an earthly Prince. The
last is most eagerly defended by P. Cunaeus a very learned man and a great
Philosopher, in his book de Republ. Hebraeorum. The reason of this difficulty
and his error, are those words of St. Paul where he describes Melchisedech to
be without father, without mother, without descent, having neither beginning of
days, nor end of life Heb. 7.3.
. And this thought he can be no other then the Son of God. Others with greater
probability both of proof and reason, declare him to be Sem, the third son of
Noah, out of whose loins our father Abraham was descended: and this opinion
has found most acceptance generally amongst the learned, though some of very
eminent parts do opine the contrary. But whether he were Sem or not, or rather
some petty King of the Land of Canaan, who went forth to congratulate Abraham
upon his return; they are much troubled to apply the negative character which
St. Paul has given us, to any upon whom they desire to fasten. The best and
clearest resolution of the doubt, which I yet have met with, is that
Meschisedech, whosoever he was, is said to be without father and mother, in the
same sense, as he is after said to be (...), which our Translators render
without descent, of which his being without father or mother is one branch or
member. And he is said to be (...), i. e. without genealogy (and not without
descent, as our English reads) because he has no predecessor either father or
mother amongst the rest of the Patriarks, whose Genealogies are recorded in the
book of God. And in this sense, as he is said to have no beginning of days,
because the time of his birth is no were remembered; so is he also said to have
no end of his life, because neither the time of his death, nor the succession
of any after him in his two great offices is specifyed upon the Registers of
sacred writ. And yet if the Catena Arabica be of any credit, we have heard more
news of late touching this great man, then has been, till of late, made known
in these Western parts. For in their Marginal notes on the 10. of Genesis they
say of Phaleg, of whom we find mention verse. 25. And this Phaleg was the
Father of Heraclim, the Father of Melchisedech Cited by Mr. Gregory in the
Pref. to his Annotat.
. But in the Chapter going before his Generation is set down in this formal
pedigree, viz. Melchisedech was the son of Heraclim, the son of Phaleg, the son
of Eber; And his Mothers name was Salathiel the daughter of Gomer, the son of
Japhet, the son of Noah. And Heraclim the son of Eber, married his wife
Salathiel, and she was with child, and brought forth a son, and called his name
Melchisedech, that is, the King of righteousness, called also the King of
Peace. By this account Melchisedech was the sixth from Sem, and Cosen german
unto Serug, who was Abraham's Grandfather: and being of the lineage and house of
Sem, might well confer that blessing on his Cosen Abraham, which had been
given to Sem by their father Noah. And then one of the greatest arguments to
prove Mel^hisedech to be Sem, that namely which is borrowed from the form and
manner of the blessing which he gave to Abraham, will be answered easily. And
were this true, (as I can hardly reckon it for an Historical truth) it might as
well be made appliable to Paul's negative Character, according to the former
interpretation; as that Melchisedech should be Sem, whose Ancestors and
posterity both are upon record in the old Testament and the new; though not
delivered us as his by the name of Melchisedech.

But leaving this unto the credit of the Authors, we must next look upon
Melchisedech (whosoever he was) as the Priest of God. And Melchisedech King of
Salem (says the text) brought forth bread and wine: And he was the Priest of
the most high God Genesis 14.18, 19.
; And he blessed him, (Abram) and said, Blessed be Abram, etc. And Abram gave
him tithes of all Ibid. v. 20.
. In this we find Melchisedech invested with the two great offices of a King
and a Priest: the King of Salem, and the Priest of the most high God. Nor was
it strange or extraordinary in those times that it should be so: the
Principality and the Priesthood in those early days, (yea and a long time
after in the Roman Empire) being commonly united in the self same person. Look
on him as a King, one that did share in the success of Abrams victory, and
then we find him entertaining this triumphant Conqueror, with a royal feast.
And Melchisedech King of Salem brought forth bread and wine. That he did only
as a King, as a Princely friend, willing to set forth some refreshment to the
wearied Soldiers. Melchisedech King of Salem brought forth bread and wine. It
was the Kings act, as a King, and for such recorded, before we find any thing
spoken of him as the Priest of God. And when we find him spoken of as the
Priest of God, we find no mention of his entertainment, of his bread and wine,
(That belonged to him as a King) but only that he blessed Abram, and received
tithes of him; (...) says the text Genesis 14.20. and Heb. 7.6.
, that is to say, he tithed him, or took tithes of him, not as the gift of
Abram, but his own just dues. By these two acts of blessing and receiving
tithes, the Priesthood of Melchisedech is described by Moses: and by the same
only does St. Paul describe it Heb. 7.1, 2.
, not obiter or on the by, but where he speaks of him in a set discourse, and
from his Priesthood does proceed unto that of Christ, whom God ordained a
Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedech. Nothing in the Apostle of the
bread and wine; for that concerned him not as he was a Priest, in which
capacity only St. Paul looks upon him: and looking on him only in that
capacity, he finds him only as a Priest, to bless and to tithe. He met
Abraham (says St. Paul) returning from the slaughter of the Kings, and blessed
him, To whom also Abraham gave the tithes of all. Nothing here spoken of the
bread and wine as an entertainment given by a Royal and magnificent Prince to
a friend and neighbor, nor as a Sacrifice neither to the most high God, as he
was a Priest: which thing the Papists mainly stand for, and marvail that S.
Paul took no notice of it. Miror in hoc capite inter tot Similitudines, quibus
Melchisedech Christum repraesentat, nihil dixisse de Sacrificio panis and vini,
etc. I wonder (says Mariana, Mariana in Heb. c. 7.
) that in this Chapter ( Heb. 7.) amongst so many resemblances wherein Christ
is made like unto Melchisedech, there is no mention made of the Sacrifice of
bread and wine which Melchisedech offered, Genesis 14.18. being a type or Symbol
of the sacrifice of the holy Eucharist. But the best is, St. Paul knew better
what Melchisedech did, and knew much better how impertinent it would be for his
present purpose, which was to parallel Christ's priesthood with Melchisedechs,
then any the best learned man in the Church of Rome. And therefore here is
nothing to be wondered at, if speaking of him as the Priest of the most high
God, he takes no notice of his actions, as he was a King. And for the Sacrifice
which they dream of and would force from thence, the better to advance the
pedigree of the Romish Mass, it is a thing so inconsistent with the meaning of
Moses, that neither the letter of the text, nor any circumstance of the
History, nor the general consent of Fathers, nor any Orthodox Rule of
interpretation, does give any countenance at all unto it.

As for the parallel made by the Apostle betwixt Christ and him (which is the
third thing to be considered) it consists most especially in these two points:
first in the identity of their titles, and then in the performance of their
several Offices. First for their titles St. Paul tells us, that Melchisedech
by interpretation is the King of righteousness Heb. 7.2.
, and that King of Salem signifies a King of Peace. Such also is our blessed
Savior, not only called in Scripture the Prince of peace Isa. 9.6.
, but our peace it self, Ephesians. 2.14. not only acknowledged by his enemies for
a man of righteousness, but righteousness it self in the very abstract, and
therefore said by the Apostle to be made our righteousness, 1 Cor. 1.30.
Melchisedech was the only King that ever by divine providence or an heavenly
calling, was a Priest also of the most high God: and therein a fit parallel for
Christ our Savior, whom God having raised him from the dead, made both Lord
and CHRIST, that is to say, both King and Priest; Lord over all the Kings of
the earth Apocal. 1.5, 13.
, and clothed in a garment down to the feet, girded about the pappes with a
golden girdle (such as the high Priest used to wear) as St. John describes him.
Melchisedech was King of Salem, which afterward being called Jerusalem,
became the royal seat of David and the Kings of Judah; our Savior Christ was
publicly acknowledged to be King of the Jews, and crowned (though with a Crown
of thorns) within Jerusalem it self, the imperial City: and does now reign
and shall for ever in the new Jerusalem, whereof more hereafter. The greatest
difficulty lies in the Negative Character, that he was without Father, without
Mother, without descent (or Genealogy) having neither beginning of days, nor
end of life: and how he may be likened unto Christ in this, or Christ to him in
all these particulars, has very much perplexed the brains of some learned men.
For admitting Melchisedech to have neither father nor mother, nor genealogy,
nor descent, according to the former construction of it: yet this can no ways
be applied unto Christ our Savior; whose genealogy is recorded by two
Evangelists, who had a Mother on the earth and a Father in Heaven. Therefore
the best solution is (for ought I can see) to say, that those particulars of
this negative Character, without father, without mother, without descent, do
all but serve to usher in that which follows next, viz. Heb. 7.3.
that he was without beginning of days or end of life: no mention being made
of his predecessors, or of any one that did succeed him in that sacred office.
Or else because it follows after, this description, without father, etc. that
he was likened unto the Son of God, and continues a high Priest for ever: it
may be said, that he did purposely divest himself of all natural relations,
putting off all references unto Father and Mother, wife and children, which
necessarily do represent both a beginning and end of days: that being thus
transformed ((...) says the Apostle) and turned out of his own proper and
natural shape he might be made more like to the Son of God, who being told that
his Father and Mother sought him weeping, seemed not to note their tears or
regard their sorrows, but put them off with this short answer Luke 3.48, 49.
, Wist ye not that I must go about my Fathers business? But take it in the
former sense because most received, and then Melchisedech is a perfect type or
emblem of our Savior Christ; who as he had no beginning of days, (^or in the
beginning was the word Joh. 1.1.
, before time it self) So shall he have no end of life, the man CHRIST JESUS
being freed from the powers of death, and made by God a Priest for ever, till
time be no more, after the order of Melchisedech.

In the performance of the office which is the next part of the parallel, our
Savior did all that Melchisedech did; and consequently may pretend to all
which Melchisedech claimed. Melchisedech blessed Abraham, so the text informs
us, and questionless that blessing was accompanied with prayers to God, that
he would ratify the blessing then pronounced upon him. Blessed (says he) be
Abram of the most high God, possessour of heaven and earth Genesis 14.19, 20.
: And blessed be the most high God, which has delivered thine enemies into
thine hand. In which we find Melchisedech the high Priest of God, not only
blessing Abraham in the name of God, but offering prayers and praises unto God
for so great a victory, in behalf of Abram: which are two principal parts of
the Priestly function. And these our Savior did perform as soon as he was
consecrated and established in his holy and eternal Priesthood. For after his
glorious resurrection, from whence his Priesthood does commence as before was
proved, and before he did withdraw his bodily presence from his Disciples, it
is said that he lift up his hands and blessed them Luke 24.50.
. And questionless his blessing was accompanied with prayers to God, that he
would furnish them abundantly, with all gifts and graces, which were necessary
for the Ministry he had called them to: he having told them formerly, and it
proved accordingly that he would pray unto his Father to send down the
Comforter Joh. 14.16.
, by whom they should be guided in the ways of truth. Nor did he so accumulate
his blessings upon them alone, that he has none left in store for us. St.
Peter has resolved it otherwise, saying to the Jews, that God had raised up
his Son Jesus, and had sent him to bless them Act. 3.26.
in turning away every one (of them) from his iniquities. And yet this blessing
came not to the Jews alone, but upon the Gentiles; and for that we have St.
Paul to witness, CHRIST, says he, has redeemed us from the curse of the Law,
being made a curse for us, that the blessing of Abraham might come unto the
Gentiles Gal. 3.14.
. The difference only is in this, that Christ is more authentic and
authoritative in his blessings then Melchisedech was. Melchisedech indeed
blessed Abraham, but he blessed him only in the name of the most high God, and
not as having power to confer the blessing. But Christ does bless us of
himself, by his own authority, and has withal a power to make good the
blessing. All power (says he) is given me both in heaven and earth, and
therefore power to give the blessings of the earth, and the blessings of
Heaven, the blessings of this life, and the life to come. Nor are we only
blessed by him, in the sense aforesaid, but we are also blessed for him, we are
blessed through him, and all unto this end and purpose, to be everlastingly
blessed in him. For him it is that we are blessed; and therefore dare not ask
any good thing at the hands of God, but it is propter merita Jesus Christi, for
the merits of our Savior Jesus Christ, which either explicitly or implicitly
is in all those prayers, which we do or ought to make to the Lord our God.
Through him it is that we are blessed, he being as it were the Conduit or
Channel, through which the blessings of the Lord are conveied unto us: in
which regard the Church concludes most of her forms of prayer, with this
solemn clause, per Dominum nostrum I. C. through Jesus Christ our Lord. And
finally we shall at last be blessed in him, when we are made partakers of that
endless happiness, which formerly consists in our union with him; when we are
so united to him that we seem to be incorporated in him, and all make up
together but one glorious body whereof CHRIST JESUS is the head.

The next part of the Priestly function, consisted in offering up the peoples
prayers to Almighty God; or offering up his own prayers for the weal of the
people. Melchisedech did both in the case of Abraham; for first he prayed unto
God for a blessing on him; and then he praised God in his Name, for his
blessings to him. And so does Christ our Savior also. St. John who had
presented him unto our view, in the first Chapter of the Revelation, clothed in
Priestly garments, as before was said; does in the eight present him in the
execution of his Priestly Office. For there he tells us of an Angel standing
before the Altar, having (in his hands) a golden Censer, to whom much Incense
was given, that he should offer it with the prayers of all Saints (those upon
the earth) upon the golden Altar, which was upon the Throne, verse. 3. This
Angel was our Lord Christ Jesus, as St. Augustine tells us, the Mediator of
the New Covenant, as the Scriptures call him Heb. 12.24.
, who offers up the prayers of his faithful servants to the Throne of God,
and adds much also of his own incense, which was given unto him, to offer it
together with the prayers of the Saints, that so they might be made more
acceptable in the sight of God. This that he does, and does it by the virtue of
the Priestly function, is more clearly evidenced by St. Paul, This man (says
he, discoursing of our blessed Savior) because he continues for ever, has an
unchangeable Priesthood Heb. 7.24, 25.
, and therefore he is also able to save them to the uttermost that come unto
God by him, seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them. And for
performance of this Office, his sitting at the right hand of God does so fitly
serve, as if he were advanced to it for this purpose only. We touched upon this
string before, and now to make the Harmony more complete and perfect, I shall
add that also of St. Paul in another place, where he brings in our Savior
sitting at the right hand of God Romans 8.34.
, and making intercession for us; In this respect he is called the Mediator of
the New Testament; Heb. 12.24. that is to say, one that does intercede betwixt
God and man, to make up the breach that was between them, and reconcile poor
man to Almighty God. And this is such a trust, such an high employment, as
never was committed unto Saints or Angels; but purposely resolved by God for
this great High Priest. As we acknowledge but one God, so can we have no more
then one Mediator, and this can be no other then our Lord and Savior. There
is one God (says the Apostle, and one Mediator between God and man, even the
man CHRIST JESUS. Do we desire to know more of him in this Office from the holy
Scriptures, hear him then speaking of himself, and saying, I am the way, the
truth, and the life Joh. 10.6.
, no man comes unto the Father but by me. So excellently true is that gloss of
Augustines, Non est quo eas nisi ad me, non est qua eas, nisi per me. Our
Savior in this case, says he, is both the journeys end, and the way also. Do
you desire to hear more from him in this Office from the holy Fathers, take
then this passage of S. Ambrose, Ipse est Os nostrum per quod Patri loquimur;
he is the mouth by which we speak unto the Father, if we hope to speed.

To state this point more fully as a point in Controversy, we are to lay these
two truths for a certain ground of our proceeding: the first, that men are
sinners from the very womb, and all their righteousness no other then a
menstruous cloth; the second, that God is a God of pure eyes, and such as
cannot patiently behold our iniquities. Such being then the disproportion
between God and man, how could God look on man without indignation, or man lift
up his eyes to God without confusion? God therefore out of his most infinite
mercy gave his Son unto us: first for a Sacrifice, to be the Propitiation for
the sins of the world 1 John 2.1, 2.
, and after for an High Priest to intercede, an Advocate to plead for us, unto
God the Father; to be the Mediator between God and man in all cases of
difference, and as it were the General Solicitour of our suites and businesses
in the Court of Heaven. Nay, having raised him from the dead, and set him at
his own right hand in the heavenly places Ephesians. 1.20.
, he made him Master of the Requests, appointing him, and him alone, to receive
those petitions and addresses which we make to God, and in our name to tender
them unto his Father; adding his own incense unto our sweet odours, that so
they might find welcome at the hands of God. And here me thinks, this story of
Themistocles will not seem impertinent: Plutarch in Themist.
who being banished from Athens, his own native soil, was fain to have recourse
to Admetus King of the Molossians; hoping to find that safety in a strange
land, which his own Country could not give him. Being admitted into the Kings
Chapel, he snatcheth up the young Prince into his arms, kneels down with him
before the Altar, and so presented his desires and himself to the King, the
young Princes Father. Which kind of suing or Petitioning, (as my Author tells
me) the Molossians held (...), to be the most effectual means of dealing with
him, and such as could not be denied. I think the Application were superfluous
to ingenious ears: yet for the driving of it home to our present point, take it
briefly thus; We by our Covenant made to God in holy Baptism, are become Aliens
to the world, and as much hated by it, as he at Athens: in that respect as much
necessitated to cast our selves upon the love and mercy of the Lord our God, as
he to seek protection in the Court of Admetus. And as the young Prince whom he
used as his Mediator, was of a mixed condition between a King and a subject,
(the Heir not differing from a servant when he is a child): So is our Savior
also between God and man: God of the substance of his Father before all worlds,
man of the substance of his mother born in the world, as Athanasius in his
Creed. Finally, as Themistocles did assure himself that he should speed in his
requests with King Admetus, because the Kings son seemed to solicit for him:
so we with greater confidence may proceed in our prayers to God, the Son of God
making continual intercession for us, that they may be granted. Where note,
that not our pressing into the Chapel, as a thing of course, nor falling down
before the Altar as a point of ceremony; but taking Christ into our arms, as he
did that Prince, will make our prayers to be effectual. This verified by Christ
himself in his holy Gospel. Whatsoever ye shall ask in my Name (says he) that
will I do, that the Father may be glorified in the Son Joh. 14.13, 24.
. And in another place of the same chapter also, Hitherto have ye asked nothing
in my Name; ask, and you shall receive, that your joy may be full.

If on these grounds we make no other Mediators of Intercession, then him that
was the Mediator of Redemption too (for such a nice distinction have some men
found out, the better to deceive their own souls, and rob Christ of his glory)
Let us not stand accused for Heretics in the Court of Rome: or if we must so
stand accused, yet let us still worship the God of our Fathers, after the way
which they call Heresy Act. 24.14.
. Certain I am that in the way which they call heresy, the Lord was worshipped
by our Fathers in the Primitive times. Ignatius who lived near the time of the
Apostles, and conversed with some of them, wills us to have Christ only
before our eyes, when we make our prayers; (...) Ignat. Epistola ad Philadelph.
. And Irenaeus who lived next to him (I mean in time and not in place) gives
this counsel also, Orationes nostras ad Deum dirigere qui fecit omnia, that we
address our prayers to him only, by whom all things were made. Origin goes the
right way too, though in many other things he was out extremely; (...) Origin
contra Celsum. l. 8.
, that we should make our supplications unto God alone, who is over all things;
to God alone, as the chief Donour of the blessing, but unto God by Christ as
the means to gain it. Remember what was said before out of St. Ambrose, and St.
Augustine to the point in hand; and we shall find no other Mediators of
intercession in the times of the Fathers, then the man CHRIST JESUS; though
those of Rome, in pity, as it were, to our Savior Christ, whom they would
gladly ease of so great a burden, have liberally bestowed the Office on the
Saints departed. And though a fuller^search into their Position, is to be made
hereafter in a place more proper, when we shall come to speak of the Communion
of Saints: yet I shall ask this question first, and then dismiss the cause to
another day. My question is, if we must call upon the Saints as our Mediators,
but Mediators only of Intercession, whether they do commend our requests to
God, immediately by themselves, or by the mediation of Christ our Savior. If
they reply, immediately, and by themselves (as certainly their doctrine does
import no less) what then shall we return in answer to our Savior words; No
man comes unto the Father but by me Joh. 14.6.
? No, nor the Saints departed neither if St. Ambrose err not. Eo nisi
intercedente, nec nobis nec Sanctis omnibus quicquam est cum Deo Ambros.
. Nor we, nor any of the Saints, says that Reverend Prelate, have access to
God, but only by the intercession of our Savior Christ. But if they say, they
do it by the mediation of our Savior, (as needs they must, and indeed some of
them do of late) we do but put our selves to a needless trouble, in making our
address to them which cannot help us, nor aid us in our prayers to Almighty God
without first going unto Christ for his furtherance in it: Especially
considering that our blessed Savior, to whom the Saints themselves must become
Petitioners, has called us, nay commanded us to come to him, as often as we
are heavy laden with sin or misery, upon his gracious promise to relieve us in
it Mat. 11.28.
. Certainly did these men remember the good old rule, Frustra fieri per plura
quod fieri potest per pauciora, they would not make more Mediators then their
case requires: nor set up such a number of superfluous Priests to become
Intercessors for us in the Court of Heaven; instead of that one High Priest
whom God has ordained; one so compassionate to us in our distresses, and every
way so sensible of our infirmities.

For though there be many other qualifications necessary to the constituting of
this great High Priest, our Savior Christ for ever blessed, as namely, to be
holy, blameless, undefiled, separate from sinners, and higher then the highest
Heavens Heb. 7.26.
: yet none does speak such comfort to the souls of men, as that he had been
compassed with infirmities, and therefore like to have compassion on the
ignorant, and on them that are out of the way Heb. 5.2.
. And such is our High Priest, our most blessed Savior, who in the days of
his flesh had been so afflicted, exposed unto the scorn of men, and the
Temptations of Satan, that he was fain to make his prayers and supplication to
his heavenly Father, and that too with strong cries and tears, to be delivered
from the dangers which did seem to threaten him. His bloody conflict in the
Garden, and that of Eli, Eli, Lamasabachtbani, when upon the Cross, are proof
sufficient that he had need of Consolation. And they are proof sufficient for
this purpose too, that being he suffered and was tempted, he is able, (yea and
willing too) to succor them that are tempted Heb. 2.17.
, as the Apostle does infer concerning him. For seeing that such an especial
part of the Priestly Office, is to make intercession for us in all our
distresses; it seemed expedient to the wisdom of God that he should find just
occasion in his own person to offer up prayers and supplications with strong
cries for himself. Non ignara mali miseris succurrere disco, said the gallant
Lady in the Poet. It was a plausible answer which Matthias Corvinus King of
Hungary gave a great undertaker in School Divinity, upon a pretty question
which himself proposed. The question was, What reason might induce our Savior
to make S. Peter Head of the Church who had thrice denied him, rather then St.
John, the dear Disciple whom he loved, a Virgin, and one never tainted with any
crime. To which when the great Clerk could make no reply, but rambled up and
down in Gods secret Councels, the King thus solved the Problem for him.
Galeot. Martius de factis Corvini. c. 30.
Si virgo Johannes and in fide firmus Pontifex fuisset etc. The words are many
in the Author, but the sum is this, That if our Savior had made St. John to be
the Head of the Church, he would have looked that all men should have been as
perfect and sincere as himself, and so have proved more rigorous and severe in
correcting sinners, then the infancy of the Church could bear: whereas St.
Peter being conscious of his own infirmities, would sympathize the better with
them, and proceed more in his government toward them with the spirit of
meekness. Assuredly did I believe that Peter was made Head of the Church, I
could not have conceived a more plausible reason which might induce our Savior
unto that Election. But howsoever I shall make this use of the story, that God
dealt most exceeding mercifully with the sons of men, in providing such an High
Priest for them, as had in all things been tempted like unto themselves; Heb.
4.15.
sin only excepted: having made himself an offering for sin, knew better then
any of the Saints or Angels could, how to apply the benefit of it to our wants
and weaknesses.

And that indeed is the main business of the Priesthood. For every High Priest
is ordained for men, in things pertaining unto God, to offer gifts and
sacrifices for sins Heb. 7.1.
, as St. Paul defines him. Which gifts and sacrifices, as they were only types
of that gift and sacrifice which Christ made of himself for the sins of the
world: so that oblation being made, there was no longer use of the Legal
sacrifice, nor consequently of the Aaronical Priesthood. By this one offering
of himself has ^e made perfect for ever all them that were sanctified Heb.
10.14.
: and thereby out a signal and remarkable difference, between that one
Sacrifice of himself, and the sacrifices formerly required by the Law of Moses.
For in the time of the Law the Priesthood daily ministering, and oftentimes
offering the same things, which (yet considered in themselves and without
reference to his own Sacrifice, in Gods secret purpose) could not take away
sin. But CHRIST by this one offering of himself for sin, did not only take away
the sins of many Heb. 7.28.
, (even of all those which faithfully believe in him) and sanctify them in his
blood by that one offering of his body once for all Heb. 10.10.
: but having so done what he undertook, and knowing that there remained no
other sacrifice to be performed, he sat him down at the right hand of God
Ibid. 12.13.
, expecting there until his enemies be made his footstool. No further
sacrifice to be offered then that already offered upon the Cross; for what
could follow after Consummatum est, when all which was foreshadowed in the
Legal Sacrifices was in that accomplished. And as for that upon the Cross, how
it alluded to the Sacrifices of the Old Testament, in what particulars the
shadow and the substance held the best resemblance, and of the benefit thereof
unto all mankind; we have already spoke in the seventh Chapter, where we were
purposely to treat of our Saviors sufferings. And we have looked upon it also
as an especial part of his Consecration unto the everlasting and eternal
Priesthood, after the Order of Melchisedech; a Priesthood which consisted not
in outward sacrifices, but in prayers and blessings. For when the Son of God
our Savior did offer himself upon the Cross for our Redemption, he neither was
a Priest after the Order of Aaron (How could that be, considering he was of the
Tribe of Judah?) nor after the Order of Melchisedech, (He was not qualified for
that till his Resurrection): but a Priest only in fieri, as Logicians call it,
in the degrees and progress of his Consecration. Which Consecration once
performed, he was no more to offer Sacrifice either bloody, or unbloudy
whatsoever; that so he might conform more fully to the Type of Melchisedech; of
whom we no where read that he offered sacrifice, further then as it may be
intimated in the name of Priest. For though I will not say, and I think I need
not be put to it, that Melchisedech never offered any Sacrifice: yet since we
do not read of any, I may safely say, that that part of his Sacerdotal function
is purposely omitted by the holy Ghost, that so he might more perfectly
represent our Saviors Priesthood, who after he was consecrated to that sacred
Office, had no more sacrifice to offer. And possibly it might be done in the
way of prevention, to keep the Church from error in this point of the
Sacrifice: who not content with the Commemoration of it, the Eucharistical and
Commemorative Sacrifice of his own ordaining, might fall into a fancy of
reiterating that one Sacrifice, (as is now practiced and defended in the Church
of Rome) and make it expiatory of the sins both of quick and dead. How guilty
they of Rome have been in this particular, and what strange positions they have
broached in pursuit hereof, would appear most fully, if one would look no
further then the Council of Trent: from the determinations whereof there lies
no appeal, though sometimes they will find some evasions from it. For in that
Council it is said, that in the Masi, our Savior Christ is really offered by
the Priest, unto God the Father Council. Trid. Sess. 21.3. and 22.5.
; that it is the same propitiatory Sacrifice, which was offered by Christ upon
the Cross Catech. Trident.
; that it is propitiatory for all persons both quick and dead, serving to purge
them of their sins, to ease them of their pains, and satisfy for the
punishment which they have deserved Council. Triden^. Sess. 22. Can. 3.
; that being so beneficial and meritorious to all sorts of people, it is to be
reiterated and often offered Ibid.
, not only day by day, but many times in the same day, as often as the Priest
shall think fit to do it. Which doctrine how plainly contrary it is unto our
Apostle, the scope and drift of the Epistle to the Hebrews, (especially the
ninth and tenth Chapters of it) do most clearly evidence. And though it was a
very uncharitable guess of our Rhemish Papists, that the Protestants would have
refused this whole Epistle, but that they falsely imagine certain places
thereof, to make against the Sacrifice of the Mass Rhemists Testament in the
title to that Epistle.
: yet we may find by that where the shoe did wring them, and that they
thought there were some passages in this Epistle with which their Mass was
inconsistent, and which the Protestants might allege, (for I regard not the
word falsely) to their disadvantage. Well therefore was it done of the Church
of England, not only to assert the true Catholic Doctrine, of the one oblation
of Christ finished on the Cross; but to add another Proposition to it, in
condemnation of the errors of Rome. The Orthodox truth asserted is St. Paul's
expressly, viz. The offering of Christ once made is that perfect Redemption,
Propitiation, and satisfaction for all the sins of the whole world both
Original and actual; and there is none other satisfaction for sin but that
alone Article 31.
. The conclusion follows naturally on the former evidence, viz. Wherefore the
Sacrifices of Masses, in which it was commonly said, that the Priest did offer
Christ for the quick and the dead, to have remission of pain or guilt, were
blasphemous fables and dangerous deceits. For what fable can be more
blasphemous, then that a poor Priest should have power to make his Maker; that
having made him with the breath of his mouth, he should fall down and worship
what himself had made; that having worshipped him as God, he should presume to
lay hands on him, and offer him in sacrifice as soon as worshipped; that his
oblation, thus made, should be efficacious both to quick and dead, both to the
absent and the present; and finally that such as be present at it, may, if they
find their stomachs serve, devour their God? A thing, of such reproach and
scandal to the Christian faith, that Averroes the Moore, but a very learned
man, and a great Philosopher, has laid this stain or brand on the Religion it
self, viz. that he had traveled over most parts of the world, but never found
a wickeder and more foolish Sect then that of the Christians. His reason is,
Quia deum quem colunt dentibus devorant Espencaeu^ de Euchar. Ador. l. 43.
, because they did devour the God whom they worshipped. And what deceit can be
more dangerous to a Christian soul, then that which leads him blindfold into
gross idolatry, and teaches him to give Divine honor to a Deity of a poor
Creatures making? for though the Elements be sanctified by the Word and prayer,
and are made unto the faithful receiver the very body and blood of Christ, yet
are they still but bread and wine as before they were. When therefore we
encounter with some passages in the works of the FATHERS, in which they either
speak of the daily Sacrifice, or say that Christ is daily offered on the Altar,
as sometimes they do: we must not understand them of a Real Sacrifice, as to
the offering up of Christ unto God the Father, a Sacrifice propitiatory to the
quick and dead, such as is now maintained in the Church of Rome; but only of an
Eucharistical and Commemorative Sacrifice, which by Christ's death is
represented to the eyes of the people, which is the Sacrifice defended by the
Church of England.

But here perhaps it will be asked, that if our Savior be to offer no more
Sacrifice, and that which he once offered upon the Cross, be not to be
reiterated, as the Priest thinks necessary; what use there is to us of his
Priestly Office, as concerning Sacrifice. I answer with St. Paul on another
occasion, much every way. For though he offers no more Sacrifices then that
made already; yet the effect and fruit thereof is still to be applied to the
souls of men, the merit of it still to be represented in the sight of God. Of
these the first may seem to be the Office of the holy Ghost; but the later
most assuredly is the Office of our High Priest, and of him alone. Who when he
finds his heavenly Father troubled with our perverseness, our high hand of
sinning, and ready to execute vengeance on us for our great misdeeds: does
interpose the merit of his death and passion, shows him the print of the Thorns
in his sacred head, his hands and feet boared through with nayls, and his side
pierced with the spear. At sight whereof Gods heavy anger falls away, and his
wrath is pacified, and he lays by the instruments of his rage and vengeance;
Tela reponuntur manibus fabricata Cyclopum Ovid. Metamorph. l. 1.
; as the Poet has it: and he resolves to tarry a little longer and expect the
amendment of his people. An Office from the which our High Priest never can
desist whilst there are men upon the world to provoke God to anger; and though
we dare not say of him, as St. Paul did of himself, that he dies daily 1 Cor.
15.31.
; yet we may safely say, and make it the rejoicing which we have in CHRIST
JESUS our Lord, that the merit of his death and passion, are daily, hourly, nay
continually, presented by him to the view and consideration of Almighty God. A
point of no mean consolation to us, whilst we are subject to the sins and
lusts, which we bear about us in the flesh; and cannot otherwise be excused
from them but by changing our mortal into immortality. And this is that which
was prefigured in the Law of Moses, by the High Priests entering into the
Sanctum Sanctorum, which was parted with a vail or traverse Curtain from the
rest of the Temple, to make atonement with the Lord for the peoples sins. The
parallel stands thus between them. First none might enter into the Sanctum
Sanctorum, or the holiest of all, but the High Priest only, Levit. 16.3. So
Christ our High Priest, and none but he, has entered into the holy places not
made with hands, to appear in the presence of God for us, Heb. 9.24, Secondly,
as the veil of the Temple was lifted up or drawn aside, to make room for the
High Priest to enter into it: so did the vail of the Temple rent in sunder at
the very instant, when the soul of our High Priest did depart from his body,
and enter the Celestial Sanctuary, Mattb. 27. Thirdly, the High Priest was
apparelled in his Priestly vestments, Levit. 16.10. and so our Savior is
described in the Rev. 13.13. Fourthly, the High Priest, entered into the
Sanctuary but once a year, which was upon the Feast of the Expiation, Exodus
30.10. So did Christ enter once into the holy place, which was upon the day (of
his death and passion) whereon he obtained eternal redemption for us, Heb.
9.12. And last of all, as the High Priest made an offering for the sins of the
people, though it were only of the blood of Calves and Goats, before he went
within the veil, Levit. 16.12. and 15. which blood he was to sprinkle on the
Mercy-seat, verse. 14, 15. and thereby made atonement in the holy place for all
the Congregation of Israel, verse. 17. So before Christ our High Priest entered
into the Heaven of glories, he made an offering of himself, Heb. 9.25. and by
his own blood entered into the holy places, verse. 12. which blood of his, that
is to say, the merits of it, he sprinkleth on the Mercy-seat of Almighty God,
and thereby does avert him from his displeasure, and reconcile him daily to
poor sinful man. Which Parallel thus made, we may the better understand St.
Paul's drift and meaning, in comparing the High Priests together, and the
excellency of Christ's Priesthood above that of Aaron. The Priests, says he, (
i. e. those of inferior order) went into the first Tabernacle, accomplishing
the service of God; But into the second went the High Priest alone once every
year, not without blood, which he offered for himself and for the errors of the
people Heb. 9.6, 7.
. But Christ being made an High Priest of good things to come, by a greater and
more perfect Tabernacle not made with hands ver. 11.12.
; neither by the blood of Goats and Calves, but by his one blood did he enter
into the holy place, having obtained eternal Redemption for us. Not that he
should offer himself often, as the High Priest entered into the holy place every
year with the blood of others verse. 25.
; but that being offered once a sacrifice for sin, he might for ever sit at the
right hand of God, chap. 10. ver. 12. to appear in the sight of God for us
verse. 24.28.
unto our Salvation, and to make intercession for us Heb. 7.25.
.

Thus stands the case with our High Priest in the point of Sacrifice; in
which, as in the other Offices, of offering up our prayers to God, interceding
for us, and pouring down his blessings on us, he does perform the Office or
Function of an High Priest for ever, after the Order of Melchisedech. But there
is yet one Argument more that St. Paul brings in proof of Melchisedechs
Priesthood; which is, that he tithed Abraham, or took Tithes of him, Heb. 7.2,
9. And if we prove not this also of our Savior Christ, the parallel betwixt
him and Melchisedech will not be complete, nor his high Priesthood so asserted
as it ought to be. But herein the Apostle will not fail us neither, affording
us two arguments to make good this point, the one derived from the eternity of
our Saviors Priesthood, the other from the Prerogative which Melchisedech had
in this particular, above Aaron and the sons of Levi. The first stands thus:
Melchisedech took Tithes of Abraham in his own right, as Priest of the most
high God; whose Priesthood being everlasting in the Person of Christ, (for he
has an unchangeable Priesthood, verse. 24.) the right of taking Tithes is
inherent in him, on the mere taking on himself of Melchisedechs function; I
mean in being made a Priest for ever, after the Order of Melchisedech. And this
is that to which St. Paul alludeth, saying, Here, men that die receive Tithes
Heb. 7.8.
, that is to say, Here, in the land of Canaan, by the Law of Moses, the Priests
and Levites of our Nation being mortal men, and subject to the stroke of death
as well as we, do receive tithes of us, to show that we acknowledge them to be
our Superiors in their place and Ministry. But there he receives them of
whom it is witnessed that he lives; His meaning is, that when Melchisedech
received Tithes of Abraham, he received them as a Type of our Savior Christ,
who now lives with God, and by his Resurrection did make known that he lives
for ever, and lived to execute the Office of a Priest for ever, after the Order
of Melchisedech. He then of whom it is witnessed that he lives, receives
Tithes, or has at least a right and title to receive them, in regard of his
unchangeable and eternal Priesthood. But he receives them not in person;
having transferred all his interests in them, and title to them, upon the
Ministers of his Gospel. No otherwise then God conferred the Tithes of the land
of Canaan on the Priests and Levites, being his in his own right, Originally,
by the law of Nature, and by him challenged and appropriated as his own
domaine. All the Tithe of the land, whether of the seed of the land, or of the
fruit of the tree, is the Lords Lev. 27.30.
. Here Is the Lords claim and title to them, as his own propriety. Behold I have
given the children of Levi all the Tenth, (or Tithes) in Israel, for an
inheritance, for the service which they serve, even the service of the
Tabernacle of the Congregation Numb. 18.22.
. There Is the collation of his right on the Tribe of Levi, whom he made choice
of to attend in his holy Tabernacle, and to do service at his Altar. And they
continued the inheritance of the Tribe of Levi, until the Priesthood was
translated unto Christ our Savior; who being made by God the true owner of
Tithes, a Priest for ever after the Order of Melchisedech, became invested ipso
facto with that right of Tithing, which God had formerly conferred on the
Priests and Levites; and consequently with a power of disposing of them, to
them that minister in his Name, to the Congregation. The second argument which
the Apostle does afford us in this case of Tithes, is the Prerogative which
Melchisedech ha^ i^ that particular above Aaron, and the sons of Levi. Levi
also (says he) which received Tithes, paid Tithes in Abraham; for he was yet
in the loins of his Father when Melchisedech met him, Heb. 7.9, 10. Then which
there cannot be a stronger and more pregnant argument to prove that Tithes are
no Mosaical institution, or the peculiar maintenance of the Levites; but that
they are derived from an higher Author, and are to be continued to the
Ministers of a better Testament Heb. 7.22.
. For the Apostle taking on him to prove this point, that the Priesthood after
the Ord^^ of Melchisedech was better and more perfect then that which was
according to the Order of Aaron; uses this argument to evince it, and it is a
weighty one indeed, that Levi himself, though he received Tithes of his
brethren by the Lords appointment, yet he and all his Tribe paid their Tithes
to Melchisedech, being all vertually and potentially in the loins of Abraham,
at such time as Melchisedech met him; and consequently being as effectually
tithed in Abraham, as all mankind have sinned in Adam, from whose loins they
sprung. Nay we may work this argument to an higher pitch, and make the full
scope of it to amount to this, That if the Tribe of Levi had been in full
possession of the Tithes of their Brethren when Melchisedech met with Abraham
and blessed him, as became the High Priest of God to do; or if Melchisedech had
lived in Canaan till their settling in it, they must and ought to have done as
their Father did, and paid their Tithes unto Melchised^eh, as the Type of
Christ, in reference to his everlasting and eternal Priesthood. But seeing that
this common place has been so much beaten on, I shall only alter some few
words of that Noble Gentleman and great Antiquarie Sir Henry Spelman, to make
his argument more suitable to my present purpose; and so close this point.
Insomuch (says he) as Abraham did not pay his Tithes to a Priest that offered
a Levitical Sacrifice of Bullocks and Goats, but unto him that presented him
with Bread and Wine, which are the Elements of the Sacrament ordained by
Christ: this may serve well to intimate thus much unto us, that we are to pay
our Tithes unto that High Priest, an High Priest of Melchisedechs Order, who
did ordain the Sacrament of Bread and Wine; and unto them in his behalf, who by
his Ordinance and appointment in the Word, Hoc facite, administer the same unto
us. And so much for the Sacerdotal Office of our Lord and Savior, which he
does execute for our good, at the right hand of God; we now proceed unto the
Regal: which though it is most eminent in his coming to Judgment, and so more
properly to be handled in the following Article: yet for so much thereof as is
exercised at the right hand of God; we shall reduce it under this, in the
following chapter.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Regal or Kingly Office of our Lord as far as it is executed
before his coming unto Judgment. Of his Vicegerents on the Earth, and of the
several Viceroys put upon him by the Papists and the Presbyterians.
WE have not yet done with this branch of the Article, that of our Saviors
sitting at the right hand of God. For of the three Offices allotted to him,
that of the Priest, the Prince, and the Prophet, all which are comprehended in
the name of CHRIST: that of the Priest, is wholly executed as he sits at the
right hand of God the Father Almighty. And so is so much also of the King, or
the Regal Office, as does concern the preservation of his Church from the hands
of her enemies, the Regulating of the same by his holy laws, and indeed every
act and branch thereof except (...) of Judicature, which is most visibly
discharged in the day of judgment. Of all the rest we shall now speak; and for
our better method and proceeding in it must recall to mind, that we told you
in our former Chapter, how both the Kingdom and the Priesthood of our Savior
Christ, did take beginning at the time of his Resurrection. He was before a
King Elect designed by God to this great Office from before all worlds; but not
invested with the Crown, nor put into the possession of the Throne (...) David,
till he had conquered Death, and swallowed up the grave in victory. That he was
King Elect, and in designation, is evident by that of the Royal Psalmist, where
he brings in God Almighty speaking of his only Son, and saying, I have set my
King upon my holy hill of Sion Psalm. 2.6.
: as evident by that of the Prophet Daniel, where he tells us that in those
days (those days which the Apostle calls the fullness of time Gal. 4.4.
) the God of Heaven shall set up a Kingdom, which shall never be destroyed
Dan. 2.44.
; which can be meant of none but the Kingdom of Christ. And that we may not
have the testimony only of Kings and Prophets, which were mortal men, but also
of the blessed Angels, those immortal Spirits: we have the Angel Gabriel,
saying of him to his Virgin Mother, that the Lord would give unto him the
Throne of his Father David, and of his Kingdom there should be no end Luke
1.32, 33.
. But yet he was but King Elect, and in designation; born to the Crown of the
Celestial land of Canaan, as the Heir apparent; and by that name enquired for
by the Wise men, saying, Vbi est ille, qui natus est Rex Iudaeorum Mat. 2.2.
, i. e. where is he that is born King of the Jews, as our English reads it. And
so do all translations else which I have seen, except Bezas and the French
which does follow him; And he indeed does read it in a different way, Vbi est
Rex ille Judaeorum, qui not us est. But I will not now dispute this point of
the translations. Suffice it that our Savior was designed to the Crown of
David, long before his birth, and did not waive his title to it, when he was
alive. Yet was he not actually inaugurated till his resurrection, nor
intronized at Gods right hand, until his ascension. That he was a King in
designatiton long before his birth, we have proved already. And that he did not
waive the title when he was alive, is proved as plainly by that part of the
accusation which the Priests and Pharisees made against him, objecting that he
called himself Christ a King Luke 23.2.
, And when he was interrogated on that Article by Pontius Pilate, viz. Art thou
the King of the Jews or not; he let it pass as a thing granted, with a Tu
dixisti, thou have said it V. 3.
, only distinguishing of his Kingdom, and telling him upon more discourse
about that point, that his Kingdom was not of this world Joh. 18.39.
. That was enough to rectify the error, and possess the Deputy that he had
no designs to disturb the State, or set on foot his claim to the Crown of
Israel, though he was sure of finding a considerable party amongst the people;
who would have made him King by force Joh. 6.15.
, if he had not removed himself out of their sight. And yet had God some
further evidence to extort from Pilate, and not from him only, but from all his
Soldiers, touching the Kingdom of his CHRIST. The Soldiers they arraied him
in a purple or imperial robe, they set the Crown upon his head (though a Crown
of thorns) they put a scepter in his hand, and then bow the knee, saying, Hail
King of the Jews. Their purpose I confess was only to expose him to contempt
and laughter. But God had also his ends in it, and in the vanity of this humor
brought forth that acknowledgment which in a serious way they had never
uttered. A deo veritas ab invitis etiam pectoribus erumpit Lact. l. 2. c. 1
, said Lactantius truly. So Pilate before whom he had been accused for taking
to himself this title, did on the Cross confirm it to him; and freely granted
him that honor, for taking which (or nothing) he had been condemned. JESUS OF
NAZARETH KING OF THE JEWS Joh. 19.19.
, was a fair, testimony to proceed from the mouth of Pilate: the fairer in
regard that he stood resolved not to have it altered; but made this peremptory
answer when the Priests proposed it, Quod scripsi scripsi V. 22.
, what I have written I have written. God certainly was in Pilates mouth, and
he knew it not. For thus became Christ's title manifested to the Greeks and
Romans, and published all abroad by those very means which were intended to
suppress it. So unsearchable are the Counsels of Almighty God, and his ways
past finding out, as the Prophet has it.

A Kingdom then our Savior had, and that acknowledged and confessed by his
very enemies; though all of them mistaken in the nature of it. And to say
truth, the general opinion of Christ's temporal Kingdom was become so
epidemicall a disease amongst Jews and Gentiles; that neither the wisdom of
the Grecians, nor the word of God amongst the Jews, nor God the word then
conversant with his own Disciples could remove the malady. And first beginning
with the Jews, the Oracles of God had long since promised a Messiah, but they
were wretchedly deceived in the manner of his coming to them, expecting such a
one as should be answerable to their present miseries, and free them from that
yoke of bondage which the Romans at that time had laid upon them. And as the
wise Philosopher tells us, that the same man does place his summum bonum upon
diverse blessings, ((...) Arist. Ethic. lib. 1.
, being sick he thinks it to consist in health, if poor in riches): even so
this people being under the captivity of a second Babylon, dream of no other
happiness then present liberty. For this cause they expected such a Messiah,
whose sword should free them from that thraldom; whose Kingdom should be more
apparent to the faith of the eye, then the eye of faith. This was it which made
Herod tremble, and all Jerusalem with him ( i. e. as many in Jerusalem as did
hold his faction) when the wise men demanded saying, Where is he that is born
King of the Jews Mat. 2.2.
? This made him murder the young children in Bethlem Judah, and amongst them
one of his own sons, as the story tells us; a man more cruel in his fears
then in his anger. The Courtiers most, and many of the better sort of people
also were all alike possessed with the same poor fancy. For seeing the glory
of Herod's Palace and experimentally knowing his prowess, they conceived him to
be the Messiah: and on that ground, as many learned men are of opinion, were
called Herodians Epiphan. alii
. As for the (...), the baser and ignoble multitude, certain it is that the
ambition of their hopes did ascend no higher. Upon which ground, some of them
flocked unto Theudas, who boasted of himself to be some great body Act. 5 36,
37.
, others to Judas of Galilee, who exhorted not to pay tribute: both thought to
be the King they had so long looked for, but miserably deceived in both, as the
issue proved. Their expectation of a temporal Messiah did not fail them yet.
CHRIST is the next they set their rest on, and would have made him King by
force: He that could feed so many thousands with a few loaves of bread, was
likely to maintain an Army with no charge at all. Afterward in the days of
Hadrian the Roman Emperor, they placed their hopes on one Barchochab. His name
did signify as much as the son of a star, which made them take him for that
star of Jacob, of which Balaam prophesied, and taking him for such to reverence
him as Eusebius tells us Eusebius. Eccl. hist. l. 4. c. 6.
, (...), as if he were a star which came down from heaven. A Star indeed he
proved, but a falling star, drawing the people generally into rebellion against
the Romans; on which they were for ever banished from their native Country. Nor
was it thus only with the Jews in general, but those who had more near
relation to their Lord and Savior. The Secretaries to this King the Apostles,
had all of them their hope stonger then their faith: and did already contend
amongst themselves, which of them should be greatest in their Masters Kingdom
Luke 22.24.
. Not in his Kingdom of grace, nor in that of glory, for they dreamed of
neither: but (...), his temporal Kingdom rather, which they all looked after
Theophy. in Luke 24.
. The seventy which were Clerks of his Counsel so conceived it also; and it is
no marvel. Nam quis viam rectam teneret errante Cicerone? We thought, said
Cleophas, that this had been the man that should have delivered Israel Luke
24.21.
. Delivered Israel? from whom? Not from sin and Satan; (...), but from the yoke
of bondage which the Romans had then laid upon them. Thus was it also with the
whole body of his Disciples when convened together, at the very time of his
Ascension. Will thou at this time, say they, restore again the Kingdom unto
Israel Act. 1.6.
? The Kingdom? What? Regnum illud temporale quod ablatum erat a Iudaeis Lira
in Acta. c. 1.
, the temporal power which by the Romans lately had been taken from them. And
now I think it cannot reasonably be expected, that the Gentiles should
conceive otherwise of the Kingdom of Christ (if they knew any thing at all of
it) then the whole nation of the Jews, or his own Disciples. Nam post
Carthaginem vinci neminem puduit Flor. hist. Romans 1.3.
. It was no shame for them to mistake in that, which was not rightly understood
by his friends and followers. If they that sat^ in the light saw so obscurely,
how could they see at all that sat in darkness, and in the shadow of death?
There had continued in the East, says Tacitus Tacit. hist. l. 4.
, and Suetonius both, a received opinion, fore ut Iudaea profecti rerum
potirentur, that out of Iewry should proceed a most puissant Prince, who should
in fine obtain the Empire over all the world. A report founded questionless
upon that of Micah, and to this purpose cited in St. Matthews Gospel, viz. that
out of Judah there should come a Governor which shall rule my people Israel
Mat. 2.6.
. This prophecy the Roman Historians of those times referred in the
accomplishment unto Vespasian and his sons; who being the Provincial Governors
of Iudaea, did afe^rwards by force of the Eastern Armies, obtain the empire.
But it wrought further as it seems upon Domitian, who is reported to have
sought out all those of the line of David, which his care and diligence could
discover; and to have murdered them being found Eusebius. Eccl. hist. l. 3.17.
. Which howsoever some ascribe to his accustomed cruelty, without further aim:
yet I am verily persuaded that jealousy in point of state, the better to
secure himself from those on whom that prophecy did reflect originally, did
induce him to it. And possible enough it is that Pilate grounding his
proceedings on the same mistake, might think quod scripsi scripsi an high part
of wisdom; and that therein he did great service to the Roman Emperors, in
terrifying others from aspiring to the name of King, which Jesus upon so good
title, and without any prejudice unto their affairs had presumed to own.

But all this while he was a King in title only, or a King designed. We must
next look upon him as inaugurated, and put in full possession of the regal
power. And that this was not done till his resurrection is positively affirmed
in two texts of St. Peter, and very concludingly inferred by a text of St.
Paul. We will take that of St. Peter first, delivered in the first Sermon that
he preached on the Feast of Pentecost, where speaking of the resurrection of
our Lord and Savior, and having pressed the point home to their souls and
consciences; he concludes thus, Therefore let all the house of Israel know
assuredly, that God has made the same, Jesus whom ye have crucified, both Lord
and Christ Act. 2.36.
. Not made him Lord, nor Christ till then, neither King nor Priest. The very
same St. Paul affirms in more positive terms. Who speaking of the promise
which God made to David (that viz. of the 132 Psalm, that of the fruit of his
body there should one sit upon his throne for evermore) resolves it thus, The
promise which God made unto our Fathers Act. 13 33.
, has he fulfilled in us their children, in that he has raised up Jesus
again, as it is also written in the 2. Psalm, Thou art my Son, this day have I
begotten thee. Of this we have already spoken more fully in the 13. Chapter,
and therefore shall not need to repeat it here. And if the word head be used in
Scriptures and other creditable Authors to signify the King or supreme
Governor of a body politic, as no doubt it is; we have St. Paul as positive
in this particular as St. Peter was. That so the word head has been often times
used, I shall not need to prove out of many witnesses, when two or three will
be sufficient. Of these the first shall be the Prophet Isaiah, saying, The head
of Syria is Damascus, and the head of Israel is Samaria Isa. 7.8.
they being the principal and commanding Cities of those several Kingdoms.
And more then so, the head of Damascus is Rezin, and the head of Samaria is the
son of Remaliah, who were the Kings of those two Realms, whereof Damascus and
Samaria were the principal Cities. Thus does the Poet say of Rome, Roma caput
mundi Prosp. in Carm.
, that it was the head of the world, i. e. the chief or commanding state, to
which all the residue of the world did owe subjection. And thus does
Chrysostom say of Theodosius the Roman Emperor, that he was (...) Chrysostom. hom.
ad Antioch. 2.
, the head of all people on the earth. It follows then, that Christ being
called in Scripture the head of his Church, (which is indeed his mystical body)
and exercising all that power and authority, which the head has upon the
members of the body natural; must needs be understood for the King thereof, the
Prince and Savior of his people, as St. Peter called him. And that Christ was
not made the head of his Church, till the resurrection was accomplished, it is
by St. Paul affirmed so plainly and in terminis, that it needs no Commentary.
The God of our Lord JESUS CHRIST Ephesians. 1.17, 20, 21, etc.
(says the Apostle) has raised him from the dead, and set him at his own
right hand in the heavenly places, above all principalities, and powers, and
might, and dominions (that is to say, above the whole Hierarchy of the Angels)
etc. And given him to be head over all things unto the Church which is his
body. This makes that clear and evident which before we said, that though our
Savior was designed to the Crown of David long before his birth, yet was he
not actually inaugurated till his resurrection, nor inthronized at Gods right
hand until his ascension.

And this distinction serves most fitly to clear the meaning of St. Paul in
that other place, from which the same may be concludingly inferred. It is a
passage in his Sermon made unto the Pisidians, where speaking of the promise
which God made to David Act. 13.23.
, (that viz. of the 132. Psalm. That of the fruit of his body there should one
sit upon his Throne for evermore, v. 12, 13.) he resolves it thus, The promise
which was made unto the Fathers v. 32, 33, 34.
, God has fulfilled the same unto us their Children, in that he has raised up
Jesus again, as it is also written in the second Psalm, Thou art my Son, this
day have I begotten thee. Many Interpreters, I know, both ancient and modern do
expound these words of the eternal generation of the Son of God, and fancy to
themselves an hodie aeternitatis, something which may be called this day,
before all eternity. Which exposition of the words, as it is very justly
disliked by Calvin; so is he very unjustly quarrelled for by some latter
writers, who look no further on the words then the words of David, and not upon
the application which St. Paul makes of them. Clearly St. Paul who spoke by the
same Spirit that David did, and therefore could not err in expounding the
words of David, intends them neither to CHRIST'S natural birth, as the son of
the blessed Virgin Mary, nor his eternal generation as the Son of God; but to
his birth day or begetting to the Crown of the heavenly Canaan; the day of
their advancement to the regal throne, being esteemed as their birth day by
most Kings and Princes. For who so ignorant in the affairs of the world, so
little conversant in the monuments of former times, as not to know that it is
usual in most States and Kingdoms, not only to celebrate with great feasts
and triumphs, the natural birthday of their Kings, which they call Diem
natalem imperatoris; but the inauguration day, the day wherein he was exalted
to the Crown imperial, which they call Diem natalem imperii. Certain I am that
the day whereon Augustus did assume the imperial power, was solemnized in Rome
every tenth year with a great deal of joy Dion Cass. in August. 1.
: and that Caligula did decree, that the day whereon he began his Empire ( Dies
quo cepisset imperium, as my Author has it) should be called Palilia Spartian
in vita Hadriani.
, and celebrated as that was by the ancient Romans, in memory that their City
was on that day founded. And thus it has continued in most States of
Christendom, but most unprosperously of late (as if it were an Omen of the
present troubles) laid aside in ours. And this interpretation of the Psalmists
words, receives good countenance from another place of the same Apostle, in
which those words of David are again recited. The place is this Heb. 5.5, 6.
, Christ (says he) glorified not himself to be made high Priest, but he that
said unto him, thou art my Son, to day have I begotten thee; as he says also
in another place, Thou art a Priert for ever after the order of Melchisedech.
The meaning of this passage we have shown before, and is this in brief; that
Christ being called by God to the two great offices, those of the Priesthood
and the Kingdom, was not exalted unto either, (though designed to both) till
God had glorified him in the sight of the people, by his resurrection. And to
my seeming, David's words, had not St. Paul conducted us to this exposition,
could have no other meaning then is here made of them. For if we mark the
composition of the same, and the place in which these words are ranked, we
shall find that God had first advanced his King, and set him on his holy hill
of Sion, on the royal throne Psalm. 2.6, 7.
; before, and but immediately before these words, Thou art my Son, this day
have I begotten thee. But what need one Apostle be called to witness in this
point, when we have all that glorious company, the Apostolical College and the
rest of their company, apply the whole Psalm to the person of Christ Act.
4.27, 28.
; of Christ anointed to the Kingdom by the hands of God, but not till Herod,
Pontius Pilate, the Gentiles and the people of Israel had conspired against
him, to do whatsoever the hand and counsel of God had before determined.

Having thus brought our Savior to the Regal throne, and set him on the right
hand of God in the heavenly places; let us next look upon him in his form of
Government, according to the arts of Empire. These by the Stalists are reduced
unto two heads, the one consisting in protecting and defending the people
committed to them, which they call (...); the other in prescribing laws, and
executing justice on the transgressors, which they term (...). Both these
most perfectly discharged by our Prince and Savior. And first the Enemies
against which he protects his people, are these three, the Devil, sin, and
persecution. The two first he discomfited in that painful combat, in which he
paid the price of our redemption, and made his passage open to the new
Jerusalem. Since that time there is nothing left in Satan but a powerless
malice; and though he roar against the Church, he shall never devour it. The
gates of hell shall not prevail against it Mat. 16.18.
, said the glorious Conqueror. Sin at the same time lost his strength 1 Cor.
15.56.
, which was the curse of the Law; and not his strength only, but his Empire
too. And though he may sojourn for a time in our mortal bodies, yet shall he
never reign over us, and have us in subjection as before he had: unless we
willingly betray our selves, and captivate our souls to those conquered powers,
which God has given us grace to master. Nor deals otherwise with the
Persecutors of his Church and people, then he has done with sin and Satan:
whom he does crush at last with a rod of iron, and break them into pieces like
a potters vessel Psalm. 2.9.
: as David tells of him in the second Psalm. And though sometimes to
manifest his own glory in his peoples sufferings, and to make trial of their
faith and Christian patience, he does permit their enemies to prevail against
them: yet was he never wanting in his own due time, to make their deliverance
more remarkable, then all their afflictions. Witness the persecutions of the
primitive times, in which the Princes of the earth and the powers of hell
banded themselves against the Lord and against his anointed: times in the which
it were a difficulty to determine, whether the gallantry of the Martyrs, or the
tyranny of the persecutors gave juster cause of admiration to the sad
spectators. With such a cheerful countenance did they bear their sufferings,
that they even wearied their tormenters; and did not lose their lives, but give
them. With what a noble confidence did they mount the scaffold, on which they
were to suffer the most cruel death, which the wit of man, and malice of the
Devil, could inflict upon them: so bravely and without amazement, as if they
had been mounted rather to behold a triumph, then to be brought to execution.
Never was tragedy of death more bravely acted; nor actor honored with a richer
and more glorious crown. And for his enemies and theirs, the vengeance of the
Lord found them out at last, and laid them in the dust with disgrace and
ignominy. For which was there of all the persecutors, who made themselves drunk
with the blood of the Saints and Prophets Apocal. 16.^
; or that have raged against the Church since those furious times, to whom he
gave not blood to drink; whom either in their gray hairs, or in the pride and
flourish of all their glories, he brought not to the grave with reproach and
sorrow; or left their dead bodies to be meat to the fowls of the Air?

Next for the Nomothetical arts of Empire, let us look on those; and we shall
find that as he came not to destroy the Law of God, but to fulfill it; so has
he added more weight to it, either by way of application or of explication,
then before it had. They who consult our Saviors Sermon on the mount, and look
upon his Commentaries on the law of Moses, which the chief Priests and
Pharisees had perverted by adulterate glosses; will quickly find that he
discharged us not from the Obligation which the moral law had laid upon us, but
only did become our surety, and bound himself to see it faithfully performed by
us in our several places. The burden was not made less heavy then it was
before (I speak still of the Moral Law, not the Ceremonial) but that he has
given more strength to bear it, more grace to regulate our lives by Gods
Commandments. And somewhat he did add of his own auhority which tended to a
greater measure of perfection, then possibly we could attain to by the Law of
Moses: and that not only in the way of Evangelical Counsels, (and that there
are such Counsels I can easily grant) but of positive precept. For so far
certainly we may join issue with the Council of Trent, that JESUS CHRIST is to
be honored and observed, Non tantum ut Redemptor cui omn^s fidant, sedut
Legislator cui obediant Council. Trident. Sess. 6. Can. 21.
, not only as a Savior unto whom we may trust, but as a Lawmakers also whom we
are to obey. The same position is maintained also by the Arminian party; but
not the more unsound for either. Veritas a quocunq est, est a Spiritu sancto,
as St. Ambrose has it. And this is so agreeable to the Word of God, that
either we must deny the Scripture, or else confess that it proceeded from the
Spirit of God. Nor are his laws indeered only to us, and sugared over as it
were, by the promise of a great reward; but enjoined also under pain of
grievous punishments: punishment and reward being the square or measure of the
heavenly government, no otherwise then of the earthly. Tribulation and anguish
(says St. Paul) shall come upon the soul of every man that does evil; but
glory, and honor, and peace to every man that does good, to the Jew first, and
also to the Gentile; for God is no respecter of persons Romans 2.9, 10.
. By which two general motives set before our eyes, and the cooperation of the
holy Spirit working with his Word, he does illuminate our minds, and mollify
our hearts, and quench our lusts, instruct us in the faith, confirm us in our
hopes, and strengthen us in Christian charity: till in the end he bring us to
the knowledge of his holy will, then to obedience to his Laws, and finally to a
resemblance of his virtues also. If after all this care and teaching either by
frailty or infirmity we do break his laws, or violate his sacred Statutes as we
do too often; he does not presently take the forfeiture which the Law does give
him (for then O Lord, should no flesh living in thy sight be justified): but in
the midst of judgment he remembers mercy. We may affirm of him most truly as
Lactantius did, Lact. l. 1. cap. 1.
Vt erga pios indulgentissimus Pater, ita adversus impios justissimus Iudex; as
terrible a Judge he is to impenitent sinners, as an indulgent Father to his
towardly children, as before was said.

Such is the nature and condition of our Saviors Kingdom, which sitting at
the right hand of Almighty God, he does direct and govern as seems best to his
heavenly wisdom; and so shall do until his coming again to judge both the
quick and the dead. Although he has withdrawn himself, and his bodily
presence, yet is he present with it in his mighty power, and by the influences
and graces of his holy Spirit. And in this sense it was that he said unto them,
Behold, I am with you always to the end of the world Mat. 28.20.
. And that not only with you, my Apostles, unto whom he spoke, but cum vobis
and successoribus vestris Dionys. Cartbus. in locum.
, with all you my Disciples and with your successors also in your several
places, till time be no more. Though he be placed above in the heavenly
glories, and is not joined unto his Church by any bodily connection; yet he is
knit unto it in the bonds of love, and out of that affection does so guide and
order it, as the Head does the members of the Body natural. Habet ecclesia
Caput positum in Coelestibus quod gubernat Corpus suum, separatum quidem
visione sed annectitur Charitate, as St. Austin has it. Viceroy there needs
none to supply his absence, who is always with us. Nor we the assistance of a
Vicar General to supply his place, whose Spirit blows where him lists, and
who is linked unto us in so strong affections. But for all this our Masters in
the Church of Rome have determined positively, that in regard our Savior has
withdrawn himself from the Church in his Body, secundum visibilem praesentiam,
for as much as does concern his visible presence: he needs must have some
Deputy or Lieutenant General, qui visibilem hanc Ecclesiam in unitate contineat
Bellarm. de Romano Pont. l. 1. c. 9.
, to govern and direct the same in peace and unity. It seems they think our
Savior Christ to be reduced unto the same straights as Augustus was, of whom
it is reported in the Roman stories, that he did therefore institute a Provost
in the City of Rome because he could not always be there in person Dion.
Cassius in Augusto.
, (...) (...), and durst not leave it absolutely without a Governor Dion
Cassius in Augusto.
. And sure however others may complain of our Saviors absence, and for that
reason think it necessary to have some general Deputy to supply his place: yet
of all others those of Rome have least cause to do it, who can command his
presence at all times, and on all occasions. For as Cornelius a Lapide A Lapide
in cap. 7. Esai.
affirms expressly, by saying only these words, Hoc est Corpus meum, the Bread
is not only transubstiated into our Saviors Body, but Christ anew begotten,
and born again upon the Altar. And not his Body only (that is not half enough)
but as the Canon of Trent tells us, there is totus Christus una cum anima and
Divinitate, Lact. l. 2. cap. 6.
, whole Christ both body and soul, and the Godhead also, personally and
substantially on the blessed Sacrament. That he is present every where in his
power and Spirit, there is none of us which denies. If they can have his
bodily presence also in so short a warning, what use can they pretend for a
Vicar General? Adeo Argumenta ex falso petita ineptos habent exitus In 3. Sess.
sab. Iul. 3. Can. 1.
, said Lactantius rightly, Besides it is a Maxim in Ecclesiastical Polity,
(...), etc. Conc. Chalcedonens.
* that the external Regiment of the Church of Christ is to be fitted to the
frame and order of the Civil State. Not if the State were popular (for there
were then no popular States when that rule was made), the Government of the
Church should be also popular: but that within such principal Cities as were
assigned for the residence of the Civil Magistrate, the Prelates of the Church
should be also planted. This I am sure no learned Romanist can deny. And
granting this I would have any of them show, when any Monarch having diverse
Kingdoms under his command, did ever yet appoint one General Viceroy to
command them all. Certain I am that the Assyrian Monarchs had in their several
Provinces several Governors, as is apparent out of the Book of Daniel Dan.
3.12.
. So had the Parsians too in the Book of Hester Hest. 3.12.
; and so the Romans too in St. Lukes Luke 3.1.
Gospel: Not to say any thing of the Monarchs of the present times, all using
the same Arts of Empire. And then what reason can there be, considering that
the Church is bound to follow the external Government of the Civil State, that
one Lieutenant General should be thought so necessary to govern all Churches in
the World; seeing one General Viceroy was not thought sufficient to govern but
a few particular Kingdoms? Or were it fit and necessary that it should be so,
yet those of Rome can show no more Commission from our Lord and Savior, for
the appropriating of this Office to St. Peter's Chair, then a bare Tradition.
For Bellarmine, although he labored, no man more, in the search hereof, could
find no Text in all the Gospel which would serve his turn: and thereupon
concludes at last, that howsoever some Supremacy in sacred matters might seem
allotted to St. Peter, tamen Pontificem Romanum Petro succedere express non
haberi in Scriptura Bellarm. de Pont. l. 2. c. 12.
, yet that the Pope succeeded Peter is not found in Scripture. What then shall
we conceive of the Popish Parasites, who give their Pope the title of
Vice-deus, as Paulo V. Vice-deo, the Numeral letters of the which make up 666
as one well observes; but that they are instruments to bring in the
Antichrist? What of that horrid blasphemy of Petrus Bertrandus, who boldly
taxes Christ of great indiscretion, in case he had not left behind him such a
Vicar General? P. Bertrand. de jurisd. Ecclesiast. and civ. c. 7.
Visus esset Deus, ut cum reverentia ejus loquar, indiscretus fuisse, nisi unum
post se talem Vicarium reliquisset, as his own words are: and such they are, as
never any Christian durst pronounce but he.

If then it be so disagreeable to the Kingdom of Christ, to have one General
Viceroy to direct the whole, let us next see, whether they have not somewhat
better provided for him, who would impose upon the Church, as many petite
Popes, as there be Parishes; if not three for one. For by their Platform every
Parish must be furnished with a distinct Presbytery; and that Presbytery to be
absolute within it self, having authority to censure, excommunicate, and what
not else, that appertains to Ecclesiastical jurisdiction. By means whereof
they make Christ's Body far more monstrous then the monster Hydra; not to have
seven heads only, but seven hundred thousand. Yet this device both new and
monstrous though it be, must needs be reckoned a chief part of our Saviors
Kingdom. For as their Champions gave it out in their public Writings, their
Controversy was not only about Caps and Surplices, as the world imagined; but
whether JESUS CHRIST should be King or not Rogers in his preface to the 39.
Articles.
. Their Discipline they honored with the Title of Christ's holy yoke, his
Scepter, and their endeavors, as they said, aimed at this end only, to build up
first the walls of Jerusalem, and then to set Christ's Throne in the midst
thereof Id. ibid.
. For why, say they, the planting of Presbyteries is the full placing of Christ
in his Kingdom; which whosoever shall reject, (I use their own words still, no
others) refuse to have Christ reign amongst them, and do deny him in effect to
be their King. Thus went the cry of old for the Presbyterians; and now the
Independents use the self same words, appropriating Christ's Kingdom, and his
Throne, and Scepter, unto their separate Congregations and Conventicular
meetings. And questionless it were an excellent representation of Christ's
glorious Kingdom, to have a company of shopkeepers and inferior handicrafts,
sitting upon the bench with their zealous Pastor, as if they were the twenty
four Elders in the Revelation Apoc. 4.4.
, pronouncing some sad judgment on the Tribes of Israel: and after hasten to
their Trades, as Quintius the Dictator did unto his plough, ut ad opus relictum
festinasse videatur Florus hist. l. 2. c. 26.
, as my Author has it. And yet so highly do they magnify this new Kingdom of
theirs, which they have raised up for themselves in our Saviors Name, that
Kings and Princes must be suffered to rule no longer, then they submit
themselves and their Supreme power to the divine authority of their new
Presbyteries. For Beza quarrelleth with Erastus, and thinks him guilty of high
Treason against God Almighty, quod Principes and Reges a Divina ista
Dominatione exemerit Beza de Excommu. adv. Erast.
, because he does not think it fit that Kings and Princes should submit unto
this fine yoke, the Judgment seat of Christ, as he idly calls it. And some
amongst our selves have not spared to say, that a true government of the Church
there can never be, till Kings and Queens submit themselves unto the Church,
subject their Scepters, and lay down their Crowns before this Throne, yea lick
up the very dust of the Churches feet Rogers in his preface, etc.
, and willingly endure such Censures, (be they what they will) as the Divine
Presbytery shall impose upon them. Huic Disciplinae omnes Reges and Principes
fasces suos submittere necesse est; as Travers once did state it in his Book of
Discipline. And could they bring it once to that (as they much endeavor it) it
were Regale Presbyterium a Royal Presbytery to the purpose, though not unto
the purpose the Apostle speaks of.

To join these Foxes, the Genevian and Roman, both together, which though they
look two several ways, as if they were to run quite contrary to one another; do
yet carry firebrarnds in their Tails, as once Sampsons did, and like them are
combined to destroy our harvest: I would commend unto them that Viceroy, or
Vicar General, (for I perceive they will have one) which once Tertullian did
commend to the Primitive Church, even the holy Ghost. For in his Treatise de
Virgin. veland. he calls him in plain terms Vicarium illum Domini Spiritum
sanctum Tertul. de veland. Virgin.
, and does assign this Office to him, dirigere, ordinare, and ad perfectum
perducere Disciplinam, to direct, order, and dispose of us in such a manner, as
may make us perfect at the last in all Christian piety. But if they will have
nothing to do with the holy Ghost, as I think they will not in this business,
we shall then find them lawful Viceroys made of flesh and blood; and those
too of Christ's own appointment, not of man's devising. That he does rule his
Church in things which concern salvation, by men in sacred Orders is confessed
on both sides: and that he does preserve the same in external Order, at peace
and decency, and in the beauty of holiness, by the power of Christian Princes,
is affirmed in Scriptures. Why else are Kings entitled the Nursing Fathers,
and Queens the nursing mothers Esa. 49.23.
of the Church of Christ, but for the protection which they give, and their
superintendency over it in their several Kingdoms? Kings are Christ's Viceroys
on the earth in their own Dominions, over all persons in all causes, as well
Ecclesiastical as Civil the Supreme Governors. And so are Bishops in the first
sense, in their several Dioceses, and under them those Presbyters which have
cure of souls. Which lest we may be thought to say without good authority, we
call the Popes themselves to witness against those of Rome, (and to the others
will say more in the following Paragraph). For Pope Eusebius in his third
Epistle dec^etory, (which whatsoever credit it be of amongst learned men, must
be good ad homines) says plainly that our Savior is the Churches head; and
that his Vicars are the Bishops to whom the Government and Ministry of the
Church is trusted. Caput Eccles^ae Christus est, Vicarii autem Christi
sacerdotes sunt Eusebius. Epistol. 3. in Tom. Council.
. And Sacerdotes in those times did signify the Bishops, no inferior Order.
For further proof whereof (if more proof be needful) consult St. Ambrose on 1
Cor. cap. 11. St. Austin in his questions on the Old and New Testament, qu.
127. The Author of the Imperfect work ascribed to St. Chrysostom, Hom. 17. the
Fathers of the Council of Compeigne, and diverse others: all of which call the
Bishop in most positive terms, Vicarium Christi, the Vicar of Christ. And for
the King, so said Pope Eleutherius in a letter of his to Lucius a King of
Britain, no great Prince assuredly, but the first Christian Prince that ever
was in the world: Vicarius Dei vos estis in regno vestro Epist. Eleuth. in
leges Ed. Confess. Spelm. in Collect. Council.
, you are Gods Viceroy or Lieutenant in your own Dominions. Which title Edgar
(as I take it) a West Saxon King, did challenge as his own of right, in a
speech made unto his Clergy in their Convocation, or some such like Synodical
meeting. The like occurs of William the Conqueror, who in a Parliament of his
is called Vicarius summi Regis, as is said by Bishop Jewel in the Defense of
the Apology, part. 5. cap 6. sect. 3.

And this perhaps the sticklers for Presbytery will not stick to grant, who
will allow Kings to be Gods Vice gerents, so they be not Christ's; and if not
Christ's, then not to intermeddle in such things as concern the Church, but to
betake themselves merely unto secular matters. Beza has so resolved it against
Erastus. Our Savior Christ, says he, has told us, that his Kingdom is not
of this world, adeo ut, (...) administrationi nunquam se immiscuerit, and
therefore would not be a Judge in a Temporal difference; and thereupon it is
inferred, that Secular Princes must not meddle in such things as concern
Christ's Kingdom. But none have spoke more plainly in it then our Scottish
Presbyters, from Father Henderson down to Cant, and Rutherford; who build their
Presbyterian Platform upon this foundation, that Kings receive not their
authority from JESUS CHRIST, but from God the Father. Which being so pernicious
a Maxim to the right of Kings, and so derogatory to the honor of our Lord and
Savior; I shall in brief sum up some passages in holy-Scripture, and other
good authorities from the ancient Fathers, as may abundantly convince them of
most gross absurdity, in offering such strange fire in the Church of God. For
first our Savior, who best knew his own Prerogative, has told us that All
power is given to him both in Heaven and Earth Mat. 28.^^.
. If all, then doubtless that of ordaining Kings, which are the greatest powers
on earth. If all, then must it be by him, as indeed it is, (or Solomon mistook
the matter) By whom Kings reign and Princes decree justice Prove. 8.15.
. In reference to this power no question but St. Paul calls him Rex Regum, or
the King of Kings. He is, says the Apostle, the only Potentate, the King of
Kings and Lord of Lords 1 Timothy 6.15.
. By the same title he is called in the Revelation, chap. 17. verse. 14. And
this not only in the way of excellency, because a greater King and a more
puissant Lord then any here upon the earth: but also in the way of derivation,
because from him all Kings and Princes whatsoever do derive their power. Just
so, and in the self same sense, some of the mighty Monarchs amongst the
Gentiles, having inferior Princes under their command, and such as do derive
all authority from them, do call themselves the Kings of Kings. Rex Regum
Arsaces, the old style of the Parthian Emperors. This further proved, and very
significantly inferred from another place of the Revelation, where it is said
of Christ, the Lamb, that he has on his vesture and on his Thigh a name
written, viz. Kings of Kings and Lord of Lords Apoc. 19.16.
. In which last place there are two things to be observed which concern this
point, the one that this name of King of Kings, and Lord of Lords is fixed and
settled in Christ's Person, as the Son of man: the other, that all Kings are De
femore Christi, certainly of his appointment and Ordination, as if they were
descended from his very loins. Nor want we of the Fathers which affirm the
same. St. Athanasius paraphrasing on this Text of Scripture, And he shall reign
in the house of Jacob for ever, etc. says plainly Athanas. Sermon. de B. Virg.
, (...), that is to say, Christ having received the Throne of David has
transferred the same and given it to the holy Kings of Christians. And so
Liberius, one of the Popes of Rome, writing unto the Emperor Constantius (a
Prince extremely wedded indeed to the Arian faction) admonishes him not to
fight against Christ, (...) (s), who had advanced him to the Empire, nor to be
so unthankeful to him, as to countenance any impious opinion, that was held
against him. Add to these two, though these the great Patriarchs of the Roman
and Egyptian Churches, the suffrage of the Fathers assembled at the Council
holden in Ariminum, who writing to the same Constantius, and speaking of our
Lord and Savior, adds these following words, viz. (...) Socrat. Hist. Eccles.
l. 2. c. 29.
, that is to say, By whom thou reignest, and have Dominion over all the world.
And this, no question, is the reason why all Christian Princes do place the
Cross upon the top of their Royal Crowns. For though they use it as a badge of
their Christianity, and to acknowledge that they are not ashamed of the Cross
of Christ; yet by allotting to it the superior place they publish and confess
this also, that they do hold their Crowns by and under him. Let us not then be
cheated by this new distinction, that Kings are Gods Viceroys but not Jesus
Christ's; though the distinction be much hugged by our great Novators. Who
intend nothing else thereby but to throw down Crowns and lay them at the foot
of their Presbyteries; and to set up instead of the Regal power, their own dear
Tribunal, a Sovereignty in all causes Ecclesiastical, to overruled it first,
and extirpe it afterward; as the right learned Bishop of Kell-Alla, very well
observes Sacros. Regum Majestas cap. 5.
.

In these ways, and by these several means and subordinate Ministers, does
Christ administer the Kingdom committed to him. And this he does, continually
sitting at the right hand of God the Father, and there to sit until his
enemies be made his footstool. This David did foresee by the spirit of
Prophecy, The Lord (says he) said unto my Lord (i. e. the Lord God almighty
said to my Lord CHRIST JESUS) Sit thou on my right hand until thy enemies be
made thy footstool Psalm. 110.1.
. This the Apostle also verifieth and affirms of Christ. But this man after he
had offered one Sacrifice for sins is set down for ever on the right hand of
God Heb. 10.12, 13.
, from henceforth expecting till his enemies be made his footstool. And this he
also tells us in another place, saying of Christ that he must reign till he
shall have put all his enemies under his feet 1 Cor. 15.15.
. Till then his Kingdom is to last, and till that time he is to sit at the
right hand of God in all power and Majesty. If it be asked when that will be
that all his enemies shall be subdued and subject to him; we answer, at the end
of this present world, when there is no enemy left to be destroyed. Now the
last enemy which is to be destroyed is death Ibid. v. 26.
, says the same Apostle. And thereupon we may infer, that while death
reigns in opposition to the Lord of life; and sin in a defiance to the Lord
of righteousness, that hitherto we have not seen all things put under him Heb.
2.8.
; and therefore must expect yet a little longer, before he shall deliver up the
Kingdom unto God the Father. But then indeed when Death is utterly destroyed,
and all the Saints admitted to the glories of eternal life, when all things are
subdued unto him, then also shall the Son himself be made subject to him, that
did put all things under him, that is God the Father 1 Cor. 15.28.24.
: Then when he has put down all rule, and all authority, and power, then
comes the end, and then he shall deliver up the Kingdom unto God the Father,
that God may be all in all. This is the sum of St. Paul's argument in that
point. In which there being many things not easy to be understood, I shall not
think my time ill spent, to make a short Paraphrase and discourse upon it, that
so we may perceive more fully the Apostles meaning. And first he says that
CHRIST must reign till he has put all things under his feet, that being one of
the especial parts of the Kingly function, as before was shown, to save and
defend his Church from the hands of her enemies; and for the enemies
themselves, to crush them with a Scepter of iron, and break them in pieces like
a Potters vessel. When this is done, when he has trodden under foot all his
mortal enemies, the persecutors of his Church, false Prophets, false Apostles,
and the great Antichrist himself, which labor to seduce even the very Elect:
when he has subjugated the powers of Hell, and that sin has no more dominion
over us, yet we shall still lie under the power of death until the last and
general Resurrection. Death therefore is the last enemy to be destroyed, that
being delivered from his thraldom, raised from the grave which is his prison,
and all those bonds and fetters broken by which we were held captive under his
command, we may be made partakers of eternal life, and reign with Christ for
ever in his heavenly glories. When that time comes, when there are neither
enemies from which to protect his Church, nor any Church to be instructed in
the ways of godliness, according to the Nomothetical part of the Regal Office:
then comes the end, the end of all things in this world, which shall be no
more; the end of Christ's Kingdom, as the Mediator between God and man, man
having by the power of his mediation, attained the end of his desires, the
guerdon and reward of his faith and piety. This being done, the rule of Satan,
and the authority of sin, and the power of death, being all broken and subdued;
he shall first raise our mortal bodies in despite of death, pronounce the
joyful sentence of absolution on them in despite of sin; and finally advance
them to that height of glory from which Satan fell, to the confusion of the
Devil and all his Angels. And having so discharged the Office of a Mediator,
for executing which he sat at the right hand of God, he shall deliver up unto
God the Father, the right and interest which he had in the Kingdom of Grace,
consisting in the building up of his Elect in faith, hope, and charity, that
they with him, and he with them, may reign forevermore in the Kingdom of
glory. Where there shall be no use of Faith, for they shall see God face to
face, and faith is the existence of things not seen Heb. 11.1.
; and less of hope, for hope is the expectancy of things desired, which being
once obtained puts an end to hope. Charity only shall remain, for that never
cease 1 Cor. 13.8.
, and therefore said to be the greatest of the three Theological virtues, of
which the Apostle there discourses, 1 Cor. 13.13* And so Primasius has
resolved it. In this present life (says he) there are three, in the life to
come only the love of God, and his Augels and of all the Saints. That
therefore is the greater which is always necessary, then that which once shall
have an end Primas. Hom. 34. in 1 Cor.
. The like St. Austin before him, The greatest of all is charity, because when
every one shall come to eternal life, the other two failing, charity shall
continue with increase, and with greater certainty Aug. de Doct. Chr. l. 1. c.
39.
. And finally before both, thus St. Chrysostom (and these three witnesses
enough), The greatest of these is Charity, because they pass away, but that
continues Chrysostom. in 1 Cor. c. 13.
.

I must confess there is hardly a more difficult Text in all the Scripture,
then this of Christ's delivering up the Kingdom unto God the Father; nor which
requires more care in the Exposition, for fear of doing injury unto God or
Christ; (conceive me still of Christ in his humane nature.) For neither must we
so understand the place, as if God reigned not now at the present time, nor was
to reign at all until this surrendry of the Kingdom by Christ our Savior.
That were injurious to the power and Majesty of Almighty God by whom all things
were made; and by whom all made subject unto Christ's command: for he it is who
did put all things under him, says the Apostle. Nor must we understand it so,
as it Christ delivering up the Kingdom had no more to do, but was reduced to
the condition of a private Saint: that were injurious to the dignity of our
Lord CHRIST JESUS. Nec sic arbitremur eum tra^iturum Deo and Patri, ut adimat
sibi, as St. Austin has it, we must not think, says he, that he will so
deliver up the Kingdom unto God the Father, as to divest himself of all Power,
Majesty. Not so: His meaning is but this at most, (taking the word Kingdom in
the usual and accustomed sense) that the form of governing this Kingdom shall
then be altered: S^n, Hell, and Death being all subdued, as in himself before,
so in all his Members; and Heaven replenished with those Saints, for whose
sakes principally he received the Kingdom. And though this Exposition be both
safe, and general, yet I conceive it may admit another sense, and such as do
most happily avoid those difficulties, which otherwise it may seem to be
subject to. What then if we should say, that by Regnum here, we are so
understand only filios Regni; if by the word Kingdom in this place, St. Paul
means those who are called the Children of the Kingdom Mat. 13.38.
, in another place: and that by the delivering up of the Kingdom unto God the
Father, we are to understand no more then the presenting of his children
(Behold I and the children whom thou have given me Heb. 2.35.
) to the fight of God; to be received into his glories, and crowned by him with
immortality. Assuredly, if I should both say it, and stand to it too, I should
not think the Exposition either forced, nor new. Not forced, for Metonymies of
this kind in the Book of God, and in all Classick Authors too, are exceeding
obvious. For Classick Authors first, (to name two or three) we have in Tacitus,
Matrimonium Principale ( pessimum principalis Matrimonii instrumentum Tacit.
Hist.
) for the Princes wife. And in the Poet Coelum, Heaven, for Coelites, the
heavenly Citizens; as Coelo gratissimus amnis, a River very acceptable unto
those in heaven. O Coelo dilecta domus, an house beloved of the Gods, in
another Poet. Thus also in the holy Scripture, Regale Presbyterium, a Royal
Priesthood, 1 Pet. 2. verse. 8. is put for a society of Royal Priests: Regnum
which is the word here used, is in our English rendered Kings. Fecit nos Regnum
and sacerdotes, says the Vulgar Latin; He has made us Kings and Priests,
says our Translation Apoc. 1.6.
, Apoc. 1. verse. 6. And more then so: in the 13. of St. Matthewes Gospel, the
word Regnum is directly used by Christ our Savior, pro filiis Regni, the
Kingdom, for the sons of the Kingdom. The Kingdom of Heaven, says he, is
like a Merchant man. i. e. the children of the Kingdom of Heaven are like to
Merchant men seeking godly pearls, verse. 24. Use but the word so here, as in
that of St. Matthew, and the delivery of the Kingdom unto God the Father, will
signify no more then the presenting of the Saints, as before I said, or
tendering Gods adopted Sons, (which are the children of the great King and the
Kingdom too) to their heavenly Father. This shows the Exposition is not
forced, we are sure of that. And we have hopes to prove that it is not new;
being I think as old as St. Augustines time. For asking this question of
himself, What is the meaning of this Text, Then shall he deliver up the
Kingdom unto God the Father? He makes this answer, Quia justos omnes in quibus
nunc regnat, etc. August. de Trinit. l. 1. c. 7.
. The meaning is, that he shall bring the righteous persons in whom he reigns
as Mediator between God and man, unto the blessed Vision of Almighty God, that
they may see him face to face. And in another place to the same effect, It is
as much as if he should have said in other words, Cum perduxerit credentes ad
contemplationem Dei and Patris Id. ibid.
, Then shall he bring the faithful to behold the face of God the Father. Which
Faithful, or the body of his holy ones, he calls plainly in another place, by
the name of Regnum (the word here used by the Apostle): affirming of the Saints
of God, eos ita esse in Regno ejus ut ipsi etiam sint Regnum ejus Aug. de
Civit. dei. l. 20. c. 9.
. They are (says he) estated in the Kingdom of God, but so as to be his
Kingdom also. But this discourse is out of season, though not out of the way.
For though our Savior shall deliver up the Kingdom unto God the Father (in
what sense soever we understand it) yet shall not this be done till after the
day of general Judgment, till he has judged the quick and dead, and given to
every one according to his works. Which is the last act of his Regal Office,
and the subject of the following Article.

ARTICLE VIII. Of the Eighth ARTICLE OF THE CREED Ascribed unto St. MATTHEW.
(...). i. e. Inde venturus judicare vivos and mortous. i. e. From thence he
shall come to judge the quick and the dead.
CHAP. XV. Touching the coming of our Savior to Judgment both of quick and
dead; The souls of just men not in the highest state of bliss till the day of
judgment; and of the time and place and other circumstances of that action.
WE are now come unto the last and greatest act of the Regal Office, the
supreme power of Judicature; and to the best part also of the Royal power,
potestas vitae and mortis, the power of life and death as the Lawyers call it.
All other acts of the Kingly function he executes sitting at the right hand of
God in the Heavenly places. But when he comes to judge both the quick and the
dead, his Judgment Seat shall be erected in some visible place (though still
at the right hand of Almighty God) where both the wicked shall behold him, to
their final confusion, and his obedient Servants find access unto him, to
their endless comforts. And this is also the last and highest degree of his
exaltation; the last in order, but the highest in esteem and honor. The first
step or degree of his exaltation was his descent into hell, to beat the Devil
at his own home, in his strongest fortress, and take possession of that part
of his Kingdom: Devils as well as Men and Angels, things under the earth, as
well as on the earth and above the heavens, being to bow the knee before him,
and be subject to him. This was done only in the fight of the Devils, and the
infernal fiends of hell; but in the next, which was his resurrection, he had
both men and Angels to bear witness to it; and some raised purposely from the
dead to attend him in it. The third degree or step (for he still went higher)
was his ascending into heaven, performed openly in the sight of the people; and
so performed, that it excelled all the triumphs which were gone before: the
blessed Angels coming out to meet him, the Saints incompassing him about to
wait upon him; the Devil and his Angels led in chains behind. After this comes
his inthronizing at the right hand of God, the Angel^ and Archangels, all the
hosts of heaven, falling down before him; the Saints and Martyrs joining to
make up the consort, and saying with a loud voice, Worthy is the Lamb that was
slain to receive power, and riches, and strength, and wisdom, and honor, and
glory, and blessing Apocal. 4.12. and 14.
; Blessing, and honor, glory and power, be unto him that sits upon the
throne, and unto the Lamb for evermore. The last and greatest as I said is his
coming to judgment, solemnized in the sight both of men and Angels, of the
unjust and righteous person, yea and the Devil and his Ministers, all which
shall be attendant at that grand Assize; some to receive their several and
particular sentences, and some to put the same into execution.

In my discourse upon this Article I shall take for granted, that there shall
be a day of judgment. He ill deserves the name of Christian that makes question
of it. And to say truth, it is a point of so clear an evidence, that the wiser
and more sober men amongst the Gentiles, though guided by no other light then
that of natural reason did subscribe unto it. For as Lactantius one much versed
in their books and writings, has told us of them Lact. l. 1. c. 18.
, not only the Sibyls who may seem to have been inspired with the Spirit of
Prophecy, but Hydaspes, and Mercurius surnamed Trismegistus were of that
opinion: delivering, as with one assent, this most certain truth, that in the
last age the godly being severed from the wicked men, with tears and groans
shall lift up their hands to Jupiter, and implore his aid for their
deliverance; and that Jupiter shall hear their prayers and destroy the wicked.
And all these things says he are true, and shall accordingly come to pass as
they have delivered, nisi quod Iovem illa facturum dicunt quae deus faciet, but
that they do ascribe to Jupiter, what belongs to God. Nor want there pregnant
reasons which may induce a natural man, if wilfully he do not quench that light
of reason which is planted in him, to be persuaded strongly of a future
judgment. For granting that there is a God, and that God is just, and seeing
that in this present world, such men as were endued with most moral virtues,
were subject to disgrace and scorn, and many times brought to calamitous ends;
and on the other side voluptuous persons who made their belly their God and
their glory their shame, to live in peace and plenty, much reverenced and
respected by all sorts of people: right reason could not but conlude, that
certainly there must be some rewards and punishments after this life ended,
which God in his eternal justice would proportion to them, according as they
had deserved. And this was David's contemplation in the book of Psalms. He had
observed of wicked and ungodly men, that they came unto no misfortune like
other folks, neither were they plagued like other men; that they did prosper in
the world, had riches in possession, and left the rest of their substance to
their babes Psalm. 17.14.
: but that he himself and other children of God, who cleansed their hearts and
washed their hands in innocence, were not only chastened every morning, but
punished also all day long. Which though at first it made him stagger in the
way of Godliness, so that his feet had welnigh slipped: yet upon further
consideration he resolved it thus, that God did set them up in slippery places,
but it was only to destroy them and cast them down, and that at last for all
their glories they should perish, and be brought to a fearful end. The Parable
of Dives and Lazarus serves for confirmation of this. Upon whose different
fortunes Abraham gave this censure, Son remember that thou in thy life time
enjoyedst thy good things, and Lazarus received evili: But now he is comforted,
and thou art tormented Luke 16.25.
. Some sins the Lord is pleased to punish in this present world, left else the
wicked man should grow too secure, and think Gods justice were asleep and
observed him not: and some he leaves unpunished till the world to come, to keep
the righteous soul in hope of a better day, in which he shall obtain the Crown
of his well deserving. And to this purpose the good Father reasons very
strongly. Should every sinner be punished in this present life, nihil ultimo
judicio reservari putaretur Aug. de Civ. dei. l. 1. c. 8.
, etc. It would be thought that there was nothing for Christ to do at the day
of judgment: And on the other side, if none, the providence and justice of
Almighty God, would be called in question by each sensual man Claudi an de
Ruffini caede.
, -- Qui numina sensu
Ambiguo, vel nulla putat, vel nescia nostri.


And therefore it is necessary also in respect of God that there should be a
day of judgment both of quick and dead; at least as to vindicating of his
Divine justice, which else would suffer much in the eye of men: when they
observe what we have noted from the Psalmist, with what prosperity and peace
the ungodly flourish, but go not as he did into the Sanctuary to understand of
God what their end should be. Add yet the Poets contemplation on this point was
both good and pious, and such as might become a right honest Christian: had he
intended that of eternal punishments which he speaks of temporal. But howsoever
thus he has it Id. ibid.
. Saepe mihi dubiam traxit sententia mentem,
Curarent Superi terras, an nullus inesset
Rector, and incerto fluerent mortalia casu, etc.
Abstulit hunc tandem Ruffini poena tumultum,
Absolvitque Deos; jam non ad culmina rerum
Injustos crevisse queror; tolluntur in altum,
Vt lapsu gravore ruant.
Often had I been perplexed in mind, to know
Whether the Gods took charge of things below;
Or that uncertain chance the world did sway,
Finding no higher ruler to obey.
Ruffino's fall at last, to this distraction
Gave a full end, and ample satisfaction
To the wronged Gods. I shall no more complain
That wicked men to great power attain;
For now I see they are advanced on high,
To make their ruin look more wretchedly.
Something there also is which may make us Christians not only to believe but
expect this day, considering that we are told in the holy Scriptures that we
shall all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, that every man may
receive according to that which he has done in his body whether good or evil
Romans 14.10
. The strength and efficacy of the Argument in brief is this. The bodies of us
men being the servants of the soul to righteousness, or else the instruments
to sin, in justice ought to be partakers of that weal and woe, which is
adjudged unto the soul; and therefore to be raised at the day of judgment, that
as they sinned together, or served God together, so they may share together of
reward or punishment. But because many times the soul sins without the body,
and many times without it does some works of piety, which God is pleased to
accept of: therefore as requisite it is that the soul separated from the body,
should either suffer torment or enjoy felicity, according as it has deserved
in the sight of God, whilst yet the body sleeps in the grave of death. And
on these grounds, next to the dictates and authority of the book of God, the
doctrine Philastr. de haeres.
of the general judgment has been built so strongly, that only some few
Atheists amongst the Gentiles, and none but the wicked Sect of Manichees
amongst the Christians, had ever the impudence to deny it.

That which concerns us most as Christians, and does especially relate to the
present Article, is that this judgment shall be executed by our Savior
Christ, sitting with power at the right hand of God the Father, but in the
nature and capacity of the Son of man. Hereafter shall ye see the Son of man,
sitting at the right hand of the power of God, and coming in the clouds of the
Air, Mat. 26.64. See the same also Mark 14.62. and Luke 22.69. The like we
have also in St. John's Gospel. The Father judges no man; but has committed
all judgment to the Son, Chap. 5* 22. What? to the Son according to his
eternal generation, as the Word of God? Not so, but to the Son of man. For so
it follows in that Chapter, viz. And has given him power also to judge,
because he is the Son of man, V. 27. And this we have directly from the Lords
one mouth. The Apostles also say the same. St. Peter first, God raised him up
the third day and showed him openly Act. 10.40, 42.
, And he commanded us to preach unto the people, and to testify that it is he,
which is ordained of God to be judge both of quick and dead. St. Paul next.
Henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of righteousness which the Lord the
righteous judge shall give me at that day 2 Timothy 4.8.
, and not to me only but to all those that love his appearing. So for St. Jude,
Behold the Lord shall come with thousands of his Saints to give judgment
against all men, and to rebuke all that are ungodly amongst them, of all their
ungodly deeds which they have committed, and of all the cruel speakings which
ungodly sinners have spoken against him Jude 14, 15.
. And this he cites out of the Prophecies of Enoch the seventh from Adam,
which shows that even the Patriarchs before the flood, were thoroughly
possessed with this sacred truth; and therefore not concealed from the holy
Prophets which have been since the world began. That it was manifested also to
the ancient Gentiles, I have no reason to believe. For though they might
collect upon grounds of reason, that there should be a day of judgment in the
world to come: yet that this judgment should be executed by the man CHRIST
JESUS, could not in possibility be discovered to them by the light of reason;
nor indeed by any other sight then by his alone, who was to be a light to
lighten the Gentiles, as well as to be the glory of his people Israel. And
therefore in my mind Lactantius might have spared that part of his censure
upon the judgment of Hydaspes before remembered Lactant. l. 7, c. 18.
: in which he approves of his opinion concerning the last day or the day of
doom, but adds that his not ascribing this great work to the Son of God, was
omitted non sine daemonum fraud, by the fraud and suggestion of the Devil. If
Hermes (or Mercurius) surnamed Trismegistus, understood so much ( quod tamen
non dissimulavit Hermes, as it follows after:) and that the verses by him
cited from the ancient Sibyls were by them spoken and intended (as he says
they were) of CHRIST our Savior, and of his coming unto judgment in that
dreadful day: we must needs say they had a clearer Revelation of it, then any
of the Prophets of the most high God; which for my part I have not confidence
enough to say. For in which of all the Prophets find we such a description of
Christ's coming to judgment as this which he ascribes to one of the Sibyls Id.
ibid. c. 19.
?

(...),
(...),
(...)
(...).
That is to say; Rolling up heaven, earths depths I shall disclose,
Then raise the dead, the bonds of fate unloose,
And deaths sharp sting; and next to judgment call
Both quick and dead, judging the lives of all.
Letting this therefore pass as a thing improbable, that any of the Heathen
Prophetesses should know more of Christ's coming to judgment, then was revealed
to any of the holy Prophets; or else deliver it in more clear expressions then
do occur in any of the Prophetical writers: we shall proceed unto the
execution of this judgment by our Lord and Savior, according to the scope of
this present Article. For which although no reason was or could be given by
those ancient sages, as those which lived before the coming of CHRIST, and
consequently were not made acquainted with his life and actions: yet there is
reason to induce a Christian unto this belief, were we not biassed to it by the
text of Scripture. For what could be more just in Almighty God, then to advance
his Son to the seat of judgment, to the end that having been dishonored
publicly both in life and death, scorned and contemned, and brought unto a
shameful end in the eye of men; he might have opportunity to show his great
power and majesty in the sight of all, but specially of his barbarous and
ungodly enemies? And unto this the Prophet Zachariah alludeth, saying, They
shall look on me whom they have pierced Zach. 12.10
. Which words, although St. John applies in his holy Gospel unto the piercing
of Christ's side, Chap. 19.37. yet in the Revelation he applies it to his
sitting in judgment, Behold, says he, he comes in the clouds, and all eyes
shall see him, and they also that pierced him, Chap. 1.17. And from these words
it is conceived I think not improbably, that the wounds in our Saviors body
shall then be visible to the eyes of all spectatours: to the great comfort of
the faithful, who do acknowledge their redemption to the blood of the Lamb;
and to the astonishment and confusion of all his enemies, but most especially
of them, qui vulnera ista inflixerunt Estius in Zechar. 12.
, by whose ungodly hands he was so tormented.

Here then we have good grounds to proceed upon, both in the way of faith and
reason, for the asserting of the day of general judgment. And yet somewhat
further must be said to remove a difficulty, which may else disturb us in our
way, before we look into the particulars of it. For possibly it may be said,
that there will be but little use of a general judgment, except it be for
ostentation of our Savious power: in regard that every man receives his
judgment, either life or death, as soon as he is freed from his earthly
tabernacle; For which there is sufficient proof in the book of God. This day
(said Christ our Savior to the penitent thief) shall thou be with me in
paradise Luke 23.43.
. As plain is that of the Apostle, It is appointed unto men once to die, and
after death the judgment Heb. 9.27.
. The same we find exemplifyed in the rich man and Lazarus: the soul of the
one as soon as dead, being carried into Abraham's bosom Luke 26.22, 23.
; the other being plunged in unquenchable flames. If so, as so it is most
certain, what use can be conceived of a general judgment, when all particular
persons have already received their sentence; what further punishments or glory
can be added to them, then Paradise to Gods Saints and servants, and the
unquenchable flames of hell for impenitent sinners. Which difficulty though
removed in some part before, as to the vindicating of the justice of Almighty
God, and the participation of the body in that bliss or misery, which the soul
presently is adjudged to on the separation, and finally the manifesting of
Christ's power and glory in the sight of his enemies: shall now be also cleared
as to that part thereof, which seems to place the soul in the height of
happiness, as soon as separate from the body, or in the depth of anguish and
disconsolation. And first, that the souls of just and righteous persons are in
the hands of God, in Paradise, in Abraham's bosom, yea in the very heavens
themselves, I shall easily grant. But that they are in the same place, or in
the same estate and degree of glory, to which they shall be preferred by Christ
in the day of judgment, I neither have seen text nor reason, which could yet
persuade me. Certain I am, the Scripture seems to me to be quite against it,
the current of antiquity, and not a few Moderns of good note and eminency to
incline very strongly to the other side. For Scriptures first, St. Paul does
speak indeed of a Crown of righteousness, to be given to him, and to all those
that love the appearing of Christ 2 Timothy 4.8.
, but not to be given them till that day, i. e. the day of his appearing. St.
Peter next informs of an incorruptible inheritance reserved for us in the
heavens; and more then so, prepared already 1 Pet. 1.4, 5.
, but not to be showed till the last time. In the last place we have St. John
acquainting us with the condition of the Saints, as in matter of fact, where he
tells us that the souls of the Martyrs under the Altar Apocal. 6.10, 11.
, where they were willed to rest themselves, till the number of their fellow
servants was accomplished. And though we grant the souls of righteous men
departed are in heaven it self; yet does it not follow by any good consequence,
that therefore they are in the highest Heaven, where God himself refideth in
most perfect majesty. The name of Heaven is variously used in holy Scriptures.
First for the Air, as where we find mention of the birds of heaven, Mat. 26.
and the clouds of heaven, Mark. 14. Next for the Firmament above, in which the
Lord has placed those most glorious lights, which frequently are called the
Stars of heaven, as Genesis 20. Then for that place, which St. Paul calls in one
text by the name of the third heaven, 2 Cor. 12.2. and in another place shortly
after by the name of Paradise, verse. 4. which is conceived to be the
habitations of the Angels, their proper habitation, as St. Jude calls it,
verse. 6. Into this place the soul of Lazarus was carried, as to Abraham's bosom;
to this our Savior promised to bring the soul of the penitent thief: Hitherto
Enoch and Eliah were translated by God, and St. Paul taken up in an heavenly
rapture. And to this place, or to some one or many of those heavenly mansion,
(for in my Fathers house there are many mansions Joh. 14.2.
, said our Lord and Savior) the souls of righteous men are carried on the
wings of Angels; there to abide, till they are called upon to meet their bodies
in day of day of judgment. And last of all it ^ignifyeth the highest heaven,
to which Christ our Savior is ascended, and sits at the right hand of God
in most perfect glory: Of which St. Paul tells us, that he was made higher
then the heavens, Heb. 7. and that he did ascend above all the heavens, Ephesians.
4. This is the seat or Palace of Almighty God, called as by way of excellency
the heaven of heavens, where his divine glory and majesty is most plainly
manifested, and therefore called by the Prophet, the habitation of his
holiness and of his glory Isa. 63.13.
. So then, the souls of righteous men deceased may be in Paradise, in the third
heaven, in Abraham's bosom: and yet not be admitted to the highest heaven
wherein God reigns in perfect glory, till Christ shall come again to judgment,
and take them for ever to himself into possession and participation of his
heavenly Kingdom.

That in this sense the Fathers understand the Scriptures, which mention the
estate of the Saints departed, will best be seen by looking over their own
words, according as they lived in the several Churches. First for the Eastern
Cherches, Justin Marter tells us, that the the souls of the righteous are
carried to Paradise, where they enjoy the company of Angels, Archangels, and
the vision of Christ our Savior; and are kept in places fit for them till the
day of the resurrection and compensation Just. Mart. qu. 75.
. Next Origin. The Saints (says he) departing hence, do not presently obtain
the full reward of their labors, but they expect us though staying and
slacking Origin in Levit. hom. 7.
; For they have not perfect joy, so long as they grieve at our Errors, and
lament our sins. Then Chrysostom more then once or twice, Though the soul were
a thousand times immortal as it is, yet shall she not enjoy those admirable
good things without the body Chrysostom. in 1. ad Cor. hom. 39.
. And if the body rise not again, the soul remains uncrowned without heavenly
bliss Id. ibid.
. Theodoret lived in the same times, and was of the same opinion also, saying,
The Saints have not yet received their Crowns; for the God of all expects the
conflict of others, that the race being ended, he may at once pronounce all
that overcome to be Conquerers, and reward them together Theod. in Heb. 11.
. Finally not to look so low as Oecumenius and Theophylact, who say almost as
much as Theoderet did; we have at once the judgment of many of the Fathers,
delivered by Andreas Caesariensis in a very few words: It is, says he, the
judgment of many godly Fathers, that every good man (after this life) has a
place fit for him, by which he may conjecture at the glory which is prepared
And. Caesar. in Apocal. c. 18.
. Look we now on the Western Churches, and first we have Irenaeus B. of Lions
in France affirming positively thus, Manifestum est, etc. It is manifest that
the souls of Christ's disciples shall go to an invisible place appointed them
by God, and there shall remain unto the resurrection; and after receiving their
bodies, and rising perfectly, that is corporally as Christ did rise, shall so
come to the Vision or sight of God Iren. l. 5. c 31.
. Tertullian next, It is, says he, apparent to any wise man, that there is a
place determined which is Abraham's bosom, for the receiving of the souls of
his sons: which region, I mean Abraham's bosom, though it be not heavenly (but
Tertullian was out in that) sublimior tamen inferis, yet being higher then the
inferi, or places below, shall give comfort to the souls of the righteous,
until the resurrection and the end of all things bring the full reward
Tertull. ad. verse. Marcion. l. 4
. So Hilarie B. of Poyctiers, The day of judgment is the day of everlasting
happiness or punishment; till which time death has every one under his
dominion, whilst either Abraham's bosom, or the house of torments reserveth
every man to judgment Hilar. in Psalm. 2.
. St. Ambrose to the same effect, till the fulness of time come, the souls
expect their due reward; for some of which pain, for others glory is provided
Ambros. de bon^ mortis. c. 10
. Next him St. Augustine his convert, After this short life thou shall not as
yet be where the Saints shall be, to whom it shall be said (in the day of
judgment) Come ye blessed of my father, etc. Thou shall not be there as yet,
who knows not that; but there thou shall be where poor Lazarus was seen a far
off by the proud richman August. in. Psalm. 36.
. In that rest shall thou securely expect the day of judgment, in which thou
shall receive thy body, and be changed, and be made equal with the Angels. St.
Bernard thus; you perceive that there be three states of the soul, the first in
this corruptible body, the second without the body, the third in perfect
blessedness. The first in the Tabernacles, the second in the Courts, the third
in the house of God Bern. in festo Omn. S. Sermon. 3.
; into which most blessed house of God, the souls (of the Saints) shall not
enter without us, nor without their own bodies.

I had not named St. Bernard amongst those Ancients, but only to the end that
it might be seen that this was generally the doctrine of the Western Church, as
to this particular; until the invocation of the Saints departed became first
to be put in practice, and afterward to be defended and imposed as good
Catholic Doctrine. For they saw well, that unless it were received for an
Orthodox truth that the Saints departed were admitted presently into the
beatificall vision of Almighty God; and in him see, as in a Mirror, what
things soever could be done or said on the earth beneath: it were in vain to
make unto them either prayers or vows, not being yet estated in their own full
glories, and consequently not admitted to the presence of God. And on the very
same reasons, for which the Church of Rome does admit the Saints to enjoy the
blessed vision of Almighty God in the heaven of glories; did Calvin labor to
decrie the received opinion in that point: though by long tract of time,
engendering prejudice and prepossession in the hearts of men against any
contrary position, it was become the general tenet of the Protestant Schools.
For well he knew, that if that doctrine could be rooted out of the minds of
men, by which the Saints were brought (though before their time) into an
habitation in the highest heavens: that of the invocation of the Saints
departed, which depends upon it, must of necessity perish with it. But
whatsoever moved him to opine so of it (for I am confident it was not any love
to the ancient Fathers) certain it is that he has freely declared his opinion
in it, in several places of his writings. In that entitled Psychopannychia, he
does thus express it, The souls of the Saints after death, be in peace, says
he, because they are escaped from the power of the enemy; but shall not reign
with Christ their King, until the heavenly Jerusalem shall be advanced to her
glory, and the true Solomon the King of peace shall sit on high on his tribunal
Calv. Psychopannychia.
. And this he does not only say, and leave the proof thereof to his ipse dixit,
as if that were enough to carry it over all the world: but cites Tertullian,
Chrysostom, Augustine, Bernard, (some of whose words we saw before) to
confirm the point. But seeing that tract of his has been called in question,
as if it did incline too much toward the Anabaptists: we will next look upon
his book of Institutions, where we find him saying, That since the Scripture
every where bids us to depend upon the expectation of Christ's coming, and
deferreth the Crown of glory till that time, we are to be content with the
bounds that God has appointed us; viz. that the souls of the godly having
ended their warfare depart unto an happy rest, where with a blessed joy they
look for the fruition of the promised glory; and that so all things shall stand
suspended until Christ appear Id. in Instit. l. 3. c. 26.. 6.
. The same he also intimates in another place, where he resolves, That not
only the Fathers under the Law, but even the holy men of God since the death of
Christ, are but in profectu, in progress, as it were, to that perfect
happiness, which is to be conferred upon them in the day of doom; that in the
mean time they abide in atriis in the out-courts of Heaven, and there expect
the consummation of their beatitude. And finally, none but our Savior Christ,
says he, has entered into the heavenly Sanctuary* where to the end of all the
world, Solus populi eminus in atrio residentis vota ad deum defert, he alone
represents to God the desires of his people, sitting a far off in the outward
Courts Ibid. c. 20.. 10.
. I know that Bellarmine does quarrel at these passages of Calvin's, and I
cannot blame him. He, and the common interesse of the Church of Rome, were so
engaged in the defense of the other opinion, without which that of the
invocation of Saints must needs fall to the ground, that it concerned them all
to calumniate Calvin, as the broacher of new Doctrines in the Church of Christ,
though in this point they find him countenanced by most ancient writers.
Neither does Calvin stand alone in this opinion* being seconded, though not in
so express terms as himself delivers it, by Bucer, Bullinger, Martyr,
Musculus, and some others also. And wonder it is, not that he was followed by so
many, but by so few prime men of the reformation, to whom his name and
authority were exceeding dear.

And if the case stand so with the Saints above, no question but it stands so
too with the souls below. For contrariorum par est ratio, as the old rule is.
And to the truth we have not only the testimony of the holy Scriptures, saying
expressly that God reserveth the unjust unto the day of judgment to be
punished, 2 Pet. 2. but of so many of the Fathers as do touch upon it, as may
appear by that of Hilarie and Ambrose before delivered. By which the other
passages of holy writ, as Jude v. 6. Mat. 8.29. and Romans 2.5. it is plain and
manifest that the torments of the damned and the Devils too, which are
inflicted on them for the present time, are far less then the vengeance of
eternal and external fire reserved until the day of judgment, and then
augmented upon all the reprobate both men and Angels. For grant the most which
had been said by any of the Ancients as to this particular, and we shall find
that it amounts to no more then this, that the souls of wicked men departed,
are presently made to understand by the righteous judge, the sentence due unto
their sins, and what they are to look for at the day of doom. Postquam anima
de corpore est egressa, subito judicium Christi de salute cognoscit August. de
Anim. and ejus Orig. l. 1.4.
, as St. Augustine has it. Which being once made known to the sinful soul,
standing before the throne of Christ, in the sight of heaven, she is forthwith
hurried by the evil angels to the mansions of hell, where she is kept as in a
Prison, under chains, and darkness, until the judgment of the great and
terrible day, Jude v. 6. And so we are to understand those words of St. Cyril,
saying, Anima damnata continuo invaditur a daemonibus, qui eam crudelissime
rapiunt and ad infernum deducunt Cyril. in Orat. de exitu Anim.
; unless we rather choose to refer the same unto the executing of the sentence
of their condemnation at the day of doom, as perhaps some may. But howsoever
they be hurryed by the Devils into the darkness of hell, as to the place
wherein they are to be secured till the day of judgment: yet that they feel
that misery and extremity of torments, which after the last day shall be laid
upon them, neither they nor any of the Ancients have delivered to us. For of
that day it is, not the day of their death, of which Scriptures do report such
terrible things, saying that the heavens shall vanish away, and be rolled up
like a scroule, that all the mountains and the hills shall be moved out of
their places Apocal. 6.15, 16, 17.
; and that the Kings of the earth and the mighty men, etc. that is to say, the
wicked of what sort soever, shall say unto the hills and rocks, Fall on us, and
hide us from the face of him that sits on the throne, and from the wrath of
the Lamb, for the great day of his wrath is come, and who is able to endure it?

And certainly the terrors of that day must needs be great, incomprehensible,
not only to the guilty conscience, but even unto the righteous souls, who
joyfully expect the coming of their Lord and Savior. For in that day, the Sun
shall be darkened, and the Moon shall not give her light, the Stars shall fall
from heaven, and all the powers thereof shall be shaken Mat. 24 29, 30, etc.
. And the sign of the Son of man shall appear in heaven, and then shall all
the kindred of the earth mourn, and they shall see the son of man coming in
the clouds of heaven with great power and glory. And he shall send his Angels
with the great sound of a trumpet, and they shall gather together the Elect
from the four winds, from one end of the heaven to the other. So far we have
described the fashion of that dreadful day, from the Lords one mouth. St. Luke
unto these former terrors does add the roaring of the Sea and the waters also.
Luke 21.25.
St. Peter, that the elements shall melt with fervent heat, and that the earth
also and the works thereof shall be utterly burned ^ Pet. 3.10.
. In this confusion of the world, and general dissolution of the works of
nature, the Lord himself shall descend from heaven in a shout, and in the voice
of an Archangel, and the sound of a trumpe 1 Thessalonians. 4.16, 17.
; and the dead in Christ shall rise first. Then we which live and remain shall
be caught up together with them in the clouds, (for though we shall not all
die, we shall all be changed, 1 Cor. 15.51.) and all together shall meet the
Lord Jesus in the Air. The meaning is, that at the sounding of this last
trump, the very same bodies which the Elect had before, though mangled by
tyrants, devoured by wild beasts or burnt to ashes, shall be raised again; and
being united to their souls shall be made alive, and rise out of the bed of
sleep like so many Joseph's out of prison, or Daniels from the den of the
roaring Lions. But as for such of the Elect, who at that sudden coming of our
Lord shall be found alive, the fire which burns up the corruptions of the
world and the works thereof, shall in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, (as
St. Paul tells us 1 Cor. 15.
) overtake them, as it finds them, at their several businesses; and burning
up the dross and corruption of their natural bodies, of mortal shall make
them to be immortal: which change shall be to them in the stead of death. In
this sort shall they meet the Lord coming in the clouds of the Air: where the
Tribunal or judgment seat of Christ shall be erected; that the ungodly man,
the impenitent sinner, who is not capable of coming into heaven for so much as
a moment (for no unclean thing, or any one that works abomination shall find
entrance there, Apocal. 21.27.) may stand before his throne, to receive his
sentence. So witnesses St. John in the Revelation: And I saw a great white
throne, and him that sat on it, from whose face fled away both the earth and
the heaven Apoc. 20.11, etc.
. And I saw the dead both small and great stand before God, and the books were
opened, and another book was opened which is the book of life; and the dead
were judged of those things which were written in the books according to their
deeds. And the Sea gave up the dead which were in her, and death and hell
delivered up the dead which were in them, and they were judged every man
according to his works; And whosoever was not found written in the book of
life, was cast into the lake of fire. To the same purpose and effect does
Christ himself describe this day and the manner of his coming unto judgment,
in St. Matthews Gospel: that which St. John calls the white throne, being by
Christ our Savior called the throne of his majesty, Mat. 25.31. At which time
all the nations of the world being gathered together before him, the good being
separated from the bad, and a brief repetition of their works being made unto
them Man. 25.34, etc.
: the righteous shall be called into the Kingdom prepared for them from the
foundations of the world; the wicked man be doomed to fire everlasting prepared
for the Devil and his Angels. For though Lactantius seem to think, that the
wicked shall not rise in the day of judgment, and does it, as he says
himself, literis sacris contestantibus Lact. l. 7. c. 20.
, on the authority and warrant of the holy Scriptures: yet certainly the
Scripture, as we see by these two last passages, is against him in it. That
which occasioned his mistake (if I guess aright) was those words of David,
viz. Therefore the ungodly shall not stand in the judgment Psalm. 1.5.
: which is not to be meant of their not appearing, but of their not daring to
stand to their trial, but shrinking under the heavy burden of their sins and
wickednesses.

Thus have I made a brief but a full description of Christ's coming to judge
both the quick and the dead; according as it is laid down in the book of God.
The substance of it we have there delivered in so plain a way, that every one
that reads it understands it also; unless he wilfully mistake and turn all to
Allegories. But for the Circumstances of this great and most glorious action,
that is to say, the method and the manner of it, the time and place, and other
things co-incident to those particulars: in those I shall crave leave to
enlarge my self a little further, as well for my own satisfaction, as the
content of the reader.

And first beginning with the time, there is but little, I confess, to be said
of that. Our Savior tells us in plain terms, that of that day and that hour
knows no man, no not the Angels which are in heaven, neither the Son, but the
Father Mar. 13.32.
. And yet as plain as these words are, they have given great matter of dispute
in the Christian Church: especially that part of them which concerns the Son,
and his not knowing when that day and that hour should come. The Arians
hereupon concluded against CHRIST'S divinity, as being ignorant of some things
which the Father knew. But unto this, the Fathers of that age answered very
rightly, that Christ speaks not of himself as God, or as the Word both made and
manifested in the flesh, but as he was the Son of man, to whom the Father had
not pleased to communicate the knowledge of so great a mystery. And of this
mind were Athanasius Sermon. 4. cont. Arium. Ambrose l. 5. de fide c. 8.
Nazianzen Orat. 4. de Theolog. Theodoret Anathem. 4. cont. Cyrill. Cyril of
Alexand^. l. 9. Thesaur. c. 4. the Author of the imperfect work on St. Matthews
Gospel ascribed to Chrysostom. Which though, no doubt, it was the most ready
and most satisfactory answer which could be given unto the objection: yet when
the learning of the Schools came to be in credit, this answer was conceived to
be derogatory to the honor of CHRIST; and many quaint devises found to avoid
the Argument, some of them so derogatory to the honor of Christ, that I think
a greater scandal could not possibly be laid upon him. And such I take to be
that of Estius, (though I think him to be one of the modestest men that ever
came out of the School of Ignatius Loyala) who tells us that Christ is said
to be ignorant of that day and hour, quia non sic eum didicerat a Patre ut
illum ulterius hominibus m^nifestare deberet Estius in Marc. 13.32.
, because he had not so learned it of his Father, as that he ought to make it
known to us men. More briefly thus, Christ says, he does does not know of that
day, and that hour, ut videlicet nobis notum faciat, he does not know it so, as
to tell it us. Which is in plain terms neither better nor worse, then to make
Christ the author of equivocation, so much in use amongst the Jesuits. For
though our Savior was not bound, nor did think it expedient, to communicate
all those things unto his Disciples, which had been imparted to him by his
heavenly Father: yet to put such a speech in the mouth of Christ, viz. I know
it not, that is to say, I do not know it so, as to tell it you, is such a
cunning piece of Iesuitisme, that it is hardly to be matched in all their
writings. And therefore leaving them to their strange devises, we will look
back again upon the answer of the Ancient Fathers: which though both right and
satisfactorie, as before I said; yet was it so deserted in the age next
following, that the Themistiani in the time of the Emperor Mauritius were
accounted heretics, and nicknamed commonly Agn^etae Damascen in lib. de
^aeres. Prateol. in Agnoetis.
, because they taught that Christ considered in his humane nature, was ignorant
of that day and hour of his own coming to judgment. And possible enough it is
they might still pass for heretics (did they live amongst us) if they
maintained this universally of Christ's humane nature, as if he neither did know
it, nor were capable of it; and not with reference to the time in which he
spoke it: there being many things communicated to him after his resurrection,
which before were not known unto him. And therefore I, for my part, shall
subscribe unto that of Origin, who tells us, that when our Savior spoke
these words he was indeed ignorant of the day of judgment; post resurrectionem
vero seivisse, quod tun^ Rex and Judex a Patre constitutus sit Orig. in Mat.
Tract. 30.
, but that he knew it after his Resurrection, because he was then made by God
both our King and Judge.

But whether Christ did know of that day or not, seems not much material to
some men, who because they would be wiser then Christ our Savior, have marked
us out the precise time of his coming to judgment. And some there be, who
think they do not trespass at all upon Gods prerogative (to whom it only does
belong to know the times and the seasons, Act. 1.7.) if they content themselves
with a certain year, and do not look so narrowly into it as to name the day. Of
the first sort was a Dutch Priest, in the parts near Noremburg, who being
skilful in Arithmetical calculations, concluded out of the numerical letters,
of this prediction in the Gospel, videbunt in quem pupugerunt, Ioh. 19.38. that
the world should end Ann. 1562. And having fooled himself in that, he presumed
so far as to name the very day, nay the hour it self, in which the world should
end, and Christ come to judgment: so far prevailing on his Parish that they
gave belief to his prediction, and at the day and hour appointed met all
together in the Chapel or Parish Church to hear their Prophet preach, and
expect Christ's coming Camerar. Medit. histor. c. 41.
. It were pity to leave the story so, and therefore I will tell the success
thereof, which in brief is this, No sooner were the people assembled together,
but there fell a great storm with thunder and lightning, and that in such a
violent and fearful manner, that they looked every minute for the Lords
appearing. But the day waxing fair again, and no Savior coming, the people
finding how they had been abused, fall on the Priest and had doubtless slain
him in the place if some of the more moderate men had not stayed their fury,
and helped the silly Prophet to get out of their fingers. Somewhat like this
of, Camerarius, we find in Espencaeus also in his Comment on the 3. Chap. of
the 2. of Tim. touching the Hutites, a by-branch of the sect of Anabaptists. Of
the next sort Alstedius a late famous writer, and Professor of Herborn in high
Germany has presumed so far, as to define the year of Christ's coming to judge
both the quick and the dead: which after his account shall be in the year of
CHRIST 3694. Alsted. Diatribe de mill annis Apocalyptitis.
(The best is he takes time enough not to be disproved) For being of opinion
(as it is plain he is) that there shall be a corporal resurrection of the Saints
and Martyrs, at least a thousand years before the general resurrection of all
flesh, during which time they shall enjoy all possible felicity that the world
can give, and fixing the beginning of those thousand years, in Ann. 2694. it
must needs follow thereupon, that the day of the general resurrection, and of
Christ's coming to judgment, must be in the year 3694. as before was said. But
before him Napeir a Scot, one of the Ancestors of the now right noble Lord of
Marchiston, adventured on the like attempt, although he differed very much in
his computation. For publishing a Commentary on the Revelation, Ann. 159^. he
will defer the end of the world no longer then to ninety two years after that
publication; which falls into the year 1685. Which though it comes two thousand
years before that of Alsted, yet was it put off long enough to save his credit;
the good man being like to die long before that time. Whereupon one of our own
Countrymen wrote this following Epigram Owen. Epigr.
.

Nonaginta duos durabit mundus in Annos,
Mundus ad arbitrium si stat obitque tuum.
Cur mundi finem propiorem non facis? ut ne
Ante obitum mendax arguerere? Sapis.
Which I find thus Englished to my hand, Ninety two years the World as yet
shall stand,
If it do stand or fall by your command.
But say, why placed you not the worlds end nigher?
Lest ere you dyed you might be found a liar.
Add unto this a pleasant jest which King James put upon the Author of the book
aforesaid (for such adventurers cannot be too much exposed to the public
scorn) and in brief is this, The Gentleman holding lands of the Crown of
Scotland, petitioned the King to have a longer term granted in his estate. The
King demanded of him how long time he desired to have added to it. To which
when he had answered five hundred years, God a my soul, replied the King, that
is four hundred years more then the world shall last, and I conceive you do not
mean to hold my Land in the world to come. And so dismissed him for that time,
although he after gratifyed him in his request, having thus made him sensible
of his own absurdities.

But leaving these Knights errant to seek new adventures, we will next look
unto the place appointed for this general Sessions; in which we have some light
of Scripture, and probabilities of reason to direct our search. This by some
very learned men is supposed to be in the Air, over the valley of Iehosaphat,
which is near mount Olivet, and both of them Eastward of Jerusalem. And this
they do upon these grounds. For first they say, the holy Scriptures seem to say
it in as plain words as may be. For thus says God the Lord Jehovah, I will
gather all nations into the valley of Jehosaphat, and plead with them there.
Cause thy mighty ones to come down, O Lord Joel. 2.2, 12.
; Let the heathen be wakened and come upon the valley of Jehosaphat; for there
will I sit to judge all the heathen round about. Besides the name of Iehosaphat
does signify as much, as The Lord will judge. And in this valley did God give
Iehosaphat a signal victory over the Ammonites, Moabites, and the inhabitants
of Mount Seir 2 Chronicles. 20.29.
; which was a type or figure of that final victory, which Christ the supreme
Judge shall give his Elect overall their enemies, in the last day, and in that
very place, as the Jewish Doctors do expound it. That of the Prophet Zechariah,
And his feet shall stand in that day on the Mount of Olives Zech. 14.4.
, which is before Jerusalem to the East, etc. though formerly applied by us
unto Christ's Ascension, may be accommodated also to his coming to judge the
world: The rather in regard it was said by the holy Angel unto his Disciples,
This same Jesus which is taken up from you into Heaven Act. 1.11.
, (being then upon the mount of Olives) shall so come in like manner as you
have seen him go hence. Which possibly may as well be meant of the place, as of
other the circumstances of his coming: and therefore by Aquinas and all the
rest of the old Schoolmen except Lombard and Alexander of Hales, is made to be
the second reason which they build upon, for nominating this valley (or rather
some place over it in the Air) to be the place appointed for the future
judgment. The third reason they take from a passage in the Prophet Ezekiel
compared with Christ's own words in his holy Gospel. The Prophet tells us of
Jerusalem, that it is placed in medio Gentium, in the very midst of the world:
and so accordingly it is seated by some Cosmographers. And Christ has told us
of the Angels, that they shall gather together the Elect from the four winds,
from one end of Heaven unto the other Matthew. 24.31.
. If then the Termini a quibus be the four parts of the world, and Jerusalem
be seated in the midst of the earth, as they say it is: the terminus ad quem
must be Jerusalem or some place near it; (and such is this Valley of
Iehosophat) or else some Angels must be thought to be of a more quick dispatch
then others, which were ridiculous to imagine. But that which is of greatest
moment, is that our Lord and Savior for ever blessed, was crucified and put to
open shame very near that place: Mount Calvary, and the Valley of Iehosaphat
being not far asunder, if not close together, and conterminous. And what can be
more probable, (for they propose not these proofs for Demonstrations) then that
where Christ was put unto public shame, he should again receive a more public
honor: and that where he himself was condemned and punished with so much
malice and injustice; he should appear to judge the world with such truth and
equity? These are the reasons brought to make good this Tenet, which as I
cannot easily grant to be convincing; so I am far from saying any thing in
reproof of that, which has such handsome probabilities to gain credit to it.

And now I am fallen upon these points, I will adventure on another, though
more nice then necessary. At least it may be so accounted, and I pass not for
it. Quilibet abundet in suo sensu. Let every man enjoy that liberty (I mean in
matters of this nature) which I take my self. We said that Jerusalem was
seated in the midst of the earth, and thereupon is called by some Geographers,
Vmbilicus terrae; and that as well Mount Olivet, as the Valley of Iehosaphat,
did both stand Eastward of that City. From hence it is by some inferred, and
their illation backed by no mean authority, that Christ our Savior did ascend
up into the East part of Heaven, (I mean that part of Heaven which answers to
the Equinoctial East upon the Earth); that in that part of Heaven, he sits
at the right hand of the Throne of Almighty God; and from the same shall also
come in the day of Judgment. The use that may be made out of this illation,
shall be interwoven in the file of this discourse; and altogether left unto the
judgment of the Christian Reader. That he ascended up into the Eastern part of
Heaven, has been a thing affirmed by many of the Ancients, and by several
Churches, not without some fair hints from the Scripture also. Sing unto God ye
Kingdoms of the earth, etc. Psalm. 6^.32.
says the Royal Psalmist, To him that rides on the Heavens as it were upon an
horse, said our old Translation; to him that rides on the Heaven of Heavens
from the beginning, as our new would have it. But in the Arabic it runs thus,
Sing unto the Lord that rides on the Heaven of Heavens in the Eastern part.
And so the Septuagint, that rides on the Heavens, (...), toward the East.
This Origin, who very well understood the Eastern languages, applies to
CHRIST, utpote a mortuis post passionem resurgens, and in Coelum post
Resurrectionem ad orientem ascendens, Orig. in locum.
i. e. who rose from the dead after his passion, and ascended up into Heaven
toward the East after his Resurrection. And so the Aethiopick reads it also,
viz. Who ascended up into the Heaven of Heavens in the East. Thus Damascen
affirms expressly, (...), that when he was received into Heaven, he was
carried up Eastward. And unto this, that of the Prophet Ezekiel may seem to
allude, where he says that the glory of the God of Israel, (Remember who it is
which is called in Scripture, the Glory of his people Israel, Luke 2.) pass^d
through the Eastern gate Eezk. 44.2.
, Therefore that gate was shut up, and might not be opened but to the Prince.
That being thus ascended into Heaven above, he sits in that part thereof at
the right hand of God, must needs be granted, if God be most conspicuously
seated in that part himself. And to prove this, we find this in the
Apostolical constitutions ascribed to Clemens, (take notice by the way of the
Antiquity of the custom of turning toward the East in our public prayers, so
generally received amongst us) who describing the Order of Divine service then
used in the Church concludes it thus, Then rising up and turning toward the
East, Let them pray to God, (...) Clement. Constit. Apost. ^l. 2. c. 61.
, who sits upon the Heaven of Heavens in the Eastern part. To this agrees
that of the Prophet Baruch, saying, Look about thee O Jerusalem toward the
East, and behold the joy that comes unto thee from God Bar. 4.36.
. Toward the East, that is to say, says Olympiodorus an old Christian writer,
(...) Olympiodor.
, toward JESUS CHRIST our Lord the Sun of righteousness. And this way also
looks that part of the old Tradition, derived as Irenaeus tells us, (who
lived near those times) ab Apostolorum Discipulis, from those which heard it of
the Apostles; that is to say, that the receptacle of the just and perfect men
is a certain Paradise in the Eastern part of the third Heaven. An argument that
the glory of God is most conspicuous in that part also of the Heaven of
Heavens, the proper mansion of the Highest, as before was shown. Finally, that
from the Eastern part of Heaven he shall make his last and greatest appearance
at this day of judgment; although it follows upon that which is said
already, has much stronger evidence. An Arabic Author Cited by Mr. Gregory,
p. 88.
writing on the duties of Christian Religion, and particularly of that Prayer,
directs us to turn our faces when we pray to the Eastern Coast, because that
is the Coast concerning which Christ said (unto whom be glory) that he would
appear from thence at his second coming. To the same purpose the Arabic Code
has a Canon saying, When ye pray, turn your selves toward the East; For so
the words of our Lord import, who foretold that his return from Heaven at the
later day should be like the Lightning, which glittering from the East flasheth
into the West. His meaning is, that we should expect his coming from the East.
John Damascen to the same effect, thus, For as the lightning comes out of the
East and shines even unto the West, (...), so also shall be the coming of the
Son of man; in which regard we worship him toward the East, as expecting him
from thence. And this says he Damascen.
, (...), is an unwritten tradition delivered to us from the very Apostles. Take
for a close, this of an old Confession of the Eastern Church, viz. We pray
toward the East, for that our Lord Christ when he ascended into heaven went up
that way, and there sits in the heaven of Heavens above the East. And in
very deed we make no doubt, but that our Lord the Christ as respecting his
humane nature, has his seat in the Eastern part of the Heaven of Heavens, and
sits with his face turned toward this world. To pray therefore or worship
toward the East, is to pray and worship toward our Savior. Nor is this only
the Tradition of the Eastern and Southern Churches, as by the forecited
Authors it may seem to be. We had it also in the West. For Paulus de Palacios a
Spanish writer, makes it the general Tenet of all Christian people, quod in
Orient humanitas Christi-sedeat, that Christ in reference to his humane
nature, sits in the Eastern part of Heaven; and that he is to come from
thence, where now he sits. And in an old Festival in this Church of England,
the Priest used thus upon the Wake days, or Feasts of Dedication, to exhort the
people; viz. Let us think that Christ dyed in the Este, and therefore let us
pray besely into the Este, that we may be of the number that he died for. Also
let us think that he shall come out of the Este unto the Doom. Wherefore let us
pray heartily to him and besely that we may have grace of contrition in our
hearts of our misdeeds, with shrift and satisfaction, that we may stand that
day on the right hand of our Lord IESV CHRIST. And so much for this Eastern
passage, for which I am principally beholding to that learned piece of Mr.
Gregory late of Christ's Church in Oxon: whom as I much esteemed when he was
alive, so have I made this free acknowledgement to the honor of his memory,
now he is deceased.

Having thus took some pains concerning the time and place of this great
action; let us next proceed unto the manner, from thence unto the method of it,
and so make an end. And in the manner of his coming there are specially th^se
three things to he considered, viz. the sign of the Son of man, the sound of
the Trumpet, and the Ministry of the blessed Angels: in all of which we shall
find something worth our Observation. Touching the sign of the Son of man,
which our Savior speaks of, as of a certain note and token of his coming to
judgment: it stands thus in Scripture; Then shall appear the sign of the Son
of man in Heaven, and then shall all the tribes of the Earth mourn, and they
shall see the Son of man coming in the Clouds of Heaven, with power and great
glory, Mat. 24.30. This sign then, whatsoever it is, is the prodromos or
forerunner of Christ's coming to judgment, of his second coming, as was the
Star which shined in the East of his birth or first coming into the world. And
this to make the Parallel more full and pertinent, shall appear visibly in the
East also, if the Authors whom I have consulted, do not much mistake it. If you
would know what sign this is; I answer that it is the sign of the Cross: a sign
like that which Christ vouchsafed to show from Heaven to the famous
Constantine. Of whom Eusebius has reported, from his own mouth too, that being
embarked in a war against Maxentius, and much perplexed in mind about that
affair, there showed it self unto him in an afternoon the form of a Cross
figured in the Air, and therein these words written (...), that is to say, in
this sign thou shall overcome Eusebius. de vita. Constable. l. 1.22.
. He adds, that after that Christ appeared to him in his sleep, holding forth
the very like sign unto him, bidding him cause the like to be framed or
fashioned in the Standard-Royal, and it should give him victory over all his
enemies. Which apparition of the Cross, or sign of the Son of man in the time
of Constantine, was a forerunner as it were of that petit Sessions, which
Christ at that time held against the cruel Persecutors of his Church and
people, Diocletian, Maximinus, Maximianus, Licinius, and the aforesaid
Maxentius, all which in very little time were brought to most shameful ends.
And that the sign of the Son of man, which our Savior speaks of as the
forerunner of the great and general Sessions, shall be no other then the sign
of the Cross shining in the Air; has the approved authority of the Ancient
Fathers, and the consent and testimony of the Western Church, and of the
Aethiopick also. For if you ask St. Hierom what this sign shall be; his answer
is, Signum hic Crucis intelligimus Hieronym. in Matthew. 24.
, that it was to be understood of the sign of the Cross. St. Augustine also
says the same, Quid est signum Christi, nisi crux Christi August. Homil. 118.
in Ioh.
, what is the sign of Christ, (or the Son of man) but the sign of the Cross?
Prudentius a Christian Poet of the Primitive times in an Hymn of his says of
this sign, Iudaea tunc signum crucis experta Prudent. de natali Chri.
, that then the Jews shall have experience of the sign of the Cross. Our
venerable Bede is of the same mind in this, with the other Fathers Beda in 24.
cap. Matthew. 24.
. Nor is it marvail that he was, for it was grown by this time the received
opinion of the Western Church, as appears plainly by that Anthem in her public
Rituals, viz. Hoc signum Crucis erit in Coelo, etc. This sign of the Cross
shall be seen in Heaven at Christ's coming to judgment. So also for the Eastern
Churches, that it shall be the sign of the Cross S. Chrysostom affirms
expressly, saying withal, that the light or luster of it shall be so
glorious, that it shall darken and obscure the Sun, Moon, and Stars Chrysostom.
in Mat. 24.
. Euthymius and Theophylact say as much for the Greek Churches; and so does
Ephrem Syrus for the Syrian also. The Ethiopian Church is so peremptory in it,
that it it is put into the Articles of their Creed, as their Zaba cited by Mr.
Gregory does affirm for certain. And finally, that it shall appear in the East,
is with no less certainty affirmed by Hippolytus Martyr, a Bishop of the
Primitive Ages, whose words are these; (...) (...) Hyposa.
, i e. For a sign of the Cross shall rise up in the East, and shine from East
to West more gloriously then the Sun it self, to give notice to the world that
the Judge is coming. And to say truth, there may be very good reason for this
old Tradition of the Cross. For what can be more honorable to our Lord and
Savior, or more full of terror to his enemies, then that the Cross of Christ
which they counted foolishness 1 Cor. 1.23.
, and more then so, esteemed the greatest obloquie and reproach of the
Christian faith: should at that day be made the Herald to proclaim his coming,
and call all Nations of the world to appear before him? No wonder if the Tribes
of the Earth did mourn, when that so hated sign did appear in Heaven, to call
them to receive the sentence of their condemnation.

For the Trump next, we find it mentioned in all places almost, in which we
meet with any thing of the day of Judgment. Our Savior tells us of the
coming of the Son of man, that he shall send his Angels with a great sound of a
Trumpet, Matthew. 24.31. St. Paul the like In a moment, in the twinkling of an
eye, at the last trump, ( for the Trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall be
raised incorruptible, and we shall be changed, 1 Cor. 15.52. And in another
place more fully, The Lord himself shall descend from Heaven with a shout, with
the voice of the Archangel and with the trump of Christ, and the dead in
Christ shall rise first, 1 These. 4.16. Now that which Christ and his Apostle
say of the time to come, the same St. John says of it, as of a thing done
before his face; speaking express^ly of this trumpet, both in the first chapter
of his Revelation, verse. 10. and in the 4. chapter, verse. 1. So far it is
agreed on without doubt or scruple. But then the difference will be thus,
whether the speech be proper, or only figurative, whether it were a real
Trumpet, or but Metaphorical. If figurative, then the phrase does signify no
more then this, that Christ shall find a means to call all the Nations of the
world to appear before him; as if it were with the sound of a trumpet: the
trumpet being used amongst the Jews by Gods own appointment, for calling the
Assembly and removing the camp of Israel Numb. 10.2.
. If but a Metaphorical Trumpet, then it may signify no more then a mighty
noise, wherewith the dead shall be awakened from the sleep of the Grave: such
as that voice spoken by the Royal Prophet, which shakes the Wilderness, even
the great Wilderness of Cades. The best way to resolve this doubt is to look
unto the giving of the Law on Mount Sinai, which was delivered in the hands of
an Angel Psalm. 24.8.
, and much after the same manner, as the day of Judgment is described in the
holy Gospel. And it came to pass (says Moses) on the third day in the morning,
that there were thunders and lightnings, and a thick clowd upon the Mount, and
the voice of the Trumpet exceeding loud, so that all the people that was in the
Camp trembled Exodus 19.16.
. And all the people saw the thunderings, and the lightnings, and the noise of
the Trumpet, and the Mountain smoking; and when the people saw it, they
removed and stood a far off Exodus 20.18.
. Whatsoever noise that was, which is by Moses said to be made with the sound
of the Trumpet, when the Law was given: the same do I conceive it will also be,
when all the world is called to given an account of all their doings, whether
conform unto that Law, or against the same. The Trumpet was sounded with great
terror, when the Law was given, that the whole world might hear the noise of
the Echo of it, and thereby brought into a fear of violating any part of that
sacred Rule. For though the Law seems to be given only to the house of
Israel, and to none but them; as indeed it was given to none but them by the
hand of Moses; in which respect it is not binding to the Gentiles, as the
Schoolmen very well observe: yet being it was naturally imprinted in the hearts
of men, as the perpetual moral Law of the most high God, although the tract and
footsteps of it were almost defaced; the Gentiles at their peril were obliged
to keep it, and to take notice of the publication of it, whenever, and by
what means soever, it should arrive unto their Ears. So that the trumpet spoken
of in the books of Moses is like that of Triton in the Poet, as shrill as that,
and without all peradventure to be heard as far. Of which Ovid thus Ovid. ^et.
l. 1.
; -- Cava buccina ^umitur illi,
Tortilis, in medium quae turbine crescit ab imo.
Buccina quae medio concepit ubi era Ponto,
Littora voce replet sub utraque jacentia Phoebo.


Thus Englished by George Sandys.

He his wreathed trumpet takes (as given in charge)
That from the turning bottom grows more large.
To which when he gives breath it is heard by all
From far up-rising Phoebus to his fall.
Such also shall the voice of the Trumpet be in the day of Judgment, when all
the Nations of the world shall be called together, and called to account for
their actions past, which ought to have been squared by the rule of the Law, of
which they have such ample notice, and such deep impressions; although they did
not stand at the foot of the Mount, when it was published by the Jews. The
Gentiles (says St. Paul) which have not the law, (that is to say, which have
it not in writing as the Jews had) do by nature the things c^ntained in the
Law; and having not the Law (so given) are a law unto themselves Romans 2.14, 15.
: which show the work of the Law written in their hearts, their consciences
also bearing witness, and their thoughts the mean while accusing or else
excusing one another. So that all Nations of the world, not the Jews alone,
having such deep characters of the Law of God imprinted in them, are thereby
made (...) Romans 1.20.
, or without excuse, if they keep it not. And being bound to keep the law,
shall be judged according to the law: and therefore shall be called together to
receive their sentence, by that or the like noise of a Trumpet, in which the
law was published by the Lord Almighty.

The next thing here to be considered, is the attendance of the Angels; which
doubtless are not taken in to fill up the train, to make the manner of his
coming the more brave and glorious, but for some other special and more weighty
use. Therefore our Savior having told us, that the Son of man shall come in
glory, and all the holy Angels with him Mat 25.30.
; adds also in the following words, and before him shall all the Nations of the
world be gathered. Gathered together, but by whom? by those very Angels. Then,
says he, shall he send his Angels, with the sound of the Trumpet, and shall
gather together the Elect from the four winds, etc. Id. 24.31.
. What, the Elect? and none but they? Not so. For they shall also gather out of
his Kingdom all things that offend, and them that do iniquity Id. 13.40.
. But having gathered them together, is their work then done? Not yet, for they
must also separate the wicked from the righteous man, the goats from the sheep,
the tares from the good seed Ib. v. 30.
, the good fish from the bad Ib. v. 49.
: that being so disposed in their ranks and files, they may together hear their
sen^ence, whether life, or death. But when the sentence is pronounced, is there
any thing more behind for these ministering Spirits? Much more assuredly: The
greatest part of their employment is yet to come. Gather ye together first the
Tares, and bind them in bundles to burn them; but gather the Wheat into my
barn Ib. v. 30.
. After the gathering and the sentence, then comes in the binding. And binding
is a term derived from the Courts of Justice, according to the course whereof,
the Prisoner is led bound to his Execution: so to prevent all hope and
possibility of their escape, and make them yield unto their censure with the
less resistance. I lictor, liga manus, verberato, infoelici arbori suspendito
Livius hist. Decad. 1. l. 1.
. Here Lictor, bind the prisoner, scourge him, or hang him on the Tree, as the
sentence varied: but whether verberato or suspendito, there was still liga
manus, the binding of the prisoner as a part of his punishment God does so deal
with wicked and ungodly men, as the great Tyrant Nebuchadnezzar did with the
three Hebrew children, in the Book of Daniel Dan. 3.20, 21.
: command them to be first bound, and after cast into the midst of the fiery
furnace. The like we find in Virgil also; Vinxerat and post Terga manus quos
mitteret umbris: the Poet speaking there of those wretched men, whom Aeneas was
about to sacrifice to the powers below. Well, being thus bound, and ready for
the Execution, what comes after next? Alligate ad comburendum, says our
Saviors Parable; bind them to burn them, says the Text. And here the case is
somewhat altered, as it relates unto the Ministers, though still the same in
reference to the Malefactors. Before it was Colligite, and Alligate, i. e.
gather them together, and bind them fast: here not comburite, but ad
comburendum. The holy Angels were the Ministers to attach the sinner, to bring
him before Gods Tribunal, and after sentence is pronounced to lay hands upon
him, and make him ready for the punishment which he is to suffer. But that
being done, they do confign him over to the Fiends of hell, to the Tormentors,
(...), as our Redeemer calls them in the 18. chapter of St. Matthew, verse. 34.
The holy Angels are the Ministers of this dreadful Court, the Devil and his
Angels are the Executioners: who bearing an old grudge to man from the first
beginning, will doubtless execute his Office on him with the most extremity.
And thus accordingly they do: Anima damnata continuo invaditur a Daemonibus,
qui crudelissime eam rapiunt and ad infernum deducunt Cyril de exitu Animae.
, as before we had it from St. Cyril. But in their Ministry, after Judgment,
to the just and righteous, the case is otherwise. The Angels, as the Scripture
tells us, are (...), Ministering Spirits; sent out to minister unto them which
shall be heirs of Salvation. Sent out to minister unto them when they are
alive; sent out, to carry their souls, (as they did that of Lazarus) into
Abraham's bosom, when they are deceased; sent out to gather the Elect, together
from the four winds. And when the joyful sentence is pronounced upon them,
they leave them not, till they have brought them to their place in the heavenly
glories. It is not only Colligite, gather them together, but Congregate in
horreum meum, in our Saviors Parable, Gather the Wheat into my barn: that is
to say, as he expounds himself in another place, in gaudium Domini Mat. 25.23.
, into the joy of the Lord; Regnum a constitutione mundi paratum Ibid. v. 34.
, the Kingdom prepared for them before the foundations of the world were laid;
or as St. Paul does change the phrase, in Civitatem Dei viventis Heb. 12.20.
, the City of the living God: To such end serve the Angels in the day of
Judgment. Which though they execute with great cheerfulness at the Lords
command; and are assured of their own confirmation in the state of bliss: yet
can they not but tremble, as the Fathers have it, at the great hazard which is
then to be undergone, by their Fellow Servants. So witnesses St. Basil,
saying, At Christ's coming from the Heavens every creature shall tremble; Even
the Angels themselves shall not be without fear, for they shall also be
present, though they shall give no account to God Basil. in Hex. Homil. 11.
. Not without fear? Of what? Of their fellow servants, and of Gods wrath upon
the world, as St. Chrysostom has it. At that day, says the Father, all things
shall be full of astonishment, horror and fear. A great fear shall even then
possess the Angels, and not the Angels only, but the Archangels, and Thrones,
and Powers of Heaven, because their fellow servants are to undergo the
judgment of their actions past Chrysostom. Epist. 5. ad Theod.
. Such and so terrible is the manner of Christ's coming to Judgment, that not
alone the guilty persons, or the Saints themselves, but even the very Angels
are possessed with terror.

As for the method of this day, whether the righteous or the wicked shall come
first to judgment, has been made a question: some thinking that the wicked
shall be first condemned, before the righteous do receive their absolution; and
others, that the righteous shall be first absolved, before the wicked have the
sentence of their condemnation. They that maintain the first opinion, do ground
themselves upon that passage in our Saviors Parable, in which the Reapers are
commanded first to gather the Tares, and bind them in bundles for to burn
them; and then to gather the Wheat into his Barn. But this illation is ill
grounded, and does much worse agree with our Saviors method used in other
places. For in the parable of the Net cast into the Sea, the good fish were
first gathered into Vessels Mat 13.4^.
, before the bad were thrown away: and in the other parable of the Sheep and
the Goats, Venite has precedencie of Discedite Mat. 25.41.
, the blessed of the Father were first absolved, before the cursed were
condemned to eternal torments. Nor will it serve the turn which is said by
some, that though the merits of the just are prius in discussione Gorran. in
Mat. 13.
, first taken in consideration, and enquired into: yet shall the punishment of
the wicked and ungodly man be prius in executione, first put in execution, and
inflicted on them. For this as ill agrees with those texts of Scripture in
which it is said not only in particular of the twelve Apostles that they shall
sit on twelve Thrones judging the twelve Tribes of Israel Mat. 19.28.
; but also of the Saints in general, that they shall judge the world 1 Cor. 6.2.
, as St. Paul has told us. That they shall judge the world; but how? Not only
s^la comparatione, by telling them or rather upbraiding them with their
impieties and impenitencies, as full well they may; in which respect the
Ninivites, and the Queen of the South, are in the Gospel said to condemn the
Jews Mat. 12.42.
, but Approbatione Divinae sententiae Estius in 1 Cor. c. 6.
, by approving and applauding that most righteous judgment, which Christ the
Supreme Judge shall pronounce against them. Which could not be in case the
wicked did receive their final condemnation, before the righteous were admitted
into some participation of the heavenly glories. When therefore it is said in
the former parable, Colligite primum, Gather first the tares together: either
the word first must have reference to that of binding which does follow after;
first gather them, and then bind them up: Or else it must be said, and perhaps
more rightly, that the gathering of the tares is there first propounded, not
because first in order of the several judgments, but because they gave
occasion unto that discourse betwixt the Heavenly Husbandman and his household
servants. This difference thus composed, and this rub removed, the method used
in this great action will disclose it self. The Lord CHRIST JESUS being set in
his glorious Throne, the many thousands of his holy Angels shining round about
him, and the Saints apparelled with their bodies standing all before him or
rather placed at his right hand, as in the Parable; the Reprobates being left
on the Earth beneath, or standing at his left hand, at as great a distance: he
shall first pronounce the sentence of Absolution upon his Elect: Mat. 25.34.
Come (says he) O ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for
you, from the foundation of the world. And this shall first be done for these
reasons specially: first that the wicked seeing from what bliss they are
fallen, and what reward is laid up for the righteous man, may be the more
confounded in the apprehension of their own misfortune: and secondly to show
how much more CHRIST is prone to mercy, then he is to judgment; according to
the good old verse, Ad poenam tardus Deus est, ad praemia velox. This done,
there shall be placed twelve Thrones near the Throne of Christ, for the twelve
Apostles: who as they were the Lords chief Agents in the work of the Gospel, so
shall they be his principal Assessors in the Act of Judicature; the residue of
the Saints and Martyrs approving and applauding (as before I said) that most
righteous judgment, which CHRIST shall then pronounce against all the wicked,
saying, Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil
and his Angels Mat. 25.41.
. This dreadful sentence thus pronounced, and the condemned persons being
delivered over by the Angels of God to the Devil and his, according to the
sentence of that righteous Judge: CHRIST shall arise from his Tribunal, and
together with his elect Angels and most blessed Saints, shall in an orderly and
triumphant manner ascend into the Heaven of Heavens: where unto every one of
his glorious Saints he shall bestow the immarcessible Crown of glory 1 Pet. 5.4.
, and make them Kings and Priests unto God the Father Apoc. 1.6.
. When all the Princes of the Earth have laid down their Scepters at the feet
of CHRIST; God shall be still a King of Kings, a King indeed of none but Kings.
Rex Regum, Dominus Dominantium always, but most amply them. For then shall
CHRIST deliver up the Kingdom unto God the Father, (which how it must be
understood, we have shown before). And the Saints laying down their Crowns at
the feet of Christ, shall worship and fall down before him, saying, Blessing,
honor, glory, and power Apoc. 5.13.
be unto him that sits upon the Throne, and unto the Lamb for ever and ever.
For thou wast slain, and have redeemed us to God by thy blood, out of every
kindred, and tongue, and people, and Nation, and have made us Kings and Priests
to God Ibid. v. 9.10.
, to reign with thee in thy Kingdom for evermore.

Thus have I made a brief but a plain discovery, so far forth as the light of
Scripture could direct me in it, both of the manner of our Saviors coming unto
Judgment; and of the Method he shall use in the act of judging. That which
comes after Judgment, whether life or death, whether it be the joys of Heaven
or the pains of Hell, will fall more properly under the consideration of the
last Article of the Creed, that of Life Everlasting: and there we mean to
handle all those particulars which I think pertinent thereunto. In the mean
time a due and serious consideration of this day of Judgment will be exceeding
necessary to all sorts of people: and be the strongest bridle to restrain them
from the acts of sin, that ever was put into the mouths of ungodly men. For
what a bridle think we, must it be unto them, to keep them from unlawful lusts,
nay from sinful purposes, when they consider with themselves, that in that day,
the hearts of all men shall be opened, their desires made known, and that no
secrets shall be hid; but all laid open as it were, to the public view? What a
strong bridle must it be to curb them and to hold them in, when they are in the
full careere and race of wickedness, when they consider with themselves, that
there will be no way nor means to escape this Judgment? Though they procure
the Rocks to fall upon them, and the Hills to hide them, yet will Gods Angels
find them out; and gather them from every corner of the World, be they where
they will. Though they have flattered their poor souls, and said, Tush God will
not see it; or have disguised themselves with fig leaves, out of a silly hope
to conceal their nakedness; or wiped their lips so cunningly with the harlot in
the Book of Proverbs, that no man can discern a stolen kiss upon them; yet all
this will not serve the turn. God will for all this bring them unto judgment,
and apprehend them by his Angels when they go a gathering. There shall not one
of them escape the hands of these diligent Sergeants; Ne unus quidem, no not
one. And finally what a bridle must it be unto them, to hold them from
exorbitant wickedness, as either the crucifying again of the Lord of glory, the
persecuting of the Saints, their mischievous plots against the Church in her
peace and Patrimony; when they consider with themselves that he whom thus they
crucify, is to be their Judge; and that those poor souls whom they now
contemn, shall give a vote or suffrage on their condemnation; and that the poor
afflicted Church which they made truly militant by their foul oppressions,
malgre their tyranny and confederacies, shall become Triumphant? And on the
other side, what a great comfort must it be to the righteous man, to think that
Christ who all this while has been his Mediator with Almighty God, shall one
day come to be his Judge? What a great consolation must it be unto him in the
time of trouble, to think that all his groans are registered, his tears kept in
a bottle, and his sighs recorded: and that there is a Judge above who will wipe
all the tears from his eyes, and give him mirth in stead of mourning? What an
encouragement must it be unto him in the way of godliness, when he considers
with himself that there is laid up for him a Crown of glory, which the Lord the
righteous Judge will give him at that day, and give it him in the fight both of
men and Angels? Finally what strength and animation must it put into them to
make them stand courageously in the cause of Christ, and to contemn what ever
misery can be laid upon them, in the defense of Christ's and the Churches cause:
when they consider with themselves, that there is no man who has lost Father
or Mother, or wife or children, or lands and possessions for the sake of
Christ; but shall receive much more in this present world, and in the world to
come life everlasting? For behold he comes quickly, (as himself has told us)
and his reward is with him, to give to every man according as his work shall
be. Even so Lord Jesus, So be it. Amen.

THE SUM Of Christian Theology, Positive, Philological, and Polemical;
Contained in the APOSTLES CREED, or Reducible to it.

THE THIRD PART.

By Peter Heylyn.

1 Cor. 12.13. For by one Spirit are we all Baptized into one Body, whether we
be Jews or Gentiles, whether we be bond or free; and have been all made to
drink into one Spirit.

LONDON: Printed for Henry Seyle. 1654.

ARTICLE IX. Of the Ninth ARTICLE OF THE CREED, Ascribed to St. JAMES the Son
of ALPHEVS. (...) (i. e.) Credo and in Spiritum sanctum; sanctam Ecclesiam
Catholicam, (i. e.) I believe in the Holy Ghost, the holy Catholic Church.
CHAP. I. Touching the Holy Ghost, his divine Nature, Power, and Office* the
Controversy of his Procession laid down Historically. Of Receiving the Holy
Ghost, and of the several ministrations in the Church appointed by him.
WE are now come unto the third and last part of this Discourse, containing in
the first place the Article of the Holy Ghost, and of the holy Catholic
Church, gathered together, and preserved by the power thereof: And in the rest
those several Gifts and special Benefits which Christ conferreth, by the
operation of this blessed Spirit, on the particular Members of his
Congregation; that is to say, the joining of the Saints together in an holy
Communion, the free remission of our sins in this present life, resurrection of
the body after death, and the uniting again of Soul and Body unto life eternal.
This is the sum and method of the following Articles, and these we shall pursue
in their order; beginning first with that of the Holy Ghost: Whose gracious
assistance I implore, to guide me in the ways of Truth that so the words of my
mouth, and the meditations of my heart, may be always acceptable in the sight
of God, the Lord, my strength and my Redeemer. But because the word or notion
of the Holy Ghost is (...), a word of various signification in the Book of God:
we will first look upon it in those significations, and then conclude on that
which is chiefly, pertinent to the intent and purpose of the present Article.
For certainly the Orators Rule is both good and useful, viz. Prius dividenda
antequam definienda sit oration Tull. in Orat.
; That we must first distinguish of the Terms in all Propositions before we
come unto a positive definition of them. According to which Rule, if we search
the Scripture, we shall there find that the Holy Ghost is first taken
personaliter, or essentialiter, for the third person in the Oeconomie of the
glorious Trinity. We find him in this sense in the incarnation of our Lord and
Savior, as the principal Agent in that Work; The Holy Ghost shall come upon
thee, Luke 1.35. And in his Baptism, descending on him like a Dove, to fit him
and prepare him for the Prophetical Office he was then to exercise; And the
Holy Ghost descended in a bodily shape like a Dove upon him, Luke 3.22. From
which descent St. Peter tells us that he was anointed with the Holy Ghost and
with power, and that from thenceforth he went about doing good, and healing all
that were oppressed with the Devil Luke 10.38.
. In the next place, the Holy Ghost is used in Scripture, to signify the Gifts
and Graces of the holy Spirit; as in Act. 2. where it is said of the Apostles,
that they were all filled with the holy Ghost, ver. 4. not with his essence, or
his person, but with the impressions of the Spirit, the Gifts and Graces of the
Holy Ghost; such as the Gift of Tongues mentioned in the following words; The
Gift of the Holy Ghost; as it is called expressly, Ver. 38. Thus read we also
that the holy Ghost was given by the hands of Peter, Act. 8.17, 18. And by the
hands of Paul, Act. 19.6. In which we read, that when Paul had laid his hands
upon them, the Holy Ghost came on them, and they spoke with tongues and
Prophesied, which last words are a commentary upon those before, and show, that
by the holy Ghost which did come upon them, is meant the Gift of Tongues, and
the power of Prophesying, both which the holy Ghost then conferred upon them.
And lastly it is taken not only for the ability of doing Miracles, as speaking
with strange Tongues, Prophesying, curing of Diseases, and the like to these,
but for the Authority and Power which in the Church is given to some certain
men to be Ministers of holy things to the rest of the people. As when Christ
breathed on his Apostles, and said unto them, Receive the holy Ghost Joh. 20.22.
; that is to say, Receive ye an holy and spiritual power over the souls of
men, a part whereof consists in the remitting and retaining of sins,
mentioned in the words next following, and serving as a Comment to explain the
former. In which respect the Holy Ghost said unto certain of the Elders in the
Church of Antioch, Segregate mihi Barnabam and Saulum, Separate unto me
Barnabas and Saul, for the work whereunto I have called them, Act. 13.2. It is
the Holy Ghost which calls, it is his work to which they were called; and
therefore separate mihi, separate to me, may not unfitly be expounded to my
Work and Ministry, and consequently to the authority and power which belongs
unto it. Which being premised, the meaning of the Article will in brief be
this, That we believe not only that there is such a person as the Holy Ghost,
in the Economy of the blessed Trinity though that be principally intended;)
but that he does so distribute and dispose of his Gifts and Graces, as most
conduces to the edification of the Church of Christ. But this I cannot couch
in a clearer way, as to the sense and doctrine of the Church of England, than
in the words of Bishop Jewel, who does thus express it, Credimus spiritum
sanctum, qui est tertia persona in sacra Triadi, illum verum esse Deum, etc. 2
Cor. 7.1.
i. e. we believe that the Holy Ghost who is the Third Person in the holy
Trinity, is very God, not made, nor created, nor begotten, but proceeding both
from the Father and the Son, by an unspeakable means, and unknown to man; and
that it is his property to mollify and soften man's heart, when he is once
received thereinto, either by the wholesome Preaching of the Gospel, or by any
other way; that he does give men light, and guide them to the knowledge of God,
to the ways of truth, to newness of life, and to everlasting hope of
salvation. This being the sum of that which is to be believed of the Holy
Ghost, both for his Person and his Office; we will first look upon his Person,
on his Property or Office afterward.

And yet before we come unto his Person, I mean his Nature and his Essence, We
will first look a little on the quid Nominis, the name by which he is expressed
in the Book of God. In the Original he is called (...) (with a double Article,
as Luke 3.22.) in Latin Spiritus sanctus, or the Holy Spirit, but generally in
our English Idiom, the Holy Ghost. The Greek word (...) comes from (...), which
signifies to breath, and is the same with the Latin Spiro, from whence comes
Spiritus, or the Spirit, a name not given, as I suppose, because he does
proceed from the Father, or the Son, or both, in the way of breathing (though
Christ be said to breath upon his Apostles, when he said receive the Holy
Ghost) but because the breath being in it self an incorporeal substance, and
that which is the great preservative of all living creatures, it got the name
first of Spiritus vitae (we read it in our English, the breath of life, Genesis
11.7.) and afterward came to be the name of all unbodyed, incorporeal
essences. For thus is God said to be a Spirit, God is a Spirit, Ioh. 4.24. The
Angels are called Ministering Spirits, Heb. 1.14. the Soul of man is called his
Spirit, let us cleanse our selves, says the Apostle, from all filthiness both
of flesh and Spirit 2 Cor. 7.1.
, that is, of the body and the soul: and by a metaphor, the motions of the
mind whether good or evil, are called spirits also, as the spirit of
giddiness, Isa. 19.14. the spirit of error, 1 Timothy 4.1. the spirit of envy,
Iam. 4.5. which come all from the unclean spirit mentioned Luke 11.24. And thus
in general, the pious motions in the mind are called Spirits too, Quench not
the spirit, says St. Paul 1 These. 5.20.
, i. e. those godly motions to the works of Faith and Piety, which the Holy
Spirit of God does secretly kindle in thee. For the word Ghost it is originally
Saxon, and signifies properly the soul of a man: as when we read of Christ,
that he gave up the Ghost, Mark. 15.37. and in the rest of the Evangelists
also, the meaning is, that his soul departed from his body, he yielded up his
soul to the hands of God, (...), says the Original, Expiravit, as the Latin
reads it; that is to say, he breathed out his soul, or he breathed his last.
Nor does it signify the soul only (though that most properly) but generally
also, any spiritual substance, as does the word spiritus in the Latin: a touch
whereof we have still remaining in the Adjective Ghostly, by which we mean that
which is spiritual, as our Ghostly Father, Ghostly Counsel, i. e. our Father in
the spiritual matters, counsel that savoreth of the spirit. So then the Holy
Ghost, and the Holy Spirit, are the same Person here, though in different
words; and the word Holy which is added, does clearly difference him from all
other spirits: Not that God being a spirit, is not holy also, or that the
Angelical spirits are not replenished with as much holiness as a created
nature can be capable of; but because it is his Office to sanctify (or make
holy) all the elect Children of God; therefore has he the title or attribute
of holy annexed unto him: And yet the title of holy is not always added to
denote this person, though when we find mention of the Holy Ghost, or the Holy
Spirit, it is meant and spoken of him only. For sometimes he is called the
Spirit, without any adjunct, the Spirit, (...) or by way of eminency; but still
with reference to those gifts which he does bestow. The manifestation of the
spirit ((...) with the Article demonstrative) is given to every man to profit
withal 1 Cor. 12.7, 8
, For to one is given by the Spirit, the word of wisdom, to another the word
of knowledge by the same Spirit. Sometimes he is called the Spirit of the
Father, as Matthew. 10.20. It is not ye that speak, but the Spirit of the Father
which speaks in you; sometimes the Spirit of the Son, as Gal. 4.6. where it
is said, that God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into our hearts, crying
Abba Father. Most generally he is called the Spirit of God, as Gen: 1.2. and
Matthew. 3.16. and infinite other places of the holy Scripture; and more
particularly the Spirit of Christ, Romans 8.9. in which place he is also called
the Spirit of God. Ye are not in the flesh but in the Spirit, if that the
Spirit of God dwell in you, there the Spirit of God; if any have not the Spirit
of Christ, he is none of his, So the Spirit of Christ. The Spirit both of God
and Christ, and in one verse both.

So far we are onwards on our way for discovery of the nature of this blessed
Spirit, as to have found him out to be the Spirit of God the Father, from whom
he does proceed by an unspeakable way of emanation, and unknown to man; for he
proceeds from the Father, as our Savior tells us John 15.26.
; and to be also the Spirit of Christ, the Son of God, by whom he was breathed
on the Apostles; and so proceeding from the Son, does proceed from both. Sent
from the Father, at the desire and prayer of the Son; I will pray the Father,
and he shall send you another Comforter, John 14.16. Sent by the Son, with the
consent and approbation of the Father; whom I will send unto you from the
Father, John 15.26. and so sent of both. And yet not therefore the less God,
because sent by either, than JESUS CHRIST is God, God for ever blessed, as St.
Paul calls him, Romans 9.5. because he was sent by God the Father, He sent his
Son made of a woman, ( Gal. 4.4.) says the same Apostle.

If any doubt hereof, as I know some do, he may be sent for resolution of his
doubt to the beginning of Genesis, where he shall find the Spirit of God
moving on the waters, Genesis 1.2. And to the Law, where he shall read how the
same Spirit came down on the Seventy Elders, Numb. 11.26. And to the Psalms,
Thou sendest forth thy Spirit, and they are created, Psalm. 104.30. And to the
Prophets, The Spirit of God is upon me, says the Prophet Isaiah, Chap. 61.1.
which was Christ's first Text Luke 4.18.
; And I will pour my Spirit upon all flesh, says the Prophet Joel, Chap. 1.28.
which was Peter's first Text Acts 2.17.
. The Spirit of God is God, no question; for in Deo non est nisi Deus, say the
Schoolmen rightly. Not a created Spirit, as the Angels were, For in the
beginning when God created the Heaven and the Earth, and all things visible and
invisible, then the Spirit was; and was not only actually in a way of
existence, but was of such a powerful influence in the Creation of the World,
that on the moving of this Spirit on the face of the Waters, the darkness was
removed from the face of the deep, and the Chaos of undigested matter made
capable of Form and Beauty.

In the New Testament the evidence is far more clear than that of the Old; by
how much the Sun of Light did shine more brightly in the times of the Gospel
than in those of the Law. Says not St. Peter in the Acts, Why has Satan
filled thine heart to lie unto the Holy Ghost? and then adds presently, Thou
have not lied unto men, but unto God Acts 5.3, 4.
. What says St. Austin on this Text? The Holy Ghost (says he) is God, Unde
Petrus cum dixisset, ausus e^ mentiri Spiritui Sancto, continuo secutus
adjunxit quid esset Spiritus Sanctus, and ait, non mentitus es hominibus sed
Deo August. contr. liter. Petil. l. 3.28.
, i. e. Therefore when Peter said unto Ananias, thou have dared to lie to the
Holy Ghost, he added presently, to show what was the Holy Ghost, Thou have not
lied unto men, but unto God. Says not St. Paul, Know ye not that ye are the
Temple of God? How so? Because the Spirit of God dwells in you 1 Cor. 3.16.
. What says the Father unto this? Ostendit Paulus deum esse Spiritum Sanctum,
and ideo non esse Creaturam August. de mor. Eccles. Cath. l. 1.16.
; that is to say, St. Paul by this shows, That the Holy Ghost is God, and so
no Creature. Does not the same Apostle say in another place, Know ye not that
your bodies are the Temple of the Holy Ghost? and then subjoyns, Glorify God
therefore in your body 1 Cor. 6.19, 20.
. And does not the same Father infer from thence the Deity or Godhead of the
Holy Ghost, Ne quisquam Spiritum Sanctum negaret Deum, continuo sequutus ait,
Glorificate and portate Deum in corpore vestro August. Epist. 174.
; Lest any man (says he) should possibly deny the Holy Ghost to be God, he
adds immediately, Glorify and bear God in your bodies. To seek for
Testimonies from more of the Fathers, to confirm this point, were to run into
an endless Ocean of Allegations; there being few who lived after the rising of
the Arian and Macedonian Heresies, who have not written whole Tracts in defense
hereof; and none at all, who give not very pregnant evidence to the cause in
hand. But where the Scripture is so clear, what need they come in. And so
exceeding clear is Scripture, as is shown already, that I marvel with what
confidence it could be said by Doctor Harding in his Reply to Bishop Jewel,
That though the Doctrine of the Church of England were true and Catholic in
this point, yet we had neither express Scripture for it, nor any of the four
first General Councils Hard. against the Apol. l. 2. ^. 1. Di. 2.
; and thereon tacitly infers, That the Deity of the Holy Ghost depended for
the proof thereof, not on holy Scripture, but on the Tradition of the Church,
and the Authority of some subsequent Councils of the Popes confirming. To
which, that learned Prelate wittily replieth, That if God cannot be God, unless
he be allowed of by the Pope and Church of R^me, then we are come again to that
which Tertullian wrote merrily of the Heathens, saying, Nisi homini Deus
placuerit, Deus non erit Tertul. in Apolog. c. 5.
; Homo jam Deo propitius esse debebit; i.e. Unless God humor man, he shall not
be God.

Some further Arguments may be used to confirm this Truth, and they no less
concludent than those before: As namely, from the Form of Baptism ordained by
Christ, In the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost Matthew.
28 19.
; From the Form of Benediction used by St. Paul, The Grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and the Love of God, and the Fellowship of the Holy Ghost 2 Cor. 13.13.
; From the Doxologie or Form of giving glory, used in the Church, and used, as
St. Basil confidently averreth, from the first beginning Basil. de Sp. Sanct.
l. 2.
, Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost; And finally,
from the place it holds in the present Creed, composed by the joint concurrence
of the Blessed Apostles. But that which I shall specially insist upon, is that
passage in three of the Evangelists, touching the sin ^t blasphemy against the
Holy Spirit of God, which is there said to be of that heinous nature, that it
shall neither be forgiven in this world, nor in the world to come, Matthew.
12.32. That is to say, It shall never have forgiveness, as S. Mark expounds it,
Mark 3.29. St. Ambrose gathers from this Text, a concluding Argument against
the Macedonian and Eunomian Heretics, who held the Holy Ghost to be only a
created power. Quomodo inter Creaturas a^det quisquam Spiritum Sanctum
computare, Ambr. de S^. Sanct. l. 1. c. 3.
etc. How dares any man (says he) compute the Holy Ghost amongst the rest of
the Creatures, considering that it is affirmed by the Lord himself, That
whosoever speaks against the Son of Man, it shall be forgiven him; but
whosoever speaks against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven him? And to
this inference of his we may well subscribe, though the sin or blasphemy spoken
of by our Lord and Savior, was not against the Person of the Holy Ghost* but
against his Power. For that no sin or heresy against his person was so
irremissible, as to exclude the offending party from all hope of pardon, is
evident by the constant practice of the Primitive Church; which as St.
Chrysostom observes, used daily to receive again to the Word and Sacraments
the Eunomian Heretics, on the recanting of their Error. That therefore being
not the si^ which is here intended, it would be worth the while, and very
pertinent to our present business, to enquire into it; though as St. Augustine
notes right well, In omnibus Scripturis sanctis nulla major quaestio, nulla
difficilior August. de Verb. Dom. in monte.
; That there is not a greater, nor more difficult question in all the
Scripture. And well might he say so of all men, who in delivering his own
judgment upon the point, does so much vary from himself, that it is impossible
to find what he does resolve on. For sometimes he makes it to be final
impenitency, as Lib. de fide ad Pet. c. 3. Sometimes to be despair of Gods
mercy, as in his Comment on the Romans; Sometimes to be a denying of the
Churches power to forgive sins, as in his Eucheirid. c. 83. Sometimes to be
sins of malice, as De Ser. Domini in monte, l. 1. And sometimes nearer to the
truth, to be an ascribing of the works of the Holy Ghost to the power of the
Devil, as in his Tract De Qu^st. ex utroque Testam. quaest. 102. Nor do the
Writers of the former or later times agree better in this point with one
another, than that Learned Father with himself: Some holding it to be a
renouncing of the Faith of Christ, as the Novatians Id. ibid.
; others the denying of the Divinity of Christ, as Hilary Hilar. in Con. 12.
; Philastrius extending it unto every Heresy Philast. in Haer. Rhetorli.
; and Origin (whom some of the Novatians also followed) to every sin committed
after Baptism Ath^nas. Homil. in Matthew. 12.
. For later Writers, the Schoolmen generally make it to be sins of malice;
affirming sins of infirmity to be committed against the Father, whose proper
attribute is Power; and sins of ignorance against the Son, whose proper
attribute is Wisdom; and therefore sins against the Holy Ghost must be sins of
malice, because his attribute is Love. And on the other side, the Protestants,
as generally, do make it to be final Apostasy, or a wilful and malicious
resisting of the Truth to the very last. And so it is defined by Calvin, who
makes them to be guilty of this sin against the Holy Ghost, Qui divinae
veritati (cujus fulgore sic per stringuntur, ut ignorantiam causari nequeant)
tamen destinata malicia resist^nt, in hoc tantum ut resistant Calv. Instit. l.
3. c. 3.
; that is to say, Who out of determined malice resist the known Truth of God,
(with the Beams whereof they are so dazzled, that they cannot pretend ignorance)
to the end, only to resist. But God forbid, that most, if at all any of the
sins before enumerated, should come within the compass of that grievous
sentence which is denounced against blaspheming of the Holy Ghost* For if
either every sin committed after Baptism, or every sin of malice, or despair of
mercy, or falling into heresy (especially in that large sense as Philastrius
takes it) should be incapable of pardon, it were almost impossible for any man
to be said. And for the rest, final Impenitency is not so properly a
particular and distinct species of sin, as a general circumstance which may
accompany any sin: And many of those who have renounced the Faith of Christ,
under persecution, or called his divinity in question, did afterward recant
their Errors, and became good Christians. Final Apostasy indeed, and a
malicious resisting of the known Truth, till the very last, are most grievous
sins, and shall no question be rewarded with eternal punishment; as every other
sin shall be which is not expiated with Repentance; but can with no more right
or reason, be called the sin or blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, than
unrepented Murder, unrepented Adultery, unrepented Heresy, or any other of
that nature. Therefore to set this business right, it is judiciously observed
by my Learned Friend Sir R. F. in his Tractate Of the Blasphemy of the Holy
Ghost, First, That this sin so much disputed and debated, in neither of the
three Evangelists which record this passage, is called The sin against the Holy
Ghost, but the blasphemy against the Holy Ghost; Secondly, That blaspheming,
according to the true Etymon of the Word, is a blasting of the fame of another
man, a malicious detracting from him, or speaking against him; as both St.
Matthew, and St. Luke do expound the word, Matthew. 12.32. and Luke 12.10.
Thirdly, That these words were spoken by our Savior Christ, against the
Scribes and Pharisees, who traduced his Miracles, affirming. That that wondrous
work of casting out Devils, which he had wrought by the power of the Spirit of
God, as he himself affirms, Matthew. 12.28. was done by the power and help of
Beelzebub, the Prince of Devils, Verse. 24. And Fourthly, That the Scribes and
Pharisees, being the eyewitnesses of such miracles, as might make them know
that Christ was a Teacher come from God, did notwithstanding lay that reproach
upon them, to the end, That the people being beaten off from giving credit to
his miracles, should give no faith unto his Doctrine. Upon which grounds he
builds this definition of it, viz. The blasphemy against the Holy Ghost was an
evil-speaking or slandering of the miracles of our Savior Christ, by those,
who though they were convinced by the miracles, to believe that such works
could not be done but by the power of God, did yet maliciously say, That they
were wrought by the power of the Devil. And hereupon he does infer these two
following Corollaries; First, That we have no safe rule to conclude, that any
but the Scribes and Pharisees, and their confederates, committed (in those
times) this blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, so condemned by Christ: And
Secondly, That it is a matter of probability, that the blasphemy against the
Holy Ghost, is not a sin committable by any Christian who lived not in the time
of our Lord and Savior. And to say truth, If such a sin were practicable by us
Christians since, it must needs be a very great marvel (if not somewhat more)
that the Apostles, who were very precise and punctual in dehorting from all
manner of sin, should never in any of their Epistles take notice of this, or
give us any Caveat to beware thereof; and in particular, that St. Paul making a
specification of the fruits of the Spirit, and such a general muster of the
works of the flesh, as are repugnant thereunto Gal. 5.19, etc.
, should not so much as give a glance which does look this way. To countenance
the opinion of this Learned Gentleman, I shall add here the judgment of two
learned Jesuits. Maldonates first, Who makes this sin to be the sin of the
Scribes and Pharisees, who seeing our Savior cast out Devils, Manifesta
Spiritus Sancti opera daemoni tribuebant Maldonat. in Matthew. 12.
, ascribed the visible works of the Holy Ghost to the power of the Devil. Of
Estius next, who distinguishing betwixt the sin against the Holy Ghost, and the
blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, refers to the first all sins of determined
malice; to the second, only such malicious and slanderous reproaches against
the mighty works of God, Quale erat illud Scribarum divina miracula malitiose
calumniantium Estias in Marc. 3.
, As was that of the Scribes, maliciously slandering our Saviors miracles. And
if it be a sin or blasphemy, call it which you will, not acted but by them, and
on that occasion, it is not practicable now.

But leaving this to the determination of the Church of England (lawfully and
Canonically represented in an holy Synod,) to which, that Learned Gentleman
does submit his judgment; proceed we on in our discourse of the Holy Ghost;
concerning whose Divinity or Godhead, there is not so much difference in the
Christian World, as in the manner of his Procession or Emission. And here
indeed the World has been long divided; the Greek Church keeping themselves to
express words of Scripture John 15.26.
, making him to proceed from the Father only; the Latins, on the Authority of
some later Councils, and Logical inferences from the Scripture, making him to
proceed both from Father, and the Son. And though these last may seem to have
the worst end of the Cause, in as much as Logical inferences to men of ordinary
capacities, are not so evident as plain Text of Scripture; yet do they
Anathematize and curse the other, as most desperate Heretics, if not Apostates
from the Faith. Nor will they admit of any medium toward reconcilement,
although the controversy by moderate and sober men is brought to a very narrow
issue; and seems to consist rather in their Forms of Speech, than any
material Terms of Difference. For Damascen the great Schoolman of the Eastern
Church, though he deny that the Holy Ghost proceeds from the Son, yet he
grants him to be Spiritum filii, and per filium Damasc. de fid. Orth. l. 1.
c. 1.
, to proceed from the Father by the Son, and to be the Spirit of the Son. And
Bessarion, and Gennadius, two of the Grecian Divines, who appeared in the name
of that Church in the Council of Florence, and were like to understand the
meaning of Damascen better than any of the Latins, affirmed (as Bellarmine
tells us of them Bellarm. de Christo. l. 2.27.
,) That he denied not the procession of the Holy Ghost from the Son, as to the
truth of his proceeding; Sed existimasse tutius dici per filium, quam ex filio,
quoad modum loquendi, but thought only that it was the safer expression to
say, That he proceeded by the Son, than from the Son. And Clictoveus in his
Comment on that Book of Damascen, l. 1. c. 12. is of opinion, That the
difference between the East and Western-Churches, as to this particular, is, In
voce potius and modo explicandi, quam in ipsa re, More in the terms and manner
of expression, than the thing it self. The Master of the Sentences does affirm
as much, saying, That the Greeks do differ from the Latins, Verbo non sensu,
not in the meaning of the Point, but the forms of Speech P. Lombard. Sent. l.
1. d. 11.
. And more than so, The Greeks, says he, confess the Holy Ghost to be the
Spirit of the Son, with the Apostle, Gal. 4. And the Spirit of Truth, with the
Evangelist, Joh. 16. And since it is not another thing to say, The Holy Ghost
is the Spirit of the Father, and the Son, than that he is, or proceeds from the
Father and the Son, in this they seem to agree with us in eandem fidei
sententiam, on the same doctrine of Faith, though they differ in words.

Thus also Rob. Grosthead, the learned and renowned Bishop of Lincoln, as he is
cited by Scotus, a famous Schoolman Scotus in Sent. l. 1. d. 11. qu.
, delivers his opinion touching this great Controversy. The Grecians (says
he) are of opinion, that the Holy Ghost is the Spirit of the Son, but that he
proceeds not from the Son, but from the Father only, yet by the Son; which
opinion seems to be contrary to ours. But happily if two wise and
understanding men, the one of the Greek Church, and the other of the Latin,
both lovers of the truth, and not of their own expressions, did meet to
consider of this seeming contrariety, it would in the end appear, Ipsam
contrarietatem non esse veraciter realem sicut est vocalis, That the difference
is not real, but verbal only. Azorius the great Casuist goes further yet, and
upon due examination of the state of the Question, not only freeth the Greeks
from Heresy, but from Schism also Azer. Inst. Moral. l. 8. c. 20.
. By consequence the Church of Rome has run into the greater and more grievous
error, in condemning every Maundy Thursday in their Bulla Coenae the whole
Eastern Churches; which for ought any of her own more sober children are able
to discern on deliberation, are fully as Orthodox as her self in the truth of
Doctrine, and more agreeable to antiquity in their forms of Speech.

For if we please to look into the Ancient Writers, we shall find Tertullian
saying very positively, Spiritum non aliunde quam a Patre per filium Tertul.
Cont. Praxean.
, which is the very same with that of Damascen before delivered. And Ierom,
though a stout maintainer of the Procession of the Holy Ghost from the Son
also, yet does he sometimes fall upon this expression, Spiritus a Patre
egreditur, and propter naturae societatem a filio mittitur Hieron. in Ep. ad.
Hedib.
, That he proceeds from the Father, and is sent by the Son; which none of the
Greek Church will deny: But if we look upon the Fathers of the Eastern
Churches, we shall find not only private men, as Basil, Nazianzen, Nyssen,
Cyril, not to descend so low as Damascen, to make no mention of the proceeding
of the Holy Ghost from the Son, at all; but a whole Synod of 180 Prelates
gathered together in the second General Council at Constantinople An. 385.
to be silent in it, though purposely assembled to suppress the Heresy of
Macedonius, who had denied the Divinity of the Holy Ghost. For in the
Constantinopolitan Creed, according as it stands in all old Records, the
Fathers having ratified the Nicene Creed, added these words for the declaring
of their Faith in the Holy Ghost, viz. I believe in the Holy Ghost, the Lord
and giver of Life, who proceeds from the Father, who together with the Father
and the Son is worshipped and glorified, who spoke by the Prophets V.
: No word in this of his proceeding from the Son. And though this Creed was
afterward continued in the Council of Ephesus An. 435.
, yet so far was that Council from altering any thing which had been formerly
delivered as to this pa^ticular, that it imposed a curse on those who should
add unto it. And so it stood a long time in the Christian Church, possessing
that part in the Public Liturgies, which it still retains. But in some tract
of time, some Spanish Bishops in the eighth Council of Toledo An. 671.
, added the clause a filioque, and made it to run thus in their public
Formulas, who proceeds from the Father and the Son. The French not long after
followed their example, but still the Church of Rome adhered to the old
expression. Whereupon Charles the Great commanded a Council of his Prelates to
be held at Aken ( Aquisgranum it is called in Latin) to consider somewhat
better of this addition An. 809.
, and caused some of them to be sent to Pope Leo the third, to have his opinion
in the matter, who was so far from giving any allowance unto the addition, that
he persuaded them to leave it out by little and little Field of Chur.l. 3. c. 1.
. And nor content to give this Counsel unto them, for fear lest the addition
might creep in at Rome, he caused the Constantinopolitan Creed to be fairly
written out on a Table of Silver, and placed it behind the Altar of St. Peter,
to the end it might remain unto posterity as a lasting Monument of the true
Faith which he professed. The like distaste did John the eighth declare against
this addition An. 857.
, in a Letter by him written unto Photius, Patriark of Constantinople, in which
he gives him to understand, not only that they had no such addition in the
Church of Rome, but that he did condemn them who were Authors of it; adding
withal, That as he was careful for his part, to cause all the Bishops of the
West to be so persuaded of it, as he was himself; so that he did not think it
reasonable, that any should be violently constrained to leave out the addition.
But after in the year 883* Pope Nicholas the first caused this clause a
filioque to be added also to the Creed, in all the Churches under the Command
and Jurisdiction of the Popes of Rome; and from thence-forwards did they brand
the Greek Churches with the brand of Heresy, for not admitting that clause to
the Ancient Creeds, which they themselves had added of their own Authority,
without the consent of the Eastern Churches, or so much as the pretense of a
General Council. But as my Lord of Canterbury has right well observed, in his
learned Answer unto Fisher Relation of the Conf. fol. 25.
, It is an hard thing to add and anathematize too. And yet to that height of
uncharitableness did they come at last, that whereas it was the miserable
fortune of Constantinople to be taken by the Turks upon Whitsunday, being the
Festival of the coming of the Holy Ghost, this was given out to be a just
judgment on them from the Almighty, for thinking so erroneously of his Blessed
Spirit; as if it might not be concluded in as good form of Logic, That sure
the Knights of Rhodes had in their lives and actions denied Christ who bought
them; because that Town and all the Island was taken by the Turks upon
Christmas Day; or that the People of Chios had denied and abnegated the
Resurrection of our Savior, who redeemed them; because that Town, and
therewith all the Island also, was taken by the said Turks upon Easter Day.

I have now done with so much of the present Article, as relates unto the
Person of the Holy Ghost, which is the first signification of the term or
notion, as it is taken personaliter, and essentialiter. We must next look upon
the word, as it is used to signify, in the Book of God, the gifts and graces
of the Spirit, in which we shall discern both his power and office. These gifts
and graces of the Spirit, the Schoolmen commonly divide into Gratis data, such
as being freely given by God, are to be spent as freely for the good of others;
of which kind are the gift of tongues, curing diseases, and the like; and
gratum facientia, such as do make him good and gracious, on whom it pleases
God to bestow the same, as Faith, Justice, Charity. The first are in the
Scripture called by the name of gifts; Now there are diversity of gifts (says
the Apostle) but the same Spirit 1 Cor. 12.4, 8, 9, 10.
: For to one is given by the Spirit the word of Wisdom; to another the word of
Knowledge by the same Spirit; to another Faith by the same Spirit, to another
the gifts of healing by the same Spirit; to another the working of miracles, to
another prophecy, to another discerning of spirits, to another diverse kinds of
tongues, to another the interpretation of tongues. The later are called Fruits,
by the same Apostle Gal. 5.22, 23.
, The Fruits of the Spirit, says he, are love, joy, peace, long-suffering,
gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance. The Gifts are known most
commonly by the name of Gratis data; the Fruits pertain to Gratum facientia:
The Gratum facientia belong to every man for himself, the Gratis data for the
benefit of the Church in common. That which God gives us for the benefit and
use of others, must be so spent, that they may be the better for it; because
not given unto us for own sakes only, nor to gain others to our selves, but
all to him. In which respect, Gods Servants are to be like Torches, which
freely wast themselves to give light to others, like Powder on the day of some
Public Festival, which freely spends it self to rejoice the multitude. That
which he gives us for our selves must be so improved, that we may thereby
become fruitful unto all good works, vessels prepared and sanctified for the
Masters use. In the first of these we may behold the power of the Holy Ghost;
in the last, his office. His power in giving tongues to unlearned men,
knowledge to the ignorant, wisdom to the simple, the gift of prophecy even unto
very Babes and Sucklings, I mean to men not studied in the Liberal Sciences. A
power so great, that no disease is incurable to it; no spirit so subtle and
disguised, but is easy discerned by it; no tongue so difficult and hard which
it cannot interpret, no miracle of such seeming impossibility, but it can
effect it. In which regard the Holy Ghost is called in Scripture, The power of
God; The power of the most High shall over-shadow thee, Luke 1.35. And Christ
our Lord having received the ointing of the holy Spirit, is said to be anointed
with the Holy Ghost, and with power, Acts 10.38. Nor want I Reasons to induce
me unto this opinion, that when Simon Magus had effected by his sorceries and
lying wonders, to be called the great power of God Acts 8.10.
; but that his purpose was to make men believe, that he was the Holy Ghost, or
the Spirit of God; which title afterward he bestowed on his strumpet Helena
Epiphan. in Haeres. Simon.
, and took that of CHRIST unto himself, as the more famed, and fitting for his
devilish purposes.

Next for his Office, that consists in regenerating the carnal, and
sanctifying the regenerate man. First, In regenerating of the carnal; For
except a man be born of Water, and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the
Kingdom of God John 3.5.
, says our Blessed Savior of Water, as the outward Element, but of the holy
Spirit, as the inward Efficient; which moving on the Waters of Baptism, as once
upon the face of the great Abyss, does make them quickening, and effectual unto
newness of life. Then for the Work of Sanctification, that is wrought wholly by
the Spirit; who therefore has the name of the Holy Ghost, not only because
holy in himself, formaliter, but because holy effective, making them holy who
are chosen unto life eternal. So say St. Peter the first, and St. Paul the last
of the Apostles. St. Peter first, Elect according to the foreknowledge of God
the Father, through sanctification of the Spirit unto obedience, 1 Pet. 1.2.
And so St. Paul, But ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are
justified, in the Name of our Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of God, 1 Cor.
6.11. That is to say, Justified in the Name of our Lord Jesus, through Faith in
him, and sanctified by the Spirit of God, through the effusion of his Graces in
the Soul of Man. The work of Sanctification is not wrought but by many acts, as
namely, By shedding abroad in our hearts that most excellent gift of charity,
filling our souls with righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost Romans
14.17.
; by teaching us to add, To our faith virtue, and to virtue, knowledge; and to
knowledge, temperance; and to temperance, patience; and to patience, godliness;
and to godliness, brotherly kindness; and to brotherly kindness, charity 2 Pet.
1.5, etc.
; that we be neither barren nor unfruitful in the knowledge of Christ. Though
Christ be the Head, yet is the Holy Ghost the Heart of the Church; from whence
the vital spirits of grace and godliness are issued out unto the quickening of
the Body mystical. And as the vital spirits in the body natural are sensibly
perceived by the motion of the heart, the breathing of the mouth, and by the
beating of the pulse; so by the same means may we easily discern the motions of
the Spirit of Grace. First, It begins in the heart, by putting into us new
hearts, more sanctified desires than we had before; A new heart will I also
give you, and a new spirit will I put within you, says the Lord by the Prophet
Ezekiel Ezekiel. 36.26, 27.
. And to what end? That ye may walk in my Statutes, and keep my Judgments. This
new heart is like the new wine which our Savior speaks of, not possible to be
contained in old bottles, but will break out first in new desires. For Novum
supervenisse spiritum nova demonstrant desideria, as St. Bernard has it. Nor
will it break out only in desires or wishes, but we shall find it on our
tongues, for (...), Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks Matthew.
12.34.
. And if the heart be thoroughly sanctified, we may be sure that no corrupt
communication will come out of our mouths, but only such as is good to the use
of edifying, and may minister grace unto the hearers Ephesians. 4 29.
. The same breath in the natural body, is Organon vitae and vocis, as
experience tells us, The Instrument of life and voice; it is the same we live
by, and the same we speak by: And so it is also in the Body mystical, as well
the vocal, as the vital breath, proceeding both alike from the Holy Ghost. Nor
stays it only on the tongue, but as the beating of the pulse is best found at
the hand; so if we would desire to know how the Spirit beats, let us next
take it by the hand, or rather by his handy works. For some there be who do
confess Christ with their mouths Tit. 1.16.
, but yet deny him in their works. The Spirit of God is very active, and
wheresoever it is, it will soon be working; if it do not work, it is no Spirit:
For usque adeo proprium est spiritui operari, ut nisi operetur, non sit, as the
Father has it, So natural it is for the Spirit to bring forth good works, that
if it do not so, then it is no Spirit. These Works St. Paul calls plainly, The
fruits of the Spirit; Love, joy, peace, gentleness, goodness Gal. 5.22.
, and the rest that follow. Which as they are planted in the Soul, may be
called the Graces, but as they are manifested in our actions, the Fruits of the
Spirit; to show us that it is a dead spirit which brings forth no fruits, even
as it is a dead faith, in St. James his judgment, which brings forth no works
Jam. 2.17.
. In a word, as it was in the generation of our Savior Christ, so it is also
in the regeneration of a Christian man; both wrought by the effectual operation
of the Holy Ghost. But these being chiefly matters practical, are beyond my
purpose.

Proceed we then to such as are more Doctrinal, which is the proper subject of
my undertaking, from this acception of the word in which the Holy Ghost is
taken for those gifts and graces, which out of his great bounty he bestows
upon us; to that wherein it signifies, The Power and Calling which in the
Church is given to some certain men, to be Ministers of holy things to the rest
of the people. That in this sense the word is taken, we have shown before, and
are now come to show how it is performed, by what authority, and what gifts
discharged and executed. The office of teaching in the Church does properly
belong to Christ, the Prophet of the New Testament, of whom Moses prophesied,
Deuteronomy. 13.15. As both St. Peter Acts 3 22.
, and St. Stephen and 7.37.
, do affirm expressly. A Prophet whom all the people were to hear in every thing
which he was pleased to say unto them and 3.22, 23.
; and that commanded under such a terrible commination, that every Soul which
would not hear the voice of that Prophet, was to be destroyed from amongst the
people. Yet though it were an office proper to our Lord and Savior, so proper
that he seemed to affect it more, than either the Priesthood, or the Kingdom;
He entered not upon the same, until he had received some visible designation
from the Holy Ghost. That he took not on him to discharge his Prophetical
Function, till after he was baptized by John in Jordan, is evident by course
and order of the Evangelical story: Not that his Baptism could confer any power
upon him, or give him an authority which before he had not; for without doubt,
the lesser is blessed of the greater, as St. Paul affirms Heb. 7.7.
; and John confessed himself so much less than Christ, as that he was not
worthy to untie his shoe John 1.27.
; but that, as man, he did receive this power from the Holy Ghost, descending
on him at that time in a bodily shape, and withal giving him that Sacred
Unction, whereby he was inaugurated to so high an office. And to this Unction
of the Spirit, does he himself refer the power he had to Preach the Gospel, and
to discharge all other parts of that weighty Function; and that too in the very
first Sermon which he ever preached; to give the people notice that he preached
not without lawful calling, or exercised a power which belonged not to him. For
entering into the Synagogue of Nazareth on the Sabbath day, he took the Book,
and fell upon that place of the Prophet Isaiah, where it is said, The Spirit of
the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me to preach the Gospel to the
poor; he has sent me to heal the brokenhearted, to preach deliverance to the
captives, and recovering sight unto the blind; to set at liberty them that are
bruised, and to preach the acceptable year of the Lord Luke 4.16, etc.
. Which having read, he closed the Book, and said unto them, This day is this
Scripture fulfilled in your ears. That he did preach by virtue of some unction
from the holy Spirit, is evident by his own Application of the Text, by which
he gave his Auditors to understand, That he did not undertake the office of his
own head only, but by the motion and impulsion of the Holy Ghost, by whom he
was abundantly furnished with all requisite gifts which might prepare him
thereunto. Non meo proprio privatoque, sed divino spiritu missus sum; eo actus,
eo impulsus, eo plenus, ad praedicandum Evangelium venio Maldon. in Luc. 4.16.
, as the learned Jesuit glosseth on it. But if you ask, where, or at what time
he received this unction, we must send you for an Answer to St. Ieroms
Commentary on those words of the Prophet, where we shall find, Expletum esse
hanc unctionem illo tempore, quando baptizatus est in Jordane, and Spiritus
sanctus in specie Columbae descendit super eum, and maenfit in illo Hieron. in
Isai 61.1.
: That is to say, This unction or anointing was performed or fulfilled at that
time, when he was baptized by John in Jordan; and the Holy Ghost descended on
him in the shape of a Dove, and remained with him. Nor does St. Ierom stand
alone in this Exposition, Irenaeus, Athanasius, ^uffinus, Augustine, and
Prosper, (all of them Ancient Writers, and of great renown) concurring with him
in the same. And to this unction or anointing at the time of his Baptism, St.
Peter questionless alludeth, where preaching to Cornelius, and his Family, he
lets them know, how God anointed JESUS of Nazareth with the Holy Ghost, and
with power, who (from that time forwards, not before) went about doing good,
and healing all that were oppressed of the devil Acts 10.38.
. In which place, by the anointing with the Holy Ghost, I understand the
furnishing of the Man CHRIST JESUS ( Iuxta dispensationem carnis assumptae, as
St. Ierom has it) with those gifts and graces of the Spirit, which were
requisite and fit to qualify him for the undertaking: By power, the Calling
and Authority which that Unction gave him, to preach the Gospel, and do the
rest of those good works which properly did pertain to his Ministration. But
that both gifts and power were conferred upon him, by the descension of the
Spirit at the time of his Baptism, to which St. Peter does allude; I have
Maldonate concurring in opinion with me, saying Maldon. in Luc. 4.18.
, Loquitur Petrus de Baptismo Johannis quem Christus susceperat, postquam a
Spiritu sancto unctum fuisse significat.

This Office as our Savior was pleased to execute in his own Person, as long
as he sojourned with us here upon the Earth; so being to withdraw himself from
the sight of man, he thought it requisite to make choice of some to be about
him, who might both be the witnesses of his Life, and Doctrine, and afterward
discharge so much of the Prophetical Office, as he should please to delegate
and entrust unto them. To these he showed himself after his Resurrection, and
conversed with them for the space of forty days; to the intent he might the
better fit them for so great a work. And being even upon the instant of
departing from them, it seemed good to him to invest them with a sacred Power,
and by some outward Ceremony and set Form of words, to dedicate them to the
Ministry of such holy things, as were not to be meddled with by vulgar hands.
He breathed on them (says the Text) and said unto them, Receive ye the Holy
Ghost John 20.22.
. Whose soever sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them, and whose soever
sins ye retain, they are retained. The meaning of these words we have shown
before, and need repeat no more but this, That in the number of those gifts,
whereof the Holy Ghost is Author, there is contained that sacred Power, by
which some men are made the Ministers of holy things to the rest of the people.
When therefore Christ breathed on his Apostles, and said, Receive the Holy
Ghost, he did, as it were, breathe out that power of Preaching the Word of
Truth, and doing other holy Offices in the Church of God, which he had formerly
received from the Holy Ghost. Receive (said he) the Holy Ghost, i. e. Such a
sublime power, as no Prince, nor Potentate can bestow; a power which gives you
such an influence on the Souls of men, as that of the remitting and retaining
sin. In which it is to be observed, That our Savior puts not down this act of
remitting and retaining sins, for the whole, entire, and adequate subject,
about which the Apostolical or Prophetical Office was to be employed; but only
as one chief part thereof in the name of all, that by the weightiness of that,
they might judge the better of the importance of the other. He had promised
them the Keys before Matthew. 16.19.
, but now he hangs them at their girdle, and puts them absolutely and fully
into their possession. Ability and power to perform the rest, they were to
tarry for yet a little longer, and then immediately to receive both from the
Holy Ghost, whom he did promise to send them after his departure: And so
accordingly he did; the Holy Ghost descending on them, upon the tenth day after
his Ascension, in the likeness of fiery cloven tongues Acts 2.3.
, and furnishing them with all those extraordinary gifts and graces which were
necessary for the first propagation of our Saviors Gospel. By his own
breathing on them, and the words that followed, he gave them jus ad rem, as the
Lawyers call it, a power to exercise a Spiritual Function in his holy Church,
and put them into possession of so much thereof, as concerned the remitting and
retaining of sins. But for the jus in re, the actual execution of that holy
Function, together with those supernatural endowments, by which they were to be
fitted and prepared for it, that they received upon this coming of the Holy
Ghost; and did not only receive it, as before from Christ, but repleti sunt
omnes, they were all filled with it, says the Text Ib. v. 4:
. This coming of the Holy Ghost, as Pope Leo notes, Was Cumulans non inchoans,
nec novus opere sed dives largitate Leo M. Sermon. de Sp. Sanct.
, rather by way of augmenting the former power and abilities which Christ had
given them, than of beginning a new. For it is a known rule of the Ancient
Fathers, That where the Holy Ghost had been given before, and yet is said to
come again, it is to be understood either of an increase of the former, in
weight or measure, or of some new gift which before men had not, but was
conferred after for some new effect; as it is noted out of St. Ierom, and S^.
Cyril, by our Learned Andrews B. Andr. Sermon. 2. on Whitsund.
. And to say truth, there was good reason why we must understand this coming of
the Holy Ghost, in both these respects, both in regard of measure and addition
too. Before, when Christ breathed on them, and therewith said, Receive ye the
Holy Ghost, their Ministry was confined within the Land of Judea, Go not into
the way of the Gentiles, or into any City of the Samaritans, but to the lost
sheep of the house of Israel Matthew* 10.5, 6.
. A less proportion of the Spirit would have served for that: But when he was
to leave them, he enlarged their bounds, and put the whole world under their
jurisdiction, Go, says he, into all the world, and Preach the Gospel unto
every Creature Mark. 16.15.
; Go therefore teach all Nations, as St. Matthew has it chap. 28.19. And if
they were to travel over all the World, and to teach all Nations, good reason
they should be enabled to speak the Tongues of all Nations also, and be
replenished with so great a measure of the Holy Spirit, as might make the
conquest of the world the more easy to them. Which work, as it was wrought in
the Feast of Penticost, so has the anniversary of that day been celebrated
ever since in the Christian Church (though under other names, according to the
language of particular Countries) as the Birth^day of the Gospel of Christ, the
day on which it was preached after his Ascension, after the great work of our
Redemption was accomplished by him. It had before been kept as a solemn
Festival (one of the three great Festivals ordained by Moses) in memory of the
giving of the Law, that day, upon Mount Sinai. And has been since observed as
a solemn Festival (one of the three great Festivals of the Christian Church)
in memory of the promulgation of the Gospel from Mount Sion, on the same day
also. A day it was of so great solemnity, that there were then assembled at
Jerusalem, of every Nation under heaven, as the Text informs us Acts 2.5.
. The Gospel was not to be published but in such a general concourse of
people; Therefore the day thereof to be solemnized by all Nations also, and
made a day of holy assembly to the Lord our God.

But our Redeemer staid not here, as if he had sufficiently discharged his
Prophetical Office, by furnishing his Apostles with the Gifts of the Spirit,
and meant from henceforth to betake himself to the execution of the Priestly
or the Kingly Offices, as being in themselves more glorious, and to him more
honorable. When he ascended up on high he led captivity captive, and gave Gifts
to men Psalm. 68.18.
, not unto Twelve alone, which was the number of his Apostles, nor to an
hundred and twenty only, which was the whole number of his Disciples Acts 1.15.
at that time. The Harvest being great did require more laborers, and
therefore Gifts must be bestowed on more men than so. And if we will believe
St. Paul, so it was indeed. For having cited those words of the royal
Psalmist, he adds immediately, And he gave some Apostles, and some Prophets,
and some Evangelists, and some Pastors, and Teachers Ephesians. 4.11.
; That is to say, either he gave unto some men such a measure of Gifts, as
might fit them to the several Callings which are there enumerated; or else he
gave the men so gifted to the use of the Church, and dedicated them, Gifts and
all, to the public service. Either or both of these was done, and done unto
the end which is after specified Ib. v. 12.
, viz. for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for
the edifying of the body of Christ. These were the Gifts which Christ conferred
upon his Church by the Holy Ghost. First, by his first descent or coming on the
feast of Pentecost, when he gave Apostles, Prophets, and Evangelists; and ever
since by furnishing the Church with Pastors and Teachers for the work of the
Ministry, and fitting them with those Gifts and Graces of the Holy Spirit,
which are expedient for their calling. And though St. Paul in this recital does
not speak of Bishops, yet questionless he does include them in the name of
Pastors. For (...) which is used in the original does signify a Ruler, as well
as Pastor; And Christ is called Episcopus and Pastor animarum 1 Pet. 2.25.
, the Bishop and Shepherd of our souls, as our English reads it, to show that
the Episcopal and Pastoral Office is indeed the same. And this I could make
good out of the constant tendry of the Ancient Fathers, had I not handled it
already in another place V. Hist. of Episc. l. 1. c. 6. n. 13.
. Nor shall I add more here out of that Discourse, but that it is affirmed
positively by our learned Andrews, Apud v^teres Pastorum nomen vix inveniri,
nisi cum de Episcopis loquntur Resp. ad Ep. P. Molinaei.
, i. e. that the name of Pastors is scarce read amongst the Ancients, but when
they have occasion to speak of Bishops. And Binius in his notes upon the
Councils excepts against a fragment of the Synod of Rhemes, for laying claim
to more antiquity than belongs unto it; and that he does upon this reason, eo
quod titulum Pastoris tribuat Paracho Bin. in Council. To. 3. part. 2. p, 978.
, because the Parish Priest there is called Pastor, contrary to the usage of
those elder times. But to put the matter out of doubt, though S. Paul does not
speak of Bishops by name in that place of the Ephesians before alleged: yet
when he called the Rulers of the Church to appear at Ephesus before him, he
does not only give them the name of Bishops, but says that they were made
Bishops by the Holy Ghost; In quo vos spiritus sanctus posuit Episcopos Acts
20.28.
, as all Translations read it, but our English only. Christ did not so desert
his Church, as to leave it without Order, and the power of Government; nor has
so laid aside his Prophetical Office, but that as well since his Ascension, as
while he sojourned here, on the Earth, amongst us, he is still the chief Pastor
and Bishop of our Souls 1 Pet. 2.25. and 5.4.
, as St. Peter calls him. Only it pleased him to commit a great part of this
care to the managing of the blessed Spirit, whom he promised to send to his
Apostles after his departure, to the end, that he might guide them into all
truth John 16.13.
, and abide with them always to the end. In which respect Tertullian calls
the Holy Ghost, Vicarium Christi, the Vicar or Deputy of Christ, his Usher, as
it were, in the great School of the Church Tertul. de Virgin. Veland.
; and does assign this Office to him, Dirigere, ordinare, and ad perfectam
producere disciplinam, that he direct, dispose, and perfect us at the last in
all Christian piety. Not that the Holy Ghost does of himself immediately
discharge this duty, but by the Ministry of such men as are called unto it:
Whom he co-operates withal, when they Preach the Gospel, by working on the
heart, on the inward man, as they upon the understanding by the outward senses.
Without the inward operation of the Holy Spirit, the Preaching of the Word
would be counted foolishness, and all the eloquent persuasions unto Faith and
Piety, which could be uttered by the tongues of Men or Angels, would seem but
as tinckling brass, and a sounding cymbal. Without an outward calling to attend
this Ministry, Vzzah will press too near the Ark, Uzziah take upon him to burn
incense on the Altars of God, and both not draw destruction on their own heads
only 2 Samuel 6.7 2 Chro. 26.16.
, but prove a stumbling block and scandal to the rest of the people. Not every
one which prophecieth in the Name of Christ, or does pretend in his name to
have cast out devils, or done any other wonderful works Matthew. 7.22, 23.
, shall be acknowledged by him in that terrible day; but he that does it in
that Order, and by those warrantable ways which he has appointed. Christ must
first send them, ere they go upon such an errand, and send them so as he did
his Apostles, to Preach the Gospel; first giving them a power to minister the
things of God, and then commanding them to go into all the world, to teach all
nations. It had not been sufficient for them to pretend a mission, unless they
could have shown their commission also; and that they had not, till he pleased
to breathe upon them, and said, Receive the Holy Ghost, with the words that
follow.

And so it has been with the Church in all Ages since. We must receive the
Holy Ghost, and be endued with power from above, before we enter on the
Ministry in the Church of Christ; and not persuade our selves to pretend unto
some special gifts and illumin^tions, unless we have the Holy Ghost in the
sense here spoken of, unless the power which we pretend to be conferred upon us
by those hands which have power to give it. Those words, Receive the Holy
Ghost, import not the receiving of saving grace, or of inward sanctimony; nor
the conferring of such special gifts of the holy Spirit, as after were given to
the Apostles for the use of the Church, but the receiving of a power, to
execute a Ministry in the Church of Christ; a special and spiritual power in
the things of God, and in the dispensation of his heavenly Mysteries. And as
they were then used by Christ, at the authorizing of his Apostles to Preach the
Gospel, so are they still the verba solemnia, the solemn and set form of words,
used at the Ordination of all Priests or Presbyters; used anciently in that
sacred Ceremony, without any exception, and still retained with us in the
Church of England (for I look not on the new Model of Ordination, as a thing in
which the Anglican Church is at all concerned) as the very operative words, by
which, and by no others of what kind so ever, the order of Priesthood is
conferred. And had not those of Rome retained them in their Ordinations, their
giving power to offer sacrifice for the quick and the dead, ( Accipe potestatem
sacrificandi pro vivis and mortuis Pontifical. Roman.
) which new patch they have added to the ancient Formulas, had never made them
Priests of the New Testament.

Of the Authority or Power of remitting sins, we shall speak more appositely
hereafter in the following Article. At this time I shall only speak of the
Form of words; which some of the pretenders unto Reformation in Queen
Elizabeth's time did very much except against, affirming, That to use the words
of our Redeemer, and not to give the gifts withal, was nothing but a mere
mockery of the Spirit of God, and a ridiculous imitation of our Saviors
actions. But unto this it is replied by Judicious Hooker, that not only the
ability of doing miracles, speaking with tongues, curing diseases, and the
like, but the authority and power of ministering holy things in the Church of
God, is contained in the number of those gifts whereof the Holy Ghost is the
Author. And therefore he which gives this power, may say without folly or
absurdity, Receive the Holy Ghost, meaning thereby such power as the Spirit of
Christ has pleased to endue his Church withal Hooker Eccl. Pol. l. 5.
. And herein he is seconded by that living Magazin of Learning, Bishop Andrews,
who reckons the Apostleship, or the very office to be a Grace, one of the
graces doubtless of the Holy Ghost; such as St. Paul calls (...), The grace
(we English it the gift) of ministering unto the Saints Andr. Sermon. 9. of the
Holy Ghost.
, 2 Cor. 8.4. For that the very Office it self is a grace, St. Paul (says he)
avoweth in more places than one, and in particular, Mihi data est haec gratia
(according to the gift of the grace of God which is given unto me,) Ephesians. 3.7.
Where he speaks of his Office, and of nothing else. And such as this, says he,
was the grace here given, of Spiritum called a Spiritual, and of Sanctum an
holy Calling; from them derived unto us, by us to be derived on others to the
end of the World, and that in the same form of words which our Savior used.

For being the especial power, which Christ at that time gave unto his
Apostles, consisted in remitting and retaining of sins, and seeing that the
same power is given by the Church of Christ, why should not the same words be
used as were used at first? why may not the same words be used in conferring
this grace of an holy calling, whereby their persons are made public, and
their acts authentical, and they enabled to do somewhat about remitting of
sins, which is not of the like avail, if done by others, though perhaps more
learned than they, and more virtuous too, but have not the like warrant, nor
the same accipite, as is conferred in holy Orders? Nor do I utterly deny, but
that together with the power, the Holy Ghost does give some fitness to perform
the same; though not in any answerable measure to the first times of the
Church, when extraordinary gifts were more necessary than in any time since.
For as the ointment which was poured upon Aarons head, did first fall down upon
his Beard, and after on the skirts of his garments also Psalm. 133.2.
: So we may reasonably believe, That the holy Spirit which descended on the
head of Christ, and afterward on his Apostles, as upon his beard, has kept
some sprinklings also to bestow on us, which are the lowest skirts of his
sacred garments. So far we may assuredly persuade our selves, That the Spirit
which calls men to that holy Function, does go along with him that is called
unto it, for his assistance and support, in whatsoever he shall faithfully do
in discharge thereof; and that our acts are so far his, as that, Whether we
Preach, Pray, Baptize, Communicate, Condemn, or give Absolution; or in a word,
whatsoever we do as the Despensers of Gods Mysteries, our Words, Acts,
Judgments, are not ours, but the Holy Ghosts. For this I have the testimony of
Pope Leo the first, a Learned and Religious Prelate of the Primitive times. Qui
mihi oneris est Author, ipse and administrationis est adjutor. Ne magnitudine
gratiae (there gratiae is used for the office or calling, as before St. Paul)
succumbat infirmus, dabit virtutem qui contulit dignitatem Leo Sermon. in
Annivers.
. Which is in brief, He that has laid the burden on us, will give strength to
bear it. But behold a greater than Pope Leo is here; Behold, (says Christ to
his Apostles) I am with you always to the end of the world Matthew. 28.20.
; that is to say, Cum vobis and successoribus vestris, as Denis the Carthusian
rightly Carthus. in Matthew. 28.
, with you and your Successors in the Work of the Ministry, to guide them and
assist them by his holy Spirit. And when he said unto them upon other
occasions, He that hears you, hears me Luke 10.1^.
; and whatsoever ye bind on Earth, should be bound in Heaven Matthew. 16.19.
; Did he not thereby promise so to own their actions, that whatsoever they
should say, or do, in order to the propagation of his Gospel, and the
edification of his Church, should be esteemed as his act? his act by whose
authority and power it is said or done.

But the assisting of the Church and Ministers thereof, with his Power and
Spirit, is not the only public benefit, though it be the greatest, which it
receives immediately from the Holy Ghost. Without some certain standing Rule,
by which the Ministers of the Gospel were to frame their doctrine, and the rest
of the people guide their paths in the way of godliness, both Priest and People
would be apt to pretend new Lights, and following such ignes fatui as they saw
before them, be drawn into destruction both of body and soul. And on the other
side, Tradition has been always found to be so untrusty in the conveyance of
Gods will and pleasure to the ears of his people; that in small tract of time,
the Law of God became obliterated in the hearts of men, the righteous Seed
degenerating after carnal lusts Genesis 6.2.
, and Abraham Josh. 24.2.
himself serving other gods, for want of a more certain rule to direct their
actions. Therefore to take away all excuse from backsliding men, it pleased
God first to commit his Law to writing, the Two Tables only; and afterward to
inspire many holy Men with the Spirit of Wisdom, Power, and Knowledge, to serve
as Commentators on that sacred Text; whose Prophecies, Reproofs, and
Admonitions, being put into their mouths by the Holy Ghost, (for Prophecy came
not in old time by the will of man, but holy Men of God spoke as they were
moved by the Holy Ghost 2 Pet. 4.1, 2.
, as St. Peter has it.) So by direction of the same Spirit, were they put into
writing. Propter vivendi exemplum libros ad nostram etiam memoriam
transmiserunt, in the words of Ierom Ierom.
. The Lord himself did on Mount Sinai give the Law, the very Letter: The
Prophets and other holy Men of God, being (...), especially inspired to that
end and purpose, did compose the Comment. By the same Spirit were the
Evangelists and Apostles guided, when they committed unto writing the most
glorious Gospel, and other the Records and Monuments of the Christian Faith.
The first of the Evangelical Scriptures was the Epistle Decretory which we
find in the fifteenth of the Acts; and that was countenanced by a visum est
spiritui sancto, i. e. It seemed good to the Holy Ghost. And when St. Paul writ
his Epistle unto those of Corinth, for fear he might be thought by that
factious people, to enjoin any thing upon them without very good warrant, he
vouched the Spirit of God for his Author in it 1 Cor. 7.40.
. They preached the Gospel first to others, as Christ did to them, by word of
mouth, that being the more speedy way to promote the Work: But being they could
not live to the end of the world, and that the purest waters will corrupt at
last, by passing through muddy or polluted Channels, they thought it best to
leave so much thereof in writing, as might serve in all succeeding Ages for the
Rule of Faith. Postea vero per voluntatem Dei, in Scripturis nobis Evangelium
tradiderunt, firmamentum and columnam fidei nostrae futuram Irenaeus adv.
haeres.
, as in Irenaeus. A man might marvel why St. John should give that testimony to
the Gospel which was writ by him, that it was written to the end, That men
might believe that JESUS is the CHRIST, the Son of God; and that believing,
they might have Faith through his Name John 20.31.
; considering that none of the rest of the Evangelists say the like of theirs;
or why he thundered at the end of his Revelation that most fearful curse,
against all those who should presume to add anything to the words of that
Book, or take any thing from it Apoc. 22.18, 19.
; being a course that none of all the sacred Penmen had took but he. But when I
call to mind the Spirit, by which John was guided, and the time in which those
Books of his were first put in writing; methinks, the marvel is took off
without more ado. For seeing that his Gospel was writ after all the rest, as is
generally affirmed by all the Ancients, those words relate not, as I guess, to
his own Book only, but to the whole Body of the Evangelical History, now
perfectly composed and finished; for otherwise, how impertinent had it been for
him to say, That JESUS did many other signs in the presence of his Disciples,
which were not written in that Book John 20.30.
, if he had spoken those words of his own Book only: Considering, that he had
neither written of the signs done in the way to Emaus, mentioned by St. Luke;
or his appearing to the eleven in a Mountain of Galilee, which St. Matthew
speaks of; or his Ascension into Heaven, which St. Mark relates, which every
vulgar Reader could not choose but know? The like I do conceive of those words
of his in the Revelation, viz. That they relate not to that Book alone, but to
the whole body of the Bible: St. John being the Survivor of that glorious
company, on whom the Holy Ghost descended in the Feast of Pentecost; and the
Apocalypse the last of those Sacred Volumes which were dictated by the Spirit
of God, for the use of his Church, and now make up the Body of the holy
Scriptures.

God had now said as much by the mouths and pens of the Prophets, Evangelists,
and Apostles, as he conceived sufficient for our salvation; and so closed up
the Canon of the Scriptures, as St. Augustine tells, Deus quantum satis esse
judicavit, locutus, Scripturam condidit August. de civit dei. l. 11.3.
, as his own words are; which certainly God had not done, nor the Evangelist
declared, nor St. Augustine said, had not the Scripture been a sufficient rule,
able to make us wise unto salvation, and thoroughly furnished unto all good
works.

Which being so, it cannot but be a great dishonor to the Scripture, and
consequently to the Spirit of God, who is Author of it, to have it called as
many of the Papists do, Atramentariam Scripturam, Plumbeam Regulam, Literam
Mortuam; that is to say, An Ink-horn Text, a Leaden Rule, and a Dead Letter, (
Pighius for one Pighius Hier. lib. 1. c. 1. and Controv. 3.
, as I remember, gives it all these Titles;) or to affirm, That it has no
authority in the Church of Christ, but what it borrows from the Pope, without
whose approbation, it were scarce more estimable than the Fables of Aesop;
which was one of the blasphemous speeches of Wolf Hermannus Hosius de Script.
Author. l. 3.
, or that is not a sufficient means to gain Souls to Christ, or to instruct the
Church in all duties necessary to salvation, without the adding of Traditional
Doctrines, neither in terminis extant in the Book of God, nor yet derived from
thence by good Logical inference, which is the general Tenet of the Church of
Rome; or that to make the Canon of the Scripture complete and absolute, the
Church, as it has added to it already the Apocryphal Writings, so may it add
and authorize for the Word of God, the Decretals of the Ancient Popes, and
their own Canon Law, as some of the Professors of it have not sticked to say
Distinct. 19. in Canon. and Gloss.
. So strongly are they biased with their private interess, and a desire of
carrying on their faction in the Church of Christ, as to place the holy Spirit,
where he does not move, in their Traditions, in Apochryphal, and mere Humane
writings, and not to see and honor him, where indeed he is, in the holy
Scriptures. Of the Authority, Sufficiency, and Perspicuity of which holy
Scriptures, I do not purpose at the present any debate. (...) Arist. Eth. l. 1.
. It is a work more fit for another place, and such, as of it self would
require a Volume; only I say, that if the written Word be no rule at all, but
as it has authority from the Church, which it is to direct; and then, not an
entire, but a partial rule, like a Noune Adjective in Grammar, which cannot
stand by it self, but requires somewhat else to be joined with it in
Construction; and that too, so obscure and difficult, that men of ordinary wits
cannot profit by it, and therefore must not be permitted to consult the same;
the Holy Ghost might very well have spared his pains of speaking by the
Prophets in the time of the Law, or guiding the pens of the Apostles in the
time of the Gospel; and the great Body of the Scripture had been the most
impertinent, and imperfect piece, the most unable to attain to the end it aims
at, that was ever writ in any Science, since the world began. Which what an
horrid blasphemy it must needs be thought, against the majesty and wisdom of
the holy Spirit, let any sober Christian judge. And yet as horrid as those
blasphemies may be thought to be, some of the most professed enemies of the
Church of Rome, and such as think, that the further they depart from Rome, they
are the nearer to Christ, have fallen upon the like, if not worse extravagancies.
For to say nothing of the Anabaptists, and that new brood of Sectaries, which
now swarms amongst us, whom I look on only as a company of Fanatical Spirits;
did not Cartwright, and the rest of our new Reformers in Queen Elizabeth's time,
say as much as this? The Scriptures say the Papists in their Council of Trent
(for I regard not the unsavory Speeches of particular men) Is not sufficient to
Salvation without Traditions, that is to say, without such unwritten
Doctrinals, as have from hand to hand been delivered to us: Said not the
Puritans the same, when they affirmed, That Preaching only viva voce, which is
verbum traditum, is able to convert the sinner V. Hooker Eccles. Polit. l. 5.
: That the Word sermonized, not written, is alone the food which nourishes to
life eternal; that reading of the Word of God is of no greater power to bring
men to Heaven, than studying of the Book of Nature; that the Word written, was
written to no other end, but to afford some Texts and Topics for the Preachers
descant. If so, as so they say it is, then is the written word no better than
an Ink-horn Scripture, a Dead Letter, or a Leaden Rule, and whatsoever else the
Papists, in the height of scorn, have been pleased to call it. Nay of the two,
these last have more detracted from the perfection and sufficiency of the holy
Scripture, than the others did. They only did decree in the Council of Trent,
That Traditions were to be received, Paripietatis affectu Council. Trident.
Sess. 2.
, with equal Reverence and Affection to the written Word, and proceed no
further; These magnify their verbum traditum so much above it, that in
comparison thereof, the Scripture is Gods Word in name, but not in efficacy.
They only add Traditions in the way of Supplement, where they conceive the
Scriptures to be defective; These make the Scriptures every where deficient to
the work intended, unless the Preacher do inspire them with a better Spirit,
than that which they received from the Holy Ghost. Good God* that the same
breath should blow so hot upon the Papists, and yet so cold upon the
Scriptures; that the same men who so much blame the Church of Rome, for
derogating from the dignity and perfection of the Holy Scriptures, should yet
prefer their own indigested crudities (in the way of Salvation) before the most
divine dictates of the Word of God. But such are men, when they leave off the
conduct of the Holy Ghost, to follow the delusions of a private Spirit.

Articuli IX. Pars Secunda. (...) (i. e.) Sanctam Ecclesiam Catholicam. (i. e.)
The Holy Catholic Church.
CHAP. II. Of the name and definition of the Church. Of the Title of Catholic.
The Church, in what respects called Holy. Touching the Head and Members of it.
The Government thereof Aristocratical.
IN the same Article in which we testify our Faith in the Holy Ghost, do we
acknowledge, That there is a Body or Society of faithful people, which being
animated by the power of that Blessed Spirit, has gained unto it self the name
of the Church; and with that name, the attribute or title of Catholic, in
regard of the extent thereof over all the World; of Holy, in relation to that
piety of life and manners, which is or ought to be in each several Member. And
not unfitly are they joined together in the self same Article; the Holy Ghost
being given to the Apostles for the use of the Church, and the Church nothing
but a dead and lifeless carcass, without the powerful influence of the Holy
Ghost. As is the Soul in the Body of Man, so is the Holy Ghost in the Church of
Christ; that which first gives it life, that it may have a Being, and afterward
preserves it from the danger of putrefaction; into which it would otherwise
fall in small tract of time.

Having therefore spoken in the former Chapter of the Nature, Property, and
Office of the Holy Ghost; and therein also of the Volume of the Book of God,
dictated by that Blessed Spirit, for that constant Rule by which the Church was
to be guided, both in Life and Doctrine; We now proceed in order to the Church
it self, so guided and directed by it.

And first for the Quid nominis, to begin with that, it is a name not found in
all the writings of the Old Testament; in which, the body of Gods people, the
Spiritual body, is represented to us after a figurative manner of Speech, in
the names of Sion and Jerusalem; as, Pray for the peace of Jerusalem, Psalm.
121. And the Lord loves the gates of Sion, Psalm. 87. The name of Church
occurreth not till the time of the Gospel, and then it was imposed by him who
had power to call it what he pleased, and to entitle it by a name which was
fittest for it. The Disciples gave themselves the name of Christians, the name
of Church was given them by our Savior Christ. No sooner had St. Peter made
this confession for himself, and the rest of the Apostles, Thou art Christ, the
Son of the living God Matthew. 16.16.
; but presently our Savior added, Upon this Rock, that is to say, The Rock of
this Confession (as most of the Ancients August. Ser. 23. ^e verbis domini.
Cyril. de Trin. l. 4. Hilar. de Trin. l. 2. Eucher. in Homil. in Natal. S.
Petr. Lyra in Matthew. 16. Gloss. Interlin. ibid. Marsil. in defensor. Pacis.
Petrus de Alliaco, the Glos^ on Gratian, etc.
, and some Writers also of the darker times, do expound the same) will I build
my Church. (...), says the Greek. The word used by our Lord and Savior, is,
(...); whence the Latins borrowed their Ecclesia, the French their Eglise, and
signifies Coetum evocatum, a chosen or selected company, a company chosen out
of others; derived from (...), which is as much as evocare, to call out or
segregate. In that sense, as the word is used to signify a company of men
called by the special Grace to the Faith in Christ, and to the hopes of life
eternal, by his death and passion; is the word Ecclesia taken in the writings
of the holy Apostles, and in most Christian Authors, since the times they lived
in, though with some difference (or variety rather) in the application to their
purposes. But anciently it was of a larger extent by far, and signified any
Public meeting of Citizens, for the dispatch of business and affairs of State;
For so Thucidides, (...) Thucid. hist. l. 1.
, i. e. That the Assembly being formed, the different parties fell upon their
disputes; and so does Aristophanes use it, in his (...) Arist. in Acharnens.
, i. e. That the people should now give the Thracians a Public meeting in
their Guild-hal or Common forum of the City. St. Luke, who understood the true
propriety, as well as the best Critic of them all, gives it in this sense
also, Acts 19.32. where speaking of the tumult which was raised at Ephesus, he
tells us, (...), That the Assembly was confused. And in the 26. Psalm.
Ecclesia malignantium, is used for the Congregation of ungodly men.

APPLICATION.
BUt after Christ had given this name unto the Body of the Faithful which
confessed his Name; and the Apostles in their writings had applied it so, as to
make it a word of Ecclesiastical use and notion, the Fathers in the following
Ages did so appropriate the same to the state of the Gospel, as by no means to
let it be accommodated to the times of the Law. That by a name distinct, they
have called the Synagogue. Synagoga Iudaeorum, Ecclesia Christianorum est
August. in Psalm. 77.
, as St. Augustine has it. And the distinction may sort well enough with the
state of the Church, as it stood heretofore in the time of the Law, and now
under the Gospel, though otherwise the names may be used promiscuously. For
properly Synagogue is no other than a Congregation, derived from the Greek
(...), which signifies to congregate, or gather together into one; and the
other in one word may be rendered a Convocation, from calling the same men
together, to some certain end. Both words of Ecclesiastical use and notion, and
both import the same thing, though in diverse words: For both the Patriarks and
other holy Men of God which lived under the Law, may be called a Church, that
is to say, a Convocation, a Body Collective of men called by their God unto a
participation of his Word and Ordinances; And we which have the happiness to
live under the Gospel, may without any reproach or dishonor to us, be called by
the name of the Congregation. Certain I am, St. Augustine, though much affected
with the foresaid distinction, does yet allow the one to be called a Church;
Tamen and illam dictam invenimus eccles^am Id. ibid.
, as his words there are; and no less sure, that the meetings of Christ's
faithful Servants are by St. Paul called (...) Heb 10.25.
, i. e. A Congregation or gathering of themselves together; as (...), a word of
the same Root and Origination, is used by him to the same purpose in another
place 1 Cor. 5.5.
. And yet I can by no means like the zeal of our first Translators, who were it
seems so out of love with the name of Church, that wheresoever they found the
word Ecclesia in Greek or Latin (for I know not which of the two they
consulted with) they would not render it the Church, but the Congregation: And
so it stands still in the Epistles and Gospels, and several other passages of
our Public Liturgy, which were taken out of that Translation. A thing which
Gregory Martin justly does except against Greg. Mart. against the English
Translation.
, though he be out himself, in saying, That the Apostles never called the
Church by the name of the Congregation. But that Error is corrected in our late
Translations, and we are now no more afraid of the name of the Church, than the
Romanists are afraid of the name of Pope. Audito Ecclesiae nomine hostis
expalluit Campian. in december. Ration.
, was a vain brag in Campians mouth, when the times were queasiest; more ayt to
strain at Gnats, than they have been since. Much less can I approve of that
false Collection, which those of Rome have made from St. Augustines words. For
whereas he appropriating the name of Synagogue to the state of the Jews, and
that of the Church, unto the Christians; inserts, I know not why, this
Grammatical note, Congregatio magis pecorum, convocatio magis hominum intelligi
solet August. in Psalm. 77.
, That to be convocated or called together does belong to Men, but to be
congregated or gathered together appertains to Beasts; the Authors of the Roman
Catechism have from thence collected, That the people under the Law, were
called a Synagogue, because like brute Beasts they sought after nothing but
temporal and earthly pleasures, not being nourished in the hopes of eternal
life Catechism. Trident. in explic. Symb.
. The vanity of this Collection we have shown before, by bringing in St. Paul
to witness how properly the word Congregation ((...) in the Greek) may be
applied and understood of the Church of Christ. The falsehood of the Tenet we
shall show hereafter, when we are come to speak of the last Article, that of
Life Everlasting. In the mean time the scornful Papist may be pleased to be put
in mind, that there is nothing more frequent in the Acts of the Council of
Constance, than Synodus in Spiritu Sancto congregata; and yet I know they
neither have the confidence, nor the heart to say, That the Bishops which were
there assembled, were gathered together like brute Beasts, which Congregari
does import in the Tridentine Criticism.

Of the Quid nominis, the name or notion of the Church, as it is called
Ecclesia, both in Greek and Latin, we have said enough. Our English word
Church has another Root, and is derived from the Greek (...), which in the
proper signification of it, does signify Gods house, the material Church, the
place appointed for the Meetings of Christian people, to celebrate the Name of
the Lord their God. So witnesses Eusebius, saying, That in as much as the Holy
Houses and Temples of that time were dedicated unto God, the chief Lord of all;
therefore they did receive his Name, and were called (...) ( Dominicae in the
Latin Tongue) that is, the Houses of the Lord Eusebius. de Laud. Constantin.
. A name, says he, imposed upon them, not by the will of man, but the Lord
himself. In correspondence to the Greek, they were called Dominica in the
Latin, and called so very early too, in St. Cyprians time, as appears by his
reproof of a wealthy widow, of whom he says, In Dominicum sine sacrificio
Venis Cypr. de pietat. and El^^mosyn.
, That she used to come into the Church without her Offering. Of this (...), as
that famous Antiqua^y Sir Henry Spelman has right well observed, came the
Saxon Cyric, or Kirk Spelm. Glossar.
, (which still the Scots retain without alteration;) which we by adding
thereunto a double Aspirate, have changed or mollified into Church. A name,
which though at first, it signified the Material Temple, (I mean, the place of
meeting for Gods Public Worship) yet came it easily to be applied to the Body
Mystical, to the Spiritual Temple, built on the foundation of the Prophets and
Apostles, JESUS CHRIST himself being the chief corner stone. As on the
otherside, the word Ecclesia, which first the Christians used to signify the
Spiritual Temple, the Collective Body of Gods people, became in little time to
denote the building, the material edifice, appointed for the meeting of the
Congregation. Tertullian has it in this sense, for the African Churches,
Convenient in ecclesiam, and confugiunt in ecclesiam Tertul. de fuga in
persecur.
, They met together in the Church, and they fled to the Church. So has St.
Jerome for the Roman, Aedificate ecclesias expensis publicis Ierom. in Isa.
cap. 60.
, Let Churches be erected at the Public charge. And for the Eastern, thus the
Synod of Laodicea, (...) Synod. L^odic. 304.
, i. e. In the Church of the most holy Martyr Euphemia.

Many more instances of which kind might be here alleged, but that St. Paul is
generally supposed by all sorts of Writers, to speak of the Material Church,
when he charged those of Corinth for despising the Church of God 1 Cor. 11.12.
, (...), says the Greek Original. Concerning which consult St. August. quaest.
57. super Levit. St. Basil. in Moral. Reg. 30. And in his Regulae Compend.
Respons. 310. St. Ierom in 1 Cor. St. Chrysostom also on the place; Theodoret,
Theophylact, and Oecumenius, on the same Text also. Nor is the word so used
only in the best Christian Writers, but did admit also of the same
signification amongst the best learned, and most critical of the Heathen
Greeks: Of whom take Lucian for a taste, who speaking of the adorning of the
Court or Senate House, expresses the place it self by the word (...), which
cannot possibly be meant of the men that met, but of the place of the Assembly.
A thing which here I had not noted, because not pertinent to the sense of the
present Article, but only to encounter with the peevish humor of our Modern
Sectaries, who will by no means yet yield the name of Churches to those sacred
places, but call them Steeple Houses in the way of scorn.

But to proceed, the word Ecclesia, or Church, in the Genuine sense, as it
denotes the Body Collective of Gods Servants, since the coming of Christ, is
variously taken in the Book of God, and also in the Writings of the purest
times. For first, it signifies a particular Congregation of men assembled
together, in some certain and determinate place, for Gods public service. In
this sense it is taken in those several Texts, where St. Paul speaks of the
Church in the house of Nymphas, Col. 4.15. To the Church in the house of
Philemon, Verse. 5. The Church which was in the house of Aquila and Priscilla,
Romans 16. and 1 Cor. 16.19. I know that this is commonly expounded of their
private Families, as if the house and family of each Faithful Christian, were
in St. Paul's esteem reputed for a Church of Christ. But herein I prefer Mr.
Medes opinion before all men else, who understands those words of the
Congregation of Saints, which were wont to assemble at such houses for the
performance of Divine Duties Mede of Churches, p. 20.
; it being not unusual with some principal Christians, in those early days, to
dedicate or set apart some private place within their own houses, for the
residue of the Church to assemble in. And this he proves, first from the
singularity of the expression, which must needs include somewhat more than
ordinary, somewhat which was not common to the rest of the Saints, whom St.
Paul salutes in his Epistles. For in so large a Bedrol as is made in the last
to the Romans, it is very probable that many, if not most of them, were Masters
of Families; and then must all their Families be Churches too, as well as that
of Aquila and Priscilla, or else we must find some other meaning of the words,
than that which has hitherto been delivered. Secondly, Had St. Paul intended
by those words, The Church which is in their house, nothing but the Family of
Nymphas, Philemon, and the rest, we should have found it put in the same
expression which he does elsewhere use on the same occasion; as viz. The
household of Aristobulus, the household of Narcissus, Romans 16.10, 11. The
household of Onesiphorus, 2 Timothy 4.19. Patrobas, Hermes, and the Brethren which
are with them, Romans 16.14. Nereus and Olympas, and all the Saints which are
with them, Verse. 15. The difference of expressions makes a different case of
it, and plainly does conclude in my apprehension, That by the Church in such an
house, the Apostle means, (...), The Church assembled at such houses, as he
there expounds it. And though he cite no ancient Author to confirm him in this
opinion, but Oecumenius (and he none of the antientest neither:) Yet in a
matter of this nature, I may say of him, as Maldonat does of Euthymius in a
greater point, whose single judgment he prefers before all the rest of the
Fathers, viz. Quem minorem licet and solum autorem, verisimilia tamen dicentem,
quam plures majoresque illos sequi malo Maldonat. in Luc. 1.
.

But to proceed unto the other acceptions of the word Ecclesia, it is also used
to signify in holy Scripture, The Church of some City, with the Region or
Country round about it, a National or Provincial Church, under the Government
of one, or many Bishops, and subordinate Ministers; as the Churches of the
Corinthians, Galatians, Ephesians, Thessalonians, Romans, and the rest
mentioned in the Acts, and St. Paul's Epistles. Thirdly, It is also used to
signify not the Church it self, or the whole Body of the people of a City or
Province, agreeing in the Faith of Christ; but for the principal Officers and
Rulers of it, such as possess the place of Judicature in the Court, or
Consistory. In this sense it is used in the 18 of Matthew, where the party
wronged, and able to get no remedy otherwise, is willed by Christ, to tell the
Church Matthew. 18.17.
; that is to say, to make his complaint to them, who having the chief place and
power in Spiritual matters, are able to compel the wrong-doer to make
satisfaction, by menacing and inflicting the Churches Censures. Tell the
Church, That is, says Chrysostom Chrysostom. in Matthew. 18.
, the Prelates and Pastors of the Church, who have the power of binding and
loosing such offenders, which is mentioned in the verse next following. And in
this sense, the name of Church became appropriated to the Clergy in the latter
times, and has been used to signify the State Ecclesiastic; ( Ecclesiae
nomen ad Clerum solere restringi, as Gerson Gerson de Relig. protect. Consid 3.
noted in his time, not without regret) as being men most versed in the Church
affairs. And lastly, it is used for the Body Collective or Diffusive of the
people of God, made up of several Congregations, States, and Nations,
consisting both of Priests and People, of men as well under, as in Authority.
In this respect, Christ is said to be the head of the Church, Ephesians. 5.23. The
husband of the Church, V. 32. To love his Church, and to give himself for his
Church, V. 25. That is to say, not only of a National or Provincial Church,
and much less of a Congregational only, but of the Universal Church, which
consists of all, dispersed and distressed over all the World. And this we do
define to be the whole Congregation of Christian people called by the grace and
goodness of Almighty God, to a participation of his Word and Sacraments, and
other outward means of eternal life.

This Universal Church being thus found out, is represented to us in the
present Article by two marks or characters, by which she is to be discerned
from such Public meetings, which otherwise might claim that title. Of which,
the one denotes the generality of extent and latitude, and is that of
Catholic; by which it is distinguished from the Jewish Synagogue, being shut
up in the bounds of that Country only; and from the private Conventicles of
Schismatical persons: The other does express the quality of the whole
compositum, by the piety and integrity of its several members, and is that of
Holy; by which it is distinguished from the Assemblies of ungodly men, from the
Ecclesia malignantium, as the Psalmist calls it.

Or, if you will, we may by these behold the Church in her chief ingredients,
which are the sanctimony of life and conversation; it is an holy Church; and
the integrity of her doctrine, free from all Heresy and Error, in the title
Catholic: For the word Catholic is not only used to signify Universality of
extent, but purity of doctrine also: The first in the natural, the second in
the borrowed sense of the word.

In the first sense, the Church is called Catholic in respect of place; Thou
have redeemed us by thy blood out of every kindred, and tongue, and people, and
nation Apocal. 5.9.
. To which accords that of an Ancient writer, saying, Ab ortu solis ad
occasum lex Christiana suscepta est Lactant. l.
, That the Gospel of Christ had been admitted from the rising of the Sun, to
the setting of it; that is to say, In all parts of the world. And it is called
Catholic too in respect of persons, who are promiscuously and indefinitely
called to the knowledge of Christ, In whom there is neither Jew nor Gentile,
bond nor free, male nor female Gal. 3.28.
but all called alike. And so Lactantius tells us also, Universos homines
sine discrimine sexus vel aetatis Lactant. Inst. l. 1. c.
, ( Minutius adds, Aut dignitatis Minut. Fell. in Octavio.
,) ad coeleste pabulum convocamus. Lastly, it has the name of Catholic in
respect of times, as comprehending all the faithful since our Saviors days,
unto the age in which we live, and to continue from henceforth to the end of
the world: Of which duration or extent of the Church of Christ, the Angel
Gabriel did fore-signifie to his Virgin Mother, that he should reign in the
house of Jacob for ever, and of his Kingdom there should be no end Luke 1.33.
. And in this sense, it does not only include that part of the Church which is
now Militant on the Earth, but also that which is Triumphant in the Heaven of
Glories. Both they with us, and we with them, make but one Body Mystical,
whereof Christ is Head; and all together, together with the Ancient Patriarcks,
and other holy men of God which lived under the Law, shall make up that one
glorious Church, which is entitled in the Scriptures, The general Assembly,
the Church of the firstborn, whose names are written in the Heavens Heb. 12.23.
. For the better clearing of which Union or Concorporation, which is between
these different Members of the Body Mystical, the Fathers of the
Constantinopolitan Council added the word One unto the Article, reading it
thus, And I believe one holy Catholic and Apostolic Church. Catholic then
the Church may be rightly called in regard to extent, whether it do refer to
time, place, or persons; and it is called Catholic too in respect of Doctrine,
with reference to the same extensions; that being the true Catholic Doctrine
of the Church of Christ, Quae semper, quae ubique, quae ab omnibus credita est
Lerinens. adv. haer^s. c. 3.
, which has always, and in every place been received as Orthodox, and that
too, by all manner of men, according to the Golden Rule of Lerinensis.
Catholic in this sense, is the same with Orthodox, a Catholic Christian just
the same with a true Professor; by which the Doctrine is distinguished from
Heretical, and the men from Heretics. Justinian in the Code, does apply it so.
Omnes hanc legem sequentes Christianorum Catholicorum nomen jubemus amplecti
Cod. Justin. Tit. de St. Trinit. and fide Cathol.
. That for the persons, the Professors; it follows after for the Doctrine, Is
autem Nicenae adsertor fidei and Catholicae Religionis verus cultor accipiendus
est, etc. A National or Topical Church may be called Catholic in this sense,
and are often times entitled so in Ecclesiastical Authors. For Constantine the
Emperor writing to the Alexandrians, superscribed his Letters in this form,
(...) Socrat. Eccles. hist. l. 2. c. 2.
, i. e. To the Catholic Church of Alexandria. And Gregory Nazianzen (being
then Bishop of Constantinople) calls himself in his last Will and Testament
Ext. ap. Barn. Brisson. Formul. l. 7.
, (...), i. e. The Bishop of the Catholic Church in the City of Constantine.

Of this word Catholic in this sense, there has been different use made, as
the times have varied. The Fathers of the purest times, made use of it to
distinguish themselves from Heretics, according to that so celebrated saying
of Pacianus. Christianus mihi nomen est, Catholicus cognomen Pacian. in
Biblioth. Patrum.
, Christian (says he) is my name, and Catholic my surname; by the one I am
known from Infidels, by the other from Heretics. And so long as the main body
of Christianity retained the form of wholesome words, and kept the unity of the
Spirit in the bond of peace, it served exceeding fitly for a mark distinctive,
to known an Orthodox Professor from those who followed after Heretical and
Schismatical Factions. But when the main Body of the Church was once torn in
pieces, and every leading faction would be thought the true Church of Christ,
they took unto themselves the names of Catholics also, as if the truth was not
more Orthodoxly held by the soundest Christians, than it was by them.

And this has been a device so stale and common, that the Nestorians in the
East (though anciently condemned for Heretics in the Third General Council) do
call their Patriark by the name of Catholic* (that is to say, The Catholic or
Orthodox Bishop) as Leunclavius tells us very rightly Leunclav. Pandect.
Turcic. sect. 3.
; not Iacelich, as the Copies of Brochardus Brochard. in descr. terr. Sanct.
, and Paulus Venetus Paul. Venet. hist. l. 1. c. 15.
, do corruptly read it. In the same Error are our great Masters in the Church
of Rome, who having appropriated to themselves the name of Catholics, and
counting all men Heretics but themselves alone: First, cast all others out of
the Church by the name of Heretics, who do not hold communion with them in
their sins and errors; and then defend themselves by the name of Catholics,
from having dealt unjustly with their Fellow Christians, men every way more
Orthodox than they be themselves. Just so the Collier justified himself for a
true Believer, because he believed as the Church believed, though he knew not
the doctrine of the Church; and the Church believed as he believed, though the
Church troubled not it self about his opinions. I know the great Cardinal
presumes very much on the name of Catholic, making it to be one of the signs
of the true Church now, because an adjunct of the true Church in the Primitive
times Bellar. de notis Eccles. l. 4 c. 4.
. And wonder it is, that we are grown so prodigal of late, as to give it to
them. A courtesy which they receive with a great deal of joy, and turn the
bare acknowledgement to their great advantage; there being no Argument more
convincing than that which is drawn from the confession of an adversary. Upon
this ground does Barclay build his Triumph for the cause of Rome. Adeo probanda
est ecclesia nostra a nomine Catholicae, quod extorquet etiam ab invitis
hareticis Barclay. Paren. ad Scot.
, as he brags it there. For my part, as I never gave it them in writing, nor in
common speech, as thinking it a greater condemnation to our selves, than men
were aware of: So could I wish the like Caution in all others also, lest
unawares they utterly exclude themselves out of Christianity. For as Pope
Gregory the first said unto some of the Bishops of his time, concerning the
Patriarch of Constantinople, who had then took unto himself the title of
Ecumenical or Universal Bishop, viz. Si ille universalis (or which is the
same, Catholicus) est, restat ut vos non sitis Episcopi Greg. Magn. l. 7. Epl.
170.
; so may we also say in the present case, if we once grant them to be
Catholick^, we thereby do conclude our selves to be no Christians, or at best
but Heretics.

Christian, perhaps they have no fancy to be called; the name of Christian in
most parts of Italy, being grown so despicable, that Fool and Christian in a
manner are become Synonyma. Italico Idiomate per Christianum hominem stupidum
and stolidum solent intelligere, as Hospinian tells us from the mouth of one
Christian Franken Hospin. de Orig. Mona^hat.
, who had lived amongst them. Since then, they have no mind to be called
Christians, nor reason to be called Catholics; let us call them, as they are,
by the name of Papists, considering their dependence on the Popes decision for
all points of Faith. And possibly we may gratify them as much in this, as if
we did permit them the name of Catholics. For Bellarmine seems very much
delighted with the Appellation, flattering himself, that he can bring in
Christ, our most blessed Savior within the Catalogue of Popes Bellar. de not.
Eccl. l. 4. c. 4.
; and that he has found a Prophecy in St. Chrysostom to this effect, Quandoque
nos Papistas vocandos esse, That Papist in the times then following, should be
the style and title of a true Professor. Great pity it is, but he, and his
should have the honor of their own discovery, and Papists let them be since the
same so pleases.

Now as the Papists make ill use of the name of Catholic, so do their opposite
faction in the Church of Christ, conclude as falsely and erroneously from the
title of Holy. The Church is called Holy, and is called so justly, because it
trains men up in the ways of godliness; because it is so in its most eminent
and more noble parts, whom God has sanctified by the Graces of his holy
Spirit; and finally, because redeemed by the blood of Christ, to the intent,
that all the faithful Members of it, being by him delivered from the hands of
their enemies Luke 1.74, 75.
, might serve him without fear in righteousness and holiness, all the days of
their lives. Not holy in the sense of Corah, and his factious accomplices, who
made all the Congregation holy Numb. 16.3:
, and all holy alike; nor holy in the sense of some Ancient and Modern Sectary,
who fancy to themselves a Church without spot or wrinkle; a Church wherein
there are no vessels of wrath, but election only; and where they find not
such a Church, they desert it instantly, for fear they should partake of the
sins and wickednesses, which they observe to be in some Members of it. Our
Savior Christ, who better knew the temper of his Church than so, compares the
same in holy Scripture to a threshing floor Matthew. 3.12.
, in which there is both Wheat and chaff; and to a fold, wherein there are both
Sheep and Goats and 25.33.
; and to a casting net, which being thrown into the Sea, drew up all kind of
Fishes, both good and bad and 13.17.
; and to an house, in which there are not only vessels of honor, as Gold and
Silver, but also of dishonor, and for unclean uses 2 Timothy 2.20.
; and to a field, in which, besides the good Seed, which the Lord had sown
Matthew. 13.25.
, Infelix lolium, and steriles dominantur avenae, the enemy had sowed his
Tares. In all and every one of which heavenly Parables, our Savior represented
unto his Disciples, and in them to us, the true condition of his Church, to the
end of the world; in which, the wicked person, and the righteous man are so
intermingled, that there is no perfection to be looked for here: In which,
erroneous doctrines are so mixed with truth, that it can never be so perfectly
reserved and purified, but errors and corruptions will break out upon it.
Perplexae sunt istae duae civitates in hoc seculo, invicemque permistae, says
the great St. Augustine August. de Civit. Dei l. 1.
. The City of the Lord, and the City of Satan, are so intermingled in this
world, that there is little hope to see them separated till the day of
judgment. Though the foundation of the Church be of precious stones 1 Cor.
3.12.
, yet there is wood, and hay, and stubble, in her superstructures; and those so
interwoven, and built up together, that nothing but a fatal fire is of power to
part them; I mean, the fire of conflagration, not of Popish Purgatory. Were it
not thus, we need not pray to God for the good estate of the Church Militant
here on Earth; but glory as in the Triumphant, as they do in Heaven. And yet
the Church is counted Holy, and called Catholic still, this intermixture
notwithstanding. Catholic in regard of time, place, and persons, in, and by
which the Gospel of our Savior Christ is professed and propagated: Holy,
secundum nobiliores ejus parts, in reference to the Saints departed, and those
who are most eminent for grace and piety. And it is called Ecclesia una, one
holy Catholic* and Apostolic Church, though part thereof be Militant here
upon the Earth, and part Triumphant in the Heavens: The same one Church in this
World, and in that ^o come.

The difference is, that here it is imperfect, mixed of good and bad; there
perfect, and consisting of the righteous only. Accordingly it is determined by
St. Augustine August. Col. cont. Donatist.
, Eandem ipsam unam and Sanctam Ecclesiam, nunc habere malos mixtos, tunc non
habituram. For then, and not till then, as Ierom, Augustine, and others do
expound the place, shall Christ present her to himself a most glorious Church,
without spot or wrinkle; and marry her to himself for ever. Till that day come,
it is not to be hoped or looked for, but that many Hypocrites, False Teachers,
and Licentious livers, will shroud themselves under the shelter of the Church,
and pass for Members of it in the eye of men, though not accounted such in the
sight of God. The eye of man can possibly discern no further than the outward
show, and mark who join themselves to the Congregation, to hear the Word of
God, and receive his Sacraments. Dominus novit qui sunt sui 2 Timothy 2.19.
; The Lord knows only who are his, and who are those occulti intus, whose
hearts stand fast in his Commandments, and carefully possess their Souls in
Truth and Godliness.

And yet some men there are, as there have been formerly, who fancy to
themselves a Church in this present world, without spot or wrinkle; and dream
of such a Field as contains no Tares, of such an House as has no Vessels but
of honor, sanctified and prepared for the Masters use. The Cathari in the East,
the Donatist in the South, and the Novatians in the West, who made one Faction
only, though of several names, were anciently of this opinion, and set up
Churches of their own of the New Edition. For flattering themselves with a
conceit of their own dear sanctity, they thought themselves too pure and pious
to join in any act of worship with more sober Christians; and presently
confined the Church, which before was Catholic, to their own private
Conventicles, and to them alone, or intra partem Donati August. Passin.
, as they pleased to phrase it. Who have succeeded them of late, both in their
factions, and their follies too, we all know full well. The present ruptures in
this State do declare most evidently, that here is Pars Donati now, as before
in Africa. A frenzy which gave great offense to the Ancient Fathers, who
labored both by Speech, and Pen, to correct their insolences; and of such
scandal to the Churches of the Reformation, that Calvin, though a ridged man,
and one inclinable enough unto new opinions, did confute their dotages, and
publicly expose them to contempt and scorn Calvin. Instit. l. 4. c. 1.
. The Ancients and the Moderns both have agreed on this, That though the Church
of Christ be imperfect always, and may be sometimes faulty also, yet are not
men to separate themselves so rashly from her Communion, or make a rupture for
poor trifles in the Body Mystical. It argues little Faith, and less Charity,
says renowned Cyprian, if when we see some Errors in the Church of God, De
ecclesia ipsi recedamus Cyprian. Epl. 3. l. 3.
, we presently withdraw our selves, and forsake her fellowship. And here we
might bring in St. Augustine, and almost all the Fathers to confirm this point;
but that they are of no authority with the captious Schismatic, and now of
late disclaimed by our neater wits. Therefore for further satisfaction of the
stubborn Donatist, we will behold the Constitution of the Church in the Book of
God, and take a view of the chief Types and Fortunes of it, to see if we can
find there such a spotless Church, as they vainly dream of. In Adams family,
which was the first both Type and Seminary of the Church of God, there was a
Cain, a murderer Genesis 4.8.
, that slew his brother: Amongst the Sons of God in the time of Noah and 6.2.
, how many that betook themselves to the daughters of men; and in Noah's Ark,
the next, and perhaps the greatest; a Cham, which wretchedly betrayed the
nakedness of his aged father Genesis 9.22.
. In Abraham's house there was an Ishmael that mocked at Isaac and 21.9.
, though the heir, and the heir of promise; in Isaac's a profane Esau that
made his belly his God and 25 31.
, and sold Heaven for a breakfast; in Jacob's there were Simeon and Levi,
Brethren in evil and 45.4, 5.
, besides a Reuben who defiled his old Fathers Bed. And in the Church of
Israel, when more large and populous, how many were mad upon the worship of the
Golden Calf, more mad in offering up their sons to the Idol Moloch: Thousands
which bowed the knee to Baal. Ten thousands which did sacrifice in the Groves,
and prohibited places; yet all this while a Church, a true Visible Church, with
which the Saints and Prophets joined in Gods public worship.

Let us next look upon the Gospel, and we shall find, that when the bounds
thereof were so strait and narrow, that there were few more visible Members of
it, than the Twelve Apostles; yet amongst them there was a Judas that betrayed
his Master. When it began to spread and enlarge it self to the number of One
hundred and twenty, there were among them some half Christians, such as
Nicodemus, who durst not openly profess the Gospel, but came unto the Lord by
night John 19.39.
; and some false Christians, such as Demas, who out of an affection to the
present world, forsook both the Apostle, and the Gospel too 2 Timothy 4.10.
: She then increased to such a multitude, that they were fain to choose seven
subordinate Ministers, the better to advance the work; and one of them will be
that Nicholas, the founder of the Nicolaitan Heretics, whom the Lord abhorred
Apoc 2.15.
. Follow it out of Iewry into Samaria, and there we find a Simon Magus, as
formal a Professor as the best amongst them Acts 8.13, 25.
; and yet so full of the gall of bitterness within Ignat Epl. ad Trallinf.
, that Ignatius in plain terms calls him, (...), The firstborn of the Devil
Sozom. hist. Eccles. l. 1. 21.
. Trace it in all the progress of it through Greece and Asia, and we shall see
the factiousness of the Corinthians, the foolishness of the Galatians, and six
of the seven Asian Churches taxed with deadly sin. Good God, into what corner
of the Earth, will the Donatist run, to find a Church without corruption, free
from sin and error. It must be sure into the old Utopias, or the new Atlantis,
or some Fools Paradise of their own in terra incognita; unless (as Constantine
once said unto Acesius, a Novatian Bishop b, (...)) they can erect a Ladder of
their own devising, and so climb up into the Heavens. Whilst they are here
upon the Earth, they have no such hopes, and do but fool themselves in the
expectation.

The chief occasion of these Errors, which the two opposite Factions in the
Church of Christ have thus fallen into, is a mistake of the right constitution of
the members of it. For those of Rome condemning all the Protestant party for
Heretics, and the Eastern Churches for Schismatical; and then excluding
Heretics and Schismatics from being any members of the Church at all; not
only appropriate to themselves the name of Catholic* but consequently confine
the Church within their Communion. And on the other side the Donatist, and
their Modern followers, out of the dear affection which they bear themselves,
first make the Church to consist of none but the Elect, and none to be Elect,
but those who join fellowship with them; and so by the same necessary
consequence, have confined the Church within the Walls or Curtains of their
private Conventicles. Both faulty, and both grounding their unsound
Conclusions, upon as false and faulty principles: For taking it for granted
first (which will never be yielded by us, nor made good by them) that both the
Christians of the East are Schismatics, and the Protestants of the North are
no better then Heretics, yet are they not presently to be cut off from being
any Members of the Church at all; as Bellarmine, and others of the Church of
Rome, have been pleased to say. A Schismatic, in the true meaning of the word,
is he, Who holding an entire profession of the truth of God, and joining with
the Church in all points of doctrine, do break the peace thereof, and disturb
the order, by refusing to submit themselves to their lawful Pastors, and yield
obedience to her power in external matters. If he stay there, and withal fall
not into manifest Heresy, and set on foot some new Opinion, as most
Schismatics have used to do, the better to justify themselves in their
separation, (so Nullum Schisma non sibi aliquam confingit haeresin, ut recte ab
Ecclesia recessisse videatur, as St. Ierom notes it Ierom. in c. 3. ad Tit.
) we have no reason to exclude him absolutely from the Church of Christ: For so
long as he falls not into dangerous error, but holds by the foundation of the
Prophets and Apostles, which the Church is built on. He is, and may be still a
member of the Church of God, though not of this or that particular Church or
Congregation, from which he has disjoined himself by his wilful folly, nor yet
so absolutely and fully of the Church of God, as they who do communicate
entirely in all things necessary. As long as the Schismatic retains the
profession of the Christian Faith, in all the Fundamental Points and Articles
of it, gives ear unto the Word, and receives the Sacraments, according to the
institution of our Lord and Savior, and performs other acts of Religious
Worship, though in a separate Church or Congregation of his own assembling. I
dare not shut him out from the hopes of Heaven, or rashly say, He is no subject
of the Kingdom of Grace. He may be still a member of the Militant Church, and
one day have his part in the Church Triumphant; notwithstanding his offense in
separating from his Fellow Christians (in case he do it not out of pride, and
against the clear light of his own Conscience:) But the Church from which he
makes his separation, may lawfully proceed against him, as a great offender,
for breaking the bond of peace and unity, which ought so carefully to be
preserved in a Church well constituted. With Heretics the case is worse,
though not quite desperate; for they not only violate the Churches peace, but
wilfully defend some pernicious Error, which tends to the destruction of the
Faith it self: So Haeresis aliquod dogma perversum habe^ Id. Ibid.
, says the same St. Ierom. But here we must distinguish first of Heresies,
before we venture to resolve of the point in Question, it being so, That
neither every erroneous opinion may be called an Heresy, nor every Heresy of
it self is so great and capital, as to exclude the man that holds it from the
Church of Christ. Many in all ages have been branded and condemned for
Heretics, because they were not wholly of the same opinions with those of
greatest reputation in their several Churches, though oftentimes in matters of
inferior nature, in which diversity of opinions might have been admitted; whom
it were both uncharitable and unchristian too, to bar from all their right and
interess in the Christian Church. Nay granting, that the Heresy be in
Fundamentals, not taken up upon mistake, but wilfully and maliciously invented
for some private ends; yet in regard they still retain amongst them the
profession of other Divine verities, which they hold and believe in common,
with the rest of the faithful (for should they err in all points of the
Christian Faith, they were no longer to be called Heretics, but Apostate
Infidels) they pertain still unto the Church, and were so counted and esteemed
of in the strictest times. An Argument whereof may be, that when an Heretic
recanted of his sin and heresy, and sought to be again admitted to the
Churches Ordinances; he was not entered, as at first, by the door of Baptism,
nor any of his acts made void, if a Priest or Minister, which he had done by
virtue of his holy orders. And so far were the Ancients from this new opinion
of making Heretics no members of the Church at all: That the Rebaptization of
an Heretic, or of such as had been formerly baptized by Heretics, was counted
an error in St. Cyprian, and afterward condemned for Heresy in those that
wilfully maintained it upon his Authority. The stories of those times make this
plain enough, especially St. Augustine's works against the Donatists, where
this point is very fully handled; and with his resolution in it, I conclude
this controversy. Isti in quibusdam rebus nobiscum sunt, in quibusdam a nobis
exierunt, etc August. de Bapt. Cont. Donat. l. 1. c. 8.10.
. In some things, says the Father, they are with us still, in others they are
departed from us. In those things wherein they agree with us, they are a part
of that great building whereof the chief Cornerstone is Christ our Savior: In
those wherein they disagree, they are parted from it. And if they draw any more
unto them, even they are fastened in those joints to the rest of that Body, etc.
In qua nec illi separati sunt in which their Teachers are not separated from
that Sacred Body.

But yet although the Romanists are extremely out in excluding all whom they
call Schismatics, or condemn for Heretics, from having any place in the
Church of Christ, to make the more Elbow-room for themselves: The Donatist and
his followers are more out than they, in making none but the Elect to be
members of it, and so monopolizing the whole Kingdom of Heaven to their faction
only: In which it is most strange to see, with what precipitancy and
inadvertency, many in the Reformed Churches of great name and credit, not
looking into the design and ill consequents of it, have labored to promote this
Tenet as most true and Orthodox; especially after John Wicliff, and Hus his
follower had set the same on foot again in these latter ages. That Wicliff was
of this opinion, is evidently to be seen in Thomas Waldensis Wald. Tom. 1. l 2.
c 8, 9.
, who does not only so report him, but does his best endeavor to confute him
in it. And that Hus also taught the same, is no less evident by the proceedings
had against him in the Council of Constance; in which, amongst others of his
doctrines, they condemned this one, viz. Unicam esse sanctam universalem
ecclesiam, eamque Praedestinatorum Vniversitatem Council. Constant. Sess. 15.
, that is to say, That there is one only holy Universal Church, which is the
general body of Gods Elect. Thus they; nor did there want some reason which
might move them to it; For noting many Errors and Corruptions in the Church of
Rome, which made them think it very unsafe to communicate any longer with it;
and being withal unwilling to be so esteemed of as men out of the Church: They
fell upon this new way to bear off that blow, by making the true Church of God
to be always invisible, because consisting only of Elect and praedestinate
persons, which were known only unto God. But on what grounds soever it was
first excogitated, the fame and piety of the men have so indeered it to the
Doctors of the Calvinian Churches, and others which profess most enmity to the
Church of Rome, that generally they make no other definition of the Catholic
Church, than that it is the Body Collective of Gods Elect. Ecclesia est coetus
hominum ab aeterno, electus a Deo ad vitam eternam; as Vrsine in his Comment on
the Palatine Catechism Vr^in. in Catech. part. 2. qu. 54.
. Ecclesia est coetus hominum sanctorum qui ex gratuita Dei electione vocati
sunt in unionem cum Christo (...) ad vitam eternam Scharp. in Curs. Theog.
, so says Scharp, a Scotchman. Ecclesia Catholica coetus est hominum sanctorum
quos ab aeterno Deus in Christo elegit Whit. Contr. 2. qu. 1. Tom. 3.
, so says Dr. Whitakers. Ecclesia Catholica coetus est universus electorum, so
the famous Raynolds Raynold. in These 4.
. The like might be produced from others of the Doctors of the Reformation,
were not these few sufficient to speak out for all. Names great enough, I must
confess, but not to be preferred before Sacred Truth; in the defense whereof,
it behooves a man not wedded to men's names and dictates, (...), in the words of
Aristotle Arist. Ethie. l. 1.
, to sacrifice his private interesses and most dear Relations. That the Elect
are of the Church, yea, and the chief ingredients of the whole compositum, it
were impiety to deny: And that it is for their sakes chiefly that the Word of
God is preached, the Sacraments of Christ administered, the promises of life
eternal offered to the Sons of Men, is a thing which I shall easily grant. And
so I understand the words of Clemens of Alexandria, saying, (...) Clem. Alex.
Admon. ad Graec.
. The Church of the firstborn, it is ((...), says the Text, whence the Father
had it) whose names are written in the Heavens Heb. 12.23.
, as St. Paul informs us. But in a great house, there are more people than the
children, though all they coheirs; and in a Royal Court there are many
Retainers, whose names are not registered in the Check. Though the Elect are of
the Church, yet neither all they, nor yet they alone. Not all the Elect; for
when Saul breathed out slaughter against the Saints Acts 9.1.
; and Mary Magdalen was possessed with seven devils Luke 8.2.
at once (whether with so many wicked spirits, or the seven deadly sins, we
dispute not now) who can affirm them to be Members of the Church of Christ? And
yet who can or dare deny, that they were vessels of election, elect according
to the foreknowledge of Almighty God? Secundum praescientiam and
praedestinationem, quam multi oves foris, quam multi lupi intus, as St.
Augustine has it. According to Gods prescience and predestination August. in
Joh.
, How many of the Sheep (says he) are without the Church; how many Wolves
contained in it? And in another place, Electorum quidam in haeresibus aut
Gentilium superstitionibus sunt, and tamen illic novit Dominus qui sunt ejus
Id. de Bapt. Contr. Don. l. 1.
, Many of the Elect. says he, are yet involved in Heresy or Heathenish
Superstitions, whom yet God knows, to appertain unto the number of his
people. Nor they alone. For there are Wolves within the fold, as the Father
tells us; and many which partake of the heavenly calling, who by impurity of
life, and unfoundness of Doctrine, exclude themselves from having place in the
Heavenly Kingdom. Out of the many which are called, but few are chosen; because
they do not cheerfully obey that calling, and hearken not with due obedience to
the voice of God, which calls them in the Church unto newness of life. Were it
not so, and that even wicked men, and ungodly sinners did appertain unto the
Church, and that the Heretic and Schismatic were not members of it; The
Church had no authority to proceed against them, or to endeavor their reclaim
by Ecclesiastial censures. Though God both may and will judge them, when he
sees his time, yet the Church cannot do it. For what have I to do to judge them
also that are without 1 Cor. 5.12, 13.
, says the great Apostle. And what were this, but to make the Church of God,
which is pure and holy, to be a stable of unclean beasts, and a sink of
filthiness: To which, all scandalous sinners would repair in swarms, in
confidence of enjoying there their desired impunity. Gods field has Tares as
well as Wheat, and both permitted to grow up till the general harvest Matthew.
13.30.
, when he shall give his Angels charge to sever the wicked from the just and
righteous persons; to bind the one in bundles for eternal fire, but gather the
other for his barn, for the joys of Heaven.

Now as these opposite parties have extremely erred in the right constitution
of the Members of the Church of Christ; so have they failed as grossly in their
Doctrine of the Churches Head: Which the one side have made too great for that
Sacred Body; the other, all Body in a manner, but no Head at all. I speak not
here of Christ, (understand not so) whom both sides do acknowledge for the Head
of the Body Mystical, but of the Supreme Head on Earth, to whom the Government
of the Church is by him committed. Our Masters in the Church of Rome, first
make the Government of the Church to be Monarchical, and lay the burden on the
shoulders of one man alone; and then this more than man, this Monarch, to be
the Pope of Rome, and none else but he. For the first part of this Assertion,
they pretend the Scriptures, mustering up all the Privileges which Christ gave
to Peter; which were they such as are pretended, were but personal only, no
more annexed to his Successors in the Chair of Rome, than in that of Antioch.
But for the second part thereof, they confess ingenuously, that there is no
Scripture to be found. For Bellarmine, who had canvased this point as
thoroughly as any man what ever of all that party, is fain to shut it up with
this close at last, That though some Headship or Supremacy may seem to be
conferred on Peter in the Book of God, Tamen Pontificem Romanum Petro succedere
express in Scripturis non haberi Bellar. de Romans Pont. l. 2. c. 12.
, yet that the Pope succeeded Peter, is not found in Scripture, but grounded on
Tradition only, as before was said. And if it be not found in Scripture, (as
he says it is not) we shall as little build our Faith upon their Traditions
though now we see what makes them rank Traditions equal with the written Word)
as upon those similitudes and ill-grounded consequences, which, for want of
better proof, he is fain to fly to. And yet this point thus weakly grounded,
is by them made an Article of the Catholic Faith; and that not only in the
new Creed of Pope Pius the Fourth (who might be partial in his own cause) where
it brings up the Rere; but in the general esteem of the Court of Rome, where it
charge in the very Front. For when the Princes of those times applauded the
piety and courage of King Henry the Eighth, in that without any alteration in
Religion, he had suppressed the Popes Authority in all his Dominions: The Papal
faction thought the censure to be very unjust, Primo and praecipuo Romanensium
fidei Articulo, de Pontificis Primatu immutato Histor. Conc. Trid. l. 1.
, considering that the first and chiefest Article of the Faith, that of the
Popes Supremacy, was so changed and abrogated. But on what ground soever they
have raised this building, and placed the Headship of the Church on such rotten
shoulders as are not able to support it; yet is this Head become so monstrous,
that it is grown bigger than all the rest of the Body. For do not his own
Canonists say, that the Pope has power of both the Swords, that Christ
committed to St. Peter (and in him to them) Terreni and coelestis imperii jura
Distinct. 22. mnes.
, The rights both of the Earthly and Heavenly Kingdoms. Was it not openly
affirmed in the Council of Lateran, In Papa esse omnem potestatem, etc Council
Later. sub. Leone. 10.
? That in the Pope there was vested an authority over all powers, both in
Heaven and Earth. And in pursuance of this power, have they not frequently
deposed Kings, absolved the Subjects of the Oaths of Allegiance, and disposed
of Kingdoms? till at last his Parasites came to broach this Tenet, Papam esse
verum Dominum temporalium, ita ut possit auferre ab alio quod alias suum est,
etc. That is to say, That the Pope only is the true and direct Lord of all
Temporal States; so that he may deprive whom he will of his estate, without any
remedy: All Bishops and Princes whatsoever, not being the Proprietaries of
their own estates; but Bailiffs and Stewards under him Ioh. de paris. de
Potest. Reg. and Papali. c. 5.
. Thus also in Spiritual matters, do they not teach that the whole World is his
Diocese, that he is Ordinarius omnium hominum Extrav. de Appel.
, and Episcopus totius orbis, the ordinary Judge of all mankind, and Bishop of
the whole world? and that being thus possessed of this general Bishopric,
Omnes Episcopi descendunt a Papa quasi membra a Capite, and de plenitudine ejus
omnes recipient Durand. de Minist. and Ord.
; All Bishops derive their power from him, as the Body does motion from the
Head, and that of his fullness they have all received: That if the Pope should
teach (as he may and does) Virtutes esse vitia, and vitia esse virtu^es Bellar.
de Romans Pont. l. 4. c. 5.
; That virtue is vice, and vice virtue, we were bound to believe him. And more
than so, That what crime soever he commit, he is not to be censured or
condemned for it, Nec a Concilio, nec a tota Ecclesia, nec a toto mundo Pet. de
Palad. de Pot. Pap. Art. 9.
, neither by a Council, nor by all the Church together, nor the whole World
neither. So privileged in a word he is, that as one of them says, Si Papa
innumerabiles populos catervatim secum ducat mancipio Gehennae Distinct. 40. Si
Papa.
, etc. If the Pope draw infinite companies of people with himself to Hell; yet
must no mortal man presume to reprove him for it. Why so? The Reason is most
plain and evident, Quia Papa and Christus unum faciunt Consistorium Hostieus.
in Extrav. de Praelat. Translat.
, because the Pope and Christ conjunct do but make one Consistory, and
consequently it must be as great a Sacrilege to question the acts of the Pope,
as those of Christ.

We see by this, to what a monstrous greatness this Head is grown, how
unproportionable to the Body his own Creatures make him. And yet he is not
only greater than all the Body, but he is all the Body too; the Pope and
Church being grown to be Terms and Convertible. For so says Gregory de
Valentia, Per ecclesiam caput ejus intelligimus, etc Greg. Valent. Disp. Theol.
Tom. 3.
. By the Church we mean her head, and by that the Pope. Dominicus Bannes
affirms the same, Pro eodem omnino reputatur autoritas ecclesiae universalis,
and autoritas summi pontificis Bannes in 22.2^. page 72.
, The authority of the Pope, and that of the Universal Church, is altogether
the same. The whole authority of the Church abides in him, says Thomas
Aquinas Aquin. 2a. 2ae qu. 1 I^art. 2.
. It remains all in him, says Silvester Silvest. in summa verbo fides.
, another of their principal Schoolmen. Bellarmine is more plain than any, Papa
potest dicere ecclesiae, i. e. sibi ipsi Bellar. de. Conc. l. 2. c. 10.
, The Pope (says he) may tell the Church, that is, himself. His meaning is,
That lest the Pope should want Remedy when offense is given him, he may be
Judge in his own cause, and on complaint unto himself, see the matter mended.
But this he learnt of Innocent the Third Pope of that name, who challenged to
himself the cognizance of some points in difference, between King Philip of
France, and John King of England, because it is written in the Gospel Dic
ecclesiae; as I have read in some good Author, but cannot call to mind in whom.

Never did Text of Scripture meet with two such learned Glossaries; never was
Pope and Cardinal better matched; nor need I add more in so clear a case,
unless it be that commonly they call the Pope Virtualem Ecclesiam, or the
Vertual Church, ((...) in the Greek;) because what power soever does of right
belong to the Body Collective of Christ's Church (the Church Essential, as they
term it) is vertually contained in his person only. Me thinks it might have
been enough for a single man to have been counted only for a Chapel of Ease.
But such is the ambition of the Pope of Rome, that unless he may be taken for
the Catholic Church, he passes not for being reckoned for a Church at all.

And yet this of the two is the lovelier Error. Better the Church be all head,
than no head at all. And such a Church that is all body, and no head at all,
have some of our Reformers modelled in their later Platforms. The Presbyterian
Party first began this Monster, which those of the Independent way have now
fully perfected. The Presbyterian Form being hatched in a popular state, but
such as did acknowledge a supreme command in the great Council of that City,
first make all Ministers equal amongst themselves, and then associate with each
Minister, two, or more Lay Elders, whom they invest jointly with all manner of
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, which anciently, and of right did belong to
Bishops. But this Presbytery thus constituted is not so supreme, but that it is
accomptable to the Classis, within which it is, as that unto the Provincial
Assembly, and all unto that National Meeting, which being made of the Deputed
Ministers, and Lay Elders out of each Presbytery, has the name of General; not
such a General Assembly as St. Paul speaks of (though possibly the name may
allude to that.) For neither are they the Church of the firstborn, nor all of
them at all times of the number of those whose names are written in the Heavens
Heb. 12.
. But let them call it what they will, they have given us such a Model of
Church Government, as was not known amongst the Ancients, and made it in effect
but an headless body: The Ruling Members being all equal in themselves, and yet
so Heterogeneous in the whole Compositum, that the greatest part thereof are
men of inferior quality, men of Shops and Trades, and consequently incapable of
Spiritual Powers. Which if it do not make the Church to be all Body, does yet
come very near it, to a Tantamount. But what the Presbyterians wanted to
complete this Monster, has since been added by the Brethren of the
Independency; who living in the waste and deserts of New England, where every
man was a king in his own opinion, and had so much of Caesar in him, as to
brook no Superior; fitted the Government of those Congregations which they
called the Churches, according unto that equality and want of order, which they
had been accustomed to in Civil matters. For in their Platform every
Congregation, whether little or great, is absolute in it self, and independent
of any other; having in it self, a supreme Authority of exercising
Ecclesiastical Powers, and Spiritual Faculties, without any reference or appeal
in point of grievance: And in the exercising of those powers and faculties,
every Member of the Congregation, whether poor or rich, as they are all
concerned, are all equally interessed. And for the Ministration of the Word,
and other Ordinances (for I think, they do not call them Sacraments) though
many times they do set a part some particular persons; yet do they not exclude
any man of what rank soever from exercising of his gift, as the Spirit moves
him. In this quite contrary to the Fathers of the Presbytery; who though they
do so dearly affect a parity amongst the Ministers themselves, yet do they
suffer none to perform that Office, but such as have an outward calling by
giving them the hands of fellowship Gal. 2.9.
: Which Ceremony they conceive savors more of parity, than that of the
imposition of hands used in Ordinations. And though each Presbyter and
Presbytery too, stand in equal rank and equipage with one another; yet in
relation to their Meetings or Bodies aggregate, they do allow of sub and supra,
the Presbytery being subordinate unto the Classis, as the Classis is to the
Provincial, and that to the General Assembly, from which lies no appeal in
what case soever. But so it is not with the Brethren of the Independency, every
particular Member of their Congregations being permitted to Preach and expound
the Scripture, according to the measure of the gift which is given unto him. So
that if Jerome were alive, he might most justly make complaint of that foul
disorder, which some began to practice in those early days, but was never so
much in request as amongst this people. Whereas (says he) all other Arts and
Mysteries, have their peculiar Artists and distinct Professors, Sola
Scripturarum ars est quam omnes passim sibi vendicant Hieron. Epl. ad Pa^l.
Tom. 3.
, only the Art of Preaching and Expounding Scripture is usurped by all men.
For this (says he) each weak old man, and ta^ling gossip (for we have Women
Preachers too in these Congregations) and each wrangling Sophister, every man
in a word does entrench upon, and take upon them to teach others what they did
never learn themselves. Some with a supercilious look speak big, and dogmatize
of holy Matters amongst silly women; others learn that of women (it is a shame
to say it) which afterward they teach to men; and some again, with great
variety of words and sufficient impudence, do talk to others of those things
which they understand not themselves. A man would think St. Jerome were
inspired with the Spirit of Prophecy, and that he spoke not of the frenzies of
the former times, but the distempers of the present. And yet perhaps we have a
better character of them (especially as it relates to their way of Government)
in the old Acephali, the Heretics which had no head, as their name does
signify: Of whom Nicephorus thus informs us, Acephali ob came causam dicti
sunt, quod sub Episcopis non fuerint, etc Niceph. Eccle. hist. lib. 18.45.
. The Acephali were so called (says he) because they were not under Bishops;
and therefore neither did they minister Baptism according to the solemn and
received Order of the Church, nor celebrate the Sacrament of the Lords Supper,
or any other Divine Office, in the usual manner. And because every man had
liberty to add unto the holy Faith, what new points he pleased, a very great
number of Heretics and Apostates did ensue upon it, with whom the Church for a
long time was perplexed and exercised. Besides that, great seditions and
disorders did from hence arise; the rascal rabble of that Sect pressing unto
the Rails of the Altar, threatening to fine the Priests, and cast them out of
their Churches with reproach and infamy, if they presumed to mention the
Authority of the General Council (that of Chalcedon it is he means) or to
recite the names of those holy Fathers who were present at it. So far, and to
this purpose he, in which we may discern a great deal of the humor, as well as
we have found the name of our new Acephali.

But to proceed, The Government of the Church not being Monarchical, as our
Masters in the Church of Rome would have it, nor Democratical or Popular, as
the Fathers of the Presbytery, and Brethren of the Independency have given it
out, both in their Practice and their Platforms; it remains then, that it must
be Aristocratical. And this indeed has been the judgment of most pure
Antiquity, and verified in the practice of the happiest times. For howsoever
those of Rome do persuade themselves, that Christ invested Peter with a
Sovereign power over the rest of the Apostles; yet generally the Fathers of the
Primitive times have determined otherwise: For so says Origin, Haec velut ad
Petrum dicta sunt omnium communia Orig. in Mat. Tract. 1.
, Those things which seem spoken to St. Peter only, are common unto all the
rest. Thus Cyprian, Hoc erant utique and coeteri Apostoli quod fuit Petrus,
pari consorti praediti and potestatis and honoris Cypr. de simpl. Praelat.
, The rest of the Apostles were as much privileged as Peter, and were all
invested with a like proportion, both of power and honor. Thus Jerome also for
the Latins (the two great Writers of the African and Alexandrian Churches you
have heard before.) Super Petrum fundatur Ecclesia etc Hier. Advers. Jovinian
l. 1.
. The Church is founded upon Peter; but this is said in another place of the
other Apostles, all of which had the Keys of Heaven, Et ex aequo super eos
ecclesiae fortitudo solidatur, and the foundation of the Church is settled
equally on them all. And thus St. Chrysostom for the Greeks, Paul (says he)
had no need of Peter, or stood in want of his voice (or countenance;) Chrysostom.
in Epl. ad Gal. c. 1.
Honor enim illi par erat ne quid dicam amplius, but was his equal at the
least, that I say no more. The like equality was maintained in the following
times amongst the Bishops, or chief Rulers in the Church of Christ. For being
Successors unto the Apostles in the Public Government, though not in their
extraordinary power, as they were Apostles, (whereof we shall speak more anon)
they had no reason to pretend superiority over one another, which none of the
Apostles could lay claim unto. Of this equality of the Bishops does St. Ierom
speak, (and it is indeed an evidence beyond all exception) Vbicunque fuerit
Episcopus sive Eugubii, sive Constantinopli, sive Alexandriae, sive Tanai,
ejusdem meriti, ejusdem est Sacerdoti^ Hier. in Epl. ad Evagr.
. Potentia divitiarum and paupertatis humilitas vel sublimiorem vel inferiorem
Episcopum non facit. Coeterum omnes Apostolorum Successores sunt. I have laid
down the place at large, because St. Jerome is conceived to have been an enemy
to the Episcopal Function, and to that end some fragments of him are alleged by
our Innovators. His meaning is, That all Bishops, whether of the greater, or
the lesser Cities, were of the same Order and pre-eminence in the Church of
Christ; and that it was neither the pride of wealth, nor the baseness of a poor
estate, which made a Bishop higher or lower in respect of Government; all of
them being Successors unto the Apostles. And so Erasmus understands him, who in
his Scholies on the place, gives this gloss or descant, Hieronymus videtur
aequare omnes Episcopos inter se, etc Eras. Schol. in Hier. Epi.
. Jerome (says he) does seem to make all Bishops equal amongst themselves,
because all equally Successors unto the Apostles; and thinks not any Bishop to
be less than another, because he is poorer; nor superior to another, because he
is richer; making the Bishop of Eugubium (a poor small City) equal unto the
Pope of Rome. St. Cyprian speaks as plain as Jerome, Vna est ecclesia, etc
Cypr. Epist. l. 4. Epl. 2.
. There is one Church (says he) divided by Christ throughout the world into
many Members. Episcopatus item unus Episcoporum multorum concordi numerositate
diffusus, And there is also one Bishopric (or Episcopal Office) alike diffused
over all the world, by an agreeing, or corresponding multitude of many Bishops.
And in another place to the same effect, Episcopatus unus, cujus a ^ingulis in
solidum pars tenetur Id. de simp. Praelat.
, i.e. There is but one Episcopal Function in the Church of Christ, whereof
every particular Bishop does stand wholly seized. And this Pope Eleutherius
does himself acknowledge, who in a Decretal of his (let those of Rome look to
the credit of the writing) tells the Bishops of France, (and in them all other
Bishops of what Realm soever) Vobis a Christo Vniversalis Ecclesia est commissa
Eleuth. Epist. Council. Tom. 1.
, That to their care the Universal Church was by Christ committed. Every
Bishop, wheresoever he be fixed and resident, has (like St. Paul) an universal
care over all the Churches. Which since they could not exercise by personal
conferences, they did it in the Primitive times before they had the benefit of
general Councils, by Letters, Messages, and Agents, for the communicating, of
their Counsels, and imparting their advice unto one another, as the emergent
occasions of the Church did require the same. Examples of the which, in the
stories of those Elder-times, are obvious to the eye of each careful Reader. By
means of which intercourse and correspondency, they maintained not only an
Association of the several Churches for their greater strength, nor a
Communication only of their Counsels for the public safety; but a Communion
also with each other as Members of that Mystical Body, whereof Christ is Head.
These Letters they called Literas format as and communicatorias, August. Epl.
163.
as in an Epistle of St. Augustine, where both names occur. And for the public
benefit which redounded by them, we may find it in Optatus an African Bishop,
who having made a Catalogue of the Bishops of Rome from St. Peter down unto
Siricius, who then held the place, or as his own words are, Qui noster est
socius Optat. Milev. de Schism. l. 2.
, who was his partner or associate in the Common Government: He adds, Cum quo
nobis totus orbis commercio formatarum in una communionis societate concordat;
i. e. With whom, together with our self, the whole world agrees in one
communion or society, by those Letters of intercourse. This, as it cuts off all
pretensions to Monarchial Government, so does it utterly destroy the
Democratical or Popular Platforms: The Public Government of the Church
belonging only unto Bishops, as Successors to the Apostles, to whom Christ
committed it. For that the Bishops do succeed in place of the Apostles, is the
constant and received opinion of all the Ancients. What Jerome did affirm
herein, we have seen before; but he affirms it more than once, and gives it us
again in another place, where showing the difference between the Montanists,
and the Catholic Church, he says, That they had made the Bishops the third in
order, Apud nos Apostolorum locum Episcopi tenent Ierom. Epl. ad Marcellan.
, but in the Church the Bishops held the place or rank of the Apostles. St.
Augustine says as much as he, deriving the descent or petigree of the
Christian Faith by the Seats of the Apostles, Et successiones Episcoporum
August. Epl. 42.
, and the succession of Bishops, which were dispersed and propagated over all
the world. St. Cyprian, as more ancient, so he speaks more plainly, who writing
to Cornelius the then Bishop of Rome, exhorts him to preserve that unity, Per
Apostolos nobis successoribus traditam Cypr. Epl. 10. l. 2. vel Epl. 42. of
Basil Edit.
, which was commended by the Apostles unto them their Successors. And before
him also Irenaeus, who lived very near St. John's time, if he lived not in it,
who speaking of those Bishops which were ordained by the Apostles, and showing
what perfections were required in them, then adds, Quos and successores
relinquebant, etc Iren. l. 3. c. 3.
. Whom they left behind to be their Successors, delivering over unto them
their own place of Government. Nothing can be more plain than this; and nothing
can more plainly declare unto us, that neither the Monarchy of the Pope, nor
the Democra^y of the Presbyterians, nor the Anarchy of the New England
Independents, had any being or existence in the Primitive times. The Government
of the Church was wholly in the hands of Bishops, who separately in their
several and respective Diocesses, or jointly in Provincial Councils, took order
in all matters which concerned the same.

But this is to be understood with a salvo jure, a reservation of the Rights
and Privileges of such Christian Princes as God raised up to be nursing Fathers
to his Church Isai. 43.23.
. To them, as God has given the sword, (for he bears not the sword in vain
Romans 13.4.
) so are they made custodes utriusque tabulae, the Guardians and Keepers of
both Tables of the Law of God; not only in keeping them themselves, as every
private man is bound to do; but in that they ought to have a care, that all and
every of their Subjects yield obedience to them, and punish such as evil doers
which offend against them. And this extends as well to Bishops, and inferior
Ministers, as to any Lay-subject of what rank soever; who though they derive
their Spiritual Function immediately from Christ himself, yet are they not
only subject to the Rule of Princes in matter of Exterior order in the service
of God, but are to be accomptable to them, in their Ministration, if wilfully
they neglect or transgress their duties.

The constant practice of all godly Kings and Emperors, as well under the Old
Testament, as since the time of the Gospel, makes this plain enough: For if we
please to search the Scriptures, we shall find David giving Rules to the
Priests and Levites in matters which concerned the worship of God 1 Chro. 23.4,
5, etc.
, dividing them in several ranks, appointing unto every rank the course of his
ministry, composing Psalms and Hymns to the praise of God, prescribing how
they should be sung, with what kind of instrument Ib. c. 25.12, 13.
, and ordering with what vestments the Singing-men should be arrayed in the act
of their service. We shall there find the Feast of Purim ordained by Mordecai
Esth. 9.19, 20.
, who then possessed the place of a Prince among them; and that of the
Dedication 1 Mac. 1.16.
by the Princes of the Maccabean progeny; yet both religiously observed in all
times succeeding; this last by Christ himself as the Gospel tells us John
10.22.
. We shall there find how Moses broke in pieces the Golden Calf Exodus 32.20.
, and Hezekiah the Brazen Serpent; how the high places were destroyed, and the
groves cut down by the command of Iehosaphat 2 Kings. 18.4.
; and what a Reformation was made in the Church of Judah, by the good King
Josiah. Finally, we shall therein find how Aaron the High Priest was reproved
by Moses, Abiathar deposed by Solomon Exodus 32.21.
; the arrogance of the Priests restrained by Ioas Kings 2.26.
. Such power as this, the godly Princes of the Jews did exercise by the Lords
appointment, to the glory of Almighty God, and their own great honor: If they
took more than this upon them, and meddled as Vzziah did, in offering incense,
which did of right belong to the Priests office 2 Chro. 26.21
: A Leprosy shall stick upon him, till the hour of his death, nor shall he
have a sepulcher amongst the rest of the Kings. And such, and none but such, is
that supreme power, which we ascribe unto the King in the Church of England.
The Papists, if they please, may put a scorn on Queen Elizabeth of most famous
memory, in saying, Foeminam in Anglia esse caput ecclesiae, that a woman was
the head of the Church of England, as once Bellarmine did; and Calvin, if he
list, may pick a quarrel with the Clergy of the times of King Henry the eighth,
as rash and inconsiderate men, and not so only, but as guilty of the sin of
blasphemy Calvin in Amos. c. 7.
, ( Erant enim blasphemi cum vocarunt eum summum caput ecclesiae sub Christo)
for giving to that King, the title of Supreme Head of the Church under Christ
himself. But Queen Elizabeth disclaimed all authority and power of ministering
divine service in the Church of God, as she declared in her Injunctions Qu.
Injunct. An. 1559.
unto all Her Subjects. And the Clergy in their Convocation, Anno 1562. ascribe
not to the Prince the Ministry of the Word and Sacraments Artic. of Rel. 37.
An. 1562.
, nor any further power in matters which concern Religion, than that only
Prerogative which was given by God himself to all godly Princes in the Holy
Scriptures. More than this, as we do not give the Kings of England, so less
than this the Christian Emperors did not exercise in the Primitive times, as
might be made apparent by the Acts of Constantine, and other godly Emperors in
the times succeeding, if it might stand with my design to pursue that Argument.
Take one for all, this memorable passage in Socrates, an old Ecclesiastical
Historian, who gives this Reason, why he did intermix so much of the acts of
Emperors, with the affairs of holy Church: viz. That from that time in which
they first received the Faith, Ecclesiae negotia ex illorum nutu perpendere
visa sunt, etc Socrat. Eccle. hist. l. 5. Proem.
. The business of the Church did seem especially to depend on their will and
pleasure, insomuch as General Councils were summoned by them, for the dispatch
of such affairs as concerned Religion, even in the main and fundamentals, and
other emergent occasions of the highest moment.

CHAP. III. Of the Invisibility and Infallibility of the Church of Christ: And
of the Churches power in Expounding Scripture, Determining Controversies of the
Faith, and Ordaining Ceremonies.
BUt laying by those Matters of External Regiment, we will look next on those
which are more intrinsecal, both to the nature of the Church, and the present
Article. For when we say, That we believe the Holy Catholic Church, we do not
mean, That we do only believe that there is a Church upon the Earth, which for
the latitude thereof, may be called Catholic; and for the piety of the
Professors, may be counted Holy; but also that we do believe, that this Church
is led by the Spirit of God into all necessary Truths; and being so taught,
becomes our School^mistress unto Christ, by making us acquainted with his will
and pleasure; and therefore that we are to yield obedience unto her Decisions,
determining according to the Word of God.

This is the sum of that which we believe in the present Arti^le, more than the
quod sit of the same, which we have looked upon in the former Chapter; and to
the disquisition of these points, we shall now proceed. A matter very
necessary, as the world now goes; in which, so many Schisms and Factions do
distract men's minds, that Truth is in danger to be lost by too much curiosity
in enquiring after it. For as the most Reverend Father, the late Lord Bishop of
Canterbury very well observes, Whiles one Faction cries up the Church above the
Scripture, and the other side, the Scripture to the contempt and neglect of the
Church, which the Scripture it self teaches men both to honor and obey; They
have so far endangered the belief of the one, and the authority of the other,
That neither has its due from a great part of men Relat. of the Conf. in the
Epistle Dedic.
. The Church commends the Scripture to us as the Word of God, which she has
carefully preserved from the time of Moses, to this day; and so far we are
willing to give credence to her, as to believe that therein she has done the
duty of a faithful witness, not giving testimony to any supposititious or
corrupted Text, but to that only which does carry the impressions in it of the
Image and Divine Character of the Spirit of God. But if a difference do arise
about the sense and meaning of this very Scripture, or any controversy do
break forth on the misunderstanding of it, or the applying and perverting it
to men's private purposes (which is the general source and fountain of all Sects
and Heresies;) we will not therein hearken to the voice of the Church, but
every man will be a Church to himself, and follow the Dictamen (or the
illumination, as they please to call it) of their private Spirit. It therefore
was good counsel of a learned man of our own, Not to indulge too much to our
own affections, or trust too much unto the strength of a single judgment, in
the controverted points of Faith; but rather to rely on the authority and
judgment of the Church therein. For seeing (says he) that the Controversies of
Religion in our time are grown in number so many, and in nature so intricate,
that few have time and leisure, and fewer strength of understanding to examine
them; what remains for men desirous of satisfaction in things of such
consequence, but diligently to search out which of all the Societies of men in
the world, is that blessed company of holy ones, that household of faith, that
Spouse of Christ, and Church of the living God, which is the pillar and ground
of truth; that so we may embrace her communion, follow her directions, and rest
in her judgment Field of the Church in Epist. Dedic.
. Very good counsel, I confess, and such as is to be pursued by all sober
Christians: But being this counsel does suppose, as a matter granted, that the
true Church is very easy to be found if it be carefully sought after; which
does imply the constant and perpetual visibility of it, (however controverted
and denied by some later Writers:) I shall first labor to make good that which
he supposes, and prove that which he takes for granted; that so we may proceed
the better on our following search, and rest the surer on the judgment of the
Church, being once found out.

And here I shall not need to look back on those, who making none to be of the
Church, but the elect children of God, do thereby make it altogether invisible
to a mortal eye. We have spoke enough of that in the former Chapter, and
therefore shall add nothing now, but that it may seem strange unto men of
reason, that when Paul and Barnabas came to Jerusalem, they were received of
the Church, as is said Acts 15.4. and yet could not see the Church which did
receive them; or that Paul went unto Caesarea, and saluted the Church, as is
said of him, Acts 18.22. in case he had not seen the Church which he did
salute. We grant, indeed, the Church to be invisible in its more noble parts,
that is to say, the Saints triumphant in the Heavens, the Elect on Earth: and
that it is invisible in the whole latitude and extent thereof; for who can see
so great a body, diffused in all places of the world, at one time, or in all
the times of his life, supposing him to be the greatest traveller that was ever
known. And yet this does not make the Church to be more invisible, than any
particular man may be said to be invisible also, because we do not see his
Brain, his Heart, and his Liver, the three principal parts, which convey Life,
and Blood, and motion to the rest of the Body; nor because we cannot see at
once both his back and his belly, and every other member in his full
proportion. The visibility of the Church is proved sufficiently by the
visibility of those several and respective Congregations or Assemblies of men,
which are convened together under lawful Ministers for the Administration of
the Word and Sacraments; to which, men may repair, as they see occasion, for
their spiritual comfort, and instruction in the things of God; with whom they
may join themselves in his public worship, with reference to that soul and
power of Government, which animates and directs the whole. And such a
Visibility of the Church there has always been, from Adam down to Noah, from
Noah to Abraham, from him to Moses and the Prophets, from thence to Christ, and
from Christ's time unto the present. It is true, the light hereof has been
sometimes dangerously ecclipsed, but never extinguished; no more than is the
Sun when got under a Cloud. Desicere videtur Sol, non defi^it, as the Father
has it.

Since God first had a Church, it has still been visible, though more or less,
according unto times and seasons, more in some places than in others, although
not always in such whole and sound condition, as it ought to be. They who are
otherwise persuaded, conceive that they have found some intervals or space of
time, in which there was no Visible Church on the face of the Earth; of which
times there are two remarkable under the Law, and two as notable as those since
the birth of the Gospel. Under the Law they instance in the reign of Ahab, of
which, Elijah makes complaint, That they had laid waste the Church, and slain
the Prophets 1 King. 19.14.
, and that he only was left to serve the Lord; and in the persecution raised
by Anti^chus. King of Syrius, of which it is reported in the Book of Maccabees,
that the Sanctuary was defiled, the public Sacrifices interdicted 1 Mac. 1.
. Circumcision and the Sabbath abrogated; and more than so, the Idols of the
Syrians publicly advanced for the people to fall down and worship, insomuch,
as all those who sought after righteousness and justice, were fain to fly unto
the wilderness, there to save themselves 1. Mac. 2.19.
. But the answer unto this is easy, For though those instances do prove that
the Church at those times was in ill-condition, in regard to her external
peace; yet prove they not, that there was such a general defection from the
worship of God, as to make the Church to be invisible.

For first, The complaint of Elijah was not universal, in reference to the
whole Church of God, but in relation only unto that of Israel, where King Ahab
reigned; a Schismatical Church that, when it was at the best, and sometimes an
Idolatrous one also. The Church of Judah stood entire in the service of God,
according to the prescript of his holy Law, under the Rule and Government of
the good King Iehosaphat; a Prince, who with a perfect heart served the God of
his Fathers, and who preserved the people under his command in the true
Religion. The Sun shined comfortably on Judah, though an Egyptian darkness had
overspread the whole Realm of Israel. And if Elijah fled for safety to the
woods and deserts, and did not fly for succor to the Land of Judah, it was not
out of an opinion, that the two Tribes had Apostated from their God as well as
the ten, but out of a wise and seasonable fear of being delivered by those of
Judah, into the hands of his enemies; Iehosaphat being at that time in good
terms with Ahab, by whom Elijah stood accused for troubling of the State of
Israel.

As for the other instance under King Antiochus, the Text indeed describes it
for a great persecution, greater than which that Nation never suffered under;
but it declares withal expressly, that there was no such general defection from
the Law of God, as was projected by the Tyrant. For the common people stood
courageously to their old Religion, and neither would obey the Kings
Commandment in offering to the Syrian Idols, or eating meats which were
prohibited by the Law of Moses. And as for those which fled unto the Woods and
Wilderness, they fled not thither only for their personal safety, in hope to
find an hiding place in those impenetrable deserts; but as unto a place of
strength, or a fortified City, from whence they might sally (as they did)
against their enemies; and in the which, they might enjoy that freedom in the
exercise of their own Religion, which could not be hoped for in Jerusalem, and
other places under the command of Antiochus. A persecuted Church we find both
before, and here; but the persecution neither held so long, nor was so general,
as to make the Church to be invisible.

And so it is also in those two instances, which the Patrons of this
invisibility have pitched upon, since the times of the Gospel; the one being in
the prevalency of the Arian Heresy, the other in the predominancy of Popish
Superstition.

For the first, it is alleged out of St. Ierom, Ingemuit mundus, and se Arianum
esse miratus est Hier. advers. Lucif.
, That the world groaned under the burden of that Heresy, and wondered how she
was become so wholly Arian. But this admits of such a qualification and
restriction, as utterly overthrows the thoughts of invisibility. For that
which Ierom calls Mundus, or the whole world generally, in Lerinensis is but
orbis pene totus, almost all the world. Arianorum venenum non jam portiunculam
Vincent. Lerinens. advers. haeres. c. 7.
quandam, sed orbem pene totum contaminaverat, The Arian poison (says that
Author) had not only envenomed a small part or portion, but almost all the
world it self. And that which Lerinensis calls orbem pene totum, almost all the
world, was only almost all that part of the world, which was under the command
and power of the Roman Emperors. Costerius in his Notes on Lerinensis does
expound him so, saying, Adeo incredibiles fuisse impietatis hujus successus, ut
omnes fere Romani imperii Ecclesias haec lues pervaserit. And to this
Exposition, that of Gregorius Presbyter, who wrote the life of Gregory
Nazianzen, gives a great deal of light, who attributes the spreading of that
powerful Heresy, unto the countenance it had from some of those Emperors,
(...), Greg. Presbyt. in vita Greg. Nazianz.
who labored with might and main to promote the same; so that the growth and
spreading of the Arrian Heresy, was neither over all the world, nor almost all
the world, but only over almost all the Churches in the Roman Empire; and that
but for the time only, when Constantius and Valens did possess the Throne.
There were then many Christian Churches in Persia, India, Aethiopia, where
neither Valens nor Constantius were of any power, and many Catholic Bishops in
France, Egypt, Italy, and consequently Catholic Churches also, to which an
Orthodox Professor might have had recourse for the worship of God, according to
the prescript of his holy Word. And though the Arian Heresy, both for time and
place, was more diffused and longer-lived than any other whatsoever in the
Church of Christ; yet neither did it overspread the whole face of the Church,
or made it for the time invisible to discerning eyes; nor by denying the
consubstantiality of persons in the holy Trinity, did they so abjure the
Christian Faith, as not to be accounted Christians (though defiled with
Heresy) by their greatest enemies. The Orthodox Professors so esteemed them,
reckoning their Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, to be lawfully called, their
Sacraments to be lawfully ministered by them, their Forms of Divine worship
nothing different from the rest of the Church, except in the Doxology only.
And if they did proceed against them in the way of punishment, it was not as
they were no Christians, Theod. Eccl. hist. l. 1. c. 24.
but as Arian Heretics. And on the other side, holding entire all other points
of Christian Faith, and scrupling only against that, because they found it not
in terminis in the holy Scriptures; the Gentiles, amongst whom they lived in
the out-parts of the Empire, persecuted them, as they did the rest who
professed the Gospel, with fire and sword, and put them unto grievous deaths;
insomuch, as suffering for the Christian Faith, not the Arian Heresy, some of
them had the honor to be counted Martyrs even by the Catholics themselves, Ita
ut non-nulli ex Ariana secta Martyrs fierent, as it is in Socrates Socrat.
Eccle. hist. l. 4.27.
.

But the main difficulty does relate to that space of time, in which the power
and superstition of the Church of Rome, carried all before it; and in relation
unto that, the Fautors of the Churches invisibility, have most beat their
brains: For not being able, when put to it by their Romish Adversaries, to
find a Church agreeing in all points with the Protestant Tenets, before
Luthers time, they betook themselves to this, as their surest refuge, That the
Church was many times invisible, and so had been immediately in the time before
them. Thus Luther pleased to place the Church, in quibusdam reliquiis Luther.
de servo Arbitrio.
, in a certain remnant of men whom the world took no heed of, who were indeed
the people, and the Church of God, though not so accounted: And Calvin hides
the same in uncertain corners, where God did wonderfully preserve it from the
sight of men, Et mirabiliter Ecclesiam suam tanquam in latebris servasse Calv.
Instit. l. 4. c. 1. sect. 2.
, as his own words are. But this not giving satisfaction to the common
Adversary, who press upon us with this Question, Where was your Church before
Luther; a pedigree thereof was fetched from Wicliff, Hus, the Albigenses, the
Pauperes de Lugduno, and I know not whom The Visibility of the Church by
Archbishop Abbot, Dr. Pride. alii.
; who in their several times and ages, had publicly opposed some errors and
corruptions in the Church of Rome, and thereby drew upon themselves the hatred
of the Roman Clergy. And by this means it was conceived, That a perpetual
visibility of the Protestant Churches might be fairly proved; the fancy of an
invisible Church beginning to grow out of credit with most sorts of men;
especially considering, that besides the opposition made by those before
remembered, Clemangius, Armachanus, Lincolniensis, had severally inveighed
against the pride and vices of the Court of Rome; and that there were many
things also in the Church it self, whereof St. Bernard, and Pope Adrian wished
a Reformation. But this, in my opinion, will not do the deed: For neither did
Clemangius, Armachanus, or the rest that follow, withdraw themselves from the
Communion of the Church of Rome; or if they had, they did not thereby make
themselves a distinct Church from it, and least of all, a Church agreeing in
all points, (perhaps not in any) with those which are defended in the
Protestant Schools. And as for Wicliff, Hus, and the Albigenses, though they
held some opinions which the Protestants do, yet held they many others which
the Protestants do not Harpsfield in Histor. Wicle^iana.
. Some I am sure, which are as much abominated by the Church of England, as the
extremest dregs of the Church of Rome. Nor can we prove the visibility of our
Church from them, from whom we neither receive our Baptism, nor our Priesthood,
nor our Form of Worship, nor any outward Rite and Ceremony, nor any thing, for
ought I know, by which we claim the name of a Christian Church. Or if we did,
our visibility would fail us in those frequent intervals, which were between
Wicliff and the Hussites, the Hussites and the Albigenses, the Albigenses and
the rest of those scattered companies, from whom this goodly Pedigree is to be
derived: Whereof the one started up in England, the other long before him in
Bohemia, the third in France, and others in the Mountains of Italy, not having
a Succession from, nor giving a Succession unto one another. So that
relinquishing this plea as a sorry shift, which only seemed to be excogitated
for the present pinch; If any ask me, Where the Church was before Luthers time,
I answer generally, First, That if the Church had failed in these North-west
parts of the world (as indeed it did not) yet were there many Christian
Churches in the East and South, the Greeks, Nestorians, Melchites, Abassins,
with diverse others, with whom the first Reformers might have held communion,
though differing from them in some points of inferior moment. And secondly, I
answer more particularly, that our Church was before Luther, where it has been
since, in Germany, France, England, Italy, yea, and Rome it self; A sick Church
then, but since by Gods grace brought to more perfect health; a corrupt Church
then, but since reformed of those particular abuses, both in life and doctrine,
which seemed most offensive. That the Church of Rome is a true Church, (though
not the true Church) no sober Protestant will deny. Iunius grants it in his
Book De Ecclesia, cap. 19. and so does Dr. Whitakers also, Cont. 2. Qu. 3. cap.
2. as great an enemy as any, of the Romish factions. The like does Dr. Raynolds
in his fifth Thesis, though he deny it (as he might) to be either the Catholic
Church it self, as they vainly boast, or any found member of the same. Nay,
even the very Separatists do not grutch them that, as Francis Johnson in his
Treatise called A Christian Plea, Printed 1627. page 123, etc. A true Church in
the verity of essence, as the Church is a company of men which profess the
Faith of Christ, and are baptized into his Name; but neither Orthodox in all
points of doctrine, nor sound or justifiable in all points of practice. And a
true Church in reference to the Fundamentals of the Christian Faith, which they
maintain as constantly, and defend as strongly against the several Heretics
and Sectaries of this present age, as any Doctor of the Protestant, or Reformed
Churches; though in the Superstructures they are fallen aside from the received
opinions of the Catholic Church. A true Church too, in which Salvation may be
had, (for why should we deny the possibility of their salvation, who have been
the chief instruments of ours Hook. of Just. sect. 17.
? says judicious Hooker) by those especially, who ignorantly follow their
blind guides, and do not pertinaciously embrace any Popish error, either
against their Science, or against their Conscience. Of whom, as of the greatest
numbers in the Church of Christ, we may very safely say with Augustine,
Coeteram turbam non intelligendi vivacitas, sed credendi simplicitas tutissimam
facit August. Cont. Fund. c. 4.
, i. e. That amongst ordinary men, it is not the vivacity of understanding, but
the simplicity of believing, which makes them safe. Of this Church were the
Protestants Members, before they did withdraw themselves from the errors of it;
before by this their separating from the errors of it, they were schismatically
expelled and thrust out of the communion of the Church of Rome, by those which
had the conduct of the affairs thereof, in the beginning of that breach. And
from this Church, do we of the Church of England, derive immediately our
interess in Christ, by the door of Baptism; the Body of the holy Scriptures,
the Hierarchy or Public Government, our Liturgy and Solemn Forms of
Administration; not as originally theirs, but as derived to them from the
Primitive times, and by them transmitted unto us. This Bristo does acknowledge
in his Book of Motives Bristo Mot. 34.
; and this we think it no reproach unto our Religion to acknowledge also: That
Aphorism of King James of most famous memory, deserving to be writ in Letters
of Gold; viz. That no Church (under color of Reformation, for of that he
speaks) ought further to separate it self from the Church of Rome, either in
Doctrine or Ceremony, than she had departed from her self, when she was in her
flourishing, and best estate, and from Jesus Christ our Lord and Head Confer.
at Hampton Court, p. 77.
. And yet I know not how it has come to pass, but so it is, that instead of
reforming of an old Church, which is all we did; the building of a new Church,
will we, nill we, is by some Zelots of both sides obtruded on us. Whereas the
case, if rightly stated, is but like that of a sick and wounded man, that had
long lien weltering in his own blood, or languishing under a tedious burden of
diseases; and afterward, by Gods great mercy, and the skilful d^ligence of
honest Chirurgions and Physicians, is at the last restored to his former
health. No new man in this case created, that is Gods sole privilege, but the
old man cured: No new Church founded in the other, that belongs to Christ, but
the old Reformed. When Hezekiah purged the Temple, and other godly Kings and
Princes of the Land of Judah did reform Religion, as we know they did; Neither
did the one erect a new Temple, or the others frame a new Religion, but only
rectified in both what they found amiss. And so it was also in the Reformation
of the Church of Rome, further than which, we need not go to look where our
Church was before Luthers time, or to find out that constant and perpetual
visibility of the Church of Christ, which has been hitherto the subject of
this Disquisition.

But put the case the worst that may be, and let it be supposed this once, That
the Church of Rome had so apostated from the Faith of Christ, that it ceased to
be a Church at all, both in name and nature; yet were there many Christian
Churches in the East and South, all of them visible no doubt, as they still
continue, which constantly maintained all those several Truths, that had been
banished and exploded in the Church of Rome. For that the Universal Church
should so fall away, as to teach any doctrine contrary to the Faith and Gospel,
is plainly to the promise made by Christ our Savior. It is true indeed, Christ
has not bound himself, nor annexed his spirit so inseparably to a National or
Provincial Church, but that it may fall at last unto such desperate and
dangerous Errors, as finally may cut it off as an unsound Member from the
residue of the Body Mystical. The Candlestick may be removed as well out of any
Church, as from that of Ephesus Apoc. 2.5.
, if wilfully they put out the light which shined amongst them; and so it is
determined by the Church of England. As the Church of Jerusalem, Alexandria,
and Antioch, has erred, so also the Church of Rome has erred not only in
their living, and manner of Ceremonies, but also in matters of Faith, says the
Nineteenth Article Artic. 19. An. 1562.
. But so it is not with the Universal, the Body Collective of Gods people, the
Church essential; nor can it be colourably inferred, (though it be the best
Argument of Dr. Raynolds Raynold. in These. 2.
, to evince his Thesis) that because many of those who are outwardly called,
and some of the Elect themselves, many of the Flock, and some of the Pastors,
and that not only in their single and sole capacities, but as convened in
Council about sacred matters, have held opinions contrary to the truth of God;
That therefore the whole Church, or the Body collective and diffusive over all
the world, shall universally agree to betray the truth, or be given over unto
Error.

One might as logically conclude, that because many of the Citizens, and some
of the Aldermen, many of the Parishioners, and some of the Ministers, and that
not only in their Houses, but the very Church, or the Guild-hal, were swept
away at London, by the last great plague; that therefore the whole City was
dispeopled by it, not a man escaping.

Such Arguments as these, need no other Answer, than to demonstrate the non
sequiturs, and inconsequence of them.

But first, before we do proceed unto further evidence, it will be necessary to
lay down the state of the Question, which is the Litis contestatio, or the
point in Controversy. And in my mind Becanus states it very rightly; We will
therefore use his terms, though he were a Jesuit, and propose it thus, viz. An
tota Ecclesia Christi, vel tota multitudo Christianorum, quatenus ex Pastoribus
and ovibus conflata est, errare possit in aliquo Articulo vel puncto fidei
Becan. Man. Cont. l. 1. c. 3.
; that is to say, whether the whole Church of Christ, or the whole multitude of
Christian people, consisting both of the Flock and the Pastors too, may err in
any Article, and point of Faith, or publicly profess any point of Doctrine,
contrary to the Faith and Gospel of our Lord and Savior.

This we deny, and we deny it on the credit of our Saviors promises, Upon this
Rock (says he) will I build my Church, and the gates of Hell shall not prevail
against it Matthew. 16.18.
. Where, by the gates of Hell, as the Fathers say, he means not only outward
violence, but Errors, Heresies, and false Doctrines, which covertly or openly
do aim at the ruin of it. And of this mind is Epiphanius in Anchorato,
Origin, Tract. 1. on Matthew, Jerome and Bid upon the place. St. Augustine
also hence infers, Haereses omnes de ecclesia exiisse tanquam sarmenta
inutilia a vite praecisa, ipsam autem manner in radice sua, in vite sua August.
de Symbolo. l. 1. c. 6.
, that is to say, That Heresies were to the Church like unprofitable branches
cut off from the Vines, the Church remaining still in the Root, in the Vine it
self. How so! Quia portae inferorum non vincant eam, because the gates of Hell
cannot overcome it. He promised his Apostles to send them a Comforter, who
should teach them all things, John 14.16. who should guide them into all truth,
John 16.13. Not that he bound himself hereby to teach them all things, or lead
them into all truths, of what sort soever; For it is sure, that some things the
Apostles were still ignorant of, as of the day and hour of the General
Judgment; And probable enough it is, that there were many Philosophical and
Historical truths, into which, the Spirit did not lead them. All things, and
all truth, must be understood of all things truly necessary to a man's
salvation. In omnem veritatem, i. e. Omnem quae expedit ad salutem Raynold. in
6. Thesibus.
, says Dr. Raynolds very rightly. A promise made indeed to them, the Apostles
personally; for it was unto them he spoke, and to none but them; but made to
all the Church in them, the whole Church essentially, whereof they were at that
time the sole Representatives. Consolatprium est ex hoc loco cognoscere, and
fide audire, quicquid est promissum his Apostolis, promissum esse toti ecclesia
Claud. Guilliand. in Joh.
, says a learned and a modest Papist, It is (says he) a special comfort to
learn, and faithfully believe, from these words of Christ's, that the promise
made to these Apostles, was also made to the whole Church, to the Body
collective. It was not Peter only, as the Papists say, nor the Apostles only,
as the words may seem to bear, to whom these promises were made, touching the
not prevailing of the gates of Hell, and the conducting of their feet in the
ways of truth; but to the whole Body of the Church represented by them.

Hence I conclude, That the whole Church, in the full latitude and universality
thereof, is free from Error; such Errors as do lead to the gates of Hell, and
are destructive of salvifical, supernatural Truths: The Church being so far
privileged by our Lord and Savior, that when the truth is banished out of one
or more particular Churches, it is admitted into others, and some still
opposing those corruptions both in Doctrine and Practice, which in the others
are defended. The Church in this capacity is secure from Error, even in the
points of smallest moment; and so it is confessed by Luther, a man not over
forwards to ascribe too much unto the Church Luth. de Arbitr. servo.
. Impossible est illam errare posse etiam in minimo Articulo, It is
impossible, says he, that the Church should err (conceive him of the Church
essential) in the smallest Article.

But this perhaps will be made more apparent by the matter of Fact, than by any
other kind of evidence in an Argumentative way. And for this matter of Fact,
we will take those times in which the truth may seem to be most miserably
oppressed, by the predominancy of the Arian faction, and the tyranny and
superstitions of the Popes of Rome. That the Arian Heresy did extend no
further than the Roman Empire, we have shown before; that all the Roman Empire
was not poisoned with it, we will show you now. For besides all the Bishops of
Rome successively, from the first rising of this Heresy, to the fall thereof,
who constantly (except Liberius only) did maintain the truth; the stories of
those times acquaint us with the names and merits of some Catholic Bishops,
who with their Churches, did oppose that predominant faction. And because it
were an endless, and indeed a needless labor to recite them all, take but those
three whom Jerome brings together in one line or passage. O Siquidem Arianus
victis, triumphatorem suum Egyptus excapit; Hilarium ^ praelio revertentem
Galliarum Ecclesia complexa est; ad reditum Eusebii sui lugubres vestes Italia
mutavit Hierom. adv. Luciferian.
, i. e. Upon the overthrow of the Arians, Egypt received her Athanasius, now
returned in triumph; the Church of France embraced her Hilary (he was Bishop of
Poictiers) coming home with victory from the battle; and on the return of
Eusebius (Bishop of Vercellis) Italy changed her mourning garments. By which it
is most clear, even to the vulgar eyes, that not these Bishops only did defend
the truth, but that it was preserved by their people also; who never had
received them with such joy and triumphs, had they not been all of one opinion.
Or had but those three Bishops only stood unto the truth, yet had that been
sufficient to preserve the Church from falling universally from the Faith of
Christ, or deviating from the truth in that particular: The word of truth being
established, (as say both Law Deuteronomy. 17.6. Matthew. 18.16.
and Gospel) if there be only two or three witnesses to attest unto it. Two or
three Members of the Church may keep possession of a truth in the name of the
rest, and thereby save the whole from Error; even as a King invaded by a foreign
enemy, does keep possession of his Realm by some principal fortress, the
standing out whereof in time, may regain it all. The Body cannot properly be
said to be wholly dead, as long as any Member of it does remain alive.

But in this storm raised by the Arians in the Church, the Orthodox Professors
had but one Error to encounter with, and that discovered and opposed in the
first rising of it. The Church of Rome maintained so many, and those promoted
by such power, and so subtle instruments, that there was far more danger in
the Mass of Popery, than any single Errors in the times before; yet never could
they so prevail by their force or cunning, but that their Errors were opposed
in some Church or other; and truth, though banished in the West, found hearty
entertainment in the Eastern parts.

As for example, The Popes Supremacy, is, and has long been held at Rome as an
Article of the Faith, and a chief one too, and held so ever since it was
declared by Pope Boniface the Seventh, Omnino esse de necessitate salutis omni
humanae creaturae su^esse Romano Pontifici De major. and obedient.
, i. e. That it was altogether necessary to Salvation, for every mortal man to
be subject to the Bishops of Rome. But this Supremacy was never acknowledged by
the Greeks, nor Muscovites, nor by the Habbassines (or Christians of Ethiopia)
nor by the Indian Churches neither, till these latter days, in which they have
submitted to the Popes authority Brerewoods Enquiries.
. And in the West it self where the Pope most swayed, it was continually
opposed by the Albigenses, the Hussites, Wiclivists, and others, in their
several times. The Popes usurped a power over Kings and Princes, and did not
only hold it as a matter practical, but publicly maintained and taught as a
doctrinal point. But against this did all the Princes of the world oppose their
power; the French by the Pragmatical Sanction Ext. in Goldast. Monarch.
; the English by the Statutes of Provisions and Praemuniri 25 ^ 27 Edw. 3.7 and
13 Rich. 2. etc.
; the German Emperors at once, both by Sword and Pen, as is apparent by the
writing of Marsilius Patavinus, Dantes, Occam, and many others of those times;
whereof consult Goldastus in his Monarchia. It pleased the Popes, for politic
and worldly ends, to restrain the Clergy of that Church from marriage, because
that having Wives and Children, they would be more obnoxious to their natural
Princes, and not depend so much as now, on the Sea of Rome Hist. Council. Trid.
l.
. But on the other side, the Greeks, the Melchites, and the Maronites, (which
are names of several Churches of the East) neither deny Ordination unto married
men, or force them to abstain from the use of their Wives when they are in
Orders Brerewoods Enquiries.
. The Russes and Arminians admit none but married men into the Priesthood; the
Iacobites and Nestorians allow of second and third marriages in those of their
Clergy; as also do the Indians and Christians under Pr^ster John, the Patriarck
being first sued to, for a dispensation. In Germany, when this yoke was first
laid upon them by Pope Gregory the Seventh, the Clergy generally opposed,
stiling that Pope, Hominem plane haereticum and vesani dogmatis Schaf^aburgens.
hist. Rer. Germ.
, an Arant Heretic, and the Broacher of a mad opinion. In Italy it was taught
by Panormitanus, Votum non esse de essentia Sacramenti Panormitan. de Cler.
Conjugar.
, That the vow of single life was not essential unto Orders. How late it was
before the Priests of England could be brought to forsake their Wives, and what
embroilments have been raised in the Church about it, Henry of Huntingdon, and
others of our Ancient Writers do declare at large? Pope Innocent the Third
first settled Transubstantiation in the Church of Rome; a word not known unto
the Fathers in the Primitive times, nor any of the old Grammarians, and
Professors of the Latin tongue. But the Armenians do reject it as an unsound
Tenet Brerewoods Enquiries.
; and so, as I conjecture, did the Egyptian, Maronite, and the Habbassine
Churches, who neither do allow of the Reservation, nor the Elevation of the
Host (as the Romanists call it) which are the Pages or attendants of that
Popish Error. And in the Church of Rome it self, it was opposed by Bertram,
Berengarius, and Basilius Monachus; as afterward by the Pauperes de Lugduno,
the Albigenses, Hussites, Wiclivists, and their descendents, to the time when
first Luther writ. The taking of the Cup in the holy Sacrament from the
Lay-Communicant, and thereby sacrilegiously robbing him of the one half of his
birthright, crept unawares upon the Church, by a joint negligence, as it were,
both of Priest and People: But so, that it was still retained by the Eastern
Churches; claimed, and accordingly enjoyed by the Albigenses, and their
followers; and so tenaciously adhered unto by the Bohemians (where the Hussites
had their first original) that in small time they got the names of Calistini
Hist. Council. Trid. l. 1.
, and Sub utraques, from their participating of the Cup, and communicating
under both kinds, when none else durst do it. And this they did in so great
numbers, that Cochlaeus, one of their greatest Adversaries, relates that Thirty
thousand of them did assemble together at one time, to receive the Sacrament,
under both kinds. The fire of Purgatory has for a long time warmed the Popes
Kitchen, and kept the Pot boiling for the Monks and Friars: But there is no
such fire acknowledged by the Greeks and Moscovites, nor by the Melchites,
Iacobites, Armenian, and Egyptian Christians Brerewoods Enquiries*
, nor by the Waldenses, Hussites, and their Descendents. The Worshipping of
Images has not only been practiced, but enjoined by the Church of Rome, ever
since the second Nicene Council: But the Christians of St. Thomas (so they call
the Indians) admit no Images at all to be set up in their Churches Id. ibid.
; The Grecians, Moscovites, and Ethiopians, though they admit of Painted
Images, yet allow not of the Carved, and forbid the worshipping of both. The
Church of Rome has long time used Auricular Confession as a kind of
State-picklock, and opening therewith the Cabinet-Counsels of the greatest
Kings, and laid it as a burden upon the conscience of the penitent sinner; But
the Nestorians, and the Iacobites, never did enjoin it themselves, or approved
it in them that did; And though the Greek Church still retains the use of
Confession (of the right use whereof we shall speak hereafter) yet such a
rigorous pressing of it, as our Masters in the Church of Rome have been used
unto, they allow not of.

These are some few of many Errors, which have been taught and patronized in
the Church of Rome; which yet were constantly opposed and condemned by others,
in the East and South: As on the other side, those Churches of the East and
South, and such as in the West did gainsay the same, had their several Errors,
which never could find entertainment in the Church of Rome. Insomuch, as one
might safely say of Theological truths, as was once said of Philosophical, viz.
Though they may not possibly be found all at once together in a National or
Particular Church; yet they are all preserved in the Universal. And it is the
Universal Church, or the Church Essential, not any Topical Church whatever,
which is free from Error.

This being granted (as I think it is proved sufficiently) that the Church
Essential cannot fall into any Error, which is destructive of divine and
salvifical truth; We will next see, whether, and if at all, how far this
privilege may be extended to the Representative. For being it is impossible for
the whole Church, the diffusive Body, to meet together in one place, for the
composing of such Differences, and suppressing such Heresies, as may
occasionally arise in some part thereof, it has been found expedient in all
former ages, to delegate some choice men out of the particulars, which being
met, should represent the whole Body Collective, and in the name of those that
sent them, agree amongst themselves what was fit to be done. These Meetings
were called General Councils: Concilia, a conciliando, from reconciling and
attoning such material differences, as did disturb the public peace; and
general, in relation unto National and Provincial Councils, assembled on
occasions of more private nature. From the Apostles times did this use
continue. Who on the dissension raised by some which came down from Judea, and
mingled Circumcision and the Law of Moses Acts 18.1, 5.
, with the Gospel of Christ, did meet together to consider and determine of it.
And having resolved upon the point, they sent their Decretory Epistle unto all
the Churches, requiring their obedience and conformity to that resolution,
which on debate amongst themselves, and by the guidance and assistance of the
Holy Ghost Ibid. v. 28.
, had been made therein.

This, as it was the first General Council of the Church of Christ, so was it
the model also of all those that followed; and of this Council it is certain,
that it could not err; Partly, because composed for the most part of the Lords
Apostles, but principally, because guided and directed by the Spirit of Truth,
who had the supreme managing of the Action. But this we cannot say of those
General Councils which after were assembled on the like occasions* For though
the Church essential might delegate her power unto those Commissioners whom she
employed at such Assemblies; yet could she not also import her Privilege. And
for the Members who convened, they neither were endued with a like measure of
the Spirit, as the Apostles were possessed of; nor sure infallibly of such
assistance from the Holy Ghost, as he vouchsafed to them in that great affair;
and therefore could not warrantably presume of the like freedom from error,
which that first General Council might lay claim unto. Augustine has resolved
it so against Cresconius, Non debet se Ecclesia Christo praeponere, cum ille
semper veraciter judicet, Ecclesiastici autem judices plerumque falluntur
August. Cont. Crescon. l. 2.27.
, The Church (says he) ought not to prefer her self before Christ, ( i. e.
Before Christ speaking in his Gospel) considering that he always judges
according to truth, but Ecclesiastical Judges being men, are ofttimes deceived.
And so it is resolved by the Church of England, who has declared, That for as
much as General Councils be Assemblies of men, whereof all be not governed by
the Spirit, and Word of God, they may err, and sometimes have erred in things
appertaining unto God Artic. of Rel. 21. An. 1562.
. A possibility then there is in the judgment of the Church of England, That
General Councils may err in the things of God; (whether in points of Faith, or
not, there is nothing said:) For being the Conveners are no more than men, men
subject, as all others are, to Humane affections, and biased many times by
their private interesses, it cannot be, but such a possibility may be well
supposed. And a declaration there is also, that some General Councils have
actually erred, as did the second Nicene in the matter of Images; for which it
stands censured by the Bishops of France and Germany, in the Synod held at
Franckford, under Charles the Great An. 794.
.

Which notwithstanding, such and so sacred is the name of a General Council, if
truly such, that is to say, if it be lawfully called, and rightly constituted,
That the determinations of it are not rashly to be set at naught, or wilfully
opposed, or scornfully slighted, it being the Supreme Tribunal of Christ on
Earth: For since the Lord was pleased so graciously to promise, That when two
or three were gathered together in his name, he would be in the midst of them
Matthew. 18.20.
, It may be piously inferred in Pope Celestines words, Cum nec tam brevi numero
Spiritus defit, quanto magis eum interesse credamus turbae convenientem in unum
sanctorum Epl. Celest. P. R. ad Synod. Ephesians.
; If the Spirit (says he) be not wanting to so small a number, how much rather
ought we to believe, that he vouchsafes to be present with a great multitude of
good and godly men convened together. He that hears you, hears me, and he
that despises you, despises me Luke 1^*16.
, said Christ himself also unto his Apostles, and in them unto their Successors
in his holy Ministry.

May it not piously be inferred from those words of Christ, as did some of the
Ancients in an African Synod, to be a very gross absurdity for a man to think,
That God would give an understanding, and discerning Spirit to particular men,
Et sacerdotibus in Concilium congregatis denegare Epi. Synod. Afr. ad Celest.
, and not afford it to be a company of godly Bishops met together in counsel?
And reason good. For as many eyes see more than one, and the united judgments
of learned men assembled together, carry more authority in Natural or Political
things than of some single persons only; so questionless the joint prayers of
many devout and godly men prevail more with God, for the assistance of his
Spirit in their consultations, than any private man can challenge or presume
upon, when points of Faith, and matters appertaining to the service of God, are
to be debated.

Upon these grounds, from the Apostles times to these, the Church has
exercised a power in her Representatives, of settling such affairs as concerned
the public; whether it were, that some new controversy did arise in the
points of Faith, or an emergent Heresy was to be suppressed; or that some Text
of holy-Scripture, which Heretics had wrested to their private ends, was to be
expounded; or finally, that the worshipping of God the Lord, in the beauty of
holiness, did require it of them. Nor was it only exercised by the Church de
facto, but de jure too. And so it is resolved by the Church of England, in her
Twentieth Article; the first and last expressly, the second upon strong and
necessary consequence. The Church has power to decree Rites or Ceremonies, and
authority in Controversies of Faith: And yet it is not lawful for the Church to
ordain any thing that is contrary to the Word of God; neither may it so expound
one place of Scripture, that it be repugnant to another Artic. of Rel. 20. An.
1562.
. Wherefore, although the Church be a witness, and a keeper of holy Writ; yet
as it ought not to decree any thing against the same, so besides the same ought
it not to enforce any thing to be believed as necessary to salvation. So stands
the Article in the very Acts and Records of the Convocation, An. 1562. where by
the way, the Book of Articles being Reprinted in Latin, An. 1571. when the
Puritan Faction did begin to show it self in its colors, the first clause
touching the authority of the Church, in Controversies of Faith, and in
Decreeing Rites and Ceremonies, was clean omitted, and stands so maimed in the
Book called The Harmony of Confessions for the Protestant and Reformed
Churches: According to which false and corrupted Copies (I know not by what
indirect means, or by whose procurement) it was so Printed too at Oxon, An.
1636. when the Grandees of that Faction did begin to put forth again. But to
proceed.

The Church or Body Collective of the people of God, having devolved this Power
on her Representatives, does thereby bind her self to stand to such
Conclusions as by them are made; till on the sight of any inconvenience which
does thence arise, or upon notice of some irregularity in the form and manner
of proceeding, she do again assemble in a new Convention, review the Acts
agreed on in the former Meeting, and rectify what was amiss, by the Word of
God. And this is that which St. Augustine averreth against the Donatists, men
apt enough to fly in the Churches face, if any thing were concluded or agreed
upon against their Tenets. Concilia quae per singulas provincias fiunt,
plenariorum Conciliorum autoritati cedere, ipsaque plenaria saepe priora a
posterioribus emendari, cum aliquo experimento aperitur quod clausum erat, and
cognoscitur quod latebat August. de Baptism. Cont. Donat. l. 2. c. 3.
, Provincial Councils, says the Father, ought to submit unto the General: And
of the Generals themselves, the former are oftentimes corrected by some that
follow, when any thing is opened which before was shut, or any truth made
known, which before was hidden. For otherwise it was not lawful, nor allowable
to particular men, to hold off from conformity to the public Order which had
been settled in the Church, nor to make public opposition unto her conclusions;
which, as the late most Reverend Father in God, the Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury very well resolves it, Are with all submission to be observed by
every Christian Confer. with Fisher, p. 55, 56. and in the large Answer, p. 229.
(that is, as he expounds himself in another place) to have external obedience
yielded to it at least, where Scripture or evident demonstration do not come
against it. And this has been the judgment of the purest times, and the
practice of the best men for the times they lived in: For thus said Constantine
the Emperor to the point in hand, Quicquid in sanctis Episcoporum Conciliis
decernitur, etc Eusebius. de vit. Constant. l. 3. c. 18.
, Whatsoever is decreed in the holy Councils of Bishops, ought wholly to be
attributed to the Will of God. More plainly Martianus Caesar, Injuriam eos
facere Reverendissimae Synodi judicio qui semel judicata in dubium vocent In
Actis Synodi Chalcedonens.
That they commit a great affront against the dignity and judgment of the most
Reverend Council, who shall presume to call in question what is there
determined. Which words of his are well enough allowed by Doctor Whitakers
Whitak. Cont. 1. qu. 5. cap 6.
, if understood of those things only (as they ought to be) which are
determined according to the Word of God. St. Augustine to this purpose also,
Insolentissimae est insaniae, etc August. Epl. 118. c. 5.
. It is, says he, an insolent madness for any man to dispute, whether that be
to be done, or not, which is determined to be done, and therefore usually is
done, by the whole Catholic Church of Christ. St. Bernard also thus for the
darker times, Quae major superbia, etc Bern. Ser. 3. de Resurrect.
. What greater pride than that one man should prefer his own private judgment
before the judgment of the Church? Tanquam ipse solus Spiritum Dei habeat, as
if he only were possessed of the Spirit of God. And this holds also good in
National and Provincial Councils, which being the full Representative of the
Church of that State or Nation, has power sufficient to compose such
controversies as do arise amongst themselves, and to require obedience of the
Represented, according to the limitations laid down before in the case of
Ecumenical or General Councils.

The practice of all times and Nations make this plain enough; in which, many
several Heresies have been concluded against, as in that of Milevis, wherein
the Pelagians were condemned, Anno 416. Matters of Faith have been resolved on,
as in the third of Toledo, Anno 589. wherein many Anathemaes were thundered out
against the Arians; and finally, Constitutions made for regulating the whole
Body of Christian people in the worship of God, as in the General Code of the
African Councils. Or were there no Record thereof in the times foregoing, yet
may we find this power asserted in these later days, and that by some of the
most eminent Doctors of the Reformed Churches. For the Divines of the Classis
of Delph, assembled amongst others in the Synod of Dort, do declare expressly,
Ordinem nullum, nullam pacem in Ecclesia Dei esse posse, etc Act. Syn.
Dord^c^b^. p. 94, 95.
. That there would be no peace, nor order in the Church of God, if every man
were suffered to Preach what he listed, without being bound to render an
account of his doctrine, and submitting himself unto the judgment and
determination of Synodical meetings. Why so? For if Paul and Barnabas, say
they, being endued with the same Spirit, as the rest of the Apostles were
endued withal, were content to go unto Jerusalem to know the judgment of the
rest in the point then questioned: Quanto aequius est ut Pastores alii qui
Apostoli non sunt, hujusmodi Synodicis Conventibus se subjiciant; How much more
fitting must it be for other Ministers, which are no Apostles, to captivate
their own judgments unto that of a public Synod. Nor was the Synod it self
less careful to provide for her own authority, than the Delphenses were to
promote the same; And thereupon decreed in the close of all, Abdicandos esse
omnes ab officiis suis, etc Ib. page 324.
. That every man should be deprived as well of Ecclesiastical as Scholastical
Offices, who did not punctually submit to the Acts of the Synod; and that no
man should be admitted to the Ministry for the time to come, who refused to
subscribe unto the doctrine which was there declared, and Preach according to
the same. And in pursuance of this final determination, no fewer than Two
hundred of the opposite party, who did refuse to yield conformity to the Acts
thereof, were forthwith banished the Country Synodal. Remonst. in Praefat.
: A Proclamation following in the Rear from the Civil Magistrate, That no man
should presume to afford them any help or maintenance, during that miserable
exile. Whether this were not too severe, I regard not here.

This is enough to show, that National or Provincial Councils do still claim a
power in handling, and determining controversies touching points of Faith; and
that they challenge an obedience to their Resolutions, of all which live within
the bounds of their jurisdiction, without which all Synodical meetings were but
vain and fruitless.

Nor has the Church only an especial power in determining of controversies
raised within her, according to the Word of God; but so to explicate and
interpret the Word of God, that no controversy may arise about it for the time
to come. Four Offices there are which the Church performs in reference to the
holy Scriptures.

The first, Tabellionis, of a Messenger or Letter-Carrier, to convey it to us;
Quid enim est Scriptura tota nisi Epistola omnipotentis Dei ad Creaturam suam
Greg. in Epl. l. 4. ep. 48.
, says St. Gregory, What else is the whole Scripture, but a Letter or Epistle
from Almighty God unto his Creature? and by whose hands does he convey this
Letter to us, but by the Ministry of his Church?

The next is Vindicis, of a Champion to defend it in all times of danger from
the attempts and machinations of malicious Heretics, and such corruptions of
the Text, as possibly enough might have crept into it, in long tract of time.
The Jews since our Redeemers time, had falsified some places of the Old
Testament, and expunged others, which spoke expressly of Christ's coming:
Delentes namque literas inficiati sunt Scripturam Chrysostom. in Philip. c. 3.
Homil. 11.
, as we find in Chrysostom. The like says Athanasius of their falsifications,
Tam manifestis Scripturis and de Christo Prophetiis excaecavit Satanas
Judaeorum oculos, etc. Ut talia testimonia falsa Scriptione falsarent Athanas.
advers. Iudaeos.
. The Arians stand convicted of the like attempt, who had expunged ou^ of all
their Bibles these words of St. John, Deus est Spiritus, John 14.24. because
they seemed to prove the Deity of the Holy Ghost; and that not out of their own
Bibles only, but out of the Public Bibles also of the Church of Millain Ambr.
de Sp. Sanct. l. 3. c. 11.
, Et fortasse hoc etiam in orient fecistis; and probable enough it was, that
they had done the same in the Eastern Churches says St. Ambrose of them. But
such a vigilant and careful eye did the Church keep over them, that their
corruptions were discovered, and the Text restored again to its first
integrity. The like may also be affirmed of such corruptions as casually had
crept into the Text of holy Scripture, by the negligence of the Transcribers,
and mistakes of Printers: Which the Church no sooner did observe (as observe
them she did) but they were rectified by comparing them with such other Copies
as still continued uncorrupted. Of which St. Augustine tells us thus,
Corrumpi non possunt, etc August. Cont. Faust. Man. l. 32. c. 16.
. The Scriptures (says he) cannot be corrupted, because they are in the hands
of so many persons: And if any one has dared to attempt the same, Vetustiorum
codicum collatione confutabatur, he was confuted by comparing them with the
elder Copies.

The third Office is Praeconis, of a Publisher or Proclaimer of the Will of God
revealed in Scripture, by calling on the people diligently to peruse the same,
and carefully to believe and practice what is therein written. And this is that
whereof St. Augustine speaks in another place, saying, Non crederem Evangelio
nisi me Ecclesiae Catholicae moveret autoritas Id. Cont. Fund. l. 1. c. 5.
, i. e. That he being then a Novice in the Schools of Christ, had not given
credit to the Gospel, unless the authority of the Catholic Church had moved
him to it.

The fourth and last Office is Interpretis, of an Interpreter or Expounder of
the Word of God, which in many places are so hard to be understood, that
Ignorant and unstable men, may, and do often wrest them to their own
destruction 2 Pet. 3.16.
, who therefore are to have recourse to the Priests of God, whose lips preserve
knowledge, and from whose mouth the people are to take the explication of the
Law of God. But being it happens many times that the Priests and Ministers
themselves do not agree upon the sense of holy Scripture, and that no small
disturbance has been raised in the Church of Christ, by reason of such
different Interpretations as are made thereof, every one making it to speak in
favor of his own opinion; the Body of the Church assembled in her
Representatives, has the full power of making such Interpretation of the
places controverted, as may conclude all parties in her Exposition: Both
Protestants and Papists do agree in this; not all, but some of each side, and
no mean ones neither. Sacrae Scripturae sensus nativus and indubitatus, ab
Ecclesia Catholica est petendus Petr. a Soto, Assert Cath. de Eccle.
; so said Petrus a Soto, for the Papist. The proper and undoubted sense of the
holy Scripture, is to be sought (says he) from the Catholic Church; which is
indeed the general opinion of the Roman Schools. And to the same effect, says
Luther for the Protestant Doctors, De nullo privat^ homine nos certos esse
habeant necne revelationem Patris, Ecclesiam unam esse de qua non liceat
dubitare Luth. ap. Bellarm. de verb. Dei. l. 1.5.
; We cannot be assured, said he, of private persons, whether or not they have a
revelation from the Father of Truth; it is the Church alone, whereof we need
make no question. Which words, considering the temper of the man, and how much
he ascribed to his own spirit in expounding Scripture, may serve instead of
many testimonies from the Protestant Writers, who look with reverence on him as
the first Reformer. This also was the judgment of the Ancient Fathers, St.
Augustine thus, We do uphold the truth of Scripture, when we do that which the
Universal Church commands, recommended by the authority of holy Scripture:
And for as much as the Scriptures cannot deceive us, a man that would not
willingly err in a point of such obscurity (as that then in question) ought to
enquire the Churches judgment August. Cont. Cre^^on. l. 1. c. 33.
. With him agrees St. Ambrose also, who much commends the Emperor Gratian, for
referring the interpretation of a doubtful Text, unto the judgment of his
Bishops convened in Council. Ecce quid statuit Imperator? Noluit injuriam
facere sacerdotibus, ipsos interpretes constituit Episcopos Ambr.
; Behold, says he, what the good Christian Emperor did ordain therein? Because
he would not derogate from the power of the Bishops, he made them the
Interpreters. Thus Innocent, one of the Popes, does affirm in Gratian, Facilius
inveniri quod a pluribus senioribus quaeritur Distinct. quin^a cap de quibus.
, i. e. The meaning of the Scripture is soonest found when it is sought of many
Presbyters or Elders convened together. And reason good. For seeing, that no
prophecy of Scripture is of any private interpretation, because it came
originally from such holy Men who spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost 2
Pet. 1.20, 21.
; It is not subject to the humor of a private spirit, but to be weighed and
pondered by that public Spirit which God has given unto his Church, which he
has promised to conduct in the ways of truth, and to be with her always to the
end of the world. Not that we do exclude any private man from handling of the
holy Scripture, if he come sanctified and prepared for so great a work, if he
be lawfully ordained or called unto it, and use such helps as are expedient and
necessary to inform his judgment; nor that we give the Church such a supreme
power, as to change the sense and meaning of the holy Scriptures, according as
her self may vary from one opinion to another in the course of times.

This is indeed the monstrous Paradox of Cusanus, who tells us, That the
Scripture is fitted to the time, and variously to be understood, so that at one
time it is expounded according to the present fancy of the Church, and when
that fancy is changed, that then the sense of Scripture may be also changed
Card. Cusa^. Epl. 2. and 7.
; and that when the Church does change her judgment, God does change his also.
And this I call a monstrous Paradox, as indeed it is; in that it does not only
assubject the truth of Scripture, but even the God of truth himself, to the
Churches pleasure.

How much more piously has the Church of England determined in it? who though
it do assert its own power in Expounding Scripture, yet does it with this wise
and Religious Caution, That the Church may not so expound one place of
Scripture, that it be repugnant to another Articl. 20. An. 1562.
. Within which bounds, if she contain herself, and restrain her power, no doubt
but she may use it to the honor of God, the settling of a Public Peace in all
matters controverted, and the content and satisfaction of all sober Christians.

The last part of the Churches power consists in the decreeing of Rites and
Ceremonies, for the more orderly officiating of Gods Public service, and the
procuring of a greater measure of reverence to his holy Sacraments. Of this she
has declared more fully in another place.

First, In relation to it self, to the Churches power, viz. Every particular or
National Church has authority to ordain, change, and abolish Ceremonies or
Rites of the Church, ordained only by man's authority; so that all things be
done to edifying Articl. 34. An. 1562.
. Next, in relation to the people, and their conformity, That whosoever through
his private judgment, willingly and purposely does openly break the Traditions
and Ceremonies of the Church, which be not repugnant to the Word of God, and be
ordained and approved by common authority, ought to be openly reproved, that
others may fear to do the like, as he that offends against the common order
of the Church, and wounds the Consciences of the weaker Brethren.

Which Propositions are so evidently and demonstratively true, according to the
constant practice of approved Antiquity, that he must wilfully oppose the whole
Catholic Church, and all the famous National Churches in the Primitive times,
who does not cheerfully and readily assent unto them. For who can show me any
Council in the former Ages, wherein some Orders were not made for regulating
both the Priest and People in the worship of God; wherein the Church did not
require obedience to her Constitutions, and on defect thereof proceeded not to
some public censure of the party? He must be utterly ignorant of all
Antiquity, and the affairs of holy Church, that makes doubt of this. Nay, of so
high esteem were the Churches Ordinances in matters of exterior order in the
service of God, that they were deemed as binding as the word it self. And so
St. Augustine has resolved it, I^ iis rebus de quibus nihil statuit Scriptura,
mos populi Dei and instituta majorum, pro lege Dei tenenda sunt August. Epl.
118. ad Casulan.
, as he in his Epistle to Casulanus: The customs of the Church, and the
institutes of our forefathers, in things of which the Scriptures have
determined nothing, are to be reckoned and esteemed of, as the Word of God. Our
Savior by his own observing of the feast of Dedication John 10.22.
, being of Ecclesiastical institution, and no more than so, showed plainly what
esteem he had of the Churches Ordinances; and how they were to be esteemed of
by the sons of men. And when St. Paul left this rule behind him, That all
things be done decently, and in order 1 Cor. 14.40.
, think we he did not give the Church authority to proceed accordingly, and out
of this one general Canon to make many particulars? Certain I am, that Calvin
has resolved it so, and he no extraordinary friend to the Churches power. Non
potest haberi quod Paulus hic exigit, nisi additis constitutionibus tanquam
vinculis quibusdam ordo ipse and decorum servetur Calvin. in 1 Cor. c. 14.40.
; That which St. Paul requires, says he, is not to be done without prescribing
Rules and Canons, by which, as by some certain Bonds, both order and decorum
may be kept together. Paraeus yet more plainly, and unto the purpose, Facit
Ecclesiae potestatem de ordine and decoro Ecclesiastico libere disponendi and
leges ferendi Paraus in locum.
; By this, says he, does the Apostle give authority to the Church of Corinth
(and in that to other Churches also) of making Laws for the establishing of
decency and order in the Church of Christ. And Musculus, though he follow the
citing of this Text by Eckius, in justification of those unwarrantable Rites
and Ceremonies, Quibus Religionis nostrae puritas polluta esset, with which the
purity of Religion had been so defiled; Muscul. in locum.
yet he allows it as a rule for the Church to go by, Vt quae l^gitime and
necessario gerenda sunt in Ecclesia, That all those things which lawfully and
necessarily may be done in the Church, should be performed with decency and
convenient order. So that we see the Church has power to decree Rites and
Ceremonies in things that appertain to order, decency, and uniformity in Gods
public service; and which is more, a power of making Laws and Canons to
enforce conformity to the same; and that too (which is most of all) in the
opinion of those men, which were no great admirers of the Churches customs, and
looked not so much on the Primitive, as the present times.

Nor is this only the opinion of particular men, but the declared judgment of
the eldest Churches of the Reformation. The Augustane Confession published in
the name of all the Protestants, and only countenanced and allowed of by
Imperial Edict, not only does ordain those ancient usages to be still retained
in their Churches, which conduce to decency and order in the service of God,
and may be kept in force without manifest sin Confess. Augustan. Art. 15.
: But it resolves, Peccare eos qui eum scandalo illos violant, etc. That they
are guilty of sin who infringe the same, and thereby rashly violate the peace
of the Church. And amongst those by them retained, are all the holy days and
fasts observed in the Church of England, kneeling at the Communion, the Cross
in Baptism, a distinct kind of habit for the Ministration, and diverse others;
which by retaining, they declare to be free from sin, but those men to be
guilty both of sin and scandal, who wilfully refuse to conform unto them. The
Bohemians in their Confession go as high as this, Humanos ritus and
consuetudines quae nihil pietati adversantur, in publicis conventibus servanda
esse Conf. Bohem. Art. 15.
; i. e. That all Rites and Customs of Humane (or Ecclesiastical) Institution,
which are not contrary unto Faith and Piety, are still to be observed in the
public meetings of the Church. And still (say they) we do retain many ancient
Ceremonies, as prescribed Fasts, Morning, and Evening Prayer on all days of the
week, the Festivals of the Virgin Mary, and the holy Apostles. The Churches of
the Zuinglian and Calvinian way, as they have stripped the Church of her ancient
Patrimony, so have they utterly deprived her of her ancient Customs; not
thinking their Religion plain enough, till they left it naked; nor themselves
far enough from the pride of Rome, till they had run away from all Primitive
decency. And yet the Switzers or Helvetian Churches, which adhere to Zuinglius,
observe the Festivals of the Nativity, Circumcision, Passion, Resurrection, and
Ascension, of our Lord and Savior; as also of the coming of the Holy Ghost
Confess. Helvet. Artic. 24.
. And those of the Genevian platform, though they have utterly exploded all the
ancient Ceremonies, under the color of removing Popish Superstitions, yet they
like well enough of others of their own devising; and therefore do reserve a
power, as appears by Calvin Calvin. in 1 Cor. 14.40.
, of settling orders in their Churches, to which the people shall be bound (for
he calls them by the name of vincula quaedam) to conform accordingly.

By which we see, that there has been a fault on both sides in the point of
Ceremonies; the Church of Rome enjoining some, (and indeed too many) Quae
pietati adversantur, which were repugnant to the rules of Faith and Piety, and
therefore not to be retained without manifest sin, as the Augustane and
Bohemian Confessions do expressly say; and the Genevians either having none at
all, or such as altogether differ from the ancient Forms.

Against these two extremes, I shall set two Rules, whereof the one is given in
terminis by the Church of England, the other by an eminent and renowned Member
of it. The Church declares her self in the point of Ceremonies, but adds
withal, That it is not lawful for the Church to ordain any thing that is
contrary to the Word of God Artic. of Relig. An. 1562. Art. 20.
. That makes directly against those of the Church of Rome, who have obtruded
many Ceremonies on the Church of Christ, plainly repugnant to the Word, and
therefore not to be observed without deadly sin. The other Rule is given by our
Learned Andrews, and that relates to those of the opposite faction. Every
Church (says he) has power to begin a custom, and that custom power to bind
her own children to it; Provided (that is the Rule) that her private customs do
not affront the general, received by others B. Andr. of the Resurrection, Sermon.
13.
, the general Rites and Ceremonies of the Catholic Church, which binding all,
may not be set light by any. And this he does infer from a Rule in the
Mathematics, that Totum est majus sua part, that the whole is more
considerable than any part; and from another Rule in the Morals also, that it
is, Turpis pars omnis toti non congrua, an ugly and deformed part which agrees
not with the whole. So than according to the judgment of this Learned Prelate,
the customs of particular Churches have a power of binding, so they run not
cross against the general.

First, Binding in regard of the outward man, who if he wilfully refuse to
conform unto them, must, though unwillingly, submit to such pains and
penalties, as by the same power are ordained for those who contemn her
Ordinances. And they are binding too, in regard of Conscience, not that it is
simply and absolutely sinful not to yield obedience, or that the Makers of
those Laws and Ordinances can command the Conscience ( Non ex sola legislatoris
voluntate, sed ex ipsa legum utilitate Stapl. Cont. 5. de potest. ecclesiae.
Qu. 7 Art. 2.
, as it is well resolved by Stapleton) but because the things which they
command are of such a nature, that not to yield obedience to them, may be
contrary unto Justice, Charity, and the desire we ought to have of procuring
the common good of all men, amongst whom we live Field. of the Church, l. 4. c.
33.
, of which our Conscience would accuse us in the sight of God, who has
commanded us to obey the Magistrates, or Governors, whom he has set over us,
in things not plainly contrary to his written Word.

To bring this business to an end, in points of Faith and Moral Duties, in
Doctrines publicly proposed as necessary in the way of Salvation, we say as
did St. Ierom in another case, Non credimus quia non legimus Hieron. adv.
Helvidium.
, We dare not give admittance to it, or make it any part of our Creed, because
we see no warrant for it in the Book of God. In matters of exterior Order in
the Worship of God, we say as did the Fathers in the Nicene Council Council.
Nicen. Can. 6.
, (...), Let ancient customs be of force, and prevail amongst us, though we
have no ground for it in the Scripture but this general warrant, That all
things be done decently, and in order, as St. Paul advised. They that offend on
either hand, and either bring into the Church new Doctrines, or cast out of the
Church her ancient and approved Ceremonies, do violate that Communion of Saints
which they ought to cherish; and neither correspond with those in the Church
Triumphant, nor such as are alive in the Churches Militant.

Of which Communion of the Saints I am next to speak, according to the course
and method of the present Creed.

ARTICLE X. Of the Tenth Article OF THE CREED, Ascribed to St. SIMON ZELOTES.
(...) (i. e.) Sanctorum Communionem, Remissionem peccatorum. (i. e.) The
Communion of Saints, The forgiveness of Sins.
CHAP. IV. Of the Communion which the Saints have with one another, and with
Christ their Head. Communion of Affections infers not a community of Goods
and Fortunes. Prayers to the Saints, and Adoration of their Images, an ill
result of this Communion.
NExt to the clause, touching the nature and authority of the Catholic Church,
follows in order a recital of the principal benefits which are conferred upon
the Members of that Mystical Body; Two in this life, and two in that which is
to come. Those in this life, are first, that most delightful Fellowship and
Communion which the Saints have with one another, and with Christ their Head;
and secondly, That forgiveness and remission of all their sins, as well actual
as original, which Christ has purchased for them by his death and passion, and
by the Ministry of the Church is confirmed unto them. Those in the world to
come, are the fruits of these, that is to say, A Resurrection of the Body, held
by the chains of sin in the shades of death; and a more full Communion with the
Saints departed, than in this life can be enjoyed; that Fellowship which we
have with them, being here but inchoate and imperfect, there complete and
absolute. Of these, the first is the Communion which the Saints have with one
another, and with Christ their Head; whereof, before I shall discourse, as it
lies before me, I shall first take the words asunder, and show what is the
true meaning of the word communio; then who they be that are presented to us by
the name of Saints. First, for the word communio, it signifies that sacred
action in which the faithful do communicate of the Body and Blood of Christ in
the holy Eucharist. Thus Hugo Cardinalis has it, Post hoc dicatur communio,
quae appellatur, ut omnes communicemus Hugo Card. in Speculo Ecclesiae.
, i. e. After this let the communion be said, so called, because all should
communicate, or, let it be so said, That all my communicate. Micrologus before
him to the same effect, Non potest proprie dici communio Microl. de Eccl.
observat.
, etc. It cannot properly be called a Communion, unless many do receive
together. Cassiodorus before either in his Tripartite History, Stant rei, and
velut in lamentationibus constituti, and cum sacra celebratio fuerit adimpleta
communionem non recipiant Histor. Trip. l. 9. c. 35.
, i. e. They which lay under the Churches censures, stood a far off full of
great heaviness and lamentation, and when the service was concluded, received
not the Communion; but when they had fulfilled the course of their penance, Cum
populo communionem participant, they were then suffered to communicate with the
rest of the people. More ancient than them all, is, that Dionysius (whether the
Areopagite, or not, I dispute not here) who wrote the Books De Hierarchia
Caelesti and Ecclesiastica, in whom we do not only find the name, but the
reason of it. Dignissimum hoc Sacramentum, etc Dionys. de Hierarch. Eccles.
. Most worthy (says he) is this Sacrament, and far to be preferred before any
other; and for that cause it is deservedly, and alone, ( Merito and
singulariter, says the Latin Copies) called the Communion. For although every
Sacrament aims at this especially, to unite those that are divided, to the Lord
their God: Attamen huic Sacramento Communionis vocabulum praecipue and
peculiariter contingit; yet to this Sacrament, the name of the Communion does
chiefly and properly belong, as that which does more nearly join us unto Christ
our Savior, and entirely unite us unto one another. And so his meaning is
expressed by Pachymeres an old Greek Writer, who has paraphrased on the whole
works of this Dionysius, (...) Pachym. in Dionys. Hier. c. 3.
. Therefore (says he) did Dionysius call it the Communion, because all which
were worthy, did communicate of the holy Mysteries. From which Communion of the
Faithful in those holy Mysteries, not only the profession of the Christian
Faith, but that sweet Fellowship and Conjunction of heart and soul which was
amongst them, got the same name also, and was generally called Communio from
that sacred Action which was most solemnly used amongst them at their public
meetings. In this sense it is used by St. Augustine, saying, Mulier illa est
communionis nostrae August. Ep^. ad Eusebium.
, That the woman (which he there speaks of) was of their Communion. And in
another place to the same effect, Donatus non nisi in sua communione baptismum
esse credit, That Donatus thought that Baptism was only to be had in the
Churches of his Profession Id. in Retract. l. 1. c. 21.
. In the same sense it is used by Jerome, speaking of his relations to the same
St. Augustine. It is not meet, says he, that I who have been trained up in a
little Monastery from my youth till now, Aliquid contra Episcopum Communionis
meae scribere audeam Hieron. inter Epl. August. Epl. 14.
, should presume to write against a Bishop of the same Communion (or
Profession) with me; and such a Bishop, whom I began to love before I knew him.
The like he writes also to Pope Damasus, where saying, that he followed no
chief but Christ, he yet acknowledges, Beatitudini tuae, i. e. Cathedrae Petri
communione cons^cior Id. ad Damasum.
, That he was joined in communion, or in love and fellowship, or consent of
Doctrine and Religion, with his Holiness, or Chair of Peter.

In both acceptions of the word, that is to say, In the communion or
communication of the holy Mysteries, and in that union of affections which
usually is held by those of the same Profession: There is a Communion of the
Saints, whether they be Active or Passive Sancti; whether triumphant in the
Heavens, or finishing their natural course upon the Earth. For the word Sancti
also has its various notions, and must be looked upon in each, or the chief at
lest, before we can proceed to a certain issue. And first, the word Sancti has
been used for those who only have the outward calling, called to be Saints, as
they are styled by the Apostle, Romans 1.7. and 1 Cor. 1.2. Though neither Saints
by the infusion of inherent holiness, nor by the piety and sanctimony of their
lives and actions. In this sense all the Romans and Corinthians, to whom St.
Paul wrote his Epistles, were Saints by calling, or called to this end and
purpose, that they might be Saints, though there were many profane and carnal
persons amongst them. Next it is used for those who are Sancti renovati, Saints
by the renovation of the holy Spirit, by which cooperating in the Laver of
Regeneration, they are washed and sanctified. And such were also some of you,
But ye are washed, but ye are sanctified 1 Cor. 6.11.
, says the same Apostle, that is to say, By the washing of Regeneration, and
renewing of the Holy Ghost, which he has shed abundantly in us Tit. 3.5, 6.
, as himself expounds it. These are Passiv^ Sancti, as before I called them;
because, both in the outward calling, and the effusion of the inward graces of
the Holy Ghost, we are simply passive. But if we do obey that calling, and
manifest the grace which is given unto us by our lives and actions; If from our
hearts we do obey that form of doctrine which has been delivered Romans 6.17, 19.
, and yield our members as servants of righteousness to holiness; then are we
not passive, but active sancti; right Saints indeed, walking in all the
Commandments and Ordinances of the Lord without reproof Luke 1.6.
. And if the fruit be unto holiness, there is no question, but the end thereof
will be life everlasting Romans 6.22.
; when we shall stand before the Throne of the Lord our God, and serve him day
and night in his holy Temple Ap^c. 7.15.
, advanced to those felicities of eternal glory, which is designed by White
Robes, and the Palms of victory, in the Revelation. Never so fully Saints as
then, though we must first be Saints in the Militant Church, before we can be
Saints in the Church Triumphant. But whether it be there or here, a mutual
communion there is always to be held between us; between the Saints upon the
Earth, though Saints by outward calling only, united in the joint
participation of the Word and Sacraments, and the external Profession of the
Faith and Gospel; but more conspicuously between those which are Saints indeed,
not only nominally, but really and truly such, in that harmony of affections
and reciprocal offices of love, which makes them truly one Body of Christ,
though different Members. And a communion there is too of this later kind,
between the Saints upon the Earth, and those which have their consummation in
the Heaven of Glories; who though they have in some part received the promise
Heb. 11.38, 40.
, yet being fellow members of the same, one Body, they pray for, and await our
ransom from this prison of flesh, without which (God has so disposed it) they
should not be made perfect.

Which said, we may now clearly see in what particulars the Communion of
Saints, intended in this Article, does consist especially, which may be easily
reduced unto three heads.

1. A Communion in the Mysteries of our Salvation, by which they are made
members of one another, and of Christ their Head. 2. A Communion of Affections,
expressed in all the acts of love and charity, even to the very communicating
of their lives and fortunes. And 3. A communion of intercourse between the
Saints in Heaven, and those here on Earth, according to the different states in
which God has placed them. All other kinds of Christian Communion, are either
contained in, and under these, or may be very easily reduced unto them.
And first, for the Communion in the Mysteries of our Salvation, and the
benefits which redound thereby to the Church of Christ, St. Paul has told us,
That the Cup of blessing which is blessed in the holy Eucharist, and the Bread
there broken, is the communion of the Body and Blood of Christ 1 Cor. 10.16, 17.
; and that being made partakers of that one Bread, we are thereby made, though
many, to be one Bread also, and one Body, even the Body of Christ; one Bread,
though made of many grains, and one Body, though composed of many members. A
better Paraphrase upon which place of the Apostle, we can hardly find in all
the writings of the Fathers, than that of Cyril. Ut igitur inter nos and Deum
singulos uniret, quamvis corpore simul and anima distemus, modum tamen
adinvenit consilio patris and sapientiae, suae convenientem. Suo enim corpore
credentes per Communionem mysticam benedicens, and secum and inter nos unum nos
corpus efficit, etc Cyril. Alex. Joh. l. 11. c. 26.
. That Christ might unite every one of us, both with our selves, and with God,
though we be distant from each other, both in body and soul, he has devised a
way agreeable to his own Wisdom, and the Counsel of his Heavenly Father. For in
that he blesses them that believe with his own Body, by means of that Mystical
Communion of it, he makes us one body with himself, and with one another. For
who will think them not to be of this Natural union, which be united in one
Christ, by the Union (or Communion) of that one holy Body. For if we eat all of
one Bread, we are all made one Body, in regard Christ may not be dis-joyned nor
divided. In which full passage of the Father, we find an union of the faithful
with Christ their Head, as well as a conjunction with one another, effected by
the Mystical communion of his Body and Blood: A double union first with Christ,
and with each others next as the members of Christ. The union which we have
with Christ, is often times expressed in Scripture, under the figure and
resemblance of the Head and Members; which as they make but one Natural Body,
so neither do they make but one Body Mystical. Know you not (says the Apostle)
that your bodies are the members of Christ, 1 Cor. 6.15. That ye are the body
of Christ, and members in particular, 1 Cor. 12.27. That we are members of his
body, and of his flesh, and of his bones, Ephesians. 5.30. And does not the same
Apostle tell us, That God has given Christ to be head over all things unto his
Church, Ephesians. 1.22. That Christ is the head of the Church, Verse. 23. And that
from this head all the body by joints and bonds, having nourishment ministered,
and knit together, increases with the increase of God, Col. 2.19. Occumenius
hereupon infers, That neither Christ without the Church, much less the
Church without her Christ, but both together so united, make a perfect body.
(...) Oecumen. in Epl. ad Ephesians.
, as that Author has it. Others of more antiquity do affirm the same. For thus
St. Chrysostom, Quidnaem significat panis? Corpus Christi, quid fiunt qui
accipiunt? Corpus Christi Chrysostom. in l. ad Cor. Homil. 27.
. What signifies the Bread? The Body of Christ: What are they made that do
receive it? The Body of Christ. St. Augustine thus, Hunc cibum and potum
societatem vult intelligi corporis and membrorum suorum August. in Joh. Tract.
26.
, i. e. He would have us understand, that this meat and drink, is the
fellowship of his body, and of his members. What? of the members only with one
another. Not only so, but of the fellowship or communion which they have with
him that is their head; who though he be above in the heavenly places, and is
not fastened to his body with any corporal connection, yet he is joined unto it
by the bonds of love, as the same Father has it in another place. Habet
ecclesia caput positum in coelestibus quod gubernat corpus suum, separatum
quidem visione sed charitate annexum Id. ibid.
. St. Cyprian speaks more home than either, both to the matter and the manner
of the union which we have with Christ. Nos ipsi corpus Christi effecti, and
Sacramento and re Sacramenti, capiti nostro conjungineur and unimur Cypr. de
Coc. domini.
. We are then made the Body of Christ, both by the Sacrament, and the grace
represented by it, when we are joined or united unto Christ our Head. Not that
we are not made the members of Christ's Mystical Body, but only by a
participation of the Sacrament of his Body and Blood; but that this Mystical
union and communion which we have with Christ, is most fitly represented by it:
For otherwise St. Paul has told us, That by one Spirit we are all baptized
into that one Body 1 Cor. 12.13.
, and consequently made the members of Christ. According unto that of Divine
St. Augustine, Ad hoc baptisma valet, ut baptizati Christo incorporentur, and
membra ejus efficiantur August. de Bapt. parvulorum.
. To this, says he, avails Baptism, that men being baptized may be
incorporated unto Christ, and made his Members. But this supposes a relation
to the other Sacrament, of which, although they may not actually participate
before they die; yet they have either a desire to it, if they be of age, and a
right or interess in it, if they die in their Baptism; in which respect they
may be said to communicate with the rest of the faithful. Concerning which, the
same St. Augustine has most excellently resolved it thus, Id. in Sermon. ad
Infantes, cited by Bid. ^. l. Cor. 10.
No man in any wise may doubt, but that every faithful man is then made
partaker of Christ's Body and Blood, when in Baptism he is made a member of
Christ: And that he is not deprived of the Communion of that Bread, and that
Cup, although before he either eat of that Bread, or drink of that Cup, he
depart this world, being in the unity of Christ's Body. For he is not deprived
from partaking of the benefit of that Sacrament, so long as he finds in
himself the things (or the res Sacramenti, as St. Cyprian calls it) which the
Sacrament signifies.

As for the Union or Communion which the faithful have with one another, though
that arise upon their first incorporation in Jesus Christ by holy Baptism, yet
is more completely signified, and more fully effected, by that communion which
they have in his Body and Blood. And so St. Cyprian, and St. Augustine, and the
rest of the Fathers do declare most plainly. St. Cyprian, as more ancient,
shall begin the evidence, and be the foreman of the Inquest Cypr. in Epl. ad
Magnum.
. That Christian men are joined together with the inseparable bonds of charity,
the Lords Supper does (says he) declare. St. Augustine generally first, of all
outward Sacraments, In nullum nomen Religionis seu verum seu falsum coagulari
possunt homines, nisi aliquo signaculorum vel sacramentorum visibilium
consortio colligantur, Men (says he) cannot be united into any Religion, be it
true or false, unless they be joined together in the bond of some visible
Sacraments August. Cont. Faust. Man. l. 19. c. 11.
. What he affirms of this particularly, we shall see anon; first taking with
us that of Dionysius, an Ancient Writer doubtless (whosoever he was.) Sancta
illa unius and ejusdem panis and poculi communis, and pacifica distributio,
unitatem illis divinam tanquam una enutritis praescribit Dion^s. de Eccles.
Hier. c. 3.
, that is to say, That holy and peaceable distribution of the same one Bread,
and that common Cup, prescribes to them which are so fed and nourished
together, a most heavenly union. More elegantly in the Greek, (...). Which
Pachymeres the Greek Paraphrast does thus reason for, (...), i. e. Because that
common feeding together with such joint consent, brings to our remembrance
the Lords Supper. Nor does the participation of this blessed Sacrament, produce
an union or communion between them alone, who do receive the same together at
one time and place; but it does join and knit together all the Saints of God,
how far soever they are distant, and scattered far and near upon the face of
the Earth. For therein we profess, that we are all servants in one House, and
resort all to one Table, and feed all of one Spiritual Meat, which is the Flesh
and Blood of the Lamb of God: The Prayers which are used in that holy action,
being so fitted and contrived in all Ancient Liturgies, that they extend not
unto those only which do then communicate, but that they and the whole Church
with them, may by the death and merits of Jesus Christ, and through Faith in
his Blood, obtain remission of their sins, and all other the benefits of his
passion Collect. after the Participation.
; as it is piously expressed in the Liturgy of the Church of England. To this
St. Ierom gives a clear and most ample testimony, who being pressed by John the
then Bishop of Jerusalem (with whom he had some personal quarrels) to go to
Rome, and witness his integrity by communicating in the face of that Church, A
qua videmur communione separari, from whose communion he had seemed to
separate, returns this Answer, Non necesse esse ire tam long, that it was not
needful for him to go so far Hier. advers. Joh. Hieros.
. How so? Et hic in Palestina eodem modo ei jungimur; In viculo enim Bethlehem
Presbyteris ejus, quantum in nobis est communion^ sociamur. For here (says he)
in Palestine, do we hold communion with that Church; and I residing in this
Village of Bethlehem, am joined in the communion with the Priests of Rome. By
which we see, that whosoever does worthily eat the Body of Christ, and drink
his Blood, according to the Institution of our Lord and Savior, communicates
thereby with all Christian men of all Countries and Nations whatsoever; and
that by virtue and effect of the said Communion, they be all knit and joined
together as members of the same one Body, in the bonds of love. And this is
that which is affirmed by St. Augustine, Non mirum si and absentes adsumus
nobis, and ignoti no smet novimus, cum unius corporis membra simus, unum
habeamus caput, una perfundamur gratia, uno pane vivamus, una incedamus via,
eadem habitemus is domo In August. Epl. 33.
, It is no wonder, says the Father, that being absent, we be present together,
and being not acquainted, do know each other; considering that we be the
Members of one Body, have the same one Head, an endowment of the self-same
Spirit, and that we live by one bread, go the same way, and dwell together in
one House. To testify this Communion which they had with each other, by virtue
of the holy Sacrament of the Lords Supper, it was a custom of the Primitive and
Purest times, to send some part of the consecrated Elements unto them which
were absent, and joined not with them in that action: And sometimes for one
Bishop to send to another a Loaf of Bread, as a token of consent in the point
of Faith, and in all brotherly love and concord; which he that did receive it,
if he thought it fitting, might consecrate and use at the Ministration.

Touching the first of these, it was well observed by Irenaeus, that when any
of the Eastern Bishops came to Rome, the Popes thereof which preceded Victor,
did use to send them some of the blessed Sacrament, although they differed in
the observation of the Feast of Easter; whereby a mutual concord and communion
was preserved between them. Of which he writes thus to the said Pope Victor
Eusebius. Eccl. hist. l. 5. c. 24.
, Qui fuerunt ante te Presbyteri, etiam cum non ita observarent, Presbyteris
Ecclesiarum (of the East he means) cum Romam acciderent, Eucharistiam
mittebant.

And of the other, it is said in those Epistles which Paulinus wrote unto St.
Augustine, Panem unum quem unanimitatis indicio misimus charitati tuae, rogamus
ut accipiendo benedicas Paul. in Ep. August. Ep 31.
, i. e. The Loaf of Bread which I have sent unto you as a token of unity, I
beseech you to receive and consecrate. See also to what purpose he sent those
five Loaves, which were designed for the said St. Augustine and Licinius, of
which he speaks in the Six and thirtieth Epistle of that Fathers works; and
that other single Loaf in the Five and thirtieth, where it appears, That the
Loaves so sent and consecrated, were called Eulogia. Hunc panem tu Eulogiam
esse facies dignatione sumendi Id. Epl. Aug. 35.
, i. e. This Loaf, you by your favorable acceptance of it, will make to be an
Eulogia, or the Bread of blessing, or panis benedictus, in the Latin Idiom. So
witnesses Durantes, a late Popish writer, when as this laudable custom had
been much perverted, and that this consecrated Bread (not consecrated for, but
after the communion ended, as it is plainly said by Honorius Augustodunensis
Honor. in gemma animae. c. 66. l. 1.
) was given to such as had not on the Sunday received the Sacrament. Et pro
Communione quae singulis diebus dominicis fieri solebat, statutum est ut
daretur in dominicis diebus Panis Benedictus, sanctae Communionis Vicarius, qui
and Eulogia dicebatur Gul. Durant. Ration. divin. l. 4. c. 53.
. A custom still retained in the Church of France, in which the Bread so
blessed, is called Pain Beni; but whether in any other Churches of the Romish
Communion, that I cannot say.

But to proceed, The second head to which the Communion of Saints is to be
reduced, is that conjunction of Affections, which is, and ought to be between
them, expressed in all the outward signs of love and fellowship, even to the
communication of their lives and fortunes. A thing most visibly discerned in
the Primitive times, when the affections of the faithful were most pure and
prevalent, especially in their salutations, their feasts of love, and other
acts of Christian bounty; and finally, in that pity and compassion which they
showed each other, when the extremity of their affairs did require it of them.

And first, Their Salutations were not only verbal, but accompanied with an
holy Kiss; mention whereof is frequent in St. Paul's Epistles, where he
requires the people unto whom he wrote, to salute one another with an holy
kiss; as Romans 16.16. 1 Cor. 16.20. 1 These. 5.26. With a kiss; that being an
especial way to inflame affections, Et animarum quoque mixturam facere, and
mingle, as it were, the souls of them that love. With an holy kiss; that is, as
Chrysostom expounds it, (...) Chrysostom. in 2 ad Cor. 13.
, not with a treacherous and deceitful kiss, as was that of Judas, nor with a
lustful and lascivious kiss, as was that of Amnon. Which salutation so
enjoined, we find to have continued unto after ages. The Christians of Justin
Martys time, (...) Just. Martyr. in Apol. 22.
, concluding their devotions with an holy kiss. And Athenagoras reports, that
it was punishable in his time by the Churches Canons, (...), if any man gave a
second kiss, in their salutations Athenagor. in legatione.
, because the second kiss might be imputed unto sensuality; which shows that
the salutation of the kiss was still in force. Afterward, on some scandal
which did thence arise, it pleased the Church to take away the outward Ceremony
of this salutation, but to retain the substance and intent thereof, in the
continuance of that harmony and accord of souls, which ought to be between
Professors of the same Religion. For Calvin very well observes, that St. Paul's
purpose was not to oblige us to the very Ceremony, but to excite us only, Ad
fovendum fraternum amorem Calvin.
, To the cherishing of brotherly love and concord, whereof the holy kiss was
nothing but a badge or emblem. And to this head or manner of expression, we may
reduce those lovely names of Fathers, Mothers, Brethren, Sisters, wherewith
they used to salute and call each other. This last objected by Cecilius,
against the Christians of the times in which he lived; as if thereby he could
have proved them guilty of incestuous mixtures. Et se promiscue fratres
appellant and sorores Minut. Felix in Octavio.
, said their witty Adversary. But this as they first learnt from the holy
Apostles, so did still retain it upon very good Reasons, as being all adopted
Children of the same one Father, Professors of the same one Faith, and Coheirs
of the same hopes of Eternal life; Unius Dei parentis omnes, fidei consortes,
spei cohaeredes, as it was well replied by the Christian Advocate.

And for that reverend name of Father and Mother, the younger people used it as
an honorable title due to age, upon the warrant of St. Paul, who advises
Timothy, to entreat the Elder Men as Fathers 1 Timothy 5.1.
, and the Elder Women as Mothers; though otherwise all Brothers and Sisters, in
regard of God their Father Almighty. Such, in a word, were the affections of
the Primitive Saints, that it was one of the principal Queries, which Diognetus
made unto Justin Martyr, (...) Justin. Mart. Epl* ad Diog.
, to know what kind of natural friendship and affection, the Christians bare
to one another. And vide ut se invicem diligunt Tertul. Apol. c. 39.
, in, and before Tertullians time, was one of the expressions which the
Gentiles used to express their wonder, at that integrity and perfection of so
rare a piety, as they observed to be in Christians toward one another. Not to
say more in this particular, we close this point with that which is affirmed by
Cyprian, on the like occasion; Et vix invenio quid prius praedicare debeamus,
eorumne stabilem sidem an individuam charitatem Cypr. Epl. 1.
, that is to say, It is not easy to determine, whether the firmness of their
Faith, or the inseparableness of their Affections, were of the two, the more
praiseworthy.

Next let us look on their (...), or their Feasts of Charity Jude 12.
, as St. Jude has called them, and called them by a name most proper to
express their nature. Coena nostra de nomine rationem suam ostendit, vocatur
(...) Tertul. Apol. c. 39.
, so Tertullian. These, as they were intended to the increase of love amongst
the wealthier, and the relief and comfort of the poorer sort; so were they
celebrated and performed with an equal piety: Begun with Prayer, concluded with
Thanksgiving, continued with frequent readings of the Scripture, and many pious
Hymns being intermingled to the praise of God.

In setting out which Love Feasts, as they spared no costs, because thereby
their poorer Brethren were relieved and cherished; so did they think all gain
which was so expended, (for Lucrum est pietatis nomine sumptum facere, as the
same Author has it) because thereby they kept themselves in a stock of piety.
And yet not thinking this enough, they had their monthly Contributions for
relief of the poor Id. ibid.
. Which as it was cheerfully brought in, so was it carefully expended, in
educating fatherless Children, sustaining old men unfit for labor; in the
repairing of their fortunes whom the Seas had ruined, the ransoming of such
particular persons as were confined unto the Islands, banished unto the Mines,
or locked up in the Common Prisons. No respect had to Countries, and to Kindred
less. This made the man a competent object of their bounty, of the Communion of
their Goods, that he was a Christian. And yet they had an ampler field for this
Christian Piety, than the necessities of private and particular persons; which
was the sending of relief to those National or Provincial Churches, which
either were in want, or in any misery. Such the Collection made at Antioch, for
the poor Brethren of Judea Acts 11.29.
; of the Corinthians, for the Saints which dwelt in Jerusalem 1 Cor. 16.1, 3.
; and to the honor of the Romans, it is recorded by Dionysius the then Bishop
of Corinth, That they did carefully relieve the wants and several necessities
of all other Churches; (...) Eusebius. Eccles. hist. l. 4. c. 3.
, as he in an Epistle unto Soter, the then Pope of Rome; so fully were their
souls united, so excellent was the union or communion which was then amongst
them, that they all suffered in the miseries of the poorest members, and did
accordingly endeavor to relieve and comfort them. Witness their carriage in
that great and dreadful Plague which happened at Alexandria, in the reign of the
Emperor Galienus, in which the love and piety of the Christian people extended
more unto their Brethren, than unto themselves; visiting those whom God had
visited, administering to their necessities when they were yet living, embalming
them with tears when they were departed, and following them with all due
ceremony to the Funeral pile. Insomuch, that even their very enemies could not
but praise that noble act, (...), and magnify that God whom the Christians
worshipped Id. l. 9. c. 7.
.

A needless thing it were to tell, how willingly the faithful of those happy
times used to accompany each other on the stage of death; how frequently they
would make offer of their own lives, to reprieve their Brethren from the
slaughter. A thing not rarely known in those blessed days, in which it pleased
the Lord to set forth unto us the excellency of that communion which ought to
be between the Saints of the most high Ghost; in which he pleased to let us see
for our imitation, how much the love of God, and the Saints of God, could work
upon a soul which was truly Christian. And therefore it was rightly noted by
Tertullian, that as the Gentiles used to say in the way of envy, Vide ut se
invicem diligunt, Look how these Christians love one another; so in the way of
admiration they did use to say, Vide ut pro alterutro mori sunt parati Tertul.
Apol. c. 39.
, See how they are prepared to die for one another also.

And now we have brought this part of the Communion of the Saints of God, which
did consist in the Communication of Affections, unto the highest pitch which it
can attain to. For greater love than this, has no man (says our blessed
Savior) than that a man lay down his life for his friend Joh. 15.13.
. Nor had I said so much of a Theme so common, but that I would fain give my
self a little hope, that by presenting to the sight of this present age, the
piety and eminent affections of the Primitive Christians, it may be possibly
revived and reduced to practice in these decaying times of true Christian
Charity.

But here I would not be mistaken, or thought to be the Author of such wretched
counsels, as under color of Communion to introduce a community; or to
persuade, that by communicating of our goods to the use of others, we should
make them common. Such a Communion as is meant in the present Article, does aim
at nothing less than so sad a ruin, as the devesting of the faithful in the
propriety, and interess of their estates, must needs bring upon them. We leave
this frenzy to the Fratricellians, who first hatched this Cockatrice, and
taught, amongst many other impious and absurd opinions, Nihil proprii habendum
esse, that men were to have nothing in propriety, not so much as wives Prateol.
in Haeres. Fratric.
. But this not getting any ground at the first appearing, was afterward
advanced and propagated by the Anabaptist. Non posse aliquem salvum fieri, nisi
facultates omnes in commune deferat, nihilque proprium posside^t Sleid. Com. l.
, That no man could be saved who brought not all his wealth to the common
treasury, or kept any thing several to himself (though it were his wife) was
then, if never else, esteemed good Christian doctrine, when frenzy, and King
John of Leyden reigned in the City of Munster. And yet as frantic as this
doctrine may be thought to be, it has found Advocates to plead for it, in
these later times, and to bring proofs in maintenance, in defense thereof, both
from the Scripture, and the practice of the Primitive times, as also from the
usage in the state of nature, and the rules of reason.

From Scripture they allege that place of the Acts, where it is said, That the
multitude of them that believed, were of one heart, and of one soul; neither
said any of them that ought of the things which he possessed was his own, but
they had all things common Acts 4.32.
A Text much urged and stood upon by some ancient Heretics, who under color
of these words, maintained a community of all men's estates, admitting none to
their Communion, who had either Wives or Goods in several, to their proper use;
and would needs be called Apostolici August. de haeres. c. 40.
, as the revivers of the true Christian and Apostolic piety. And they might
have some further ground for it, from the best and purest times of the
Christian Church, of which Tertullian says expressly, Indiscreta apud nos
omnia praeter uxores Tert, Apol. c 39.
, That they had all things common except their wives; in which, they differed
from the Gentiles, who held their wives in common, and their goods in several.
Nor was this the continual and general practice of the Gentiles neither, the
Commonwealth of Sparta being a right Commonwealth indeed, wherein community of
all things was established by Original Laws Plutarch. in Licurgo.
, one of the Fundamentals of that Government. And till this Iron-age came in,
as the Poets tell us, there was no such matter as propriety, as Land or Houses;
Communisque prius ceu lumina solis and Aer Ovid. Metam. l. 1.
, The Earth being no less common in the state of nature, before the natural
liberty, and rights of mankind were limited and restrained by the Bonds of
Law, as was the Air they breathed in, or the light of the Sun that shined upon
them. Nor was this natural liberty so wholly abrogated, but that there did
remain some Vestigia of it, amongst the more amicable and intelligent men,
whose reason could not choose but tell them, that where they settled their
affections in a friendly way, they were to interess the party whom they did
affect in a joint participation of their goods and fortunes. For that all
things ought to be common amongst friends (such as all mankind ought to be by
the common principles of nature, and the rules of Reason) was one of the
dictates of Pythagoras, seconded by Tully, not denied by Seneca; besides that
golden saying of Aristotle, (...) Arist. Ethic. l. 7.
, That wheresoever there was friendship, there must be community. But these,
although they seem in show to be several Arguments, may all be satisfied with
one answer, those specially which are borrowed from the practice of the
Primitive and Apostolic Church, and the misunderstood dictates of those old
Philosophers. For where the Scripture says, They had all things common, we are
to understand it (...), and not (...), according to the use and communication,
and not in referenee to the right and original title.

The goods of Christians were in several, as to the right, title, and
possession of them; but common in the merciful inclination of the owner to the
works of mercy. And this appears exceeding plainly by the Text and Story of the
Acts. For the Text says, That no man said of any thing that it was his own, no
not of the things which he possessed; which plainly shows, That the possession
still remained to the proper owner, though he was mercifully pleased to
communicate his goods to the good of others. But this the story shows more
plainly; For what need any of the Possessors of Lands or Houses, have sold
them, and brought the prices of the things which were sold, and laid them down
at the Apostles feet Acts 4.34, 35.
, to be by them distributed to the poorer Brethren, If the poor Brethren might
have carved themselves out of such estates, and entered on them as their own? or
with what color could St. Paul have concealed this truth, and changed this
natural community to a communication ( Charge them which be rich in this world,
says he, that they be willing to communicate 1 Timothy 6.17, 18.
,) a communication merely voluntary, and such as necessarily preserves that
interess which the Communicators have in their temporal fortunes. And so
Tertullian also must be understood; For though it be omnia indiscreta, in
regard of the use, or a communion if you will with the Saints, maintained with
one another in their temporal fortunes; yet was it no community, but a
communication, in reference to that legal interess which was still preserved;
and therefore called no more than rei communicatio, in the words foregoing. The
like may be replied to the other Argument drawn from the quality of friendship,
and the authority of Aristotle, and the rest there named.

That which I have, is properly and truly mine, because descended on me in due
course of Law, or otherwise acquired by my pains and industry; and being mine,
is by my voluntary act made common, for the relief and comfort of the man I
love, and have made choice of for my friend; yet still no otherwise my friends,
but that the right and property does remain in me. Quicquid habet amicus noster
commune est nobis, illius tamen proprium est qui tenet Seneca.
, as most truly Seneca. As for the practice of the Spartans, and that natural
liberty, which is pretended to be, for mankind, in the use of the Creatures:
It is a thing condemned in all the Schools of the Politics Arist. Polit. l. 1.
c. 7.
, and does besides directly overthrow the principles of the Anabaptist, and the
Familist, and their Confederates, who are content to rob all mankind of the
use of the Creatures, so they may monopolize and ingross them all to the use of
the Saints, that is themselves. But the truth is, that these pretenses for the
Saints, are as inconsistent with the Word and Will of God, as those which are
insisted on for mankind in general. For how can this Community of the Saints,
or mankind, agree with any of those Texts of holy Scripture, which either do
condemn the unlawful getting, keeping, or desiring of riches, by covetousness,
extortion, theevery, and the like wicked means to attain the same; or else
commend frugality, honest trades of life, and specially liberality to the poor
and needy? Assuredly, where there is neither meum nor tuum, as there can be no
stealing, so there needs no giving: For how can a man be said to steal that
which is his own; or what need has he to receive that in the way of a gift, to
which he has as good a Title, as the man that gives it?

I shut up all with this determination of the Church of England, which wisely*
as in all things else, does so exclude community of men's goods and substance,
as to require a Christian Communication of, and communion in them. The riches
and goods of Christians (says the Article) are not common, as touching the
right, title, and possession of the same, as certain Anabaptists do falsely
boast; therefore no community Artic. of Rel. 38. An. 1562.
. Notwithstanding every man ought of such things as he possesses, liberally to
give Alms to the poor according to his ability; and there a Communion of the
Saints in the things of this world, a communication of their riches to the
wants of others.

But the main point in this Communion of the Saints, in reference to one
another, concerns that intercourse and mutual correspondency which is between
the Saints, in the Church here Militant, and those which are above in the
Church Triumphant. The Church is of a larger latitude, than the present world:
The Body, whereof Christ is Head, not being wholly to be found on the Earth
beneath, but a good part thereof in the Heavens above. Both we with them, and
they with us, make but one Body Mystical, whereof Christ is Head; but one
Spiritual Corporation, whereof he is Governor. (...) Chrysostom.
, as we read in Chrysostom. And if he be the Head of both, as no doubt he is;
then must both they and we be members of that Body of his; and consequently,
that correspondence and communion must be held between us, which is agreeable
to either in his several place.

So far, I think it is agreed on of all sides, without any dispute. The point
in question will concern, not the quod sit of it, that there is and ought to be
a communion between them and us; but quo modo, how it is maintained, and in
what particulars. And even in this, I think it will be granted on all hands
also, that those above do pray unto the Lord their God for his Church in
general, that he would please to have mercy on Jerusalem, and to build up the
breaches in the walls of Sion, and to behold her in the day of her visitation,
when she is harassed and oppressed by her merciless enemies. How long (say they
in the Apocalypse) O Lord, holy and true, how long do thou not judge and
avenge our blood, on them that dwell upon the earth Apol. 6.10.
? And as they pray unto the Lord to be gracious to us, so do they also praise
his name for those acts of mercy, which he vouchsafes to show to his Church in
general, or any of his servants in particular. The joy that was in Heaven at
the fall of Babylon, which had so long made her self drunk with the blood of
the Saints and Martys Id. c. 18.20.
; and that which is amongst the Angels of Heaven over every sinners that
repents Luke 15.7.
, are proof enough for this, were there no proof else. We on the other side, do
magnify Gods name for them, in that he has vouchsafed to deliver them out of
the bondage of the flesh, to take their souls unto his mercy, and free them
from the miseries of this sinful world; as also for those manifold and
admirable gifts and graces which he has manifested in them, and those examples
of good living which he has pleased to leave us in their lives and actions
Collects for all Saints, and Burial.
: Finally, calling upon God, That we by following their good examples in all
virtuous and godly living, may come to those unspeakable joys which are
prepared for them who unfeignedly love him; that we with them, and they with
us, may have one perfect consummation and bliss, both in body and soul, in his
everlasting and eternal Kingdom. And more than this, we still preserve an
honorable remembrance of them, as men that having fought a good fight against
Sin and Satan, have glorified their Savior in his earthly members; and to the
memory of the principal and most chief amongst them, have set apart some
particuliar days, that so the piety of their lives and conversations might
redound more unto Gods glory, and to the better stirring up of the sons of men
to serve the Lord in righteousness and holiness (as they did before) all the
days of their lives.

This was the judgment and the practice of the best times of the Church, when
superstitious vanities had not yet prevailed; according as I find it registered
in the works of Augustine, Honoramus sane memorias eorum, tanquam sanctorum
hominum Dei, qui usque ad mortem corporum pro veritate certarunt August. de
Civit. Dei. l. 8. c. 27.
. And this they did unto the ends before remembered, Vt sc. ea celebritate Deo
vero gratias de eorum victoriis agamus; and nos ad imitationem talium coronarum
eorum memoriae renovatione adhortemur. Of this, I know no sober man can make
any question, nor do I find it scrupled at by any of the Reformation, who have
not wholly studied Innovations in the things of God.

For my part, I shall venture a little further, and think it no error in
divinity to allow the Saints a little more particular intercession for us, than
possibly has been granted in the Protestant Schools. That those Celestial
Spirits which are now with God, do constantly recommend unto him the
flourishing estate and safety of the Church in general, I suppose as granted.
The current of Antiquity runs most clearly for it. That some of them, at some
times, and on some occasions, do also pray for some of us in particular, I
think I have sufficient reasons to persuade me to; so far forth, as by
revelation from the Lord their God, or by remembrance of the state that they
left us in, or any other means whatever, they can be made acquainted with our
several wants. If it should please God to take away a man that is ripe for
Heaven, whose bosom-friend is guilty of some known infirmities: I little doubt,
but that the spirit of him departed, will pray for the amendment of his friend,
in the Heavens above, for whose well-doing on the Earth, he was so solicitous.
To think that any of the Saints in the state of bliss, were utterly unmindful
of such friends as they left behind, were to deprive them of a quality
inseparable from the soul, the memory. And to suppose them negligent of such
pious duties as the commending of a sinner to the throne of grace, were to
deprive them of a virtue inseparable from the Saints, their charity.
Potaemiana, a Virgin-Martyr, in Eusebius, promised the Executioner at the time
of her death, (...) Eusebius. Eccles. hist. l. 6. c. 5.
, That she would pray unto the Lord for his conversion. The story does not
only say, that she kept her promise, but prevailed also in her suit; her
Executioner (his name was Basilides) becoming thereupon a Christian, and dying
in defense of the Faith and Gospel. Thus does Ignatius write unto the
Trallenses (nor is the credit of the Epistle questioned by our nicer Critics)
that he did daily pray for them to the Lord his God, and that he would, not
only do it whiles he was alive, (...) Ignat. Ep^. ad. Trallens.
, but that he would continue in the same good office, even in the estate of
immortality. Origin for his part was of this opinion, That the Saints helped us
by their Prayers; Ego sic abitror (says he) quod nos adjuvant orationibus suis
Origin.
. So was St. Cyprian too, that most godly Martyr, Sanctos defunctos jam de sua
immortalitate securos, de nostro adhuc esse sollicitos Cypr. de Immortalitate.
, The Saints, says he, though sure of their own salvation, are yet sollicitous
for ours. Which if it be too general to be brought in evidence, he tells us a
solemn covenant made betwixt him and other Bishops, to this effect, Si quis
nostrum prior hinc praecesserit, etc Id. in Epl. 2.
. i. e. That he who first departed to the state of bliss, should recommend to
God the estate of those whom he left behind him. And so far we are right
enough in my poor opinion; and if our adversaries in the Church of Rome would
proceed no further, the difference between us would be soon made up: The error
is not in the Doctrine, but the Application. For as it happens many times, that
an ill use may be made of a very good doctrine, so in the darker and declining
times of the Church of Christ, it was conceived to be a solecism in the way of
piety, not to commend our prayers and desires to them, who had so carefully
commended our estate to God. And so at last, as there is seldom any medium
inter summa and praecipitia, in the words of Tacitus Tacit. hist. lib. 2.
, no stop in tumbling down an hill, till we come to the bottom: The Saints in
Heaven, against their wills, and besides their knowledge, became the ordinary
Mediators between God and Man. And this I find to be the very process of the
Council of Trent, in drawing up the Article for the Invocation of Saints.
First, That the Saints do pray for us, Sanctos una cum Christo regnantes
orationes suas pro hominibus Deo offerre Council. Trid. Sess. 25. ca. 2.
. And so far Orthodox enough, had they gone no further; but then comes in the
Inference or Application, which is all as dangerous; That therefore we must
pray to them: Proinde bonum atque utile esse simpliciter eos invocare, and ob
beneficia a Deo impetranda, etc. ad eorum orationes, opem, auxiliumque
confugore. And here we have the point in issue. We grant, because indeed we
must, unless we absolutely mean to renounce our Creed, That the Saints pray for
us in the general; as being some part of that Communion which belongs to them,
as fellow members with us of that Mystical Body whereof Christ is the Head: But
yet we do not think it lawful, to pray to them, but to praise God for them,
which is that part of the Communion which belongs to us. And we grant this,
because we may, that some of them, at sometimes, and on some occasions, do pray
for some of us particularly, as before was noted; but yet we do not think as
the Papists do, That in an ordinary way, they can have notice given them of our
present wants, or be made privy unto our necessities. In these two Negatives
consists the difference between us in the present Controversy; and though it
be in all cases difficult, and in some impossible to prove a Negative, yet we
have no small hopes to do it.

First, for the first, We do not think it lawful to pray unto them, because
that by the testimony and confession of the very adversary, we have no warrant
for it from the holy Scriptures. Sure I am, that Dominicus Bannes, a Dominican
Friar, and one of the learned of the pack, does confess ingenuously, That the
Doctrines of the Invocation of the Saints, and the Worship of Images, are
neither taught expressly, nor implicitly, in the Word of God Dom. Bannes, 2a.
2ae. Qu. 1. Art. 10.
. Orationes ad Sanctos faciendas, imagines esse venerandas, neque etiam
express neque involute Scripturae docent, which is as full and home, as can
be. And in this case we say in general, as did St. Ierom of another, but of
different nature, Non credimus quia non legimus Hier. adv. Helvid.
, We cannot think that there is such a duty to be practiced, because we do not
find it any where commanded; and that as we embrace those things which are
there delivered, Ita ea quae non sunt scripta renuimus, so we reject those
things, whatsoever they be (if pressed as Doctrinals, or necessary Moral
duties) which are not written in the same. And more particularly, we say as St.
Cyprian did, That to pray in any other manner than Christ has taught us, is
not only ignorance, but sin Cypr. de Orat. Domin.
. (...), etc. What Scripture (says Epiphanius, speaking in this very case)
does require this of us? Which of the Prophets does allow that any man, much
less a woman, should be worshipped by us Epiph. in Haeres. Collyrid.
? (and Invocation questionless is an act of Worship.) His inference is, That if
it neither be allowed nor required by them, then no such thing is to be done.

Again, we do not think it lawful, because the holy Scripture seems to be
against it. St. Paul has given it for a rule, That none are to be invocated or
prayed unto, but those on whom we do believe Romans 10.14.
. How shall they call on him (says he) in whom they have not believed. Which
Text the Fathers used of old to prove against the Arians, and the Macedonians,
that Jesus Christ our Savior, and the Holy Ghost, were verily and truly God,
because the Christians did believe in them, and pray unto them. For which
consult Tertullian de Trinit. cap. 14. Origin in his Comment on the Tenth to
the Romans. St. Basil, De Spi. Sancto, cap. 22. and Athanasius in Orat. 2.
Arianos, An Argument no way concludent on the Fathers side, in case the Saints
may be invoked, as well as he. For how could they infer from hence, That Christ
was very God, because prayed unto, in case the Saints were also capable of
Invocation? How easily might the Argument have been retorted by those several
Heretics, If Invocation of the Saints (who certainly were no other than the
sons of men) had been accounted in those times for good Catholic Doctrine?

And though the Papists shift off this, and the like illations, by saying, That
they pray not to the Saints departed, as to the Authors of those benefits which
they crave at their hands: Sed ut eorum meritis and precibus orationes n^strae
effectum sortiantur Aquia. 2^.2 ae qu. 83. Art. 1.
, as Aquinas has it; but that by their great merits and intercessions, our
desires may the sooner be obtained: Yet this will prove no Plaster for the
general sore, nor save the common people from downright Idolatry. The Cardinal
indeed thus resolves the case, That it is lawful for us men to pray unto St.
Peter, to have mercy on us, to save us, and set open to us the Gates of Heaven;
to grant us health and patience, and what else we want: Modo intelligamus tuis
precibus and meritis Bellar. de Beat. Sanct. l. 1. c. 17.
, if so we understand it thus, Do all these things which I desire, by thy
prayers and merits. But I would fain know of Bellarmine, if he knew himself,
how many of the vulgar sort (whatever may be said of some Learned men) have
ever learnt, or practiced such a reservation; or, if they have, how far it may
extenuate and excuse the sin.

Lastly, We do not think it lawful, because we cannot be persuaded that it
stands with Reason; which reasonable men must needs allow some place to, in
matters appertaining to the worship of God. And Reason tells us, how improper
and absurd it is, To pray to those, of whom we have no certainty that they hear
our prayers; but certainty enough, that they cannot grant them: The gifts and
graces which we ask for, not being in the power of the Saints to give, as is
acknowledged generally in the Schools of Rome. Which Reason is so strong on the
Protestant side, That the Papists have no way to bear off the blow, but by an
illustration drawn from the Courts of Princes: To whom, since every private
subject may not have access, they are necessitated to make use of some powerful
favorite, or otherwise to commend their suit, and tender their Petitions, to
those which are in ordinary attendance on him. And this perhaps we would not
stick at, were our access to God in Heaven, as difficult, as it is sometimes
unto Kings on Earth; or, that our Savior Christ had not undertook the office
of recommending our desires to his Heavenly Father. But we know well, that God
has told us, That his eyes are always over the righteous, and his ears open to
their prayers Psalm. 34.15.
; not open only as to hear them, but to grant them too, Nisi quod prompte
audiat, and audita tribuat Salvian. de Gubernat. Dei. l.
, as it is in Salvian. And well we know, that Christ has called us to him,
saying, Come unto me all ye that be heavy laden, and I will refresh you Matthew.
11.28.
. Encouragement enough for us to go to him, and to God by him; there being no
way but by him to his Heavenly Father, as himself tells us in St. John Joh.
14.6.
. Besides, this difficulty of access unto Kings and Princes, and their dispatch
of business by their servants, is not, if pondered as it ought, an Argument
either of their Power and Majesty, but of their impotency and their weakness.
Though they are Gods by office, they are men by nature; and as they cannot come
to know the desires and grievances of inferior Subjects, but by allowing others
to receive their suits; so should they personally attend the business of every
Suter, they could not eat at all to repair nature, nor sleep or slumber to
refresh it. St. Ambrose very happily has taken off all color of so poor a
subterfuge; whose words I shall lay down at large, as being unanswerably home
to the present point. Ideo ad Reges itur per Tribunos and Comites, quia homo
utique est Rex, and nescit quibus debeat Rempub. credere. Ad Deum autem quem
nihil latet (omnium enim merita novit) promerendum, suffragatore non est opus,
sed mente devota. Vbicunque enim talis ei loquutus fuerit, respondebit illi
Ambr. in Romans 1.
, that is to say, We therefore have recourse to Kings by Lords and Courtiers,
because the King is but a man, and knows not whom to trust with the Public
Government. But to obtain the favor of God, from whom nothing is hid, (for he
knows what every man deserves) we need no other spokesman than a pious soul;
with which, whosoever comes unto him, shall graciously be both heard and
answered by him.

In the next place, We grant, that in some cases, as before is said, some of
the Saints do pray for some of us in particular; but yet we do not think as the
Papists do, that there is any ordinary way to give them notice of our wants, or
make them privy unto our necessities. If so, then it is in vain for us to make
our Prayers to them who can neither hear us, nor know in any Ordinary way what
we pray for to them. And so far it is granted by the greatest Champions of the
adverse party, Si non cognoscant nostr^ orationes, videtur otiosum and
supervacaneum ad ipsos orare Suarez. de Relig. Tom. 2. l. 1. c. 10.
, says their great Schoolman, Fr. Suares. Now that the Saints departed, have
no knowledge of our wants or wills (conceive me still of any ordinary way of
communication) is evident by that passage in the Prophet Isaiah. Abraham (says
he) is ignorant of us, and Israel does not acknowledge us Isai. 63.16.
. If so, if Abraham himself to whom the promises were made, and Israel the
father of all the Tribes, were ignorant of the affairs of that very people
which descended from them; what knowledge then should we conceive in the Saints
departed, (after so many ages as have intervened since the death of most of
them) concerning us, and our affairs, who are so very strangers to their Blood
and Families?

But lest perhaps it may be thought, that the Communion of the Saints supplieth
that defect, or that the Saints of the New Testament are invested with a
greater privilege than were the Patriarcks of the old: It is assured us by St.
Augustine, that they know nothing of our actions, or of our occasions. Spiritus
defunctorum non videre quaecunque eveniunt aut aguntur in ista vita hominum
August. de cura pro mortuis.
, as that Father has it. More positive and particular is St. Jerome in it, who
speaking of Nepotianus, has this notable passage, viz. Quicquid dixero, quia
ille non audit, mutum videtur; cum quo loqui non possumus, de eo loquinon
desinamus Ierom. Epl. 3. de Epitaph. Nepot.
, i. e. Whatsoever I shall speak, does but seem as dumb, because Nepotian does
not hear me; and therefore, since I can no more speak with him, I will be the
longer in speaking of him. And though the Fathers in their Funeral and
Anniversary Orations, which they made in honor of the Saints, and at the Tombs
of the Martyrs, make many Rhetorical compellations of them, and Apostrophes to
them (to which the Popish Invocation of Saints owes much of its Original, as
the learned Primate of Armagh very well observes Answer to the Jesuits
challenge.
) yet was it but with ifs and ands, as in that of Nazianzen. (...) Nazianz.
Orat. 1. cont. Julian.
, Hear (says he) O thou soul of renowned Constantine, if thou have any sense
or notion of these affairs. And now at last the point is brought unto an issue.

By them of Rome it is supposed, that there is knowledge in the Saints
departed, of all things happening in the Earth, that they take notice of our
prayers, are privy unto our necessities; and therefore that it were a Solecism
in the way of piety, not to address unto them our Petitions. We stand on the
defensive part, and so reply upon them with an Absque hoc, Sans ceo, no such
matter verily. Let them prove this, (and if they prove not this sufficiently,
then they prove just nothing.) and we will either be non-suted, and acknowledge
judgment, or yield so far, at lest unto them, that though this praying unto
Saints be the furthest way about, yet we may think it possibly the next way
home.

And first out of the Old Testament, they produce Jacob and Moses to give in
evidence on their side; Reverend men, against whom we shall not take exception.
Of Jacob it is said, That in his Benediction of the sons of Joseph, he used
these words, And let my name be named on them (or called on by them, as the
Margin of our last translation) and the name of my Father Abraham and Isaac
Genesis 48.18.
. And Moses (says the Text) besought the Lord his God and said, Remember
Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, thy servants, unto whom thou swarest by thine
own self Exodus 32.11, 13.
. To both which Texts (the one being but an Exemplification of the other only)
this Answer is returned by Calvin, Iudaeos patres suos ad ferendas sibi
suppetias non implorasse Calv. Instit. l. 3. ^. 20.
, etc. That Moses, and the sons of Joseph, and the other Jews, did not in these
and other places of this nature, make any prayers to Abraham, Isaac, or Jacob;
but only did desire of God, to call to mind the Covenant he had made with
them, and in them, to and with their whole posterity; which though it satisfy
very fully, as to the objection, yet we will go to work in another manner, and
against this, and all the other Testimonies which they either have produced
already, or shall produce hereafter to the point in hand, out of the Books of
the Old Testament, shall save unto our selves the benefit of exception;
exception not against their persons, but against their evidence. For in the
opinion of the Papists, the Patriarcks, all of them were in Limbo Patrum,
before the Resurrection of our Lord and Savior, in the retired and secret
Caverns of the Earth; debarred from all access to Almighty God, from all
commerce and traffic with us mortal men, in as much want of Heavenly comforts,
as those by them supposed to be in Purgatory, though in far less pain.

The truth or probability of this opinion, I dispute not here, having declared
my self in that point already: All that I shall from hence infer, be it true or
false, is, That according to their own Divinity, the Fathers before Christ's
Resurrection could very ill solicit the affairs of the Jews, their children,
as being not till then admitted to the Court and presence of the Lord Almighty,
nor yet possessed, though sure enough at last, of their own felicities.
Bellarmine, that great master of Controversies, has resolved it so Bellar. de
Cultu Sanct. l. 1. c. 19.
, Because (says he) the Saints, and other holy men, who died before Christ
came in the flesh, did not enter into Heaven, did not see God, nor could by any
Ordinary means understand the prayers of those who sued unto them; therefore it
was not used in the Old Testament to say, Holy Abraham pray for me; but men
prayed by themselves, for themselves to God, and alleged the merits of the
Saints which were dead already, that by their merits they might find success
of their prayers unto him. And in another place he determines positively, for
the matter of fact, that though the Saints are prayed to now, in the times of
the Gospel, Ante adventum Christi non invocabantur Id. de Beat. Sanct. l. 1. c.
20.
, yet were they not prayed unto, or invocated, till the coming of Christ.
Finding no better comfort for them in the Old Testament, let us next follow
them to the New, in which the Texts most stood upon to confirm their doctrine,
are in the 15 of St. Luke. In the seventeenth verse we read it thus, I say unto
you, that likewise joy shall be in Heaven over one sinner that repents. And
in the tenth, I say unto you, there is joy in the presence of the Angels of God
over one sinner that repents. These are the Texts which make most for them,
and these, God knows, make very little to the purpose. For first, according to
the Exposition of some Ancient writers, the hundred sheep mentioned in our
Saviors Parable, represent the whole body of the Elect* both Men and Angels;
whereof the ninety nine were the holy Angels, continuing in their first
integrity, the stray sheep all mankind which was lost in Adam; for whose
recovery the Son of God, that good Shepherd, John 10.10. did suffer death upon
the Cross, and so accomplished the great work of man's redemption. For this see
Hilary on St. Matthew. Can. 18. Chrysologus, Sermon. 168. Titus Bostrensis on the
place, Isidore in his Book of Allegories; not to descend to later Writers,
though Cajetan, and others of the Romish party might be here alleged: Which
Exposition, if admitted, overthrows the project; for then no more can be
inferred from those Texts of Scripture, but that there is great joy in the
Court of Heaven, and in particular amongst the blessed Angels, for the
redemption or recovery of lost man, by Christ. But waving the advantage of this
Exposition, and granting that those Texts relate to particular persons, yet all
that can be logically inferred from hence, is, That the Saints and Angels do
know some things, and at some times, which are done here upon the Earth;
namely, so often, and so much, as God of his especial grace does reveal unto
them. This is all, and this we will not grutch them; for observe the Inference.
Our Savior, as his use was, spoke in Parables, even in the Parables of the
lost sheep, the lost groat, and the Prodigal Son. A certain man having a flock
consisting of an hundred sheep, does lose one of the hundred; and after long
search made does find it, and bring it back unto the Fold Luke 15.4.
A certain woman is supposed, having a little stock of ten pieces of silver, to
lose one of her pieces; and, after great pains taken, to meet with it again
Verse. 8.
. On this they call together their friends and neighbors, and say unto them,
Rejoice with us, for we have found the sheep, and the piece of silver, which
was lately lost Verse. 6.8* 9.
. So then, unless the man and woman in our Saviors Parable, had pleased to
call their friends together, and imparted to them the finding of the lost
sheep, and the lost piece of silver, the friends and neighbors might have been
so far from showing any great joy at the recovery, that possibly they might
have never heard of the loss. If so, then certainly it cannot be inferred from
hence, that the Saints and Angels, which are the friends and neighbors of those
several Parables, are privy to our wants on Earth, by course and ordinary
dispensation; but only this, that some things, and at some times, are imparted
to them by their God, by way of grace, and extraordinary revelation. No
Protestant (as I conceive) so void of Reason, as to make question of the one;
no Papist hitherto so cunning, as to prove the other.

This, though it seem to be a very bold and venturous Assertion, may very
easily be made good, though we should use no other medium for the proof
thereof, than their own difference and disagreement in the manner of it. A
difference or contrariety indeed so great and admirable, that fire and water
will more easily be reconciled, than their opinions. Five several ways have
been invented by the Schoolmen, and those that since have traveled in the
controversies of the present times, by which to make the Saints acquainted with
our state on Earth; some false, others blasphemous, and the rest so doubtful,
that there is no belief to be given unto them, no building to be laid on such
weak foundations.

The first of these opinions is, Quod sint ubique praesentes Bellar. de Cult.
Sanct. l. 1. c. 20.
, that they are present every where, in all parts of the world; and so no
strangers either to our words or actions. But this (besides the want of
sufficient proof) does trench too much on the Prerogative and Attributes of
Almighty God; there being no power Omni-present, but is also infinite, and
Omni-presence so peculiar unto God himself, that the Gentiles challenged the
Christians of the Primitive times, for ascribing to their God that privilege,
whereof both Jupiter himself, and all the Topical gods of Nations were
conceived incapable. Discurrentem scilicet eum volunt, and ubique praesentem
Minut. Felix, in octavio.
, as Cecilius pressed it in the Dialogue.

The second is, That they are made acquainted with the passages of this present
world, Sanctis mortuis atque Angelis internuntiis Bellar. de Cult. Sanct. l. 1.
c. 20.
, by the information of such Saints as were daily added to their number, and
the relation of those Angels which by Gods appointment pitch their Tents about
us. Which, though it be conjectural only, and is proposed without any proof at
all, yet for as much as comes within the knowledge of those Saints and Angels,
we should lose nothing of our ground if we closed in with them. But then there
are many Prayers and Vows which we make to God, that go no further than the
heart, and do not find a vent by the tongue at all; The Spirit making
intercession for us (as St. Paul affirms) with groanings that cannot be
expressed Romans 8.26, 27.
; which only he that searches the heart, (says the same Apostle) can take
notice of: No Saint nor Angel being privy to the groans of the Spirit.

Some therefore are so far transported beyond the bounds of piety and Christian
prudence, as in the third place, to make the blessed Saints and Angels
acquainted with our very thoughts Bellar. ut supra.
. A fancy very prejudicial to the Majesty of Almighty God, and indeed as
dangerous as blasphemous; the attribute of (...), the searcher of the hearts
and reins, being proper only unto God Jerem. 11.20.
. It is God alone that knows the heart, Acts 15.8. He that searches the
heart, Romans 8.27. That tries the heart, 1 These. 2.4. Which searches both the
reins and hearts, Apoc. 2.23. A high Prerogative, not given by any of the
Gentiles to their supreme deities, and therefore quarrelled at in the Primitive
Christians, because by them ascribed, to the Lord their God, Et Deum illum suum
in omnium mores, actus omnium, verba denique and occultas cogitationes
diligenter inquirere Minut. Felix.
, as by the same Cecilius it was charged upon them.

The fourth, which is the way most traveled, but of no more certainty* is,
That they see our thoughts and counsels, by looking on the face of God; in
whom, as in some magical mirror, Tanquam in speculo, as they phrase it Bellar.
de Sanct. cultu. l. 1.20.
, they see what ever things are done both in Heaven and Earth. And hereupon
that saying of the first Pope Gregory, Qui videt videntem omnia, videt omnia
Greg. M. Dial. 4. c 33.
, is grown into a Maxim in the Schools of Rome. But for the proof of this, as
of that before, we have no proof at all, but some bare conjectures, or
Gregory's ipse dixit, if so much as that; too weak foundations to support such
a weighty fabric, and therefore not relied on by their greatest Scholars.
Aquinas, the great Patriarch of the Roman Schools, says plainly, That the
blessed Angels behold the Divine Essence of God, and yet know not all things:
Nesciunt enim futura contingentia, and cogitationes cordium Aquin. 12. Qu. 12.
Art. 8.
, For they neither know future contingencies, nor the thoughts of the heart,
which belongs only unto God. Thus Martinez, Been potest videns deum non videre
omnes creaturas in illo Martinez. 1.2. Qu. 5. Art. 2.
, That one who sees God face to face, may withal not behold in him each
particular Creature. Thus Bannes, Nullus beatus videt in essentia divina omnia
individua, aut omnes cogitationes eorum Bannes, in 1. Tho. Qu. 12. Art. 8.
, No blessed Saint beholds all individuals, or the thoughts of all men, in
the Divine Essence. And Durand, with a limitation that spoils all the rest,
Intellectus creatus videns divinam essentiam, videt in ipsa omnia, quae per
ipsam naturaliter, and ex necessitate repraesentantur, alia vero non Durand. 3.
Did. 24. Qu. 2.
, that is to say, A created understanding looking on the Divine essence, does
therein see all things, which naturally and of necessity are represented by it,
and not else at all. Bellarmine therefore is resolved on another way, which
though it has less countenance from the ancient Schoolmen, yet is by him
preferred before all the rest, Vt quae magis idonea sit ad convincendos
Calvinistas Bellar. de Beat. Sanct. l. 1. c. 20.
, as being fittest to convince and confute the Calvinists; And that is, that
all sublunary matters are made known unto them, Deo revelante, by revelation
from their God; which is the matter to be proved, and by us denied, but with no
evidence made good by the learned Cardinal, for ought I am able to perceive.
That at some times they have some things revealed unto them, is already
granted, That all things are revealed unto them, is but his opinion, and the
opinion of some few of the same society: Others as eminent as he, or they,
therein differing from them, who tell us, that this revelation is so made by
God, Ut unus alio plures vel pauciores videat Martinez ut supra.
, That one Saint comes to know more or less than others, according to the
providence and goodness of Almighty God, Qui disponere potest quatenus and
quantum se extendat cognitio cujuscunque videntis deum Velofilla. Adv. in 9.
Tom. Aug.
, Who can, and does dispose of so great a favor, both to the manner and the
measure of the knowledge given; therefore no revelation of all things, to the
Saints in general, as Bellarmine desires to have it; but only of some things
to some of them, and but on some occasions too, as before was granted. Or were
it as Bellarmine desires to have it, yet must our prayers unto the Saints be a
fruitless vanity: For what else is it to desire of the Saints or Angels, that
they would recommend our wants, and endear our prayers unto the Lord;
considering that our prayers and wants can come unto their knowledge by no
other means than by such revelation? Little need they commend our desires to
him, who must first tell them what we want, before they can solicit him in
our behalf.

Upon such false and faulty grounds have they raised this doctrine, and by that
means reduced again into the world an old piece of Gentilism, long since
exploded: For if we please to look into the Mysteries of the Pagan Theology, we
shall find that they devised a kind of inferior gods, whom they called (...),
or Deastros, and placed them (as it were) in the middle between God and men.
(...), as it is in Plato Plato in Sympos.
. And they devised them to this end, That because the principal or supreme gods
were of so pure and divine a nature, as might not be profaned with the
approach of earthly things, or with the care and managing of worldly
businesses; They might make use of these Deastros or (...), as Mediators for
them in the Courts of the greater deities. Thus the same Plato does inform us,
(...) Id. ibid.
: God (says he) is not to be approached by men, but all commerce and
intercourse between gods and men, is performed by the mediation of Demons. And
in particular he tells us, That they are the Messengers and reporters from men
to God, and again from God to men, (...), etc. As well of the supplications and
prayers of the one, as of the commands and rewards from the other. This have we
more exactly from Apuleius, whom take here at large, Mediae sunt potestates per
quas and desideria nostra and merita ad Deos commeunt, inter mortales
caelicolasque vectores, hinc precum, inde donorum; qui ultro citroque portant
hinc petitiones inde suppetias, seu quidam utrinque interpretes and salutigeri
Apuleius de Daemonio Socrat.
. We had the sum before in English, and repeat not now. He that desires to see
more to the same effect, may find it in the tract of Plutarch, entitled, De
defectu oraculorum, and in St. Augustines most learned and elaborate Books
inscribed, De civitate Dei, especially in the eighth Book, cap. 18.21. and in
the ninth Book, cap. 9.17. where we shall find this point discussed, Whether in
our addresses to the Court of Heaven, we should make use of Demons for our
Internuncios. An error, which it seems began to creep into the Church, upon the
first converting of the Gentiles to the Faith of Christ, who under color of
humility, as if they were not worthy to come near to God, would have brought in
the worshipping of Angels, instead of Demons; but were encountered presently by
St. Paul himself, advising the Colossians (who as it seems began to be thus
inclined) to take special care, lest any man did beguile them of their reward
through voluntary humility in the worship of Angels Col. 2.18.
. But what they failed to do in the holy Angels, the Papists have since brought
about in the blessed Saints, whom they have made their Mediators between God
and man, in the commending of their prayers and desires to God, and the
obtaining from his hands of such gifts and graces as they stand in need of. And
that they might in every point come home to this Pagan Theology in the
worshipping of those Daemonia, they do not only pray to the Saints departed,
but dedicate unto their proper and immediate service, (as the Gentiles did to
their Daemonia) Temples, and Festivals, and Altars, and set forms of worship;
and at the last advance their Images also in the Church of God, and give them
the same veneration which they conceived was due to the Saints themselves. For,
Instans est Theologorum sententia Azor. Divin. Instit. Tom. 1. l. 9. c. 6.
imaginem honor and cultu eodem honorari and coli quo colitur id cujus est
imago, as Azorias tells us for all; so that it is the common and received
opinion of the Church of Rome, and not of some particular Schoolmen, as they
use to plead in other cases. And certainly, they that shall seriously observe
with what laborious Pilgrimages, magnificent Processions, solemn Offerings, and
in a word, with what humble bendings of the body* and affectionate kisses, the
Images of the Saints have been, and are still worshipped in the Church of Rome,
cannot be otherwise persuaded, but that that she is relapsed again to her
ancient Gentilism. It is true, the better to relieve themselves in this
desperate plunge, they have excogitated many fine distinctions, as Terminative
and Objective, Proprie and Improprie, Per se and per accidens; which, howsoever
they may satisfy the more learned sort, are not at all intelligible to poor
simple people. What, said I? That they may give satisfaction to their learned
men. No such matter verily. For Bellarimine himself confesses, That they who
hold that any of the Images of Christ our Savior are to be honored with that
kind of worship which they call (...), are fain to find out many a nice
distinction, Quas vix ipsi intelligunt, ne dum populus imperitus Bellar. de
Beatit. Sanct. l. 2. cap. 22.
, which they themselves, much less the silly ignorant people, could not
understand. Which makes me think, that sure the Cardinal was infatuated with
the spirit of dotage, himself defining positively in the self same page,
Imagines Christi improprie and per accidens posse honorari cultu latriae, That
by the help of a distinction, our Saviors Image might be honored with the
highest worship. But this I do account a fruit of this Iconolatriae, this
Image Worship as they call it, that it draws down on them who use it, that most
heavy curse, That such as worship them are made like unto them Psalm. 135.18.
. Now as it is in Bellarmines judgment with the Image of Christ, so is it also
with the Images of the Saints departed: The worship which is given unto them in
the Church of Rome, not being to be salved with a dark distinction, which
neither the poor ignorant people, no, nor the greatest Clerks which they have
amongst them, have light enough to understand. And though perhaps some men of
learning may be able to relieve themselves by these distinctions; yet I can see
no possibility how the common people, who kneel and make their prayers directly
to the image it self, without being able to discern where the difference lies
between their Proprie and Improprie, or Per se and per accidens, can be excused
from palpable and downright Idolatry. Add unto this the scandal which is
thereby given unto Jews and Turks, and the great hinderance which it does
occasion unto their conversion; who do abominate nothing more in all
Christianity, than this profane and impious adoration of Images Sir Edward
Sandys Relation of Religion.
. In which respect, we may affirm with safety of the modern Romans, what St.
Paul tells us of the ancient; viz. Nomen Dei per vos blasphemari inter gentes
Romans 2.24.
, that by their means the Name of God is blasphemed amongst the Gentiles. But
of this Argument enough, though neither improper nor impertinent to our present
business; both Invocation of the Saints, and Adoration of their Images, having
been brought into the Church under color of maintaining that communion, which
ought to be between the Saints upon the Earth, and the Saints in bliss; betwixt
the members of the Militant Church, and the Church Triumphant, both of them
making that one body whereof Christ is Head.

And under the same color also have they obtruded on the Church their device
of Purgatory, and all the suffrages and prayers of the Saints alive, for those
which are deceased, but not yet in glory. For as it seems, the prayers which
many of the Saints in bliss, make for them on Earth, is but in way of a
requital for some former courtesies, because by reason of their prayers, and
devout oblations, their souls had been delivered out of Purgatory, and by that
means exalted unto such a degree of happiness, as to enable them to pray for
their Benefactors. This is, Ka me, ka thee, as the saying is. If by my prayers
a soul has been delivered from the fire of Purgatory, it is all the reason in
the world, that he should remember me when he comes into his Kingdom; or, if he
do not, that I call upon him, and put him in remembrance of his obligation. It
is true, that prayer to and for the dead, is of larger latitude, than to refer
to those only who have been in Purgatory: Our Masters in the Church of Rome
requiring prayers unto some Saints who were never there, as the blessed Virgin
Mary, the Apostles, Martyrs and Primitive Antiquity; allowing prayers and
offerings for the Saints deceased, when as these Purgatorian fires had not yet
been kindled. For prayer and offering for the dead, there is little to be said
against it; It cannot be denied, but that it is ancient B. Andrews Answers to
Cardinal Peron.
, says our Learned Andrews. I can admit prayer for the dead, and deny your
purgatory; I can give you reasons to pray for the dead, and yet keep far enough
from Purgatory Montague Answer to the Gagger. c. 42.
, says as learned Montague. It was indeed a custom of the Primitive Church,
not only to make commemorations of the Saints departed, for the instruction of
the living, and honor of the dead, as before was said; but to name them at the
time of the celebration of the holy Eucharist, offering to God that reasonable
service for them that had departed, and did rest in peace, in sure and certain
hope of a Resurrection. To this effect, there is a passage in the Liturgy
ascribed to St. James (which as Brerewood Brerew. Enqu. of Rel. c.
very well observes, was questionless the Public Liturgy of the Church of
Jerusalem) to this effect, That God would remember all the faithful that are
fallen asleep, in the sleep of death, since Abel the just to this present day,
and that he would vouchsafe to place them in the Land of the living Liturg.
Jacob. in Biblioth. Pat.
. To this effect, we do not only find in Cyprian, Sacrificamus pro mortuis
Cypr. l. 3. ep. 6.
, the offering of the Sacrifice of praise and prayer in behalf of the dead; but
an express order taken by him that Gemimus Victor who had made one of the
Presbyters of the Church of Carthage executor of his last Will and Testament,
and thereby wholly taken him off from the work of his Ministry, should neither
be named in the Offertory, nor any prayer be made for him at the holy Altar Id.
Epl. 66.
. Ne deprecatio aliqua nomine ejus in ecclesia frequentetur, as his words there
are. To this effect we have this clause, or prayer in St. Chrysostoms Liturgy.
Offerimus tibi rationalem hunc cultum pro iis qui in fide requiescunt,
majoribus scilicet, Patribus, Patriarchis, Prophetis and Apostolis, Praeconibus
and Evangelistis, Martyribus, Confessoribus, etc Chrysostom. Liturg. in fine Tom.
6.
. We offer this reasonable sacrifice unto thee, O Lord, for all that rest in
the Faith of Christ, even for our Ancestors and Predecessors, the Patriarcks,
Prophets and Apostles, Evangelists, Preachers, Martyrs, Confessors, etc. And
finally, to this end served the ancient Diptychs, being Tables of two leaves
apeece, in the one of which were the names of such famous Popes, Princes, and
Prelates, men renowned for piety, as were still alive; and in the other a like
Catalogue of such famous men, as were departed in the Faith; as is observed by
Josephus Vice Comes, in his Observat. Eccles. de Missae apparatu, Tom. 4. l. 7.
c. 17. and by Sir H. Spelman in his learned Glossary. Out of these Diptychs did
they use to repeat the names, both of the living, and the dead, at the time of
the Eucharist, as appears plainly by that passage of the Fifth Council of
Constantinople: In which we find first, That the people came together about
the Altar, to hear the Diptychs, Tempore Diptychorum cucurrit omnis multitudo
circumcirca Altar Council. Constant. 5. Act. 1.
* and then that recital being made of the four General Councils, as also of the
Archbishops of blessed memory, Leo, Euphemius, Macedonius, and other persons
of chief note, who had departed in the Faith of our Savior Christ; the people
with a loud voice made this acclamation, (...), Glory be to thee, O Lord. Not
that it was the meaning of the ancient Church, to pray for the deliverance of
their souls from Purgatory, since they never thought them to be there; but
partly to preserve their memory in the minds of the living, and partly to pray
for their deliverance from the power of death, which does yet tyrannize over
the bodies of the faithful; the hastening of their Resurrection, and the joyful
public acquitting of them in that great day, wherein they shall stand to be
judged at the Tribunal of Christ. These were the ends, for which the Offerings
and Prayers for the dead were made: Which being very consonant to the rules of
piety, found such a general entertainment in the Primitive times, that none but
Aerius and his followers disallowed the same. Of him indeed it is reported by
St. Augustine, Illo cum suis Asseclis Sacrificium quod pro defunctis offertur
respuebat August. de haeres. c. 53.
, that he and his followers admitted not of Sacrifices in behalf of the dead
(the Sacrifices he means, are of praise and prayer;) for which, and others of
his Heterodox and unsound opinions, he was condemned for an Heretic by the
ancient Father, and so remains upon record. Concerning which, take here along
the judgment of Dr. Field, once Dean of Gloucester; who speaking of Aerius and
his Heterodox doctrines, resolves it thus Field of the Church, l. 3. c. 29.
. For this his rash and inconsiderate boldness and presumption in condemning
the Universal Church of Christ, he was justly condemned: For howsoever we
dislike the Popish manner of praying for the dead, which is to deliver them out
of their feigned Purgatory, yet do we not reprehend the Primitive Church, nor
the Pastors and Guides of it, for naming them in their public prayers, thereby
to nourish their hope of the Resurrection, and to express their longing desires
of the consummation of their own, and their happiness which are gone before
them in the Faith of Christ? What Bishop Andrews, and Bishop Montague have
affirmed herein, we have seen before, and seen by that, and by the judgment of
this Reverend and Learned Doctor, That the Church of England is no enemy to the
ancient practice of praying for the dead in the time of the celebration of the
holy Eucharist; though on the apprehension of some inconveniences, as her case
then stood, it was omitted in the second Liturgy of King Edward the sixth, which
is still in force. But howsoever it was so omitted in the course of the
Eucharist, yet does it still retain a place in our public Liturgy, and that in
as significant terms as in any of the formulas of the Primitive times. For in
the Form of Burial Prayer in the Burial of the dead.
, Having given hearty thanks to Almighty God, in that it has pleased him to
deliver that our Brother out of the miseries of this sinful world: We pray,
That it would please him of his infinite goodness, shortly to accomplish the
number of his Elect, and to hasten his Kingdom, that we with that our Brother,
and all others departed in the true Faith of Gods holy name, may have our
perfect consummation and bliss, both in body and soul, in his eternal and
everlasting glory.

But Prayers and Offerings for the dead, as before was said, are no proofs for
Purgatory. The Church of England which allows of prayer for the dead* in her
Public Liturgy, has in her Public Articles rejected Purgatory as a fond
thing, vainly invented, and grounded upon no warrant of Scripture, but rather
repugnant to the same Articles of Relig. 22. 1562.
. The like do Montague of Norwich, and the Dean of Gloucester, whose words we
have before repeated; and so does Bishop Jewel, the greatest ornament, in his
time, of our Reformation. And as for prayer for the dead (says he) which you
Dr. Harding say ye have received by tradition from the Apostles themselves,
notwithstanding it were granted to be true, yet does it not evermore import
Purgatory Defense of the Apol. part 2. c 16.
: Nor does he only say it, but he proves it too. For bringing in a prayer of
St. Chrysostoms Liturgy, in which there is not only mention of the Patriarcks,
Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors, but of the blessed Virgin her self, he
adds, I trow ye will not conclude hereof, that the Patriarcks, Prophets,
Apostles, etc. and the blessed Virgin Mary, were all in Purgatory? Of the same
judgment is the late renowned Archbishop of Canterbury, who tells us, That
it is most certain, that the ancients had, and gave other Reasons of prayer for
the dead, than freeing them out of Purgatory Conference with Fisher.
. And this (says he) is very learnedly and largely set down by the now learned
Primate of Armagh. Where we have the Primate of Armagh in the bargain too. But
what need such a search be made after the judgment and opinion of particular
persons of the Church of England, when it is manifest that the Greek Church at
this day, and almost all the Fathers of the Greek Church anciently, though they
admit of prayers for the dead, yet believe no Purgatory? Of which, Alphonsus a
Castro does very ingenuously give this note, De Purgatorio in antiquis
Scriptoribus, potissimum Graecis, fere nulla mentio est Alphon. a Cast. de
haeres. l. 8.
. Qua de causa etiam ad hodiernum diem Purgatorium non est a Graecis creditum.
In which, besides a plain acknowledgement that the Greek Fathers knew not of
it, there is a very shreud intimation, that there is little mention in the
antien^ Latins. Some other ground there must be for the fire of Purgatory,
than prayers and offerings for the dead; but what that is, is not so easily
agreed upon amongst themselves. Some rely wholly on Tradition, and others, as
they build on that for the main foundation, so they bring Texts of Scripture as
a second help for their collateral security only, and no more than so. But
Friar John Bacon has declared, That there be others who think that Purgatory
cannot be proved by authority of Scripture; that the Books of Maccabees which
commonly are alleged for proof thereof are not Canonical; that the Apostle 1
Cor. 3. speaks of that fire that shall purge the elements of the world in the
last day; and that touching those words of Christ, it shall never be remitted
in this world, nor in that to come, they prove not that there is a remission of
sins in the other world Bacon. l. 4. did. 49. qu. 1.
: Nor is John Bacon only of this opinion. For they who carefully consult the
writings of our Romish Adversaries, will easily perceive how little confidence
they have in those Texts of Scripture, which commonly are alleged in defense
hereof; there being not so much as one Text hitherto produced and insisted on
by some of that party, but what by others is denied to be meant of Purgatory.
And to say truth, their differences are so many and irreeoncilable in all the
points and circumstances which concern this doctrine; that the disagreements
which they have amongst themselves may serve sufficiently instead of all other
Arguments, to confute the Tenet. First for the place, which Eckius will have to
be in the bottom of the Sea Eck. in Encheirid.
, some in Mount Aetna, others in the Center of the Earth, and Bernard de Busses
in an Hill of Ireland In Rosar. part 3. c. 2.
; next for the Torments, which Sir Thomas Moor will have to be only by fire
Lorich. Instit. Cathol.
, Fisher his fellow-sufferer by Fire and Water, Lorichius neither by Fire nor
Water, but by the violent convulsions of Hope and Fear; then for the
Executioners, which Bishop Fisher will have to be holy Angels, Sir Thomas Moor
to be very Devils B. Jewels Defense, part. 2. c. 16.
. So for the sins that are to be expiated in those flames, which some will have
to be only venial; others to be the venial ones, and the mortal too: And for
the time of their continuing in that state, which Dennis the Carthusian extends
to the end of the world Carthus. in Homil. de 4. Noviss.
, Dominicus a Soto limits but to ten years only Soto in did. 19. qu. 3. art.
2.
; others have shortened that time too, if either their friends will hire some
Priest to say Mass for their souls, or the Pope do but speak the word. And last
of all for the extremity of the pain, which Aquinas makes as violent as those
of Hell; and yet the Rhemists say, that they which are in Purgatory are in a
more happy and blessed condition than any man living Rhemist. Annot, in Apoc.
14.13.
; Durandus, betwixt these extremes, gives them some intermission from these
terrible pains* upon Sundays and Holidays Durand. de Office mortuor. c. 7.
. By which uncertainty or contrariety rather of opinions, we may clearly see,
upon what weak foundations they have raised this building; which probably had
fallen to the ground long since, if the profit which arises by it to their Monks
and Friars, had not kept it up. But I forbear to meddle further in this point
of Purgatory, which for my part, I do conceive to be rather a Platonical and
Poetical fiction V. Virg. Aeneid. l. 6.
, than to have any ground in Scripture, or true Antiquity; The Fathers for the
first 600 years after Christ's Nativity, making no resolution in it, either
public or private, save that St. Augustine to avoid a worse inconvenience,
may seem to some to patronize it. And yet he does it with such doubtingness,
and so much uncertainty, that any man not blinded with his own opinion, may see
he knew not what to determine of it. For sometimes it is no more then quantum
arbitror August. de fide and operib. c. 16.
, for as much as he thinks, and other whiles, incredibile non est, that it is
not incredible Id. in Enchierid. c. 67.
: But then he leaves it off with a quaeri potest, as a matter disputable: At
other times he goes as far as a forsitan verum, that peradventure it is true
Id. ad Dulcitium. qu. 1.
; and yet at last utterly rejects it with an ignoramus; Heaven we do know,
says he, and we know Hell also; Tertium locum ignoramus Id. in Hypegnostick.
l. 5.
, a third place between both, we can tell of none. He that can ground a point
of faith upon such uncertainties, must have more skill in Architecture, than I
dare pretend to. But this is only on the by, to show how little the Communion
of the Saints has to do with Purgatory, which neither is a consequent, nor
concomitant of it. The Saints may pray for one another, we for their
consummation in the state of glory, and they for our well-doing in our passage
thither, and no such thing as Purgatory be inferred from either. It is now
time, that I proceed to such other benefits as do redound unto the Church from
her Head CHRIST JESUS.

Articuli X. Pars Secunda. (...). (i. e.) Remissionem Peccatorum. (i. e.) The
forgiveness of Sins.
CHAP. V. Of the first Introduction of sin: God not the Author of it. Of the
nature and contagion of Original sin. No Actual sin so great, but it in capable
of forgiveness. In what respect some sins may be counted Venial, and others
Mortal.
IT is a saying of St. Augustines (in no point so uncertain as in that of
Purgatory) that possibly God could not have bestowed a greater blessing on his
Church, than making his only begotten Son Christ Jesus to be head thereof. By
means whereof it comes to pass, that one and the same person, Et orat pro
nobis, and orat in nobis, and oratur a nobis, does both pray for us, and pray
with us, and yet is also prayed to by us. How so? That he resolves immediately
in the words next following, Orat pro nobis ut sacerdos noster, orat in nobis
ut caput nostrum, oratur a nobis ut deu^ noster; that is to say, He prays for
us as our Priest, he prays with us as our Head, and is prayed to by us as our
God. Himself is both the Suter, and the Mediator, yea, and the party sued unto;
and therefore doubt we not, when we call upon him, but he will grant us those
Petitions which himself makes for us. As Priest, he represents continually to
Almighty God the benefit and effect of that perfect Sacrifice, which he once
offered on the Cross for the sins of the world; As Head unto the Church, he
recommends our prayers to the Throne of Grace, and joyneth with his Members in
their suits to God, for the more speedy and effectual obtaining of them; As
God, he has his eye still over us, and his ear still open to our prayers,
which he has both the will and the power to grant, so far forth as he sees it
fitting and expedient for us. He suffered for our sins, as he is our Priest;
forgives them, as he is our God; and mediates, as our Head, with his Heavenly
Father, for the remission of those sins which he suffered for. The medicine for
our sins was tempered in his precious blood, and therein we behold him in his
Priestly Office; the application of this medicine was committed to the sons of
men, whom he by his Prophetical Office authorized unto it. The dispensation of
the mercy thereof still remains in God, as an inseparable flower of the Regal
Diadem; for who can forgive sins, but God alone Luke 5.21.
, said the Pharisees truly. And this forgiveness of our sins, as it is the
greatest blessing God ca^ give us in this present life, because it opens us a
door to eternal glory; so is it placed here as the first in order of those
signal benefits which do descend upon the Church from her Head Christ Jesus.
For we may hopefully conclude, that since Christ was not only pleased to die
for our sins, but does intercede also with his Heavenly Father, that we may
have the benefit of his death and passion; those prayers of his will make that
death and passion efficacious to us, in the forgiveness of those sins under
which we languish. With the like hope we may conclude from the selfsame Topic,
That if we have our part in the first Resurrection, that, namely, from the
death of sin, to the life of righteousness, we shall be made partakers of the
second also, that, namely, from the death of nature, to the life of glory. For
Chrysostom has truly noted, (...) Chrysostom. Hom. in 1 ad Cor. 15.
, That where the Head is, will the members be; If therefore Christ our Head be
risen from the grave of death, the members shall be sure of a Resurrection: If
Christ our Head be glorified in his Fathers Kingdom, the members in due time
shall be glorified also. So that as well the Article of the Forgiveness of
sins, as those of the Resurrection of the body, and The life everlasting,
depend upon Christ's being Head of this Mystical Body, and that too in the
method which is here proposed: The forgiveness of sins being given us as a
pledge or assurance that we shall have a joyful Resurrection in the day of
judgment; as that is but a way or passage to eternal life.

First then we are to speak of the Forgiveness of sins, and therein we will
first behold the whole body of sin, in its own foul nature, that so we may the
better estimate the great mercies of God in the forgiveness of the same. And
for beholding the whole body of sin in its own foul nature, we must first take
notice, That it pleased God in the beginning to exhibit to the world, then but
newly made, a lively copy of himself, a Creature fashioned ad similitudinem
suam, after his own Image Genesis 1.27.
, says the Text. In the creating of the which, as he collected all the
excellencies of inferior Creatures, so did he also crown him with those
heavenly graces, with which he had before endued the most holy Angels; that is
to say, a rectitude or clearness in his understanding, whereby he was enabled
to distinguish betwixt truth and error; and with a freedom in his will, in the
choice of his own ways and counsels, Ut suae faber esse possit fortunae, That
if he should forsake that station wherein God had placed him, he might impute
it unto none, but his wretched-self. It is true, God said unto him in the way
of Caution, That in what day soever he did eat of the fruit forbidden, he
should die the death: But he had neither undertaken to preserve him that he
should not eat, and so by consequence not sin; much less had he ordained him to
that end and purpose, that he should eat thereof, and so die for ever. And true
it is, that God fore-knew from before all eternity, unto what end this Liberty
of man would come; and therefore had provided a most excellent remedy for the
restoring of lapsed man to his grace and favor: Yet was not this foreknowledge
in Almighty God that so it would be, either a cause, or a necessity, or so much
as an occasion, that so it should be. And it is therefore a good rule of Justin
Martyr, seconded by Origin, and diverse others of the Fathers, (...) Justin
Mart. ad Orthod. qu. 58.
, etc. The Prescience of God (say they) is not cause or reason why things come
to pass, but because these and these things shall so come to pass, therefore
God fore-knows them. So that God dealt no otherwise in this case, with our
Father Adam, than did the Father in the Parable with his younger son; gave him
that portion of his goods which fell to his share, and after left him to
himself. And as the Prodigal child being an ill husband on the stock which his
Father gave him, did quickly waste the same by his riotous living, suffered the
extremities of cold and hunger, and was fain to cast himself again on his
Fathers goodness Luke 15.18.
; so man not using well that stock which the Lord had given him, gave himself
over to the Epicurism of his eye and appetite; By means whereof, he lost those
excellent endowments of his first Creation, was shamefully thrust out of
Paradise, without hope of return, and in conclusion fain to cast himself on the
mercies of God, as well for his subsistence here, as his salvation hereafter.
The story of man's fall makes this plain enough, and wholly frees Almighty God
from having any hand or counsel in so sad a ruin. For there we find how God
created him after his own Image, placed him in Paradise, commanded him not to
meddle with the Tree of good and evil, threatened that in case he did eat
thereof, he should surely die; and lastly, with what grievous punishments he
did chastise him, for violating that Commandment Genesis 2.17.
. All which had been too like a Pageant, if God had laid upon him a necessity
of sin and death, and made him to no other end, as some teach us now, but by
his fall to set the greater estimate on his own rich mercies. So excellently
true is that of Ecclesiasticus, though the Author of it be Apocryphal, That God
made man in the beginning, and left him in the hands of his own counsels Ecclus.
15.14.
. And this is the unanimous doctrine of the New Testament also, where it is
said, That by man came death, and that not only of the body, but of the soul,
1 Cor. 15.21. That by one man, sin entered into the world, and death by sin,
Romans 5.12. That by one man's disobedience many were made sinners, Verse. 19. That
all die in Adam, Verse. 22. And in a word, That no man ought to say when he is
tempted, that he is tempred of God, for God tempts no man; but every man is
tempted, when he is drawn away by his own lusts, and so enticed to do evil Jam.
1.13.
. If God tempt no man, as it is plain by St. James he does not, then was not
Adam (that one man whom St. Paul relates to) either tempted by him, or by his
purpose and decree drawn into temptation. If every man ought to ascribe his
falling into sin and death, unto a voluntary yielding to his own desires, then
certainly ought Adam so to do, as well as any, who by his own unworthy lusts,
was drawn away so visibly to his own destruction. We might proceed from
Scripture to the Primitive Fathers, but that the evidence would be too great to
be listened to: Suffice it that we find not any of that sacred number, which
ever made God accessory to the act of sin; scarce any of those blessed Spirits,
which either of set purpose, or upon the by, did not oppose so lewd a Tenet.

And it was more than time that they should so do, and that the present Church
should pursue their courses; for some there were, some desperate and wretched
Heretics, who had so far made ^old with Almighty God, as to make him the
Author of those sins and wickednesses, which ill men committed; and some there
have not wanted in these later times, who have not only made him accessory,
but even the very principal in the sin of Adam, and of ours by consequence.

Of the first sort of these were the Cataphrygians, the Scholars of Montanus, a
wicked Heretic Eusebius. Eccl. hist. l. 5. c. 14.
. Some also taught the like in Rome, as did Florinus, Blastus, and their
Associates; thereupon Irenaeus published a discourse with this Inscription,
(...), That God was not the Author of sin Ibid. c. 19.
. And he gave this Inscription to it (as the story tells us) because Florinus
with great earnestness had taught the contrary. It seems Florinus was an
Heretic of no common aims, and would not satisfy himself with those vulgar
follies which had been taken up before; but he must ponere os in coelum, break
out into blasphemous frenzies against God himself, and vented such an impious
Tenet, which never any of the former Heretics (...), had once dared to broach;
the Cataphrygians laying but the ground which he built upon; yet bold and
venturous though he were, we do not find that he became much followed in this
lewd opinion; or that his followers, if he had any at the lest, ever attained
unto the height of their masters impudence. Some therefore of the following
Heretics, who in their hearts had entertained the same dreadful madness, did
recommend it to the world in a fairer dress, and laid the blame of all their
sins on the stars and destinies: The powerful influence of the one, and
irresistible decrees of the other, necessitating men to those wicked actions
which they so frequently commit. Thus are we told of Bardesanes, Quod fato
conversationes hominum ascribet, that he ascribed all things to the power of
fate August. de Haeres. c. 35.
. And thus it is affirmed of Priscillianus, Fatalibus astris homines alligatos,
That men were thralled unto the Stars Ibid. c. 70. and 15.
; which last St. Augustine does report also of one Colarbas, save that he gave
this power and influence to the Planets only. But these, if pondered as they
ought, differed but little, if at all, from the impiety of Florinus, before
remembered: Only it was expressed in a better language, and seemed to favor
more of the Philosopher, than the other did; for if the Lord had passed such an
irrevocable Law of Fate, that such and such men should be guilty of such foul
transgressions, as they commonly committed; it was all one as if he were
proclaimed for the Author of them. And then why might not every man take unto
himself the excuse and plea of Agamemnon, (...) Homer. Iliad.
, It was not I that did it, but the gods and destiny: Or if the Lord had given
so irresistible a power to the Stars of Heaven, as to enforce men to be
wickedly and leudly given, what differs this from making God the Author of
those vicious actions, to which by them we are enforced? And then why might not
every man cast his sins on God, and say as did some such good fellows in St.
Augustines time, Accusandum potius esse autorem Syderum, quam Commissorem
scelerum August. de Genesis ad lit. l. 2.27.
, That he who made the Stars was in all the fault? Which granted, we may pass
an Index Expurgatorius on the present Creed, and utterly expunge the Article of
Christ's coming to judgment. For how could God condemn his Creature to
unquenchable flames? or put so ill an office upon Christ our Savior, as to
condemn them by his mouth, in case the sins by them committed were not theirs,
but his? or punish them for that which himself works in them, or to which
rather he compels them by so strong an hand? that of Fulgentius being most
excellently, and infallibly true, Deus non est little ultor, quorum est author
Fulgent. ad Monimum.
, God does not use to punish his own actions in us.

Nor were Florinus, and those other Heretics before remembered, the only ones
that broached those doctrines; our later times, not being so free as I could
wish from so great impiety. The Libertines, a late brood of Sectaries, have
affirmed as much Calv. advers. Liberti. c. 12.
, and taught as did Florinus in the days of old, Quicquid ego and ^u facimus,
Deus efficit, n^m in nobis est; and so make God the Author of those wicked
actions which themselves committed. The Founders of this Sect, Coppinus and
Quintinus, both Flemings; and these Prateolus reports for certain to be the
Progeny of Calvin, and other leading men of the Protestant Churches. These
carne (says he) e Schola nostrae tempestatis Evangelicorum Prateol. Elench.
haer. in Quintino.
. Pythagoras could not have spoken it with more authority: Bellarmine somewhat
more remisly, Omnino probabile est eos ex Calvinianis promanasse Bellar.
, and makes it only probable, that it might be so, but not rightly neither:
For Staphylus reckoning up the Sects which sprang from Luther, however that in
other things he flies out too far, yet makes no mention of those fellows.
Paraeus on the other side, in his Animadversions on the Cardinal, assures us,
That they were both Papists, acquaints us with the place of their Nativity, and
the proceedings had against them. Calvin who writ a Tract against them, makes
one Franciscus Poquius, a Franciscan Friar, a principal stickler in the cause:
And we may add ex abundanti, that the said Sect did take beginning Anno 1529.
when Calvin had attained to no reputation, no not amongst those very men who
have since admired him, and made his word the touchstone of all Orthodox
doctrine. So that for the reviving of this Heresy in these later ages, so far
forth as it is delivered positively, and in terms express, which was the
blasphemy of Florinus, we are beholding for it to the Church of Rome, or some
that had been members of it; how willingly soever they would charge it on the
Protestant Doctors: Yet true it is, for magna veritas and praevalebit, that
some, and those of no small name in such Protestant Churches, as would be
thought a pattern unto all the rest, have given too just a ground for so great
a scandal. And well it were they had observed that Caution in their Public
Writings, which Caesar looked for in his Wife, and that is (...) Plutarch.
Paral. in I. Caesare.
, that they had been as free from the suspicion of it, as the crime it self.
For howsoever they affirm it not in terms express, which was the desperate
boldness of that Florinus; yet they come very near it, to a tantamont, by way
of necessary consequence and deduction, which was the Artifice of Bardesanes
and Priscillian: For if God before all eternity, as they plainly say, did
purpose and decree the fall of our Father Adam, Vt sua defectione periret Adam,
in the words of Calvin Calv. Instit. l. 3. c 23. sect. 7.
; there was in Adam a necessity of committing sin, because the Lord had so
decreed it. If without consideration of the sin of man, he has by his
determinate sentence ordained so many millions of men to everlasting damnation,
and that too necessario and inevitabiliter V. Synod. Remonstrant.
, as they please to phrase it, he must needs pre-ordain them to sin also; there
being, as themselves confess, no way unto the end but by the means. And then
what can the wicked and impenitent do but ascribe all their sins to God, by
whose enevitable Will they were lost in Adam, by whom they were particularly
and personally necessitated unto death, and so by consequence, to sin? For thus
Lyconides in Plautus pleaded for himself, when he deflowred old Euclios
daughter; Deus mihi impulsor fuit, is me ad illam illexit; It was Gods doing,
none of his, that he was so vicious. I hope I need not press this further, or
show the true or real difference between the laying the burden of our sins
upon Christ our Savior, as the Jews theirs upon the Scapegoat by Gods own
appointment, and laying the whole blame and guilt of them on our own
affections. He is but ill trained up in the School of Piety, who will not take
upon himself the blame of his own transgressions, and fly to God only on the
hopes of pardon. And yet I shall make bold to add, and indeed the rather, that
they who first did broach this Doctrine of the necessity and decree of Adams
fall, and consequently making God the prime Author of sin, confess they have no
warrant for it in the Holy Scripture. For whereas some objected upon Gods
behalf, disertis verbis non extare, that the decree of Adams fall had no
foundation in the express words of Holy Writ; Calvin Instit. l. 3. c. 23. sect.
7.
Calvin returns no other Answer than a Quasi vero, as if (says he) God made
and created man, the most exact piece of his Heavenly Workmanship; without
determining of his end. Nay, himself calls it for a farewell, horrible decretum,
a cruel and horrible Decree, as indeed it is: A cruel and horrible Decree, to
pre-ordain so many millions to destruction, and consequently unto sin, that he
might destroy them. If then the introduction of the body of sin came by no
other means but by man alone, and that the charging of it upon Gods Decrees
have no foundation in the Scriptures; If it run cross unto the constant current
of Antiquity, and that the like Err^neous and Blasphemous Tenets were reckoned
of as Heresies by the Ancient Fathers; If it be founded only on the ipse
dixit, or the why nots, and Quasi veros of a private man, and by him reckoned
for an horrible and cruel Decree: Nay more, if it be contrary to the Word of
God, and increase of Piety, and tend apparently to the dishonor of God, and
bolstring wicked men in their sinful courses; then certainly we may conclude,
that God could have no hand in this woeful Tragedy, that man alone is Author of
his own calamity, and can accuse himself only, and his own affections, for
giving way to those temptations which brought sin upon him, and not upon
himself alone, but his whole Posterity.

For if we look into the Scripture, we find that sin did not content it self
with the person of Adam, as if it had been a sufficient victory to have brought
him under, unless in him, his whole Race and Offspring, which were then
radically and potentially in the loins of Adam, had been infected also with the
same contagion. For Adam is not here considered as a private person, who was to
stand or fall to himself alone, without occasioning either good or evil unto
any, more than in way of imitation of his great Example: But as the stock of
all mankind, who were to have a share in his weal or woe. For being the
original and root (as before was said) of all mankind descended from him, whom
he did represent at his first Creation; he did receive that stock of
righteousness which God gave unto him, not for himself only, and his own
particular benefit, had he used it well, but as the common Patrimony and
Inheritance of himself and his. And having so improvidently lost both himself
and it, by yielding to the motions of that flesh which he was to govern, he
lost it not only for himself when he came under the attainture which the Law
brought on him, but he did wholly forfeit it for himself and them; his Race or
Offspring which were then radically in his Loins, being involved with him in
the same perdition. For as the Scripture says of Levi, that he paid Tithes in
Abraham unto Melchisedech, because he was in the Loins of Abraham when
Melchisedech met him Heb. 7 9, 10.
; so may we also say in the present case, that all men sinned and lost
themselves in our Father Adam, because they were all of them in the Loins of
Adam when he lost himself. The Scripture says not only that sin came to man,
or fell on him only, as if the power thereof had terminated in that one man's
person, on whom it first did come or fall, but that it came by man, as a Pipe
or Conduit, by which it passed also unto others. By one man sin entered into the
world, says the Apostle to the Romans Romans 5.12.
; By man came death, says the Apostle to the Corinthians 1 Cor 15.21.
; that is to say, By that one man, our Father Adam, both sin and death found
opportunity to enter on his whole posterity. Et per Adamum ex quo omnes
mortales originem ducunt, dicitur peccatum introiisse Origin. in Romans cap. 5.
, as it is in Origin. This sin thus miserably derived from our father Adam, we
call Original sin, or the Birth-sin, as in the Ninth Article of the Church of
England. A sin, because it is a taint or stain in the soul of man, by which we
are adjudged impure in the sight of God: The Birth-sin, or Original sin, as
being naturally and originally inherent in the very birth; and therein
different from the sins of our own committing, which for distinction sake are
entitled actual. The nature of which Birth-sin, or Original sin, is by the
Church of England in her public Articles defined to be the fault and
corruption of the nature of every man that naturally is engendered of the
Offspring of Adam, whereby man is very far gone from Original righteousness, and
inclined to evil Artic. of Rel. 9. 1562.
. In which description we may find the whole nature of it, as first, that it is
a corruption of our nature, and of the nature of every man descended from the
Loins of Adam. Secondly, That it is a departure from, and even a loss or
forfieture of, that stock of Original Justice, wherewith the Lord enriched our
first Father Adam, and our selves in him. And thirdly, That it is an
inclination unto evil, to the works of wickedness, by means whereof (as
afterward the Article explains it self) the flesh lusts against the Spirit,
and both together do incur the indignation of God. So that if we speak of
Original sin formally, it is the privation of those excellent gifts of divine
Grace, inabling us to know, love, serve, honor and trust in God, and to do the
things that God delights in, which Adam once had, but did shortly lose; If
materially, it is that habitual inclination which is found in men, most averse
from God, carrying them to the inordinate love and desire of finite things, of
the creature more than the Creator; which is so properly a sin, that it makes
guilty of condemnation the person whosoever it be in whom it is found. And this
habitual inclination to the inordinate love of the creature, is named
Concupiscence; which being twofold, as Alensis notes it out of Hugo Alens.
part 2. qu. 105. memb. 2.
, that is to say, Concupiscentia spiritus, a concupiscience of the spirit, or
superior; and concupiscentia carnis, a concupiscence of the flesh, or inferior
faculties; the first of these is only sin, but the latter is both sin and
punishment. For what can be more consonant to the Rules of Justice, than that
the Will refusing to be ordered by God, and desiring what he would not have it,
should find the inferior faculties rebellious against it self, and inclinable
to desire those things in a violent way, which the Will would have to be
declined?

Now that all of us from the womb are tainted with this original corruption and
depravation of nature, is manifest unto us by the Scriptures, and by some
Arguments derived from the practice of the Catholic Church, countenanced and
confirmed by the ancient Doctors. In Scripture, first, we find how passionately
David makes complaint, that he was shapen in wickedness, and conceived in sin
Psalm. 51.5.
. Where we may note in the Greek and Vulgar Latin, it is in sins and
wickednesses in the plural number, (...), and (...), as the Greek, in peccatis,
in iniquitatibus, as the Latin has it. And that to show us, as Becanus has
right well observed, Quod unum illud peccatum quasi fons sit aliorum Becan.
Man. cont. l. 4. c. 1.
, that this one sin is as it were the Spring and Fountain, from whence all
others are derived. Next, St. Paul tells us in plain words, that by the offense
of one (of this one man Adam) Judgment came upon all men to condemnation; and
Judgment could not come upon all, or any, were it not in regard of sin. Not
that all men in whom Original sin is found, without the addition of Actual and
Personal guiltiness, are actually made subject unto condemnation, and can
expect no mercy at the hands of God; but that they are all guilty of it, should
God deal extremely, and take the forfeiture of the Bond, which we all entered
into in our Father Adam. Thus find we in the same Apostle, that we are by
nature the children of wrath Ephesians. 2.3.
, polluted and unclean from the very womb, our very nature being so inclinable
to the works of wickedness, that it disposes us to evil from the first
conception; and makes us subject to the wrath and displeasure of God. Last of
all, we are told by the same Apostle, (for we will clog this point with no
further evidence) That the wages of sin is death Romans 6.23.
; that sin entered into the world, and death by sin; and that death passed upon
all men, for that all have sinned Ibid. 5.12.
. And thereupon we may conclude, That wheresoever we behold a spectacle of
death, there was a receptacle of some sin. Now we all know, that death does
spare no more the Infant, than the Elder man; and that sometimes our children
are deprived of life, as soon almost as they enjoy it, sometimes born dead, and
sometimes dead as soon as born, Prima quae vitam dedit hora carpsit, in the
Poets language. A wages no way due to Infants for their actual sins (for
actually as yet they have not offended;) and therefore there must needs be in
them some original guilt, some Birth-sin (as the Article calls it) which brings
so quick a death upon them. And this is further verified from the constant and
continual practice of the Church of Christ, which has provided, That the
Sacrament of Baptism be conferred on Infants, before they come unto the use of
Speech or Reason; yea, and at some times, and on some occasions (as namely, in
cases of extremity, and the danger of death) to Christen them as soon as born.
For by so doing, she did charitably, and not unwarrantably conceive, that they
are received into the number of Gods children, and in a state of good
assurance; which could not be so hopefully determined of them, should they
depart without the same. And with this that of Origin does agree exactly, Si
nihil esset in parvulis quod ad remissionem deberet and indulgentiam pertinere,
gratia Baptismi superflua videretur Origin,
. Were there not something in an Infant which required forgiveness, the
Sacrament of Baptism were superfluously administered to him. Upon which grounds,
the Church of England has maintained the necessity of Baptism, against the
Sectaries of this age, allowing it to be administered in private houses, as often
as any danger or necessity does require it of her. A second thing we find in
the Churches practice, and in the practice of particular persons of most note
and evidence, which serves exceeding fitly to confirm this point; and that is,
That neither the Church in general does celebrate the birthday of the Saints
departed, but the day only of their deaths; nor any of the Saints themselves
did solemnize the day of their own Nativity with Feasts and Triumphs. First,
for the practice of the Church, we may take this general rule once for all, Non
nativitatem sed mortem sanctorum ecclesia pretiosam judicat and beatam, That
the Church reckons not the day of their birth, but the death-day (if I may so
call it) of the Saints to be blessed and precious. According unto that of the
Royal Psalmist, Right precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his
Saints Psalm. 116.15.
. Upon which grounds, the word Natalis has been used in the Martyrologies V.
Ma^yrol. Romans and alia passim.
, and other public Monuments of the Catholic Church, to signify the death,
and not the birthday of the Saints departed. And more particularly we are thus
informed by St. Augustine, Solius Domini and Beati Iohannis dies nativitatis in
universo mundo celebratur August. de Sanct. Sermon. 21.
, i. e. That only the day of the nativity of our Lord and Savior, and of St.
John Baptist, were celebrated (in his time) in the Church of Christ: Of Christ,
because there is no doubt but that he was conceived and born without sin
original; and of the Baptist, because sanctified in his Mothers womb Luke 1.15.
, as St. Luke says of him. And for particular men it is said by Origin, Nemo
ex sanctis invenitur hunc diem festum celebrasse Orig in Levit. Hom. 8.
, etc. That never any of the Saints did celebrate the day of their own
nativity, or of any of their sons and daughters, with a Solemn Feast. The
reason was the same for both, because they knew that even the best of them were
conceived in sin, and brought forth in wickedness; and therefore with no
comfort could observe that day, which the sense of their original corruptions
had made so unpleasing. But on the other side, those men who either knew not,
or regarded not their own natural sinfulness, esteemed that day above all
others in their lives, as that which gave them their first-being to enjoy their
pleasures; and they, as Pharaoh in the Old Testament Genesis 40 20.
, and Herod in the New Matthew. 14.6.
, failed not to keep the same as a Public Festival. Soli peccatores super
hujusmodi diem laetantur, as it is in Origin Orig. in Lev. Hom. 8.
. And hereupon we may infer (without doubt or scruple) that having the
authority of the Scripture, and the Churches practice, and that practice
countenanced by Authors of unquestioned credit, (not to say any thing further
in so clear a case from the concurrent Testimonies of the Ancient Fathers) That
there is such a sin as Birth-sin, or Original sin, a Natural corruption
radicated in the Seed of Adam, which makes us subject to the wrath and
indignation of God.

Thus have we seen the Introduction of sin, the first act of the Tragedy; let
us next look upon the second, on the Propagation, the manner how it is derived
from Adam unto our Forefathers, and from them to us. And this we find to be a
matter of greater difficulty. St. Augustine, in whose time these controversies
were first raised by the Pelagians, did very abundantly satisfy them in the
quod sit of it; but when they pressed him with the quo modo, how it was
propagated from Adam, and from one man to another, he was then fain to have
recourse to Gods secret justice, and his unsearchable dispensation. Et hoc
quidem libentius disco quam doceo, ne audeam docere quod nescio August. adv.
Julian. l. 5.
, as with great modesty and caution he declined the business: For whereas sin
is the contagion of the soul, and the soul owes its being unto God alone, and
is not begotten by our parents; the Pelagians either would not, or could not be
answered in their Quere, How Children should receive corruption from their
Parents, not could the good Father give them satisfaction unto their demand.
But as a Dwarf standing on the shoulders of a Giant, may see many things far
off, not visible to the Giant himself; so those of the ensuing times, building
on the foundations which were laid by Augustine, have added to him the solution
of such doubts and difficulties, as in his time were not discovered. Of these,
some have delivered, That the soul contracts contagion from the flesh, even in
the very act of its first infusion, the union of the soul and body; nor is it
any thing improbable that it should so be. We see that the most excellent Wines
retain their natural sweetness, both of taste and color, as long as they are
kept in some curious Vessel; but if you put them into foul and musty bottles
Matthew. 9.17.
, they lose forthwith their former sweetness, participating of the uncleanness
of the Vessel in which they are: Besides, it is a Maxim amongst Philosophers,
Quod mores animae sequuntur temperamentum corporis, That the soul is much
biased and inclined in the actions of it unto the temper of the body; and if
the equal or unequal temper of the body of man, can (as it seems) incline the
mind unto the actual embracing of good or evil; then may it also be believed,
that the corruptions of the flesh may dispose the soul, even in the first
infusion of it, to some habitual inclinations unto sin and wickedness. Than
which, though there may be a more solid, there cannot be a more conceiveable
Answer: But others walking in a more Philosophical way, conceive that the
accomplishment of the great work of Generation, consists not in the
introduction of the form only, or in preparing of the matter, but in the
constituting the whole compositum, the whole man, as he does consist both of
soul and body: And that a man is, and may properly be said to beget a man,
notwithstanding the Creation of his soul by God, because that the materials of
the Birth do proceed from man, and those materials so disposed and actuated by
the emplastick virtue of the Seed, that they are fitted for the soul, and as it
were produced unto Animation. Which resolution, though it be more obscure unto
vulgar wits, is more insisted on by the learned, than the former is, and
possibly may have more countenance from holy Scripture. When God made man, it
is said of him, That he was created after Gods own Image Genesis 1.27.
, that is to say, Invested with an habit of Original Righteousness, his
understanding clear, and his will naturally disposed to the love of God: But
Adam having by his fall lost all those excellent endowments, both of grace and
nature, begot a Son like to himself: And therefore it is said in the fifth of
Genesis, That he begot a son in his own likeness, after his own image, and he
called his name Seth Genesis 5.3.
. Though Adam was created after the Image of God, and might have still
preserved that Image in his whole posterity, had he continued in that state
wherein God created him; yet being fallen, he could imprint no other Image in the
fruit of his Body, than that which now remained in him, his own Image only,
the understanding darkened, and the will corrupted, and the affections of the
soul depraved and vitiated. Qualis post lapsum Adam fuit, tales etiam filios
genuit; such as himself was after his Apostasy, such and no other were the
Children which descended of him, ^s Paraeus very well observes Paraeus.
. And if it fall out commonly (as we see it does) that a crooked Father does
beget a crook-backed Son; that if the Father look a squint, the Children seldom
are right-sighted; and that the child does not only inherit the natural
deformities, but even the bodily diseases of his Parents too: It is the less to
be admired that they should be the heirs also of those sinful lusts, with which
their Parents were infected from the very birth. Nor does it any way advantage
us in this present case, that our Parents were regenerate, (for so we may
suppose) when they did beget us; and being washed themselves from Original sin,
by the laver of regeneration, should therefore in congruity be enabled also to
beget children like themselves, free from that pollution. For the Regenerate
are never so absolutely cleared from this corruption, but that there is a law
in their members which does still war against the Spirit, and that which, as
the Scripture tells us, has in it self such an unpleasingness to God, as
makes it to have somewhat in it of the nature of sin Heb. 11.6. Tit. 1.15.
. It is true, that by the Sacrament of regeneration the guilt thereof is washed
away, and man thereby acquitted from the punishment of it; yet there remains
in us still, that (...) (that wisdom or sensuality of the flesh) as St. Paul
entituleth it, whereby we are inclined to resist at all times, and sometimes
actually do rebel against the Spirit: Or were it so, that in the state of grace
and regeneration, we were all cleansed throughout, yet might our children be
partakers of those corruptions which naturally and originally were inherent in
us: For let the Husbandman W^ndow, and Rye, and Pick his Wheat with all care
and industry, till there be neither Chaff, nor Tare, nor ill Seed amongst it*
yet when that Wheat is sown, and the stalk grown up into an Ear, those Ears
will be as full of Chaff, as was the Seed it self, out of which they came,
before such care and pains had been took about it. And so St. Augustine has
resolved it, saying, Oleae semina non oleas generare sed oledstros August. de
Pecc. Orig. l. 2. c 40.
, That the wild Olive springs from the true Olive Tree.

What then? may any man complain, as it seems too many did in the time of
Chrysostom? (...) Chrysostom. in 1 Cor. Hom. 17.
, What reason is it that we should be punished and afflicted, it is for him we
suffer; for Adams fault, and not our own, that we are thus scourged. Assuredly
there is no such matter; and we may say to such complainers as that Father did,
(...). Not so, says he, it is no such thing, we suffer not for his, but our
own transgressions. The best man has too many sins, which he is to answer for,
besides that of Adam; and therefore none to lay the blame of his guilt and
punishment upon Adam only, as if he only had offended, and not we our selves.
There is not one who has not wretchedly increased that stock of wickedness
which his Father left him, adding transgressions of his own, many actual sins,
to that original corruption which he had from Adam. And howsoever, we are
unthrifts on that stock of grace which God is pleased to give unto us, and
either hide our Talents in a Napkin Luke 19.20.
, as we know who did, or else mispend them like the Prodigal, on our riotous
lusts; yet we are too good husbands on that stock of sin which is bequeathed us
by our Parents. There is not a man amongst us, but improves that patrimony,
adding one sin unto another, as Lust to Drunkenness, Murder to Adultery,
Rebellion to Secret Treasons; Lascivious speech to loose Affections, and
unchaste actions unto both: Which though they are the necessary consequents of
original sin (unless exceedingly held in by the bridle of grace) so are they
daily multiplied, and increased continually, by giving way to our corrupt
affections, and following the example of that first Transgressor. Sic
instituere majores, posteri imitantur, as he in Tacitus Tacit. de Mor. German.
; The Fathers manner of life is the Sons example. So that the followers of
Pelagius when they imputed sin unto imitation, had they intended it of actual,
not original sin, they had not been much wanting of the mark they aimed at. We
are made guilty of original sin, immediately from our own Parents, as they from
theirs, ascending till they came to Adam, in the way of Propagation; and make
their actual sins our own in the way of imitation. Nor need we press this
further, than with that of Origin, Parents non solum generant filium sed and
imbuunt, and qui nascuntur non solum filis Parentibus sunt, sed and Discipuli
Origin in To. Cap. 5.
, in reference unto sin and wickedness we are the Scholars of our Parents, not
their Children only: But whether it be by Propagation, or by Imitation, or by
transcending all examples which have been before us, most sure it is, that we
are all corrupt and become abominable, that there is none that does good, no
not one Psalm. 14.2.
, being filled with all unrighteousness, fornication, wickedness, covetousness,
Maliciousness, full of envy, murder, debate, malignity Romans 1.29.
, insomuch as from the Crown of the head to the sole of the foot, there is
nothing but swellings, and soars, and putrefaction Isa. 1.6.
. More sure it is, that even our righteousness is but like to a menstruous
cloth, and that our justest actions are not able to endure the trial, if they
should come to be weighed in the sight of God, by the severity of the Law, and
the exact balance of the Sanctuary. Vae enim laudabili hominum vitae, si
remota misericordia discutias eam August. Conf. lib. 9.13.
; Woe, says Augustine, to the most commendable part of all our lives, should
not God look upon us with the eyes of mercy, and through the Spectacles of the
merits of our Lord CHRIST JESUS.

Not to insist longer on those curiosities, which are and may be made by
unquiet men, about the Introduction, Propagation, and universal over-spreading
of the body of sin, we must resolve, as he that fell into a pit did resolve the
Passenger who was inquisitive to know how he came into it. At ille, obsecro
inquit tecum cogita, quomodo hinc me liberes, etc. Id ibid.
My friend, said the poor fellow, take no care to learn how I fell into it, but
do the best you can to help me out of it. That we are fallen into the pit, not
only of Original but of Actual filthiness, we all know too well; and we know
too, that we first fell into it by the fault of our Father Adam, but have since
plunged our selves more deeply in the mire of sin, then Adam by his personal
error could have brought upon us. If we are yet unsatisfied with the manner
how, notwithstanding all that has been formerly here delivered, and may be
elsewhere found in the Ancient writers, we may do well to take as much care as
we can for our getting out, and not molest our selves and others with those
needless questions, which have been made about the manner of our falling in.

And this is that which we are next to go in hand with. For if there were no
way to get out of this pit, the knowledge which we have of our falling in, and
of the condition we lie under till we be delivered, would so perplex us and
afflict us, that Christians of all men would be most miserable. But so it is,
that God of his great goodness and love to man has so provided, that no man
can complain that he wants help to get out, if he be not wanting to himself,
but will stretch out his hand and lay hold of such means as are by God prepared
to that end and purpose. If we sing Domine de profundis, and call upon him out
of the deeps of our sin and misery, no doubt but he will hear our voice Psalm.
130.2. and ver. 7, 8.
, and take pity on us, for with him there is mercy, says the Royal Psalmist,
with him is plentious redemption, sufficient to deliver Israel from all his
sins. The pit of sin is deep, that of mercy bottomless, a kind of Puteus
inexhaustus, a Well which can never be drawn dry, as the Pope said of England,
when at his devotion. Though man sin grievously and unpardonably in the sight
of others, yet has God mercy still in store for the greatest sinner; Gods
goodness being so transcendent as not to be exhausted by man's maliciousness.
Bonitas invicti non vincitur Fulgen. ad Monimum.
, said Fulgentius rightly. Those of the Church of Rome have made a difference
of sins, accounting some to be venial, others mortal; which terms we well
enough approve of, rightly understood; but I approve not the distinction of
some Protestant Doctors, of remissible and irremissible Vrsin. Catech. part 1.
qu. 7.
, of sins which may be pardoned, and of sins that may not. First, We deny not
the distinction of venial and mortal sins, rightly understood, but do think
that some sins are fitly said to be mortal, and some venial, because some are
forgiven, some not, according to the quality of the sin, and the party sinning.
Not that we think that some are worthy in themselves of eternal punishment, and
others but of temporal only, whereof the first are counted mortal, and the
others venial, as the Papists think: but that some sins either in respect of
the matter wherein men offend, or ex imperfectione actus, in that they are not
committed with a full consent, are not so inconsistent with the Spirit of
Grace, but that the Spirit of Grace still remaining in him, which does them,
and preserves him in the good opinion and esteem of God. These we may call
Peccata quotidianae incursionis, sins of daily incursion, vain thoughts, and
idle words, and unseemly motions; which the best men are subject to at some
time or other. And if God were extreme in marking what is done amiss (in these
several ways) no flesh were able to abide it Psalm. 130.3.
. He that is faulty in these kinds, though he deserve punishment, and eternal
punishment at the hands of God, if God should take advantage of the Law against
him, yet shall his punishment be less, and his stripes far fewer, than it
shall be in those who transgress maliciously, and sin with an high hand of
presumptuous wickedness. We have not so much of the Stoic as to make sins
equal, or to maintain peccata omnia sunt aequalia, in the way of Paradox, as
once Tully did, though the Papists falsely charge it on us. For though we use
not the distinction in their sense and meaning, yet neither do we say that all
sins are equal, and of like deformity, or in the same degree of contrariety
with the grace of God; or that they have the same effects, and shall be
punished at the last with the like extremity. Only we take it for a dangerous
and presumptuous doctrine, to teach that any sin (if properly and truly sin) is
venial, in and of it self, without true repentance, as that which does include
nothing offensive to God, or is meritorious of his judgments. For Almain one
of their great Doctors does affirm expressly, that it is a question amongst the
Schoolmen, whether there be any such sin or not Alnain. Moral. tract. 3. c. 20.
? And himself concludes out of Gerson, that no sin is venial of it self, but
only through the mercy of God; it being a contradiction that God should forbid
an act under a penalty, and when he has done, that act should not be mortal in
its own nature; because being thus forbidden, it is against the Law of God, and
that which is against Gods Law, must needs be infinitely evil, and by
consequence mortal. And so it is also in respect of the party sinning; For as
Cajetan has well observed Cajetan ap. Field of the Chapter l. 3. c. 9.
, That which does positively make sin venial, or not venial, is the state of
the subject wherein it is found. If therefore we respect the nature of sin as
it is in it self, without grace, it will remain eternally in stain or guilt,
and so subject the sinner to eternal punishment: But yet such is the nature of
some sins, either in regard of the matter wherein they are conversant, or their
not being done with full consent, that they do not necessarily imply an
exclusion of Grace out of the subject in which they are found, and so do not
necessarily put the doers of them into such a state which positively makes them
not to be venial, by removing grace, which is the fountain of remission. So
that no sin is positively venial, as having any thing in it self which may
claim remission, because it has not any thing of Grace from whence all
remission does proceed; though many sins ex genere, or ex imperfectione actus
(as before was said) that is to say, in reference to the matter wherein man
offends, or to the manner, as not done with a full consent, may be said to be
venial negative, and per non ablationem principii remissionis, in that it does
not necessarily imply the exclusion of grace, by the exclusion of which grace
from the souls of men, sins are named mortal. For being that Grace only is the
fountain whence remission springs; nothing can make sin positively venial, but
to be in Grace, nor nothing make it positively mortal, but to be out of the
state of Grace. And so we see that some sins may be called venial, according to
the quality of the sin, and the party sinning, in that they bring not always
with them eternal punishment, though possibly not repented of particularly: and
that all sins are venial ex eventu too (though otherwise mortal in themselves)
in that there is no sin so great, but by the blood of Christ, and sincere
repentance, may ^e done away, and freely pardoned by the merciful goodness of
the Lord our God, who desires not the death of a sinner, but rather that he
should turn from sin and be saved.

For that there is no sin so great which is unpardonable or irremissible in
respect of God, the infinitness of his mercy over all his works, his
graciousness in pardoning David's Murder, Solomon's Idolatries, Paul's
Persecuting of his Church, Peter's denying of his Master, and thousands of the
like examples do most clearly evidence. If ever men had reason to despair of
pardon, none I am certain could have more than those we did so wilfully and
maliciously imbrew their hands in the most innocent blood of our Lord and
Savior; yet when their hearts were touched at St. Peter's Sermon, so that they
asked him, What they were to do, that they might be saved Acts 2.37, 38.
, He presently chalked them out a way, by Baptism and Repentance to obtain the
remission of sins, even of that bloody sin it self, of crucifying by their
wicked hands the Lord of glory. If any had more reason to despair than they, it
must be none but such of the Scribes and Pharisees, who saying that our Savior
Christ had cast out Devils by Beelzebub the Prince of Devils, may properly be
said to have blasphemed against the Holy Ghost, and consequently to have
committed such a sin, as in the judgment of our Savior is pronounced
unpardonable. He that blasphemeth against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be
forgiven him, as St. Luke expressly Luke 12.10.
. And yet St. Ambrose is so charitable, as to think, that some of them were
pardoned Ambr. de Poenit. l. 2. c. 4.
; it being probable, that some of those very Scribes and Pharisees were present
at St. Peter's Sermon, and so within the compass of repentance and forgiveness
of sins. And then withal we may observe, that though it be expressly said, That
the blasphemy against the Holy Ghost shall not be forgiven, yet it may well be
understood with a qualification; impossibility being sometimes used in holy
Scripture to denote a difficulty: As where it is affirmed, as positively, and
expressly, to be impossible for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven
Matthew. 19.24, 25.
. Where certainly it was not the intent of Christ, utterly to exclude all rich
men from the hopes of Heaven; but only to declare how hard and difficult it
was for those who trusted in their riches, and wallowed in the pride and
pleasures of a prosperous fortune, to set their minds upon the blessings of
eternal life. And so it is also in the present case, in St. Chrysostoms
judgment, Ideo dici nunquam remitti Chrysostom. in Matthew. 12.31.
, quia difficilius remittitur, Of the blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, says
he, it is therefore said, that it shall never be forgiven, because it is more
hardly pardoned, and with greater difficulty, than any other sin whatever. And
that this qualification, or the like, is to be admitted, appears yet further by
the words which are next before it, and to which, these in question must needs
have relation; where it is said, That all sins, and all blasphemies shall be
forgiven unto men. In which he did not, could not mean, that all sins, and at
all times, should be pardoned to all sorts of men; for then no sin were
damnable, but the blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, which is most untrue.
Therefore the sense must be in both, That all sins ordinarily, and (...), shall
be forgiven unto men upon true repentance, but the blasphemy against the Holy
Ghost shall not so ordinarily be forgiven, or shall more hardly be forgiven,
than any other. Not that it cannot be forgiven at all* Non utique quod remitti
non possit, as most truly Maldonat Mald. in Matthew. 12.
: But because they who do blaspheme against the Holy Ghost, Nullam peccati sui
excusationem habent, have seldom any thing to allege in excuse thereof, and so
were more unpardonable than other men.

As for those passages pretended from the holy Scripture in maintenance of the
irremissibility of some kind of sin, and in particular of this against the
power of the Holy Ghost, they neither prove the point which they are produced
for, nor were intended by the Sacred Penmen of the Word of God, of that sin or
blasphemy. In the first place, it is alleged from St. Paul to the Hebrews, To
be impossible for those who were once enlightened, and have tasted of the
heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the Holy Ghost, if they shall fall
away, to renew them again to repentance, seeing they crucify to themselves the
Son of God afresh Heb. 6.4, 6.
. But this the Fathers understand not of a difficulty or impossibility of
admitting such men unto repentance, but that they could not be admitted to a
second Baptism, and thereby to be renovated, and illuminated, to die, be
buried, and rise a second time in Christ, in so facile and complete a washing
of sin, as the Sacrament of Regeneration did afford at first. Chrysostom is
express for this Chrysostom. in locum.
, (...), He does not take away repentance, but a second Baptism. St. Ambrose
also says the same, and shows that the meaning of this Text is, and must be,
De non iterando baptismate Ambr. de Poenit. l. 2. c. 2.
, not of repelling sinners from the thought of repentance, and the remission of
their sins by the Churches Ministry, as the Novatians falsely taught; but of the
not admitting them to a second Baptism, which some began to introduce upon that
occasion. And that the Apostle speaks of a second Baptism, is evident by the
word (...), or illuminatos, which was used anciently to signify those that
were baptized Dionys. in Hierarch. Eccl. Passim.
, as (...), or illumination, for Baptism, the very Sacrament it self. Secondly,
by the word (...), or renovare, which intimates or implies our renovation by
that holy Sacrament. Per lavachrum enim renovamur per quod renascimur Ambr. ubi
supra.
, as St. Ambrose notes it, We are renewed by the laver of regeneration, by
which we are newborn to the life of righteousness. And thirdly, from the word
(...) of crucifying again the Lord of life, our Baptism being as the figure of
his death or crucifixion, in which our old man is crucified with him, as St.
Paul has told us Romans 6.6, 4.
, That the body of sin might be destroyed, and buried in his grave by Baptism.
And thereupon if follows by St. Paul's illation, Non magis quenquam bis
baptizari, quam Christum bis crucifigi posse Heins* Annot. in Heb 6.
, says the learned Knight Sir Daniel Heinsius, That the impiety is as great
for a man to be baptized again, as if Christ should again be crucified. The
like may be affirmed of a second Text alleged from the same Apostle Heb. 10.26.
, where it is said, That if we sin wilfully, after we have received the
knowledge of the truth, there remains no more sacrifice for sin. Which Text,
as that before, is applied by Calvin to such as fall away from the Faith and
Gospel, whom he excludes utterly from all hope of pardon, as men that sin
against the holy Spirit of God; but very wrongfully in all.

For first, although we read it wilfully in our last Translation, yet is it
only (...) in the Greek originals; which Beza renders uliro, the Vulgar
Latin, voluntario, our old Translation, willingly, as the Rhemists do. And to
say truth, the word does signify no more, though to comply with Calvin's
Comment on the Text, our last Translators who inclined too much unto his
opinions, do now read it wilfully. And if it be but willingly, as indeed it is
not, I would know in what a desperate estate we Christians were, if every sin
which is committed willingly, after truth embraced, shall either be reputed in
the sight of God for the sin against the Holy Ghost, or utterly past hope of
pardon. Nor is the case much better, if we read it wilfully, though better with
some sort of men, than it is with others. For miserable were the state of us
mortal men, if every sin that is committed wilfully (which too often happens)
either against the truth of science, or the light of conscience, should make a
man incapable of the mercy of God, as one that blasphemed or sinned (take which
word you will) against the power and virtue of the Holy Ghost. A doctrine never
countenanced in the Primitive times; the Church extending her indulgence to the
worst of Heretics, and opening both her arms and bosom unto those Apostataes,
which with true sorrow for their sins, did return unto her; condemning the
Novatians for too rigid and severe in their bitter Tenet, touching the
non-admittance of them unto public penance, and after that unto the Sacraments
of the Church again. Which being premised, the meaning of the Text will appear
to be only this, That they who willingly offend, after they have received the
knowledge of the truth, and Gospel, must not expect another Christ to die for
them; or, that he who died once for their sins, should again die for them. St.
Ambrose and St. Chrysostom do expound it so: Out of whom, Clictoveus in his
Continuation of St. Cyrils Commentaries upon the Gospel of St. John, informs
us, That the Apostle does not hereby take away the second or third remission of
sins (for he is not such an enemy to our Salvation) but says only that Christ
our Sacrifice shall not be offered any more upon the Cross, for the man so
sinning Cyril in Joh. l. 5. c. 17.
. And this is further proved to be the very meaning of the Apostle in the place
disputed, out of the scope and purpose of his discourse; which was to show unto
the Jews, that it was not with them now, as it was under the Law: For under the
Law they had daily Sacrifices for their sins, but under the Gospel they had but
one Sacrifice once for all Heb. 10.11.
. Every Priest (says he) does stand daily ministering, and offering often times
the same sacrifice; but this man (JESUS) after he had offered one sacrifice,
sat down for ever at the right hand of God; than which, there cannot be a
clearer explanation of the Text in question. Though Sacrifices were often
reiterated in the times of the Law, Hic vero nec baptismus repetitur, neque
Christus bis, nisi cum ludibrio mori pro peccato; yet neither is Baptism to be
reiterated in the times of the Gospel, nor can Christ be exposed for sin, to a
second death, without a great deal of scorn, as Heinsius has observed from
Chrysostom Heins.. Annot. in Heb. 6.
. Some light does also rise to this Exposition, from the words immmediately
succeeding, where the Apostle speaks of a certain expectation of a fearful
judgment; Which joined unto the former verse, have this sense between them,
That he which does not put his whole trust and confidence in the sufficiency of
the Sacrifice already offered, but for every sin expects a new Sacrifice also,
must look for nothing in the end, but a fearful judgment, which most
undoubtedly first or last shall fall upon him.

The third and last place, which is commonly alleged for proof that there are
some sins irremissible in their own nature, is that of St. John, If any man
(says he) see his brother sin a sin, which is not unto death, he shall ask,
and God shall give life for them that sin not unto death. There is a sin unto
death, I do not say he shall pray for it 1 John 5.16.
. In which words we find two sorts of sins, a sin to death, and a sin that is
not to death; a sin which is not unto death, for the remission of the which a
man is bound to pray in behalf of his Brother; a sin to death, concerning which
it seems unlawful for one man to pray for another. And yet it does but seem so
neither: For the Apostles words, I do not say he shall pray for it, amount not
to a Negative, that he shall not pray for it, as the fautors of the contrary
opinion would full gladly have it; (...) ^ather to a toleration, that they
might pray if they would, the business being of (...) a nature, that the
Apostle had no mind to encourage them in it, because he could not promise them
the success desired; but leaving every man to himself, to pray, or not to pray,
as his affections to the party, or Christian pity of the case might induce him
to. That by peccatum ad mortem somewhat more is meant than ordinary mortal
sins, is a thing past question; but what it is, is not so easy to discover.
St. Augustine will have the sin, which is here called a sin unto death, to be
that sin wherein a mam continues until his death without repentance August. de
corrept. and great. c. 12.
; but adds withal, That in as much as the name of the sin is not expressed,
many and different things may be thought to be it. Pacianus an old Catholic
writer, interprets it of peccata manentia Pacian. Epl. 3.
, Such sins as men continue in till the hour of death. St. Ierom reckons such
men to commit this sin, Qui in sceliribus permanent, who abide in their
wickedness, and express no sense nor sorrow of their lost estate. The
Protestant writers do expound it generally of the sin against the Holy Ghost;
For which, say they, no man ought to pray, because our Savior has testified
it to be irremissible Fulk. on the Rhemist. Test. 1 John 5.16.
. And to this end, they do allege a place from Ierom, affirming, Stultum esse
pro eo orare qui peccaverit ad mortem, That it is a foolish thing to pray for
him which sins unto death, because the man that is marked out to some visible
ruin, nullis precibus erui potest, cannot possibly be reprieved by prayer. But
herein Ierom is not consonant to himself elsewhere; for in another place he
tells us, with more probability, that nothing else is here meant, but that a
prayer for such a sin (whatsoever it be) is very difficulty heard Ierom.
. And this I take to be the truer, or at least the more probable meaning of the
Apostle, who says immediately before, This is the confidence which we have in
him, that if we ask any thing according to his will, he hears us, 1 John
5.14. And therefore lest we should conceive that this holds true in all
Petitions whatsoever, which we make for others, he adds, That if it be a great
sin, such as is not ordinarily forgiven, but punished with death, I dare not
say, that you can either pray with confidence, or that I can give you any great
hopes of prevailing in it. According as God said to the Prophet Jeremy, Pray
not for this people, for I will not hear thee Jere. 7.16.
. And though St. Augustine sometimes thought this sin to be final impenitency,
or a continuance in sin till death without repentance, yet in his Book of
Retractations, he resolves the contrary, affirming, That we must despair of no
body, no not of the wickedest, as long as he lives; and that we may safely pray
for him, of whom we do not despair Aug. Retract.
. So that for ought we see by these Texts of Scripture, there is no sin which
properly may be said to be irremissible. And therefore I resolve with
Maldnonate, though he were a Jesuit Maldon. in Matthew. 12.
, Tenendam esse regulam fidei, quae nullum peccatum esse docet quod a Deo
remitti non possit, That it is to be embraced as a rule of Faith, that there is
no sin so great (whatsoever it be) which God cannot pardon; for which, if
heartily bewailed and repented of, there is no mercy and forgiveness to be
found from God. I shut up all with that of the Christian Poet ^rudens. Hamart
in fu^^.
.

Spem capio sore quicquid ago, veniabile apud te,
Quamlibet indignum venia faciamve loquarve.
In English thus.

My words (O Christ) and deeds, I hope, with thee,
Though they deserve no pardon, venial be.
CHAP. VI. Of the Remission of sins by the Blood of Christ, and of the
Abolition of the body of sin by Baptism and Repentance. Of confession made unto
the Priest, and the Authority Sacerdotal.
THus have we in the former Chapter discoursed at large of the Introduction and
Propagation of Sin, and of the several species or kinds thereof; and also
proved, by way of groundwork and foundation, that albeit sin in its own nature
be so odious in the sight of God, as to draw upon the sinner everlasting
damnation; yet that there is no sin so mortal, so deserving death, which is not
capable of pardon or forgiveness by the mercy of God. We next descend unto
those means, whereby the pardon and remission of our sins is conveyed unto us;
the means by which so great a benefit is estated on us. The principal agent in
this work is Almighty God, of whom the Scripture says expressly, That it is one
God which shall justify the circumcision by Faith, and the uncircumcision
through Faith Romans 3.^0. and 8.33.
; that it is God which justifies the Elect; and that the Scriptures did
foresee, That God would justify the Heathen Gal. 3.^.
. In all which Texts, to justify the Elect, the Jews, the Gentiles, does
import no more, than freely to forgive them all the sins which they had
committed against the Law, and to acquit them absolutely from all blame and
punishment, due by the Law to such offenses. Which appears plainly by that
passage of the same Apostle, where speaking of Almighty God, as of him that
justifies the ungodly, Romans 4.5. he shows immediately by way of gloss or
exposition, in what that justifying does consist, saying out of David, Blessed
are they whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered: Blessed is
the man to whom the Lord will not impute sin Romans 4.7, 8.
. And this God does, not out of any superadded or acquired principle, which is
not naturally in him; but out of that authority and supreme power which is
natural and essential to him: In which respect, no Creature can be said to
forgive sins, no not our Savior Christ himself, in his mere humane nature; but
must refer that work unto God alone: For who can (so) forgive sins, but God
only, said the Pharisees truly Mark 2.7.
. And as God is the only natural and efficient cause of this justification,
the principal Agent in this great work of the remission of sins; so is the
only moral and internal impulsive cause which inclines him to it, to be found
only in himself; that is to say, his infinite mercy, love, and graciousness,
toward his poor creature, Man, whom he looks on as the miserable object of
grace and pity, languishing under the guilt and condemnation of sin. Upon
which Motives, and no other, he gave his only begotten Son to die for our
sins, to be a ransom and propitiation for the sins of the world 1 John 2.2.
: That whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but (through forgiveness
in his Blood) have life everlasting John 3.16.
. But for the external impulsive efficient cause of this act of Gods, the
meritorious cause thereof, that indeed is no other than our Lord JESUS CHRIST;
the death and sufferings of our most blessed Lord and Savior. For God
beholding Christ, as such, and so great a sufferer for the sins of men, is
thereby moved and induced to deliver those that believe in him, both from the
burden of their sins, and that condemnation which legally and justly is due
unto them. This testified most clearly by that holy Scripture, Be ye kind
(says the Apostle) unto one another forgiving one another, even as God for
Christ's sake has forgiven you Ephesians. ^.32.
. Where plainly the impulsive cause inclining God to pardon us our sins and
trespasses, is the respect he has unto the sufferings of our Savior Christ.
Thus the Apostle tells us in another place, That we are freely justified by the
grace of God, through the Redemption which is in CHRIST JESUS Romans 3.24.
. Justified freely by Gods grace, as by the internal impulsive cause of our
Justification, by which he is first moved to forgive us our sins; through the
Redemption procured for us, by the death and sufferings of CHRIST JESUS, as the
external moving or impulsive cause of so great a mercy.

In this respect, the pardon and forgiveness of the sins of men, is frequently
ascribed in Scripture to the Blood of Christ; as in the Institution of the
Sacrament by the Lord himself, This is my Blood of the New Testament, which is
shed for you, and for many, for the remission of sins Matthew. 26.28.
. Thus the Apostle to the Romans, Whom (JESUS CHRIST) did God set forth to be a
propitiation through faith in his Blood, to declare his righteousness, for the
remission of sins that are past, through the forbearance of God Romans 3.25.
. And thus to the Ephesians also, In whom we have redemption through his Blood,
the remission of sins, according to the riches of his grace Ephesians. 1.7.
. To this effect St. Peter also, For ye know that ye were not redeemed with
corruptible things, as with silver and gold, but with the precious Blood of
Christ, as of a Lamb without blemish, and without spot 1 Pet. 1.18, 19.
. And so St. John, The Blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sin 1 John
1.7.
; and, he has washed us from our sins in his own Blood, in another place Apoc.
1.5.
. Infinite other places might be here produced, in which the forgiveness of our
sins is positively and expressly ascribed to the Blood of Christ, or to his
death and sufferings for us, which comes all to one. But these will serve
sufficiently to confirm this truth, that the main end for which Christ suffered
such a shameful ignominious death, accompanied with so many scorns and
torments, was thereby to atone or reconcile us to his Heavenly Father, to make
us capable of the remission of our sins, through the mercy of God; and to
assure us by that means of the favor of God, and our adoption to the glories of
eternal life. By that one offering of himself has he for ever perfected all
them that are sanctified Heb. 10.14.
: Blotting out the handwriting of Ordinances which was against us, and nailed
it to his cross for ever Col. 2.14.
; to the end, that being mindful of the price wherewith we were bought, and of
the enemies from whom we were delivered by him, We might glorify God both in
our bodies and our souls 1 Cor. 6.20.
, and serve the Lord in righteousness and holiness, all the days of our lives.
For if the blood of Bulls and of Goats, and the ashes of an Heifer, sprinkling
the unclean, sanctified to the purifying of the flesh, in the time of the
Mosaical Ordinances: How much more shall the Blood of Christ, who through the
eternal Spirit offered himself without spot to God, purge your conscience from
dead works to serve the living God Heb. 9.13, 14.
, in the time of the Gospel? This is the constant tenor of the Word of God,
touching remission of our sins by the Blood of Christ. And unto this we might
here add the consonant suffrages and consent of the ancient Fathers; If the
addition of their Testimonies, where the authority of the Scripture is so clear
and evident, might not be thought a thing unnecessary. Suffice it that all of
them, from the first to the last, ascribe the forgiveness of our sins to the
death of Christ, as to the meritorious cause thereof; though unto God the
Father, as the principal Agent, who challenges to himself the power of
forgiving sins, as his own peculiar and prerogative, Isai. 43.25. Peculiar to
himself, as his own prerogative, in direct power essential and connatural to
him; but yet communicated by him to his Son CHRIST JESUS, whilst he was
conversant here on Earth, who took upon himself the power of forgiving sins
Matthew. 9.2, 6. and 28.18.
, as part of that power which was given him both in Heaven and Earth. Which as
he exercised himself when he lived amongst us, so at his going hence he left it
as a standing Treasury to his holy Church to be distributed and dispensed by
the Ministers of it, according to the exigencies and necessities of particular
persons. For this we find done by him as a matter of fact, and after
challenged by the Apostles as a matter of right belonging to them and to their
successors in the Ministration. First, For the matter of fact, it is plain and
evident, not only by giving to St. Peter (for himself and them) the Keys of
the Kingdom of Heaven, annexing thereunto this promise, That whatsoever he did
bind on Earth, should be bound in Heaven, and whatsoever he did loose on
Earth, should be loosed in Heaven Matthew. 16.19.
; But saying to them all expressly, Receive the Holy Ghost John 20.22, 23.
; Whose sins soever ye remit, they are remitted unto them, and whose soever
sins ye retain, they are retained. And as it was thus given them in the way of
fact, so was it after challenged by them in the way of right, St. Paul
affirming in plain terms, That God was in Christ, reconciling the world unto
himself, by not imputing their trespasses unto them 2 Cor. 5.19, 20.
; but that the Ministry of this reconciliation was committed unto him, and
others, whom Christ had honored with the title of his Ambassadors, and Legates
here upon the Earth.

Now as the state of man is twofold in regard of sin, so is the Ministry of
reconciliation twofold also in regard of man. As he is tainted with the guilt
of original sinfulness, the Sacrament of Baptism is to be applied, the Laver of
Regeneration, by which a man is born again of water, and the Holy Ghost, John
3.5. As he lies under the burden of his actual sins, the Preaching of the Word
is the proper Physic to work him to repentance, and newness of life, that on
confession of his sins he may receive the benefit of absolution. Be it known
unto you (says St. Paul) that through this man (CHRIST JESUS) is preached unto
you remission of sins; and by him all that believe are justified from all
things, from which ye could not be justified by the Law of Moses Act 13.38.
.

And first for Baptism, It is not only a sign of profession and mark of
difference, whereby Christian men are discerned from others which be not
Christened, (as some Anabaptists falsely taught) but it is also a sign of
regeneration or new birth, whereby, as by an instrument, they that receive
Baptism rightly, are grafted into the Church, the promises of the forgiveness
of sin, and of our adoption to be the sons of God, by the Holy Ghost, are
visibly signed and sealed; Faith is confirmed, and Grace increased by virtue of
Prayer unto God Artic of Rel. 27. An. 1562.
. This is the public Doctrine of the Church of England, delivered in the
authorized Book of Articles, Anno 1562. In which, lest any should object, as
Dr. Harding did against Bishop Jewel, That we make Baptism to be nothing but a
sign of regeneration Defense of the Apol. part. 2. cap. 11. sect. 3.
, and that we dare not say, as the Catholic Church teaches according to the
holy Scriptures, That, in and by Baptism, sins are fully and truly remitted,
and put away: We will reply with the said most Reverend and Learned Prelate (a
man who very well understood the Churches meaning) That we confess, and have
ever taught that in the Sacrament of Baptism, by the death and Blood of Christ,
is given remission of all manner of sins; and that not in half, or in part, or
by way of imagination and fancy, but full, whole, and perfect of all together;
and that if any man affirm, that Baptism gives not full remission of sins, it
is no part nor portion of our Doctrine. To the same effect also, says
judicious Hooker, Baptism is a Sacrament which God has instituted in his
Church, to the end, That they which receive the same, might thereby be
incorporated into Christ, and so through his most precious merit, obtain as
well that saving grace of imputation, which takes away all former guiltiness;
and also that infused divine virtue of the Holy Ghost, which gives to the
powers of the soul the first dispositions toward future newness of life Hook.
Eccl. Pol. l. 5. n. 59. and 67.
. But because these were private men, neither of which, for ought appears, had
any hand in the first setting out of the Book of Articles (which was in the
reign of King Edward the Sixth) though Bishop Jewel had in the second Edition,
when they were reviewed and published in Queen Elizabeth's time; let us consult
the Book of Homilies, made and set out by those who composed the Articles; And
there we find, that by Gods mercy, and the virtue of that Sacrifice which our
High Priest and Savior CHRIST JESUS the Son of God once offered for us upon
the Cross, we do obtain Gods grace, and remission, as well of our original sin
in Baptism, as of all actual sin committed by us after Baptism, if we truly
repent and turn unfeignedly unto him again Homil. of Salvation, p. 2.
. Which doctrine of the Church of England, as it is consonant to the Word of
God in holy Scripture, so is it also most agreeable to the common and received
judgment of pure Antiquity. For in the Scripture it is said expressly by St.
Peter, to the sorrowful and afflicted Jews, Repent and be baptized every one of
you in the name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins Acts 2.38.
. By Ananias unto Saul, Arise, and be baptized, and wash away thy sins, calling
on the name of the Lord Acts 22.16.
. By Paul himself, who had experimentally found the efficacy and fruit thereof
in his own person, That God according to his mercy has saved us, not by works
of righteousness, which we have done, but by the washing of regeneration, and
renewing of the Holy Ghost Tit. 3.5.
; and finally, by St. Peter also, That Baptism does now save us (not the
putting away of the filth of the flesh, but the answer of a good conscience
toward God) by the resurrection of Jesus Christ 1 Pet. 3.21.
. This also was the judgment of the Ancient Writers, and that too long before
the starting of the Pelagian Heresies, to which, much is ascribed by some as to
the advancing of the efficacy and fruit of Baptism, by succeeding Fathers. For
thus Tertullian, Quotidie nunc aquae populos conservant, deleta morte per
ablationem delictorum. Exempto scilicet reatu eximitur and poena. Ita
restituetur homo Deo ad similitudinem ejus qui retro ad imaginem Dei conditus
fuerat Tertul. de Baptism c. 5.
. Now (says he) do the Waters daily preserve the people of God, death being
destroyed and overthrown by the washing away of sins; for where the guilt is
taken away, there is the punishment remitted also. St. Cyprian thus, Remissio
peccatorum sive per Baptismum sive per alia Sacramenta donetur, proprie
Spiritus Sancti est Cypr. de Baptism. Christi.
; that is to say, that the remission of sins, whether given in Baptism, or by
any other of the Sacraments, is properly to be ascribed to the Holy Ghost. The
African Fathers in full Council do affirm the same, and so does Origin also for
the Alexandrians, of both which, we shall speak anon in the point of
Paedo-baptism. Thus Nyssen for the Eastern Churches, (...). Baptism, says he,
is the expiation of our sins, the remission of our offenses, the cause of our
new birth and regeneration Nyss. in Orat. de Baptis. Christ.
. Thus do the Fathers in the Constantinopolitan Council, profess their Faith in
one Baptism (or being only once baptized) for the remission of sins. And
finally, That this was the doctrine of the Church in general, before Augustines
time, who is conceived to be first that did advance the power and efficacy of
Baptism to so great an height, in opposition to the Pelagian Heresies V. Tombs
his Book against Infant Baptism.
, appears by a byword grown before his time into frequent use; the people
being used to say, when they observed a man to be too much addicted to his
lusts and pleasures, Sine illum faciat quod vult, nondum enim baptizatus est
August. Conf. l. 1. c 11.
; i. e. Let him alone to take his pleasure, for as yet the man is not baptized.
More of this we shall see anon in that which follows. Nor is this only
Primitive, but good Protestant Doctrine as is most clear and evident by that of
Zanchius, whom only I shall instance in, of the later Writers. Cum Minister
Baptizat, etc. When the Minister baptizeth, I believe that Christ with his own
hand reached, as it were, from Heaven, Filium meum sanguine suo in remissionem
peccatorum aspergere, besprinkleth the Infant with his Blood to the remission
of sins, by the hand of that man whom I see besprinkling him with the Waters of
Baptism. So that I cannot choose but marvel how it comes to pass, that it must
now be reckoned for a point of Popery, that the Sacraments are instrumental
causes of our justification, or, of the remission of our sins; or that it is a
point of learning, of which, neither the Scriptures, nor the Reformed Religion,
have taught us any thing Goodw. of Justify part. 2. c. 4. sect. 12.
. So easy a thing it is to blast that with Popery, which any way does
contradict our own private fancies.

But here before I do proceed further in this present Argument, I shall make
bold to divert a little upon the ancient use of Baptismal-washings, before our
Savior Christ ordained it for an holy Sacrament; that we may see what hint our
Savior took in this Institution, who thought it no impiety to fit the ancient
usages of the Jews and Gentiles to the advancement of the Gospel; though now to
hold conformity with the Church of Rome, in matters very pertinent to the same
effect, is reckoned for the greatest Error in our Reformation.

First for the Jews, that they used very frequent washings, is most clear in
Scripture. For not only the Pharisees particularly, who were a superstitious
supercilious Sect, but the Jews in general have this Character given them by
St. Mark Mark 7.3, 4.
, That they eat not, except they wash their hands often; that they washed as
often as they came from market, or any public place of meeting; and that they
did observe upon old Tradition, the washing of Cups, and Pots, of brazen
Vessels, and of Tables. And this they did not only in the way of cleanliness,
or in point of manners, to wash away the filth of their bodies when they went
to eat, or to make clean their Vessels, and other Vtensiles, which they ate or
drank in: But rather out of an opinion, that by those frequent washings they
preserved themselves from the filth and corruption of the world; especially in
their return from the streets and market places Mark 7.4.
, where possibly they might meet with some that were uncircumcised, or
otherwise obnoxious to an ill report, by which they thought themselves defiled.
And this I take to be an ancient custom of the Jews, because I find it much in
use amongst the Samaritans, who were in many, if not most, of their common
Ceremonies, but the Apes only of the Jews. Who on the same opinion of their
own dear sanctity, which had so perfectly possessed their neighbors of Judah,
did use when they had visited any of the Nations, to sprinkle themselves with
urine upon their return; and if by negligence or necessity of business they had
touched any, not of their own Sect, to drench themselves over-head and ears in
the next Fountain Epiphan. in Panar.
. The reason of which is thus delivered by Epiphanius, (...), i. e. Because
they held it for an abomination to come near a man that was of a different
Religion, or persuasion from them. But this appears more plainly by that
passage of St. John's Gospel, where there is mention of six water pots of stone,
at the marriage feast of Cana in Galilee, (...), after the manner of the
purifying of the Jews John 2.6.
. Where by no means I can consent to Maldon^tes interpretation, who will not
have these water-pots to be used at all for any Legal or Mosaical purification,
Qua qui secundum legem polluti erant, mundabantur, in which they used to wash
themselves who had incurred some legal pollution; but only for those
Pharisaical washings, which the Pharisees used often in the midst of a feast:
Which had it been the meaning of the holy Evangelist, it is like he would have
rather called it, The purification of the Pharisees, than the Purifying of the
Jews. We also have the testimony of St. Paul himself, affirming, That the
service of God under the first Tabernacle, consisted only in meats and drinks,
and diverse washings, and carnal Ordinances Heb. 9.10.
; where we see diverse washings put for part of the Legal Ceremonies. Not to run
over more particulars, that washing of the hands was used as a sign of
innocence, a sign of freedom from such guilt as men stood accused of, is not
apparent only by those words of the Royal Psalmist, I will wash my hands in
innocence, Psalm. 26. But by that memorable passage in the Book of Deuteronomy,
where the Elders and Judges of the people, in the case of an accidental
undiscovered murder, are commanded to wash their hands, and say, Our hands have
not shed this blood, neither have our eyes seen it Deuteronomy. 21.7.
. In imitation of which custom (for the Romans had no such, for ought I have
read) Pilate forsooth, must wash his hands at the death of Christ Matthew. 27.2^
, as if it had been an accidental ( chance-medley, as we use to call it) not a
studied murder.

Next, to proceed unto the Gentiles, these Legal washings of the Jews in case
of pollution, were quickly taken up by the Neighbor-nations, near whom they
lived, and amongst whom their ordinary business and affairs gave them
correspondence; insomuch, that they had not only frequent washings to cleanse
them from ordinary offenses, but used them also as purgations for their greater
crimes, and as preparatories to their Sacrifices and Divine solemnities. Of
sprinkling the common people with this holy water we find this of the Poet,
Spargere rore levi, and ramo foelicis Olivae, lustravitque viros Virg. Aeneid.
, that is to say, That the Priest sprinkled the bystanders with an Olive-bough,
and thereby hallowed them (as it were) for the present service. Of the opinion
which they had of doing away their greater crimes by the washing of water, we
have the example of Orestes, who having killed his Mother, and so lost his
wits, is said by Homer to have recovered his understanding again, by this kind
of washing. The like did Theseus on the murder of the sons of Pallas Pausan. in
Attic.
; the like Apollo and Diana on the slaughter of Pytho Id. in Corinthiac.
, as we read in Pausanias, a learned writer of the Greeks. Tertullian has
delivered it for a general rule, Penes veteres quisquis se homicidio infecerat,
purgatrice aqua se expiabat Tertul. de Bapt. c. 5.
, That anciently they which were guilty of homicide or wilful murder, did use
to expiate the crime with a purging water; and that they also did the like in
the case of Perjury. Nay, he that was returned from war, and was no otherwise
involved in the blood of mankind, than according to the ordinary course of
battles, did either in piety or modesty think himself unfit to deal in any
civil, much less sacred matters, Donec me flumine vivo abluero Virg. Aeneid. 2.
, as the Poet has it; till he had washed himself in the running waters. Of
which, and of the Expiations which were conceived to be attained by means
thereof, we find this in Ovid, O nimium faciles, qui tristia crimina caedis
Fluminea tolli posse putatis aqua.


In English thus. Too facile souls, who think such heinous matters
May expiated be with River-waters.
Wherein, although he hit it right, as to the humor of the people in those
expiations, yet he was somewhat out in the word fluminea, the waters only of
the Sea serving for expiation of the greater crimes, Propter vim igneam
magnopere purgationibus consentaneam Alex. ab Alex. Dier. Genial. l.
, as my Author has it. For which cause questionless, the Papists in the
composition of their holy water, make use of Salt, as one of the chief
ingredients, that it may come more near in nature unto the water of the Sea; of
which, there is enough to be seen in the Roman Rituals. Last of all in their
Sacrifices and solemn service of the Gods, it is observed by Alexander ab
Alexandro, In omnibus sacris sacerdotem, cum diis immolat and rem divinam
facit, corporis ablutione purgari Id. ibid.
, That the Priest used to wash himself all over in the way of Purgation. The
reason was, because that by such washings they did not only think themselves
to be cleansed from sin, Sed and castimoniam praestari putant, but that
chastity and purity of mind was conferred withal: And to come nearer to our
business, Tertullian tells us, Sacris quibusdam per lavachrun initiari Tertul.
de bap: c. 5.
that unto some of their sacred offices, as to those of Isis, Mithras, and the
Games of Apollo, they were consecrated or initiated by a kind of Baptism. So
that our Savior finding such a general consent both of Jews and Gentles, in
ascribing unto water such an expiating and cleansing power, retained it as the
fittest element for the initiating of his followers in his holy Church, and the
cleansing of their souls from that filth of sin, which nature and corrupt
education had contracted in them. No otherwise than in the institution of the
other Sacrament, he made not only use of the bread and Wine, but almost also
of the accustomed formal words which were in use amongst the Jews at their
Paschal Supper: his heavenly wisdom so disposing of these former Rites, that he
seemed rather to direct and sanctify them to his own great end, than any way
to innovate in the institution.

Having thus spoke a little of these Baptismal washings used amongst the Jews
(for by that name they do occur both in St. Marks Gospel and in Paul's Epistle)
and of the efficacy falsely and erroneously ascribed unto them by the ancient
Gentiles: We must next look upon them as an Institution of our Lord and
Saviors, and of the true effect of that institution in cleansing of our selves
from the filth of sin. Not that we give this power to water, as it is an
Element, but do ascribe the same to Baptism as it is a Sacrament ordained by
Christ himself to that end and purpose. And so far it is pleaded by Tertullian
strongly, that if the Gentiles did ascribe so great power to water in all their
Expiations and Initiations, Quanto id verius aquae praestabunt per Dei
authoritatem Tertul. de bap. c. 5.
, How much more truly may it be made effectual to those very purposes by the
authority and appointment of Almighty God? All waters in themselves were alike
effectual as to the curing of Naamans Leprosy; Abanah and Pharphar, Rivers of
Damascus, as proper to that cure as the river of Jordan 2 King. 5.12.
, had not God in the way of a present remedy, conferred that blessing upon
Jordan, which was not to be found in those other Rivers. It was Gods blessing,
not the water, which produced that Miracle, to which all other waters might
have been as serviceable, if God had said the word, and disposed so of them.
And so it is also in the work of regeneration, which we ascribe, not to the
water, but the institution; nor to the Sacramental water of it self alone, but
to the holy Spirit which is active in it, Et ipsi soli hujus efficienciae
privilegium manet Cypr. de baptismo Chri.
, to which belongs the prerogative in this great effect. For as the Spirit of
God moving upon the waters of the great Abyss, did out of that imperfect matter
produce the world; so the same Spirit moving on the waters of Baptism, does by
its mighty power produce a regenerate Creature. From hence it is, that in the
setting forth of so great a work, the water and the Spirit are often joined
together, as in St. John, Except a man be born again of Water and the Spirit,
he cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven Joh. 3.5.
; And in St. Paul, accrrding to his mercy has he saved us, by the washing of
regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost Tit. 3.5.
: And in St. John's Epistle also, There be three that bear witness on the earth,
the Spirit, and the Water, and the Blood 1 John 5.8.
. And if the Spirit go along with the Waters of Baptism (as we see them joined
together in the holy Scripture) no question but it will be made effectual to
the work intended, which is, the washing away of sins, whether small or great,
whether Original or Actual, of what sort soever.

For proof whereof, besides what has been said of this Point already, let us
behold the practice of the Primitive times, when the Discipline of the Church
was grown so severe, that some were hardly admitted at all unto public
Penance, others removed from the communion of the Church, for three, four, or
seven years together, and sometimes (as the quality of the sin appeared) for
the whole time of their lives. A Discipline which the Church used only toward
those which had given up their names in baptism, to be visible members of that
body whereof Christ was Head; and that made more unpleasing to most sort of men
upon the growth and spreading of the Novatian Heresy, who mistaking the
Apostles meaning, declared all those to be incapable of mercy, who sinned after
Baptism, and therefore neither would admit them unto public penance, nor
otherwise restore them to the Churches peace, of whom St. Cyprian thus
complains, Sic obstinatos esse quosdam ut dandam non putent lapsis
poenitentiam Cypr. l. 4. Epl 2.
. And though the Orthodox party did abominate these Novatian rigors, yet were
they too strait-laced toward those who fell into any public or notorious sin,
after they had received the Sacrament of Regeneration, it being conceived, that
after Baptism, major in sordibus delictorum reatus August. Confess. l. 1. c. 11.
, as it is in Augustine, the smalest sins seemed greater than indeed they were.
Upon this ground, and an assurance which they had that all their sins whatever
were expunged in Baptism, it was the custom of too many to defer their Baptism
till the hour of their death, or till they lay so far past hope on the bed of
sickness, that nothing but the stroke of death was to be expected. Thus does
the Story tell us of the Emperor Constantine, that in extremo vitae die Eusebius.
de vita Constant. l. 4. cap. 51.52.
, when he was even brought to the point of death, he was baptized in Nicomedia
by the hands of Eusebius; the like of Theodosius a most pious Prince: upon
these grounds St. Austine did defer his baptism a long time together, that so
he might more freely enjoy those pleasures to which he was addicted in his
younger years Aug. Confess. 1.
. On the like fear of such relapses as were censured so severely in those rigid
times, he put off the baptizing of Adeodatus (his own natural Son) till he came
to thirteen years of age, at what time the severity of the Church began to
slaken, or rather the good Fathers judgment was then changed to the better, on
the right understanding of the use and nature of that holy Sacrament. A custom,
as ill taken up, so as much condemned; and subject to the Churches censures
when occasion served; those which were so baptized and escaped from death, whom
they called Clinici Eusebius Eccles. hist. l. 6. c 42. and
, because they were baptized on the bed of sickness, being disabled by the
Canons from the holy Ministry Council. Neocaesar. Can 12.
. But whether censured or not censured it comes all to one, as to the point I
have in hand, which was to show that in the practice and opinion of those elder
times, the Sacrament of Baptism was held to be the general plaster for all
manner of sins; and though sometimes deferred till the hour of death, on the
occasion and mistakes before remembered, yet then most earnestly desired, ad
delenda erratu illa, quae quoniam mortales erant, admiserant Eusebius. de vita
Constable. l. 4. c. 1.
, as the Historian says of the Emperor Constantine, for expiating of those
sins which they had committed.

But on the other side, as some did purposely defer it till the time of their
death, out of too great a fear of the Church's censures, and a desire to enjoy
the pleasures of sin yet a little longer; so others, and those the generality
of the people of God, out of a greater care of their childrens safety, procured
it to be administered unto them in their ^endrest infancy, almost as soon as
they were born. And this they did on very pious and prudential considerations
though there be no express command, nor positive precept for it in the holy
Scripture, for when we read, that we were shapen in iniquity, and conceived in
sin, Psalm. 51.5. that all men are by nature the children of wrath, Ephesians. 2.3.
and that except a man be born again of water and the Spirit he cannot enter
into the Kingdom of Heaven, Joh. 3.5. What Parent can so far put off all
natural affections, as not to bring his child to baptism (especially if there
be any danger of death) as soon as all things fitting can be had in readiness
for that ministration? And though there be no positive precept, nor express
command for Infant Baptism in the holy Scripture, it is sufficient ground for
the Church to go on, if it be proved to be an Apostolical practice; and that it
is at least an Apostolical practice, there will appear sufficient evidence to
any man not prepossessed with prejudice, and mis-perswasions: For when we find
particular mention of the baptizing of whole households, as of that of Lydia,
Act. 16.15. of the Jailer verse. 33. of the same Chapter, and of Stephanus, 2
Cor. 1.16. Either we must exclude children from being part of the household,
which were very absurd, or else admit them with the rest to this holy
Sacrament. But because many exceptions have been made against these instances,
some thinking it possible enough that those households had no children in them
(as we see many families in great Towns and Cities where no Infants are;)
others restraining the administration of Baptism unto such of the household, as
by giving testimony of their Faith and Repentance were made capable of it; we
must for further proof make use of a Rule in Law, and back that Rule of Law by
a practical Maxim delivered by the Ancient Fathers: The Rule is this, That
Custom is the best interpreter of a doubtful Law; and we are lessoned thereupon
to cast our eyes, in all such questionable matters, unto the practice of the
State in the self-same case. Si de Interpretione legis quaeritur, imprimis
inspiciendum est, quo ^ure Civitas retro in hujusmodi casibus usa fuit.
Consuetudo enim optima interpretatio Legis est De legib and long. Consuet.
, Where we have both the Rule and the Reason too; Which Rule as it holds good
in all Legal Controvesies, so there is a practical Maxim of as much validity
in matters of Ecclesiastical nature, delivered by the ancient Writers. This
Maxim we will take from St. Augustines mouth, and after show how consonant it
is unto the mind of the rest of the Fathers. Quod universa tenet Ecclesia, nec
in Conciliis institutum, sed semper retentum est, non nisi Apostolica
autoritate traditum rectissime creditur August. Cont. Donat. l. 4. c. 23.
, i. e. Whatsoever the whole Church maintains, which has not been ordained
by authority of Councils, but been always holden, most rightly may be thought
to have been delivered by Apostolical authority. To this agrees St. Hierom
also, saying, Etiamsi Scripturae autoritas non subesset, totius Orbis in hanc
partem consensus instar praecepti obtineret Hierom. adv. Lucifer.
, That were there no authority of the Scripture for it, yet the unanimous
consent of all the world were as good as a precept. So does St. Irenaeus also,
who tells us that in doubtful cases, Oportet in antiquissimas rec^rrere
Ecclesias in quibus Apostoli conversati sunt, and ab iis de praesenti
quaestione sumere quod certum and re liquidum est Iren. advers. haer. l. 3 c. 4.
, we are to have recourse to the Eldest Churches in which some of the Apostles
lived, and learn of them what is to be determined in the present question. And
to this Maxim thus confirmed, not only the Romanists do submit, but even
Calvin too; who tells us he would make no scruple to admit Traditions, Si
modo Ecclesiae traditionem ex certo and perpetuo sanctorum and Orthodoxorum
consensu confirmaret Calv. cont. Pigh. de lib. Arbit.
, If Pighius could demonstrate to him, that such Traditions were derived from
the certain and continual consent of Orthodox and godly men. If then, according
to this Maxim, it be made apparent, that Infant Baptism has been generally
used in the Church of Christ, not being ordained in any Council, but practiced
in those elder Churches in which some of the Apostles lived, and since
continued in the constant and perpetual usage of all godly men, we may
conclude, that certainly it is of Apostolical Institution, though there occur
no positive Precept for it in the Book of God.

Which ground so laid, we will proceed unto our proofs for this general
practice, taking our rise from Augustines time, without looking lower, because
his Authority is conceived to have carried the Baptism of Infants, almost
without control in the following ages Tombs Exam. of Marsh. p. 12.
. First then for Augustine, he is positive and express herein, Infantes reos
esse Originalis peccati, and ideo baptizandos esse, That Infants being guilty
of Original sin, are to be Baptized August. Sermon. 8. de Verb. Apl. c 8.
, and this he calls antiquam fidei regulam, the old Rule of Faith, and says
expressly, Hoc Ecclesia semper habuit, semper tenuit, and a majorum fide recepit
Id. Sermon. 10. de Verb. Apl. c. 2.
, That the Church always held and used it, deriving in from the authority and
credit of their Predecessors. St. Chrysostom a Presbyter of the church of
Antioch, where St. Peter sometimes sat as Bishop, somewhat before S. Augustins
time, speaks of Infant Baptism, as a thing generally received in the Christian
Church; Hoc praedicat Ecclesia Catholica ubique diffusa, The Catholic Church
(says he) over all the world does approve of this. Some what before him lived
St. Hierom, a Presbyter of the Church of Rome, which questionless was one of
the Apostolic Sees, founded both by St. Peter and St. Paul, the two great
Apostles of Jew and Gentile, as the Ancients say Iren. adv. haeres. l. 3. c. 3.
, And he is clear for Infant Baptism. Qui parvulus est Parentis in Baptismo
vinculo solvitur, etc. Children, says he, are freed in Baptism from the sin of
Adam, in the guilt whereof they were involved, but men of riper years from
their own and his Hieron. adv. Pelag. l. 3. in fine.
. And in conclusion he resolves, Infantes etiam in peccatorum remissionem
baptizandos, etc. That Infants are to be baptized for the remission of sins,
and not as the Pelagians taught, into hopes of Heaven, as if they had been
guilty of no sin at all. A little before him flourished St. Ambrose, successor
to Barnabas the Apostle in the Sea of Millain Martyro^. Romans in Jun. 10.
, who speaking of the Pelagian Heresies, who published amongst other things,
that the hurt which Adam did unto his posterity, was exemplo non transitu,
rather by giving them such a bad example of disobedience, than by driving on
them any natural sinfulness, does thereupon infer, that if this were true,
Evacuatio Baptismatis parvulorum Ambr. lib. 10. Epl. 84.
, The Baptism of Infants were no longer necessary. And in the same age, but
before, flourished Gregory Nazianzen, who calling Baptism Signaculum vitae
cursum ineuntibus, a Seal imprinted upon those who begin to live, requires,
That children should be brought unto holy Baptism, (...), lest they should wart
the common grace of the Church Nazianz. de Baptism. Orat. 41.
. And though he afterward advise, that the Baptism of Children should be
deferred till they be three years old, that so they might be able to make
answer to some Catechetical questions; yet in a case of danger he does press it
home; it being better (as he grants) that they be sanctified insensibly, they
not perceiving it (by reason of their tender years) than that they should
depart hence without that signature. Ascend we from the fourth to the third age
of the Church, and there we find St. Cyprian the Great, Bishop of Carthage, as
great a stickler for the Baptism of Infants, as any one whosoever in the times
succeeding. He in an Epistle to one Fidus does thus plead the case, Porro si
etiam gravissimis delictoribus, etc Cypr. Epl. 59. ad Fidum.
. If, says he, remission of sins be given to the greatest offenders, none of
which, if they afterward believe in God, are excluded from the grace of
Baptism: Quanto magis prohiberi non debet infans, qui recens natus nihil
peccavit, etc. How much rather should an Infant be admitted to it, who being
newborn, have not sinned at all, save that they have contracted from Adam that
original guilt, which follows every man by nature; and therefore are more
capable of the forgiveness of sins, than others are, Quod illis remittuntur non
propria sed aliena peccata, Because it is not their own, but another sin: Nor
was this the opinion of St. Cyprian only, but the unanimous consent of Sixty
and six African Bishops convened in Council, by whom it was declared (as he
there relates) That Baptism was to be ministered as well to Infants, as unto
men of riper years. Before him flourished Origin, and he tells us plainly,
Ecclesiam ab Apostolis traditionem accepisse, etiam parvulis Baptismum dare
Origin. in Romans c. 6.
, That the Church received the Baptism of Infants from Apostolical tradition.
And more than so, he shows, That it is ministered to them in reference to
original sin; which were it not to be found in Infants, and that they did not
stand in need of remission of sins, Gratia Baptismi superflua videretur, the
grace conferred in Baptism would be thought superfluous Id. in Levit. hom. 8.
. And in another place, speaking of the Ceremonies of Baptism, and of the
Questions and Answers which are therein used, he makes them to be matters of
such antiquity, that few or none ( Quis facile explicat rationem Id. in Numer.
homil. 5.
, as his words there are) were able to assign the true reason of them. Which
questionless must be understood of Infant Baptism, or else it could be no hard
matter to assign a Reason, of any Question there propounded unto men of years.
And in this age I place the Author of the Questions and Answers ascribed to
Justin Martyr, and found amongst the rest of his works, but are none of his:
Which Author, whosoever he was, speaking of this Infant Baptism, as a thing
usual in his time, and of the different estates of such Infants as died
baptized, from those that departed without Baptism, resolves it thus, That the
baptized receive good things at the Resurrection, which the other do not
Justin. Mart. Qu 56. ad Orthod.
; and that they are accounted worthy of the good things they receive by
Baptism, (...), by reason of the faith of those who present them to it, their
Godfathers, and Godmothers, as we call them now. In the beginning of this
third Century, or the end of the second, did Tertullian write his Book of
Baptism; in which, though he seem to disallow of Baptizing Infants, in regard
of the danger which may arise unto the Sureties, ( Quid enim necesse est
sponsores etiam periculo ingeri Tertul. de Baptis. c. 18.
?) if either they should die before they see their undertaking performed, or
the child fall into a vicious course of life; yet even his disallowance is a
proof sufficient, That Infant Baptism, in his time, was a thing in use. And I
hope no man will conceive, who rightly understands what Tertullian was, that
his dislike or disallowance, is to be put in balance with a Catholic custom,
retained for so many ages in the Church of Christ; or if it were, not only
children must be barred from the favor of Baptism, but all unmarried persons,
whether Maids or Widows, Batchelors or Widowers, (for them he would have put
off too in the self-same Chapter,) unless they can give good assurance of their
future continuance. But before him, about the middle of this second Century
flourished Irenaeus, one who conversed with Polycarpus, and others of St. John's
Disciples; and he seems very clear also for Infant Baptism, Christus venit
omnes per seipsum salvare, omnes inquam qui per ipsum renascuntur in Deum,
Infantes, and parvulos, and pueros Irenaeus adv. haeres. l. 2. 39.
. Christ, says he, came into the world to save all by himself; even all, which
by him are born again unto God, whether they be Infants, Boys, or Youths. Upon
which words the Glosser makes this observation, Nomine renascentiae Dominica
and Apostolica phrasi Baptismum intelligi; that is to say, that under the name
of new birth, or of being born again unto God, both our Redeemer, John 3.5. and
his Apostles, and St. Paul, Tit. 3.5. understand the Sacrament of Baptism.
Which note, by whomsoever made, is not alone agreeable unto holy Writ, but to
the meaning and acception of most Catholic Doctors, as might be made apparent,
had I place and time. And so far we are able to go in a direct line toward the
very time of the Lords Apostles; and doubt not but we could have pursued it
higher, had the writings of those few Worthies which went before, come
uncorrupted to our hands. But this I hope will prove without further search,
That Infant Baptism has the countenance of Apostolical Tradition, though not
of any Positive precept.

But here two Questions will arise, which require an Answer. For being that
Faith in Christ has been always reckoned for a necessary condition in them
that come to be baptized; what Faith can possibly be expected at the hands of
Infants? And secondly, If Baptism be so necessary, as it seems to be by most of
the authorities before produced, for purging us from the corruption of original
and actual sins, what is to be conceived of them who die unbaptized?

First, For the Faith which is by some supposed to be in Infants born of
Christian Parents, I can by no means yield unto it. For actual Faith they can
have none, in regard they are not able to distinguish between good and evil;
and though the Seeds of Faith are sown in them by Baptism, or that thereby they
are prepared to receive an habit of Faith, which may be afterward acquired by
them, or infused into them; yet that they do bring with them an Habitual Faith,
I can by no means understand. How then were children justified? by what faith
baptized? I answer, By the faith of others. The faith of those who do present
them unto Baptism, and of the Church which does admit them, and finally of
their Christian Parents, with whom the Covenant was made for themselves and
theirs. St. Augustine is express for this, in more places than one. Sicut eos
renasci per ministerium baptizantium, ita eos credere per corda and ora
confitentium August. Epl* 105*
: As they are born again (says he) by the Ministry of those who do baptize
them, so they believe by the hearts and mouths of those who confess Christ for
them. Again, says he, Satis pie recteque creditur prodesse parvulo eorum
fidem, a quibus consecrandus offertur Id. de lib. Arbitr. l. 3.23.
, That it may piously be believed, that little children are benefited by the
faith of them, by whom they are offered unto Baptism. And in another place he
says, Accommodat illis, matter ecclesia aliorum pedes ut veniant, aliorum corda
ut credant Id. Sermon. 10. de verb. Apl.
; The Church our Mother does supply them with other men's feet, that they may
come, and with other men's hearts too, that they might believe. The like saying
may be also alleged (as B. Jewel does acknowledge Defense of the Apol. part. 2.
c. 11.
) out of St. Cyprian, Ierom, and others. And to what other material purpose, if
not to this, served Godfathers and Godmothers in those early days, whereof we
find mention in Tertullian, and in the Quaestiones ad Orthod. ascribed to
Justin Martyr, as before was shown? Or who made answer to those Interrogatories
proposed in Baptism, unto Infants, whereof Origin speaks, but the Sponsores or
Presenters spoken of by the other two? And though St. Bernard be a Postnatus,
one of later date, yet, in my mind, he gives a very special reason why it
should be so; why God should graciously accept the faith of others for those
tender Infants, who have none of their own. Nec enim omnipotentis justitia
propriam ab his putat exigendam fidem, quos novit nullam propriam habere culpam
Bernard. Epl. 77.
; The justice of Almighty God (says he) does not think it fitting, that having
committed no particular sin of their own, he should exact of them a proper and
particular faith of their own; but as they were undone by another fault, so
they should be relieved by another faith. To which effect, though not so
fully, I have read somewhere I am sure in St. Jerome, but cannot well remember
where, Qui peccavit in altero, credat in altero; That he which has sinned in
others, may believe by others.

For the next point, though we maintain the necessity of Baptism, as the
ordinary outward means to attain salvation; and do correct those Ministers by
the Churches censures, by whose gross negligence or default (if required to do
it) an Infant shall die unbaptized Can. 69. of the year 1603.
, Yet we conceive it not so absolutely necessary in the way to Heaven, but it
is possible for a man to be saved without it. For antiquity supplied in some,
the want of water, by blood, which many times was the case of Martyrs; in
others, the inevitable want of Baptism, by the Holy Ghost, the earnestness of
the desire, if it might have been had, supplying the defect of the outward
Ceremony. Hence came the old distinction of Baptismus fluminis, Baptismus
flaminis, and Baptismus sanguinis. Concerning which, the Fathers teach us this
in brief Field. of the Church. l. 3. c. 21.
, That where men are debarred by an evitable impossibility from the outward
Sacrament, Faith and the inward conversion of the heart, flying unto God in
JESUS CHRIST, through the sweet motion and gracious instinct of the Holy
Spirit, may be reckoned for a kind of Baptism, because thereby they obtain all
that, which they so earnestly sought after in the Sacrament of Baptism, if they
could have been partakers of it. And if it be so, that an ordinary degree of
Faith do sometime obtain salvation without the Baptism of Water; much more may
that which makes men willing to suffer death for Christ's and the Gospels sake,
and be baptized, as it were, in their dearest blood. It was not simply the want
of Baptism, but the neglect and contempt thereof, which anciently in the
Adulti, men of riper years, was accounted damnable. But what may then be said
in the case of Infants, in whom are no such strong desires, no such sanctified
motions? Shall we adjudge them with St. Augustine to eternal fire, (as some say
he did) who thereby worthily got the name of Infanto-mastyx, or the scourge of
Infants, as he had gloriously gained the title of Malleus Pelagianorum, The
Maul or Hammer of the Pelagian Heretics? No: God forbid, that we should so
restrain his most infinite mercies unto outward means. Or shall we feign a
third place for them, near the skirts of Hell, as our good Masters do in the
Church of Rome? We have as little ground for that in the holy Scripture: Rather
than so, we may resolve, and I think with safety, that as the Faith of the
Church, and of those which do present such as are baptized, is by God accepted
for their own; so the desire and willingness of the same Church, and of their
Godfathers, and Parents, where Baptism cannot possibly be had, is reputed
theirs also. Or if not so, yet we refer them full of hope to the grace of God,
in whose most rigorous constitutions and sharpest denunciations, deepest
mercies are hid; and who is still the Father of mercies, though the God of
justice. And so I shut up this discourse with these words of Hooker Hooker
Eccl. Polit. l. 5.
, That for the Will of God to impart his grace to Infants without Baptism, the
very circumstance of their natural birth, may serve in that case for a just
Argument; whereupon it is not to be misliked, that men in a charitable
presumption do gather a great likelihood of their salvation, to whom the
benefit of Christian parentage being given, the rest that should follow is
prevented by some such casualty, as man has no power himself to avoid. So he,
of those which are descended of a Christian stock. What may be thought of
children born of unbelievers, has been said elsewhere: And so much of the first
ordinary outward means ordained by Christ for the remission of our sins, the
holy Sacrament of Baptism.

Proceed we next unto the other, which is the power of the Keys committed in
the person of St. Peter to the Catholic Church, and those which by the
Churches order are authorized and appointed to it: That miserable man being
wrought upon unto repentance, by the power and preaching of the Word, may on
confession of his sins be forgiven of God, or have the benefit of absolution
from the hands of his Ministers, if their spiritual necessities do so require.
For certainly there is not a more ready way to forgiveness of sins, than by
sincere and sound repentance; nor any speedier means to beget repentance, than
to present our sins unto us in their own deformity, by the most righteous
myrror of the Word of God. For when the sinner comes to know by the Word of
God, the heinousness of his misdeeds, the wrath which God conceives against him
for his gross offenses, together with the punishment which is due unto them
according to his rigorous judgments: The thought thereof must needs affect him
both with fear and horror, and make him truly sensible of his desperate state.
To whom then shall he fly for succor, but to God alone, humbly confessing unto
him both his sins and sorrows? How can he look to be recovered of the biting of
these fiery Serpents, but by looking with the eye of faith on that brazen
Serpent, which was exalted on the Cross for his Redemption? Or if he find his
Conscience troubled, and his mind afflicted, and that he has not confidence
enough to draw near to God; then let him go unto the Priest, whom God has made
to be the Judge between the unclean and the clean Levit. 10.10.
, whom God has authorized to minister the word of comfort, to raise up them
that be fallen, and support the weak, to give light to them that sit in darkness,
and in the shadow of death, and to guide their feet in the way of peace. This
is the Method to be used, the course to be pursued by those who do desire to
profit in the School of repentance. And about this, as to the main and
substance of it, there is but little difference amongst knowing men. For that
Repentance is a necessary means required for the remission of sins, committed
after Baptism, the Ancients and the Moderns do agree in one. The Fathers used
to call it secundam tabulam post naufragium, the second Table after Spiritual
shipwreck; on which, all those who had made shipwreck of the Faith and a good
conscience used to lay hold (after they had foregone the benefit received in
Baptism) to keep them up from sinking in the depth of despair, from being
overwhelmed in the bottomless Ocean of sin and judgment. The Moderns set as
high an estimate upon it, if they go not higher: For Calvin places in
repentance and forgiveness of sins the sum and substance of the Gospel; Non abs
re summa Evangelii statuitur in poenitentia and remissione peccatorum Calvin.
Instit. l. 3. c 3. n. 1.
. And Beza makes it a necessary preparation, ad perendum and recipienduns
Christi beneficium, for seeking and obtaining of those benefits which we have
by Christ Bez. Epl. 20.
. The like does Zanchius in his Book De Relig. Cap. 18. These. 1. And it is
generally agreed on also, That confession of our sins must be made to God, to
whom alone belongs the proper and original power of forgiving sins; and who
alone is able to renew those heavenly characters of divine graces in our souls,
which had been formerly defaced by the continual batteries and assaults of sin.
If we confess our sins, says the Apostle* he is faithful and just to forgive
us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness 1 John 1.9. Verse. 8, 10.
. But if we say, we have not sinned, we both deceive our selves, and make God a
liar. Upon which words there cannot be a better gloss than that of Ambrose.
Considering (says he) that there is no man free from the guilt of sin, Negate
hoc sacrilegum Ambros. in Psalm. 118. ult.
, it was an high degree of sacrilege to affirm the contrary; that being one of
the Prerogatives of Almighty God, and far above the common law of nature? But
on the other side, Remedium confiteri, It is, ^aith he, a present remedy to
confess the same; all manner of diseases being then most dangerous, when they
are hid from the Physician. And it is generally agreed on by all parties too,
according to the holy Scripture, that none but God has proper and original
power of forgiving sins, (for who can so forgive sins, but God alone? said the
Pharisees rightly, Luke 5.21.) and that it appertains unto him alone to create
in us a clean heart, and renew a right spirit within us, Psalm. 5^.10. Nor do I
find it much disputed amongst moderate men, but that satisfaction unto men for
the wrong sustained, and to the Church for public scandals, has always been
accounted a concomitant of sincere repentance. The old rule holds
unquestionably true in the present times; and, non dimittitur peccatum nisi
restituatur ablatum, that sin is never fully pardoned, till the party wronged
have satisfaction, either in fact or in the reality of our intentions, is a
good piece of Pro^estant doctrine for ought I can tell. And as for satisfaction
to the Church in the case of scandal, St. Augustine does require it in his
Encheiridion, Vt fuit etiam satis ecclesiae in qua remittuntur peccata August.
Enchei^id. c. 65.
, That the Church have also satisfaction in which sins are pardoned. He must be
very ignorant in all Ancient writers, who makes doubt of this, and not much
conversant in the writings of the late Divines, who knows not how this
satisfaction is insisted on by the strictest of our Reformators. Nay, I will go
a little further, and say according to the Scriptures, and the Primitive
Fathers, That satisfaction also must be given to God. Not satisfaction of
condignity as the Schoolmen call it Vasquez in 3. part. Tho. Tom. 4.
, which is a just and equal compensation for the sin committed; for so Christ
only satisfied for the sins of men; but satisfaction of congruity and
impetration, by which God is incited on the part of man, by his contrition, and
humiliation, and other penitential actions, to free him from the punishment
which he has deserved. The Sacrifice of God is a broken spirit, an humble and
a contrite heart, he will not despise Psalm 51.17.
. With which, and such like sacrifices is the Lord well pleased Heb. 13.16.
; better than with a Bullock which has horns and hoofs Psalm. 69.31.
. And in this sense, (not in relation unto temporal punishments, remaining
after the remission of the guilt it self, as the Papists use it) we are to
understand the word in the Ancient Fathers; as Per delictorum poenitentiam Deo
satisfacere, in Tertullian, Lib. de poenit. Cap. 5. Precibus and operibus suis
Deo patri misericordi satisfacere, in St. Cyprian. Epist. 10. Per poenitentiae
dolorem, humilitatis gemitum, cordis contriti sacrificium co-operantibus
eleemosynis, in St. Ambrose.

But the main matter in dispute, (for we will not trouble our selves further
about this particular) is, Touching the confession of our sins to men, and the
authority of Sacerdotal Absolution: In the first of which we differ from the
Church of Rome; and in the other, from the Grandees of the Puritan faction.

First, For confession to be made to the Priest or Minister, it is agreeable
both to the doctrine and intent of the Church of England, though not so much in
practice as it ought to be. For in an Exhortation before the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper, the Priest as Minister is required to say unto the People Second
Exhortation before the Communion.
, That if there be any of them which otherwise cannot quiet his own conscience
by the means aforesaid, but requires further comfort or counsel, then let him
come to me (the Parish Minister) or some other discreet and learned Minister of
Gods Word, and open his grief, that he may receive such ghostly counsel,
advice, and comfort, as his conscience may be relieved; and that by the
ministry of Gods Word he may receive comfort, and the benefit of absolution,
to the quieting of his conscience, and the avoiding of all scruple and
doubtfulness. So also in the form of Visitation of the sick, the infirm person
is required to make a special confession (to the Minister) if he feel his
conscience troubled with any weighty matter; after which confession, the Priest
shall absolve him in this sort Form of visitation of the sick.
. But because men might be unwilling to make such confession, for fear their
secret sins should be brought to light, both to their danger and disgrace; in
case some obligation lay not on the Priest or Minister, for his concealing of
the same; the Church has taken order for their security: For in her
Ecclesiastical Constitutions she has thus ordained* That if any man confess
his secret and hidden sins to the Minister, for the unburthening of his
conscience, and to receive spiritual consolation, and ease of mind from him;
the said Minister shall not at any time reveal and make known, to any person
whatsoever, any crime or offense so committed to his trust and secrecy (except
they be such crimes as by the Laws of this Land, his own life may be called
into question for concealing the same) under pain of irregularity Canon 113. of
the year 1603.
. And poena irregularitatis, as the Canonists tell us, not only does deprive a
man of all his spiritual promotions for the present time, but makes him utterly
incapable of any for the time to come; and therefore is the greatest penalty,
except degradation from his Priesthood, which possibly a Clergyman can be
subject to. And finally, because good Laws are nothing worth, unless some care
be taken for their execution, it was made one of the enquiries in the Book of
Articles established in the Convocation of the year 1640. for a perpetual rule
and standard in all Episcopal and Archidiaconal Visitations Canon 9. of the
year 1640.
, and proposed thus to the Churchwardens, viz. Have you ever heard that your
said Priest or Minister has revealed and made known at any time to any person
whatsoever, any crime or offense committed to his trust and secrecy, either in
extremity of sickness, or in any other case whatsoever (except they be such
crimes as by the Laws of this Land, etc.) declare the name of the Offender,
when and by whom you heard the same Article of Visit. c. 2. n. 25.
. In which we see, this Church allows of one Key only to unlock Confession,
and that the Gallican Church does allow of also. For in the Readmission of the
Jesuits into the University of Paris, it was especially conditioned and
provided for, amongst other things, That if they heard of any attempt or
conspiracy against the King, or his Realm, or any matter of treason in
Confession, they (and all other Clergymen on the like occasions) should reveal
the same unto the Magistrate Contin of the Fr. hist. p. 30.
. But to proceed, As is the purpose of the Church, such also is the judgment of
those learned men which are most eminent therein, both for parts and piety,
especially for their aversness from all Popish fancies.

First, Bishop Jewel thus for one, Abuses and errors being removed, and
specially the Priest being learned, we mislike no manner of Confession, whether
it be private or public. For as we think it not unlawful to make open
Confession before many, so we think it not unlawful (abuses always excepted) to
make the like confession in private, either before a few, or before one alone
Defense of the Apol. part. 2. c. 7. sect 2..
. The like says Bishop Morton in his Appeal, It is not questioned between us
whether it be convenient for a man burdened with sin, to lay open his
conscience in private unto the Minister of God, and to seek at his hands, both
counsel of instruction, and the comfort of Gods pardon: But whether there be,
as from Christ's institution, such an absolute necessity of this private
confession, both for all sorts of men, and every Ordinance and particular sin,
so as without it there is no pardon and remission to be hoped for from God
Mortons Appeal. l. 2. c. 14.
. Bishop Overal put it into his Enquiries amongst the Articles of his Episcopal
Visitation, Anno 1619. Whether the Minister did his duty in exhorting people to
confession, according to the order of the Common Prayer Book; or had revealed
any thing so made known unto him, contrary to the 113 Canon, that so he might
be punished accordingly See the whole Article in Montag. Gagg. c. 12.
. And finally, thus Bishop Usher, the now Primate of Armagh, Be it therefore
known, that no kind of confession, either public or private, is disallowed by
us, which is any ways requisite for the due execution of the ancient power of
the Keys, which Christ bestowed upon his Church. The thing which we reject is,
that new Pick-lock of Sacramental Confession, obtruded upon men's consciences as
a matter necessary to salvation Answer to the Jesuits Challenge. c.
: Others as eminent as they, might be here produced: But I content my self with
these, because that even in the opinion of those very men who have cast
scandals upon those others, as inclined to Popery, they are not chargable with
any correspondence with the Church of Rome. Nor shall I show, how consonant
this doctrine is to the Ancient Fathers, who require this confession of us; nor
of the Lutheran Churches who do still retain it, as appears plainly by the
Augustane confession, saying, Nam and nos confessionem retinemus Confess. Aug.
cap. de Conf.
etc. and by the Testimony of Gerrardus, and other of their learned Writers
Gerrard. Lo. Com. Tom 3. de poenit.
Only I shall add here what Bellarmine has affirmed of Calvin, because his
judgment, I am sure, will be worth the having, Admittit etiam Calvinus privatam
confessionem coram Pastore, quando quis ita angitur and afflictatur, peccatorum
sensu, ut se explicare nisi alieno adjutorio nequeat Bellarm.
. Calvin (says he) admits of private confession before a Minister, when a man
is so perplexed and troubled in his mind, that he cannot extricate himself no
otherwise out of these anxieties.

What then? Is there no difference in this point between Rome and us?
Assuredly, much every way, especially as to the necessity, and particularity:
For those of Rome impose an absolute necessity of this Sacramental Confession,
as they call it, and that De jure divino, by virtue of some positive, and
direct command even from Christ himself; and that too of all sins, and with all
the circumstances, which is a tyranny and torture to the souls of men. But the
Protestants (says Bishop Morton) acknowledge the use of it with these two
restrictions: The first, That it be free in regard of Conscience; the second,
That it be possible in regard of performance Mort. App. l. 2. c. 14.
. And Bellarmine informs of Calvin also, that he puts these limitations upon
Confession, Ut libera sit, nec ab omnibus exigatur, nec necessario de omnibus
Bellar. ut supra.
; that is to say, That it be left at liberty, and neither exacted of all men,
nor the enumeration of all particular sins required of them. First then, the
Papists make it absolutely necessary to a man's salvation, and that too by
Divine precept. Without it there is no way to Heaven, says P. Lombard P. Lomb.
Sent. l. 4. did. 17.
. Pope Innocent the third denied Christian burial unto such as die without
Confession Innocent. in Council. Later. c. 21.
. And Hugo in his Book De potestate Ecclesiae, is bold to say, That whosoever
comes to the Communion unconfessed, be he never so repentant and sorry for his
sins, does without doubt receive it to his condemnation Hugo de pot. Eccles.
How so? for that we will enquire of the Council of Trent, where we shall
find, Ad salutem necessariam esse jure divino, That it is necessary to
salvation by the Law of God Council. Trid. Sess. 14. c. 5.
; one of the Sacraments of the New Testament, and therefore not to be omitted
upon any terms. And yet for all their great brags of the Ius Divinum of
Sacramental or Auricular Confession, call it which you will, though they have
ransacked many Texts of Scripture to find it out, it has been hitherto but to
little purpose. Some build it on those words in St. Matthews Gospel, where he
speaks of those that were baptized by John in Jordan, confessing their sins,
Matthew. 3.6. But, what says Maldonate to this? Quis unquam Catholicus tam
indoctus fuit ut ex hoc loco Confessionis probaret Sacramentum Maldonat. in
Matthew. 3.
: Was ever Catholic so unlearned, as to go about to prove Sacramental
Confession from that Text? Some hope to find it in those words of our Savior
Christ, Whose sins ye remit, they are remitted, etc. John 20.23. But Vasquez
says, that of all those who have undertook it, Vix invenies qui efficaciter
inde deducat, You shall hardly meet with any that have effectually deduced a
good proof from thence Vasq. Tom 4. Qu. 90 Art. 1.
. Others presume as much on that place of the Acts, where it is said, That many
which believed, came and confessed, and showed their deeds, Acts 19.18. But
this, says Cajetan, was a public Confession, and in generals only, sed non
confessio Sacramentalis Cajetan in Acts 19.18.
, Not such a private and particular one as is now required; not such a
Sacramental one as is now defended. But we might well have saved this
particular search, it being ingenuously confessed by Michael de Palacios, a
Spanish Writer, That notwithstanding all their pains, to found it on some Text
of Scripture, they are so far from being agreed amongst themselves Palacios in
Sent. l. 4. did. 17.
, that it is much to be admired, Quanta sit de hac re concertatio, What
contention there is raised about it, and how badly they agree with one another.
And if they have no better ground for the main foundation, how little hopes may
we conceive of finding any good in their superstructures? And yet upon no
better grounds do they exact a most unreasonable particularity of all men's
affairs, to be delivered to them in confession; requiring of all persons, being
of age, a private and distinct confession of all and every known mortal sin,
open and secret, of outward deed, and inward consent, together with all
circumstances thereof, though obscene and odrous, not fit to be communicated to
a modest ear; and that too once a year, at least, if they do not oftener. For
this we need not go much further than the Council of Trent, where we shall
find, Oportere a poenitentibus omnia peccata mortalia, quorum post diligentem
sui discussionem conscientiam habent, in confessione recenseri, etiamsi
occultissima sunt, and tantum adversus duo ultima Decalogi mandata (remember
that they divide the last Commandment into two) commissa, etc Council. Trid.
Sess. 4. cap 5. ca. 4, 7.
. Which how impossible it is to do, should one go about it, what an
intanglement it may prove unto the conscience of a penitent sinner, and what a
temptation also to the Priest himself, to be acquainted with particulars so
unchaste and lustful, I leave to any sober Christian to determine of, who shall
find more hereof in Alvares Pelagius de Planctu Ecclesiae, L. 2. Art. 2, 3,
27, 73, 83. and Agrippa de Vanitate Scientiarum, cap. 64. Writers of their own,
than I think fitting at this time they should hear from me, who do not love to
rake in such filthy puddles. So then, the business of Confession does stand
thus between us, That we conceive it to be free, whereas those of Rome will
have it obligatory; we, that it is Iuris positivi only, but they Iuris divini;
we, that it is a matter of convenience, and they of absolute necessity. And
then for the performance of it, they do exact a punctual enumeration of all
sins, both of commission and omission, together with all the accidents and
circumstances thereunto belonging; which we conceive in all cases to be
impossible, in some not expedient, and in no case at all required by the Word
of God.

Now as we disagree with those of the Church of Rome, about the nature and
necessity of private confession, so have we no less differences with the
Grandees of the Puritan faction, about the efficacy and power of Sacerdotal
Absolution, which they which speak most largely of it, make declarative only,
others not so much; whereas the Church has taught us, that it is authoritative
and judicial too. Authoritative, not by a proper, natural, and original power,
for so the absolving of a sinner appertains unto God alone; but by a delegated
and derived power, communicated to the Priest in that clause of their
Commission, Whose sins soever ye remit, they are remitted; and whose sins
soever ye retain, they are retained, John 20.23. Which proves the Priest to
have a power of remitting sins, and that in as express and ample manner, as he
can receive it. But though it be a delegated, Ministerial power, yet does not
the descent thereof from Almighty God, prove it to be the less judicial: Then
Judges, and other Ministers of Justice sitting on the Bench, may be said to
exercise a judicial power on the lives and fortunes of the Subjects; because
they do it by virtue of the Kings Commission, not out of any Sovereign power
which they can challenge to themselves in their several circuits. Now that the
Priests or Ministers of the Church of England, are vested with as much power in
forgiving sins, as Christ committed to his Church, and the Church to them, the
formal words, Whose sins soever ye remit, they are remitted, etc. which are
still used in Ordinations, do expressly signify. Which though some of the
Grandees of the Puritan faction have pleased to call Papisticum ritum, an old
Popish ceremony Travers de Discipl. Eccl. p. 53.
foolishly taken up by them, continued with small judgment by our first
Reformers, and minore adhuc in ecclesia nostra retentus, and with far less
retained by the present Church; yet we shall rather play the fools with the
Primitive Christians, than learn wit of them. And for the exercise of this
power, we have this form thereof laid down in the Public Liturgy; where, on
the hearing of the sick man's confession, the Priest is to absolve him with
these formal words In the Visitation of the sick.
, viz. Our Lord Jesus Christ, who has left power unto his Church to absolve
all sinners, which truly repent and believe in him, of his great mercy forgive
thee thine offenses: And by his authority committed unto me, I absolve thee
from all thy sins, in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost, Amen. In which we find, that the Sacerdotal power of forgiving sins, is
a derived or delegated Ministerial power, a power committed to his Ministers by
our Lord and Savior; but that it is Judicial also, not Declarative only. It
is not said, That I do signify or declare, that thou art absolved, which any
man may do as well as the Priest himself; but I do actually absolve thee of all
thy sins, which no mortal man can but he. In this the Priest has the
pre-eminence of the greatest Potentate. And in this sense it is, that St.
Chrysostom says, Deus ipse subjecit caput Imperatoris manui Sacerdotis
Chrysostom. de Esaiae Verb. Homil. 5.
, i.e. That God himself has put the head of the Prince under the hand of the
Priest: For as no man whatsoever, although he use the same words which the
Minister does, can consecrate the Elements of Bread and Wine into the Sacrament
of the Body and Blood of Christ, because he wants the power of Order, which
should enable him unto it; so no man not in Priestly order can absolve from
sin, though he may comfort with good words an afflicted Conscience, or though
he use the same words which are pronounced by the Minister in absolution. The
reason is, because he wants the power of order, to which the promise is annexed
by our Savior Christ, which makes the sentence of the Priest to be so
judicial; which when the penitent does hear from the mouth of the Minister, he
need not doubt in foro conscientiae, but that his sins be as verily forgiven on
Earth, as if he had heard Christ himself in foro judicii, pronouncing them with
his own mouth to be forgiven in Heaven: According to the promise made unto St.
Peter (or the Church in him) when he delivered him the Keys; that whatsoever he
did loose on Earth, should be loosed in Heaven Matthew 6.19.
. And so we are to understand St. Chrysostomes words, Iudex sedet in terris,
dominus sequitur servum Chrysostom. de verb. Isai. Hom. 5.
. The Judge remains upon the Earth, the Lord follows the servant. His meaning
is, That what the servant does here upon the Earth, according to his Masters
will, the same the Lord himself will confirm and ratify. To which effect, it
is affirmed by others of the Ancient Writers, but in clearer words, That the
judgment of man goes before the judgment of God. The Priest is then a Judge to
pronounce the sentence, and not a Crier only (as some say) to proclaim what
the Judge pronounces; and as a Judge does actually absolve or condemn the
sinner, by the same power of pardoning or retaining sins which he had from
Christ, or which Christ executes by him as his lawful deputy. For as Kings are
said to minister Justice to their Subjects, though they do it not in their own
persons, but by a power devolved on subordinate Officers; and as Christ himself
may properly be said to have fed the multitudes, though he gave the loaves
only unto his Disciples, and his Disciples to the multitudes Matthew. 14.19.
: So he may also be affirmed to absolve the penitent, although he do it by the
mouth of the Priests or Ministers; it being his act (...), and theirs but
(...), originally his, and ministerially theirs, the same power in both. And
this may further be made good by that form of Speech, used by our Savior in
the delegation of this power unto his Apostles, and by them to his Ministers in
all ages since, being the very same with that which he himself has given us in
the Pater noster. In his Commission it is thus, (...), whose sins soever ye
remit, John 20.23. And in the Lords Prayer it is thus, (...), and forgive us
our sins, Luke 11.4. The same word used in the original for the one, and the
other. And if it be a Solecism to say, as no doubt it is, That we desire no
more of God in that clause of the Prayer, than that he would signify or
declare that our sins are pardoned: The Solecism must be as great (for ought I
can see) to say, That they are only signified or declared to be pardoned by
the mouth of the Minister.

Now that this is the meaning and intent of the Church of England, some of our
Romish adversaries do not stick to grant, though others to calumniate this most
Orthodox Church have given out the contrary. For one of their great
Controversors has declared in print, that it is the doctrine of some of the
Protestants, That Priests have power not only to pronounce the remission of
sins, but to give it also; And that this seems to be the doctrine of the
Communion Book, in the Visitation of the sick, where the Priest says, And by
his authority committed unto me, I absolve thee from all thy sins, etc. Ap.
Montag. Answer to the Gogger. c. 11.
. And therefore when a foul-mouthed Jesuit had been pleased to charge us with
denying power unto the Priests of forgiving sins; Bishop Usher tells him to
his face, That he does us wrong Answer to the Jusuites challenge, p. 109.
, and proves it by the very formal words in our Ordination, Whose sins soever
ye remit they are remitted, and whose sins soever ye retain they are retained.
But no man can say more to this, than has been said already by Bishop Morton,
now Lord Bishop of Durham, The power of absolution (says that learned Prelate)
whether it be general or particular, whether in public or in private, is
professed in our Church; where both in our Public Service is proclaimed Pardon
and Absolution upon all Penitents; and a particular applying of particular
Absolution unto Penitents by the Office of the Ministry. And greater power
than this, has no man received from God B. Morions Appeal, p 270.
. And this has also been acknowledged by the Leaders of the Puritan faction,
who in their Petition to King James at his first coming to this Crown, excepted
against the very name of Absolution Answer of Oxon to the Petition.
, (as being a Forinsecal and Iuridical word* importing more, surely, than a
Declaration) which they desired to have corrected. And thereupon it was
propounded in the Conference at Hampton Court, That to the word Absolution in
the Rubric following the general Confession, these words, Remission of sins,
might be added for Explanations sake Conference at Hampton Court, p. 14, 88.
. And though Dr. Raynolds, one of the Four Proctors for the said Petitioners,
in the foresaid Conference, may be conceived to have been of the same opinion
with these of the agrieved sort, whom he did appear for; yet he was so well
satisfied in the power and nature of Sacerdotal Absolution, that he did
earnestly desire it at the time of his death, humbly received it at the hands
of Dr. Holland, the Kings Professor in Divinity in the University of Oxon, for
the time then being See Practice of Piety in fine.
; and when he was not able to express his joy and thankfulness in the way of
speech, did most affectionately kiss the hand that gave it. But what need more
be said for manifesting this judicial power in the remitting of sins, than what
is exercised and determined by the Church in the other branch of this
Authority, in retaining sins? By which, impenitent sinners are solemnly and
judicially cut off from the sacred Body of the Church, and utterly excluded
from the company and Communion of the rest of the faithful. Of which, the
Church has thus resolved in her public Articles, viz. That person which by
open denunciation of the Church, is rightly cut off from the unity of the
Church, and Excommunicate, ought to be taken of the whole multitude of the
faithful, as an Heathen and Publican, until be be openly reconciled by penance,
and received into the Church by a Judge, that has authority thereunto Article
of Religion 33. An. 1562.
Where clearly we have found a Judicial power, and a Judge to exercise the
same; and that not only in the point of retaining sins, in case of
excommunication, but also in reconciling of the penitent, in remitting sins, in
the way of ordinary absolution. Which whether it be given in Foro poenitentiae,
or in Foro Conscientiae, either in private on the confession of the party, or
publicly for satisfaction of the Congregation, does make no difference in this
point; which only does consist in the proof of this, That the Priests or
Ministers of the Gospel, lawfully ordained, have under Christ a power of
forgiving sins: Which comfortable doctrine of the remission of sins, by Gods
great mercy at all times, and the Churches Ministry at some times (as occasion
is) is the whole subject of this branch of the present Article. Proceed we next
to those great benefits which we reap thereby, The Resurrection of the Body,
and the Life Everlasting.

ARTICLE XI. Of the Eleventh Article OF THE CREED, Ascribed to St. IVDE, the
Brother of JAMES. (...). (i. e.) Carnis Resurrectionem. (i. e.) The
Resurrection of the Body.
CHAP. VII. Of the Resurrection of the Body, and the Proofs thereof. The
Objections against it answered. Touching the circumstances, and manner of it.
The History, and grounds of the Millenarians.
WE are now come unto that Article of the Christian Faith, which has received
most opposition, both at home and abroad: Abroad amongst the Gentiles of the
Primitive times, who used all their wit and learning to cry down this Doctrine;
at home, within the pale of the Church it self, by some who had the name of
Christians, but did adulterate the prime Articles of Christian belief by their
wicked Heresies.

First, for the Gentiles, it was a thing much quarrelled and opposed amongst
them, that Christ himself should be affirmed to have risen again; insomuch,
that St. Paul was counted mad by Festus Acts 26.24.
, and but a babbler at the best by the great wits of Athens Acts 17.18.
, for venturing to Preach before them of JESUS and the Resurrection, i.e. of
Jesus and his resurrection, for of that only he did speak, when they so judged
of him; but of this quarrel they grew soon weary, and so gave it off. For being
it was a matter of fact, confirmed at the first by so many witnesses who had
seen him and converted with him after his raising from the dead, and thereupon
received in the Church with such unanimity, that the faithful rather chose to
lay down their lives than to alter their Belief in that particular, the world
became the sooner satisfied in the truth thereof. But for the Resurrection of
the dead which was grounded on it, and that his Resurrection was of so great
efficacy, as that by virtue of it all the dead should rise, which had deceased
from the beginning of the world to the end thereof, that they accounted such a
monstrous and ridiculous paradox, as could not find admittance amongst men of
reason. For this it was which was so scoffed at by Cecilius in that witty
Dialogue Minut. Felix in Octavio.
; Re^ase ferunt post mortem, post favillas, they give it out (says he) that
they shall live again after death, and that they shall resume those very bodies
which now they have, though burnt to ashes, or devoured by wild beasts, or
howsoever putrified and brought to nothing. Putes eos jam revixisse. And this,
says he, they speak with so great a confidence, as if they were already raised
from the dust of the grave, and spoke as of a matter past, not of things to
come. And it did stomach them the worse, in that the Christians did not only
promise a Resurrection and new life to the bodies of men, which all
Philosophers and men of ordinary sense knew to be subject to corruption; but
threaten and foretell of the destruction of the Heavenly Bodies, the Sun, the
Moon, and all the glorious Lights in the starry Firmament, which most
Philosophers did hold to be incorruptible, as the same Cecilius does object in
the aforesaid Dialogue. That Christ was raised from the dead, besides the many
witnesses which gave credit to it, the Gentiles could not well deny (especially
as to the possibility of such a thing) without calling some of their own gods
in question. For not only the deity of Romulus did depend on the bare
testimony of one Proculus, who made Oath in the Senate, that he had seen him
ascend up into heaven, augustiore forma quam fuisset Florus Hist. Romans l. 1.
, in a more glorious shape than before he had: but that of Drusilla, and
Augustus, and Tiberius Caesar, which were all Roman gods of the last Edition
Seneca in Apocolocyntho.
, must fall unto the ground also for lack of evidence, if either it were
impossible for a dead man to be raised to life again, or taken up into the
Heavens, as our Savior was. But that from this particular instance (supposing
it for true, as it might be possibly) they should infer a general Doctrine,
that all the dead should rise again at the Day of Judgment, this would not
sink into their heads, unless it might be made apparent, as they thought it
could not, that any of that sect had been raised again, to confirm all the rest
in that opinion. Without some such Protesilaus Cecil. in Min. Fell.
no credit to be given to the resurrection, preach it they that would. It seems
the Gentiles in this point were like the rich man mentioned in our Saviors
Parable Luke 18.30.
, Except one rise up from the dead they will not believe. It was not Moses and
the Prophets, nor Christ and his Apostles that could do the deed.

Leaving these therefore for a while, and keeping those who did assume the name
of Christians, and yet denied this Article of the Christian Faith unto the
close of this discourse; Let us for our parts rest our selves on the Word of
God, and see what Moses and the Prophets, what CHRIST and his Apostles have
delivered to us in affirmation of this Doctrine. For Moses first, it is the
general opinion of most learned men, that he was the Author of the Book of Job
V. Bellar. de Script. Eccl.
, and that he wrote it purposely for a Cordial to the house of Israel, whom he
found very apt to despair of Gods mercies toward them, and easily out of
comfort in all times of trouble; Which granted, we shall have from Moses a most
ample testimony, where he reports these words of that Myrror of patience, I
know that my Redeemer lives, and that he shall stand at the latter day upon
the earth Job 19.25, etc.
; And though after my skin worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see
God; Whom I shall see for my self, and mine eyes shall behold, and not another,
though my reins be consumed within me. St. Hierom notes upon these words, that
no man since Christ's time did ever speak so clearly of Christ's resurrection and
his own, as Job does here before Christ's coming, Nullum tam aperte post
Christum, quam ipse hic ante Christum, de Christi resurrectione loquitur, and
sua Hieron. Praefat. in lib. Job.
, as the Father has it. And on the same, a Reverend Father of our own makes
this gloss or descant: It is affirmed, says he, by Job, that his Redeemer
lives, and shall rise again; which is as much as to say, He is the
resurrection and the life Joh. 11.25.
(St. John could say no more.) It is his hope; He is by it regenerate to a
lively hope 1 Pet. 1.3.
, St. Peter could say no more than that. He enters into such particulars, this
flesh, and these eyes 1 Cor. 15.53.
, which is as much as was or could be said by St. Paul himself. There is not in
all the Old, there is not in all the New Testament a more pregnant and direct
proof for the resurrection B. Andrews of the Resur. Ser. 5.
. St. Hierom as we saw before was of this opinion. St. Gregory comes not much
behind, who on these words of Job, gives us this short Paraphrase, Victurum me
certa fide credo, libera voce profiteor, quia Redemptor men's resurget qui inter
impiorum manus occubuit Gregor. M. Moral. in Job.
; that is to say, with a sure Faith I do believe (it was it seems a part of his
Creed) and with as great freedom I profess (he both believed in his heart, and
confessed with his mouth) that I shall rise again at the last day; for as much
as my Redeemer shall assuredly rise, who is to be done to death by ungodly men.
And this is further to be noted in this Text of Scripture, that we no sooner
hear of a Creator in Moses, than of a Redeemer in Job; no sooner of the death
of mankind in Adam, but of their restoring to life in Christ. And more than so,
that though Moses who wrote this was a Jew, yet Job who spoke it was a Gentile
(not of the seed of Jacob, though perhaps of Abraham's) to show, that both the
Jews and Gentiles (as well the Gentiles as the Jews) were to have their share
in the resurrection of Christ Jesus, and therefore in due time to expect their
own. I know that the Socinians, Anabaptists, and some other Sectaries, who are
no very good friends to the resurrection, do otherwise interpret these words of
Job, and will not have them meant of his resurrection, but of his restitution
to his former glories. But for my part I must profess, that if the Greek
Catena, and the authority of the Latin Fathers, and the consent of all the
Orthodox and learned Writers of these times, were to be laid aside as
incompetent Judges; I am not able to discern any thing from the Text or
Context, that the Holy Ghost intended them any other ways* than to set forth
Jobs constant faith in the resurrection, the knowledge that he had of his
Redemption from the jaws of death.

From Moses pass we to the Prophets, to the Psalmist first, Thou turnest man
unto destruction, and say, Return ye children of men, or come again ye
children of men, as the old Translation Psa. 90.3.
: Thou turnest men unto destruction, there we have their death; he calls them
to return again, there is there resurrection. And this appears yet further by
the following words, Thou carriest them away as with a flood, they are as a
sleep Ver. ^.
; and if they be but as a sleep, they shall be wakened in due time, at the
sounding of the last Trump, without all peradventure. I know indeed this Psalm
does bear the Title of the Prayer of Moses, but whether made by him, or by
David, or some other in his name, is not yet resolved: It is sufficient to this
purpose that it passes amongst David's Psalms, as a distinct and separate body
from the works of Moses.

On forwards to Isaiah, the Evangelical Prophet, who seems to look on Christ as
if gone before him, Thy dead men (says he) shall live, together with my dead
body shall they arise: Awake and sing ye that dwell in dust, for thy dew is as
the dew of herbs, and the earth shall cast out the dead Isa. 26.19.
. And parallel to this in another place, When ye be old your heart shall
rejoice, and your bones shall flourish like herbs; and then the hand of the
Lord shall be known toward his Servants, and his indignation toward his
Enemies Id. 66.14.
. In both these Texts we find a Resurrection of the dead, effected by the
raising of the body of Christ, and in some part with it; a resurrection like to
that of men which do wake from sleep; like that of herbs, which though they
creep into the earth in the time of Winter, shall again re-flourish in the
Spring. And in the last we have not only a pure evidence for a resurrection,
but for the Day of Judgment, which shall follow on it: wherein the righteous
Judge shall distribute his rewards and punishments, his hand of mercy toward
his Servants, but wrath and indignation upon all his Enemies. St. Hierom so
interprets the Prophets meaning, and parallels this last place with another
of the Prophet Daniel, in which it is affirmed expressly, that they which sleep
in the dust of the earth shall awake, some to everlasting life, and some to
shame and everlasting contempt Dan. 12.2.
: Thereupon he does thus infer, Omnes igitur Martyrs and sancti viri qui pro
Christo fuderunt sanguinem, and quorum tota vita fuit Martyrium, resurgent and
evigilabunt, atque laudabunt Deum Creatorem suum qui nunc habitant in pulvere,
de quibus in Daniele scriptum est Hieron. in Isa. 26.
, etc. Add to this rank of Proofs those several passages in which God calls
himself the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob Exodus 3.6.
and alibi.
, and the illation made from thence by our Lord and Savior, to prove the very
point which we have in hand; Concerning the resurrection of the dead, have you
not read (says he) that which was spoken to you of God, saying, I am the God
of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob? God is not the God of
the dead but of the living Mat. 22.31.
. Here is authority enough, we need seek no further; Authority enough to
persuade us this, that the Patriarchs before the coming of our Savior, were
certain of their resurrection to eternal life, that they were well assured of
this, that God would recompense their faith, and reward their piety, by making
death the way only to a greater happiness. And this we find to be a truth so
generally received amongst the Jews, even in the most declining time of their
Church and State; that none but the Sadduces, who also did deny the being of
Angels, and of Spirits also, did make question of it, who for this cause are
branded every where in the Gospel with this mark upon them, that they said
there is no resurrection, as Mat. 22.23. Mark. 12.19. Luke 20, 27. Act. 23.8.
just as it follows on the mention of Ieroboham the son of Nebat that he made
Israel to sin.

Now to these Positive Texts of Scripture, and such as have their being and
foundation only in the Old Testament, we will add such as are presented in
the New; and those not barely positive and peremptory as the rest before, but
such as seem to have a great measure of rationality in them, and to be
logically inferred upon very sound premises. And of this kind we meet with
diverse in St. Paul's Epistle to the Corinthians, amongst whom many doubtful
souls had called in question the resurrection of the body. To satisfy their
doubts, and remove their scruples, the Apostle grounds himself on this, that
CHRIST was risen. If CHRIST be risen from the dead, how say some among you that
there is no resurrection of the dead 1 Cor. 13.12.
? for if there be no resurrection of the dead, then is CHRIST not risen.
Considering therefore we have proved that CHRIST is risen, and that by the
testimony of no fewer than five hundred brethren at one time Ib. V. 6.
, besides the other arguments which have been and may be further alleged to
confirm that truth, it follows by the reason of the Apostle, that there is a
Resurrection of the Body also. And to this purpose that of Gregory, Quam in se
oftendit in me facturus est, exemplo hic monstravit quod promisit in proemio
Greg. M. Mor. in Job.
, That, says the Father, which he exemplified in himself, he will make good
upon me; what we find proved in his person, shall be further manifested in our
own. Besides, we know that Christ is often called in St. Paul's Epistles, the
head of the Church which is his Body as Ephesians 4.23. etc.
, and we with joy and gladness do acknowledge it for a certain truth. Now
Chrysostom has truly noted, (...) Crysost. in Ephesians.
, that where the head is, there also will the body be; and if the Head be
glorified, the Body will be also glorified; If therefore CHRIST our Head be
risen, then shall we also be raised in due time who are his Body, or at least
the Members of that Body; for ye are the body of Christ, and members in
particular 1 Cor. 12.27.
, says the same Apostle. But this must be expected in its own due time, as
before I said: I^ being not to be supposed that so great a work as this shall
be wrought upon us either unseasonably, or out of order; Every one in his own
order, says the Text, first CHRIST, the first fruits of the resurrection,
afterward such as are Christ's at his coming 1 Cor. 15 23.
. Where still observe how Christ's resurrection and our own are tied by the
Apostle in a string together. Eadem catena revincta est Christi resurrectio and
nostra, as my Author has it; we cannot stir one end of the chain, but the
other moves with it. This habitude or connection between Christ and us, will
help us to another Argument to confirm this Doctrine. For if we be the members
of the body of Christ, we must be crucified in our members, as Christ's body
was; Mortify therefore your earthly members Col. 3.5.
, says St. Paul. And certainly we may conclude, That if we be crucified with
Christ, we shall rise with Christ; if we do suffer with him, we shall also
reign with him Romans 8.17.
, and be glorified with him.

There is another rational way of Argumentation used by the Apostle; the sum
whereof in brief is this, That if there were no Resurrection of the Body,
whereby we might receive the comfort of those good acts which we have done in
our flesh; then should we have but small encouragement in the works of piety,
especially to hazard our estates, nay, our very lives in maintenance and
defense of the Holy Gospel. Why stand we then (says he) in jeopardy all the
day long 1 Cor. 15.30.
? And why have I my self encountered Beasts at Ephesus, after the manner of men
Ibid v. 31, 32.
, or suffered in my flesh that full variety of torments, that I may justly say
of my self, that I die daily? And not so only, but certainly we rob our selves
of too much pleasure by the severity of our Religion, and foolishly deny to our
lives those comforts, which make life valued for a blessing. For to what
purpose should we weary out our souls with fasting, and our skins with
sackcloth; or to what purpose do we make our knees even hard and callous, by
kneeling in his holy Temple; were there no Resurrection of the Body, or no life
to come? If in this life only we have hope in Christ, we were of all men the
most miserable Ibid. v. 19.
. Rather than so, let us give way to our desires, and eat and drink, enjoy the
pleasures of the world, whiles they are before us; for ought we know, we may
die to morrow Ibid. v. 32.
, and with that death to morrow there is an end of all things. Thus might a man
reason for a Resurrection in behalf of himself, and he may reason for it also
on the behalf of God, whose justice cannot be declared in the sight of men, if
there were no Resurrection of the flesh to express it by. To this end, we are
told by the same Apostle, That we shall all appear before the judgment seat of
Christ; that every man may receive according to that which he has done in his
body, whether good or evil Romans 10.10.
. The strength and efficacy of which Argument, as is elsewhere noted, is briefly
this. The Bodies of us men, being the servants of the soul to righteousness, or
else the instruments to sin, in justice ought to be partakers of that weal, or
woe, which is adjudged unto the soul; and therefore to be raised at the day of
judgment; that as they sinned together, or served God together, so they may
share together of reward or punishment. Which Argument, as it strongly proves
the Resurrection of the Body, so it as strongly does conclude for a
Resurrection of the same Body, the same numerical body which before we had, not
of a new created body, as some idly dream. For certainly it were no justice in
Almighty God, if one flesh should fast and pray, and kneel, and watch, and
weary out it self in the service of God, and another flesh reap that which it
never labored for. No comfort to the poor body at all, to abridge it self of so
much pleasure, and be exposed to so much danger and affliction, and another
strange body shall step up, and receive the reward. Jobs confidence was, That
he should see God with the same eyes, and none other for them Job 19.27.
. If they restrained themselves, as it were by Covenant with the Lord, from
straying after objects of lust, and not entice him to a maid, as he says he
did Id. 31.1.
; It is but justice, that they the same eyes, and none other, should be
rewarded with the view of a better object. If they have been poured out like
water Id. 16.20.
, and dropped many a tear in the sight of God; Reason and Justice both will
agree to this, That the tears should be wiped from those eyes, not from a pair
of new ones which did never shed any. And unto this St. Paul comes home, not
speaking of the Resurrection of a Body in general, but of this body in
particular. It is these eyes of Job, none other, which shall see the Lord; and
hoc corruptibile in St. Paul 1 Cor. 15.53.
, this corruptible, and none other, which must then put on corruption.

And thus far we have gone upon positive proofs, and sought them also in the
Law, and the Prophets only. Another kind of evidence may be found in
Scripture, which for distinctions sake, shall be called Practical; common alike
to Law and Gospel, both to Jews and Christians. Of this sort was the solemn
form of burial amongst the Jews, the charges they were at in Spices and sweet
Ointments to embalm the Bodies of their dead; and the command given both by
Joseph and Jacob to their children, for the transporting of their bones to the
Land of Canaan Genesis 49.29. and 50.25.
, the type and shadow of Gods Kingdom in the Heavens above. All special
testimonies that they did expect in the Lords good time, a Resurrection of
those Bodies, so carefully, so choicely tendered, laid up in the Repository of
the Grave with such cost and decency. When Mary Magdalen poured forth ointment
on our Saviors head, he app^oved it as a work well done; saying, She did it
aforehand, to anoint his Body to the burial Mark 14.8.
. And to this purpose the good women mentioned by St. Luke, prepared their
ointments and sweet odors Luke 23.56.
, intending therewithal to embalm his Body, but were therein prevented by his
Resurrection Id. 24.1, 2, 3.
. Which as it proves sufficiently what the custom was, so our Redeemers
Resurrection which so soon followed the anointing made by Mary Magdalen, shows
plainly to what end it pointed. The care they took about them in their funeral
rites, is evidence sufficient, if there were none else, That they commit the
bodies of the dead unto the Earth, in sure and certain hope of the Resurrection
In the form of Burial.
, according to the Language of the English Liturgy. Upon this very ground, no
other, the Christians of the Primitive times did use to spare no cost to embalm
their dead, but were more prodigal of sweet odors, and most precious ointments
in the obsequies of the Saints departed, than the poverty of their estate could
well admit of. Tertullian so affirms it, saying, Sciant Sabaei se pluris merces
suas Christianis sepeliendis profligari, quam diis fumigandis Tert. Apol. c. 42.
. We spend, says he, more Frankincense and Arabian Spices upon the burial of
our dead, than would suffice to offer at the Altars of the Heathen gods. And on
this ground it has hitherto been the piety of the Church of England, to lay
the bodies of the dead into the Earth with all due solemnities; though now she
stand accused for Superstition, even in this particular, in the conceit of some
Novators, more precise than pious. Nay, if I understand aright the Apostles
meaning, St. Paul derives a very strong Argument from this ancient custom, to
prove the Resurrection of the dead against all opposers. Else what do they,
says he, which are baptized for dead? if the dead rise not again, why are they
then baptized for dead 1 Cor. 15.29.
? That is to say, and the Greek Text will bear it well, why do they use such
frequent washings over the bodies of the dead, why are the dead baptized, as a
man may say, with rich balms and ointments, why are they laid into the Earth
with such costly oils; if there be no certainty of this, that even those bodies
shall be raised to eternal glory?

I know it is an hard place I am fallen upon: A place which has as much
perplexed the wits of our greatest Clerks, as any one in all Paul's Epistles.
St. Ambrose does expound this place of Baptism, applied unto some living man in
the name and behalf of his friend dying without Baptism; out of a superstitious
conceit, that Baptism so conferred upon one alive, in the name of him that was
deceased, might be available to the Resurrection of the other dying unbaptized
Ambros. in 1 Cor. c. 15.
, Atque ita vivus nomine mortui tingebatur, as the Father has it. That there
was Vicarium tale Baptisma Tert. de Resurrect. Carn.
, as Tertullian calls it, amongst the Marcionites, is plain and evident; yea,
and amongst the Cerinthians also, another sort of Heretics as bad as they.
Epiphanius tells us of the quod sit Epiph. de Cerinth. haer. 28.
, that so indeed it was amongst them; and Chrysostom Chrysostom. in 1 ad Cor. c.
15.
informs us of the manner of it. But that such a superstitious custom as
baptizing one man for another, in hope that other might receive the benefit and
effect thereof, should creep so early into the Church of Corinth, as to get
footing there within three years after the first Preaching of the Gospel to
them (for no more time occurred between St. Paul's first Preaching there Anno 52
V. Baron. Annal. An. 52, 55.
. and the writing of this first Epistle, which was in Anno 55.) is a thing not
possible to be believed. Rather I think that mistaking of St. Paul's meaning in
the place aforesaid, might give occasion to that erroneous practice amongst the
Cerinthians, the wretched followers of Cerinthus; and then by a very easy
mistake, it might be fastened on these Corinthians, as it seems it was. Others
expound it of the Clinici, as they called them, in the former times, such as
were sick upon their death beds, and being like to die, and as good as dead,
desired the Sacrament of Baptism before their departure out of this life, in
hope to find the better entrance by it, unto that to come. Most true it is,
that this Baptismus Clinicorum, does often occur in Ancient Writers Eus^^. hist.
Eccles. l. 6* c. 42.
, and in the Canons also of some former Councils, in which it was prohibited
that any man so baptized should be admitted into holy Orders. But that this
custom was in use in those early days, or that the people were permitted to
defer their baptism till the extremity of sickness did enforce them to it, or
did not rather receive it with the Faith it self, as well in Corinth, as
elsewhere it is plain they did Act. 16.33. and 19.5. and 16.25
, I can by no means be persuaded. Another Exposition has been thought upon,
and that too, borrowed from a custom as erroneous as that first delivered;
which is, that many did desire in the former times to be baptized on or near
the Sepulchers of the Martyrs, that so they might profess that Faith in the
Resurrection, for which they were slain Muscul. in 1 Cor. 15.
. This Musculus reports of some, but of whom I know not: But sure I am,
whosoever they were, they were exceedingly mistaken, in looking for the Tombs
of Martyrs in the Church of Corinth, within three years, no more, after their
conversion. And on the same leg, as I take it, halts the gloss of Chrysostom
(whom Theophylact follows) affirming it to be the custom of the Church of
Corinth, that when they were to be baptized, they said over the Creed, and that
as they said the words of this Article, viz. The Resurrection of the Body, the
Sacrament of Baptism was conferred upon them Chrysostom. in lo^.
: And then the meaning must be this, Why are they then baptized for dead? that
is to say, why are they then baptized into the resurrection of the dead, in
case the dead rise not again? But first, there is no constat of any such
custom; and if it were, it had been but a weak Argument in so strong a
Disputant, to prove the Churches Doctrine in a point of Faith by the particular
Churches custom, not elsewhere used, nor ever of such credit as to be
continued. Finally, not to wander into more particulars, Lyra does give this
gloss upon it, Pro mortuis, i. e. pro peccatis mortalibus quae sunt opera
mortua. Why are they then baptized for the dead? that is says he, Why are they
baptized for deadly sins, which are called dead works in holy Scripture; pro
quibus abluendis accipitur Baptismus Lyra in loc.
, for washing away of which they receive that Sacrament. But this agrees not
well with the following words; For being that the resurrection is of those that
are so baptized, if by pro mortuis we must mean dead works, or our mortal sins,
it may be then inferred by the Rules of Logic, that our dead works or mortal
sins shall be also raised.

Here is we see variety of Interpretations, and those well backed and
countenanced by no mean authorities. But for all that I stand to my first
Exposition, and doubt not but to make it more above all exception, than any of
the rest before delivered. And for the proof of this I shall take for granted,
that the Church of Corinth did consist especially of converted Gentiles, and
such of the Grecizing Jews which embraced the Gospel; and therefore being a
mixed Assembly were to be spoken to in such forms of speech as were intelligible
unto both. Secondly, I shall take for granted too, that howsoever the words
(...) and (...), be taken in the Ecclesiastical notion, for giving or receiving
of the Sacrament of Baptism, by which we are initiated in the Church of Christ:
yet in the natural and original notion, they signify no more than a simple,
ordinary, or common washing. And so they signify not only in the Heathen
Authors, who understood, no doubt, the Idiom of their own natural language, but
in the sacred Writers also. Certain I am, that so the word is used by St. Mark
himself, after the institution of that holy Sacrament, and the appropriating of
the word to that signification. For speaking of the often washings used amongst
the Pharisees, he tells us that when they come from the Market they eat not
except they wash Mark 7.4.
; and that they use the washing of pots and cups, of brazen vessels and of
Tables. They do not eat unless they wash, as our English reads it, (...),
unless they be baptized, says the Greek Original; and answerably thereunto the
Vulgar Latin, nisi baptizentur. So also for the following words, that they
observe the washing of Pots and Cups, the Greek Text calls it in plain terms,
(...), etc. accordingly the Vulgar Latin, Baptismata Calicum and Vrceorum, i.
e. the baptizing of their Cups and Pots. We may add here a sort of Heretics
amongst the Jews, who teaching the necessity of these daily washings or
baptizings, were called Hemerobaptists; Not that they did every day reiterate
the Sacrament of Baptism (they had not then been Jews, but Christians, though
erroneous Christians) but that they thought it necessary to dip themselves
every day in water over head and ears ( Singulis diebus in aqua mergi Prat. de
haeres.
) the better to preserve themselves (as they did suppose) from the pollutions
of the flesh. Which being granted or premised concerning the original and
natural use of the word (...), or Baptizare, We will next endeavor to prove out
of good authority, that both the Gentiles, and the Hellenistical or Grecizing
Jews, whereof the Church of Corinth at this time consisted, used constantly to
wash (or if you will, baptize) the bodies of their dead, before their Funerals;
and that this custom was observed also amongst the Christians, for a long time
after. That it was in use amongst the Gentiles is evident by that of Ennius,
where he tells us of the good woman, who washed and anointed the body of
Tarquin (Tarquinii corpus bona faemina lavit and unxit) to make it ready for
the Grave. By that of Virgil touching the washing and anointing of the body of
Misenus, viz. Corpusque lavant frigentis and ungunt Virg. Aen. 6.
. Thirdly, By those Funeral Officers, whom they called Pollinctores, which
Tertullian speaks of in his Apologetick, who were to take the charge of
burials, Tert. Apol. c. 13
and to see men decently interred. And they were called Pollinctores, quasi
pollutorum (i. e. mortuorum) unctores, says the learned Scholiast, from the
anointing of dead bodies, according to that of Apuleius, Pollinctor ejus
funeri, dum unctionem parat, etc. And finally, it will appear by that ancient
custom of embalming their dead bodies used amongst the Egyptians (mention
whereof is made in the last of Genesis) one part whereof consisted, as we read
in Herodotus, of washing the corpse, and wrapping it in a fine linen cloth
Herodot. hist. in Euterp.
; So was it also with the Hellenistical or Grecizing Jews, as appears plainly
in the Acts concerning Tabitha Act. 9 37.
, whom being dead, they washed and laid her in an upper chamber. And though
perhaps the Gentiles, whether Greeks or Romans, thought not of any such thing
as a Resurrection, when they used this Ceremony; yet I conceive that at the
first institution of it (before the light of rectified Reason was quite darkened
in them) it did look that way: a resurrection unto judgment being so naturally
imprinted in the soul of man, that it is every good man's hope that it shall be
so, and every wicked man's fear that so it will be. Nor was this custom of
washing the bodies of the dead in the Church of Corinth, peculiar unto them
alone, or reckoned for a remnant of their old superstitions; but constantly
retained as a decent Ceremony in most Christian Churches, to keep them up in
hope of a resurrection; That so it was at Rome, for the Western Churches, is
affirmed expressly by Tertullian in his Apologetick Tert. Apol. cap. 42.
, Rigere and pallere post lavacrum mortuus possum, says he in his old vain of
writing, which is dark and difficult: his meaning is, as Rhenanus B. Rhenan. in
Tertul. Apol.
and Pamelius after him observe, to show that it was the custom of the
Primitive Church defunctorum corpora lavare, to wash the bodies of the dead
when they laid them out. More plainly speaks Eusebius Eusebius. hist. Eccl. l. 7.
c. 21.
for the Eastern Churches (or rather Dionysius out of whom he cites it) where
making mention of the great plague in Alexandria, and the remarkable piety of
the Christians toward their sick Brethren, he tells us that they did not
only close the eyes of the deceased, but also washed their dead bodies (
corpora lavarunt and ad sepulturam ornarunt, as the story has it) and decently
adorned them for their burial. Lay all which has been said together, and St.
Paul's meaning will appear to be only this, that by the washing or baptizing of
their dead (call it which we will) by their anointing the dead bodies with
such costly unguents, they might themselves conclude of a Resurrection. To what
end else served all that cost and charges which they laid out on them, if they
looked not for the resurrection of those bodies with such cost interred? And I
the rather am confirmed in this Exposition, because I meet with the like phrase
in another place. For as here we have (...), a washing or baptization of the
dead; So in the book called Ecclesiasticus we meet with (...), the washing or
baptization of a man, which ignorantly or unawar^ had polluted himself by the
touching of a dead corpse or carcass, and was by such a washing or baptization
to be made clean again, Qui baptizatur a mortuo, and iterum tangit eum, etc.
Eccles. 34.26.
He that washes himself (so our English reads it) after the touching of a dead
body, if he touch it again, what avails his washing? where, though in our
Translation it is called a washing, yet in the Greek and Latin both it is a
baptization.

Next to these positive and practical Proofs, we will add some natural and
experimental Evidences which conclude the same, and are more within the compass
of the observation of the meanest capacities. We see the Sun withdraws from
us every evening the comfort both of light and heat, and yet we doubt not of
his rising on the morrow morning. We go to bed as to our grave, yielding our
selves to sleep-which is the image of death, with prayers and supplications to
Almighty God, in hope to be restored unto sense and action on the day ensuing.
We note it in the common course of the works of Nature, that Herbs and Plants,
and all the Flowers of the field, do in the time of Winter seem to lose that
life which made them flourish with more luster than the Court of Solomon; but
we observe withal, as a thing of course, that the next Spring returns them to
their perfect beauties; Expectandum nobis etiam corporis ver est Minut. Feli^*
in Octavio.
, we have a Spring to come, said the Christian Advocate. The Husbandman commits
his seed unto the ground in expectation of a plentiful and joyful Harvest; his
hope deceives him not at last, though that which he buried in the womb of the
Earth, must die before it quicken unto life again. This is another of St. Paul's
Arguments to our present purpose, Thou fool, says he, that which thou sowest
is not quicked except it die 1 Cor. 15.36.
, upon which words of the Apostle take this gloss or descant out of an old
Greek M. S. in Bodleys Liberarie. (...), etc. The Earth labors not after the
ordinary manner of a woman in travel. Her Infant Corn is not quickened except
it die. Should it live still it could not be formed in that womb. The earth
receives the bare corn only, and by corrupting it, restores it in a better
fashion than she took it in Cited by ^. Gregor. chapter 27.
; (...); And can we have says he, a more forcible impression or representation
of our own restitution, than by this example? Observing these things (as we do)
in the works of Nature, how can we think so poorly of the Lord our God, as if
it were not in his power with the like facility to re-give to us our former
beauties, as either to the Plants or Planets? Should we make search into the
secret and more wonderful works of prudent nature, we may be told by Pliny,
That dead Bees are restored both to life and motion, only by sprinkling them
with Nepenthe Plinii Hist. Nature.
; young Pellicans by the blood of the old ones; and Eels, with vinegar and
blood. The raising of the new Phoenix out of the ashes of the old one, has been
a thing so generally received over all the world, that for my part I dare not
question it, though I know some do. And of the Swallows it is said, that at the
beginning of Winter they use to fall down together in heaps into the dust or
water, and there sleep in their Chaos; till hearing the voice of returning
Nature at the Spring, they awaken out of this dead sleep, and live amongst the
fowls of the Air again. And more than so, it is affirmed by George Mayor a
German writer Geo. Mayor in 1 Cor. 15.
, that he found a company of Swallows lying dead under an old Table in the
Church of Witteberge, which by an artificial heat he restored to life, the
ordinary time of nature being then not come, in which they should revive of
course.

This makes it plain, that nature is no Enemy to a Resurrection, by consequent,
our Faith in this agreeable to the course of Nature, and not to be denied by a
natural man; though no one Point or Article of the Christian Faith has been
more eagerly opposed by the ancient Gentiles, nor more pertinaciously decried
by Heretical Christians. And howsoever men of inferior parts might make scruple
of it, yet can I not but wonder at those great Philosophers that they should
plead so earnestly against a Tenet so consonant to the ways and works of
Nature, and otherwise not much a stranger to their own opinions. Themselves,
both Platonists and Pythagoreans acknowledge an eternal being of the soul; and
though the man did dye, and his corpse was buried, yet the Soul lived again in
another Body. And so the ancient Druides were persuaded also, Regit idem
spiritus artus, Orb a^io Lucan. Phars. l. 1.
, as the Poet has informed us of them. The truth of this opinion I dispute not
here; I know it to be vain and foolish. Only I shall conclude from their own
Position, and think the Argument will be good ad homines, That the same Soul
may be as easily believed to live again in its own body, as in the body of
another, made of purpose for it. And this Tertullian does retort against those
Philosophers, who did admit of this Pythagorean (...), this transmigration of
the soul from body to body, and yet deny the Resurrection of that body, to
which the Soul more naturally ought to be united, Si quaecunque ratio praeest
animarum humanarum reciprocandarum, in corpora, cur non in eandem substantiam
redeant, cum hoc sit restitui id esse quod fuerat Tertul. Apol. cap 48.
, as his words there are. That which most stumbled both these Philosophical and
our Christian Heretics, was, That the faithful of the Primitive times did not
only stand for the Assumption of a new Body (which perhaps the others would
have granted with no great difficulty) but the Resurrection of the old: The
restitution of a body which had either been consumed to ashes, eaten by Worms,
devoured by Fishes and wild Beasts, and finally, incorporated into the
substance of those Beasts and Fishes which had so devoured it. Which being
thought impossible by some old Philosophers, and not well understood by some
poor weak Christians, occasioned it on both sides to be called in question, and
by some Christian Heretics to be more decried, than ever it had been by the
Gentiles formerly. The Marcionites of old denied it, so did Marcus too; and so
did Basilides, Cerdo, and the rest of that wicked brood. The Anabaptists and
Socinians of these times do deny it also, although not on the same grounds as
the former Heretics; by those it was denied, because thought impossible, in
which, they and the Gentiles did agree together; by these, because they do not
think it consonant to the Word of God, That flesh and blood should inherit the
Kingdom of Heaven 1 Cor. 15.50.
; as if there were no difference between the substance of flesh, and the
infirmities and frailties which attend upon it, between a natural body, and a
body glorified: Of which more anon.

In the mean time to satisfy the doubts of those of what sort soever, which
charge this Article of our Faith with impossibilities, we may demand of them
these particulars (besides what has been said to the point already,) viz.
Whether it be not equally as possible to Almighty God, if not more possible, to
recreat a man from something, than to creat him first of nothing? Whether the
natural substance of a man corrupted be not more apt to be recollected unto it
self, than the dust of the Earth was in it self to be first framed to such a
substance? Credamus ergo abeodem restitui posse veterem hominem, qui and novum
fecit Lactant. l. 7.23.
, as it is excellently well pressed upon them by Lactantius. If for the manner of
it, they would know by what arts and agents, so great a miracle as the raising
of the same numerical body shall be wrought upon them, we must refer them to
themselves, and in themselves they have an Answer. They all know so much of
themselves, that they live, move, and have a being; that they are all engendered
by their natural Fathers, and fashioned in the secret Closets of their Mothers
womb; yet certainly it is a matter, if considered rightly, not very capable of
credit, that so small a quantity of seed should either be improved into a
substance of such different parts, as flesh, and blood, and bones, and sinews,
or else divided into so many parts of such different substance: When at the
last, the body is made fit to receive the soul, they cannot tell either by what
means the soul is given, or the whole birth nourished. Lord I am fearfully and
wonderfully made, said the Royal Psalmist Psalm. 139.14.
. If then they know not by what means they were made at first, but shut up
their inquiry in an admiration of the unsearchable power and wisdom of the
most high God; why should they look to be resolved of all doubts and
difficulties, touching the Resurrection of the self-same bodies, and not refer
that also to Gods power and wisdom? Which was the answer of Tertullian to the
Roman Sophisters, Read si potes rationem qua factus es, and tunc require qua
fies Tertul. Apol. cap. 48.
, First render an account (says he) how thou first were made, and afterward
enquire how thou shall be raised. But not to answer them with Questions after
the manner of the old Socratical way of disputing; to illustrate our belief
more fully in this Article, and gain theirs unto it, I will lay before them two
such instances as will clearly carry it, except they think more meanly of the
power of God, than of subservient nature and the force of art. It is the nature
of the Loadstone to draw steel to it, that is a thing well known. And it is
found of late by a strange experiment, that if a massy body of steel be ground
to powder, and all the Atoms of it buried in a lump of Clay; yet will the
powerful virtue of the Stone or Adamant, being gently moved upon the
superficies of the Cake, attract into a lump all those dusts of steel, so
strangely scattered and dispersed: Which though it be a wondrous power and
effect of nature, yet comes it short of that which is done by art; The
substance of the steel not being altered, though the parts attenuated Notes on
Scripture by Mr. Gregory.
. For it is found by those who do trade in Chemistry, that the forms of things
are kept invisibly in store, though the materials of the same be altered from
what first they were; and that by virtue of those forms, the things themselves
will be restored to their former being; which they make good by this
experiment. They take a Flower or Plant, of what kind soever, in the Spring
time, when it is in its fullest and most vigorous growth; and beat it in a
Mortar, Root, Stalks, Flowers, and Leaves, until it be reduced to a confused
Mass. Then after Maceration, Fermentation, Separation, and other workings of
that art, there is extracted a kind of Ashes or Salt, including those forms
and tinctures under their power and Chaos, which they put up in Glasses very
close made up, the mouth of the Glass being heated in the fire, and the neck
thereof wrung close together to keep in the Spirits. Which done, applying to it
a soft fire or candle, you shall presently perceive the Flowers or Plants to
rise up by little and little out of those Ashes, and to appear again in their
proper forms, as when they grew upon the ground. But take away the fire or
candle, and they remove immediately to their Chaos again. A wonderful effect of
art and nature, such as not only does resemble the Resurrection, but so far
confirm it, that he who shall deny it for the time to come, will make the God
of Heaven less powerful than the Sons of Art. The ingenuous Author of the Book
called Religio Medici, does also touch upon this rarity; but I have not now the
Book by me to put down his words, or to make use of any other of his
observations to the point in hand.

And to say truth, there need but little more be added as to the Quod sit of
the Resurrection, to the point it self. That which remains relates unto the
manner only, to some points of circumstance, and to such Christian uses as are
raised hereon.

And first, Perhaps it may be demanded of us, as once of the Apostle in former
times, Quali corpore venient, How, with what Bodies they shall rise 1 Cor.
15.35.
? Not whether in the very same Numerical Body, for that has been made good
before, but whether in the same shape and fashion which before it had. We know
that man returns again into his Earth at several ages; the tender Infant, and
the Man of ripest years, being alike subject to the stroke of impartial death.
In which respect it has been questioned by the Ancients, whether they shall
arise in the same age, and disproportions of Age and Stature, which they had
whilst they lived. St. Augustine does resolve it Negatively, and determines
thus, That we shall all of us be raised in that proportion both of strength and
beauty, which men attain to commonly at the time of their best perfection.
Restat ergo (says he) ut suam quisque habeat mensuram vel quam habuit in
inventute, vel quam habiturus esset, si vixisset August. de Civit. l. 22. c. 13.
. And this he groundeth on that passage to those of Ephesus, where the Apostle
speaks of that special care which CHRIST has taken of his Church, and our
edification, till we all come to a perfect man, unto the measure of the fullness
of the (age or) stature of CHRIST Ephesians. 4.13.
, Ad mensuram plenitudinis aetatis Christi, that is to say, as he expounds it,
Ad juvenilem formam, to that degree of age or stature which our Redeemer had
attained to at the time of his passion, which was about the four and thirtieth
year of his life, as may be gathered from the Scriptures.

A second Quere has been made concerning them which are diffigured and
deformed, and mulcted as it were by nature, how, in what bodies they shall come
in the Resurrection? Not with their imperfections, I conceive not so; for in
the Heavens there shall be nothing not complete and of full accomplishment. And
on the other side, were they freed of those imperfections, it may be said that
then they are not raised in the self-same bodies. To this we have the
resolution of St. Augustine also, affirming, That in that glorious day, the
substance of their bodies shall continue as before it was, but the deformities
and imperfections shall be taken away. Corporibus ergo istis naturae
servabitur, vitia autem detrahentur August. de Civit. l. 22. c 16.
, as the Father has it. A resolution which St. Paul does seem to favor,
saying, That the body shall be raised in glory, though it be sown in dishonor 1
Cor. 15.
; as do his following words the former, viz. Though it be sown in weakness (in
the weakness of old age or infancy) shall be raised in power. For neither is it
likely, that infancy being imperfection, and old age corruption, can stand with
the estate of a glorified body; or that our Lord which made the blind to see,
and the lame to go, which came to seek his grace on Earth, will not much rather
heal them of their imperfections, whom he vouchsafes to admit to the glories
of Heaven. A glorious place is fit for none but glorified bodies: And so far
glorified shall the bodies of Gods servants be, as to be raised in power,
whereby they shall be freed from all wants and weaknesses; in incorruption,
which shall make them free both from death and sickness; in glory, which shall
make them shine with a greater splendour, than any of the Stars of Heaven, as
did the face of Moses in the Book of Exodus Exodus 34.27.
, and that of Stephen the Proto-martyr in the Book of the Acts Acts 6.15.
; and lastly, in agility, by which they shall be like the Angels, mounting as
on the wings of an Eagle to meet the Lord JESUS at his coming. In reference
unto these spiritual qualities, St. Paul affirms, That it was sown a natural
body, but shall be raised a spiritual body 1 Cor. 15.44.
: Natural for the substance still, spiritual for the qualities and endowments
of it. Spiritualia post Resurrectionem erunt corpora, non quia corpora esse
desistunt, sed quia spiritu vivificante subsistunt, as St. Augustine has it.

Another Quere yet remains, which had been moved, it seems, in St. Augustines
time, by some, whose curiosity did exceed their judgments. The Question was,
Whether the woman should be raised to eternal glory, in her own sex, or the
more noble sex of man? Alas poor Souls! what monstrous crime had they
committed, that they should be excluded from the Kingdom of Heaven? Of what
strange errors and mistakes must guilty-nature be accused when she framed that
sex (or rather God when he created it at first out of Adams side) by which it
is supposed incapable of immortality? Yes certainly, say they, for it seems
to us, that Christ has so adjudged it, saying, That in the Resurrection they
neither marry, nor are given in marriage Matthew. 22.30.
: And if no marriage, then no woman; the woman being therefore made, that she
might be married. Vain men, why do they talk so idly in the things of God!
Nuptias negavit dominus in resurrectione futuras, non foeminas August. de
Civit. Dei. l. 23. c. 17.
, as St. Augustine notes. The Lord has not excluded women from the
Resurrection; only in answer to a captious Question which the Saduces made, he
returned them this, That in that day there should be neither care nor notice
taken of those worldly matters. This is the sum and substance of our Saviors
Answer, and this is nothing to the prejudice of the Sex or Persons. Nor need we
doubt, but as that Sex have done most acceptable service to the Lord their God,
either in keeping constantly the faith of wedlock, or in preserving carefully
an unspotted chastity, or suffering resolutely for the testimony of the Faith
and Gospel; so shall they also in those bodies receive the crown reserved for
so great obedience. But what need more be said of this needless Quere, which
Christ our Savior has prevented and resolved already? Who therefore first
appeared to those of the Female Sex, that making them the publishers of his
Resurrection, he might assure them of their own, Qui ergo utrumque sexum
instituit, utrumque restituet August. de Civit. l. 22. c. 17.
. God, says St. Augustine, as he made both Sexes, will restore both Sexes, and
raise up both in their own proper and original being unto. Life eternal.

Other particulars of the manner of this Resurrection, as the dreadful terror
of the day, the sounding of the Trump, the conflagration of the world, and the
like to these; have either been already handled, or else will fall within the
compass of the following Article. That which remains to be considered at the
present, will be matters practical; first, in relation to our friends, and then
in reference to our selves, and our own affairs.

First, in relation to our Friends, That we bemoan not their departure with too
great extremity, or sorrow for them without hope 2 These. 4.13.
, as if lost for ever. Were it indeed so irrecoverable a los^, that either
their bodies were for ever banished from their souls, or that their souls did
die and perish with their bodies, it were a misery to which no sorrow could be
equal: But being so assured of a Resurrection, it is not to be supposed of them
which die in the Lord, that they are either lost to themselves or us; They
only have withdrawn themselves for a certain season, from the vanity and
troubles of this present world, and shall return at last unto life again, both
to our comfort and their glory. In this respect, it was the ancient custom of
the Church of Greece, and is not yet worn out of use, (...) Matthew. Blastares in
Mr. Greg. c. 21.
, To set boiled Corn before the Singers of the holy Hymns, which are accustomed
to be sung at the commemoration of the dead who sleep in Christ. And this they
do to manifest their hopes in the Resurrection, of which the Corn is so
significant an emblem, as before was shown. And to say truth, Death, if
considered rightly, is the gate of life, and of a life not to be shaken with
adversities, or subject unto change of fortune. Hanc Deus fidei praestat
gratiam, ut mors quam vitae constat esse contrariam instrumentum foret per quod
in vitam transiretur, it is St. Augustines note August. de Civit. Dei. l. 13.
c. 4
But what need Augustine be alleged, when we may hear the same of the ancient
Druides? of whom the Poet tells us, that they held this Paradox, Longae,
(canitis si cognita) vitae Mors media est Lucan. Pharsal. l. 1.
, That death was but the middle way to a longer life. If then our Ancestors in
those dark times of ignorance, when they knew not Christ, conceived no
otherwise of death, and the terrors of it, than as the way unto a life of more
excellent nature; then certainly, a nobler and mo^e cheerful constancy must
^eeds be looked for at our hands, who are not only more assured of the
immortality of the soul, which they blindly guessed at, but of the Resurrection
of the Body also, which they never heard of.

The next consideration does concern our selves, and lessoneth us not to set so
high a price upon our lives, but that we may be willing to lay them down, as
often as the preservation of Religion, the safety of our Country, or the
necessary service of the State do require it of us. A duty which we should not
doubt to discharge most gladly, did we consider as we ought, that loss of life
on such occasions, is but like the putting off of our garments over night, to
be worn again upon the morrow. For certainly those men acquit themselves with
the bravest spirit, who least regard the terrible approach of death. Nor can
there be a stronger Motive to induce us to it, than that the Bodies, so
abandoned to the Sword of the Enemies, or to the Persecutors of the Church of
God, shall be revived, and reunited to the Soul again. It is reported of the
Druides, whom before I spoke of, that they taught amongst these Northern
Nations, not only an immortality of the Soul, but a (...), or transmigration
of it into other bodies. And it was thought an happy error to be so persuaded;
for being thoroughly possessed with this opinion, they never feared to run upon
the greatest dangers, to brave them with undanted courage, and to encounter
with the violentest and most terrible engigns which were then invented. So poor
a matter was it thought to be coy and sparing of those lives which they were
sure to find again in another body Id. ibid.
.

Felices errore suo, quos ille timorum
Maximus, haud urget, lethi metus; inde ruendi
In ferrum men's prona viris, animaeque capaces
Mortis, and ignavum est rediturae parcere vitae.
Which may thus be Englished. Thrice happy they, whom the extremest fear
Of death afflicts not, who upon the spear
Dare boldly run, and in their hearts disdain
To spare that life which shall return again.
How brave a courage then ought we to carry with us in our Christian Warfare,
who have such excellent advantages above those Ancients? To us it is
ascertained by the Word of God, not that our souls shall be transmitted into
other bodies, but be conveyed immediately to a place of rest, there to expect a
Resurrection of those bodies which before they lived in. To us it is
ascertained by the Word of God, that each several Atom of the body shall be
recollected, and married to the soul for ever, that the bones which were broken
may rejoice; and that the body and soul being thus united, shall pass
immediately into the glories of eternal life prepared for them before the
beginnings of the world. A brave encouragement to gallant and heroical
resolutions: Preciumque and causa laboris Ovid. Meta l. 5.
, in the Poets language, The cause and recompense of all our labors.

But some I know have otherwise provided for themselves than so, and found out
a Terrestrial Paradise, wherein they shall enjoy for a thousand years all the
pleasures of Earth, before they be admitted to the joys of Heaven: A fancy, if
I may so call it, of no mean antiquity, defended by some principal men of the
first times of the Church, who took it upon trust, without more enquiry; and
having made it better than at first they found it, commended it unto the Church
for good Catholic doctrine. For some there were, even in the infancy of the
Gospel, who being too much in love with this present world, conceited to
themselves such a sensual and voluptuous kind of life, after the Resurrection
from the dust of the Earth, wherein they should have use of women, and wallow
in all carnal and libidinous pleasures, which the most Epicurean soul could
affect or covet. A fancy merely Jewish in its first original, afterward
entertained by some Heretical Iudaizing Christians, and finally, rather
rectified than refelled by many of the Fathers in the Primitive times.

And first beginning with the Jews, we showed in our discourse of the Kingdom
of Christ Chap. 14. Part 2.
, how much they were besotted with the expectation of a Temporal Monarchy,
looking for such a Messiah as should come with power, restore again the Crown
of Judah to the house of David, and make that Commonwealth more formidable to
the Neighboring Princes, than ever it had been in the times before. And to
befool themselves the more in this fond conceit, there was no promise nor no
prophecy in the Old Testament, intended to the building up of the Spiritual
Temple, or to the raising of Christ's Kingdom in the souls of men, which they
applied not to the founding of a Temporal Monarchy, the repairing of Jerusalem,
the new erecting of the Temple, and to the re-establishment of Circumcision,
and other of the Rites and Ceremonies of the Law of Moses. Concerning which
consult St. Ierom, in his Comment on Isai. 31. and on Ezekiel. 36. and on Micah 4.
Tertullian in his third Book against Marcion, cap. ult. and diverse others of
the Ancients (not to say any thing in this place of the Jewish Rabbis, who run
all that way:) In which it will appear, that they both did and do expect a
restitution of their temporal power, and all the pleasures of a rich and
flourishing Empire, which are most correspondent to a carnal mind. Which fancy
being taken up, and so strongly fixed, that there was no removing of it out the
hearts of the Jews, was forthwith entertained by some nominal Christians, who
out of a compliance with that obstinate people, embraced not only many of
their Rites and Ceremonies, but of their dreams and fancies also: Whom
therefore Ierom calls Christianos Iudaizantes, Iudaizing Christians, in many
places of his works, in which, Iudaei and Christiani Iudaizantes, or, Iudaei
and eorum erroris haeredes, the Jews and those that do inherit their
Superstitions, march along together. Of these, the first was that Arch-heretick
Cerinthus, who did not only set on foot in the Church of Christ, the Festivals
and Sacrifices of the Law of Moses; but also taught, Regnum Christi post
Resurrectionem terrenum fuisse Eusebius. Eccles. hist. l. 3. c. 25.
, and carnem nostram Hierosolymis cupiscentiis and voluptatibus carni
servituram, That after the Resurrection, Christ should have an Earthly Kingdom,
in which his followers should enjoy, in their New Jerusalem, all the delights
and pleasures of the flesh, of what kind soever. And this not only to endure
for a little while, the ordinary life a man, or so, but for a thousand years
complete, as Nicephorus adds Niceph. Eccles. hist. l. 3. c. 14.
. Marcus another leading Heretic was of this opinion; and so was Nepos also,
an Egyptian Bishop, who teaching first, That all the promises made by God in
holy Scripture, Iudaico more reddendas esse, were to be understood according to
the Jewish Glosses Eusebius. hist. Eccles. l. 7. c. 22, 23.
, did thereon build this following Tenet, That the Saints should for a thousand
years enjoy all manner of corporal delights and pleasures in the Kingdom of
Christ, which after the resurrection should be founded here upon this earth.
Against this Nepos and his doctrine in this particular, Dionysius that great
and learned Bishop of Alexandria wrote a full discourse, which he entitled
(...), A Discourse of Promises; and finding that he grounded his erroneous
Tenets on the Revelation, he wrote another on that Book, which he inscribed
(...), or The confutation and reproof of the Allegorists. Nor did he labor by
his pen only, but by conference too; making a journey (or Episcopal
Visitation) into Arsenois, a Province of Egypt, where this opinion was most
cherished, of purpose to dispute down this erroneous Doctrine. In which he sped
so answerably unto his desires, that many of the chief Sticklers in it did
recant their error Dionys. Alex. ap. Eusebius. l. 7.23
, et veritatem una nobiscum confite bantur, and cheerfully embrace that truth
which he brought unto them.

This Doctrine being set on foot, though by such vile Heretics, and seeming to
have ground and countenance from the Revelation, was by the Fathers and other
Writers of the first times of the Church, thought fitter to be rectified and
reformed, than abandoned wholly. And thereupon a new conceit was taken up, and
dispersed abroad unto this effect, That after the Resurrection Christ should
have an Earthly Kingdom, the principal Seat whereof should be Jerusalem;
Jerusalem new built of gold, and most precious stones (Jerusalem aurea and
gemmata Hieron. in Praef. ad Isa.
, as St. Hierom calls it) in which the Saints should reign with him for a
Thousand years in all manner of happiness, and after that accompany him to the
Heaven of Heavens, and there live for ever. This was the sum of the Opinion
thus refined and rectified. But for the Readers satisfaction and my own
together, I shall describe it more at large, that we may see the better what we
are to think of it; and therein I shall follow Lactantius chiefly, who has
more copionsly presented the true state thereof, than any other of the
Ancients. By him we are informed, that after the destruction of the Roman
Empire, which must be utterly subverted before any of these things shall come
to pass Lactant. l. 7. c. 16.
, there shall follow great plagues, unseasonable weather, a general mortality
of all living Creatures, many strange Prodigies in the Air, the Stars fall down
from Heaven, and the whole course of nature shall be out of order. Things being
in this dreadful state, the Lord shall send into the world the great Prophet
Elias, who shall convert many unto God, with great signs and wonders; but in
the middle of his work, Antichrist shall arise out of Syria, encounter with that
great Prophet, kill him in the Fight, leaving him for three days unburied,
after which time he shall revive, and be taken up into Heaven Cap. 17.
. After this shall presently ensue a terrible persecution of those righteous
persons, who will not worship this proud Tyrant, calling himself the Son of
God, and practicing to seduce the people after the working of Satan, by power,
and signs, and lying wonders; insomuch that all the Saints shall be compelled
to retire themselves into the Wilderness, and there abide in great distress,
calling continually for help to the Lord their God. For their relief Christ
shall descend at last with the Hosts of Heaven, fight with this dreadful
Tyrant, overthrow him often Cap. 19.
, and finally, take him and his Confederates Prisoners, whom he shall presently
condemn to their merited torments. Then shall the graves be opened, and the
bodies of the Saints shall arise Cap. 20.
, and stand before the Judgment seat of Christ, the Conqueror, and being
united to their souls, shall be incorporated with those righteous persons which
are found alive, and both together constitute an earthly Kingdom to our Lord
and Savior, who shall reign over them (or with them, rather) for a Thousand
years; triumphing over the remainder of their mortal Enemies, who shall not be
extinguished, but preserved to perpetual slavery. During this time the Devil
shall be bound in chains that he do not hurt the Saints inhabiting the holy
City in all peace and happiness Cap. 24.
; the Sun shall show more glorious than ever formerly; the Earth become more
fruitful than it was before, producing most delicious fruits of its own accord;
the Rocks shall yield the sweetest honey, and all the Rivers flow with Milk and
Wine. After which Thousand years expired, the Devil, that old Murderer, shall
get loose again; stir up the Nations of the Earth to destroy the Saints; and
not only lay siege unto the holy City Cap. 26.
: But fire, and hail, and tempests from the Heavens above, shall make so
general and terrible a destruction of them, that for Seven years there shall no
other wood be burat but their Spears and Targets. Then shall the Saints be
brought into the presence of Almighty God, whom they shall serve for evermore;
and at the same time shall be the Second and most general Resurrection, in
which the wicked shall be raised to eternal torments, and damned for ever to
the lake of fire and brimstone.

This is the substance of the Story, as Lactantius tells it; which, whether
it have more of the Jew or of the Poet in it, it is hard to say. That of the
great defeat of Antichrist, and the burning of the Spears and Shields for Seven
years together, is branded by St. Hierom for a piece of an old Talmudical Tale,
the Jewish Rabbis making the like endless fables Hieron. in Ezekiel. 39.
( interminabiles fabulas, as the Father calls them) of Gog and Magog, who
for a while shall tyrannize so cruelly over those of Israel, but be at last
subdued and slain with as great an overthrow as he affirms of Antichrist, and
his Confederates. That of the flourishing estate of Christ's earthly Kingdom,
was reckoned in those times when it was most countenanced, to be but a Poetical
fiction; Figmenta haec esse Poetarum quidam putant Lactant. l. 7. c. 22.
, as Lactantius does himself acknowledge. And more than so, he seems to refer
his Reader for a further description of this Kingdom to the works of the Poets;
affirming positively, that all those characters shall be verified of this
Kingdom of Christ (I mean this Millenarian Kingdom) Quae Poetae aureis
temporibus facta esse dixerunt, which by the Poets are affabulated of the
golden age; for proof whereof, for fear we should not take his word, he puts
down a description of it out of Virgils works. But in my mind his own
description of it comes more near to Ovids, who thus concludes his Map or
Character of that blessed time Ovid. Metam. l. 1.
.

Mox etiam fruges Tellus inarata ferebat,
Nec renovatus Ager gravidis canebat aristis:
Flumina tum Lactis, tum flumina Nectaris ibant,
Flavaque de viridi stillabant Ilice Mella.
Which is thus Englished by Geo. Sandys.

The fruitful Earth Corn un-manured bears,
And every year renews her golden Ears:
With Milk and Nectar were the Rivers filled,
And yellow Honey from green Elmes distilled.
But whether it were Jewish or Poetical, or compounded of both, the fancy being
once taken up, proved very acceptable, as it seems, in those elder times, to
most sorts of people both in the East and Western Churches, who did not look
upon it in its first Original, or as it was obtruded on the Church by
Heretics; but as by some good pious men it was refined and rectified, and so
commended to them for a Catholic point. And he that took the pains to refine
it first, and make it more agreeable to an Orthodox ear, was Papias Bishop of
Hierapolis a City of Phrygia, a pious man, Sed modico admodum judicio praeditus
Eusebius. Eccl. hist. l. 4. c. 36.
, but otherwise of mean parts and of little judgment. And yet because of the
opinion which the world had of him, he was herein followed by Irenaeus, and
some others, as Eusebius tells us; who perhaps might think it a good bargain
if they could better the opinion, and thereby hope to get the Jews and the
Iudaizers to come over to them. St. Hierom speaks of him as the first who
published that Jewish Tradition of Christ's earthly Kingdom (the first, he
means that published it so refined and bettered,) and that after the
Resurrection the Saints should reign together with the Lord in the flesh for a
Thousand years. Hic dicitur mill annorum Iudaicam edidisse (...), dicens post
resurrectionem Dominum in carne cum Sanctis regnaturum, as he tells us of him
Hier. de Eccl. Scriptor.
. And then he adds, That he was followed herein by Iraeneus and Apollinarius,
as also by Tertullian in his book De spe fidelium, by Victorinus Pictaviensis,
and Lactantius, Gennadius adds Tychonius Afer Gennad. de vir. illust.
, who in his Commentaries on the Revelation did affirm the same. And so did
also Justin Martyr, Melito Sardensis, and Severus Sulpitius in the life of St.
Martin. So did St. Augustine for a while ( Hoc etiam and was aliquan do opinati
sumus August. de Civit. l. 20. c. 7.
, as himself informs us,) but after, upon better consideration, he receded from
it. By all these it is held for a truth undoubted, That Christ shall come down
from Heaven in the end of the world, and converse with men, and govern them
with Peace and Justice; and that the Saints which shall be raised, and they who
shall be found alive at the time of his coming, shall reign with him a thousand
years, and serve the Lord with righteousness and perfect holiness. So far they
generally agree, though some not fully cleared of the former errors, (and
amongst them Lactantius must go for one) conceived, That those just men who
were found alive, should generate an infinite number of subjects Lactant. l. 7.
c. 24.
, ( infinitam multitudinem generibunt) with which to people this New Kingdom.
The greatest difference amongst them did consist in this, Whether the
computation of this Millenary or thousand years, was to commence before, or
after the day of Judgment; Lactantius being of opinion that it should be after
Ibid. cap. 20.
; but Justin Martyr, and most others, that these thousand years should be first
accomplished Justin Mart. in Dial. cum Tryph.
, and then the general Resurrection, and the day of Judgment, should succed
immediately. And though St. Augustine for his part, did think the opinion thus
reformed to be somewhat tolerable; yet being vehemently opposed by Ierom, who
upon all occasions does declare against it, accounting it but a remainder of
the Jewish dotages, it became by little and little to be less esteemed, and in
a very short time after to be quite deserted. Nor was it ever since revived
till these later times, in which the Anabaptists first gave the hint unto it;
and since that numerous brood of Sectaries which have swarmed from them, have
once more published it abroad to the view of the world.

As for the ground on which those Ancient Writers built this Terrestrial
Kingdom ^hey either were some promises made by God to the house of Israel,
concerning the coming and the Kingdom of Christ, in the time of the Gospel; or
else some words of Christ himself, which they interpreted that way; or finally,
some passages in the Revelation, which did directly seem to give countenance to
it.

First, For the Promises made by God in the Old Testament, however they may
seem to favor those of that opinion; yet is it heartily acknowledged by
Tertullian (though he held the Tenet) That they were to be understood non de
terrena sed coelesti promissione Tertul. adv. Marcion. l. 3. ult.
, of heavenly, not of earthly promises. In the New Testament, the first place
which they build upon, is that in the nineteenth of St. Matthew, where it is
said, That every one who has forsaken Houses, or Brethren, or Sisters, or
Father, or Mother, or Wife, or Children, for my Names sake, shall receive an
hundred fold, and shall inherit everlasting life Matthew. 19.29.
; that is to say, according to St. Marks expression, An hundred fold now in
this life time, and in the world to come life everlasting Mark 10.30.
. But that this is not to be understood in a literal sense, nor the
accomplishment thereof to be made in that Golden Kingdom, St. Ierom reasons
very tartly, For then, says he, it needs must follow, Ut qui unam uxorem pro
domino dimiserit, centum recipiat in futuro Hierom. in Matthew. 19.
, that he who does forsake one wife for the love of Christ, should in that
Kingdom of theirs receive an hundred: Which how absurd it were, he leaves them
to judge. In the next place, they fasten upon that of Luke, in which our
Savior said unto his Apostles, That they should eat and drink at the same
Table with him in his Kingdom Luke 22.30.
. But neither these words must be taken literally, as they seem to sound, or if
they be, they will be found directly contrary unto that of St. Paul, assuring
us, That the Kingdom of God is not meat and drink, but righteousness, and
peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost Rom 14.17.
. The like may be replied to that other place, by them alleged to this purpose
Hier. in Epl. ad Hedib.
, viz. I will not drink henceforth of this fruit of the Vine, until that day
when I shall drink it new with you in my Fathers Kingdom Matthew. 26.29.
. These words St. Ierom does interpret of the Blood of Christ, not to be drank,
unless we do ascend with him into the upper Chambers of the Heavens above, and
from his hands receive the Cup of the New Testament, Et inebriemur ab eo vino
sobrietatis, and be made drunken, as it were, with the Wine of Sobriety. Which
Answer, how it satisfied the Millenarians, I am not able to say; but I profess
sincerely, it does not satisfy me: Nor have I met with any Exposition of this
difficult place, which does not leave it as perplexed as before it was. And yet
I am not of the mind, that it can possibly be alleged in favor of the
Millenarians, because it is in Regno Patris mei, in my Fathers Kingdom, which
generally is used in Scripture for the Kingdom of Heaven; and not in Regno
meo, my Kingdom, or the Kingdom of Christ, as in that of Luke: Though that of
Luke be but a metaphorical form of speech, and signifies no more than that
degree of nearness to their Lord and Savior, which the Apostles should obtain
in the Kingdom of Glory, such as is commonly between those who ordinarily did
eat, drink, and sit down together at the self-same Table. And therefore unto
these, and such Texts as these, which speak of eating and drinking, or sitting
down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the Kingdom of Heaven Matthew. 8.11.
, there cannot be given a better answer, than that which Christ returned to the
captious Saduces, viz. That in the Kingdom of Heaven, they neither marry, nor
are given in marriage, but are as the Angels of God Matthew. 22.30.
And if they are as the Angels of God, there shall be neither eating nor
drinking then; we are sure of that. Nor is it like that glorified and immortal
Bodies, alimoniis terrenis sustentanda sint, can be sustained with corruptible
and earthly food Hierom. Praefat. ad 18. lib. in Isai.
. For as Ierom very well infers, Vbi cibus, sequuntur and morbi, etc. Where
there is meat, there will be sickness; where there is sickness, death will
follow, and after that another Resurrection is to be expected, and then another
thousand years to be added to that, Et sic de coeteris. As for those passages
alleged from the Revelation, if they be literally understood, they seem to be
expressly for the Millenarians; but then withal it draws after it such
inconsequences, as plainly overthrow their whole foundation. For I hope they
will provide themselves of a better Supper Apoc. 19.17, 18.
, Than to eat the flesh of Kings, and the flesh of Captains, and the flesh of
Mighty-men, and the flesh of Horses, and of them that sit on them, and the
flesh of all men, both bond and free, and small and great? Such cheer, and such
an earthly paradise as they seem to dream of, will agree but ill.

I must desire to be excused for calling it a Dream of an earthly paradise; for
I am verily persuaded, that it is no other. It hangs upon such doubtful proofs,
and is so differently reported by the Patrons of it, that never sick-mans dream
was more incoherent. Which that we may the better see, and see withal how every
one added somewhat of his own unto it, according as the strength or weakness of
his fancy led him, I shall put down a memorable passage of Gennadius, which
most fully speaks it, In divinis repromissionibus nihil terrenum vel
transitorium expectamus, sicut Melitani sperant; Non nuptiarum copulam, sicut
Cerinthus and Marcus delirant; Non quod ad cibum vel ad potum pertinet, sicut
Papiae Autori Irenaeus, Tertullianus, and Lactantius acquiescunt: Neque per
mill Annos Resurrectionem regnum Christi in terra futurum, and Sanctos cum
illo in deliciis regnaturos speramus, sicut Nepos docuit, qui primam justorum
Resurrectionem and secundam impiorum confinxit Gennad. de Eccles. dogmat.
. By which we see that Melito did fancy only a transitory and earthly Kingdom;
Cerinthus and Marcus introduced the use of the marriage bed; Papias seemed to
be content with eating and drinking; and Nepos found out the distinction (to
make all complete) between the first and second Resurrection; making the first
to be only of the just and righteous, the second of the wicked and impenitent
sinner, after the end or expiration of the thousand years. This is the
Genealogy or Pedigree of this Opinion, which has of late begun to revive
among us, and finds not only many followers but some Champions also. Whom I
desire more seriously to consider in their better thoughts, whether this their
supposed Kingdom of our Lord and Savior, commended to the world by some
Ancient Writers, gave not the first hint unto Mahomets Paradise Sandys Relation
of his Travels.
; In which he promises to those who observe his Law, most delicious dwellings,
adorned with flowery Fields, watered with Chrystalline Rivers, and beautified
with Trees of Gold, under whose comfortable shade they shall spend their time
with amorous Virgins, and be possessed of all voluptuous delights, which to a
sensual minded-man are the greatest happiness. I know that some of late times,
and of eminent note, have given us this opinion in a better dress; delivering
upon probable grounds, That before the end of the world, there shall be a time
in which the Church of Christ shall flourish for a thousand years, in greater
purity and power, both for faith and manners, and in more outward luster and
external glory, than hitherto it has done in all former ages. Coelius Secundus
Curio in his Book De Amplitudine Regni Dei, P. Cunaeus in that De Repub.
Iudaeorum, Du Moulin in his Christian Combat, Piscator in his Comment on the
Revelation, Alstedius in a Tract of his, called Diatribe de mill Annis
Apocalypticis, and diverse others not inferior unto them for parts and learning,
have declared for it. And for my part I see no danger in assenting to it: If
this will satisfy the Millenarians, they shall take me with them; but if they
stand too stiffly to their former tendries, and look not for this flourishing
time of the Gospel till the Resurrection of the just be first accomplished, and
then expect to have their part and portion in the pleasures of it, I must then
leave them to themselves. The method of my Creed does persuade me otherwise;
which from the Resurrection of the Body leads me on immediately unto the joys
and glories of eternal everlasting life; to which now I hasten.

I know it does much trouble many pious and sober men to find the force and
efficacy of our Saviors Argument, in the place foregoing, which seems more
plainly to assert the Immortality of the Soul, than the Resurrection of the
Body; the bodies of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, being dissolved into dust in the
time of Moses, though their souls were living with their God.

Concerning which we are to know, 1. That the Sadduces by whom this Question
was propounded, did not alone deny the Resurrection of the dead, but so as to
affirm withal, Antiq. Jud. l. 18. c. 2.
Animas cum corporibus extingui, That the Soul it self did also perish with the
body, as Josephus tells us, They said, that there was neither Angel nor Spirit,
Acts 23.8.
as St. Luke says of them. 2. That though the Pharisees who were their opposite
faction, in the latter end of the Jewish state, did grant a Resurrection, or
Reviviscency from the dead, yet was it after such an Animal and Carnal sense,
in eating, drinking, and conversing with women, ( In qua cibo and potu opus
esset, and conjugia rursum jungerentur, etc. says my Author of them) as the
Mahometans now dream of in their sensual paradise. And against this absurd
opinion (as indeed it was) the Sadduces had found out that Argument about a
woman which had or might have had seven Husbands by the Law of Moses, whose
writings only they received as Canonical Scripture, desiring to be satisfied
in their curiosity, to which of the seven she should be wife at the
Resurrection. Which when the Pharisees could not answer (as keeping to those
principles indeed they could not) they thought to put our Savior to it at the
self-same weapon. But they found there another manner of Spirit, than what had
spoken to them, by, and in the Pharisees: For Christ who knew their hearts,
found their cunning also. And therefore did so shape his answer, as by
declaring the true nature of the Resurrection against the Pharisees, to
justify the Immortality of the Soul against the Sadduces. 1. Then, he tells
them how much they were mistaken in the nature of the Resurrection, for want of
a right understanding of the holy Scriptures ( Erratis nescientes Scripturas,
Matthew. 22.29.
as the Vulgar reads it.) The Scriptures which do speak of a Resurrection, not
being to be understood in such an Animal and Carnal sense, as the Pharisees did
understand them. Those bodies which were sown in corruption, were to be raised
again incorruptible, 1 Cor. 15.
and therefore not to live by the food which perishes: Those bodies which were
sown in their mortality, by reuniting with the Soul, should become immortal,
and therefore not to stand in need of any Seminal or Carnal way of Propagation;
Luke 20.36.
For in the Resurrection they neither marry, nor are given in marriage; neither
can they die any more, but are as the Angels of God in Heaven, in the condition
of their being, as to those particulars. This said, and so much of their doubt
resolved, as concerned the error of the Pharisees, he lets them see the
weakness of their own opinion, touching the annihilation or extinguishment of
the Immortal soul of man: And that too from the works of Moses, which
themselves embraced, without consulting any other of the holy Penmen: For when
God said to Moses in the present tence, I am the God of Abraham, the God of
Isaac, and the God of Jacob, it must needs be, that Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,
must be accounted of as living at that present time, and living otherwise they
were not at that present time, but as their blessed Souls did live in the sight
of God, their Bodies being long before consumed and perished; though even those
bodies by the infinity of comprehension which is in God, might be looked upon
as living also, in reference to that eternal life which was prepared for them
in the day of the Resurrection. And this I take to be the meaning of St. Luke,
who does not only say in the present tence, That the dead are raised, but
adds these following words to the other Evangelist, Luke 20.38.
viz. For all live in him; that is to say, All men, though buried in their
dust, are living in the sight of Almighty God, who sees at once all things that
have been, are, and shall be unto all eternity, as if present with him; and
consequently beholds the Souls of his righteous servants, Abraham, and Isaac,
and the rest, in the bliss of Paradise, as if apparrelled with those bodies
which before they had. So then, the Immortality of the Soul being so fully
proved by our Saviors Argument, The Resurrection of the dead (being the thing
which seemed to be scrupled by the Sadduces) was concluded also, and yet not
such a Resurrection the Pharisees dreamed of, in which there should be
marrying, and giving in marriage (that is to say, In which things should be
ordered by the rules of this present life) but such a one, wherein the Saints
of God should be like the Angels, discharged from all relations incident to
flesh and blood, exempt from all humane affections of what sort soever. For
certainly, had not the Argument concluded strongly and convincingly to the
point proposed, neither the Scribes, men better studied in the Scriptures, than
any of the rest of the Jewish Nation, had given this testimony to it, Luke 10.9.
Magister dixisti been, as we see they did, nor had the mouths of such curious
and captious Sophisters been muzzled, as we see they were from asking him the
like Questions for the time to come, both which the story tells us in the close
of all. But I have staid too long on this Text of Scripture, it is now time I
should proceed to the rest that follows.

ARTICLE XII. Of the Twelfth Article OF THE CREED, Ascribed to St. MATTHIAS.
(...). (i. e.) Et Vitam Aeternam. Amen. (i. e.) And the Life Everlasting. Amen.
CHAP. VIII. Of the Immortality of the Soul, and the glories of Eternal Life
prepared for it; As also of the place and torment of Hell. Hellfire not
metaphorical but real. The conclusion of all.
MOrs non extinguit hominem, sed ad praemium virtutis admittit Lactant. l. 7.
c. 10.
, Death, says Lactantius, does not put an end to the life of man, but rather
opens him a way to receive the recompense of his well deservings. For though
the body be returned unto the earth out of which it was taken, and that there
were no Resurrection to be looked for, for it; yet in the better part, the
soul, he is incorruptible and immortal, not subject to the stroke of death, nor
to be made a prey unto worms and rot^enness. In this respect it is to be
disposed of in some suitable place, and to be punished or rewarded in a
suitable manner; none but an Everlasting Life, or eternal punishments, being
the doom thereof in the world to come, according to the good or evil which in
this world it has projected or accomplished. Now that the Soul of man is not
only a spiritual essence which actuates the body in the which it is, but an
immortal essence too, which shall over-live it, we have good proof in holy
Scripture, and that both from the Old Testament and from the New. The souls of
the righteous, says the wise man, are in the hands of the Lord Wisd. 3.1.
. And though the Body go down into the Earth, yet the Soul returns unto him
that gave it Eccl. 10.7.
, says a wiser than he. But behold a greater than Solomon, or the wisdom of
Solomon, even CHRIST the wisdom of the Father has affirmed the same; not only
commending his own Soul to Almighty God Luke 23.46.
, but teaching St. Stephen Act. 7.59.
, and all the rest of the Saints in him, how to do the like; This day, says he
to the good Thief, thou shall be with me in Paradise. And more than so, he does
convincingly conclude the immortality of the Soul from those words in Exodus
Exodus 3.6.
. I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, which
sufficiently does prove that point. This day thou shall be with me in Paradise.
Not in their bodies either of them, for the body of the one was on the cross,
and the other in the Grave till the resurrection. It must be therefore in their
Souls, which neither the Cross could crucify, nor the Grave bury. St. John
affirms the same as a matter of fact, which in the former Texts (except that
of Exodus) we find but in hope or promise; For speaking of the estate of the
Saints departed, which he beheld as clearly in an heavenly Rapture, as if it
had been a thing done before his eyes, he tells us that he saw under the
Altar, the souls of them that were slain for the Word of God, and for the
testimony which they had Apoc. 6.9, 10
, And they cried with a loud voice, saying, How long O Lord, holy and true,
delayest thou to judge and avenge our blood upon them that dwell on the earth?
And of this nature is that passage in St. Lukes Gospel, though perhaps it be
but Parabolical, in which the Soul of Lazarus is carried into Abraham's bosom,
as soon as it had left his body. So that the wonder is the greater, if the tale
be true, that Paul the third, a Christian, and a Christian Prelate, one of the
Popes of Rome in these later Ages, should make doubt hereof, as they say he
did; Of whom it is reported, that, lying on his deathbed, he should say to the
standers by, That he should shortly be assured of three particulars, of which
he had not been resolved all the time of his life; that is to say, Whether
there were a God? Such a place as Hell? or, That the souls of men were immortal
or not? A speech which has so much of the Atheist in it, that Christian
charity forbids me to give credit to it; though possibly his course of life (as
to say truth, he was a man that sought his own ends more than the glory of God)
might give occasion to the world to report so of him. And yet I must confess
my charity is not so perfect, as not to believe the like report of Pope John
the three and twentieth, who lived in safer times than this Paul the third, and
might take liberty to speak whatsoever he thought, without fear of giving any
advantage to an opposite party. For he indeed, as it is charged against him in
the Council of Constance, was of opinion, that the Soul of man did die with his
body, like that of beasts; And did not only hold it as his own opinion, but
pertinaciously maintained it. Quin imo dixit pertinaciter credidit, Animam
hominis cum corpore humano mori, and extingui, ad instar animalium brutorum, as
the Council has it. Some who were called Arabici in the former times, held the
self same error, as Eusebius tells us Eusebius. hist. Eccl. l. 6.36.
, for which they were accounted for no better than Heretics, and put into the
Catalogue of Heretics of St. Augustines making Aug. de haeres. c. 83.
. And yet upon a Disputation which they had with Origin, they did desert their
error, and recant it too; the story of which Nicephorus reports at large
Niceph. Eccl. hist. l. 5. c. 23.
. A Pope may hold the same opinion, and pertinaciously maintain it against all
Opponents, and yet we must not say that he is an Heretic, no, take heed of
that: That were to trench too deep upon the privileges of St. Peter's Chair.

But what need any proof be brought from the Word of God to prove the
immortality of the Soul of man, which was a truth confessed by the very
Gentiles, who saw no more than what was represented to them by the light of
Nature, and the dull spectacles of Philosophy. By Plato, one of the sagest of
them it was affirmed expressly and in positive terms, who uses also many
Arguments in defense thereof. Which Arguments though they seem too short to
some Christian writers, to come up close unto the point; yet they approve his
judgment in it, confessing, that De immortalitate animae verum sentiret
Lactant. l. 7. c. 8.
, he held the very truth in that particular. But before him Pythagoras and
Pherecides did affirm the same, although Pythagoras for his part went a way by
himself, touching the passing of the Soul into other Bodies, Transire animas in
nova corpora, as mine Author has it Id. ibid. c. 23.
. It is true, that Aristotle seemed to be doubtful of it, and problematically
sometimes to dispute against it; though other-whiles Arist. de Anim.
the words (...) and (...), eternal and immortal, do escape his pen. Nor was it
positively denied by any in the Heroic times of learning, save only by
Dicearchus, Democritus Lactant. l. 7. c. 8.
, and the Sect of Epicures; who placing the chief happiness, or summum bonum,
in corporal pleasures, were, as it were, engaged to cry down the Soul. And yet
Lucretius an old Poet, and a principal stickler of that Sect, does now and then
let fall some unluckly passages, which utterly overthrow his cause. As this for
one, Cedit item ^etro de terra quod fuit ante
In terras, and quod missum est ex aetheris oris,
Id rursum Coeli fulgentia templa receptant.


Which may be briefly Englished in these two lines. To Earth that goes, which
from the Earth was given,
And to Joves house, that part which came from Heaven.
In this Lucretius did agree with that of Hermes, or Mercurius, surnamed
Trismegistus, who makes man to consist of two principal parts (as indeed he
does) (...), the one mortal, which is the body, and the other immortal, which
is the soul Lactant. l. 7. c. 13.
. And of the same opinion was Apollo Milesius, and the Sibylline Oracles, both
which are cited by Lactantius, l. 7. c. 13. and Cap. 18.20. But what need more
be said in so clear a case, when Tacitus reports it for the general opinion
of all knowing men, Cum corpore non extingui magnas animas Tacit. in vi^^ Agric.
, That the Souls of great and gallant persons, were not extinguished with their
Bodies? Were it not so, the Body were in better case than the Soul by far, and
of more continuance; which does not only remain a Body for a while, as before
it was, entire and uncorrupted, after the Soul is taken from it; but by
embowelling, imbalming, and such helps of Art, may be preserved from
putrefaction many ages together. Which Reasons and Authorities of so many
Writers, and the general consent of all learned men in the times before him,
prevailed so far at last on one Aristoxemus, that finding no way to decry the
Souls immortality, he fell into a grosser error, Negando ullam omnino esse
animam Lactant. l. 7. c. 13.
, denying, that there was any Soul at all, Quo nihil dici delirius potest, than
which a greater dotage could not be imagined, as it is very justly censured by
Lactantius. And yet as great a dotage as it seemed to him, though coming from
the mouth or pen of an Heathen-man, has been revived again in these times of
Liberty, and a Book printed with the title of Man's Mortality, wherein the
Author (whosoever he was) does endeavor to prove, That the whole man, as a
rational Creature, is wholly mortal, contrary to that common distinction of
Soul and Body. Which if it be not the dotage of that Aristoxemus, is
questionless the Heresy of the old Arabici: This Author teaching, that our
immortality begins at the Resurrection, at the general judgment; and they,
that the Soul of man dying with the Body, and de coetero ad immortalitatem
transituram Niceph. Eccl. hist. l. 5. c. 23.
, was from thenceforth to pass into immortality. Such is the infelicity of the
times we live in, that the more gross the heresy, and the more condemned by
those great lights of learning in the former times, the better entertainment it
is sure to find with unknowing men.

I purpose not to make an exact discourse of the Souls immortality, but only
to assert it in such a manner, as to prepare my way to the present Article,
which does in part depend upon it. For if there were no Soul at all, or if the
Soul did perish, as do those of Beasts, it were in vain to think of a
Resurrection, or flatter our selves with expectation of eternal life. The
immortality of the Soul is to be premised, before we speak of Heaven, and the
life to come; and that premised, or granted, as I hope it will be, we must next
fit it with an Ubi, with a constant place, of as great perpetuity as a soul it
self; and with a life as permanent, as the place can be. Which place or life,
being we cannot find it in this present world, we must look for it in another;
and therefore, that which in this Creed is called Life everlasting, is called
in the Nicene Creed, The life of the world to come. And if it be a Life of the
world to come, this world, and all the beauties of it, must first pass away,
before we can possess our estates in that; even as St. Paul has told us of our
Savior Christ, That he took away the first Covenant to establish the second
Heb. 10.9.
. Now that the world shall have an end, is a thing so clear in Christianity,
that never any Heretic in all ages past, did call the truth hereof in
question: And so it was conceived in Philosophy also, till Aristotle, and the
Peripateticks which followed him, began to hammer a conceit, De aeternitate
mundi, of the worlds eternity. Certain I am, that all the old Philosophers
before his time, and namely, Heraclitus, Empedocles, Anaxagoras, Democritus,
and diverse others; as also the Stoics, and the whole Sect of the Epicures
(though in other things they did agree like fire and water) were all agreed
upon this point, That as the world had a beginning, so it should have an end.
The judgment in this case of those old Philosophers, Diogenes Laertius will
afford us on an easy search: And for the said two Sects, to take one of each,
Seneca tells us for the Stoics, Unus hominum genus condet dies Senec. Nature.
qu. l. 3. c. 19.
, That one day shall bury all mankind, and not all mankind only, but the
whole frame of the Creation, ( totum hunc rerum omnium contextum Id. epist. 71.
, as he elsewhere has it) dies aliquis dejiciet, shall in one day be cast down
and brought to end. The like Lucretius says for the Epicureans Lucret. de Not.
Rerum. c. 3.
, of which Sect he was.

Una dies dabit exitio, multosque per Annos
Sustentata ruet moles and machina mundi.
In English thus. The goodly frame and engine of this All,
So many years upheld, shall one day fall.
Nor did they thus agree, as by joint consent, touching the Quod sit of this
truth, That the world should end; but they descended to the Quomodo, or the
manner of it, affirming, That it shall be consumed with fire. St. Ierom does
affirm it of the Gentiles generally, that they so conceived it, (I mean still
the Philosophers, or the learned Gentiles:) Quae quidem and Philosophorum mundi
opinio est; omnia quae cernimus igne peritura Ierom. in Isa. 51.
. The Stoiks and the Epicureans also did agree in this, Quod mundus hic omnis
ignescat; That the whole world should be burnt with fire, as Octavius tells
us in the Dialogue Minut. Fell.
. Eusebius not content to deal in such general terms, gives us the names of
Zeno, Cleanthes, and Chrysippus, ancient Stoics all, who have so declared
Eusebius. de Praep. Evang. sect. 15.
. The like says Cicero of Panaetius, whose fear it was, Ne ad extremum mundus
ignesceret, lest the world should be consumed with fire. See to this purpose
also Seneca, in his Book De Consolatione ad Mart. c. 26. Pliny in his Natural
History, l. 7. c. 16. The Sibylline Prophecies, lib. 2. Oracul. Lucans Pharsal.
and Ovids Metamorph. l. 1. who does thus express it.

Esse quoque in fatis reminiscitur, affore tempus,
Quo mare, quo tellus, correptaque Regia Coeli
Ardeat, and mundi moles operosa laboret.
Which may be Englished as follows. Besides he called to mind, that by the
doom
Of certain Fate, a certain time should come,
When Sea and Land, the Court of Heaven, the frame
Of this great work, the world, should burn in flame.
Who can peruse these passages of those Ancient Gentiles, and not conceive they
had consulted with the writings of the Prophet Isaiah Isai. 51.6.
, where it is said, That the Heavens shall vanish away like smoke, and the
Earth wax old as does a garment; and also in another place, That the Heavens
shall be rolled together like a piece of parchment Id. 54.4.
, that is to say, Like a Piece of Parchment shrivelled and shrunk up together
by a scorching fire? Who can peruse those passages of the ancient Gentiles, but
must conceive that they were partly enlightened by the self-same Spirit with
which St. Peter was enspired, when he told us in his second Epistle, saying,
The day of the Lord will come as a Thief in the night, in which the Heavens
shall pass away with a great noise, and the Elements shall melt with fervent
heat, the Earth also and the works that are therein shall be utterly burnt,
Cap. 4.10. And in the next save one, as follows, Looking for, and hastening to
the coming of the day of God, in which the Heavens shall perish with fire, and
the Elements melt with fervent heat? Were it a thing to be admitted in
Chronology, I could not but believe that these ancient Gentiles had ploughed
with St. Peter's Heifer, and from him borrowed their discourses of the worlds
conflagration.

And now I am fallen into the writings of those ancient Gentiles, and found what
they conceived of the Souls immortality, and the consumption of this world by a
burning fire: I will not leave them till they have delivered their opinions
also concerning the estate of the soul departed, and the glories of eternal
life in the world to come. In which they have expressed themselves in so clear
a manner, that we may justly say as Octavius did, Aut nunc Christianos
Philosophos esse, aut Philosophos fuisse jam tunc Christianos Minut. Fe^^.
, That either the Christians are Philosophers, or the old Philosophers were
Christians. For that there was a Paradise, or some place of delight and
pleasure for the reception of the souls of virtuous persons, appears by that
sacred speech of Zoroaster, the antientest of the Sages amongst the Gentiles,
and one not much short of the time of Abraham, with whom he is supposed to have
been contemporary, (...) Zoroast. in Oracul. Chal^
, Seek Paradise, says he; that is to say, (...), that all enlightened recess of
souls, as Pletho the Scholiast does expound it; (...), A Quire of the divine
powers encircling the Father, as Psellus glosseth on that Text; but Psellus on
occasion of the words aforesaid, goes a little further. (...), etc. It
concerns us, says he, to make haste unto the light and beams of our Heavenly
Father, who has bestowed our souls upon us, endued with such a perfect measure
of understanding; and who not only does direct our minds in the ways of
godliness, (...), but in due time also will save our Bodies. The Divine Plato,
and his followers, borrowed a great deal of their light from this Zoroaster,
and the like Dictates of the rest of the Chaldean Sages, which grounded him in
his opinion of the Souls immortality, and the account it was to give to the
dreadful Judge in the world to come, whereof he speaks in his second Epistle,
and eleventh Book De Legibus. Pythagoras, though sometimes he held the
transmigration of the soul into other Bodies, yet in his better thoughts he
disposed it otherwise, and placed the souls of virtuous men in the Heavens
above, where they should be immortal, and like the gods, saying Pythag. in
Carm. Aureis.
, (...)
(...).


That is to say, Leaving the Body, they to Heaven shall fly,
Where they shall be immortal, never die.
And to this purpose also that of Epicharmus may be here alleged, assuring us*
That if we live a life conform to the rules of virtue, death shall not be able
to do us hurt, because our souls shall live in a blessed life in the highest
Heavens. Upon these grounds, but specially upon the reading of some Books of
Plato, Cleombrotus is said to have been so ravished with the contemplation of
the glories of that other life, that for the more speedy attaining of them, he
cast himself down from the top of a Mountain, with greater zeal by far, than
wisdom. And therefore much more commendable was the death, and dying speech of
one Chalcedius (another of those old Platonicks) Revertar in patriam ubi
meliores Progenitores and Parents De ver. Chr. Rel. c. 15.
, I am, says he, returning into my own Country, where I shall find the bettet
sort of my Progenitors and deceased Parents. Nor was this such a point of
divine knowledge, as was attainable only by the wise men of Greece; the sober
men amongst the Romans had attained it also. For Cicero affirms expressly,
Certum esse ac definitum in coelo locum, ubi beati aevo sempiterno fruantur
Cicero in Some. Scipion.
, That there is a certain and determinate place in Heaven where the blessed
souls of those who deserve well of the public shall enjoy everlasting rest and
happiness. And Seneca speaks thus of death, intermittit vitam non eripit, that
it only interrupteth the course of life, but destroys it not Senec. ad Lucil.
, because there will come a day at last, qui nos iterum in lucem reponat, which
will restore us again to the light of Heaven. Finally, Not to add more
testimonies in so clear a case, Homer makes Hercules a companion of the gods
above, with whom he lives in endless solace, (...). And Ennius says the like
of Romulus Cicero Tuscul. qu. l. 2.
, Romulus in Coelo longum cum diis agit aevum. If we would know what their
opinion was of the place it self, in which eternal life was to be enjoyed, we
have a glimpse or shadow of it in the fiction of the Elysian fields so
memorized and chanted by the ancient Poets; Locos laetos and amoena vireta
Fortunatorum nemorum, sedesque beatas Virg. Aen. l. 6.
; A place conceived to be replenished with all variety of pleasures and divine
contentments, which possibly the soul of man could aspire unto: the ground
continually covered with the choycest Tapistry of Nature, the Trees perpetually
furnished with the richest fruits, excellent both for taste and color, the
Rivers running Nectar, and most heavenly Wines, fit for the Palate of the gods;
And which did add to all these beauties, (...), the sweets thereof not blasted
by untimely dewes, or interrupted by the inclemency of a bitter winter. A place
by them designed for the souls of those who had been careful of Religion, or
lost their lives in the defense and preservation of their natural Country, or
otherwise deserved nobly of the public. Nay, even the rude Americans and
savage Indians, whom we may justly call jumenta rationalia, a kind of
reasonable beasts, retain amongst them a Tradition, thar beyond some certain
hills (but they know not where) there is a glorious place reserved for the
souls of those who had lived virtuously and justly in this present life, or
sacrificed their lives to defend their Country, or were the Authors of any
notable and signal benefit which tended to the good of mankind.

If then not only the Philosophers and learned Gentiles, but even the
Barbarians and rude Americans have spooken so divinely of the place and state
of good men departed; there is no question to be made, but that the Patriarchs,
Prophets, and other holy men of God, were very well assured of the truth
hereof, although they lived before or under the Law, as well assured as we that
have the happiness to live under the Gospel. For St. Paul tells us of the
Fathers which were under the cloud 1 Cor. 10.1, 2, 3.
, that they all passed through the red Sea, and did all eat the same spiritual
meat, and did all drink the same spiritual drink (for they drank of that
spiritual Rock which followed them, and that Rock was Christ) Not that they had
the same Sacraments in specie, which we Cristians have; but others which
conduced to the same effect, and did produce the same fruits both of Faith and
Piety. The Mysteries of salvation, the hopes and promises of eternal life, are
frequently expressed in the Old Testament, quamvis obscuriores long, though
more obscure by far than in the forms of speech in which they are presented to
us in the New Testament, as Peter Martyr well observes Pet. Mart. in loc. com.
l. 2. c. 16.
. And he notes too, that many were the temporal promises, or the promises
concerning temporal blessings; but so, as to conduct and train them up in the
hopes of happiness eternal: The temporal blessings which they had, were but the
types and figures of those endless comforts which were reserved for them in the
Heavens above; the land of Promise, but a shadow of that promised land, of
which they were to be heirs in the Kingdom of God: Jerusalem but a Map of that
glorious City, whose Author and founder is the Lord. Enoch had neither been
translated before the Law, nor Elias under it, had not both of them steadfastly
believed this truth, that they should see the goodness of the Lord in the Land
of the living. And yet some men there were, and I doubt still are, who teach,
that the holy men of God which lived before Christ our Saviors time, did fix
their hopes only upon temporal blessings, and not at all upon spiritual, or if
upon spiritual, as the peace of conscience, yet not upon eternal happiness,
which is the crown and glory of that peace. The Anabaptists and the Familists
were of this opinion, against whom the Church of England has declared her self
in the Seventh Article of her Confession; saying, That they are not to be heard
which feign that the old Fathers did only look for transitory promises. Of
this opinion also was that wretched Servetus, who thought no otherwise of the
people of the house of Israel, quam de aliquo porcorum grege Calv. Instit. l.
2. c. 10. sect. 1.
, than other men would do of an herd of Swine, whom he conceived the Lord did
fatten in the Land of Canaan, Citra ullam spem coelestis immortalitatis,
Without breeding them in any hopes of the life eternal. And against him does
Calvin (who has given us this knowledge of him) intend his whole tenth Chapter
of his second Book of Institutions. Nor do I find but that our Masters in the
Church of Rome like it well enough, though they keep more aloof in the tendrie
of it. For neither does Prateolus, nor Alphonsus a Castro, nor any other of
their Writers for ought I can find, in reckoning up the errors of the
Anabaptists, or of Servetus and his followers, account this for one; nor do
they give such efficacy to the Jewish Sacraments, as to confer Grace, or
spiritual gifts on them that were partakers of them. And Harding tells us in
plain terms, That the body is not raised to eternal life, but by the real and
substantial eating of the flesh of Christ Answ. to the Apol. par. 2. c.
. Which were it so, as Bishop Jewel well observes, what life could Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, and other holy Patriarchs and Prophets have, which were
before the coming of Christ, and therefore could not really and substantially
eat his flesh? Must we not needs conclude by this strange Divinity, that they
have no life, but are dead for ever, without any hope of resurrection unto Life
everlasting, But what need such deductions, though most clear and evident, when
one of their infallible and Authentic Records speaks it out so plainly, that
every ordinary understanding cannot but perceive it? I mean the Roman Catechism
published by the order and authority of the Council of Trent. The Authors
whereof abusing the authority of St. Augustine in his Comment on the 77th.
Psalm, will have the Jewish Church to be called the Synagogue, Quia pecudum
more quibus magis congregari convenit, terrena tantum and caduca bona
spectarent Catech. Romans in exp. Symb.
; i. e. Because like brute beasts who properly are said to be congregated or
gathered together (for so the word Synagogue does import) they sought after
nothing but transitory and temporal things. Than which no Anabaptist in the
world could have spoke more plainly. A Tenet very contrary to plain Texts of
Scripture, which speak no otherwise of the Patriarchs, Prophets and other holy
men of God, which lived before and under the Law, than of those to whom
pertained the adoption of Sons, and the glory, and the service of God Romans 9.4.
, and the same Promises which are made to us who live under the Gospel. For
does not God say to our Father Abraham, that he was both his shield, and his
great reward Genesis 15.1.
? his shield, or his Protector, as the Vulgar reads it, to save him from all
danger in this present world; and his exceeding great reward in the world to
come. And does not Job, whose history was writ by the hand of Moses (as it is
generally conceived by men of learning) profess a more than ordinary confidence
in the Resurrection Job 19.26.
, and of his seeing God with those very eyes, which were to be consumed with
worms? Does not the Royal Psalmist tell us of himself, that he did verily
believe to see the goodness of the Lord in the land of the living Psalm. 27.1^.
? And does not the Prophet tell us of the blessed Land where men live for ever,
that the eye has not seen, nor the ear heard, neither can the heart of man
conceive those things which God has prepared for them that love him?
Sufficient evidence to prove, that as well in the Old Testament as in the New,
Everlasting Life is offered to mankind by God, according to the Doctrine of
this Church of England Article 7.
.

It is true, the Promises of Everlasting Life to us which live under the
Gospel, are delivered in more clear expressions than those which were delivered
to our Fathers which lived under the Law; for which we have the greater cause
to give thanks to God, who speaks so plainly to us without Tropes and Figures,
without Types and Ceremonies, the shadows of those things which we have in
substance. For what can be more plain than that of our Lord and Savior,
saying, That the righteous shall go into life everlasting, Matthew. 25.46. That
they which do forsake all for his sake, shall in the world to come have eternal
life, Mark 10.30. That whosoever believes in the only begotten Son of God,
shall not perish, but have life everlasting, John 3.6. That he which hates his
life in this world, shall keep it unto life eternal? Chap. 12.25. Or what can
be more plain than those words of St. Paul in the first to Timothy, advising
us, That we lay up in store for our selves a good foundation against the time
to come, that we may lay hold on eternal life, Chap. 6.19. Or those to Titus,
That being justified by his grace, we shall be made heirs according to the
hopes of life eternal, Chap. 3.7. Or that in the second to the Corinthians, We
know that if our earthly tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of God,
an house not made with hands, eternal in the Heavens? Chap. 5.1. Finally, What
can be more plain than that of St. Peter, assuring us, That by the Resurrection
of Christ from the dead, we are begotten again to an inheritance immortal,
undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved for us in the Heavens? 1 Pet.
5.3, 4. Or that in the same Epistle, where he tells his Presbyters, That if
they feed the flock of Christ committed to them, when the chief Shepherd shall
appear, they shall receive, immarcessibilem coronam gloriae, an immarcessible
Crown of glory, or a Crown of glory which withers not, as our English reads
it? Chap. 5.4. How much more might be added from the Revelations, and other
passages of the New Testament, where the same thing is either figuratively
expressed, or easily inferred by logical and necessary consequences? but that I
was to show that eternal life was promised unto those who lived under the Law,
although not every where, nor altogether in such clear expressions, as it is
held forth unto us who live under the Gospel. As clear are those expressions
also, which do set forth the nature and condition of this life to come, as
those which do deliver the eternity and duration of it: For in some places it
is called the joy of the Lord, Enter into thy masters joy, Matthew. 25.5. Where
there is fullness of joy, and at his right hand there is pleasure for evermore
Psalm. 16.12.
, as the Psalmist has it; Et nunquam turbata quies, and gaudia firma, in the
Poets language. Sometimes it is called a Kingdom, and a Crown of glory. A
Kingdom by our Savior in St. Matthews Gospel, Chap. 25.5. A Crown of glory by
St. Paul; as also a Crown of righteousness, 2 Timothy 4.8. and finally, a Crown of
life by St. James, Chap. 1.12. With one of which Crowns, or some like unto it,
we shall be all made Kings in Gods heavenly Kingdom, as is affirmed by St. John
in the Revelation Apoc. 4.4.
. In a word, it is sometimes called Civitas Dei viventis, or the City of the
living God, as in that to the Hebrews, Chap. 12.5. A City, by St. John
described to be of pure Gold, and as clear as Crystal, the Walls of Iaspar
stone, and the Gates of Pearl Apoc. 21.18. Verse. 19.
, and all the Pavements throughout of most precious stones. Which Character we
must not understand in the literal, but the mystical sense: The Man of God in
his description of the New Jerusalem, selecting such materials to set forth the
same, as he conceived to be most estimable in the eyes of men. Put all which
has been said together, and we shall find, That under this one notion of Life
Everlasting, are comprehended all the comforts which attend the same; that is
to say, A Kingdom, and a Crown of glory, the joys and never-fading pleasures
which are to be possessed at the right hand of God in that Heavenly City, the
very Gates whereof are so rich and beautiful. O coelo dilecta domus, postesque
beati! A City where we shall possess all divine contentments which possibly the
soul of man can aspire unto; health without sickness, beauty without blemish,
felicity without admixture of afflictions, and joy without disconsol^^ion:
There shall we for evermore enjoy the Beatifical Vision of Almighty God, when
we shall see him face to face, in his perfect glory, and know him as we are
known of him 1 Cor. 13.12.
, not by faith but sight; which is the only object of divine felicity, Visio
Dei beatifica sola est summum bonum nostrum August. de Trinit.
, said St. Augustine truly. And in that blessed Vision of Almighty God, we
shall with joy possess those unspeakable glories, which St. Paul calls (...) 2
Cor. 12.4.
, Such as it was not possible for a man to utter; which neither the tongue of
man nor angels can express aright. To which, what need we add the happiness
which we shall enjoy, in having the society of the glorious company of the
Apostles, the goodly fellowship of the Prophets, the noble army of Martyrs, the
beloved embraces of those happy souls, whose sad departure from us we so much
lamented. What need it be added unto this, That there we shall enjoy those
favors which the frown of Princes cannot ruin, nor the riot of posterity
impair, nor the tongues of evil people blemish; those riches which the rust of
pleasure shall not eat into, nor the moth of vanity consume, nor the great
thief of Hell steal from us? In a word, What need be added unto this, That
there we shall attain such an height of bliss, Vt ne voto quidem opus sit, that
there shall be no need of prayers, but we shall spend our whole eternity in no
other office, than singing Hymns of praise and glory to the Lord our God? All
this, and more than can be added, is comprehended in the glory of that blessed
Vision, which is all in all. But of the glories and felicities of eternal life,
it is enough to say a little, because it is impossible we should say enough.

Two things there are which may deserve a further, and more punctual search,
because they have been much debated amongst the learned: The one about the
different degrees in eternal happiness; the other about the knowledge which the
Saints shall have of one another, whether they lived with us, or in other ages.
Of both these I shall venture a word or two in a positive way, rather than
traverse and debate them in the way of Argument.

And first beginning with the last, It is apparent that the Apostles knew our
Savior after his Resurrection from the grave of death; and that the people of
Jerusalem, the holy City, did know those Saints, who rose together with our
Savior, and appeared unto them; though both our Savior, and those Saints rose
in glorified bodies; Bodies not subject any more unto putrefaction. And if a
mortal eye could see and distinguish clearly of such bodies, as by their
Resurrection were become incorruptible; how much more may we think that a
glorified eye is able to recall unto our remembrance, the knowledge of that
glorified body, which formerly we knew in the state of corruption. It is
apparent also by our Saviors Parable, that Dives and Lazarus knew each other,
though then in diverse places, and in different states Luke 16.^3*
; the one at rest in Abraham's bosom, the other in the pit of Hell, and in
flames unquenchable. How much more shall the Saints, the Elect of God, both
know, and be made known unto one another; abiding in the same place, and the
same estate, and looking daily in the Mirror of Gods blessed Vision, which
represents all things unto them in their true condition? We shall then know, as
we are known of God, as St. Paul has told us 1 Cor 3.12.
; out of which place, St. Augustine comforted a poor widow, called Italica, who
mourned heavily for the loss of her husband, assuring her, That as in this life
she saw him with external eyes, but with those eyes discerned no more than his
outward lineaments; so in the life to come she should see him again, and in
that sight discern the very thoughts of his heart, and all his secret counsels,
and imaginations August. Epl. 6.
. Nor shall we only know and be known of those, with whom we took sweet
counsel together, or walked together in the House of the Lord as Friends; but
at the first sight shall be able to say, that this is Abraham, Isaac, Jacob;
these are the Saints that went before us, these are they who came in the arrere
many ages after. For Christ our Savior tells the Jews, That they should see
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and all the Prophets in the Kingdom of God Luke 13.28.
: Not see them, as men see a stranger whom they did not know, but see them so,
as to know who they were by their names and qualities; Else could not the
discomfort be so great unto them, to see their Fathers after the flesh, and all
the Prophets whom they murdered, in a state of glory; and they, their miserable
and unhappy children, to be quite excluded from the same. And the same Christ
our Savior does assure his followers, That they should sit at the same Table
with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the Kingdom of Heaven Id. 22.30.
; that is to say, They should commerce as freely, and as knowingly with those
ancient Patriarks, as men that use to eat together in the self-same house.
Besides, the Scriptures do affirm in several places, That at the last day,
shall be a manifest declaration of the just judgment of God, when he shall
reward every man according to the works which he has done in the flesh,
whether good or evil. And if the works of every man shall be brought to light,
then much more shall the workers of those iniquities be made known to the
Saints their Judges; for if the persons be not known, where would be that
confusion of the face which the Scriptures speak of, which shall befall the
wicked and impenitent sinner, upon the manifestation of his deeds of darkness?
Many a malefactor has been hanged more cheerfully in places where we was not
known, where he could be no shame to his friends and kindred, than if he had
been executed in the sight of those who knew him, and the parentage whence he
came. And to this purpose are the words of our blessed Savior unto his
Apostles, when he informs them, That they should sit upon twelve seats,
judging the twelve Tribes of Israel Matthew. 19.28.
. By which it is apparent that they shall be known by the Tribes of Israel, to
be the poor despised Apostles of a more despised and persecuted Savior. It
follows consequently upon good deduction, not only that the twelve Apostles
shall know those of the Tribes of Israel, whom they are to judge; but that they
shall be also known of one another, and of all the Saints, who shall rejoice in
that preferment of their Chiefs and Leaders, though raised unto an higher pitch
and degree of glory, than others of their Brethren are advanced unto.

For that in Heaven there shall be different degrees and estates of glory, I
take to be a point so clearly evidenced in holy Scripture, that little
disputation needs be raised about it: Though some too much affected to a parity
in this present life, expect to find it also in the life to come. The Fathers,
I am sure, did all look this way. And so much Peter Martyr does confess
ingenuously, although himself no friend unto their opinion. De Patribus fatemur
ingenue quod praemiorum discrimina statuerunt, which is plain enough Pet.
Martyr. Com. Loc. cl. 3. c. 17.
. And as he does affirm this of the Fathers generally, so he affirms
particularly of St. Ierom, that he was istarum differentiarum acer propugnator;
a great assertor of those different degrees and estates of glory, as indeed he
was. And certainly they had good warrant to resolve so in it. Daniel, a Prophet
of the Lord, and one in more than ordinary favor with him, has assured us
this, That they which be wise, shall shine like the brightness of the
firmament, and they which turn many unto righteousness like the Stars for ever
Dan. 12.3.
. In which we see two different duties recommended to us, to learn the rules of
wisdom first, to be wise our selves, and then to teach them unto others, to
turn them to righteousness; accordingly the rewards proportioned, to shine like
the brightness of the firmament, like the stars of Heaven. And who sees not
how much the splendour of the Stars exceeds the brightness of the Sky, of the
clearest Firmament? The like St. Paul has told us of the Resurrection, That
there shall be a difference in it; that there is one glory of the Sun, another
glory of the Moon, another glory of the Stars; and of the Stars, that one Star
differs from another Star in glory 1 Cor. 15.41.
. Now our Astronomy does teach us upon very good inferences, that the Sun is
One hundred sixty and six times bigger than the Earthly Globe, whereas the Moon
hardly amounts unto a fortieth part thereof; and that the fixed Stars of the
first magnitude, are found to be One hundred and seven times bigger than the
Body of the Earth, those of the least, coming but to the sixth part of that
proportion. Which shows the difference in glory to be very great, though
possibly the Rules of that Art may fail us in the proportioning of that
difference: But whatsoever be the error in those Rules of Art, assuredly there
can be no etror in the words of Christ, in whom the Prophets and Apostles do
concenter and meet together. And he has told us in plain terms, That in his
Fathers house there are many mansions John 14.2.
; that is to say, as Denis the Carthusian states it, conform unto the mind and
meaning of the ancient Fathers, Multi praemiorum gradus, and variae
distinctiones, many degrees of happiness and estates of glory, though all most
glorious in themselves. According to which Rule of our Lord and Savior, we
find a difference made in his holy Gospel, between those men which had been
faithful over much, and those which had been faithful over a little only
Matthew. 25.21, 23.
; the one being made the Ruler of Ten Cities, the other but of Five alone Luke
19.17, 19.
; between the recompense and reward of a righteous person, and that which is
laid up by God for the reward of a Prophet. He that receives a righteous man,
in the name of a righteous man, shall receive a righteoas man's reward. And he
that receives a Prophet in the name of a Prophet, shall receive a Prophets
reward Matthew. 10.41.
, says our Lord and Savior. And to say truth, besides the warrant and
authority of the holy Scriptures, that so it should be, it stands with very
good Reason that so it should be; and is most consonant to the Rules of
distributive Justice, that so it must be. For if that faith in Christ, and a
conformity to the words of his holy Gospel, be, in the merciful construction of
the Lord our God, thought worthy of a crown of glory; then certainly a greater
and more lively faith, and a more conscionable walking in the sight of God,
must be rewarded with a richer and more excellent Crown. And so it also
follows by the rule of contraries. For if he that knows the will of his
Master and does it not, shall be beaten with more stripes Luke 12.47.
, than the ignorant man, as the truth it self has said he shall; it must needs
follow by that Rule, that they which know Gods will exactly, and conscionably
apply themselves to observe the same, shall be rewarded with more blessings at
their Masters hands. And so the old Carthusian whom before I spoke of, does
resolve the question. Many (says he) are raised above their brethren in the
house of God, Secundum quod aliqui ferventius Deum dilexerint Dion. Carthus. in
Joh. 14.
, as being far more zealous in their love to God, more constant in pursuit of
their way to Heaven, than others of their Brethren are, which yet by Gods great
mercy shall come thither also. As therefore the Apostle advised those of
Corinth, so must I also counsel those which shall read these papers, that they
do covet earnestly (...), the best gifts and graces 1 Cor.
, that so they may possess the most eminent places. Or if they dare not look so
high, to be sure of this, that they do so conform their lives unto Gods
commandments, that when their earthly Tabernacles are dissolved into dust and
ashes, their souls may be disposed of in the place of rest, there to expect
the Resurrection of their Bodies to Eternal life, and lodged for ever in some
one of those heavenly Mansions reserved for them in the Heavens.

And this indeed is that which we all must aim at, if we have any of that zeal
to the Kingdom of Heaven, which was so eminent in the Patriachs, Apostles,
Martyrs, Confessors, as to be left upon record for our instruction. Of Abraham
it is written in the Book of God, that he left his own Country, and all his
kindred, in search of a far better Country, that is an Heavenly Hebr. 11.
; that he left Vr, one of the chief Cities of the Chaldeans, but one made with
hands, to look for an house not made with hands, whose builder and maker is the
Lord. David preferred one day in the house of God, before a Thousand years
consumed in his earthly Palaces Psalm. 84.10.
, yea, though he were advanced no higher in that House of God, than to be a
doorkeeper. St. Peter was so rapt with the sight of those Heavenly glories, in
which he did behold our Savior in his transfiguration, that he set up his
resolution with Bonum est nobis esse hic Matthew. 17.4.
, that it was best for him to abide there always. And when St. Paul had seen a
glimpse of the joys of Paradise, to which he had been taken up in an heavenly
rapture, how willingly did he endure the cross, and despise the shame, in
reference to the joy which was set before him Hebr. 12.2.
? how earnestly did he come out with his cupio dissolvi, that he desired to be
dissolved and to live with Christ? With what a gallant zeal did the old Father
Ignatius contemn the fire, Gallows, fury of wild Beasts, the breaking of his
bones, quartering of his members, and the crushing of his body into pieces,
tota Diaboli tormenta, nay all the torments of the Devil and Hell, only upon
this bare hope, ut Christo fruar Hierom. in Catal. Script.
, That he might come at last to enjoy his Savior? Such an Heroic zeal was
that of the good Father St. Augustine, who declared himself to be contended to
endure the torments of Hell, so he might thereby gain the joys of Heaven Aug.
Sermon. 31. de sancti.
, rather than lose the same for want of those dreadful sufferings. And not much
short of this was the resolution wherewith St. Basil answered his Persecutors,
when they did think to terrify him with the fear of death; I will not fear
that death, says he, which can do no more than restore me unto him that made
me Nazan. de vit. Basil.
. Infinite more of these examples might be laid before us, were not these
sufficient to let us see how high a price they set on the joys of Heaven, the
glories of this Life eternal, of which they had no more assurance than what was
made unto them by the Word of God; which Word of God we have for our assurance
and comfort also, besides the conduct and authority of their good example. Of
such inestimable nature are the glories of Eternal Life, which are prepared by
God for all them that love him, and carefully pursue those ways which do lead
them thither.

But so it is not with those men, who either wilfully shut their eyes against
the knowledge of God, or, who confess him with their mouths, but scornfully
deny him in their words and actions, leading a life conform to their sensual
appetite. There is another habitation reserved for them, even that prepared for
the devil and his angels Matthew. 25.41.
, the house of everlasting torments and unquenchable flames. The knowledge and
belief of which doleful state, pertains no less unto a Christian, than that of
everlasting life in eternal glory. The wicked and impenitent soul being again
united to her sinful body, shall find an everlasting life, but in endless
torments. Which though it be not said expressly in the Apostles Creed, is yet
contained by consequence, and in the way of reduction, in the present Article;
but more particularly and in terminis expressed in the Creed or Symbol of St.
Athanasius. There it is said to be necessary to everlasting salvation, to
believe this, amongst other things of our Lord and Savior JESUS CHRIST, That
at his coming unto judgment all men shall rise again with their bodies, and
shall give account for their own works; and they that have done good shall go
into life everlasting, and they that have done evil into everlasting fire
Quincunque vult.
. Which is no more than what our Savior Christ has told us, though in other
words (and every word of his is to be believed) where it is said, That the hour
is coming, in which all that are in the graves shall hear his voice Joh. 5.28,
29.
: And shall come forth, they that have done good to the Resurrection of life,
and they that have done evil to the Resurrection of damnation. Being therefore
in this place to speak of the pains of Hell, and such considerable
circumstances as conduce to the knowledge of them; I will begin first with the
Quid nominis, the names by which it is made known in the writings of the
Evangelists and Apostles, and other creditable Authors in the Christian Church,
and so descend to the Quid rei, or the thing it self.

First then the names by which it has been delivered and made known unto us by
the sacred Penmen, are these four especially, that is to say, Hades, Abyssus,
Tartarus, and Gehenna; of which, the three first are merely Greek, and the last
an offspring of the Hebrews. Of Hades we have spoke already in the Article of
Christ's descent into Hell; as also of the Latin Inferi or infernum, which they
use to express it, and shall not here repeat what was there delivered. By that
which was delivered there, it appears to be a dark and disconsolate place in
the deeps of the Earth, a place appointed for the punishment of ungodly men;
not only in the judgment of the sacred Penmen, and the old Ecclesiastical
writers in the Church of Christ, but also of all learned men amongst the
Gentiles, whether Greeks or Latins. The same is signified as plainly in the
name of Abyssus, which is thrice used by St. John in the Revelation, to
signify the bottomless pit, or the pit of torments: from whence the smoke
ascended like the smoke of a furnace, Chap. 9.2. from whence the Beasts
ascended to make war against the Two Witnesses of the Lord, Chap. 11.7. from
whence that Beast ascended also to his just perdition, on which the woman sat,
which made her self drunk with the blood of the Saints, Chap. 17.8. And is
indeed no other than that Stagnum ignis and sulphuris, that lake of fire and
brimstone, mentioned in the twentieth Chapter. Nor is the word used only in
the Revelation, to signify Hell, or the place of torments, but in St. Paul's
Epistle to the Romans also, where it is said, Say not in thine heart, who shall
ascend up into Heaven? That is, to bring Christ down from above Romans 10.6, 7.
. Aut quis descendet in Abyssum, or, who shall descend into the deep? That is,
to bring up Christ again from the dead. Where, by Abyssus, which is rendered by
this word, the deep, is meant no other place but Hell, Inferi or infernum, as
says Martin Bucer, by whom the whole Text is expounded of Christ's descent into
Hell, as has been proved at large in the foresaid Article. This finally is the
very place, to which the Devils who exclaimed against Christ our Savior for
coming to torment them before their time Matthew. 8.29.
, desired him that they might not go. And they besought him (says St. Luke) ne
imperaret illis ut in Abyssum irent, i. e. That he would not command them to go
into the deep Luke 8.31.
, or rather into the Abyss, or the bottomless pit, as the word is rendered
thrice in the Revelation. Abyssus therefore must be Hell, or the house of
torments prepared for the Devil and his Angels, against the judgment of that
great and terrible day; which they were so afraid to enter, that they besought
the Lord not to send them thither. The third word used for Hell in the holy
Scripture is Tartarus, used only by St. Peter, and that but once. God spared
not (says he) the Angels that sinned, but having bound them with chains of
darkness, detrusos in Tartaro tradidit cruciandos 2 Pet. 2.4.
, cast them down into Hell, to be kept there to the day of judgment. Where
Tartarus, though Englished Hell, is not that very place of torment to which
they shall be doomed in the judgment day; but the out-skirts or suburbs of it,
the prison in the which they lie bound in the chains of darkness. But whether
it be Hell it self, or the dungeon to it, the ancient Gentiles who best knew
the true meaning of it, have made it a dark place in the deeps of the Earth;
and therefore called by Ovid, Tenebrosa Tartara Ovid. Met. l. 1.
. Thus Hesiod also tells us of it, that the dungeon of Tartarus is as much
under the Earth, as Heaven is above it; (...) Hesiod. in Theogonia.
, as his words there are. And so did Virgil understand it when he told us this,
Tartarus ipse bis patet in praeceps tantum, That Tartarus is twice as deep as
the Heaven is high. And in a prophecy of one of the Sibyls, which I find often
cited by the ancient Fathers Lactant. l. ^. August. de Civitat. Dei. l. 1^. c.
23.
, it is described to be a place in the lower parts of the Earth. For speaking
of the day of judgment, it is there affirmed, (...), That then the gaping Earth
shall discover the Tartarean dungeon. That they did also use the word for the
place of torments, is evident by that of Anacreon, an old drunken Poet, who
gives this reason why he was so loath to die, and forsake this world, (...),
Because he feared to go to Tartarus: And so St. Augustine understood it, when
he said of Christ, That he descended unto Tartarus, but felt there no torments.
The fourth and last word was Gehenna, or Ge-Hinnom, a word not known amongst
the Gentiles, and only used by Christ when he spoke to the Jews, whose it was
originally; and by St. James in his Epistle to that scattered Nation Jam. 2.6.
, who very well understood the true meaning of it. For Ge-Hinnom or the Valley
of Hinnom, was a Dell or Valley near Jerusalem, in which there was a fire
continually burning, partly to consume the dead Carcasses and filth of the
City, and partly for the sacrificing of those wretched Children which were
offered to the Idol Moloch: Which making it a place both of stink and terror,
it came to be a type of Hellfire it self; and for the fire of Hell, or for
Hell it self, was used by Christ and his Apostle, as before was said; the
Hebrew word being mollified and made Gehenna. Hell is called many times
Gehinnon, says Peter Martyr Pet. Martyr. Com. Loc. clas. 3. c. 16.
, because a Vale being a low and deep place, does resemble Hell; Quod infra
terram esse creditur, which generally is believed to be under the Earth. A
place of fiery torments, says Martin Bucer; and therefore called Gehenna
ignis, or the Hell of fire, in St. Matthews Gospel Matthew. 5.22.
.

These are the several words used by the sacred Penmen of the New Testament,
when they speak of Hell. And all being laid together, will amount to this, That
it is a dark and dismal place in the deeps of the Earth, prepared by God
originally for the devil and his angels, and secondarily for impenitent
sinners, where they shall fry for ever in unquenchable flames, and see no other
light but the fire that burns them. And this being properly the punishment
reserved in Hell, for those who are condemned to that bottomless pit, I shall
insist the more upon it: Not looking here upon the separation of the wicked
from the love of God, or the despair which they groan under, or the guilt of
conscience; which either are but poena damni, the loss of that which Gods
beloved do enjoy in the Heavenly glories, or are in part inflicted on the
wicked man in this present life. For unto this relates those Parables in St.
Matthews Gospel, where it is said by Christ, That the Angels shall gather out
of his Kingdom all things that offend, and them that do iniquity, and shall
cast them in caminum ignis into the furnace of fire Matthew. 13 42, 50.
. And in the Parable of the Net, we have it in the same words, in caminum
ignis. Thus the rich glutton in St. Luke is said to be tormented in those fiery
flames Luke 16.24.
: And in the twentieth of the Revelation it is called expressly, Stagnum ignis
and sulphuris, A lake of fire and brimstone Apoc. 20.10.
, as was said before. A truth communicated to, and by the Prophets of the
former times, who give us this description of Tophet, or the Valley of Hinnom,
That the pile thereof is fire and much wood, that the breath of the Lord is
like a stream of brimstone to kindle it Isai. 30.33 and 34.10.
; and that the stream thereof shall be turned into pitch, and the dust into
brimstone. And Malachi speaking of the day of judgment, tells us, That it
shall burn like an Oven, and that all which do wickedly shall be as the
stubble, Quos inflammabit dies veniens, whom that day when it comes shall burn
up Mal. 4.1.
. A truth so known among the Gentiles, whether by tradition of their Ancestors,
or conversation with the Jews, we dispute not here, that by the verses of the
Poets, and the works of their most grave Philosophers, as Minutius tells us,
Illius ignei fluminis admonen^ur homines, Men were admonished to beware of that
burning lake. To which it were impertinent to add the testimonies of the
Ancient Fathers, by one of which it is called Divinus ignis Lactant. l. 7. c.
21.
, Poenale incendium Minut. Fell. in Dial.
by a second, Ardor poenarum by a third August. de Civit. Dei. l. 21. c. 2, 3.
, Aeternus ignis, by a fourth, and sic de coeteris. And though a Question has
been made (as all things have been questioned in these captious times) whether
this fire be true and real, or only metaphorically called so in the Book of
God; yet by all sound Interpreters it is thus agreed on (as has been very well
observed by a learned Jesuit) Metaphoram esse non posse quae sit tam perpetua
Maldonat. in Marc. 9.
, That such a constancy of expression does exclude a Metaphor. Nor do there
want good Reasons to confirm this truth, against the cavils and exceptions of
unquiet men.

For first, considering that the fire of Hell is so often threatened in the
Scriptures to ungodly men, unless we hold fast to this good old Rule in
expounding Scripture, to take it in the literal sense, according as the native
meaning of the words import, but where the same may be against the truth of
faith, and honesty of manners (it is St. Augustines Rule De Doctr. Christ. l.
3. c. 10.
) we shall leave nothing safe nor sound in the Book of God. And then it is to
be considered, That Christ our Savior shall pronounce this sentence in the day
judgment, Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the
devil and his angels; Which if it be not spoken in the literal sense, according
to the plain meaning of the words, neither the guilty can perceive what they
are to suffer, nor the Ministers what they are to execute, nor the Saints what
belongs to them to approve and applaud; but all things will be left in most
strange perplexities. Besides, it was the custom of our Lord and Savior, when
he had spoken to the Jews in Tropes and Parables, to make an exposition of them
to his own Disciples; and in that exposition to speak so plainly, that every
one might be able to understand him: As in the Parables of the Tares, and the
Casting Net, delivered in the thirteenth of St. Matthews Gospel, the Disciples
understood not what he meant by either, but were as ignorant of his scope and
purpose, as the rest of the Jews; But when he did expound himself unto them in
private, touching the sending of his Angels in the day of judgment to sever the
wicked from the just, and to cast them, being severed so, into the furnace of
fire; and then demanded, if they understood what was said unto them, they made
answer, yea Matthew. 13.51.
. It must not therefore be a Metaphor, but a proper Speech, by which our
Savior Christ did expound his meaning, and open the obscurity of the said two
Parables; for to expound a Parable by a Trope or Metaphor, had neither been
agreeable to our Saviors goodness, nor any way conducing to their Edification.

So then, the fire of Hell shall be true and real, not Figurative and
Metaphorical; and as it is a real fire, a devouring fire, so is it ignis
inextinguibilis, an unquenchable fire in the third, and ignis aeternus, an
everlasting fire, in the five and twentieth of Matthew; The smoke whereof goes
up for ever, says the Prophet Isaiah Isai. 34.10.
. A fire which feeds both on the body and the soul, yet shall never consume
them; and such a fire, as breeds a kind of worm within it, which shall never
die, but always gnaw upon the conscience of the man condemned, and create far
more anguish to him, than all bodily torments. And of this worm it is which St.
Basil speaks, where reckoning up the terrors which shall be presented to the
wicked in the day of judgment, amongst them he recounteth a darkish fire, which
though it has lost his light, shall retain its burning, (...) Basil in Psalm.
33.
, and a most venomous kind of worm feeding on flesh, and raising intolerable
torments with continual biting. See to this purpose also that of Gregory Nyssen
in his Homily De Resurrectione Christi; nor is it thus delivered in the
writings of the Christians only. Josephus also has the like, a Jew, but a
learned and a modest Jew, in an Oration of his which he made to the Grecians;
not extant in his works indeed, but mentioned by Damascene, and preserved by
Zonaras Zonar. Annal. Tom. 1. f. 1^1.
: For speaking also his opinion of the final judgment, to be executed by the
Messiah in the last day, he says, That there remains for the lovers of
wickedness, an unquenchable and never ending fire, (...), etc. And a fiery worm
not dying, nor destroying the body, but breaking forth of the body with
unceasing anguish. And to this truth, as to the miserable state of those in
Hell, all the old Catholic Doctors do attest unanimously, whether Greeks or
Latins. Tatianus, one of the most antientest of the Grecian Doctors, calls
the estate of the damned in Hell, (...), a death which never dies, an immortal
misery Tatian. O^a. adv. Gentes.
: Tertullian, the most ancient Latin, Cruciatum non diuturnum sed sempiternum,
Not only a long and lingering torrant, but an everlasting one. St. Augustine
answerably unto that of Tatianus, does call it Mortem sine morte August. de
Civit. Dei. l. 21. c. 2, 3.
, adding more over of those sires, Punire non finire corpora, that they torment
the body, but destroy it not. Tertullian he goes further yet, says, That it
burns the body, but repairs it also Tertul. Apol. c. 48.
, and calls it poenam nutrientem, A fire which so devoureth, that it also
nourishes. With him Lactantius does consent Lactant. l. 7. c. 21.
, so also does Minutius Felix, Prudentius, Cassiodorus, and indeed who not? And
why should this be thought a wonder so far beyond the reason and belief of a
mere natural man; or such, who taking on themselves the names of Christians,
will yet believe no more than will stand with reason? Does not the Scripture
tell us of a burning bush Exodus 3.2.
, a bush that burned with the fire, and was not consumed? And the Historians,
of the Hills of Aetna and Vesuvius, which do almost continually send out
dreadful flames, and yet never waste? And the Philosophers of a Worm or Beast,
which they call the Salamander, whose natural habitation is in the midst of the
fire? and the Poets of Prometheus, and Titius Vultures, which having fed so
many hundred years upon their Bowels, had not yet devoured them? Does not
experience tell us daily, That the lightning glanceth on our Bodies often, but
does seldom hurt us? And does not Ovid say expressly, Nec mortis poenas mors
altera finiet hujus Ovid. in Ibin.
, That there is a second death which shall never end? yet I confess, that the
prevailing Heresy which pretends to such wit and piety, has no small reason
to declare, Interire posse animas aut ab exitio liberari Ap. Grotius in Matthew.
25.
, That the souls of wicked and impenitent men shall either be annihilated, or
in fine released. For we may safely say of these new Pretenders, as once
Minutius did of the old Philosophers, Malunt penitus extingui, quam ad
supplicia reparari Minu^. Fell. in Dial.
; Considering how they have subverted all the Fundamentals of the Christian
Faith, it is all the reason in the world, that they should rather wish to be
annihilated, than survive to torments, such torments as shall know neither end,
nor measure.

BUt blessed JESUS, why do we waste our time in such nice disputes, in proving
and disproving points of so clear an evidence, which were much better spent in
pursutes of those ways and courses, by which we might have hope to fly from
the wrath to come. Thou Lord have set before us both Heaven and Hell,
command us to choose the one, and avoid the other; and tracedst us out the
way unto life eternal, both by thy Doctrine and Example. Conduct us we beseech
thee in the paths of righteousness, suppress that itch of curiosity, which
has not left one Article of the holy Faith without stain or censure; and make
us cheerfully submit our Reason to the Rule of Faith. And thou O God, the
Father Almighty, Maker of Heaven and Earth, send down thy holy Spirit into our
hearts, that by his Grace we may believe in thine only begotten son JESUS
CHRIST our Lord, place all our hopes upon the merits of his most precious death
and passion, our comforts in his glorious Resurrection and Ascension; That by
his means and mediation, we may be made true Members of thy Catholic Church,
enjoy a right Communion with thy blessed Saints, and the remission of our sins
in this present world; That so we may be made partakers of the Resurrection
unto Life eternal in the world to come. So be it. Amen.

FINIS.

