A Family-Altar Erected to the Honor Of the Eternal God: OR, A Solemn Essay to
promote the Worship of God in Private Houses:

Being some Meditations on Genesis 35.2, 3.

By O.H. an unworthy Minister of the Gospel.

Psalm 101.2. I will behave my self wisely in a perfect way: O when will thou
come unto me! I will walk within my house with a perfect heart.

Psalm 118.15. The voice of Rejoicing and Salvation is in the Tabernacles of
the Righteous.

Si enim negligit Deus in hoc Saeculo genus hominum, cur ad Coelum quotidie
manus tendimus? cur orationibus crebris misericordiam Dei quaerimus? cur ad
Ecclesiasticas Domos currimus? cur ante Altaria supplicamus? nulla enim est
nobis ratio precandi, si spes tollitur impetrandi: Salvian. Massil. de
Gubernat. Dei, lib. 1.

LONDON, Printed for T. Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns in Cheapside.
1693.

To the Christian Reader, especially to Householders professing Religion.
FOR your sakes (dear Friends) I presume again to appear upon the public
Stage, to be your faithful Monitor, to prompt you to your duty, and to promote
the Work of God in your own Souls, and the Worship of God in your Families: And
I know not how a Minister can employ his Time, and Studies, and Pen better
(next to the Conviction and Conversion of particular Souls) than pressing upon
Householders a care of the Souls under their charge: This has a direct tendency
to public Reformation: Religion begins in Individuals, and passes on to
Relatives; and lesser Relatives make up greater. Churches and Commonwealths
consist of Families. There is a general complaint of the great decay of the
Power of Godliness, and Inundation of Profaneness; and not without cause: I
know no better Remedy than Domestic Piety: Did Governors teach their
Inferiors by Counsels and Examples; did they severely discountenance and
restrain Enormities, and press Holiness, and then call on God unitedly and
affectionately, that he would efficaciously work what they cannot effect; who
can tell what a blessed alteration would follow? In vain do you complain of
Magistrates and Ministers, while you that are Householders are unfaithful to
your Trust: You complain, the World is naught; what do you to mend it? Do not
so much complain of others, as of your selves; and complain not so much to Man
as to God, and plead with him for Reformation, and second your Prayers with
earnest Endeavors: Sweep before your own doors: Act for God within your
sphere: As you have more opportunity of familiarity with House-fellows, so you
have more authority over them by their dependence on you, to influence them;
and if you improve not this Talent, you will have a dreadful account to give,
especially when their blood will be required at your hands, because their sin
will be charged on your neglect. Oh Sirs! have you not sins enough of your own,
but you must espouse the guilt of your whole Families? It Is you that make bad
Times, and bring down Judgments on the Nation. Would you rather see your
Children frying, and hear them crying in Hell Torments, than speak a word to
them for their instruction, hear them cry under your correction, or cry to God
for their Salvation? Oh cruel Tigers, and barbarous Monsters! You may conceit
your selves to be Christians; but I cannot judge that Man worthy to be a fit
Communicant at the Lord's Table, that maintains not the Worship of God
ordinarily in his Family; and I think he deserves admonition and a censure for
this sin of omission, as well as for the scandalous sins of commission; for he
bewrays his horrid Hypocrisy in pretending to be a Saint abroad, but is a
Brute at home: For a right-bred Christian is an Universalist, having respect to
all God's Commandments: Psa. 119 6.
Such as are righteous before God, Luke 1.6.
walk in all the Commandments and Ordinances of the Lord blameless: Let these
then go amongst the Herd of profane wretches, and fare as they do at the last,
that make no conscience of Family or Relative Godliness: Such as will not pray
now, will cry too late, Lord, Lord, open to us, when the door is shut; Mat. 25
11, 12.
yea, they that now will not cry for a crum of mercy, Luke 16.24.
shall in Hell cry out for a drop of Water, to quench their flaming Tongues in
those Eternal Torments: To these wretched Hypocrites I recommend the serious
considering of Prove. 1.24.-31. Job 8.13, 14.15.34. chapter 27. v. 8, 9, 10.

I shall address my self to honest, well-meaning Householders, who make
conscience of serving God with their Families. You may look on this as your
privilege, as well as duty; I hope you do. David thought it a great mercy that
he and his People had any thing to offer, 1 Chronicles. 29.9.-14.
and any hopes of entertainment: Oh what an honor is it that the King of
Heaven gives you any admittance into his Presence Chamber with your Families
twice a day! to confess your sins, beg pardon, supplies of mercy; to give him
the glory of his Goodness, to lay your Load on him, and get ease; I hope you
will never be unwilling to it, or weary of it, God forbid you should: You are
not weary of Mealtimes, if you be healthful; know and keep these appointed
times of coming to God. If you promise to meet a Person of Quality at such an
hour, when the Clock strikes, you rush up, crave pardon, and tell the company,
one tarries for you, you must be gone: Oh make not more bold with God than you
would do with Men; and keep your hearts continually in a frame for duty:
Rambling in the day indisposeth your spirits for duty at night: So act, as to
think you must go to an heart-searching God before you sleep; and so pray, as
if it were the last time you should approach to God with your Family in this
World: Study the frame of your hearts; be not content with lip-labor: Rest not
in the work done, without communion with God: Presume not upon your own
goodness, you that are the holiest: Despair not because of your wickedness, or
guiltiness, you that think your selves the worst of men: Remember, Manasseh
prayed, and God was entreated of him, when he humbled himself greatly. 2 Chro
33.12, 13. Zech 4.10.
Be not discouraged because you cannot do so well as others: God despises not
the day of small things: God has babes in his Family, ^sa. 38.14.
that chatter like a Crane or Swallow. A Child's lisping is understood by an
indulgent Father: And if a distempered Child stoop down, and reach us up any
small thing, we take it kindly; so does God when a sick Soul falls low in
Humility, and reaches high in Heavenly-mindedness. You cannot be always
actually on your knees, or speaking with your tongues, but still maintain a
praying-frame of heart. Mr. Greenham says, When one asks how your Family does,
let this put you in mind to pray for them; thank God for mercies; reflect on
your selves, What have I done for their welfare? how are the Souls of my
Children, Servants? and lift up an Ejaculation for them: Be much in Prayer:
Give your selves to Prayer: Prayer is your Physic, your Armoury, Ammunition,
your Antidote against Satan, World, Flesh: This is your way of Trading with God
for the richest Commodities for your selves and yours; the profit will be
yours, the glory God's.

To help you in this work, I have writ this Treatise, not having seen any
directly upon this so needful a Subject, and was requested to do something this
way; Supplement to Morning Exercise at Cripplegate, Printed 1676.
but after I had completely finished this following Work there came to my hands
a very Learned and Elaborate Discourse of Mr. Tho. D^olittle's on Josh. 24.15.
driving this Nail home, which may seem to render this Essay needless; yet upon
these considerations (if it be judged convenient) I am willing it should
receive impression; 1. That Excellent Discourse full of Sinewy Arguments may be
more suitable to Learned, this plain Treatise to Vulgar Capacities, being
adapted to the common use of Country People. 2. Both matter and method are far
differen^, as I perceive upon reading and comparing both. 3 That Discourse is
inserted amongst the Voluminous Books of Morning Lectures; this being a small
thing by it sel^ is more attainable and portable. 4. Possibly this may fall
into some hands, that the former has not, and may be an Appendix and
Supplement to that choice Piece, which I do earnestly recommend to the Reader
to purchase and peruse; and if this my sl^nder Attempt may provoke any to
purchase that, and both together may but attain this great end of setting up
Family Worship in the power of it, I have my End, and shall follow all these
Soul-helps with my earnest Prayers, that the God of all Grace would pour into
your Souls the Spirit of Grace and Supplication, make the Members of your
Families conscientious in joining; and Governors and Governed Orthodox in
Principles, sincere in their Spirits, holy in their Practices, to the Glory of
God, and good of his Church; which is the hearty desire of thy Soul-friend,

Feb. 2. 1692/3. Oliver Heywood.

TO THE READER
THIS Discourse, and that other by Reverend Mr. Newcome on Prove. 25. v. 28. do
very opportunely come out together, both in reference to one another, and to
the Time we live in, and to that which should be aimed at in all Times, the
reviving and keeping alive of serious, practical Religion, but most of all in
this Time wherein it so much languishes.

They that know the Reverend Author of this Work, or have perused (with desire
to profit) those pious practical Treatises, which he has formerly Published,
will think (as we do) that there is no need of any Letters Commendatory to
bespeak thy favorable acceptance of the following Discourse: The design of
which is to persuade and engage those that are Heads and Governors of
Families, to take up Joshua's Resolution; that whatever others do, yet they and
their Houses will serve the Lord, in daily faithful fervent Prayer, with
Thanksgiving.

It is a word in season: For it is a common Complaint, and that too, by many,
who are not a little guilty of it themselves; That the Power of Godliness, the
Life of Practical Religion, is at this day under a lamentable decay: And
amongst the many Causes of this decay, there is scarcely any that has been
more perniciously influential thereunto, than the neglect of Family Worship of
God, which is one most proper means to promote Seriousness in Religion:
Frequent solemn Addresses to God, having a tendency to keep God in remembrance,
and to cause the Apprehensions of God to make the deeper impression, and to
have the stronger influence upon the hearts of those who have not quite lost
all sense of a God, or forgotten that they have Souls to save, or lose. Prayer
also being a means of God's appointment, to obtain Family Blessings and
Mercies, (as well as Personal and National,) according to the many Promises
which God has made of Audience and Acceptance of the Prayers that are put up
unto him in the Name of Christ, with upright hearts. To those that sincerely
love God, and have wisdom to judge of things as they relate to Eternity; the
Duty commended in this Treatise, will appear, not only to be a necessary Duty,
but a precious Privilege, and gracious Vouchsafement: For there are two things
which do especially render a Christians continuance in the World desirable and
comfortable to him; the one is, that he may acquaint himself with God, and
enjoy some sweet Communion with him, (which is a beginning and foretast of
Heaven whilst we are here on Earth.) They that are utter strangers to this,
have no cause to think, that they are as yet made meet to be partakers of the
Inheritance of the Saints in Light. The other desirable End or Business of a
Christians Life is, that he may be serviceable to God, by promoting his Glory
and Interest in the World, especially by furthering the spiritual Good, and
Salvation of Souls; both these do meet together in the conscientious practice
of this Duty. First; Communion with God: When the Head and Master of a Family
(who is as Prophet, Priest and Ruler in his Family) does jointly with his
Children and Servants (as a little Church of God in his House) offer up daily
Sacrifice of Prayer, Praise and Thanksgiving unto God, the Author of their
Beings, the God of their Lives, and the giver of every good gift wherewith
their Lives are sweetened: And does also receive from him Communications of
Grace and Mercy; for our bountiful God will never be behind-hand with those
that seek him in truth, but gives liberally to them that ask in Faith.

Secondly; Serviceableness unto God, in training up his Family in the fear of
God; God himself bearing witness how greatly acceptable Family-Religiousness is
unto him, in that high Commendation, which he has recorded of Abraham; I know
him, (says God) that he will command his Children, and his Household after him,
and they shall keep the Way of the Lord. It Is a Duty that is both Work and
Wages; a Service, that carries its Reward with it (Reward, not of Debt, but of
Grace,) it brings a Blessing upon a Family, as the Ark did on the House of
Obed-Edom; when on the contrary, dreadful Wrath is imprecated to be poured out
upon the Families that call not on the Name of God, Jer. 10.25.

Reader, if thou be one that live in the daily exercise, and due performance
of this Duty of Family Prayer, thy own experience of the spiritual Benefits and
Advantages of it, will enable thee to set to thy Seal to what the God of Truth
has spoken in his Word. I never said to the Seed of Jacob (Israelites indeed,
that know how to wrestle with God,) seek ye my face in vain. But if being a
Master of a Family, thou be a stranger to this duty, either through
slothfulness, multiplicity of business, or prejudice and disaffection to the
Duty; the Reverend Author has said enough to convince thee, that it is thy
Duty; and if convinced hereof, thou will continue in the wilful neglect of thy
known duty, thou do in effect say with those in Jer. 44 16. As for the Word
which thou have spoken to us in the Name of the Lord, we will not hearken unto
thee; What an aggravation will this be of thy sin! For to him that knows to
do good, and does it not, to him it is sin, Jam. 4.17. i. e. exceeding sinful;
and also of thy punishment; for that Servant which knew his Lords will, and
prepared not himself, neither did according to his will, shall be beaten with
many stripes, Luke 12.47. That the one and the other may be prevented, and thou
may be prevailed with conscientiously to practice this Duty, is the design
of this Treatise, and the hearty desire of

Thine in the Lord John Starkey. Thine in the Lord John How.


THE CONTENTS.
CHap. I. The Text opened. Doctrines raised. Chap. II. Showing what is meant by
Family-Altars, and what is required of Householders. Chap. III. Arguments to
prove that Governors of Families must set up Altars for the Worship of God.
Chap. IV. Objections proposed and answered that militate against Family-Altars.
Chap. V. An use of Conviction, Lamentation over Prayerless-Families. Chap. VI.
Motives to persuade Governors of Families to set up Altars to God, for his
Solemn Worship. Chap. VII. Directions how to set up an Altar in Families, and
how to manage Family Worship. Chap. VIII. Directions how to manage the Worship
of God in Families, as to the matter of Prayer, Chap. IX. Helps how to manage
Family Worship, as to the manner of Performance. Chap. 10. A Resolution of
several Cases of Conscience, concerning the Worship of God in Families.
Books lately Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns in
Cheapside.
SYnodicon in Gallia Reformata: Or, the Acts, Decisions, Decrees and Canons of
those Famous National Councils of the Reformed Churches in France, being a most
Faithful and Impartial History of the Rise, Growth, Perfection, Decay of the
Reformation in that Kingdom, with its fatal Catastrophe upon the Revocation of
the Edict at Nants in the Year 1685. also the Confession of Faith, and
Discipline of those Churches, their Speeches, Sacred Politics, Cases of
Conscience, and Controversies in Divinity, etc. their Government, Laws, etc.
Collected out of the Original Manuscript Acts of those Renowned Synods* In two
Vol. in Fol. By John Quick.

A Body of Practical Divinity, consisting of above 176 Sermons on the lesser
Catechism Composed by the Reverend Assembly of Divines at Westminster, with a
Supplement of some Sermons on several Texts of Scripture. By Thomas Watson,
formerly Minister of St. Stephen's Walbrook, London. Recommended by several
Ministers to Masters of Families and others. In Folio.

The Confirming Work of Religion, or its great things made plain by their
primary Evidences, and Demonstrations, whereby the meanest in the Church may
soon be made able to render a Rational Account of their Faith. Written by
Robert Fleming, Author of the Fulfilling of the Scriptures. Now Published by
Daniel Burgess.

Advice to an only Child, or excellent Counsel to all Young Persons, containing
the Sum and Substance of Experimental and Practical Divinity. Written by an
Eminent and Judicious Divine for the private use of an only Child, now made
public for the benefit of all.

A Present to such as have been Sick and are recovered: Or a Discourse
concerning the Good that comes out of the Evil of Affliction. Being several
Sermons, Preached after his being raised from a Bed of Languishing. By
Nathaniel Vincent, M. A. and Minister of the Gospel.

A Defense of Mr. M. H's. Brief Enquiry into the Nature of Schism, and the
Vindication of it; with Reflections upon a Pamphlet called, The Review, etc.
And a brief Historical Account of Nonconformity from the Reformation to this
present time.

A Sermon at the Funeral of the Worshipful John Symonds late of great Yeldham
in the County of Essex Esquire Preached in the Parish Church of great Yeldham
aforesaid, on the 24th of Feb. 1692. By John Brooks, M. A. and Rector there.

A Sermon Preached at the Funeral of the Reverend Mr. Tho. Shewel, M. A. and
Minister of the Gospel in Coventry. By William Tongue, Minister of the Gospel.

Mr. Richard Baxter's Paraphrase on the Psalms of David.

Songs of Praise with Penitential Cries. By the Author of the Midnight-Cry.

Death improved, and Immoderate Sorrow for Deceased Friends and Relations
reproved. By Edw. Bury, formerly Minister at Great Bolas in Shropshire. In
Octavo.

A short Story of the Rise, Reign and Ruin of the Antinomians, Familists, and
Libertines, that infected the Churches of New England, etc.

A brief Tract on the Fourth Commandment, wherein is shown the cause of all our
Controversies about the Sabbath Day, and the means of Reconciling them.
Recommended by the Reverend Dr. Bates and Mr. John How.

A Sermon Preached before the King and Queen at Whitehall, November. 5. 1692. By
Richard Lord Bishop of Bath and Wells.

Satan Sifting, or the Oil of Joy for the Spirit of Heaviness. In Octavo.

The Carnality of Religious Contention. In two Sermons Preached at the
Merchants-Lecture in Broadstreet. By John How. Octavo.

Theological Discourses and Sermons on several Occasions. In two Parts. By John
W^ll^s, D. D. Professor of Geometry in Oxford Quarto.

There is now in the Press a Discourse against Rash Anger. By Henry Newcome, M.
A. and Minister of the Gospel.

A Family-Altar Erected to the Honor of the Eternal God.
Genesis 35.2, 3. Then Jacob said unto his Household, and to all that were with
him; put away the strange Gods that are among you, and be clean, and change
your Garments:

And let us arise and go up to Bethel, and I will make there an Altar unto God,
who answered me in the day of my distress, and was with me in the way which I
went.


Chap. I. The Text opened. Doctrines raised.
THis Text is copious, and may be called a Family-Text, as comprehending the
whole Duty of Householders and their Inferiors: He that is not relatively
Religious, is not really Religious: God has to do with all Men in all their
capacities: And Men have to do with God in all their Stations, Relations,
Actions. As we must give an account to God of our natural, civil, and spiritual
Acts: God's Word must regulate all we do, that we may act as Christians,
according to God's will, and for his glory. The Text contains an excellent
pattern for all Families.

The whole Context holds forth these four Generals.

1. God's Commission to Jacob, v. 1. 2. Jacob's Charge to his Family, v. 2, 3.
3. His Families cheerful Compliance, v. 4. 4. The blessed Issue, viz. success,
safety, v. 5. An hint of all these.
1. The Text declares God's Commission to Jacob; In which Commission observe
four things.

Viz.
1. The Privacy of it; God said of Jacob, when alone: 2. The Order; 1. Arise,
2. Go to Bethel, 3. Dwell there. 3. The Duty to be done; make there an Altar.
4. The Reasons to enforce this Duty.
1. God's appearing to him.

2. His danger; fleeing from his Brother.

Doct. 1. That most of God's manifestations to his People are personal, or when
they are alone.
Jacob was alone when he had the Vision of the Ladder, Genesis 28.12. when God
bids him return to the Land of his Fathers, Genesis 31.3. Jacob was left alone
when he wrestled with the Angel, Hos. 2.14. Song 7.11.12.
Genesis 32.24. Our Lord invites Souls to solitary recesses, where he whispers
them in the Ear, speaks to their Heart, Nunquam mimes solus quata cum folus.
there usually is a reciprocal giving of Loves: It Is good being alone with God.
Happy Souls that can say with our dear Lord, Joh. 16.32. Ye shall leave me
alone, and yet I am not alone, because the Father is with me.

2. From the Order and Appointment; Arise, go to Bethel.

Doct. 2. God alone is the fittest to dispose of Men's Habitations.
Deuteronomy. 32.8. The most High divided to the Nations their Inheritance; when he
separated the Sons of Adam -- The great God is the Author of all Topography and
Geography; as well as Genealogy and Chronology, Act. 17.26. He has made of one
blood all Nations of men, for to dwell on the face of the Earth, and has
determined the times before appointed, Sicut in castris sua cuique Turmae and
Dicuri^e distincta est statio ita in terra locatos esse homines, ut singuli
populi suis finibus contenti sint; and in ipsis populis suum quisque domicilium
incolat. Calv. in loc.
and the bounds of their Habitations. And as God is the Sovereign Disposer of
all; so what he does is in infinite Wisdom, as a General of an Army, ordering
the Troops to their distinct Posts, with which all men must be contented.

Qu. But why does God bid Jacob here go to Bethel?

Ans. 1. To convince him of his absolute dependence upon God, and his duty of
Resignation of himself and all he had to God's good pleasure.

2. To quiet Jacob's spirit that was at this time full of fears, because of the
late slaughter of the Shechemites, chap. 34.30.

3. To secure him and his Family from danger, by carrying them to a safer place
out of harms way; Genesis 28.11, 19. Eight German Miles, says Paraeus in loc.
Bethel being thirty English Miles distant from Schechem, Southwards: God has
his Pathmos for his Servants in times of danger; his Pella for his hidden ones
in an Universal Slaughter.

4. To put Jacob upon paying his Vows; for hitherto he had been slack in making
good his promise made at Bethel, chap. 28.22.

How God speaks of himself in the third person. See Par. in loc.
3. Here Is the Duty God puts Jacob upon, which is to make there an Altar unto
God; which he must do, partly to maintain and promote God's Worship; partly to
strengthen his Faith against his present fears, from the gracious Experiments
he had at Bethel, Genesis 31.13.

Doct. 3. God will be worshipped where ever his People inhabit.
Men's shifting their Habitation must not divorce them from God and Religion: As
God is every where present, so in every place Incense must be offered to his
Name, Mal. 1.11. Change of place must not lessen our Piety.

4. Here Is the Reason to urge this Duty; 1. God's appearing to him there.

Doct. 4. Former Appearances of God to his Children are Memento's of present
Duty.
Jacob had been nine years in the Country, and had not returned to Bethel to
pay his Vows made there; whether, 1. That he waited for a (...) opportunity, to
do it solemnly with Tithes or Sacrifices: Or 2. Waited for an admonition from
God, Totus a Divino Nutu pendebat, nec dubitabat Dom. illi fignificaturum
tempus. Yid. Poli Syn. in loc.
and hoped for God's signifying his mind, since he wholly depended on the
Divine Appointment: Or 3. Whether now his new straits put him in mind of his
old straits, receipts: Or 4. Whether this was Jacob's sin to forget and neglect
this duty; which is most likely, that rich Jacob forgets what poor Jacob had
vowed.

Doct. 5. God has a day and a way to rub up his Peoples memories to perform
forgotten duties.
God tells him there was a day he fled from Esau his Brother, Dr. Lightfoot on
Genesis thinks God was angry with Jacob for distrusting his promise, and sending
Esa^ 500 Cattle, which he had vowed the Tithes to the Lord of, therefore sough
to kill him Observat. o^ Genesis p. 16.
and now lets him see the danger he is in of the Canaanites, that he may
perform old duties before he expects new mercies: And indeed new straits revive
old guilt, Genesis 42.21.

Thus much for the first General, God's Commission.

2. Here Is Jacob's Charge to his Family, verse 23. Then Jacob said to his
Household -- Wherein Jacob as an Householder acts the part Of a
1. Prophet. 2. Priest. 3. King.


1. He is as a Prophet, to instruct his Family in the mind of God; 2. Teaching
them their duty; 3. His own purpose what he is resolved upon; And 4.
Communicating to them his own Experience for Argument and Encouragement, chap.
2. 1. His Prayer. 2. God's Answer, in his deliverance, and direction, verse 3.

2. He acts herein as a Priest in his own house.

1. In making an Altar unto God. 2. In pouring a Drink Offering thereon, and
pouring Oil thereon, verse 14.
3. He acts the part of a King or Supreme Governor over his own Family, which
consists,

1. In the Command he lays on them, 1. To put away strange Gods; 2. To be
clean; 3. To change their Garments. 2. In his actual exercises of Jurisdiction,
Viz.
1. Their compliance, ver. 4. They gave him the strange Gods, and Earrings. 2.
His demolishing, or putting them out of their sight; he hid them.



Q. 1. How came idols to be in Jacob 's Family?

Ans. 1. Either those newly taken from the Shechemites, amongst other spoils,
chap. 34.29. which Jacob's Sons might keep, not to worship, but for their
precious matter, of Gold, Silver.

2. Or Jacob's Gentile Servants kept these Images to worship, secretly unknown
to Jacob.

3. Or they might be maintained, and used by Leah, or Jacob's two Wives, or
Concubines, Billah, and Zilpah, or Deborah Nurse to Rebecca; for Idolatry was
but gradually purged out.

4. Why might not these Gods be the Images that his beloved Rachel stole? chap.
31.19. They are called Teraphims or Images; Laban calls them his Gods, v. 30.
They were made in the shape of men, whom the Heathen adored as subordinate
Gods, to whom they committed the protection of their Houses, with whom they
consulted about secret or future things; from whom they received delusory and
diabolical Answers: These Idols Laban worshipped together with the true God;
which Rachel took as due to her for a Portion; or (it may be) to prevent her
Fathers consulting them, that they might not inform him, which way Jacob fled:
But Charity bids us believe that Rachel stole these Idols, to confute his
egregious folly in worshipping Gods that might be stolen, or at least, to take
away an occasion of her Fathers Idolatry.

Qu. 2. Why did Jacob bury them, or hide them under an Oak, and not break them
to pieces?

Ans. 1. The Greek Version adds, [(...)] and abolished them, even until this
day: Exo. 32.^ 2 Kin. 18
And this seems probable from parallel Instances, that he first melted them,
then hid them.

2. He did this privately, not known to his Family, so that they could not seek
for them or find them: And they being now to depart thence, could not have the
opportunity to enquire after them. De non existentibus and non apparentibus
eadem est ratio.

3. There is a peculiar reason, why he hid them in this place: Whether we take
it for Terebinth, or Turpentine Tree as the Greeks translate it, [(...) -- ] or
an Oak, (as we read it,) for the Hebrew word (...) signifies either) (if we
respect verse 8. we find Deborah was buried under an Oak, called Allon-Ba^uth,
the Oak of weeping, a fit Funeral of dead Idols; so was these.

Siradix spetetur sign. arborem exsecra^ile^ sunest^s^ qualis ap^d Ho^^e^
delubra ^l^^^i solert and fo^te (...) causa sui (...) Poli Crit. ^^ ^oc.
4. Interpreters give us two Reasons why they buried these Idols under an Oak;
1. Because those Trees were generally abused to Idolatry, as Isa. 1.29.
therefore proper places for Interment of these Monuments of Idolatry. 2. This
was the safest place, where they were likely to remain longest hid, because the
Heathen had a great Veneration for Oaks, therefore would not cut them down, or
dig them up. Besides; Critics observe, that the root of this word signifies ^^
execrable, doleful Tree; such as is wont to be planted by Idol-groves; thence
he hid th^se execrable Idols, in that place.

Doct. 6. It Is fit all Monuments and occasions of Idolatry be put out of
peoples sight.
See Exodus 23.13. Deuteronomy. 12.2, 3. H^s. 2.16, 17.

Doct. 7. A resolute Reformation produces safety and satisfaction.
When Jacob had taken this course, the terror of God was upon the Cities round
about them, and they did not pursue after the Sons of Jacob, v. 5. they became
still as a Stone: Yea, their desire to hurt them was restrained; or they were
dispirited: Yea, God made them Friends to them: Oh wonderful work of Almighty
God!

But all this is Excentrick to my main design; I shall not meddle with Jacob's
Prophetical, and Regal Office over his Family, but speak chiefly or only to his
Priestly and Sacerdotal Office, signified here by his making an Altar unto God.

The famous Usher in his Annals on the third Age of the World, fol. 9. says,
Jacob was 91 years of Age when Joseph was born, consequently 77 years old when
he began first to serve Laban; upon his return into Canaan he built an Altar,
which he called El-Elohe-Israel [i. e. The mighty God, the God of Israel] Genesis
33.20. which was the self-same place where Abraham heretofore had built his
first Altar, Genesis 12.6, 7, and where Jacob's Well was, near to Mount Gersim,
Job. 4.5, 20. This was about the year of the World 22^3. 1731. before the birth
of Christ; he died at the Age of 147 years, 2315 years after the Creation:
Having got both the Birthright and Blessing from his Brother Esau; and so was
Priest in the Family, till God settled the privilege of Priesthood on the
Tribe of Levi, instead of the firstborn. He says, this History of Genesis
contains the Story of 236^ years space; he quotes Servius Sulpicius, affirming
that in this Tract of time lived Job, a man embracing the Law of Nature, and
the knowledge of the true God, etc. But this by the way.

The Altar which Jacob now was to build was at Bethel, formerly called Luz,
Genesis 28.19. Which he promises shall be Gods House, verse, 22. Where he will
offer Prayers and Sacrifices to God, and where God promises and vouchsafes
his special presence; according to Exodus 20.24. Whether Jacob repaired, the old
Pillar, his quondam Pillow, Chapter 28.18. which might be ruined by the injury of
time, or demolished by Idolatrous neighbors: Or whether he erected a new one,
more stable, durable and fashionable than time and his former low circumstances
would then permit: Is (...) much material unto dispute: Though most probably
the latter: However this Altar was a Monument of Gods mercy, and a token of his
present gratitude: And the use and end of it was to offer Sacrifice; so says
the Text, Genesis 35.14. He poured a Drink Offering thereon, and he poured Oil
thereon; these were to be joined with a Sacrifice, Exodus 29.40. Called
Drink Offerings, Numb. 28.14.

Concerning an Altar observe, the Scripture takes notice of a threefold Altar,
1. A Literal, or Typical Altar. 2. A Mystical. 3. A Metaphorical Altar.


1. The Literal, or Typical Altar was that either before the Law or under the
Law, the first Altar we read of is that of Noah, Genesis 8.20. yet those
Sacrifices we read of, Genesis 4. presuppose an Altar. In the Mosaical
Dispensation, See Mr. Weemse Expos. of Cerem. Laws. Com. 2. p. 46.
there were two sorts of Altars; 1. The Altar of Burnt-offering; 2. Of Incense:
The former in the Wilderness was built of Earth; and, says Mr. Weemse, the
Lord would have it so, because he would not have it permanent, to remain after
they were gone out of the Wilderness: And he would not have it made of hewn
Stone, to signify, that men's Inventions do but pollute the Worship of God,
Exodus 20.24, 25. This is an Altar most holy, Exodus 40.10. it signified the
Death of Christ for satisfaction to Divine Justice. 2. There was the Altar of
Incense, mentioned Exodus 30.27. This is called the Golden Altar, Exodus 40.26,
27. and it holds forth Christ's Intercession at God's right hand. The four
Horns signify the strength and efficacy of Christ's undertaking. None might go
to the Golden Altar to offer Incense, but he who might go to the Brazen Altar
to offer Sacrifice. So we have no Mediator of Intercession, but he that is the
Mediator of our Redemption.

2. A Mystical Altar; that is Jesus Christ only, Heb. 13.10. We have an Altar
whereof they have no right to eat, which serve the Tabernacle. This is in
opposition to the Mosaical. Our New Testament Altar, Christ, affords to us our
Soul-sustenance, safe Protection, Sanctification, Justification, Consolation,
Eternal Salvation: We need no other: We have all in Christ. See Isa. 56.7. Rev.
8.3.

3. There Is a Metaphorical Altar, figuratively so called: So Gospel-Mnistration
is called an Altar, 1 Cor. 9.13. They which wait at the Altar are partakers
with the Altar, i. e. holy things, or things of the Temple in allusion to the
Old Testament Dispensation. So the Worship of God is called the Altar, Matthew.
5.23, 24. If thou bring thy gift to the Altar, i. e. to God in a religious
action: Yea, the whole Gospel Worship is thus denominated, Rev. 11.1. Rise,
measure the Temple of God, and the Altar, and them that worship therein; i. e.
look that Gospel-service be regualar according to God's Word cleansed from
Antichristian pollutions: This is prophesied, Isa. 19.19. In that day shall
there be an Altar to the Lord in the midst of the Land of Egypt -- i. e. God's
Worship shall be settled in all places in Gospel Times, not a Levetical, but
Evangeligal Altar: Nothing is more common in Old and New Testament, than to
speak of Gospel Worship in the phrase of the Law.

The like may be said of Sacrifices, spiritual Sacrifices in a Gospel sense; so
offering up to God our selves, Romans 12.1. prayer and praise, Heb. 13.15. Acts
of Charity, v. 16. a broken heart, Psalm. 51.17. Martyrdom, Phil. 2.17.

As for a false Altar, constituted in the Romish Church, upon which they would
offer Christ daily as a Sacrifice for quick and dead, Protestants renounce it,
as a crucifying the Son of God again, and inconsistent with Scripture and
Reason, Heb. 9.25. nor yet that he should offer himself often -- v. 26.28.
Christ was once offered to bear the sins of many, Heb. 10.14. For by one
offering he has perfected for ever them that are sanctified. It cannot be
denied that the Ancients have called the Lord's Supper, an unbloody Sacrifice;
the Table, an Altar; Ministers, Priests; the whole action, an Oblation: but not
in the sense the Papists do, but by way of allusion, as it is a Memorial of
Christ's Sacrifice; or as spiritual prayers, praises, alms, are attended
therewith; as our Divines have abundantly proved; and disproved the propriety
of speech as applied to that Ordinance.

Well then, we renounce Popish Altar, Quid opus est Altari ubi nec ignis ard^at
nec vi^im^ caedantur. Pet. Martyr cont. Guard.
Sacrifices, Priests, yet acknowledge in a spiritual sense, that Christ by his
Blood has made all Believers Kings and Priests unto God and his Father, Rev.
1.6. And that we are built up a spiritual House, an holy Priesthood, to offer
up spiritual Sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 2.5, 9.

The words being thus opened, I shall raise this important

Doct. That Governors of Families must as Priests erect Family-Altars for
God's Worship.
It well becomes Householders or Governors of Families, to set up and maintain
Family-Altars for worshipping of God, in and with the Members of their Families.

As holy Jacob the famous Patriarch was a Prophet to instruct his Family in the
true Religion, and a King to Govern them for God; so a Priest to set up an
Altar, offer Sacrifices and perform Religious Worship for and with his Family:
Yea the poorest man that has a Family is to be Prophet, Priest and King in his
own House.

God commands Jacob to build an Altar at Bethel, Jacob resolves upon it, and
gives all his Family orders how to behave themselves in managing this important
affair; and when they did their duty, God secured them, they journeyed and
passed on safely.

Let none say that this setting up an Altar by Jacob was but ordered upon this
particular occasion of his paying his Vows formerly made at Bethel, and so does
not oblige us?

I Answer, 1. It Is true this circumstance of the place, occasion, and this
solemnity are personal and particular but the duty is, general, moral and
prepetual, as I shall prove it.

2. Jacob doubtless worshipped God with his Family in all places where he had
come, as he took the fear of God with him in his heart, so he left not the
external practice of Religion behind him: But set up Gods Worship which was
equivalent to an Altar in all places where he came, as his Father Isaac and his
Grandfather Abraham had done.

3. And may not we have the like occasion as he had to rear an Altar? Have we
had no mercies from God? Do we lie under no Vows, or at least, Obligations to
the Lord? And do not these presidents, and general rules bind us to the like
practice, except we have a particular command by a voice from Heaven, or in an
extraordinary way? I shall evince the contrary.

4. Because Jacob was left alone, and wrestled with the Angel and prevailed
upon an extraordinary occasion, Gen 32.24 i. e. the fear he had of his Brother
Esau: Shall we think that Jacob never prayed alone, but when he was in the like
hazard? No, doubtless he was well acquainted with God, and much accustomed to
this trade of conversing with God: So because we find God prompting him to this
Family-work here, can this be thought to exclude his ordinary course of
Family-doctrine? No certainly, It rather implies and includes this.

In prosecuting this Point I shall use this Method, 1. Open what I mean by
Altars in Families. 2. Prove it to be Householders Duty to set them up. 3.
Answer Objections against this Practice. 4. Make some Deductions and
Applications.


Chap. II. Showing what is meant by Family-Altars, and what is required of
Householders.
BY Altar I mean (by a Synechdoche) all the Worship of God to be performed in
Families: To an Altar in old time literally, and in Gospel Times Mystically, or
Metaphorically; there are four things requisite.

1. The Institution or Consecration; none can appoint an Altar to be Erected
but God, Exodus 20.24. An Altar of Earth shall thou make: None has Power to
order Gods Worship but himself alone: Men may not add or diminish at their
pleasure: Mat. 28.20.
Mininisters must teach, Christians must observe all things whatsoever our Lord
commands us: Numb. 7.10.
Men may Dedicate an Altar, It is God alone that properly Consecrates or
Sanctifies it; yet men are said to Consecrate themselves to the Lord, 2 Chronicles.
29.31, 33.
yea and other things in a secondary way, and instrumentally: But as God
appoints, so himself only does Authoritatively, efficiently, actually,
Consecrate Persons and things: Let us see we have a warrant from God for what
we do in his Worship.

2. An Altar requires a Priest: Before Moses Law, the Firstborn of the Family
was Priest to offer on the Altar; but afterward Good took the Tribe of Levi
instead of the Firstborn, in remembrance of the Lords smiting the Firstborn
in Egypt, Number. 3.12.13. Number. 17.9.
Aaron and his Family were the blossoming rod whom God had chose in a peculiar
manner to Minister before him: But our Lord Jesus is our New Testament Aaron,
yet above him, even after the Order of Melchizedeck; Heb. 6.20.
an higher Order than that of Aaron: Upon whose account all Gods Saints be
Kings and Priests: Joh. 17.17.
For as Christ's Divinity sanctified his Humanity, for our Lord as God
sanctified himself as man; so he also sanctifies all his Saints; Heb. 10.14.
By one offering he has perfected for ever them that are sanctified; for this
end, that they may be an holy Priesthood to offer up spiritual Sacrifices, 1
Pet. 2.5.
acceptable to God by Jesus Christ.

3. A Priest must needs have something to offer upon this Altar. Heb. 8.3, 4.
The Priests under the Law offered Bulls, Goats, and brute Beasts: Christ
offered himself as a Sacrifice for our sins: Saints offer their Souls and
Bodies as a Thank-offering to the Lord; their prayer and praises, as was hinted
before: But the Holy Ghost advises us to be more ready to hear, than to give
the Sacrifice of fools, Eccles. 5.1. or than fools to give Sacrifice, who
vainly think to please God with variety and costliness of their Offerings.
Obedience is better than Sacrifice; and the Sacrifice of the wicked is an
abomination to the Lord; therefore it becomes us all to look to our state and
standing and also to the manner of sacrificing, as well as the matter
sacrificed.

4. As to the Altar, there must be respect to the End and Design of this Altar;
for the End either makes or marr's the Action: Now the Text says, I will make
there an Altar unto God; and God says, Exodus 20, 24. Hos. 8.11
An Altar shall thou make unto me; not to Idols, not to sin, or to themselves,
to please their own fancy, or for vainglory: God threatens he will break down
all such Altars: Hos. 10.2.
For though every Family must have its proper Altar in their peculiar relative
capacities, yet they must only make use of the one Altar Christ Jesus for
acceptance and worship God after the pattern showed in the Mount; Zech. 14.9.
that the Lord may be one and his name one, i. e. his worship uniform, the same
in all places: Hence it was that when the two Tribes and an half had made an
Altar, the other Tribes were offended, and prepared War against them; till they
were assured it was not in opposition, but as a Testimonial of their relation
to, and worshipping of the same God, therefore called it Ed, a witness: Read the
story, Jos. 22.10, 34. Every Family must Erect such an Altar, to be a witness
that they serve the same God that is worshipped in public Assemblies, and the
Catholic Church in all times and places.

Only this Altar I am now treating of, is distinct from, 1. Public. 2 Secret
personal Altars.

1. It is not properly Public, either National or Congregational, such as that
which David Erected, 2 Samuel 24.18. Gad came to David and said, go up, rear an
Altar unto the Lord: This was for all Israel to make an Atonement, and this was
the place where the Temple was to be built; whither all the Tribes were to go
up to worship God: And this Family-Altar must not exclude the public
Ordinances: Upon which holy David's heart was so set, that he envies the Sparow
and Swallow that built their Nests near Gods Altars, Psalm. 8^.3.
and is transported with an ecstasy of holy joy at his approach to it; Psalm.
43.4^
Then will I go to the Altar of God, unto God my exceeding joy: No, no, the
more a Christian is conversant with God in his Family, the more will he prize
and improve public Ordinances: Yet this is a distinct Altar.

2. This is distinct from secret Acts of Worship or personal Altars, such as
Abraham Erected, Gen 12.7, 8. The Lord appeared unto Abraham -- And there he
builded an Altar unto the Lord -- and in the next verse, called upon the name
of the Lord. Howbeit some Expositors think this was a Family-Altar, which
Abraham Erected, to keep his Family in the true Religon; and to separate
himself and them from the Idolatrous Neighborhood: If so it confirms my
assertion for Family-Altars. But certainly that in Genesis 22.9. was more
personal: So was Jacob's, Genesis 28.18.

This therefore that I am speaking of is a Family-Altar, an Emblem of Family
Worship.

It Is true sometimes a Family signifies a whole Nation, a Kingdom, Amos 3.1.
The whole Family which I brought up from the Land of Egypt: This is all the
Hebrews, afterward divided into the two Families of of Judah and Ephraim, Jer.
33.24. The Sons of Adam were all one Family, and after the confusion of
Languages they were distributed into the several Regions of the World, Deuteronomy.
32.8. Jer. 8.3.
and had their Names from the Head and Root of that Family from whence they
sprung: This is not the notion of Family here: But it is to be taken strictly
for persons dwelling together in one house, Lev. 20.5. Then I will set my face
against that man, and against his Family: This is distinct from Kingdoms and
Provinces: Judge. 1 25. They let go the man and all his Family. Esth. 9.28.
Where Family is distinguished from Province and City: And this is the most
famous and ordinary use of the Word: And in the Text the restriction is to
Jacob and his House: Lawers, Civilians, Divines thus use the word and say that
[Domus est naturae consentanea Societas] an House or Family is a Society most
agreeable to Nature: In this house are such as are most ordinarily and
familiarly conversant together that Work, Eat, Drink, Sleep under one Roof: To
a complete Family (say they) is requisite ^. A [ Paterfamilias. 2.
Materfamilias. 3. Filius. 4. Servus.] Father, Mother; Son, Servant: But indeed
the proper constitutive essential parts of a Family are but these two 1. Pars
Imperans. 2. Pars Subdita.


i. e. 1. The Governing 2. The Governed
parts:

And ordinarily the Governing part must set up this Altar, and Order the
worship of God in his House or Family together with the rest: Hear what a great
Divine (now with God) says in this point Mr. Baxters Christian Directory, Tom.
2. Fol. 490. Note therefore that the Governor is an Essential part of the
Family, and so are some of the Governed ( viz. that such there be) but not each
member; If therefore twenty Children or Servants shall Worship God without
their Father or Master of the Family, either present himself, or in some
representative, it is not a Family Worship in a strict sense: But if the Head
of the Family in Himself, (or Delegate, or Representative) be present with any
of his Children or Servants, though all the rest be absent, it is yet a
Family-duty, though the Family be incomplete and maimed, (and so is the duty
therefore, if culpably so performed;) thus far that Reverend Man of God.

If it be inquired, how must an Householder act the part of a Priest in his
Family? what must he do? Answer; The office and business of a Priest in the Old
Testament consisted in these four things chiefly.

1. To instruct the People in the Principles of Religion, and their duty to God
and each other; Mal. 2.7. The Priests lips should keep knowledge, and they
should seek the Law at his mouth: Therefore God rejected those Priests that
rejected knowledge; Hos. 4.6. This is the work of Householders, Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7.
Thou shall teach them diligently unto thy Children.

2. To manage the holy Offerings and Sacrifices for the Atonement on the behalf
of the Children of Israel, Lev. 16.11. Lev. 1.5, 8.
Aaron must make an Atonement for himself, and for his house -- And verse 21.
Aaron shall lay both his hands upon the head of the live Goat, and confess over
him all the iniquities of the Children of Israel: Thus did Job, chapter 1.5. He
rose early in the morning and offered burnt-Offerings according to the number
of them all; for Job said, It may be that my Sons have sinned -- Thus must we
do, confess the sins of our Family, and beg pardon through Christ.

3. The Priest was to intercede for the People, as Aaron was to take a Censer,
and put fire thereon from the Altar, and put on Incense -- and stood between
the dead and living, Nam quoties in Sanctum ingrediebatur Sacerdos, quasi in
Dei conspectum prodibat, ut inter eum and populum esset Mediator. Calv. in loc.
Numb. 16.46, 48. Hence the Priests Office was to burn Incense in the Temple,
and the multitude of the People were praying without, at the time of Incense,
Luke 1.9, 10. For as often as the Priest entered into the holy place, he
appeared as in the presence of God, that he might be a Mediator between God and
the People. It Is true, there is no Mediator of Intercession, no more than of
Redemption betwixt God and Sinners, but Jesus Christ alone in a proper sense;
yet as one may pray and prevail for another through Christ, so a godly
Householder may and must be the mouth of his Family on their behalf.

4. The Priest was to bless the People, Numb. 6.23. Speak unto Aaron, and to
his Sons, saying, on this wise ye shall bless the Children of Israel, saying
unto them, the Lord bless thee, and keep thee, etc. Doubtless this was
petitory, or by way of petition, and God answers that prayer, verse 27. And I
will bless them. But how far they did this in the Name, and by the Authority of
God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. I cannot say, Weems^ Christian Syn. p. 311.
Weemse tells us, that the Priests lifted up both their hands when they blessed
the People. The Text in Psalm. 134.2. [Lift up your hands in the Sanctuary]
alludes to this, because the Priests could not lay their hands upon all the
People, they lifted them up; for in blessing they were wont to lay on their
hands; therefore Jacob laid his hands on Joseph's Sons: Genesis 48.17
There was a Sacerdotal, a Patriarchal, and a Parental Blessing. Thus the Chief
of a Family blesses his Household, 2 Samuel 6.20. Then David returned to bless
his Household; which was by prayer, and in the Name of the Lord, pronouncing a
Blessing upon his Family; not as a Priest, nor as a Prophet only, but as a
Governor of his Household, which the meanest Householder may, and must do.

Chap. III. Arguments to prove that Governors of Families must set up Altars
for the Worship of God.
THE second Head proposed is, the proof of this Doctrine, That Householders must
Erect Altars for the Worship of God in their Families.

1. The Command of God: Prayer is the great duty required of all men! (...)
bread a^ David's Table continually, i. e. at meal-times, 2 Samuel 9.7. So in d^
season is expounded, continually, Numb. 28.2, 3.
The Text says, pray without ceasing, 1 These. 5.17. This is not to be
understood as the Euchites or Messalians of old did, as excluding other Duties,
but either maintaining a praying disposition; or improving all seasons of
Prayer: Using a constant course of praying: Customary praying is one thing, and
a custom of praying is another; 1 Pet. 4.7. Col. 4.2.
this latter is a Duty: Therefore we are bid to watch unto Prayer, as well as
watch in Prayer: i. e. be sure you observe the hours and season of Prayer, in
Closet, Family, Public; be not absent; be not negligent: Then for the place, 1 Timothy 2.8. I will that men Pray every where: If in all places then in their
Houses, and with their Families in conjuction: For it means our common
dwellings, as well, as Temples; since there is no promise perculiarly
appropriated to one place, Joh. 4.21. Mal. 1.11.
more than another, under the Gospel: For so was the Prediction; In every place
Incense shall be offered to my name: Then for the sorts of Prayer, read Ephesians.
6.18. Praying always with all Prayer and Supplication in the Spirit: i. e.
Mental, Vocal Prayer; Petition for good, Deprecation of evil, Intercession for
others, Thanksgiving for mercies: In the Public Assemblies, in Private Houses,
in secret Closets: Certainly these kinds of Prayers are necessarily included:
And by good Consequence inferred: Let none say, this is far fetched, for
Scripture-consequence is good Argument: ^at, 22.29, 37.
As our Savior proves the Resurrection. If Prayer at all times, in all places,
of all sorts, be a Duty; surely Family Prayer is a Duty, for it will come under
all these.

2. Scripture-types prove Family Worship, as the Passover was clebrated in
private Houses, Exodus 12.3 -- Thy shall take to them every man a Lamb -- A Lamb
for an House: i. e. an Household, ver. 4 For the Hebrews say there must be ten,
if one Family was not sufficient, they must call in the members of another
Family; for it must all be eaten at once: The Passover was a token of the
deliverance of Israel out of Egypt, and and saving their firstborn, when the
firstborn of Egypt were destroyed: The Master of the Family took Bread, brake
it, hence was called [Bo^zeang] a breaker: Then he Blessed it, saying, blessed
art thou O Lord God, King of the World, who bring Bread out of the Earth:
Then gives to every one about the quantity of an Olive, to some the bigness of
an Egg: This, says Weemse, Weemse Christian Syn. p. 13^. Whether there was two
Suppers or no. See Godwin, Moses and Aaron. lib 3. cap. 4. p. 137.
was at their common Supper with which the Passover was joined! and doubtless
Religion must always attend our Civils: This holds forth Family-Devotion: Let
none say this were their Sacrament; for though it was, yet it was a
Family-Religion; and though it typified the Lord Jesus, answered by the Lord's
Supper in the New Testament, which is a Church-Ordinance; yet it also held
forth God's Worship in Families! But a clearer type is the Morning and Evening
Sacrifice; one Lamb is to be offered in the Morning, the other in the Evening;
this must be day by day continually, Exodus 29.38, 39. This was for every
individual Family and Person, and it must be every day, not only on
Sabbath Days and other Solemnities; but it shows that God must be daily
worshipped: Yea, it must be Morning and Evening, that prayer and praise may be
the Lock and Key of the day. And David alludes to this, Psalm. 5.3. Psalm. 141.2.
saying, My voice shall thou hear in the Morning; and let my prayer be set
before thee as Incense, and the lifting up of my hands as the Evening
Sacrifice. This was constantly managed, but solemnly; yet we do not find that
the whole Assembly met every day, therefore most probably a Family work, and
worship.

3. Natural Religion prompts to it: There is certainly such a thing as the Law
and Light of Nature, which puts men on to what is morally good, and restrains
men from, or checks them for what is grossly evil: Hence the Apostle says, Romans
2.14, 15.
The Gentiles do by Nature some things materially good, and natural Conscience
accuses or excuses: So he appealeth to Nature, as an Argument a Fortiori: 1
Cor. 11.14
Does not even Nature it self teach you? Whence these [(...)] common in
workings proceed, I dispute not, whether from some Relics of Gods Image in
Man, (which some censure as ^elagianism) or they be superinduced by God since
the fall for the benefit of mankind: See Mr. Gepel of Temptation.
But doubtless such notions there are, as that there is a God, a Supreme Being;
that he is to be feared, loved, worshipped: And that not only Singly, but
Socially, in Families as well as alone, or in greater Assemblies: hence besides
their National, and City-Gods, they had their [ Lares and Penates] their
Household Gods, though alas they were but Dumb Idols: From them it may be
Idolatrous Micah had an House of Gods: Judge. 17.5.
And shall poor dim-sighted Heathens think it highly rational to have Dung hill
Gods in their houses; and shall not men professing the true Religion of the
true God, own their Omnipresent God, by setting up an Altar to him in their
houses? the Prophet speaks peremptorily, Mic. 4.5. All People will walk every
one in the name of his God, and we will walk in the name of the Lord our God,
for ever and ever. Is there not much more reason? and should not such as own
the true God run parallel to these poor Idolaters in Acting for, and Worshipping
of the true God? Shall Nature teach them to have more care of their Children
than Christians in Gods way? Yea shall even the Sea Monsters, Lam. 4.3.
draw out their Breasts and give Suck to their young ones? And shall Christians
be so cruel to the Souls of theirs as to neglect this Household Duty.

4. The Prophecies and Promises of the Word imply this Family Worship, Jer.
31.1. At the same time, says the Lord, will I be the God of all the Families
of Israel; and they shall be my People: Whether this mean all the twelve Tribes
or Judah only; it is a Gospel-Promise, and implies Worship: For relation to God
infers Adoration of him: Mat. 4.10. Putatis nos occul^^re quod c^limus, si
delubra and aras non habemus -- eum sit litabilis hostia bonu^ animus and pura
men's, ut sincera conscientia -- haec nostra Sacrificial ac Dei sacra sunt; sic
apud nos Religiosin est (...) qui (...) ^inucia ^^^cis Octavius.
Thou shall worship the Lord thy God; and this in Families, not only larger,
but lesser. Holiness to the Lord is not only to be written on the Bells of the
Horses, but the Pots in the Lord's house shall be like the Bowls before the
Altar; i. e. their very Kitchin-stuff, and common Utensils shall be reckoned as
holy as Altar-vessels immediately employed in Sacrifices: Yea further, every
Pot in Jerusalem, and in Judah shall be Holiness to the Lord of Hosts, Zech.
14.20, 21. The Persons and Utensils in private shall all be dedicated to God,
and accepted by him in Gospel Times: Civilities shall savor of Sanctity: These
New Testament Priests shall without scruple, serve God in their houses: Every
Family shall be a Temple, wherein God will be woshipped: House-pots shall be
holy Vessels. This is meant of Gentile Worshippers, verse 16. And Jews shall
not be behind them, Zech. 12.12, 13, 14. The Land shall mourn, every Family
apart, Heb. Families, Families, Royal Family, Sacerdotal Tribe, and common
People; they shall mourn apart, and shut up themselves apart from company and
pleasures to exercise godly sorrow, vent their spirits in repenting prayers,
and mournful groans for their barbarous Crucifying the Prince of Life: This
some from all places did at Jerusalem, Act. 2. and more shall do it the day of
their general Call and Conversion to God.

5. The Servants of God have Practiced it: You can scaace name a Religious
Householder, but he has set up an Altar in his Family, and offered Spiritual
Sacrifices thereupon. Joshua a Noble Warrior resolves upon this, chap. 24.15.
But as for me, and my house, we will serve the Lord; let others do as they dare
answer it another day, I with my Children and Servants must and will worship
the Lord! Worshipping God is serving him, Psalm. 72.11. All Kings shall fall
down before him; all Nations shall serve him; i. e. Zeph. 3.9.
by calling on God in prayer: Doubtless Joshua did this. David a great King, in
the midst of Political and Ecclesiastical Employments withdraws himself from
all, and returned to bless his House, 2 Samuel 6.20. 1 Chronicles. 16.43.
which could be no other way but by prayer, and praising God for and with his
Family: Public occasions must not justle out this Family Worship. Job -- rose
up early in the Morning, offered Burnt-Offerings, sanctified the Members of his
Family, and (lest it be thought that this was but occasional and accidental)
the Text says, Thus did Job continually, chap. 1. 5. And good Expositors
think, Daniel's going into his House, Dan. 6.10.
and his Windows being open in his Chamber, (or Dining room, his usual Oratory)
he kneeled upon his knees three times a day, and prayed; this they judge to be
Family Prayer, being so obvious and discernable by his Adversaries. However,
that devout Captain Cornelius, that feared God with all his house, prayed to
God with his Family, Act. 10.2. which he explains, saying, Nec omittenda est
circumstantia quod familiam in Dei timore insti tuit contempto periculi metu,
quod inde inst abat; valde enim exosa erat Judaica Religio; nec impun^ erat
Civi Romano, peregrinam, ut vocabant, Religionem suscipere. Quare et si hodie,
pessime in mundo audit sincera Evangelii p^o^^ssio, tamen nimis vitiosa est
timiditas, si quem impediat injustum is^ad ca^^^, ne suam familiam Deo audeat
in Sacrificium sua pia Institutione ass^re. Vid. Calv. in Act. 10.2.
I prayed in my house, verse 30. Calvin notes, That Cornelius instructs his
Family in the fear of God, contemning the fear of danger; for, the Jewish
Religion was then hateful; nor might a Roman espouse a strange Religion;
wherefore, although the sincere Profession of the Gospel is much decayed in the
World, yet that fearfulness is too criminal, if upon the account of that unjust
hatred, any one should not dare to dedicate or offer up his Family as a
Sacrifice to God, by a holy Institution! Thus Calvin.

6. Argument for Family-Altar, is, the Providence of God calls for it: God
sets the solitary in Families, Psalm. 68.6. There is certainly a signal act
of Divine care in disposing Men, and Women's Affections to each other; Psalm.
113.9. Exodus 1.21. Ruth 4.11. 2 Samuel ^.11.
to make a barren Woman to keep house, to be a joyful Mother of Children: It
was God that made the God-fearing Midwives houses: The Lord made Rachel and
Leah to build the House of Israel: And why does God make his David's a sure
house? Why does God give Servants? Is it only to gratify the flesh, or a
fancy? Is it only for Worldly profit? Is it not for Religion sake? Has God no
higher ends than most men have for Worldly advantages or pleasure? Surely God
puts persons into this Relation for himself: Who is the grand End of all his
Acts? He has made all things for himself! Prove. 16.4.
Should men then live like Heathens and Beasts? Do they not thereby contradict
Gods design? Does God give Wife and Children to them that fear him, and does he
not expect they should fear and serve him together? Ps. 128.3, 4.
If Children be Gods Heritage, Psalm. 127.3.
why should not we present them to the Lord upon our knees? If they be Gods
reward to us, why should we not give them again to God as our best reward? If
Families are Societies of Divine Institution, do they not need Divine
Benediction? Should not Persons carry on Religion in a Relative capacity?
Surely yes: When God Sanctifies this Relation by his appointment, should not
men Sanctify his name by setting up his Ordinances? there is great reason for
it: 1 Timothy 4.5.
For every thing is Sanctified by the Will of God and Prayer: Gods Will to
warrant our lawful use thereof, Prayer for our holy and profitable use thereof.
As men without both these cross Gods design, so they have no due use of this
sweet Domestical Constitution and Relation.

7. This Family-Altar distinguishes betwixt Godly and Prophane-Families: This
is one discriminating Character, the one calls on God, the other not: This is
as the Altar Ed, to testify to all the World their solemn owning of the true
God: On the contrary, wicked Persons are thus described, Deuteronomy. 29.18. Lest
there should be amongst you, Man or Woman, or Family or Tribe, whose heart
turns away this day from the Lord our God: Mind it, Families, in their
Domestical capacity, as well as in a Personal, or National capacity may be
alienated from God, and may have a root that bears Gall and Wormwood, then
see what follows: This is that which makes evil Families, Jer. 8.3.
when instead of Praying, Reading Scriptures, Singing Psalms, there is Cursing,
Swearing, Mocking at serious Godliness, Vain or Profane Talk, at least but
Worldly Discourse: But Religious Families are such as maintain Gods Worship
according to Gods Institution, where the daily perfume of Prayer ascends
Heavenwards: Mr. Fenner Preaching at the Funeral of a godly old man disabled
from work, and and daily going among his friends for relief, says, Oh how much
better was that poor Cottage where he lived, whence the Incense of Prayer and
Praises mounted daily upwards; than the Sumptuous Palaces of Princes and
Nobles, where Oaths and Blasphemies are belched out! It was the appointment
among the Jews and Proselites, that every Family, Esth. 9.27.28.
Province, City, should observe the Feast of Purin, as a memorial of their
deliverance from Hamans Conspiracy, and is there not as much reason that
Christian Families should celebrate the great work of Redemption in their
Families? Just. Mart. Apol. Christ. ad Ant. Plum.
Justi^e Martyr tells us amongst the other Characters of Primitive Christians
this was one [Quod jejuni prius Orant] that they prayed fasting, before they
set upon any Work: At enim qui non ita vivere comperiuntur sicut ille docuit,
certum est Documentum non esse Christianos, quamvis id lingua profi^cantur.
And having described the godly manners of Ancient Christians, he adds, that
those that live not as Christ taught, it is a certain note, that they are not
Christians, though they profess it in speech, and words.

8. Christian-families are Churches, and Churches must have Altar's for God's
Worship. Luke gives us an account of the Primitive Church, that they continued
steadfastly in the Apostles Doctrine, and Fellowship, and in breaking of bread,
and in prayer, Act. 2.42. Breaking Bread in the Lord's Supper is a public
Church-Ordinance, the other are also common to Families, as well as
Christian-Assemblies. Families consist of individual Persons, Istae enim
Congregationes sunt quasi parts similares Ecclesie Catholicae, atqae adto, and
no nen and naturam ejus participant. Ames Med. Theo. lib. 1. c. 32.
Congregations of Families, and the Catholic Church of particular Societies;
and Families may partake of the Name, and must of the Nature of Churches. What
is a Church but a Religious Society gathered for God's Worship? The Church was
limited to Families in the first Ages of the World; thence it spread it self by
Divine Grace into many streams (all proceeding from one spring as branches from
one root) till the Church became National. But Families were the first
Original: Nor does Family-Religion cease when Public Assemblies are erected,
Genesis Diu me torsit hic lotus, and etiamnum torquet. Vid. Pol. Crit. in locum.
4.26. Then began men to call upon the Name of the Lord. That Text has
tortured Interpreter; but this is clear, that calling on God's Name is part of
God's Worship; that this Piety was maintained in Seth's particular family; and
possibly, in a little time men begun more publicly to own God's Worship when
others did degenerate; Genesis 6.2.
and hence the Sons of God and of Men were thereby distinguished; which
confirms the former Argument. But this is that I now say, that families are to
be as Churches. And some interpret those places, Col 4.15. Philem. 2.
Romans 16.5. Greet the Church in their house, and Church in thine house, to be
no more than a private family. Grotius takes it for a domestical Church, and
says, [ubi tres, licet Laici, ibi Ecclesia est] that three persons though
Laymen, make a Church: Now where there is God's House, it is an House of
Prayer. That Is no Church where there is no Altar to God, but it is a Synagogue
of Satan. We cannot call every family a Church, but a Christian godly family;
and it is to called by the Analogy or Resemblance it bears to a Church, from the
Worship of God maintained therein. So then, without God's Worship in your
houses, you are not Churches, and so not Members of Christ, or of the Catholic
Church of God; but in that respect, as Heathens.

9. Householders have a charge upon their hands, which they must give an account
of, and opportunity to discharge this Trust. Governors are charged with their
families: Hence is the fourth Commandment given to them chiefly, Exodus 20 -- 1^
that they should take care that their family should keep the Sabbath Day; and
hence is the fifth Command given to Inferiors to obey their Governors: Yea
therefore are Parents rewarded or punished in their Children, according to the
second Commandment; because Governors must account for their Inferiors: Yea
God orders Householders to bring all under their roof to the feast of Weeks,
with their Freewill Offerings, Deuteronomy. 16.10, 11. and the feast of Tabernacles, v
13, 14. Yea they were to bring their Males yearly, three times in the year, v.
16. And it is not for nothing that Householders have this charge laid on them,
because they have greater Authority, opportunity to bring them together for
God's Public Worship in the family; for they may call them together upon
natural and civil accounts, to eat, and to work and why not to pray together?
their command is a Law. A Master may say, Luke 16.2.
Give an account of thy Stewardship, and why not of such a Sermon? They may
demand an account of their time and talents committed to their trust, and why
not a Reason of their hope, and an account of their piety or proficiency? why
not call them to prayer? And indeed it is a debt due to men's Children and
Servants. This is implied in Col. 4.1, 2. Masters give unto your Servants that
which is just and equal -- presently he adds, continue in prayer; intimating
that praying for, and with Servants, is just and equal both upon their own and
Servants account; it is as due as their promised wages: God makes Masters as
truly Watchmen as Ministers, and if they fail, Ezekiel. 3.18.
God will require their blood at their hand: Besides the advantages and
convenience of frequent intercourse capacitates Governors for this solemn
Exercise; and God will require accounts of all these Talents another day.

10. There are daily cases, occasions, necessities that concern families, to be
presented unto the Lord: There are family-sins to be confessed, wants to be
bewailed, mercies to be desired, cares, and crosses to be removed, fears to be
prevented, temptations to be resisted, duties to be performed, graces to be
exercised, obtained, peace to be maintained, or regained, passions to be
suppressed, mercies to be acknowledged; and all these must be laid at God's
foot in daily prayer. That Is a rare family that has not some Prodigal Son, or
Carnal Soul, as a Member of it; some body sick in it, or some Child to dispose
of in Marriage or Calling; some doubts or difficulties that call for prayer,
wherein the whole family is concerned; or if there be no such exigency at
present, yet who knows how soon any of these, or all these may light upon a
family? And what remedy is there like family prayer? Phil. 4.6. Be careful in
nothing, but in every thing by prayer and supplication, with thanksgiving, let
your requests be made known unto God. This is a Catholicon, a Cure for all
Diseases, a Salve for every Sore. We find that when God afflicted Abimelech's
family, Genesis 20.1 1 Exodus 9.2
Abraham prayed unto God, and God healed him, his Wife, Maidservants, and they
bare Children. A Pharaoh will beg Moses prayers for him in his Affliction; and
oh what a woeful state is that family in, that has no body to speak a word to
God for it, and with it, in domestic troubles! A Child lies groaning, and the
Father cannot groan out a prayer; a Servant lying at the point of death; and
the Master has no skill or will to bring him to Jesus for cure. Alas! that any
should be so insensible of their wants, Deest sempe quod petitur vel ex to^o
vel ex part vel in s^se, ve^ in sersu nestro, vel denique quoad actum, vel
quod continu atam ejus durationem. Ames Med Theol. l. 2^ cap. 9.
so ignorant of the means of relief, or distrustful of the Power of God, or
efficacy of prayer: No family is above wants, therefore none should be without
prayer; for prayer rises from sense of wants, which no person or family is
without, in whole or in part, in it self, or in sense, in act or continued
duration of mercy.

11. The Blessing of God usually attends Family-Altars: Not as though God were
tied to Religious Families, as Heathens chained their Idols, or as Elies Sons
fancied Gods presence necessarily attending the Ark; but God usually visits
pious Families: Scripture and Experience testify this, Psalm. 115.12, 13. Psalm.
118.15.
He will bless the house of Israel, he will bless the house of Aaron; he will
bless them that fear the Lord both small and great, i. e. Proselites, Gentiles,
Converts: The voice of rejoicing and salvation is in the Tabernacles of the
righteous: Our Lord loves to converse, where his Children inhabit; it is true,
he prefers public Assemblies; The Lord loves the Gates of Zion, Psalm. 87.2.
more than all the Dwellings of Jacob: God loves to see his Children together
in his H. Worship: The greater the Solemnity, if good, the more of Gods Spirit
and Presence: But God does not despise his Children seeking him in families;
Psalm. 101.1, 2.
when devout David sings of mercy and judgment to God, and behaves himself
wisely in a perfect way, he cries out; O when will thou come unto me? Gods kind
visits are worth a World, whether by way of Providence, Assistance, Influence
or Evidence: How often have Gods Children met with God in their families? Genesis
18.10. Act. 10.3. Luke 8.43.51.
Abraham had a Promise of a Child, Cornelius had a glorious Vision of an Holy
Angel; and our Lord came to Jairus's house, to raise his dead Daughter: How
often has God answered Family Prayer? Even at present by melting the hearts of
Children, Servants! And afterward: It Is recorded of Mr. Banen of Stepleford,
That he seldom performed Family-duty, but he had some Answers of Prayer to
bless God for, since the former time of appearing there before God. Anno autem
1584. terrae motu Mons quidam in Ditiore Bernatum ultra alias Montes violenter
latus pagum quendam nonaginta familias habentem contexit totum, dimidia domi
excepta in qua paterfamilias cum uxore and liberis in genua provolutus Deum
invocabat. Polani Syntag. cap. 22. fol. 301.
It is a remarkable story that Polanus relates of an Earthquake in the year
1584. in Berna; in a Mountain violently hurried beyond other Mountains,
overturning a whole Village of Ninety houses and families excepting half of one
house, in which the Father of the family with his Wife and Children were
prostrate on their knees praying.

So true is that of Solomon, Prove. 12.7. The Wicked are overthrown and are not,
but the house of the Righteous shall stand: Prove. 3.3
God blesses the Habitation of the just. Exo. 12.1
He thinks fit sometimes to distinguish by his wise Providence betwixt the
houses of the Israelites and Egyptians: And experience does daily show that the
house is blessed where God is sincerely worshipped, as the Lord blessed the
house of Obed-Edom, and his Household for entertaining the Ark, 2 Samuel 6.11.

12. On the contraty God curses Prayerless-families; that is a Prophecy as well
as a Prayer, Jer 10 25 -- Pour out thy fury upon the Heathen that know thee
not, and upon the Families that call not on thy name: It Is a dreadful
Prediction; 1. For the wrath threatened, not ordinary, but fury; anger boiled up
to the highest degree of revenge, anger and fury are sometimes joined, Jer.
7.20. Ezekiel. 8.18
and when God deals in fury his eyes spare not, neither has he pity: This is
dreadful: But 2. Here Is the measure of it, Pour out thy fury; this notes
plenty, abundance, variety of sore Judgments; not one, or two, but multitudes
of Plagues, like drops in a Shower, or as Floodgates opened as a general
Inundation, spreading it self universally, poured out on Children, Jer. 6.11.
young Men, Husband and Wife, aged with him that is full of days. Isa. 34.2.
Oh what would become of England if this fury were as universal as the neglect
of this family-duty! Descensus a ^ummis in ^imum.
and this fury is irresistible; it is like a descent from above, which can no
more be stopped and avoided than the Showers of Rain: There is no stopping
these Cataracts of Heaven, no quenching this fire of fierce wrath against
irreligious Families, when the Lord renders his anger with fury, Isa. 66.15.
and his rebuke with flames of fire. 3. But what is all this for? what means
the heat of this great anger? is it for Idolatry, Murder, Drunkenness,
Blasphemy, or for some horrible, heinous crimes? no, it is for sins of omission,
not knowing God, not calling on God's Name: O miserable families where Religion
is not exercised, there these threatenings must be executed!

Object. But we see no such thing; prayerless families flourish, live bravely,
have all things at command, Job. 21.7, 13.
prosper more than others, their houses are safe from fear, neither is the Rod
of God upon them.

I must confess this promiscuous dispensing of outward Providence, that
wickedness is prosperous, holiness oppressed, has been an offense to the
godly, and an hardening to the wicked: And David himself was puzzled with it,
Psalm. 73.17.
till he went into the Sanctuary, then he understood their End, and God's End
in this.

Deuteronomy. 32.35 Romans 9.22.
But I answer, 1. Forbearance is no acquittance; a Reprieve is no Pardon; Their
foot shall slide in due time. God bears long with sinners for wise ends, till
the Vessels of Wrath be fitted for destruction. God will be in some men's debt
till another World: They shall have their good things here, Luke 16.25
and torments hereafter. A wise man will choose his Heaven hereafter, though he
have an Hell here.

2. Yet this Curse and wrath upon wicked persons and prayerless families is
secret and invisible; even in outward, Hag. 16. Mat. 22.
they may sow much, and bring in little; eat and not have enough: Yea God
curses even the Blessings of such as worship not God; however, they have not a
Covenant-right to what they do enjoy; it is not sanctified to them for their
good; 1 Timothy 4.5
for the Creature is sanctified by the Word of God and Prayer; but prayerless
families have no outward comforts thus sanctified: Besides, the saddest
invisible Curse is upon their Souls and Spirits; a blind mind, hard heart, a
seared conscience, and a spirit of slumber, are the greatest Judgments and
Fruits of God's heaviest fury, Romans 1.26, 28. 2 These. 2.10, 11. Psalm. 81.11,
12. It Is a dreadful thing when a [Lord have mercy on them] is writ upon men's
Doors and they cannot read it, will not believe it, or lay it to heart, Isa.
42.24, 25. This is next to Pharaoh's Plague, and next door to Hell: They that
will not heed now, must feel this fury, and in the latter days shall consider
it perfectly. Read Jer. 23.19, 20. Deuteronomy. 29.19, 20.

Thus much for the Reasons, to prove erecting Family-Altars for God's Worship
an important duty: The Command of God, Scripture-Types; Natural Religion;
Promises; Prophecies; Scripture-Examples; Divine Providence; discriminating
Character; their being Christian Churches; Governors charge and account; daily
necessities of Families; God's Blessing on praying-families; his Curse and
Wrath upon prayerless families.

Chap. IV. Objections proposed and answered that militate against Family-Altars.
BUT there is no Truth so plain, no Duty so good, but Satan can furnish a witty
head, and wicked heart with plausible Arguments against it: And it is strange if
men have not something to say against this Duty, that apparently tends to
undermine Satan's Kingdom.

Object. 1. Had Family Prayer been a Duty, we had found it expressly commanded
in Scripture, but we find it not in any express Precept.

Ans. 1. Where find you Infant Baptism expressly commanded in the N. Teftam.?
yet it is plain by necessary consequence, so is this. Circumcision was
commanded; there is the like Reason for Baptism; both are plain to all but
perverse spirits. I hinted before that proper consequence is strong Argument.

2. Let not proud Reason dictate to the wise God how he must speak. General
Rules laid down in Scripture are to be applied to particular Cases, by Nature
and Reason in several circumstances. If God say Men must provide for their
families, he leaves it to their discretion, what kind of Meat, Clothes,
Lodging, Callings they provide. God bids us pray without ceasing, in all
places, all manner of prayer, and leaves it to prudence for particular places,
times, words, company, so that it answer the main End of God's Glory, Communion
with himself, and Edification. Let not captious Wits pick quarrels to evacuate
the substance of a Duty, because the circumstance is not expressed. God gives
Laws to Rational Creatures, and indulgeth us so far as to leave us to our
liberty in mutable circumstances, except expressly prescribed.

Object. 2. Jesus Christ prayed not with his family, yet he is the best
Pattern; if he had prayed with them constantly, they would have learned from
him, but they want to be taught, Luke 11.1.

Ans. 1. Christ's case and ours are far different; what was suitable to his
Disciples was not proper to him; he needed not for himself to confess sin, ask
forgiveness, beg mortification, increase of grace, assurance; so that it was
not necessary that he should ordinarily be their mouth.

2. Yet Scripture-silence is no good Argument: And their desire of instruction
in Prayer is no good Argument he Prayed not with them; for Prayer is a Personal
Duty, And our Lord could not be always with them: And yet we find our Lord did
occasionally Pray with his Family: In Gratitude, Mat. 11.25, 26. In working
Miracles, Mat. 14.19. In the Holy Supper, Luke 22.19. And that large and last
Prayer uttered with his Disciples, John 17. In all which he spoke what was
proper to him as God-Man, and our Mediator; and herein he is an excellent
pattern to all Householders.

Object. 3. The Sacrifice of the wicked; (and so his Prayer) is abomination to
the Lord: Prove. 15.8.
How can you then put them on Praying when most are bad?

Answ. 1. God loses not his Authority to Command, because man has lost his
Capacity to Obey; it is his Duty still, though he cannot perform it in such a
due manner as God requires: He is bound to Pray as a Creature though he cannot
do it as a Child: Better do it as men can, than not do it at all; Prayer is a
natural duty: Jonah 3.8.
The Ninevites must cry aloud, and mightily to God, and it was not in vain:
Act. 8.22.
Simon Peter bids Simon Magus Pray, though in the Gall of bitterness.

2. We must distinguish betwixt a resolved and a returning Sinner: We bid not a
Thief pray that he may meet with a Booty, that is abominable; Psalm. 66.18. Isa.
55.6, 7.
or men Regarding Iniquity in their hearts: But in a complex sense we bid them,
Turn from their evil ways, and so Pray: Prayer must be joined with Repentance;
as Prayer is [ Medium Cultus, so it is Medium Gratiae] as means of carrying the
heart to God in Worship, so it is a mean to obtain Grace. Prayer is the Souls
motion Godward, desire is the Soul of Prayer, and who dare say to the wicked,
desire not God, Christ, Faith? By Praying men may learn to Pray right, Luke
11.13.
For God gives his Holy Spirit to them that ask him.

Oject, 4. There Is wicked Children or Servants in the Family, how dare we join
with them? For whose sake God may justly reject us.

Answ. 1. If the Praying Governor be Godly and pray right, he need not fear
non-acceptance: Christ was heard in his Prayer, though Judas was present: What
think you of poor Ministers Prayers in mixed Congregations? Act 27.35.
Certainly the presence of unworthy Persons prejudiceth not the entertainment
of sincere Worshipers.

2. Prayer is Gods institution to make bad good, some have been much wrought
upon by the Prayers of others, God heard Stephen for Paul in time; if it
advantaged not at present. Mr. Weems said of Mr Bruce he knocked down the Holy
Ghost upon us all: Deny them not this means of Conversion.

Object. 5. This setting up a Family-Altar for so constant Prayer savours of
Forms, and will fill the Country with Formalists and Hypocrites.

Answ. 1. Forms are not simply condemned, but Forms only, wanting the power of
Godliness, 2 Timothy 3 5. Our business is not to make Hypocrites but Converts: By
Form is meant a Mask, Vizor or Appearance opposed to Substance and Reality: But
we persuade and direct to sincerity, as to Priciple, Manner and End of
Religious Exercises.

2. But a Form of Goliness is better than none at all: Men cannot have the
Power of Godliness without the Form; no more than you can have the Kernel
without the Shell: He that Prays does something toward Duty, but he that
refuses to Worship God at all, bids open defiance to God's Commanding
Authority, and says; I scorn to bow so much as a Knee to God in Prayer: This
is a presumptuous Sin: Psalm. 10.4.
The wicked through the pride of his heart will not seek after God. Let him
answer it as he dare: The Text says, 1 Timothy 4 8. Bodily Exercise profits
little [(...)] for a little, 1 King. 21.27.
i. e. for a little time, or for a little- i. e. in some outward respects, as
in Ahabs fasting, though it reach not so far as the Eternal Salvation of the
immortal Soul: However this is better than a total neglect.

Object. 6. But such kind of Praying Morning and Evening is a stinting the
Spirit, a limiting God to man's time, when the Spirit moves not to it.

Answ. 1. Christ and his Apostles had set times for Prayer; Jesus often times
resorted into the Garden, Judas knew his stated hour and place, John 18.2. And
the Apostles had an hour of Prayer, Acts 3.1. Was this stinting the Spirit?
Indeed this Objection is levelled against Preaching, Singing, Supper, and all
stated Ordinances, how do men know that the Spirit will move at such a season?

2. It Is one thing to stint, another to lie in the walk of the Spirit: Men are
bound to wait at the posts of Wisdoms Doors, and are blessed, Prove. 8.34.
and in the road of further blessing; for the wind of the Spirit blows where
and when it lists: Joh. 3.8.
And no body will say he limits the wind that waits in the Heaven for a fair
gale to wast him over: Besides, Isa. 64.7.
God expects that men should stir up themselves to take hold on God:
Self-excitation is God's appointment to get the heart into frame. How often
does David begin low and end high? 2 Timothy 1.6.
We must stir up the gift of God in our hearts: A Dead, Dull, Senseless Heart
is no supersedeas from Duty: Omission upon indisposition does but harden the
heart, and indispose for Duty, and gratify Satan, yea and displease God.

Object. 7. This Family Prayer is but a singular invention of brainsick
novellists, not used of old, and is more ado than needs.

Answ. 1. In Scripture-times it was used, and in the purest Primitive-timess;
Basil says [ Mane orto die in precationes properare] that Christians made
haste to Prayers by day-brake in the Morning; Chrysostom says we go not [a
mensa ad lectum] from Table to bed, but to Prayers, lest we be more brutish
than bruits: It were easy to produce instances from Cyprian, Augustine, etc. of
Primitive Christians frequency in Prayers: You will say butt these were Church
prayers? Answer; Churches were mostly then in Houses, yet some instances prove
also daily Family-Prayers: And Godly Persons in all Ages have used it.

2. Can men be too Devout? Does not our Lord say, Luke 18.4^. Mat. 6.33. Mat.
22.37.
one thing is needful? Seek first the Kingdom of God: Thou shall Love the Lord
thy God with all thy Heart, Mind, Strength: Can you do too much for God? Can
you be too often with God? Eccl. 7.16.
Alas! you cannot be overmuch righteous, in the internals of Religion: no, nor
in the externals, as long as you keep to commanded duties, and one duty cross
not another: Nay, when we have done all that is commanded, Luke 17.10.
yet still we are unprofitable Servants; we have but done our duty. Joh. 12.3.4.
It was Judas that said, Wherefore is this wasted? Godly Souls still complain
of defects: Whom did you hear complain on their deathbed that they had served
God too much, or been too religious?

Object. 8. They are no better than others that pray in their families; they
can lie, cheat, be covetous, proud, passionate, censorious, hard-hearted.

Ans. 1. Take heed what you say; act not the Devil's part, to be
false-accusers, taking up a false report, or without proof. It Is well known,
that now adays, if persons be strict and serious in Religious duties, many
pick quarrels with them, take advantage against them, aggravate their faults;
these men's Motes are Beams, Act. 28.22.
yea Mountains; this Sect is every where spoken against; there needs no further
Jury to try them; but if they be praying persons, they are Hypocrites; as if
Piety were a note of Hypocrisy: The Lord rebuke thee, oh Diabolist! judge
charitably till you know the truth; you may wrong them, as Primitive Christians
were.

2. Suppose they do miss and miscarry, alas! they are but men. Thus the Angel
excused honest Joshua, when Satan accused him; Is not this a brand plucked out
of the fire? Zech. 3.13.
Alas! he smells of Babylon too much; but may not these be upright for the
main? and how will God take it, if you slander his Children? But suppose it be
true that they are faulty, does their Religion teach them so? Is this the fault
of their praying, or not praying aright? Is it because they are too religious,
or defective in it? No, say you, they are Hypocrites; and if they prove so that
are so devout, what will become of you, 1 Pet. 4.18.
that are so far short of them? If the righteous scarcely be saved, where shall
you appear?

Object. 9. We pray in public and secret, is not that sufficient? what needs
family prayer too? surely God never required so much a-do.

Ans. 1. One duty cannot supersede another: These are distinct circumstances of
performing the same duty: Religion must be carried on in all places, relations;
1 Pet. 3.7.
Husband and Wife must pray together; yea and Neighbors must call to each
other, and say, Come, come, let us go speedily to pray before the Lord: Zech.
8.21.
Think not then to put off God with one sort of Religiousness, but you must be
holy in all manner of conversation, 1 Pet. 1.15^ (...).
in every turn, turn you which way you will, to your general or particular
Calling, to a single or married state, to solitariness or company; you must
still take your Religion with you, and practice it as a Member of Church or
Family.

2. It Is very suspicious whether those worship God sincerely in public, or at
all in their Closets, that worship not God in and with their families. It was
the saying of Lactantius [non est vera Religio quae cum Templo relinquitur]
that is no true Religion which men leave behind them at Church: Men may make a
shift to serve God as others do, at Church, for vainglory, or ostentation, and
pretend secret prayer merely for an evasion; but family prayer will try whether
they worship God sincerely or no; Men see the former, but know not the latter.

Object. 10. None of my Neighbors use it, if I pray in my family I shall be
singular.

Ans. 1. Would thou choose rather to follow a multitude in evil to Hell, Exodus
23.2.
than travel with a few to Heaven? Our Lord says, What do you more than
others? Mat. 5.47.
Or what singular thing do you? Are you content to fare as the most fare? Will
you rush with the Herd into the deep, and be damned for company? Is that
good-fellowship that ends in the sad reckoning another day? Christ's Flock is a
little Flock. But read Matthew. 7. 13, 14. and consider whether you will choose.

2. If you have not the greater, you have the better company to travel with:
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and all the holy Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles,
Martyrs, Ministers, Confessors, Christians, they have all traveled in this
Road: Psalm. 32.6.
For this shall every one that is godly pray unto thee. Methinks you should
rather choose to be Companions of the excellent, Psalm. 16.8. Mal. 3.14, 17.
whom God will own when he makes up his Jewels; than those Atheists that say,
It is in vain to serve God.

Object. 11. But I know some strict Professors that use not to pray in their
families, nay, that plead against it.

Ans. 1. That Is no part or property of their goodness: I deny not but some
godly persons may for a season live in the omission of some duties, either
through want of information, or their own sloth, or through false Teachers, and
the power of delusion; yet this is a temptation, but free grace will recover
them, and the new Nature within them will incline them to own their duty, when
they are convinced of it, and when they come to themselves.

2. Yet some Professors seem good that are not so; they may have a name to
live, Rev. 3.1.
and yet be dead: all is not Gold that glisters; men may have the face, but not
the frame or heart of Christians. Gal. 6.12.
How many make a fair show in the flesh, and account themselves the only
Saints, and are so esteemed by others, that are not owned by the Lord? The
complexion of a Saint is one thing, but the constitution of a Child of God is
another. Some Notionists spread their sails, and think themselves wronged if
they be not called the godly Party; but herein they are proved rotten, by
casting off some precious truths and necessary duties; imitate such at your
peril; Psalm. 119.6.
a sincere Saint has respect to all God's Commandments.

Object. 12. We have scoffers in our families, that will withdraw, and not
join, but jear; it may be a Son, or Wife will be doing something else that
while, and this will breed confusion, and do hurt.

Ans. 1. But who is Master, thou or they? If thou have lost thy governing
power, be ashamed of it, and resume thy Authority. Whose Cause do thou
manage, God's, or the Devil's? If the Cause be God's, in the name and strength
of God, own it, and he will stand by thee; fear not Man in the way of duty: It
was thy carelessness to join thy self to an untamed Heifer, or admit an unruly
Servant into thy family; add not Rebellion to that sin; be humbled, and reform.

2. Had never any of God's Children profane wretches in their family? Abraham
had a persecuting Ishmael; Isaac a profane Esau; David a scoffing Michal; what
did they? did they give over praying? no, they prayed more fervently: Genesis
17.18. 2 Samuel 6.20, 21, 22.
Oh that Ishmael may live in thy sight! David was so far from ceasing his
Devotion, that Michal's scorns were as Oil to inflame his Zeal; I will yet,
says he, be more vile than thus, and will be base in mine own sight; if they
account it sordid baseness, I account it my chiefest honor to humble my self
before the Lord: And what think you, is a total omission, or vigorous
performance of family-duty more likely to win and work upon your carnal,
scornful Relations? I am sure a laborious charity is better than contemptuous
withdrawing; and is usually blessed with success; however it is a mean to set
order.

Object. 13. I am bashful, modest, and of weak gifts, and cannot fashion to
pray before others; I shall but bewray my ignorance.

Ans. 1. Can thou take upon thee in other Cases, and not in this? Who
commands thy Servants to work? or who instructs them in their Calling, or
chides them when they displease thee? they shall hear from thee if they miss
it; and can thou not speak to God before them? Cursed is that Modesty that is
ashamed of duty: Mat. 10.33.
Have thou not reason to fear Christ will be ashamed of thee? Is not this for
God's Cause? 2 Timothy 2.12.
deny him at your peril, he will deny you.

2. Are not all in your family underlings to you? have not you Authority over
them, to enjoin them silence and reverence? if you have lost your Authority by
your ignorance or childishness, thank your selves. Those that honor God, he
will honor; 1 Samuel 2.30. Mal. 2.8, 9.
but departing out of God's ways, renders men contemptible and base: It Is Grace
and Holiness that must recover your credit. But I know the reason why you will
not pray; it is because you think you cannot do so well as others, or to get
applause; this is your pride: But if you would shame your selves, and do your
best, God would provide for your credit: Gifts would increase.

Object. 14. But I am poor, it is an hard World, we work hard cannot spare time;
I have a great family and charge to maintain.

Ans. 1. Do not thou and thy family spend as much time in idle talk, sports,
needless Visits, sitting by the fire, as this would come to? None so hard set
in their Callings, but they might redeem half an hour in the morning, Ephesians. 5.15.
and more at night; yea though it were from sleep, for God's Service, if they
had an heart for God: Conscience will tell thee, thou spendest more time, that
might be better employed; but an heart is wanting.

2. It Is an usual saying, Meat and Mattins hinder no work; There Is a great
truth in it: Prayer expedites business; for it obtains a blessing from God:
Eliezer [Abraham's Servant] prayed, and God prospered his Journey: You are
Atheists if you think work stands in prayer-time: Psalm. 1.3.
No, no, it makes whatsoever you take in hand to prosper. The poor man cried to
Mr. Carter, Sir, I work hard, and fare bare, and thrive not; he answered, Work
hard, and pray hard, and see what that will do.

Object. 15. I, says the rich thriving man in the World, but my hands are so
full of business, and Chapmen or Customers come so fast, or I am to go abroad
in my Calling, that I cannot get time for prayer.

Ans. 1. I shall to this give the same Answer that Mr. Ignatius Jurdan gave to
a Shopkeeper in London, accounted religious, being very busy in his Shop early
in the morning; Mr. Jurdan took him aside, said, Sir, I perceive you are very
busy; do you keep up the Trade of Religion in all this throng? he answered, I
hope I do; I, but says he, do you visit God in your Closet and Family morning
and evening? he replied, In the evening I pray constantly with my family, but
in the morning sometimes Customers come and hinder us; Mr. Jurdan said, I tell
you, I would throw these goods into the Channel, or set a fire on them rather
than they should hinder me in my course of Devotion, or in the way to Heaven.
So say I, Sirs, do you prize gain above godliness? then you are none of God s
Servants, but the World's Slaves: Say not, it is but for a time, one neglect
brings on another, and thy heart will be more hardened; and by missing one
season of Communion with God, you lose more than all your Estates are worth:
Are you content, that the World be your Portion? Oh make not gain your
godliness!

2. How can you expect your gains and riches should be blessed to you when you
take not God's way to obtain a blessing? Prove. 3.34
If you begin not with God; the end will be cursed, Prove. 10.
God's curse is in the House of such wicked persons: However such treasures of
wickedness profit nothing; 1 Timothy 6.9 10
and since you will be rich you fall into temptation and a snare, and many
foolish and hurtful lusts which will drown you in destruction and perdition: Do
not you know that worldly riches cannot satisfy? Consider, the more you get of
the World, the more difficult is your journey to Heaven, and greater your
account.

Object. 16. You bind us to a tedious Bondage, this is a wearisom task to Pray
with our Families Morning and Evening, it is not to be endured.

Answ. 1. It Is a sign of a Carnal Heart to be weary of Duty: A gracious Soul
thankfully accepts the offer of frequent approaching to God: Psalm. 43.4.
Then, says David, will I go to the Altar of God, Psalm. 73.28.
to God my exceeding joy: It Is good for me to draw nigh to God: This is the
height of a Christians preferment, the sweetest recreation, and only gainful
employment: To them that love God his commands are not grievous; 1 John 5.3.
Prove. 3.17.
but these ways of Wisdom are not only pleasant, but pleasantness: Alas Sirs,
what Spirits are you of, Mal. 1.1^.
that say, What a weariness is it? Surely Heaven it self would be your Hell,
unless your Hearts and Natures were changed.

2. It is a dreadful token of Gods rejecting that man and of that Man's
forsaking the Lord, that will rather pick quarrels with Divine Commands than
obey them: Remember what became of them that said, ^oh. 6.60, 66.
This is an hard saying who can hear it? They went back and walked no more with
Christ. It Is a sign thou take thy Religion for low and base ends, and when
those ends are attained then farewell Christ; And Oh the wretched end of
forlorn Apostates, and whither will thou go for a better Master, where will thou find a better Service? will'st thou prefer Satan's Drudgery to Gods Service
which is perfect freedom? Joh. 12.26.
Ah sinner thou have the black brand of Reprobation upon thee, and and shall be
filled with thy own ways. Prove. 14.14


Object. 17. Says one, I never used this Family Prayer and have been an
Housekeeper this Twenty, Thirty, or Forty years, and am loath to bring up a
new Custom, or condemn my former Practices.

Answ. 1. Custom in sin, or sinful neglects doubles the sin, and hardens the
heart, Jer. 13.23. Can the Ethiopian change his Skin -- Then may ye also do
good that are accustomed to do evil: What think you, is it an extermination or
aggravation of a fault to plead Custom? Will the Thief say to the Judge, My
Lord, I have been so accustomed to stealing that I cannot leave it? Oh say not
I will go to Hell because I have traveled in that Road all my days, and am
loath to change --

2. Converting Grace can break off a bad Custom, yea sanctifying work will turn
an old Stream into a new Channel, or rather renew the Souls Faculties and make
a new Creature, or Creation; 2 Cor 5.17.
Old things pass away, and behold all things are become new; new Principles,
Motives, Rule and End: You are not true Christians, if you be not new
Creatures; Phil. 3.9.
And if you be not found in Christ, you are lost for ever. You had need pray
and pray again for new Covenant-Mercy; That God would give you a new Heart,
Ezekiel. 36.26, 27.
and a new Spirit -- That you may walk in his Statutes. Ephesians. 4.22, 23, 24. 1
Pet. 1.18.
Be not content with the Old Man, that corrupt rotten Image of Old Adam, but
put on the New Man, that will make you capable of new Acts, in a new manner:
Better late than never: Be not wedded to old Traditions.

Object. 18. I have used it formerly, but got no good by it, and so gave it
over; and if I begin again, I doubt I shall not hold out.

Answ. 1. Whose fault was that? Was it God's fault or thine? The blame must not
be laid on the Duty but on the Person: Thousands have got good by it, and would
not lay it aside for all the Worlds wealth; If thy heart had been right, Job.
17.9.
thou would have held on thy way, if thy hands had been clean thou would
have been stronger and stronger: 2 John 8.
Alas that thou should lose thy reward, by losing what thou have wrought;
Poor Soul, thou have Run in vain, all thy Labor is lost, Ezekiel. 18.24.
thy former Righteousness shall not be mentioned for thee, but against thee.

2. Who persuaded thee to leave off Family Prayer? You did run well, who
hindered you? Not God or his Ministers; this persuasion comes not of him that
called you: Gal. 5.7.8.
No, no, it was the Devil and a Wicked Heart that bewitched you: And is it not
egregious folly, Gal. 3.1, 3.
having begun in the Spirit, to think to be made perfect by the Flesh? Will you
go out of God's blessing into the warm Sun? Jer. 2.5. Mal. 3.14.
What iniquity have you found in God or in his ways? Oh gratify not the Devil,
and Flesh, 2 Kin. 6.33.
by saying, It is invain to God; Or what should I wait for the Lord any longer?
Hos. 2.7.
Come Sirs, renew you old Acquaintance, Return to your first Husband; receive
your ancient convictions, impressions; engage the strength of God and you shall
hold on

Object. 19. I like not this precileness, you shall never persuade me to it;
you spend your breath in vain, yet I hope to be saved, as well as the best of
you all: God is merciful.

Answ. 1. Now Flesh and Blood and carnal reason speak out, and vent the natural
malignity of a wicked heart, Romans 8.7.
the carnal mind is enmity against God, for it is not subject to the Law of
God, neither indeed can be: Oh that any of Gods creatures should spit such
venom against its maker! How far are you from blessed Paul, who when God called
him by his Grace -- He conferred not with Flesh and Blood. Gal. 1.16.
Will you ask the Devils Advice whither you shall be God's Children or no? Will
you not serve God without the Devils leave? Well go on in your gratifying God's
enemy, and see the issue, it will be bitterness in the End.

2. Dare you stand by this, answer at God's Bar and great Tribunal? Dare you
then say, Lord thou did indeed bid us Pray, but we had no mind of that Duty;
we loved not thee, nor did we approve of thy ways; we thought they were too
strict, and bound us too strait; we had more mind of our carnal ease, and
sensual lusts; Luke 19.14.
we were Latitudinarians; and resolved upon it, we will not have this man to
rule over us, whatever it cost us? Well Sirs, think not not much if God say,
Prove. 1.25, 26. Psalm. 50.21.
You have set at naught all my Council and would none of my Reproof; I also
will laugh at your calamity: Your thought I was altogether such an one as your
selves, but I will reprove you: Now is the day of Vengeance, Mercy has an end,
and Justice takes place; and those mine Enemies that would not that I should
Reign over them, Luke 19.27.
bring them hither and slay them before me.

Object. 20. Well, now I am convinced Prayer is a Duty, Family Prayer is my
Duty, and I have a mind to perform it; but I know not how to to manage it, I am
a mere strangeer to it, God help me, I am a mere Ignoramus, and know not what
to say.

Answ. 1. Where Is the fault? Have thou not enjoyed Means, Helps, Ordinances
many years for the good of thy Soul? Do thou not see others as very Idiots
as thou attain to excellent gifts, under the same helps, that can pray very
pertinently, even extempore; but I guess the true cause, it is either the Pride
of thy heart, that thou can not pray so well as others, or it is thy laziness
that thou have not diligently used means to get knowledge or excite thy
faculties: Prove. 1.32.
thy sloth will slay thy Soul; and thy damnation will be just.

2. God stands not upon Gifts, Elocution, or ready Utterance, the Sacrifices of
God are a broken Spirit; Psalm. 51.17.
a broken and a contrite heart, God will not despise. If thou have not precious
Liquor, can thou not offer him thy empty Bottles? If thou can not Pray,
can thou not fall down on thy Knees and tell God thou can not Pray? Can
thou not desire him to help thee to pray? Yea, can thou not say, as much as
the poor Publican, God be merciful to me a Sinner; Luke 18.13.
to us Sinners? If it be not wilfulness but weakness, God will indulge thee
much, his Spirit will help thy Infirmities, Romans 8.26.
both what to say, and how to pray. But in this case I shall give some helps
anon.

Chap. V. An use of Conviction, Lamentation over Prayerless-Families.
THE first use I shall make of this point is of Lamentation, and severe
Admonition; if this be so, as I have Proved, and Answered Objections against
it; That Governors must Act the parts of Priests to Erect Altars for the
Worship of God in their Families: Then I doubt it will fall heavily upon many
thousand Families in England, for which I fear God's Vengeance is hanging over
their heads: God looks and expects, that in a Professing Kingdom, a Nation
where the Gospel has been so long owned by Public Authority, that Religion
Should have been more owned and practiced in Families, than I fear it is; God
may justly wonder, That there is no Intercessor -- Therefore how justly may the
Lord put on Garments of Vengeance --. Isa. 59.16, 17, 18.
and Repay recompense to these Islands: Woe is us that there is so few serious
gracious Families to be found in these Islands: Religion runs at a low Ebb,
serious devotion is banished from among us: Some Families are. 1. Without
Priests. 2. Without Altar. 3. Without Sacrifice: Or, 4. The Sacrifice of
Devils, instead of Gods, or joined with Gods?

A Brief hint of all these.

1. There are many Houses without Priest, i. e. where the Governor of the
Family has no Religion, is not devoted to God, anointed with the Spirit, and
consecrated to be a Gospel-Priest to Erect an Altar or offer Sacrifice: A poor
Carnal Master of a Family, that knows not how to frame for Gods Worship, alas
poor ignorant sott! He is not capable of speaking a Word from God to his
Family, or of speaking a word to God for them! You go to bed and rise, Psalm.
127.2.
one time after another, Prayerless; you can keep them up late and call them up
early to their work, but never say, come to Prayers: not a word of God all the
day long, not a Chapter read, not a Psalm Sung, not a Prayer put up in the
Family from day to day; nay it is well if there be any solemn praying for a
blessing at Meats, or giving God thanks for meat, but Scholars grace, as they
say; every one for himself; so they sit down and rise up like beasts; at best,
they fall to saying [God bless my Meat, Amen] and so put off God with a
compliment: Ah graceless Master, ah graceless Family! ( i. e. as a Family) woe
be to thee.

1. How durst you Marry, set up Houses, or take the charge of of a Family upon
you, that are no better furnished for it? Do you not shame with your selves,
that you cannot say a word to God for them? No not if thy Wife, Child or
Servant lie a dying, and their Souls ready to be damned, thou have not a word
to speak for their recovery or Salvation, O wretched miscreant!

2. Do you not condemn your selves, that can teach your Children and Servants a
trade to get a livelihood by, and live hansomly in this World, and not one word
for another World? You command them to work, never to Worship God: You quarrel
with them for offending you, never for offending God: You expect they ask you
for what they need, but you will not ask any thing of God either for them or
your selves.

3. Are you not worse than Idolatrous Micah, Judge. 17.5. He had an house of
God's, and made an Ephod and Teraphim, and consecrated one of his Sons, who
became his Priest: Much what like some ignorant Parents that will set a Lad to
say a Primmer-grace; better so than none at all. But Micah was not content with
that, but got an Hedgehog Priest, a wandering Levite to say Divine Service in
his family; and now he is a jolly fellow, and thus boasts, v. 13. Now know I
that the Lord will do me good, seeing I have a Levite to my Priest. This poor
Idolater will rise in Judgment against thee.

4. How will you answer your charge? do not your Children and Servants cry out,
Oh pity us, pray for us, cruel Parents; you brought us sinful creatures in a
sinful World, help us out of this woeful state! But alas! you have not a word to
say for them, with them; you regard their precious Souls no more than an Ox or
Horse; their blood will be required at your hands: How will they curse you in
Hell? Oh woe is me! had I lived in a praying-family, I might have been converted
and saved; I never heard a word of God except blaspheming his Name: How will
this grind your Ears, and grieve your Hearts another day!

2. Other families are without an Altar; have not so much as a form of
godliness; not so much as a show of Religion: Oh! that it should be said of
many houses of England, as of Israel, 2 Chronicles. 15.3. Now for a long season
Israel had been without the true God, without a teaching Priest, and without
Law: As God threatens in Hos. 3.4. That the wretched Jews shall be without any
Religion true or false, as it has been since their murdering Christ to this
day.

1. How do these wretches resemble the Beasts? that own God no more than a Dog
or Swine; Isa. 1.13. Jer. 8.7, 8.
and it is better to be a Beast, than to be compared to a Beast: Yea God calls
in dullest creatures to condemn an irreligious People.

2. How can you expect a blessing upon your mercies? they are unhallowed things
as to you; nay, they are accursed to you, and, if God give commission, will
rise up in Rebellion against you: Lev. 27.14.
Thou have not sanctified thy House, so it is not estimated as to thee.

3. You hinder God's Interest in the World, and do what you can to propagate
Irreligion to future Generations; how will they plead the practice of
Ancestors? My Father never prayed in family, nor will I: Omission is a Trade
soon learned, hardly rooted out: 1 King. 14.16.
Here Jeroboam made Israel sin many Generations after: Oh you little know how
far your sin may spread!

4. Do you not often read your sin in the punishment of it? When you are
Atheists in not worshipping God, your Children are Atheists in denying God: You
are defective in duty, they abound in iniquity: You pray not for them, God
rejects them, and leaves them to notorious Villainies, to be punished by the
Judges; or God strikes them with some astonishing Judgment, as he did Eli's
Sons; This will make thy heart ache, and call thy sins to remembrance.

3. Some families possibly have a Priest, an Altar, but want a Sacrifice: As
Isaac said to his Father Abraham; Genesis 22.7.
Behold the fire and the wood, but where is the Lamb for a burnt-offering? So
say I, here is materials, the outward form, but where is the marrow, and
mystery of true godliness? Do thou give up thy Soul and Body as a Living
Sacrifice to God? Romans 12.1 Psalm. 51.17.
Do thou bring a broken and contrite heart for sin? Do thou practically
obey Divine; Heb. 13.16.
Commands, and do all the good thou can in thy Place? do thou especially
take Jesus Christ in the Arms of thy Faith, Heb. 13.10. Ephesians. 1.6.
and expect acceptance only in the Beloved? Do thou only Compliment with God?
Woe be to thee.

1. If there be not a Principle of Grace within, thou art but a lifeless
Machine, like a Parrot that speaks articulatly without Sense and feeling, Psalm.
17.1.
David's Prayer went not out of feigned Lips, 2 Samuel 7.27.
why so? he had found in his heart to Pray his Prayer, mind it; thou must find
thy Prayer in thy heart; before thou utter it with thy lips, and then thou must
Pray a Prayer; and not only say a Prayer as most do: Some will down on their
knees and patter over a few words in a heartless manner, when their minds are
roving to a thousand trifles; and this is their devotion they brag of, and God
must be pleased with; whereas it is a poor Heartless, Lifeless, Spiritless
form, without power, 2 Timothy 3 5. Isai. 29.13. Gal. 6.7.
which God rejects: This Lip-labor is but Lost-labour: for it is a mocking of
God, and he will not be mocked.

2. If you sleepily, slug gishly, unseasonably perform your Family duties: Some
spend all the day, and the evening in work or worldly business; it maybe in
idle chat, and vain discourse and just when they are for going to bed, rush up
and fall on their knees, and patter over a few words betwixt sleeping and
waking: And most of the Family fitter for their beds than for Devotion: Alas!
Sirs, does not God clap a Curse upon such as do the work of the Lord
negligently? Jer. 48.10.
and does not God say, Mal. 1.14.
Cursed be the deceiver that has in his stock a Male, and voweth and
Sacrifices to the Lord a Corrupt thing? Ah! Soul, had thou not a Male, a
better, fiter hour in thy Power, than that sleepy hour at bedtime? must God be
put off with the Worlds leavings? does not he that gives thee all thy time
deserve the best? does not God bid thee seek first his Kingdom? and shall this
be last? must the very Flower and Cream of thy time be spent in Vanity, and God
be thus served? O! be ashamed and blush at thy disingenuous dealing with the
Almighty.

3. If you come to own God in Family excercises, by Fits and Starts, in a good
mood, or when some affliction lies on You or Your Family, Oh how slavish are
you? but Alas! there are some that are never gracious, but in Pangs; never
Serious, but when severely handled, like a Dog under the Cudgel, Hos. 7.
and then it is but howling, not Child like Crying, Hos. 5.15. Isa. 26.16.
in their affliction they will seek God early and earnestly, they pour out a
Prayer when his chastning is upon them; and never else: Poor Souls, should you
not come to the Throne of Grace! Heb. 4.16.
to find Grace to help in time of need? And when is the day, where is the place,
and what is the state wherein you have not need of God? are you not daily
Sinning, and need Pardon as well as Daily-bread, may you not dye this Day, this
Night? are not Morning and Evening due times to seek God; Some will not Pray in
their Families, but a little on Lords-days Nights, when they have nothing else
to do: as though all time were not Gods weekday as well as Lord's Day; surely
God is to be owned daily, I will, said David, Psalm. 61.8.86.3.
daily perform my vows and I cry unto thee daily; and why should you be as the
Morning Cloud and early D^w, Hos. 6.4.
when God is daily teaching you with his benefits, and therefore must be daily
praised, not Lord's Day but weekday, and every day in the week; Psalm.
68.19.72.15.
what if God forget or forsake you any day, what would become of you?

4. If you miss it in the End of your Family-dutys you will be rejected, and
alas! thousands propound wrong Ends to themselves, in this as in other
excercises of Religion: some keep up Family-duty, because it was the custom of
their Ancestors, and it would be a kind of disparagement to degenerate: Some
to gratify a Religious Wise, or Pious Servant; some to make a show and
ostentation of their gifts: others to stop the mouth of a clamorous Conscience:
Some for a Worldly gain: Mal. 6. Mal. 23.14.
others as the Pharisees to be seen of Men; nay it is well if some Pray not for
a Cloak of their Villainy, that devour Widows Houses, and for a pretense make
long Prayers; long Prayers are not simply condemned in themselves, for it is a
sign of rare Piety, [Nam quo quisque Sanctior est, precandi studio magis est
deditus] the more Holy men are, the more Prayerful: But, Oh! damnable
Hypocrisy, to make so Holy an Ordinance truckle to so vile a lust: it is well if
that wickedness be dead and buried with the Pharisees: of whom Calvin says,
Quia illis precanda assiduitas turpis lucri fit ancupium, neq exim aliter
preces vendebant, quam Mercenarii diurnas operas locant: Calv. in loc -- quod
res per s^ laudabilis in pravum finem conversa est, nam ubi ex conductitiis
precibus, captatur quaestus, quo magis crescit fervida (ut loquuntur)
devotionis species, to magi^ profanatur Dei nomen. Id. ibid.
their assiduous Praying was a kind of stalking-horse, or occasion to their
filthy lucre, neither did they sell their Prayers otherwise than Mercenary men
order their day-labours.

For (says that Prince of Interpreters,) Where gain is gotten by such
designing Prayers, the more fervent that kind of Devotion increases, the more
is the name of God Profaned: thus he I beseech you therefore tremble to think
of prostituting so Glorious a work to so Ignominious an End: for the End makes
or mar^s an Action.

4. As some Families are without Priest-Altar, Sacrifice of the right kind, so
there are some that have something of all these, yet have another Altar and
Sacrifice inconsistent with these, that Swear by the Lord and that Swear by
Malcham: Zeph. 1.5.
that set up the Devils Altar by the Lords; as the Samaritans of old, it is said
in one verse they feared the Lord, in the next verse they feared not the Lord,
why so? the answer is put betwixt them, they feared the Lord, and served their
own Gods, 2 Kings 17.32, 33, 34. i. e. They did materially do the same things
in Worship that Israel did, for fear of being hurt by the Lions, ver. 25, but
they had Gods of their own, ver. 29. and God could not endure this
Mongrel-Religion, and interprets it to be no true Fear, or due Worship of God:
for God will not be partner with Idols, he only must be served or not at all:
Ezekiel. 43.8.
Our Lord takes it ill when men set their thresholds by his thresholds, there
post by his Posts, -- thus they defile his Holy Name by their abominations:
these are a grievous nauseance to the Holy and jealous God: Psalm. 94.20.
shall the Throne of Iniquity have fellowship with thee? can men serve God and
Mammon? must Bacchus, Venus, Vulcan, be set up cheek by joul with the Living
and True God? wickedness practiced in the Governors, tolerated in Inferiors:
Swearing, Cursing, Lying, Cheating, Drunkeness, Uncleaness, mocking at
Strictness of Religion? observe it, there is no true Worship where there is not
strict Discipline: how sad is it to see some men devout in Worship profligate in
Practice? one thing on their knees, another on their feet: Pray like Angels,
practice like Devils? confess Sin one hour, commit it the next: plead for
Pardon, to obtain a Dispensation; Alas! that any now a days should resemble
Israel of old, that would Steal, Murder, commit adultery, steal falsely? and
come and stand before god in his house, Jer. 79.10.11.
or worship and say, we are delivered to do all these abominations: or like the
impudent whore, pro. 7.14 I have Peace Offerings with me, this day have I paid
my vows* so some men think they may do as they list, and cast the reins in the
Neck to run to all licentiousness, why so? have they no Religion? yes they have
said their Prayers, and are in good Reputation for Religion, and since they
have been so Serious, now they hope God will not take notice of their
infirmities, but overlook them, as the man Mr Shepherd tells of, that
frequented Taverns, Ale houses, and Whore-houses all day, yet would not go out
without Prayer in the Morning, Oh horrible Impiety: this is gross Atheism,
for, 1. It is a making God the Patron of their Impiety, as if the Holy God
approved and encouraged these Vices: so they bribe him with a few
Formal-duties; But what says God to such vile Atheists, that hate instruction,
and cast his words behind them -- and then allow themselves in all villainies,
-- these things have thou done, Psalm. 50.17.21.
and I kept silence, thou thoughtest that I was altogether such a one as thy
self, but I will reprove thee, and set them in order before thine Eyes: a time
is coming that God will vindicate his Justice and Omniscience against these
audacious Sinners, that did misconstrue and abuse his long suffering; as if by
his connivance he had justified or allowed their courses.

2. This greatly dishonours God, Dicebantus Christiani ad Contumeliam Christi.
Sal.
and takes his name in Vain: as long as you say one thing and do quite
contrary; you discredit your profession: whilst you will be called Jews, or
Christians, make your boast of God, know his Will -- and practice it; otherwise
through breaking the Law you dishonor God, Romans 2.17.24.
for the name of God is Blasphemed among the Gentiles through You -- You harden
wicked men against God's ways, and make them conclude that either God is as bad
as you, or approves of you, or is Ignorant of your doings, else he would be
avenged on you: Exodus 20.
he will not hold you guiltless that take his name in vain.

Psalm. 66.18.
3. How can you expect acceptance that thus regard Iniquity in your hearts? You
bring your Sacrifice with a wicked heart, therefore it is abomination to the
Lord: Pro. 21.87.
when you spread your hands, See Isai. 1.11, 19.
says God. Yea when you make many Prayers, I will not hear, Your hands are
full of Blood, -- God will disown your Persons and performances, Mal. 2.3.
and even spread the dung of your Solemn Feasts upon your Faces: methinks when
you read that astonishing Text, in Psalm. 50.16. your Consciences should fly in
your faces, as it did in Origen's, But unto the wicked God says, what have
thou to do to declare my Statutes, or that thou should take my Covenant in
thy Mouth? O tremble at such a sharp rebuke.

4. You tempt your Children and Servants to be Atheists, while you act so
contrary to your Prayers, Professions: just as scandalous Ministers that speak
Well and live Ill; people are ready to say if this man believed himself* what
he imposes on us, he would act at another rate will he direct us this way to
Heaven, and go clean contrary? surely he thinks it is but a fancy, else he would
embrace it himself Oh! what have both to answer for? you lead them to Hell by
your Example, offend them, hinder them in Heavens way; Mat. 23.15.
and make them many fold more the Children of Wrath than they were. And by this
means you gratify Satan, he will give you leave to say well and Pray well, so
that you be still in his Fetters by Wicked works: this mightily strengthens his
interest: yea by this means you fortify your selves against Convictions and go
Hoodwinked to Hell, for you will not believe but that your state is safe as
long you can Pray so well, and are so Religious in your Families: and alas!
though you bolster up your selves with an imagination of your interest in
Christ, yet abundance of Scriptures tell you, you have nothing to do with him,
without holiness in heart and life, Tit. 2.14.
for he gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all Iniquity, and
Purify to himself a peculiar People Zealous of good Works: And be it known to
you that it is not saying a few Prayers, according to which you must be Judged
another day, 2 Cor. 5.10.
but according to what you have done whether it be good or bad; Nay these very
Family Prayers, without a principle of Grace, and Holy Life, will aggravate
your Sin and Condemnation: your Hypocrisy will sink you deeper in Hell, and
your long Prayers will make you receive greater damnation: for the Furnace of
Hypocrites is seven times hotter than others, Mat. 23.14. Mat. 24.51.
and Conscience will torment you the more: nor is it a sprinkling a little
Holy Water in your houses that will remove the Curse of God, that lies on your
Families, contracted by your wickedness, Covetousness and unjust gain: for
brevity I referr you to Hab. 2.9.10, 11, Zech. 5.3. Pro. 15.25, 27.

I say not all this to discourage any from Family Prayer, but to deter from
Sin, and regulate Prayer, and that such specious Hypocrites and formalists may
be alarmed to Repentance reformation.

A word more to such inferiors as live in praying Families: young persons,
look to your state, it is not living amongst godly persons, that will make you
godly, nor yet complying with Praying gestures that will denomintae you Saints
or Gospel-Worshipers: you may do as your Governors would have you for Carnal
ends: 2 Chro. 24.2.
as young Joash did right in the sight of the lord all the days of Jehojadah:
but his heart was not right, he proved naught; so may You; if you be
unprincipled, you will either gaze about you, or think of other things or fall
asleep which is the common practice of Young Persons, when their Parents or
Masters are at Prayer: I shall but relate a passage of that Pregnant Young man
Mr Janeway, Mr. Clerks last vol. of lives, fol. 66.
to his Brother sleeping at Family Prayer, Oh, says he, what an high contempt
is this of the great God! how little sense of your own danger, what dreadful
Hypocrisy! what a miracle of Patience you were not wakned in Hell-flames! This
reproof softened his Brothers heart, and wrought savingly on him as was hoped*
the Child being about 11 years of Age: Oh! that it might have this effect on
guilty Souls.

Al^^! Sirs, are not you concerned in the Prayers of the Family? while you
sleep, Satan watches, and rocks the Cradle? and be it known to you, your
judgment sleeps not, 2 Pet. 2.3.
your damnation slumbereth not: for ought you know you may wake in Hell; what
meanest thou O Sleeper? arise, call upon thy God; Jonah 1.6.
if so be that God will think upon thee that thou Perish not?

But besides, there are graceless Souls in Praying Families: alas! how many
walk unsuitably, will Swear, Lie, be Wanton, Unclean, tippling Drunken persons,
that commit lewdness when they are out of their Fathers or Masters sight, and
think, if they can but hide their pranks from the Eye of their Superiors,
all is right Ah poor Atheist, does not God see thee, Psalm. 94.89. 10, 11.
Understand you brutish among the People, ye Fools, when will ye be Wise? he
that planted the Ear shall he not hear? he that formed the Eye, shall he not
See? Be sure your sin will find you out: And do not others see you? will not
they cry shame on you? and reflect upon the Families where you were bred, or
have lived? Oh what a reproach and disparagement do you cast on the Instruments
of your Education? what grief are you to the Godly, that shake the head, and
cover their faces to behold you? where is your imitation of Godly patterns? is
this the fruit of their pains, the answer of their Prayers? were you thus
taught? Woe be to you that must be snatched out of Godly-Families, and cast
among Devils, you had better never have been born, or born among Turks or
Pagans, your condemnation will be aggravated; your own Consciences will fly in
your faces: Oh how many good instructions have I slighted! how many convictions
have I striffled, What great Motionss have I resisted, good examples
contradicted! Prove. 5.11, 12, 13, 14.
I have not Obeyed the voice of my Teachers, nor inclined mine Ears to them
that instructed me! and now I must mourn without hope, and dye without
instruction, or any to pray for me.

Chap. VI. Motives to persuade Governors of Families to set up Altars to God,
for his Solemn Worship.
AND now Friends, what remains but a due Compliance to this call? Oh that
Sacred Altars we^e set up for Gods Solemn Worship, in all the Families through
the Kingdom! were God duly Worshipped in all Houses, how happy a Nation should
we be! we might hope that God would tarry with us, and Bless us: if men would
Pray as Christians, and live as Christians, things would be better with us than
they are: let none mistake us, together with the Worship of God we must
discover the necessity of a saving Principle in the heart, and suitable
practice in the life; men must first be good, then they will do good: and they
must be first united to Christ, or neither will follow: for he says, Joh. 15.5.
without me [(...)] being divided from me] you can do nothing: you can do
nothing Spiritually, nothing acceptably; Oh Sirs do not think to put off God
with a few Dutys, or formal performances without Sense and Savor: God says,
See this fully explained by Mr. Buroughs on Hos. 6.6. page 600.618.
I desired Mercy and not Sacrifice, (i. e. not only Sacrifice,) and the
Knowledge of God more than Burnt-Offerings: the word Mercy is a Synechdoche
comprehending all the dutys of the second Table under one: by Sacrifice is
meant Synechdochically all instituted Ordinances and Worship, all the
affirmative precepts of the second and fourth Commandments; but yet Prayer to
God is of such absolute necessity, and founded in Nature (if it be granted that
there is a God,) that the Heathen could prefer it to Sacrifices saying [(...)]
offer Prayers to the Gods not Oxen: but though Prayer it self be a natural
duty, yet the Circumstances of time and place may be various as occasion is
offered; hence Divines say, Negative Precepts bind [semper et ad semper] always
and to all times; affirmative bind indeed [semper] always, but not [ad semper]
to all times; therefore Pray continually, if it be done in season God looks
upon it as always, or continually done, but if another duty of great importance
be to be done at that instant, God dispenses with the former and it cease to
be a duty then, yet the duty continues, and must not be totally superseded:
only God will have Sacrifice, See 10 instance ib. p. 603.
but not without the Spirit; for instituted Worship, without natural Worship,
is not regarded: Joh. 4.24.
he will be Worshipped in Spirit and in truth; nor will God accept these Prayers
and Sacrifices as an Attonment for Sin, or a dispensation to continue in Sin,
if you leave out Christ in the former, and make use of Christ in the latter,
your Prayers are abominable.

Having premised this* I shall subjoyn a few Motives to pesuade You to
Family Prayer; besides the Reasons to prove it a duty, which I desire you to
review, and learn to practice this lesson, as you would obey a Divine Command;
Answer old Testament Types; not act against nature it self; accomplish promises
and Prophecies; imitate Godly Examples; Answer divine Providence; distinguish
yours from Profane Families; approve your selves and Families to be little
Churches; as you will give account of the charge committed to your trust;
obtain a supply of your Family-necessitys; and a blessing upon your selves and
yours; and avoid God's curse and wrath upon your Families; fall close to this
duty; I have answered many objections.

And now I Beseech you in the Bowels of Christ to set up Altars; and offer your
selves and Families wholly and entirely to the Lord, as a whole Burnt-offering
for Gods-sake who made you for himself, daily preserves you, and can
plentifully reward your Obedience, and revenge your Disobedience? 2. I Beseech
you for Christ's sake who laid down his Life for you, Tit. 2.14.
that he might purchase you to himself, a peculiar People zealous of Good
works. 3. For the Holy Ghosts sake, which is moving you to duty, suggesting
good things into your minds, will help your infirmities, Oh do not quench it
grieve it. 4. For the Churches sake, for Zions sake hold not your peace, Isa.
62.1.
but help the traveling Church in her Pangs till she be delivered. 5. For the
Nations sake, that is almost drowned in Atheism and Sensuality, and daily
subject to Gods displeasure and fury. 6. For your poor children and servants
sake, who need your Prayers for their Conversion, Pardon and Reconciliation
with God. 7. For your own Souls sake that are often under guilt, imperfect in
Grace; and have much work and burden upon your hands and a great account to
make? Surely if you have any sense upon your hearts of any of these things, you
will instantly, constantly and affectionatly call upon God in your Families.
Again, let me urge you with the benefits of this work of Family Prayer.

1. This Altar-Devotion will be the best Ornament to your houses; no Pictures,
stately Rooms or household good will be such neat and Splendid furniture as this
Worship of God: the bravest hangings and most Glorious Paintings, are but
Sordid and Nauseous Excrements to this; it is this that renders a beggars
Cottage far more honorable than a Princes Palace without it: Righteousness
exalts a Nation [and family] but Sin is a reproach to any People or Person:
this is far before full bags, Magnificent tables, and entertainment, a large
train of attendants: for God is there, as the poor Hermit-like Philosopher
said, [(...)] here dwell the Gods? Pro. 14.34.
So the high and lofty one dwells -- with the contrite and humble Spirit, Isai.
57.15.
in the most homely habitation. What a comely sight is it to behold all the
members of a family Prostrate on their knees every Morning and Evening! to hear
Melodious Praises to God unanimously Sung! it is an Emblem of Heaven: it is
recorded of the Prince of Anhalts House that it was [Templum, Academia, Curia,]
a Church, an Academy, and Court, where himself was as Priest, Tutour, Judge and
Sovereign Lord: Oh happy such a family! I may say of such a Governor as the
Queen of Sheba of Solomon, happy are thy men, happy are these thy Servants
which stand continually before thee! 1 Kin. 10.8.
This, this only is the Glory of a Family.

2. This is not only the Ornament, but muniment and defense of a Family: Psalm.
91.1.
he that dwells in the secret place of the Most High, shall abide under the
shadow of the Almighty! Communion with God usually is attended with protection
from God; if any be safe it is the Godly that shall be safe? Lot's Family must
be delivered from Sodoms flames: the Lord shall create upon every
dewlling place of Mount-Zion, Isai. 4.5.
as well as upon her Assemblies, a Cloud and Smoke by day (that the Enemy shall
not find them) and the shining of a Flaming Fire by night (that they may see
the their way, Zech. 2.5.
yea it shall be a Wall of Fire round about them) for upon all the Glory shall
be a defense: yea God himself will be the Glory in the midst of them; none know
the advantages of Praying families, but experienced and Observant Christians.

3. This is the way and means to bring Spiritual and Eternal Salvation to your
Houses: surely that was a great word that our Dear Lord spoke to Zacheus, Luke
19, 9
this day is Salvation come to this House? that little man used great care and
made an hard shift to behold Jesus, and meat with a blessed, unexpected guest,
that brought him the greatest Blessing, himself and Salvation with Him? Our
Lord never comes alone, but brings Happiness with him: the conversion of one
man as it was a pledge of his Adoption, so it made even [domum illam salut is
haeredem] the whole Family an heir of Heavenly Glory: Nam quia deus dum patrem
familias adoptat, toti etiam ejus domni se in deum fore promit tit jure salus a
capite extenditur ad totum corpus: Calv. in loc. Act. 10. 2, 11, 14.
for (as Calvin observed) when God adopts the Governor of a Family, he
promises to be a God to the whole house, and by right Salvation is extended
from the head to the whole body: So Lydia was baptized and her household, and
the Jaylour: Act. 16, 15, 33, 34. and oh what joy was produced, when himself
and his house believed! yea Cornelius owning God in Family Worship, brought to
him and his, words, whereby the Master and all his house should be saved* not
of Merit but in a Covenant-way, and in answer of Prayer: Oh Sirs, would you not
have your Children and Servants saved? this is Gods appointed way, to bring it
about; call in Divine aid, and grace to do that for yours, which you cannot.

4. Family Worship will make up a defect in, or want of public Ordinances;
Providence may cast your lot in places where the streams of the Sanctuary run
low, or muddy; in this case house-wells may do you much Service, when public
persecution breaks up Church-assemblys, house-worship will maintain Religion in
the World; and that private Fire will break out into an open Flame; what had
become of Religion had it not lodged in private houses? this has been Gods
usual reserve to maintain the power of Godliness; Church History ^ells us, that
the open profession of the Gospel has run at a low Ebb, and this has helped
it to a Glorious Resurrection: Ministers were Banished, Assemblies scaterred,
Churches demolished, and scarce any appearance of public Meetings; yet then
the fire glowed hot in private hearths, and in God's due time a door was opened
for Solemn Assemblies; how much are we beholding to God for House-Altars! and
such a day may overtake us again. And suppose you have free liberty of Public
and Powerful Ordinances, how can you expect a blessing upon them without
seeking God for it in your Families! What good will Preaching do without your
private instructions, admonitions, councels, prayers? this will inculcate
truths, and may lay a foundation for after-godliness; and as Family Worship is
most indisputable, so least unaproachable by the enemy, because often
indiscerneabl; however you may most warrantably suffer for it, if that be God's
will, as you heard Daniel ventured himself for it to the hungry Lions.

My Beloved Friends what shall I say? what Arguments shall I use to persuade
you to this duty of Family Worship? I doubt your Religion is to seek, if you be
so loath to set up this Family-Altar, which may consecrate all your Civil and
Natural acts and Offices; I will but Pose you with these few Interrogatorys.

1. Suppose a Grave and Pious Minister, or Christian friend lodge with you,
would you not for shame reach him a Bible, and desire him to go to Prayer with
you lest he should suspect you to be Prayerless at other times? and will not
Gods authority and presence have the like influence, and awe upon your Spirits?

2. Suppose your Friends and Relations should quite disown, and disclaim you,
unless you would Pray in your Family, would you not make an hard shift to do
something that way, rather than be accounted unworthy of Humane Society? and
shall that prevail more than God's disclaiming you, or disowning converse with
you?

3. If your Landlord should turn you out of your House, or your Father shoud
Disinherit you if you set not up this Family-altar, could you be content to
suffer both, rather than do it? and shall a threatening of your Father in
Heaven, or Great Landlord, to reject or eject you out of Heaven avail nothing?

4. If a Law were imposed upon you to pay five Shillings a time, that you
neglect Prayer in your Family, would you forfeit that sum [toties quoties] as
often as you go Prayerless to Bed; and would you not fear that would beggar you?
and shall not greater losses and heavier penalties deter you from this Omission?

5. If the King or a Nobleman should promise you five Pound a time, that you
call your Family together, read a Chapter, Sing a Psalm, Kneel down and Pray to
God, would you not strain hard to procure that Money; and will not a greater
profit from the Almighty God prevail with you to perform this exercise to
obtain a reward?

6. Suppose a Brand were set upon your Foreheads like Cains Tan, or a dreadful
Trembling should seize upon your bodies for such a Neglect, or you should pass
under such a Stigmatizing character as that in Deuteronomy. 25.9, 10. The house of him
that has his Shoe loosed: So if this name be given you, this is a Graceless,
Prayerless man; would not this shame you out of this wretched Omission?

7. Suppose the next time you go Prayerless to Bed, your loveliest Child and
Darling should be snatched away by a sudden stroke of Death, as it was in
Egypt, the first born of Pharaoh and others dyed, Exo. 11.56.
and there was a great Cry: would not this move you into better Manners? Oh but
a greater evil befalls you, your own precious Souls are endangered by Neglect.

8. Suppose a Red Cross, with a [Lord have Mercy upon Vs] were set upon your
doors, and the Pestilence were within your house, seizing on you, one after
another, and you had nothing else to do, but to get ready to dye, would you not
spend some time in Prayer for your selves and Families? Behold a worse Plague
is upon you of Sin, and will you not Pray?

9. Suppose, upon every Omission of Family Prayer you should lose a Limb or
member of your Body, first one finger, then a Toe should be cut or torn off,
till all be gone, and you dismembered, would not this force you to this duty?
and yet your Precious Souls are in hazard, which are ten thousand times more
worthy than a Limb, yea than the whole Body by wilful Neglect.

10. Suppose a Gallows were set at your door, and you must be hanged thereupon
the next time you go out of your door, when you have not Prayed in your Family;
would you venture to be hanged rather than omit this duty? do you love your
lives no better? Oh! but Eternal death is far more dreadful, and are Eternal
torments, Rev. 21.8.
that lake that burns with fire and Brimstone nothing to you? is the second
death easy? and shall not Sinners be damned for their Omission of good, as
well as Commission of Evil? Be it known to you, Numb. 32.23.
that if you will not do so ( i. e. as God Commands) Behold ye have sinned
against the Lord, and be sure your sin will find you out; it will hunt you as a
Blood hound, and haunt you as an evil Spirit in conscience here, and in
Torments hereafter: if God said to Cain for a defect in his Sacrifice, Genesis 4.7.
if thou do not well Sin lies at the door, [i. e. guilt shall be charged
upon thee] and you know how it dogged him, though he failed but in the manner of
it, not acting Faith on Christ, for acceptance; Oh what will become of you that
fall short even in the matter also? and do nothing of what God Commands you;
yea you think it is a needless ceremony, and mock them that do carefully,
constantly and conscientiously perform this duty; woe unto you, if you dye in
this Sin you are undone forever.

But one word more, if any offer themselves to be members of particular
Churches, and partake of the Lords Supper, I should judge them not fit to be
Communicants except they Pray in their Families: and if any be admitted and
perform not their duty, I should think them as worthy church censures, as those
that are Idle and omit working in their particular callings, which is enjoined
2 These 3.6, 12, 14. what censure this is, lesser or greater, whether only
withdrawing familiar converse with the offender, or upon obstinacy public
Excommunication, I leave to the judgment of the Learned; But Si quis renuit
libe^os suos alere, reprehendunt eum, pudefaciunt eum, urgent eum! Si adhuc
renuit, public in eum proclamant in Syna goga dicentes (...) crudelis est, non
vult alere liberos ^un^vel ipsis volu^ribus immundis crudelior, nam illae
pullos suos alunt etc Dr. Lightfoot in Evang: Mathaei Borae Hebraicae, cap. 18.
17. p. 215.
Dr. Lightfoot tells us out of the Rabbis, that if any refuse to nourish his
children, they must reprove him, make him ashamed, urge him; if he still
refuses, they must publicly proclaim in the Synagogue, such a one is cruel and
will not nourish his children, he is more Cruel than the unclean Fowls, for
those nourish their Young ones, and may we not say the same of such as neglect
these needful Family-excercises for the Souls of their's?

Chap. VII. Directions how to set up an Altar in Families, and how to manage
Family Worship.
I Have now done with persuasives to this great Exercise of Family Worship;
whether all that I have said will prevail, I know not; but loath I am, all this
should be in vain; it is pity so needful an Exercise should fall to the
ground, and all that I have said should rise up in judgment against you. I
again renew my motion in the name of the Lord Jesus: you that are young set up
your families with God, whatever you have of the World beside to set up with,
this will be your treasure; your Palladium, your defense; you cannot miscarry
if you begin with God; you that are old, and have been housekeepers long, set
up this altar, turn over a new lease, begin a new life, you are not too old to
learn, nor too good to be taught, better thrive late than never, though you
begin at the eleventh hour, you shall not be rejected; Death looks you in the
face, look up to God and be saved; say not, I will go to Hell because I have
been long traveling in that road. Be not ashamed to undo all you have done or
misdone, unravel this confused skein; what stick you at? Is not the Infinite
God worthy of your love? Fear, worship? are not the Souls of your Families
precious; is not heaven worth your seeking, having?

Oh! say you, I would fain set up an Altar in my Family to the Lord; I would
offer him a Sacrifice, and Worship God, but I know not how to set about it, or
manage it to any purpose so as may be acceptable to God, profitable to my
Family, or comfortable to my own Soul, I Pray you give me some directions on
this behalf; I answer that I shall very willingly, but first I do solemnly
require your promise to set about it in the name and strength of Christ, and do
thy best you can to do it right: my Instructions I shall reduce to two heads.

viz.
1. Preparatives to it. 2. Management of it.
For the Preparatives to your setting up this Family Altar, I shall but give
you these four. 1. See your heads and hearts be well stock't; your heads with
sound Knowledge, and your hearts with Saving-Grace: without either of these
you will not be fit for this undertaking; without the former you will have no
skill, without the latter, you will have no Will to the Work, but go to it as a
Bear to the stake. 1. Be sure you get Scripture knowledge, a knowledge of God,
the object of worship, of the Mediator by whom only you must have access to the
Father, a knowledge of the Holy Ghost that must help your infirmities, a
knowledge of your selves, of Divine Truths, Precepts, Prove. 19.2.
Promises; that the Soul be without knowledge it is not good, otherwise you will
Worship you know not what, or you care not how, or regard not why; you will
degenerate into Formality and Superstition; it is worth nothing, what you find
in Isa. 19. having told us of an Altar in ver. 19. he tells us of a Sacrifice
ver. 22, but betwixt those he says, that the Lord shall be known to Egypt, yea
and the Egyptians shall know the Lord in that day, and shall do Sacrifice and
Oblation, by Altar is meant Gospel Worship, by a Pillar at the Border of it, is
meant, a Monument of the True Religion, betokening Evidences of their Piety in
all places, but without the true knowledge of God in Christ, they will set up
the Athenian Altar, Act. 17.23.
To the Unknown God? and therefore it is said, that the Lord shall be known to
Egypt, in the Gospel-Publication, and not only so, but the Egyptians shall know
the Lord; Savingly, Sincerely, Sensibly, Experimentally (for words of sense
denote affection and practice) then and never till then will they be fit to
offer an Oblation; for if men offer the blind for Sacrifice is it not Evil?
Mal. 1.8.
and if the offerer be blind and Ignorant, is not he Evil? will God accept such
a person? what cares God for men's Ignorant Devotions? Hos. 4.1.
if there be no knowledge of God in the Land, there is no Mercy nor Truth: for
saving knowledge is the door and window to let in Saving Grace. 2. You must allo
have a saving Principle of Grace in your hearts, a bowed Will, a renewed
Conscience, Sanctified affections, a Soul set with a by as Heaven-wards, that
you may delight in the Law of God, Romans 7.22. Joh. 4.24.
after the inward man and may Worship God in Spirit and in Truth, else your
Praying will be but canting, your labor will be but lip labor, and so lost
labor, all your Piety will be but Hypocrisy, and your hearts will not be
engaged in it, then you will be heartless in setting about it, and soon weary
of it, without union to Christ; you can do nothing, see then that Christ dwell
in your hearts by Faith; Ephesians. 3.17. 1 John 4.16.
that is the Mistical Bond that you be united to him by love, that is the Moral
Bond and Ligament, from that Spring flow Holy desires, delight in God; fear of
God; repentance, Humility, Self-denial, Zeal, and all other Graces, without
which you will be but cold Worshipers of God; Set up with something within, or
you are Formalists at best. But you will say, how shall we get this principle of
Grace? I answer, you must be convinced, that you have it not by Nature, that
you cannot work it in your own hearts, Ephesians. 2.8.
for Faith is the gift of God, 2 Cor. 13.5.
you must examine your selves whether Faith be in you, you must study and plead
the Covenant of Grace, Jer. 31.33, 34. Deuteronomy. 30.6.
wherein God promises to put his Law in your inward parts, to teach you to
know him, to circumcise your hearts to love him, to put his fear in your
hearts; Jer. 32.40. Ezekiel. 36.26, 27.
to put his Spirit into you, and a new Spirit within you; and by studying and
pleading these precious Promises you may be partakers of the Divine nature, 2
Pet. 1.4.
that you may serve the Lord in a new and due manner.

2. Another Preparative to this Family-Altar, is the due and regular
constitution of Families: which consists in a Solemn choice of Family
Relations, Governors of Families must be very cautious herein that are a going
to set up Families; it is true, Children are necessary parts thereof and persons
must take these as God sends them, they are not Elective, or of our choice, but
there are ways appointed by God to make them good, but that I meddle not with
at present; it is such as are arbitrary or within our power to make choice of;
as Wives and Servants, the first inferiors or assistants in Families, these
may be a great furtherance or hinderance to an House-holder in the Exercise of
Religion.

1. When you are to choose a Wife, be very shy and careful, 2 Cor. 6.14.
Be not unequally Yoked together with Unbelievers, lest it come to pass, that
when you draw one way, she draws another: when you would Pray in your Family,
she be busy about the World, and will not join with you, but act the part of
Scoffing Michal, 2 Samuel 6.20.
who jeered her holy Husband David for his servent Zeal to Gods Worship in
Dancing before the Ark; Oh what grief of heart will this be to you that must be
forced to turn your sweet communion with, into a severe admonition of your own
Wife! and the nearer the Relation the heavier the affliction; when your Wife
proves a tempting Eve, or as Solomon's Wives who turned away his heart from God;
Oh! 1 Kin. 11.2, 3, 4.
the danger of Seduction, but if not so, yet a bad wife will be a continual
vexation, like a constant dropping in a very rainy day; you little know the
inconveniences attending such a Relation; you will say, how can we help it? I
answer, Prudence, Prayer, and due consideration beforehand may ordinarily
Prevent such a bad choice; if you make it your business to Marry in the Lord, 1
Cor. 7.39.
and Yoke only with such an one as bears Christ's Yoke, consulting Christian
Friends, renouncing Carnal Ends in your Choice, as Beauty, Portion, Parentage,
but be sure of grounded hopes of Saving Grace in the first place; let Religion
and Reason, not Lust or Fancy make your choice, lest you smart for your Folly;
Oh what an help may a Prudent Gracious Wife be in assisting you in setting up
this Family-Altar; a Wise Woman builds her House, Pro 14.1. Judge. 13.23.
Ruth. 4.11. 1 Samuel 1.^, 10,13.
Manoahs Wife encouraged her Husband, and Rachel and Leah builded the house of
Jacob or Israel: Hanna Prayed while her Husband Elkanah Sacrificed, and no
doubt joined with him devoutly at home; Oh what a blessed harmony to see
Husband and Wife heirs together of the Grace of Life, 1 Pet. 3.7.
that their Prayers may not be hindered, but mutually furthered! this plainly
intimates that unsuitableness of Spirit, or untowardness in either hinders
Prayers, i. e. either diverts them from Praying, or spoils the efficacy of
Prayer; therefore let Young men be Wise in this main concern of choosing a
Wife, for who would fetch Water to kindle Fire, as one says, or a Bed of Snow
to keep one Warm? you have quench-coals enough now within, espouse not more,
rather get Bellows to kindle your Spark. 2. As for Servants, be Serious and
cautious in choosing godly ones; if it be possible choose godly Servants: trust
not to your care and pains to make them so; if Onesimus be begot in Bonds, he
will be profitable to his Godly Master Philemon; there is no trusting Carnal
Servants, Philem. 10.11.
they will but comply out of awe, and may degenerate into Atheism; If thy
Servant be upright, he will not only Pray when thou prayest, which will make a
blessed harmony, Genesis 24.12.
but will Pray alone for thee and as Godly Eliezer did in his Masters business,
and then things will succeed well; for (as one says) a Praying Servant, will
not only work, but set God a work: Oh happy Family where Servants Echo to
their Masters Sighs! these will unanimously besiege Heaven with importunate
groans: yea let carnal Laban and Potiphar speak as they find, Genesis 30.27 c.
39.5.
and they will affirm that God has blessed them for Jacob and Joseph's sakes.
But you little know the hurt you may have, and Children also by graceless
Servants. This was David's purpose and endeavor to have men faithful to God,
to be house-fellows with him, and to banish from him froward Persons, Proud,
Psa. 101.38.
Slanderers, Apostates, Deceitful Liars, and wicked doers; and if you will serve
God comfortably in your Families, you must imitate Pious Example.

3. Dedicate your houses to the Lord; so did Gods servants of old, when they
had built a new house they dedicated it, Deuteronomy. 20.5. when they had been
banished from it, and were restored, they again dedicated it as David did, when
Absalom had polluted it: Psalm. 30.
we read also of a man sanctifying his house to be Holy unto the Lord Lev. 1
Cor. 4.11.
27.14. this must be done, by Praising God for houses to dwell in, all have not
this Mercy, some choice Saints have had no certain dwelling place: others have
wandered in Deserts, Mountains, Dens and caves, Heb. 11.28. Mat. 8.20.
of whom the world was not worthy: yea our dear Lord himself had not not where
to lay his head? and who are we that God should honor us with convenient
habitations? It becomes us to own him as our chief Landlord, and resolve by
God's assistance to pay our chief rent to him, and Honor the Lord with our
substance and all that we have: Prove, 3.9.
we must thank God that we have any thing to give back again to him; 1 Cron.
29.10,-14. Psalm. 119.38, 94, 106.
for all things come of him, and of his own we give him; we must first give our
selves to the Lord, as devoted to his Fear, Service, Worship: as we must not be
content with what God gives us, except he give us himself, no more will God be
content with what we give him, without giving our selves to him: then let us
give him our Children, Servants, so far as we are able: Be earnest with him in
Prayer for a Blessing on all we are or have; let us plead the Covenant and
promises for our Selves and ours, Genesis 32.9, 10.
as Holy Jacob did; observe the word of precept for our Warrant to dwell in our
houses, promises for our encouragement, and act according to rule, and the best
patterns, that we will walk within our house with a Perfect heart, Psalm. 101.2.
that we will use all we have to Gods Glory and the good of his Church; Act.
16.15.
that we will entertain Christ's Ambassadors in our houses, as Lydia and the
Jailer did: that we will read Scriptures, instruct our Families, Sing Psalms,
continue instant in Family and Closet-Prayer, that all the rooms of our house
may be seasoned; if you thus begin with good, you lay a good foundation, and
may groundedly hope the presence of God will be with you, and with your
Families.

4. Order your Families aright, as there must be discipline in the Church which
is a fence to Doctrine and Worship, beholding, Col. 2.5.
says the Apostle, your order and the stedfastness of your Faith, so it is in
Families, if the Master have by gross Sin, Passion, Pride, too much Lenity, or
Imprudent Behavior forfeited his Authority, or by Tyranny have abused it, that
he become Contemptible, he shall hardly keep up Family Worship, Children or
Servants will be ready to laugh him to scorn, as not able to rule himself,
therefore little fit to rule others, and think they have good reason to ramble
abroad, and will be under no government; and will come none to Prayers; this is
their Sin, but there has been too much occasion given by their Weak or Wilful
Governors; therefore I advise that you maintain your Authority, and use it for
God. Loose not the reins of Government, yet sweeten it with Love: when Love
Oils the Wheels, and lines the Yoke, Government becomes amiable and attractive
to Duty; when David said, hear my Brethren, it chained his Subjects to him, but
when Rehoboam answered roughly, it deterred them from him: Rule in love and
they will obey in love: if you show good will to their Souls, Ephesians. 5.7, 9.
with good will they will do you Service, as to the Lord Holiness begets
awfulness; tenderness produces Ingenuous Subjection; Humility maintains
authority more than domineering rigor; let it appear you rule your Familes
under God, and for God: I confess this Theme is more proper to the next subject
of the Regal or Magistratical power of House-holders, whither I remit it; yet a
word or two, as due order and government does promote Gods Worship; Be sure
that every member in your Family know and keep in their posts and places, that
there be no interfeiring or Envy: and see that every one order their business
both within doors and without, that they attend Family Prayer; and see you do
not overcharge them with so much business as to render them incapable, either
by unseasonable attendance on their Secular concern, forcing them to be absent,
or by over-tiring them, that they are fitter to lie down in their Beds, than to
fall down on their Knees and lift up their Hearts to God in Prayer; learn to
order your affairs with Discretion: Psalm. 112.5.
Let every Work know it is time, and every one know his work; that confusion may
not shut out Religion; Order Facilitates any business: prevents impediments,
produces good Success; I know some Families cannot ordinarily be reduced to
such a good order as some others; but if Governors were prudent to contract
their Worldly business into a less compass, or wisely forecast for it, though
their Families be numerous, and business urgent, they might do much this way:
Oh be not greedy of gain to trouble your own house: cumber not your selves or
yours with many things, but mind the one thing needful. Psalm. 10.4^.
Be sure you maintain Religion whatever you do; give unto God the things that
are Gods: learn to divide the hoof aright, that the World incroach not upon
Gods due, or rob him of his right: if you part Religion from your calling, it is
mere Heathenism; if you part your particular callings from Religion, it becomes
Enthusiasm? join them together, and they will be mutually helpful to each
other, and to you in a due pursuit of both: change of employments will make
both a diversion, a Pleasing Recration; observe the Apostles rule: Brethren let
every man wherein he is called therein abide with God; 1 Cor. 7.24. Let your
Condition, Station, Relation be what it will, engage God to be with you,
bespeak his presence by Prayer, and besprinkle all your Civil Actions with
Religious Excercises.

Chap. VIII. Directions how to manage the worship of God in Families, as to the
matter of Prayer.
I Have briefly dispatched the preparatives for Erecting and managing Family
Worship, in a due order; I now proceed more closely to the carrying on of this
work ^^^ly, that you may please, Glorify and inj^od, profit and edify your
selves and others in this undertaking; in which I propose two sorts of
instructions; Which do Concern 1. Matter. of managing Family Worship. Concern
2. Manner. of managing Family Worship.


1. For matter, or words in Family Prayer, the Holy Ghost says, take with you
words, and turn to the Lord; Hos. 14.2.
say unto him, take away all Iniquity, and receive us Graciously -- by words,
he means not only Phrases, or literal expressions for therein Hypocrites may
abound, but, 1. The subject Matter to be treated upon, as Joab put words into
the Woman's Mouth; 2 Samuel 14 3.
i. e. the main purport, design, or manner of her Similitude, not every
Syllable she spoke: 2. Practice accordingly, keep the law; Ebraei eadem voce
expri^unt verba et (...) verba debent esse realia, et homine digna praesertim
apud Deum. vid. Pol. crit in loc.
act as real Saints, for the ten Commandments are called [(...)] words, and our
compliance therewith must answer our professions, and prayers; Else we do
nothing; we must live up to our prayers; the word also signifies an ordering,
regulating and Marshalling a thing, and indeed we cannot order our Words before
him, by reason of darkness, therefore must we be very Cautious and exact, as
the wise man admonishes, Eccl. 5.2. Be not rash with thy Mouth, and let not
thy heart be hasty to utter any thing before God, for God is in Heaven, and
thou upon Earth, therefore let thy words be few, i. e. Well weighed in Prayer
or vows, God is of Infinite Majesty not to be despised, of Transcendent
Holiness not to be offended, and of unsearhable Knowledge not to be deceived;
nor to be flattered with vain Repetitions; study not to speak fine but fit
words, not many but weighty, proceeding from thy heart, directed unto God and
pertinent to the matter in hand. 4. Words may signify Arguments in Prayer, So
Job 6.25. how forcible are right words (i. e. Proper Arguments, as appears from
the later clause) but what does your arguing reprove? accordingly holy Job
wishes, Oh that I knew where I might find him! that I might come near to his
Seat! Job. 23.34.
I would order my Cause before him, and fill my Mouth with Arguments; not to
out-argue God, or to prove him unjust, no nor to move God to that which he is
unwilling to, for he is in one mind, and who can turn him? No, ver. 13.
he is Righteous and Unchangable, I dare not deal with God, or challenge him to
deal with me upon terms of strict justice, but upon terms of new
Covenant-Grace, pleading his promise made to Sinners in Christ, and soliciting
for performance of them.

And now I proceed to help House-holders in the matter of their Family Worship,
particularly in Prayer, I shall produce some Stones out of the Word of God for
rearing this Family-Altar, and the rather because this is a general complaint,
and was a principal objection, that they knew not what to say if they should
kneel down in their houses with their Families: but to such as are willing but
weak in their addresses to the throne of Grace, I shall subjoyn these two
instructions for their help.

1. Attend upon a powerful Ministry: there you will hear Directions, Motives,
Precepts, Promises, Scripture-Arguments to quicken and direct you in this work:
there you may gain knowledge of God the object of Worship, Christ the Mediator
and Advocate, of the Holy Ghost that must assist you: there you will get a good
understanding in Gods mind and will, which will furnish you with abilities, and
further your acquaintance with God; Prove. 3.13.
Happy is the man that finds Wisdom, and the man that gets understanding:
that man is prepared to every good work: But how shall a Soul obtain this
sacred understanding? I answer, one way is by the ear; as he lost true wisdom
by abusing that sense, and hearkening to the Siren Songs of the subtle
Serpent: so the Scriptures frequently calls you to hearken to the voice of God
in the Ministry of the Word: Light and Life, and Love may come in at that door;
Isa. 55.3. Romans 10.1^. Gal. 3.2.
Hear and your Souls shall live; Faith comes by hearing, yea men may receive
the Spirit by the hearing of Faith. But how shall men breath without Spiritual
Life? and how can men Pray without the assistance of the Spirit? Romans 10.14
how shall they call on him in whom they have not believed, and how shall they
believe in him, of whom they have not heard, and how shall they hear without a
Preacher? nor is it any kind of preacher that you must hear, but you must take
heed whom you hear, that they be sent, i. e. duly qualified and regularly
Commissionated: you must take heed what you hear, that it be not men's fancys,
but the approved word of the Living God; you must also take heed how you hear:
alas! any kind of hearing will not serve turn: you must Pray and prepare before
you hear it; set your selves in Gods presence, cast out all Sin, apply it to
your selves, mix it with Love, own Gods Authority in it; hide it in your
hearts, meditate on it, resolve upon the practice of it: and who can tell what
blesssed fruits it may produce in your hearts and lives? 2 These. 3.1.
Pray you that the word may have free course, and be Glorified; and if it be so
in you, the fruit of Preaching will appear in your Prayers as well as
Practices: Psalm. 81.10, 11.
an heart opened to the Word, will open the Mouth wide in Prayer: But if you
will not hearken to Gods voice you will have no voice to God, nor will God
regard what you say; Prove. 28.9.
for He that turns away his Ear from hearing the law, even his Prayer shall
be abomination.

2. Search the Scriptures: Joh. 5.39.
this is both the Rule and Matter of Prayer: if you be mighty in the
Scriptures, you will be mighty and pithy in Prayer! God loves to be spoken to
in his own language: study Scripture-Precepts, and turn them into Prayers,
study Scripture-Promises, and turn them into Pleas, study Scripture-Threatnings
and turn them into deprecations, and study Scripture-Patterns for imitation:
you may find several excellent Prayers in the Bible, as of Abraham Genesis 18.23,
32. So Jacob, Genesis 32.9, 12. Moses, Exodus 32.11-13. So Joshua, 7.6* 9 Hanna, 1 Samuel 1.11. Solomon, 1 Kings, 3 6, 9.8.22-53. David, 1 Chronicles. 17.16, 27. Neh.
1.4, 11. Ezra, 9. Dan. 9. And many sweet Prayers put up and recorded by the
blessed Apostle Paul, and others, too many to be mentioned, which in reading
the Holy Scriptures you may meet with; Say not then, you have nothing to say
before the Lord; it is your Ignorance or Negligence, if you be barren in your
addresses to the throne of Grace: some good Devines have proposed a method and
words in Scripture Phrase, which I will not now trouble you with; but if you
daily use to read the Bible, you will find patt expressions flowing into your
mind in Prayer, which will prove pertinent matter upon all occasions; when you
read Scripture, think now God is speaking to me, and thereby furnishing me with
matter to speak to him in Prayer; this passage suits my case, I will improve it
in Confession, Petition, Deprecation or Thanksgiving in my addresses to God,
and thus you will arrive to an habit of free-conversing with God; and it
becomes Governors of families to be more employed in reading Scriptures than
others, Deu. 17.19. Josh. 1 8. 1 Timothy 4.14.
so God appoints Kings, Captains, Ministers, to be daily exercised in this
duty: because they were to be helpful to others; so must you; if you consult
with Gods word, you go in unto God, so some observe by comparing, Psalm. 73.17.
of going into the Sanctuary of God, with 2 Samuel 7.18, then went King David in,
and sat before the Lord. i. e. he went in to God: to intimate that Reading and
Praying are near a kin^: the one is an help to the other: if you read much, it
will help you to Pray much, it will help you to read and understand. Be much
employed in both.

3. Learn to understand and improve the Lords Prayer, Mat. 6.9, 12. Consider
the Prologue, Parts, and Conclusion of it: get some Succinct and plain
Exposition of it, do not Cantingly, Formally, and Superstitiously blubber it
over, as a Charm, but use it as a Comprehensive Platform of Praying: I am not
altogether against the use of the words in the Lords Prayer: Nay I would rather
you kneel down with your Family, and said nothing but the Lords Prayer, than
that you should use no Prayer at all: only see you understand the meaning of
it? and do not rabble it over as a Parrot, but do it seriously; and take heed
of Mocking God: Hypocrisy is a sin as well as Atheism: to pray otherwise than
Christ has taught, is not only Ignorance, but a gievous sin, says an Ancient;
Aliter orar(...) quam do^uit non ignorant^a Selaest, sed et Culpa, Cyprian
Sermon. 6. a orat Domini et cum ipsu(...) hab^amus apud ^atre(...) Advocatum ^o
peccatis nostri^, Advocat^ nost(...) verba prommus, id. ib.
this referrs both to the matter and manner of praying, for, says he. the
Father will acknowledge the words of his Son, when we Pray to him, in his name:
[qui habitat intus in pectore, ipse sit et in voce] let him be in our voice
that dwells in our hearts: [quia Deus non vocis, sed cordis auditor est] God is
not the hearer of the voice but of the heart. But we are now speaking of
Family Prayer, wherein God requires both voice and heart; and I am giving helps
for the matter of Prayer, and this is a certain truth, that all and only the
things that are to be asked of God are comprehended in the Lords Prayer; that is
the sum and substance of the [petenda] things to be asked: if you do not
always utter the words, you must express the Sense; therefore it is fit you
should understand them; for every word has it is weight; [Our Father which art
in Heaven] thou art the common Father of all Mankind, our Father in Christ, we
humbly and reverently prostrate our Selves at thy Footstool in confidence of
entertainment, through thy well-beloved Son and our Advocate: give us
child-like affections to thee, and endeared love to all thine, and tender
Compassion to all others! [Hallowed be thy name,] let thy Glorious Titles,
Attributes, Word and Ordinances be manifested through the World, dispose all
things to the Glory of thy name, assist us in our confessing and forsaking our
Sins, adoring thine infinite perfections, believing in thee, subjecting our
selves to thee, attending on thee, and aiming at thy Glory in all we are, or
do, or suffer. [Thy Kingdom come] destroy O Lord, the Devils kingdom, of
Ignorance, Wickedness, advance thy Kingdom in Converting Sinners, building thy
Church, maintaining the power of Godliness, and hastening the Kingdom of Glory,
confirming and preparing our own Souls for our Lords second coming; [Thy will
be done in Earth as it is in Heaven,] let thy preceptive Will be our rule,
enable us to comply with it, give us knowledge of it, conquer the enmity of our
stubborn wills, enable us to do it singly, Sincerely, Universally and
constantly, as Angels and Saints Glorified; help us quietly to acquiesce in thy
Providential will, be it for us or against us; [Give us this day our daily
bread] vouchafe to us a competent portion of outward Comforts, for our daily
supply, thy blessing therewith, which is the staff of our bread, for we depend
on thee for all: [Forgive us our debts as we forgive our debtors] for Christ's
sake and satisfaction Pardon all our Sins; whereby we are endebted to divine
Justice, and can never satisfy, but lay hold by Faith on the Lord our
Righteousness, and freely forgive all men their offenses against us, and Pray
God to forgive them: [And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from
Evil] Lord we have bad Herds, prevent occasions of Sin, restrain the tempter,
keep us out of harms way, or make us conqerours of World, Flesh, and Devil; let
not Sin have Dominion over us! [ For thine is the Kingdom, the Power and the
Glory, for Ever, Amen.] We take not our encouragement in our Prayers from any
thing in our Selves, but from Thee who art the only Sovereign All sufficient
God, able and willing to help poor Creatures; to thee only be ascribed all
Dominion, Blessing, Honor, Glory and Power, for evermore, Amen, So be it.

Thus I have given you a short hint of the meaning of this Excellent Prayer,
that you may be left without excuse for your willful Neglect.

4. Frequent Christian Society; converse with Godly Praying persons, this will
help you in Family Work and Worship, not only as it is a good Example, but as
it assimilates you to them, and also as it provokes to an holy Emulation, it
will make you shame with your selves, that such as had no better breeding or
higher Education than you, have yet attained to such Knowledge, Gifts and
Elocution; this will make you admire the Grace of God in them, and think it not
impossible, but that the same Grace may do as much in you. Romans 11.12. 2 Cor.
9.2.
Paul sought by the Gentiles Piety to provoke the Jews to Emulation, and tells
us the Corinthians zeal (in Charitable contribution) had provoked very many:
it is not to tell what Light and Life, Eccl. 49.12.
and Love may be conveyed from one Christian to another: If two lie together
they have heat; Pro. 27.17
Iron sharpens Iron, A ^ow majori discit all ^ll.
so a man sharpeneth the countenance of his Friend: they say Bores whett their
Tusks one against another; and the younger Ox learns to Plow of the elder:
wicked men do exasperate one another: So must, Heb. 10.24.
so will God's Children consider one another, to provoke unto Love and to good
works: [(...)] it is a word borrowed from Physicians, who describe a violent
Fever by this word, which imports that at some times the Fit is so strong, as
to make the Body to tremble, the Bed to shake under the Patient: The same word
used of the Contention or Paroxism betwixt Paul and Barnabas: Only this is of
Love, Acts. 15.39.
that was of Anger; striving which should exceed in Zeal for God, from the
sense of Christ's Love to them; outstripping one another in heavenly motions:
However, if you frequently converse in the Societies of praying Christians, you
will be acquainted with their expressions, which you may make use of, so you
have experience thereof, and your hearts be joined therewith, and suited
thereto; and their phrases becoming yours, you will be more fit for Family duty.

5. Converse with God alone: first Pray in your Closets, and then you will be
more enabled to Pray in your Families, both as to Matter and Manner: a frequent
exercise of Closet-prayer will move you to conversing with God: there you will
find that God will suggest Words into your minds, which you may produce in your
Families with your Mouths, and this course will imbolden you before others: and
possibly this is one part of Gods rewarding Closet-prayer openly which our Lord
promises. Mat. 6.6. Job 22. 21, 26, 27.
Thus says Eliphas, to Job, acquaint now thy self with him (i e with God) and
as one of the blessed Fruits of Familiarity, thou shall lift up thy Face unto
God, (i. e.) thou shall openly own him before others without Sinful modesty or
blushing, 2 Cor. 3.18.
as a Man dare boldly approach his intimate Friend (whoever be present; ^he
adds also, thou shall make thy Prayer unto him, and he shall hear thee. -- Oh
the blessed Fruits of a Souls acquaintance with God in a Corner! such will not
be ashamed of him before others, such shall resemble God; this Intimacy
Transforms men into his likeness, as long intimate acquaintance has altered
the Habit of some men's bodies and disposition of their Minds into that of their
friends, Moses conversing with God in the Mount made his Face shine, Exo. 34.30.
so that some Rays of Divine Glory appeared to Aaron and the Israelites; the
more you are with God, the more you have of God, and this of Praying with
boldness, confidence, and assurance is both a Duty and Privilege, obtained by
frequent conversing with God as our friend: But the manner of the expression is
worth nothing [thou shall make thy Prayer to him: (...) Mid^p icavit (...)
ver^^ (...) fudit ^^^atio^.
] the Words are Emphatical, and signify, a pouring out of Prayer, with
Multitude of Words in Prayer, strong Words, clothed with Power: you will never
want Matter, or Words, or inlargedness, if you be thus acquainted with God:
your Family will soon take notice that you have been with Jesus in a corner,
when they discern such freedom of Speech and Spirit, yea, no body can hinder
you from Praying with your Family; one Act of Religion draws on another, secret
Duties prepare for more public; and it is true, what Dr. Preston observes, that
helps to Religion are within the compass of Religion, multiplied Acts
strengthen habits, by running men learn to run, by writing they learn to write:
so by Praying you will best learn to Pray.

6. Study the Nature of Sin, see what a Scriptural discovery you can make of
the Sin of Nature and Nature of Sin, the kinds, degrees, circumstances,
aggravations of Sin, together with the doleful effects and consequences of it,
in this and another World; this will help you in Confession, self-accusation,
and deep Humiliation, which is a considerable part of Prayer; This
Self-knowledge helps both in the Matter and manner of Praying. 2. Chron. 6.29.
What Prayer or supplication shall be made of any Man, or of all thy People of
Israel, when every one shall know his own Sore, Psalm. 38.9.
and his own Grief -- Sorrow makes eloquent, you need not prompt a necessitous
Beggar; he has Words at will, and shows his Sores, which is powerful Oratory;
if Sin were your burden, it would squeeze out Sighs and Groans, and a Groan is
a good Prayer; Lord my desire is before thee and my Groaning is not hid from
thee, and if there be inward Sighs there will be outward Speeches, if you be
full of Griefs, you will be full of complaints, Job 32.18, 1.0, 29
if you be full of Matter -- it will make you burst like new bottles; and you
will speak that you may be refreshed: consult the Book of Conscience, and you
will find it easy to draw up a large bill of Indictment against your own Souls.

7 Study your wants, need makes beggars, and adds Spurs to Prayers, learn of
poor Beggars at the Door, Malefactors at the Bar, consider your own Indigency,
the case of your Families, Congregations, the Nation; is there no unconverted
Sinner in your Family, is there no Sin breaking out amongst you; is there no
Grace weak or wanting in your self or yours? Is there no Temptation assaulting
any of you? or no affliction, or Judgment incumbent on you, or impendent over
you? look and look again, as you use to make an inspection into your Stock,
when you go to the Market to make provision: follow the Lord importunately for
a crum of Mercy, Mat. 15.27. Duk. 18.3. verse 13.
as the poor Woman in the Gospel, or as the importunate Widow, or if you can
say no more, say as the Publican, God be merciful to me a Sinner, the Lord be
merciful to my poor Sinning Family, who knows what prevalency may be in such a
Word uttered from an humble sense of Soul-wants? you know that Man went to his
House justified rather than the vaunting vainglorious Pharisee.

8. Make a Catalogue of your mercies, recollect the kindness of God, Personal,
Domestical, both in Temporals and Spirituals: it is true, Psalm. 40.5.
they are so many that they cannot be declared in order, they are more than can
be numbered: Verse 12.
but let that not discourage you in your attempt (no more than reckoning up
your Sins, which are also innumerable) but do what you can in both, if you
cannot do what you would or ought, the more you endeavor the more will be
suggested to your Memory, and so the more will be matter of praise and
thankfulness for renewed Mercy every day, and as you find any signal Mercies,
set up an Eben-ezer, and say, hitherto has the Lord helped us, 1 Samuel 7.12.
you will experience multiplied occasions of such Memorials, speak good of God
in conferrence, Psalm. 34.3.
and call in the help of others to magnify the Lord with you, and perhaps the
members of your Family will bring every one a Stone to raise the pile of praise
to an higher pitch, yea and bring their Coal to warm your hearts together, and
kindle a greater Flame of heavenly devotion; try this course, and you will see
the blessed issue.

9. Consider what dangers you are daily incident to, and see if that will not
afford you matter of Prayer, possibly some of your Callings expose you to
greater hazards than ordinary, some ride much abroad early and late to Markets,
and are subject to falls; some work under ground and may be crushed to death,
others go to Sea and see the wonder of the Lord in the deep, and it has been
said, he that knows not how to Pray, Qui nescit orare, discat navigare.
let him go to Sea; there is no Calling but it has its Snares and
difficulties, which it exposes Persons to; and Wisdom is profitable to direct,
foreseen Dangers least hurt: for as Persons are forewarned, at least, it
affords Matter of Deprecation. But there are thousands of accidents that the
most sagacious eye cannot foresee, which you see others fall into and fall by,
one falls into a Pit and perishes, another, his Horse falls, and he breaks an
Arm, or Leg, or his Neck, others are assaulted by Robbers and Slain, others are
burnt by sudden Fires in their Houses; your own observation may afford you many
sad Instances, and what befalls others may befall you, and may not these afford
you matter of Prayer, for their prevention, or your preparation for them, put
your selves into Gods hands every Morning and Evening, for you are never safe
but under his Tuition, the Omniscient Omnipotent God can only guard you and
your Family, He that keeps Israel neither slumbers nor sleeps, Psa.
121.4.227.1, 2.
other means are ineffectual without him.

Zech. 12.10
10. Beg Gods Holy Spirit: It is a Spirit of Grace and Supplication, go to God
in the name of Christ and if you can say nothing else, yet tell him you cannot
Pray, but withal say, Lord I hear others can Pray, why not I? No matter how
dull the Scholar is, so I have thee for my Master, I hear others of mean gifts
Naturally, are yet instructed Spiritually, and have arrived to great dexterity
in managing Family Worship, and may not I be endowed with the same Spirit,
first of Sanctification, and then of Supplication? come Lord and teach me to
Pray as John taught his Disciples, or rather as Jesus teaches his Members,
thou say, Luke 11.1. v. 13.
if ye being evil know how to give good Gifts unto your Children, how much more
shall your heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to them that ask him? I know
this is an hard Text, but it must not be understood, as if God would give his
Sanctifying Spirit to a carnal man's Prayer, by virtue of a promise, but either
common gifts of the Spirit to such, or further degrees of the Spirit to his own
Children, and so I think it is to be taken as the Pledge and earnest of the
Holy Spirit to Sanctified Souls, as Calvin takes it; as being one of the good
things of the kingdom of Heaven: Which Godly Souls most importunately ask and
beg for; and you see here a free and faithful promise of Christ, that his and
our Father will bestow his Holy Spirit on us, Jubemar q^id^m pulsare, sed nemo
Sponte pra^nditari vel (...) Syllab^m po^erit, visi arcado Spiritus sui
instinctu nos Deus puisi^^ ade^^^ sibi corda nostra aperiat, Call. ix loc.
and the Blessed Apostle tells us the advantage of the Holy Spirit for our
assistance in prayer, Romans 8.26. likewise also the Spirit helps our
infirmities, for we know not what we should Pray for as we ought, etc. All
acknowledge that the Spirit must help our infirmities in the manner of right
Praying, exciting Graces and Holy affections and knitting our thoughts to God:
But the great question is whether the Holy Ghost dictates to Gods Children
matter or expression in Prayer. I think the Text is clear that it does: For the
Text says not that we know not how to pray, but what we should pray for as we
ought; hence a Schoolman says [Dissicillimum est scire quid sit desiderandum]
it is most difficult to know what is to be desired; a Godly man knows the end
Gods Glory, and the enjoyment of him, but unless the Spirit teach him he will
miss it in the means, and as our Savior says, ask they know not what, Mat.
20.2^. Luke 9.54, 55. Job 6.8, 9 Jonah 4.3.
as we have some instances in Scripture, and many sad experiments in our
selves, and though the Lords Prayer be a rule in general, yet we may be to seek
in particulars except the Spirit bring things into our thoughts, and often
suggest Scripture expressions to our Memorys, in earnest and perinent Pleading
with the Lord; the Spirit inlightens us in our Ignorance, assists us in our
weakness, resolves us in our doubtings, Comforts us in our Sadness, Quickens us
in our Deadness. Composeth us in our distractions; Oh! therefore sue out this
blessed Advocate within, which will make Interpellation in our Hearts, as
Christ makes intercession at Gods right hand, and then you Pray acceptably. But
God hears no Language but that of his Spirit; yet God's Spirit makes
intercession by helping God's people to intercede, Spiritus i^t^^lat ^a^i endo
nos ^^terpell (...) ^r ac saci^^ to nos orare, clamat faciendo nos clamare:
videsis Pare^m in loc.
it Prays, by helping us to Pray, not as Arrians imagine that the Holy Ghost is
below the Son, as supplicating the Son, or that the Son is less than the
Father, as supplicating the Father, which is a gross mistake; for Christ
intercedes for us, by the virtue of his merit, with the Father, the Holy Ghost
by helping us to cry Abba Father, Gal. 4.6. Let none Imagine that this is an
Euthusiastick fancy, or a miraculous gift (as Chrysostom thought) no, nor a
Melancholy dream; they that have any solid experience in the things of God,
know that the assistance of the Spirit in Prayer is the greatest reality in the
World; nor was it a temporary gift, but a permanent Grace abiding with the
Church for Ever: Joh. 14.16. Ephesians. 6.18. Jude 20.
Enabling even private Christians to Pray in the Spirit; and in the Holy Ghost;
yet differently, as God sees good, sometimes more enlarging their hearts, and
at other times withdrawing his Influences; but it becomes us to embrace its
Motions, and Pray earnestly for it. Thus much for helps to the matter of Prayer.

Chap. IX. Helps how to manage Family Worship, as to the manner of Performance.
THUS at last I have dispatched the instructions that concern the matter of
Family Prayer, for the help of such as are weak and are sensible of their own
Insufficiency; and have been longer than I intended, and must contract in the
Rest.

As to the due manner of managing this Solemn Family-Work, so much is writ by
others concerning the necessary Essentials of all Prayer, that it is needless
here to add any thing: what belongs to all Prayer, Public, 1 Cor. 14.15.
Family, Secret Prayer, you must be sure it be Cordial, you must pray with the
Spirit, and understanding also; your Family devotion must not be a mere
customary Formality, like the Papists Tongue-threshing, as Luther calls their
Cantings: You must engage your hearts in the work, Jer. 30.21.
and then draw nigh to him; You must also ask what is according to God's will,
2 Samuel 7.27.
ground Your prayers upon a Promise, as David did: and God requires You must
also prepare your heart and then stretch out Your hand to God in pray^^; 1 John
5.14, 15. Joh. 11.12 Psalm. 26 ^.66.^8. Isa. 64.7.
Wash before You Worship; for if you regard Iniquity God will not hear Your
prayer; You must stir up your selves to take hold of God; come in sincerity,
with all Humility, with Importunity: You must propound right Ends in your
prayers, not for self-credit to be seen of Men, as the Pharisees, nor for
Worldly profit or to please a Friend, But for God's Glory and enjoying
Communion with him. But above all, see that you improve Christ as your
Advocate, in all your addresses to God, without whom your best Sacrifices are
rejected.

Bu^ I must not insist on these, but lay down some general Directions how to
manage this Family-Altar, and the Sacrifice thereon

1. Set Your Souls in God's presence: Remember who it is you have to deal with?
Psalm. 16.8.
not with men like your selves, but with the Infinite, Eternal Incomprehensible
Majesty of the great God: an Heart-searching, All-seeing and Holy God, Hab.
1.13. Psalm. 11.57. Job 13.16, 17
that is of purer Eyes than to behold Evil, and cannot look on Iniquity; whose
Throne is in Heaven, who loves Righteouness; but an Hypocrite cannot come
before him; work your hearts to an awe of his Divine Majesty: Consider of his
Infinite perfections, and the great distance betwixt the Glorious God and silly
Worms, yea betwixt the Holy God and your Sinful Souls; Remember God is a
Consuming Fire, Heb. 12.28.29.
and you as dried stubble, therefore serve him with Reverence and Godly Fear;
Psalm. 29.2.
give him the Glory due unto his Name, internally, externally, in your
conceptions of him, affections to him, prostration before him; he is to be had
in reverence of all that are round about him; Psalm. 39.7.
It Is more to appear before God than the Holiest men, or greatest Princes on
Earth, regard not Auditors or joyners in Worship, so much as the object of
Worship; Say as Abraham the friend of God, Behold, Genesis 11.27.
now I have taken upon me to speak unto the Lord, which am but dust and ashes;
Oh that my Soul were weighted with the Glorious Majesty of God!

2. Call in Divine assistance, presence and his Gracious Benidiction, the first
thing you do stand up, and bespeak God's Blessing upon you in the present
undertaking (except you find it convenient to begin with a Psalm to call the
Family together, Psalm. 86.11.
and desire the Lord to unite your hearts unto him, and prevent distractions,
and Satan's Temptations, and vain Worldly cogitations in that Duty, and lift up
your Souls to himself with such an Ejaculation as that, Lam. 3.41. Deu. 26.16.
Let us lift up our hearts with our hands to God in the Heavens; look down from
thy Holy Habitation, from Heaven and bless thy Servants! We are taking thy
blessed Book into our Hands? Lord (...) our Eyes to behold Wondrous things out
of (...), let it be a light to our Feet, and a (...) to our Paths: let it be as
our neces^ (...) Food, Yea sweeter than Honey or honey (...) more profitable
than Thousands of (...) and Silver; help us to understand, ap^ (...) and
Practice what we read: let our (...) a set before thee as Incense, and the
(...) of our hands as an Evening Sacrifice: (...) be now attentive, and thine
Eyes (...) in the Prayer of thy Servants; to us (...) shame and confusion of
Face; -- but to (...) Lord our God belong Mercys, and Forgiv^esses? Thou have
Proclaimed thy name, ^^racious, ^^^ifull, Long-suffering, etc. To ^is name of
the Lord do we flee, pleading (...) Mercy, only for the sake of Christ; look
(...) be face of thine anointed.

(...) ^mmediatly set upon this practice of (...) Altar to the Lord: Embrace
the (...) ^viction; the Evening of that day (...) ^ou have heard the Duty
pressed on (...) about it; plead no excuse to put it (...) more convenient
season; Felix lost his (...) and Soul by such a demur: set about it (...) your
Spirits are warm: give not Satan advantage by delay: Imperatives have no future
tense, present dispatch is Essential to Gods commands; anon, anon, at my
leisure, is no Obedience; now or never; there is danger in delays; Ps 119, 60.
I made haste, says David, and delayed not to keep thy Commandments. Remember
his holy Resolution in a weighty matter of the like nature, for settling God's
Worship, Psalm. 132.23, 45. Your Spirits will cool by delays, Satan will get
advantage; some have confessed that the Holy Spirit has departed from them,
upon their not yielding to it is motions, and they have run into the dead Sea of
Profaneness by degrees, if you miss your opportunity you are undone: you may dye
before Morning, if you go prayerless to Bed, and where will you be then? You
have no lease of your Lives; you must not say to your Neighbor, go, Pro. 3.28
and come again and to Morrow I will give: and will you say so to God? Oh do
not put off God in paying his dues, either, as to first undertaking or
after-performance: Qui non vul hodi^ or as minus apti^ erit.
Take heed of delays, and make no intermissions; he that is not fit to day will
be less sit to Morrow.

4. Excite your selves, and Families to the Work; it was the Practice of the
Primitive Church, to have one to say before Prayer [sursum corda] up with your
hearts; alas! our Spirits grow dull in the Intervals of Duty; Isa. 64.4.
you must stir up your selve to take hold on God: You must wind up your
affections, and turn your Spirits as you would do the strings of an instrument;
and you will find they will quickly slip down again; twice did David say, O God
my heart is fixed, yet immediately he found it unfix't again, and cries, Psa.
57.^
Awake Psaltery and harp, I my self will awake early; You must be forced to
give your hearts a pluck and check many times in a Duty, if you make conscience
to maintain them in a good frame: 1 Pet. 4 7, Col. 4.2.
hence those expressions of Watching unto Prayer, and watching in Prayer; as
well as Watch and Pray: Mat. 26.42.
Oh take heed of doing the work of the Lord neglegently! serve not God with
that which costs you nothing: Romans 12.11.
But do your best in every Duty: Be you fervent in Spirit, serving the Lord; Be
in good earnest, as if this were the last prayer you were to put up: Muster up
all your Forces, excite your Graces, rouse your Affections to and in the work,
then you will pray better and better.

5. Take a fit season for Family Worship; it is a great fault to put off
Family Prayer till the last thing you do; it will not be so seasonable to go
down upon your knees, when you are fitter to ly down in your Beds: Our Lord
says of his sleeping Disciples, the Spirit indeed is willing but the Flesh is
weak; Mat. 26.41.
but alas! some in your Families that have not a willing Spirit, and would
rather be at rest, than wrestling with God; Eutichus might be a Godly man, Act,
20, 9.
yet being at an unseasonable hour, he dropped asleep, which Calvin says, Quid
mirum si nocte intemp^^ cum So^^o ^^latus ^^^dem Succ^buit? Calv. in loc.
might be in some sort excusable, for its no wonder, if having struggled
against sleep, at such an unseasonable time, at length he was overcome: he
concludes he had not composed himself to sleep, because he chose an unfit place
to sleep in; being in a Window, and it must be ascribed more to natural
Infirmity, than willful fault; but by this instance Governors must learn to
take fit times for Family Worship; not when Children and Servants are tired out
with working; if it be attainable, go to prayers before Supper, when your
Spirits are most brisk and lively; drowzy Devotion brings guilt on the person
and Family, especially if it be through imprudent Management; a fit time for
Duty Morning and Evening, when the Family Comes together to their Stated Meals.

6. Let Family Worship be performed when other Worldly business can be best
laid aside: One thing is needful, Luke 10.42.
take heed of incumbring your selves with the many things of the World: I hope
I need not bid you order the members of your Family to lay hands off all other
Works, but you must endeavor that (if possible) their hearts be also taken off
all other Employments, 1 Cor. 7.35.
that they may attend upon the Lord without distraction; not that Governors
can pretend to govern the inward man, but that they may so dispatch and dispose
of Worldly concerns under their cognizance, as to leave both themselves and
Families, as little occasion of diversion, as may be; therefore must you take
such times for Religious Exercise, wherein you may be freest from business.
Pro. 18.1.
Solomon says, Through desire a man having separated himself, seeks and
intermedleth with all Wisdom; Man's mind is but Finite, and cannot be intent on
several things at once; you must mind Religion, in your Earthly business, but
if you mingle Earthly business with your Religious Dutys, you mar all.

7. Be short and serious: Be not ordinarily long, lest you be judged tedious:
Consider the infirmities of Children and some Family occasions and
conveniences: Weaklings of the Flock must not be over driven, lest they faint
or tire in the way: Children and Servants have but a measure of affection,
especially if yet Carnal: They will soon be ready to say, Mal. 1.13. Amos 8.5.
Behold, what a weariness is it, and when will the Duty be over? Yea, and
perhaps will fall asleep, or seek Diversions, or take occasion to be absent:
Not but that it is their fault; but you may give them occasion: Yet though you
may be short, you must be serious, run not over Duties cursorily, or in post
have, as a task, and longing for a Period: You must be warm and lively: Our
Lords Prayer was short, but pithy, and full of affection; Mat. 26.39.
O my Father, if it be possible, let this Cup pass from me, nevertheless not as
I will, but as thou will: It is not length of speaking, but strength of
affection that God looks at: Yet a longer Prayer is not unlawful, upon some
special occasion, or upon more than ordinary enlargement of affections: But
what I now say, is in a stated course of Family Duty's: Be short, Succinct,
Distinct, Methodical, and Pathetical in your Devotions.

8. Let not guilt stop your Mouths: If you have in the intervals of Duty slipped
into any Sin; Oh! Be sure to get it off before you wait on God in your
Families: Retire into a corner, confess thy sin, bewail it, act Faith on the
Mediator for Pardon: Yea, suffer not guilt in thy Family, let not wickedness
dwell in thy Tabernacles, for then thou shall lift up thy face without spot:
Job 11.14, 15.
If thou indulge sin in thy self, or in thy Family, Conscience will stare in
thy face, and weaken thy confidence in thy Approaches to God: Guilt had shut
David's Lips, till it was Pardoned, therefore he Prays, O Lord open thou my
Lips: Psalm. 51.15.
An unsuitable Carriage, provokes God to withdraw Assistance: Then what can you
do? And as guilt stops your Mouths, so it opens the Mouths of others: They will
be ready to say, it is no matter of your praying, except you practiced better:
Your Servants and Children will be ready to despise you; and withdraw from you,
and so breed Confusion in your Family, which will hinder Prayer: But if your
Lives speak for God, as well as your Lips, you may say as David, Psalm. 119.42.
v. 43.
So shall I have to answer him that Reproacheth me, for I trust in thy Word.
Then you may hope he will not take the word of Truth out of your Mouth: Let
there be a sweet Harmony betwixt your Professions, Prayers and Practices, and
then God will hear you, Men will own you, and your own Consciences will witness
for you:

9. Familiarize Holy Discourses with your Families, and put the Members thereof
upon Secret Duties: If your Relations never hear a word of God, or Religion in
intervals of Family Exercise, that Duty will be strange to them, and they will
but judge it as a formal round, and your selves will have less Heart to the
work: If God be not in your thoughts all the day, Psalm. 10.4. Impius hoc loco
nomen collectivum est, utque enim de una tantum persona loquitur, sed
indifinite de omnibus: Talis est hominum natura quando destituitur gubernatore
Deo Moller in hoc.
you will but coldly Pray at Night, nay, it is well if you be not like those
wicked Men, that through the Pride of their Countenance, will not seek after
God: Why so? The Text says, God is not in all his thoughts, or (as it is in
the Margent) all his thoughts are, there is no God: Wicked, here is a
Collective word, for he speaks not only of one person, but indefinitely of all
(says a good Interpreter) for such is the Nature of Man, when he is Destitute
of God to govern him: And if God be not in your thoughts, he will not be in
your words, for out of the abundance of the Heart, the Mouth speaks: And who
will believe you are in earnest, when your Lips are sealed up in Silence, tell
your Wife, Children, Servants, at due seasons, of the preciousness of Souls,
the necessity of grace, excellency of Christ, the Concernment of Eternity, the
near approach of Death, the great account of Judgment, and the importance of
Watching, Praying: And put them upon going alone by themselves, and praying as
well as they can: And as such Discourse will familiarize these Solemn Truth and
Duties to them, so it will make them willing to join with you in Family
Worship: If you will not own God before your Relations, sure you will not own
him before Enemies! Gordius the Martyr, being persuaded to keep his Heart to
himself, Oh! no, says he, it is fit that this Mouth of mine, which was made by
God, and for God, should speak of God, and for God: Oh! Friends will you take
your leave of God, in the Morning or Evening Sacrifice, and never own him, till
the return of that Family Service? God forbid: Are not the Souls of yours
committed to you? Must you not give an account of them? And is not faithful
speaking to them for God, one way of discharging trust; 2 Cor. 9.13.
profess your Subjection to the Gospel, and your example may prevail on all
about you, for God is much glorified thereby.

10. Observe answers of Prayers, and gather up Experiences: As this will
furnish you with matter of Prayer, so it will help you in the due manner of
managing it: How did the Lord assist my Heart in such a Duty? What quickenings?
What meltings? What Communion with God? What further degrees or strength of
grace, got I in such a performance? What power against such a Corruption? What
strength against Temptation? What further Ability or Encouragement in and for
Gods Service? Or make your remarks upon your Family, what person is informed,
reformed, conformed, to the ways of God? What Convictions or Impressions have I
observed, on the Spirit of such a Child or Servant? What Miscarriages to be
reproved or bewailed? What evils have been prevented or removed? How the Lord
has blessed or prospered your undertakings? That God may have the glory, your
selves may have the use or profit of what you have met with in your Families:
David says, Ps. 8, 8. Ps. 5.3.
I will bear what God the Lord will speak, for he will speak peace unto his
People and to his Saints: In the Morning I will direct my Prayer unto thee,
(...) Disp^^iom ^ibi^ (...) est spicul^^or inst^r speculatoris observaturus ^^
venias mihi auxilio.
and will look up, the words are very Emphatical, First, his great care and
exactness so to Order, Direct and Compose, both his Person and Prayers in such
a manner, as to be well pleasing to God, Then will I stand as a Watchman, upon
my Watchtower, to consider what answer he will give me: The Altar which I have
made, shall be my Watchtower, also on which I will stand to expect some
blessed Answer: What help the Lord will afford me: By this means you may suit
the condition of your Family, and not shoot at Rovers: But always find matter,
from things daily occurring to present before the Lord; yea, and those very
occurrences, will excite suitable affections of Joy and Sorrow, to quicken you
in Prayers or Praises: This is what Solomon prescribes in Prove. 27.23. Be thou
diligent to know the State of thy Flocks, and look well to thy Herds: Whether
it refer to a literal Inspection of Shepherds, in a proper Sense; or
Metaphorical; in a Political as Magistrates; Ecclesiastical as Ministers, or
Oeconomical as Governors of Families: It Is a great Duty in all respects, [ est
praeceptum oeconomicum, says Mercer] it properly and principally belongs to
House-holders: Else how can you accommodate your Counsels, Admonitions of them,
or Petitions for them, or your Sympathy or Compassion with them? Thus I have
disparcht my Instructions, both Preparatory for erecting this Family Altar, and
also directed in the due manner of managing this Family Worship, both for
matter and manner:

And now you cannot plead Ignorance or Imbecility, I have in my weak Capacity
reached out my Hand to help you, your way is lined out, yea, some have written
down words, and forms of Prayer to assist you, and you have godly Ministers, to
whom you may repair for further direction, and if still you wilfully live in
the neglect of this known Duty, your Blood ^e upon your own Heads, yea, the
Blood of your Families, will also be required at your Hands: God Almighty make
you willing and able for the Discharge of your relative Duty: But if after all
this, you will not speak a word to God, for your Poor, Languishing, Gasping,
Dying Families, to keep them out of Hell, I leave you to that Justice, which
will shortly plead with you at another rate, than we poor Ministers can do, and
will take vengance on you, for your willful neglect, and Disobedience to the
Calls of God:

Chap. 10. A Resolution of several Cases of Conscience, concerning the Worship
of God in Families.
MY last work, is the Answering of Sundry Cases of Conscience, some whereof
have been propounded to me, others are ordinarily incident in this point,
concerning this Family-Altar, and Sacrifices in Families.

1. Query, Whether may an House-Holder take upon him to Preach, expound
Scripture, dispense the Seals of the Covenant, as Baptism, and the Lords Supper
to the Members of his Family, seeing he is a Priest?

Answ. 1. Ministerial Authoritative teaching by virtue of others is one thing,
and charitative subservient teaching is another: A Master of a Family, Deuteronomy.
11.18, 19, 20, 21. Heb. 5.4.
must teach all under his Charge as a Master, yet not usurp the Office of a
Minister, without a just due Call: His teaching must not be in opposition, but
in subordination to Ministerial Instruction: As Families are Subordinate to
Churches:

2. Masters of Families must not take upon them that they are not fit for, or
presume beyond their Capacity, incurring the guilt of proud self-conceitedness,
or vain ostentation, as to undertake to interpret the Original, or give the
Sense of dark Prophecy, or obscure Scriptures, or determine knotty
Controversies: Yet may declare (when it lies in their way) what they have read
or heard from Learned Pious Men, or got in public Preaching.

3. Yet it is safest, ordinarily to pass by those abstruse and difficult
points, and insist upon plain, practical, fundamental, catechistical Truths, or
take occasion from the Chapter read in the Family, to infer such a seasonable
word, suppose of admonition; (as I have heard a godly Father say) this is for
you, look to it, this aims at you in such a case, and with serious Exhortations
press it home upon Conscience: Or inform the ignorant in such or such a point,
requiring them to remember it.

4. But as for administering Baptism and the Lords Supper, they may not presume
to do it, being an act of Office: This being annexed to Christ's Commission,
Teach and Baptize, and this is the Cup of Blessing, Mat. 28.19, 20. 1 Cor.
10.16. 1 Cor. 11.13.
which we [viz. as Ministers] bless: And this they receive of the Lord; and are
to deliver it to the People: And I find several Judicious Divines affirming,
that Dispensing the Seals, is peculiar to an Organized Church, and is proper
only to Ministers rightly Ordained: For the Lords Supper is a Symbol, and mean
of public Communion; not of Families as such! For though Christ administered it
to his Family, yet not as a Family, but as a Church: The Judgment and Practice
of the Primitive Doctors and Christians, is a sufficient proof of this.

2. Query, Is the Master or Governor of the Family, always bound to perform
Family Duty? May he not in some cases, Substitute another to perform that
Office for him?

Answ. 1. It is incumbent upon the governor of a Family, as his proper charge:
And it is the fittest he do it himself, it capable: David was a great King, and
had much business abroad, 2 Samuel 6.20. Job 1.35.
yet returned to bless his House, and put it not off to a Chaplain: Job was the
greatest of all the Men in the East, yet he acted personally in Family Worship:
I have heard of a Noble Man in England, that though he keep a Chaplain, yet to
show his Authority and Duty voluntarily at some times himself prays with his
Family: This is well done:

2. Yet a Chaplain may be made use of, especially where the Family is numerous,
or when his gifts and graces are more taking and edifying, and he is likely to
do more good than the Governor: Deuteronomy. 12.12, 18.
It may seem probable, that some Levites were kept in some of the Jews
Families, being often reckoned with their Sons, Daughters, Servants, it may be in
some Cases to perform these Religious Duties in the Family: Judge. 27.13.
And so Idolatrous Micah, had his Levite-Chaplain: which he too much boasted of:

3. Some have thought, that a Wife in a Family, may in some Cases perform
Family-Duty, and that this Honor may be given to the weaker vessel, to do the
Office of Religious Exercise, 1 Pet. 3 7.
as well as partake in the Government of the Family: doubtless she is to pray:
And it has been judged by Learned men that she may and must pray in the family
with her husbands leave, and in her husbands presence, so she cover her face
with a Vail, in token of her subjection: This they think is meant by a woman
praying or prophesying with her head covered, 1 Timothy 2.12. 1 Cor, 14.34.
not in the church where she was not to speak, but in the family when she
performed that piece of worship, Quanquam nec hoc male quadrabit, fi dicamus
Apostolum hanc modestiam non modo in loco ubi tota Ecclesia congregatur,
requirere a mulieribus: sed etiam in quovis graviore caetu aut matronarum a^t
virorum: Quales interdum in privatas aedes convenient: Calv. in locum:
and Calvin seems to incline to this apprehension, saying, the Apostle requires
this modesty of women, not only in the place where the Church meets together,
but in any grave assembly of Matrons, or such as sometimes are in private
houses: It Is true he denis them liberty to prophecy in any other place, but I
see no reason why an Abigail, a Deborah, may not at least be the mouth of a
family to God. But I am not positive herein, but leave it to others
consideration.

4. And why may not a Servant, a Steward of the house, such as Eliezer,
Abraham's Servant, or Obadiah, Ahabs Servant, pray in the Family? Especially in
these cases, when the Master gives him, not only liberty, but a call to that
Performance, yea requests him to pray in the Family. 2. When that Servant has
gifts to qualify him for such a work and is not exposed to the scorn and
contempt of his fellows. 3. In case of the Masters sickness or absence from
home, or when more public necessary business diverts him. 4. In case that
Servant be Humble Submissive, Self-denying, and know his place, and do it not
with a kind of Bravado, over his Fellow Servants, or Contempt of his Master:
And if in all things, that Servant show himself Obedient, according to his
Duty: 1 Timothy 6.1, 2. 1 Pet. 2.18, 19.

3. Query, Or case of Conscience is, When is the fittest time for the
performance of Family Worship?

Answ. As to the time of Prayer: I am really ashamed, when I read how often the
Turks and Mehometans Pray; it is said by Writers, they go seven times a Day to
their Devotion, viz. 1. [Diluculo] Early in the Morning: 2. [Oriente Sole] at
Sunrising: 3. [Meridie] at Noon: 4. [Inter Meridiem and Vesperam] betwixt Noon
and Even: 5. [Occidente Sole] at Sunset. 6. [In Vespere] an hour after
Sunset. 7. [Media nocte] at Midnight: Oh! Be ashamed, you professed
Christians, to be out stripped by the Barbarous Turks:

Weems Christian Synag. p 85. David thrice. Psalm. 55 17. Dan. 6.10.
But as for the Jews, whom primitive Christians imitated, their hours of Prayer
were borrowed from the times of their Sacrificing, 1. Morning, which was any
time before the third hour, Acts 2.15. 2. Their Midday, called the sixth hour,
Acts 10.9. or about Noon: Inde colligimus non posse cavere Ecclesiam certa
disciplina. ac hodie nisi obstaret nimius corpor atile esset quotidie habere
tales Conventus: Calvin Act 31.
3. Evening-Prayer, which was about the ninth hour, which was six a Clock at
Night: Act. 3.1. Calvin thinks they did not go into the Temple to Pray, merely
to comply with Jewish Rites, but the better to propagate the Gospel; yet
asserts, that the Church cannot want her certain Discipline, and at this Day,
says he, but that too much drowziness hinders, it were profitable to have
daily such meetings for Prayer: He means, in a more public manner: But for the
Circumstance of time, it is judged, that Morning and Evening are fittest
seasons for Family-Devotion: Hence Calvin notes [Hoc excercitio docebantur, ab
invocatione and cultu dei incipere diem and claudere] by this exercise, they
were taught to begin and shut up the Day with Prayer, and the Worship of God: I
have hinted this before, and shall only add in short a few Directions.

1. You must be sure to Pray for a Blessing upon your Meat at Meals, according
to, 1 Timothy 4.4.5.

2. Take your Family at Meal-time to seek God, and read his Scriptures, to sing
Gods praise, and to perform Family-Duty; Morning and Evening:

3. Let it be a stated time, if possible, known to the Family, that none may
plead excuse for their absence: But the whole Family may attend:

4. Yet if some extraordinary accident intervene, you must not think your
selves so precisely bound to a time, as to be perplexed in Conscience for
Omission, but take another more convenient, which may more directly suit your
occasions:

4. Case, Suppose the occasions of an Householder, call him abroad about his
lawful occasions, before the rest of his Family can rise out of their Beds, may
he omit Family-Duty?

Answ. 1. In such a Case, he must go to Prayer with such of his Family as are
risen, as it is likely some are, to help him away:

2. However, he must pray alone, committing himself and his Family into Gods
hands, which the Lord may graciously accept:

3. He must double his Diligence at his return, or at another time: And mourn
for what he cannot mend: A good Heart will lament any providential hindrance of
Communion with God.

4. But if possible, so cast your Worldly concerns, as not to hinder your
Family Exercise, prudent foresight may do much to forecast for it: Ex. 16.22.
But if your Calling be such, as that cannot be, do as the Israelites did,
gather double the Day or Night before, two omers for a Man or Family, lay in
for the Day following, what may stand you in stead by pleading with God, for
what yow'll need:

5. Case, What gesture is to be used in Family Prayer, whether sitting be
lawful?

Answ. Scripture tells us of several gestures in Prayer, as

Luke 18.13.
1. Standing, Mark 11.25. When ye stand Praying, forgive: The Publican stood
afar off, smote upon his Breast, yet a Penitent Praying posture:

John 17.1.
2. The Eyes fixed upwards, Jesus lift up his Eyes to Heaven as we look a Man in
the face, when we speak to him: Or in some Cases, the Eye may be shut, to
prevent gazing or distraction:

3. Sometimes prostration, or laying the Body on the Earth, has been a Praying
gesture, Genesis 18.2. Josh 7.6. Mat. 26.39.
Abraham bowed himself toward the ground, but Joshua fell to the Earth upon his
Face: Our Lord also fell on his face and Prayed:

4. Ephesians. 3.14. 2 Chronicles 6.12, 13. Luke 22.41. Psalm. 95 5. P^i. 2.18.
But the most ordinary gesture is kneeling, called bowing the knee: Even King
Solomon, kneeled down upon his knees, and spread forth his hands: Our dear Lord
also (whose Example is our Rule) kneeled down and Prayed: Methinks we should
not be too stiff to kneel before the Lord our Maker, before whom every knee
must bow, either in Devotion, or Destruction.

All agree. 1. That the gesture should be reverent before the great God: Cum
quis quoerit or are coliocat membra sicut ei occurrit. Aug. De orat.
2 That bodily gesture should be such as does best express the inward reverence
of the Heart: 3. That the gesture be such as does most quicken the Heart, and
help on in the Duty: 4. That it be such as gives a good example to others:

As for sitting in Prayer, it is an unbecoming lazy gesture, especially if
chosen, and in the beginning of a Duty: Indeed for weak Bodies tired out with
other gestures, some excuse may be made, but ordinarily it is not allowable:

Object. But is it not said of David, he went in and sat before the Lord, 2 Samuel 7.18. yet he Prayed.

Answ. 1. Some say, David was a King, and therefore might sit, according to the
Jews Rule, it is not lawful for any to Pray sitting before the Lord, but the
King!

2. Others say, the King Sat in Dust and Ashes, in an humble posture, he fell
on his face, say others:

3. This was more a Meditation, than a Prayer, admiring the goodness of God: Or
he might first sit, and then kneel:

Mansit (...) res^itit: Pius arim quam corpre sedie qui^tus coram ^^mino, Case:
4. But indeed the word sitting, signifies David's constancy in Meditating,
Praying; for a Man usually continues longer sitting, than standing: David sat,
i. e. continued longer, and more familiarly before the Lord, and with him, than
ordinary: It refers more to the Composedness of his Mind, than to the posture
of his Body: Therefore let not this Text, patronize that sleepy gesture:

6. Case is, What place must we choose, or how must we use our Voice in
Family Prayer:

Answ. 1. We are not bound to Consecrated places for Family-Duty: In this you
may use your liberty: In Gospel Times, God stands not so much upon the place of
Worship, as the quality of Worshippers, and manner of Worshipping: Joh. 4 23,
24. 1 Timothy 2.8.
Look at the frame of your Hearts, as before described, and fear not
Entertainment, where ever you be.

2. Yet the Circumstance of place may be duly weighed, if you live amongst
Lions, Mockers, Scorners of Religon, though you must maintain your profession
of God's name in your Families, as Daniel did, yet it is a disputable point,
whether you may not sometimes retire from open violence into some private
place. But there may be a greater reason for retirement than that, viz. To
avoid the suspicion of Hypocrisy, Mat. 6.5.
and Vainglory which was the Pharieses great fall; or you may withdraw into
some distant place from the street, to avoid disturbance by hurrys, Tumults and
Confusions that may distract you.

3. But let the place be so known to the Family as all may repair to it, as an
Exchange, at the time of prayer, be it dwelling house, parlour, Chamber; Dan.
6.10.
as Daniel improved some convenient room, called a Chamber for his
Family-Devotion, So may You.

4. For voice, it is true God is an all-seeing Spirit, and men may speak to God,
when they speak not a word, as Moses, Hanna, Nehemiah; prayer is the motion of
the will to God, but in Family Prayer it is otherwise, men have Bodies and
Tongues and Ears, and cannot understand others conceptions without a vocal
articulate sound; what you pray must be audible, else they cannot join with
you, or be edified by you: only see your Hearts go along with your Lips; and
Remember the saying of Solomon, The words of Wisemen are heard in quiet, more
than the cry of him that rules among Fools; Eccl. 9.17. I know it referrs to
Wise Counsels, not prayers, but some may pray more affectionatly with a low
Voice, than others with loud clamours: Yea possibly you may command your
thoughts better in the former, than latter; see you be serious, and your voice
Audible and Intelligible, not Mumbling your prayers, so that your Family cannot
understand you or know what you mean.

7. Case is, Whether is a form of Prayer Lawful, or whether may an
House-holder use a Form of Prayer, or may others join with him in the use
thereof?

Answ. 1. Our most solid judicious Divines of those called Puritans, do not
judge forms of Prayer absolutely unlawful; Dr. Preston says, Dr. Preston Saints
daily Exercise, p. 80, 81, 82.
I think there is none here that doubt of it, but that a Set Form of Prayer may
be used; you know, Christ prescribed a Form, -- there were certain Psalms that
were Prayers used constantly, -- still in all times the Church had Set-Forms; I
know no objection against it of weight, etc. Mr. Hildersham, (the Oracle of his
time) says, Hildersham on Psalm. 51. Lect. 12. p. 63. See 3. Arg. for forms.
I dare not deny but a weak Christian may use the help of a good Prayer Book in
this Case; better to pray on a Book than not to pray at all; certainly it is
the Spirit of Error that has taught the World otherwise.

2. Yet these worthy men affirm truly that every Christian, even the meanest
and weakest has the gift and Spirit of Prayer; 1 Timothy 4.14.
So says the latter of these Worthys, and must not neglect the gift that is in
him; Dr. Preston says, there is no man that has any work of Grace in his
heart, but he is enabled in some measure to pray, without a set Form of prayer;
there was never any man in any extreme want, but he knew how to express
himself, where he had liberty to speak.

3. But Yet considering that some Christians (though truly Gracious) may for a
season be very raw, and unfit to open their Cases to God methodically, or in
apt words, and considering it is before a Family that a man is to be the Mouth
of, and considering that unmeet and undigested expressions expose an Ordinance
of God to contempt; I could advise some Christians, before they pray with
others, to premeditate, and duly weigh what they are to say to God, and think
of a proper method, and some Scriptural expressions, to produce them in Prayer,
as I have before directed:

4. As I doubt not the lawfulness of a member in a Family joining with such a
Prayer, if the matter be sound and Orthodox, so I question but such a Master as
Conscientiously uses this practice, will so increase in gifts and abilities,
that in due time, he will cast away those Crutches, and learn to go on
profitably in daily Family Exercise, to the edification of all that join with
him: So that in the diligent and humble use of these means, many nauseous
Tautologies, and needless Impertinencies will be paired off, which offended
intelligent ears: The Worthy Dr. Preston says, a Child that cannot go, may
have a prop to help it; but we must not always be Children, we must not always
use that help:

8. Case is, What if the Householder or Governor be loose and careless,
possibly comes home full of Drink, yet will Pray, though in no fit case for it,
or he is unsound at heart, Prays but coldly, formally, may I join?

Answ. 1. Thy acceptance with God, depends not on the state of him that Prays,
nor on his zeal, but upon thy non acting of Faith in Christ, it thou be upright
in joining with the words, and endeavored to lift up thy Heart to God, the
Lord may graciously entertain thee, Gal. 6.5. Romans 14.12.
though the person praying may be Rejected: For every one shall bear his own
burden, and give an account of himself to God; Not of others that we join with:

2. Yet if thou be certainly assured that the party Praying speaks Nonsense
or Blasphemy, in stead of Praying, thou art bound in Conscience to show thy
dislike of it, lest God be Dishonored, and Offended with the whole Family, the
Man hardened in sin, thy own Conscience defiled, and thy selt in danger of
playing the Hypocrite, in pretending to join with what thy Soul abhors: In this
case thou must withdraw, and get alone, and mourn for it:

2 Kin. 5.13. 1 Samuel 25.37.
3. And it is also thy Duty, humbly and modestly to take a fit season to speak to
thy Master, as Naamans Servants did to him, when they saw him out, and you know
it did good: And Abigail told her Husband Nabal of his fault and danger, and
his heart dyed within him: who can tell what good such a word in season may do?
He may think of it afterward, Jonathans Preaching David's Case, 1 Samuel 19.4, 6.
with his Passionate Father Saul, did good for a while: If you come to a Father
or Master humbly and submissively, not saucily and malapartly, you may win upon
them, and if you can say little, yet if you burst out into tears for their sin,
it may prove as convincing Rhetoric to them as King Edward's weeping was to
Bishop Cranmer and Ridley, denying his Sister Mary liberty for Mass; who said.
The King had more Divinity in his little finger than they had in their whole
body.

4. If still there be no Remedy or Reformation, though thou must not with cursed
Cham, discover thy Fathers or Masters nakedness, if otherwise it may be helped,
yet thou may or must acquaint a godly Minister, or Christian friend, ask
their advice, and (if that be judged expedient) that they may speak to thy
Father, or Master, with as much secrecy as possible, and this runs parallel to
our Lord's Rule, Mat. 18.15, 16. Who knows but a conviction may fasten? and if
he be obstinate, he will leave off his praying in a little time; for his
sinning will make him give over praying, or his praying his sinning.

9 Case. Suppose I be cast into a graceless and prayerless family, how must I
do, or what is my duty?

A. 1. Examine thy grounds and ends in coming thither; consider thy Call, if
thy Parents fixed thee there as an Apprentice, quiet thy self in God's dispose;
make good use of this Providence; if thou came thither voluntarily, without due
consideration, be humbled for sin, beg pardon, make sure of a friend above.

2. Use all lawful means to remove into a more wholesome Air; I say to thee as
the Apostle to a godly Servant, 2 Cor. 7.21.
Art thou called, being a Servant, care not for it; but if thou may be made
free, use it rather. Methinks God says to you as once to Israel, Numb. 16.21,
24, 26, 31.
Depart, I pray you, from the Tents of these wicked men. It Is a wonder the
ground does not cleave in sunder, or some Judgment comes not down upon such
praverless Families.

3. Humbly propound some Expedients for Remedy: See if any other Member in the
Family will undertake that work, or whether the Governor will give you leave
to pray in the Family; and behave your selves so holily and winningly, that the
good conceit of Superiors or Equals may be a prologue and preparative to that
work.

4. If all this avail not for Family Worship, and necessity detains you there,
as you love your Souls, spend more time, take more pains in secret; [Abi in
Cellam and dic, miserere mei] get into your Cell, and say, Lord have mercy on
me, as the old Monk said to Luther; Jer. 13.17.
or as Jeremiah, If ye will not hear it, my Soul shall weep in secret places
for your Pride. Pray for your own Soul, that you may not perish with others;
pray for the Family, and all the Members thereof, Governors and Governed; be
not discourraged with their scoffs; who knows what the Event may prove?

10 Case. What if I be cast into a praying-family, what use shall I make
thereof?

Ans. 1. Give glory to God: admire his wise and gracious Providence: It Is not
the Lot of all young people: Think and say, Lord, who am I to enjoy this
Privilege? this is a blessed place, Judge. 6.37. Genesis 28.17.
a place of blessings: This Fleece is wet with Dew, when others are dry: This
is none other but the House of God, and this is the Gate of Heaven: Blessed be
God that has cast my Lot here.

2. Join in family prayer: Be not needlessly absent; but do not content your
selves with bodily presence, or postures, but see to it, that your hearts also
join with the expressions, else you play the Hypocrites: And when you go forth,
and set up Families of your own, use the same practice, but with the same
spirit of your pious Masters.

3. Improve this stock of your Relation's prayers. A Father may lay up an
Estate for his Child in Bills and Bonds, which may prove a good Portion. The
Corn sown in the Field, is as good as that in the Garner, in some respects
better! The Father sows, the Child reaps a blessed Crop! God forbid that I
should lose my Child's Portion for want of looking after it: Lord cut not off
the Entail of my Fathers Covenant: Oh hear the many cries he put up for me in
my hearing!

4. Behave your selves suitably to that Family where so gracious a Providence
has cast you: God forbid you should be a scoffing Ishmael in an Abraham's
house, a profane Esau in Jacob's, a Rebellious Absalom, or a filthy Ammon in
holy David's Family: You disgrace the ways of God more than others, when it
shall be said, See what a Beast was bred in a praying-family: You greatly
discredit your Breeding, and sink your selves deeper in Hell: God Almighty open
your Eyes, awake your Consciences, and reform your Conversation; that you may
walk worthy of God to all well pleasing.

I have now done with this great Subject of a due Erecting a Family-Altar, and
offering Gospel Sacrifices to the Lord; and oh that there were of these Altars
set up in every dwelling house, Cant. 3.6.
and Divine Incense ascending like Pillars of Smoke Heaven wards.

I have but a word of Encouragement to weak, but willing Souls, that set upon
Family Worship, but meet with so many discouragements from without, but
especially within, that their hearts are apalled, and are ready to give hack,
and say, Will God accept such poor, lean, and lank Sacrifices, so dead,
heartless, lifeless? I do no good, I get no good, I might as well give over, I
am often so woefully indisposed for duty, that I might as well let it alone.

O my Friends! look on this as a temptation, and beware of it; strive against
it, rouse up your spirits.

1. Consider, you are not the first or only persons that Satan has resisted in
duty; for even Joshua the High Priest (a Type of Christ) had Satan standing at
his right hand, Zech. 3.13. 2 Cor. 2.11.
to resist h^^ and he had too much advantage against him; for, he was clothed
with filthy garments: And our weakness is Satan's strength, our guilt his
advantage: But our Jehovah says, The Lord rebuke thee: The Devil makes spots,
and then accuses us of our spots; but Christ wipes them off.

2. Our Lord takes well your good will to do, though you can do but little: 2
Cor. 8.12.
The imprimis of a willing mind is accepted, though your following Items be few
and poor: The Lord is not unrighteous to forget your work and labor of love;
Heb. 6.10.
i. e. those duties we perform to the Lord with labor and hard struggling.
It Is the observation of precious Mr. Hildersham; Think not, On Psalm. 51. p. 65.
says he (Beloved) that those prayers only are pleasing to God, wherein we
please our selves best, or which we perform with most facility and aptness of
mind and speech; no, no, when we can perform this duty in obedience to God,
even against our own disposition, and oppositions in our own hears; these are
the prayers that are most acceptable to God; as Abraham's Obedience, Genesis 22.12.

3. By using and exercising little grace, improving small ability to pray, you
will increase it, and will more comfortably carry on the work; Mat. 25.29.
so the Text; To every one that has (i. e. by employing it, he shows that he
has, for otherwise the unprofitable Servant had a Talent also) shall be given,
and he shall have abundance. Sick persons, whose appetite is weakened, by eating
provoke and recover them, one morsel drawing down another: You Will find this
true in spirituals.

4. The weaker you think your selves, and the more likely to depend on the
right means of your acceptance, that is the Spirit of Christ for assistance,
and the Merit and Intercession of Christ for entertainment: For alas! you find
you have no flush of gifts to fill the Sails, or height of enlargement to carry
with full gale to God; you are emptied, and your Plumes quite fallen as to any
thing you do, and therefore conclude, you are too low to reach God, and your
duties quite lost, except your persons and performances be found in Christ.
Phil. 3.9.
I shall therefore conclude this whole Discourse with that sweet Text, that is
worth a world, without the benefit of which, all our Altars and Sacrifices are
Ciphers, Rev. 8.3. And another Angel came and stood at the Altar, having a
golden Censer, and there was given unto him much Iecense, that he should offer
it with the prayers of all Saints, upon the golden Altar, which was before the
Throne.

FINIS.

