CYPRIANUS ANGLICUS: OR, THE HISTORY OF THE Life and Death, OF The most
Reverend and Renowned PRELATE WILLIAM By Divine Providence, Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury, Primate of all ENGLAND, and Metropolitan, Chancellor of the
Universities of Oxon. and Dublin, and one of the Lords of the Privy Council to
His late most SACRED MAJESTY King CHARLES the First, Second MONARCH of Great
Britain.

CONTAINING ALSO The Ecclesiastical History of the Three Kingdoms of ENGLAND,
SCOTLAND, and IRELAND from His first rising till His Death.

By P. Heylyn D. D. and Chaplain to Charles the first and Charles the second,
Monarchs of Great Britain.

ECCLUS. 44. VERSE. 1, 3. 1. Let us now praise Famous Men and our Fathers that
begat Us.

3. Such as did bear Rule in their Kingdoms, Men Renowned for their Power,
giving Counsel by their Understanding, and Declaring Prophesies.

LONDON: Printed for A. Seile, MDCLXVIII.

To the Honorable Sir JOHN ROBINSON Knight. and Baronet, HIS MAJESTY'S Lieutenant
of the Tower of London.
SIR,
YOU have here before you the History of an Eminent Prelate and Patriot, a
Person who lived the honor, and died a Martyr of the English Church and State,
for it was his sad Fate to be crushed, betwixt Popery and Schism; and having
(against both) defended the Protestant Cause with his Pen, he after cheerfully
proceeded to Seal that Faith with his Blood. Together with the Story of this
Great Man, you have likewise that of the Age he lived in, (especially so far as
concerned the Church) wherein you will find recorded, many notable Agitations
and Contrivances, which it were pity should be lost in silence, and pass away
unregarded. These Considerations toward a Gentleman of your worth, Curiosity,
and loyalty, are warrant enough to justify me in this Dedication. And yet I
must not conceal, that it belongs to you by another right; that is to say, the
Care of recommending this Work to the Public, was committed to a Gentleman,
who himself had presented it to your hand, if God had not taken him away, just
upon the point of putting his purpose in execution. So that it seems in me, as
well matter of Conscience, as of Respect, to deliver it wholly up to your
Patronage and Protection; since in exposing it to the world, I do but perform
the will of my dead Father; and in addressing it to your self, together with my
own, I also gratify that of my deceased Friend. The value of the Work it self
I do not pretend to judge of, my duty and interest for the Author forbids it,
but for the Industry, Integrity, and good meaning of the Historian, I dare
become answerable; And in truth, I hope well of the rest: without which I
should not have made bold with Sir John Robinson's Name in the Front of it; who
being so nearly related both in blood and affection to that Incomparable and
Zealous Minister of God, and his Prince, cannot besides a Natural, but upon an
Honorable Impression, concern himself in the glories or blemishes of this
Character, defective in nothing, but that it could not be as ample as his
worth. And now having discharged my trust, and duty; as I could do no less, so
I have little more to add for my self, but that I am

SIR, Your most humble and obedient Servant HENRY HEYLYN.

A Necessary INTRODUCTION To the following HISTORY.
BEFORE we come unto the History of this Famous Prelate, it will not be amiss
to see upon what Principles and Positions, the Reformation of this Church did
first proceed; that so we may the better Judge of those Innovations which
afterward were thrust upon her, and those Endeavors which were used in the
latter times to bring her back again to her first Condition.

1. Know therefore, that King Henry viii. having obtained of the Bishops and
Clergy, in their Convocation, Anno 1530. to be acknowledged the Supreme Head
on Earth of the Church of England, did about three years after, in the 26 of
his Reign, confirm the said Supremacy to Himself, his Heirs and Successors,
with all the Privileges and Preheminencies thereunto belonging, by Act of
Parliament. And having procured the said Bishops and Clergy, in another of
their Convocations, Submission of the Clergy,
held in the year 1532. to promise in verbo Sacerdotii, not to assemble from
thenceforth in any Convocation, or Synodical Meeting, but as they should be
called by his Majesty's Writ; nor to make any Canons or Constitutions, Synodal
or Provincial, without his Leave and License thereunto obtained; nor, finally,
to put the same in Execution, till they were Ratified and Confirmed under the
Great Seal of England: Procured also an Act of Parliament to bind the Clergy
to their promise. Which Act, called commonly, The Act of the Submission of the
Clergy, does bear this name in Poulton's Abridgment, Character,
viz. That the Clergy in their Convocation, should Enact no Constitutions
without the Kings assent, Anno 25. Henry viii. c. 19. Which Grounds so laid, he
caused this Question to be debated in both Universities, and
and all the Famous Monasteries of the Kingdom: viz. An aliquid au^horitatis in
hoc Regno Angliae, Pontifici Romano de jure competat, plusquam alii cuicumque
Episcopo extero. Which Question being concluded in the Negative, and that
Conclusion ratified and confirmed in the Convocation, Anno 1534. there past an
Act of Parliament about two years after, Entitled, Ejection of the Pope.
An Act Extinguishing the Authority of the Bishops of Rome; In which there was
an Oath prescribed, for abjuring the Popes Authority within this Realm: The
refusing whereof was made High Treason, Anno 28. H. viii. c. 10.

Pope, as it did no way prejudice the Clergy in their power of making Canons,
No Diminution of the Power and Privileges of the Church by the Alteration.
Constitutions, and other Synodical Acts, but only brought them to a dependence
upon the King for the better ordering of the same; so neither did it create any
diminution of the Power and Privileges of the Archbishops, and Bishops in the
free exercise of that Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction which anciently belonged to
them. For in the Act of Submission beforementioned, there passed a Clause,
that all former Constitutions Synodal, or Provincial, which were not contrary
to the Word of God, the Kings Prerogative Royal, or the Laws and Statutes of
this Realm, should remain in force, until they were reviewed and fitted for the
use of the Church, by 32 Commissioners, to be nominated by the King for that
end and purpose: Which re-view being never made in the time of that King, nor
any thing done in it by K. Edw. vi. (though he had an Act of Parliament to the
same effect) the said Old Canons and Constitutions remained in force, as before
they were. By means whereof, all causes Testamentary, Matrimonial, and Suits
for Tithes; all matters of Incontinency, and other notorious Crimes which gave
public Scandal; all wilful absence from Divine Service, Irreverence, and other
Misdemeanors in the Church, not punishable by the Laws of the Land, were still
reserved unto the Ecclesiastical Courts. Those Ancient Canons and Constitutions
remaining also for the perpetual standing Rule by which the proceedings in
those Courts were to be regulated and directed; so as it does appear most
clearly, that it was not the purpose of that King, either to diminish the
Authority, or to interrupt the Succession of Bishops, which had continued in
this Church, from the first Plantation of the Gospel, to that very time: but
only to discharge them from depending on the Popes of Rome, or owing any thing
at all to their Bulls and Faculties, which had been so chargeable to
themselves, and exhausted so great a part of the Treasure of the Kingdom from
one year to another.

The manner of Electing and Confirming Archbishops and Bishops, Established by
King HENRY viii.
for the Electing and Consecrating of Archbishops and Bishops. In which it was
Enacted, that on the Vacancy of every Bishopric within his Realm, his Majesty
should issue out his Writ of Conge d' eslire to the Dean and Chapter of the
Church so Vacant, thereby enabling them to proceed to the Election of another
Bishop; that the Election being returned by the Dean and Chapter, and ratified
by the Royal Assent, his Majesty should issue out his Writ to the Metropolitan
of the Province, to proceed unto the Confirmation of the Party Elected; and
that if the Party so Confirmed, had not before been Consecrated Bishop of some
other Church, that then the Metropolitan taking to himself two other Bishops at
the least, should proceed unto the Consecration, in such form and manner, as
was then practiced by the Church; so that, as to the Rites and Ceremonies of
the Consecration, there was no alteration made at all. Those which were
Consecrated after the passing of this Statute, were generally acknowledged for
true and lawful Bishops, by the Papists themselves; or otherwise Dr. Thomas
Thurlby, Bishop of Westminster, had never been admitted to have been one of
those who assisted at the Consecrating of Cardinal Pool, when he was made
Archbishop of Canterbury, on the death of Cranmer. All which recited Statutes
with every thing depending on them, being abrogated by Act of Parliament in the
time of Queen Mary, still continuing in effect notwithstanding some Statutes to
the contrary by K. EDW. vi.
were revived in the first Year of Queen Elizabeth, and so still continue. But
so it was not with another alteration made in the form of exercising their
jurisdiction by King Edw. 6. In the first Parliament of whose Reign, it was
enacted, that all process out of the Ecclesiastical Courts should from thence
forth be issued in the Kings Name only, and under the Kings Seal of Arms
contrary to the usage of the former times. Which Statute being repealed by
Queen Mary, and not revived by Queen Elizabeth, the Bishops and their
subordinate Ministers have ever since exercised all manner of Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction in their own Names, and under the distinct Seals of their several
Offices.

4. In Doctrinals and forms of Worship, there was no alteration Hen. 8. though
there were many preparations and previous dispositions to it; The Reformation
of the Church under EDW. vi.
the edge of Ecclesiastical Affairs being somewhat blunted, and the people
indulged a greater Liberty in consulting with the Holy Scriptures, and reading
many Books of Evangelical Piety, then they had been formerly: which having left
the way more open to Archbishop Cranmer, and diverse other learned and
Religious Prelates in K. Edwards time (seconded by the Lord Protector, and
other great ones of the Court, who had their ends apart by themselves) they
proceeded carefully and vigorously to a Reformation. In the managing of which
great business, they took the Scripture for their ground, according to the
general explication of the ancient Fathers; the practice of the Primitive times
for their Rule and Pattern, as it was expressed to them in approved Authors:
Modelled according to the Scriptures and the Ancient Fathers.
No regard had to Luther or Calvin, in the procedure of their work, but only to
the Writings of the Prophets and Apostles, Christ Jesus being the Cornerstone
of that excellent Structure. Melancthons coming was expected ( Regiis Literis
in Angliam vocatus, as he affirms in an Epistle to Camerarius) but he came not
over. And Calvin made an offer of his service to Archbishop Cranmer, ( Si quis
mei usus esset, if any use might be made of him to promote the work) but the
Archbishop knew the man, and refused the other; so that it cannot be affirmed,
that the Reformation of this Church, but
was either Lutheran or Calvinian in its first original. And yet it cannot be
denied, but that the first Reformers of it did look with more respectful eyes
upon the Doctrinals, Government, and Forms of Worship in the Lutheran Churches,
then upon those of Calvin's platform; with relation rather to the Lutheran, then
Calvinian Forms.
because the Lutherans in their Doctrines, Government, and Forms of Worship,
approach't more near the Primitive Patterns than the other did: and working
according to this rule, they retained many of those ancient Rites and
Ceremonies, which had been practiced; and almost all the Holy Days or Annual
Feasts which had been generally observed in the Church of Rome. Nothing that
was Apostolic, or accounted Primitive did fare the worse for being Popish; I
mean for having been made use of in times of Popery: it being none of their
designs to create a new Church, but reform the old. Such Superstitions and
Corruptions as had been contracted in that Church, by long tract of time, being
pared away, that which was good and commendable did remain as formerly: It was
not their intent to dig up a foundation of such precious stones, because some
superstructures of Straw and Stubble had been raised upon it. A moderation much
applauded by King James, in the Conference at Hampton Court; whose golden
Aphorism it was, That no Church ought further to separate it self from the
Church of Rome, either in Doctrine or Ceremony, then she had departed from her
self, when she was in her flourishing and best estate, p. 77.

Bishops a distinct Order from that of the Presbytery.
according to the Rules laid down with the fourth Council of Carthage,
celebrated Anno 407. or thereabouts, and generally received in all the
Provinces of the Western Church, as appears by the Book of Consecrating
Archbishops and Bishops, etc. Approved first by the Book of Articles, and
confirmed in Parliament, Anno 5.6, Edw. VI. as afterward justified by the
Articles of Religion agreed upon in Convocation in Queen Elizabeth's time, Anno
1562. And by an Act of Parliament in the 8th. Year of her Reign, accounted of
as part of our Public Liturgies. And by that book it will appear, that Bishops
were then looked upon as a distinct Order of themselves, and not as a different
degree only amongst the rest of the Presbyters; For in the Preface to that
Book, it is said expressly, That it is evident to all men, diligently reading
Holy Scripture, and Ancient Authors, that from the Apostles time there have
been these Orders of Ministers in the Church of Christ, Bishops, Priests, and
Deacons: Not long after which, it follows thus, viz. And therefore to the
intent these Orders should be continued, and reverently used and esteemed in
the Church of England, it is requisite, that no man ( not being at this
present, Bishop, Priest, or Deacon) shall execute any of them, except he be
Called, Tried, and Examined, according to the form hereafter following. But
because perhaps it will be said that the Preface is no part of the Book, which
stands approved by the Articles of the Church, and established by the Laws of
the Land, let us next look into the Body of the Book it self, where, in the
Form of Consecrating of Archbishops, or Bishops, we find a Prayer in these
words, viz. Almighty God, giver of all good things, who have appointed diverse
Orders of Ministers in thy Church, Mercifully behold this thy Servant, now
called to the Work and Ministry of a Bishop, and replenish him so with the
truth of Doctrine, and Innocence of Life, that both by word and deed he may
faithfully serve thee in this Office, etc. Here we have three Orders of
Ministers, Bishops, Priests, and Deacons; the Bishop differing as much in Order
from the Priest, as the Priest differs in Order from the Deacon; which might be
further made apparent in the different Forms used in Ordering of the Priests
and Deacons, and the form prescribed for the Consecration of an Archbishop, or
Bishop, were not this sufficient.

6. But though the Presbyters or Priests, were both in Order and Degree beneath
the Bishops, The Power ascribed unto the Priest or Presbyter,
and consequently not enabled to exercise any public Jurisdiction in Foro
judicii, in the Courts of Judicature: yet they retained their native and
original power in Foro Conscientiae, in the Court of Conscience, by hearing the
confession of a sorrowful and afflicted Penitent, and giving him the comfort of
Absolution, a power conferred upon them in their Ordination; in the Form
whereof, it is prescribed that the Bishop, and the assisting Presbyters, shall
lay their Hands upon the Head of the Party who is to be Ordained Priest, the
Bishop only saying these words, viz. Receive the Holy Ghost, whose sins thou
do forgive they are forgiven, and whose sins thou do retain, they are
retained; In the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost,
Amen. Which words had been impertinently, and unsignificantly used, if the
Priest received nor thereby power to absolve a sinner, upon the sense of his
sincere and true repentance, manifested in Confession, or in any other way
whatsoever. And this appears yet further by the direction of the Church, in
point of Practice; For first, it is advised in the end of the second
Exhortation before the receiving of the Communion, in hearing the Confession of,
that if any of the people cannot otherwise quiet his own Conscience, he should
repair unto his Curate, or some other discreet and learned Minister of Gods
Word, and open his grief, that he may receive such Ghostly counsel, and advice,
and comforts, as his Conscience may be relieved, and that by the Ministry of
Gods Word, he may receive comfort, and
and the benefit of Absolution, to the quieting of his Conscience, and avoiding
all scruple and doubtfulness. Agreeable whereunto is that memorable saying of
St. Augustine, viz. Qui confiteri vult ut inveniat gratiam, qu^erat sacerdotem.
Secondly, It is prescribed in the Visitation of the Sick, That the Sick person
shall make a special Confession, if he feel his Conscience troubled with any
weighty matter, and that the Priest shall thereupon Absolve him in this manner
following, giving Absolution to the Penitent Party.
Our Lord Jesus Christ, who has left power to his Church to Absolve all
Sinners which truly repent and believe in him, of his great Mercy forgive thee
thy Offenses; and by his Authority committed to me, I Absolve thee from all thy
Sins, in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, Amen.
Which form of Absolution, is plainly Authoritative, and not Declarative only,
(such as that is which follows the General Confession, in the beginning of the
Morning and Evening Prayer) as some men would have it.

Penitent, as well in the time of Health, as in extremity of Sickness, The
security of the Penitent provided for by the Church,
may pour his Sins into the Bosom of the Priest, with the more security; it is
especially provided, by the 113 Canon of the Year 1603. That if any man Confess
his secret and hidden sins to the Minister, for the unburthening of his
Conscience, and to receive spiritual Consolation and ease of Mind from him, we
do not any way bind the said Minister by this our Constitution: but do
straightly charge and admonish him that he do not at any time reveal and make
known to any person whatsoever any Crime or Offense so committed to his
secrecy, (except they be such Crimes as by the Laws of this Realm his own Life
may be called in question for concealing the same) under the pain of
Irregularity. and
And by incurring the condition of Irregularity, the party offending does not
only forfeit all the Ecclesiastical Preferments which he has at the present,
but renders himself incapable of receiving any other for the time to come.
Confession made upon such security will be as saving to the Fame of the
Penitent, as the Absolution to his Soul. In which respect it was neither
untruly nor unfitly said by a learned Writer, Dominus sequitur servum, the
Authority of Absolution more fully justified.
etc. Heaven (says he) waits and expects the Priests Sentence here on Earth;
for the Priest sits Judge on Earth, the Lord follows the Servant: and what the
Servant binds or loses here on Earth ( Clave non errante) that the Lord
confirms in Heaven.

8. The like Authority is vested in the Priest or Presbyter at his Ordination
for officiating the Divine Service of the Church, offering the Peoples Prayers
to God, The several Offices which be performed by the Priest,
Preaching the Word, and Ministering the Holy Sacraments in the Congregation;
Which Offices, though they may be performed by the Bishops, as well as the
Presbyters: yet they perform them not as Bishops, but as Presbyters only. And
this appears plainly by the Form of their Ordination, in which it is
prescribed, that the Bishops putting the Bible into their hands, shall
pronounce these words, Take thou authority to preach the Word, and Minister the
Holy Sacraments in the Congregation where thou shall be so appointed. In the
officiating of which Acts of Gods Divine Service, attired at ordinary times in
his Surplice,
the Priest, or Presbyter is enjoined to wear a Surplice of white Linen
Cloth, to testify the purity of Doctrine, and innocence of Life and
Conversation, which ought to be in one of that Holy Profession. And this St.
Jerome tells us in the general, Religionem Divinam alterum habitum habere in
ministerio, alterum in usu vitaque communi: that is to say, that in the Act of
Ministration, they used a different habit, from what they use to wear at
ordinary times. and
and what this different habit was, he tells us more particularly in his reply
against Pelagius, who it seems dislik't it; and asked him what offense he
thought it could be to God, that Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, or those of any
inferior Order, in Administratione sacrificiorum candida vest processerint,
did in the ministration of the Sacraments bestir themselves in a white Vesture;
so he advers. Pelag Lib. 2. with which compare St. Chrysostom in his 83 Homily
on St. Matthews Gospel, at extraordinary in his Cope.
for the Eastern Churches: And hereunto the Cope was added in some principal
Churches, especially in the Celebration of the Blessed Eucharist. Both which
appear most evidently by the first Liturgy of K. Edw. 6. compared with one of
the last clauses of the Act of Parliament, 1 Eliz. c. 2. in which it is
provided, that such ornaments of the Church and of the Ministers shall be
retained and be in use, as were in the Church of England by Authority of
Parliament in the second year of the Reign of King Edw. vi. But this Vestur^
having been discontinued (I know not by what fatal negligence) many years
together, it pleased the Bishops and Clergy in the Convocation, Anno 1603. to
pass a Canon to this purpose, viz. That in Cathedral and Collegiate Churches
the Holy Communion shall be administered upon principal Feast days, sometimes
by the Bishops, etc. and that the principal Minister using a decent Cope, etc.
Canon 24.

9. In that part of Divine Service which concerns the offering of The Priest in
his officiating the Divine Service of the Church,
it was required of the Priest or Presbyter; first, that in all the days and
times appointed, he used the Prayers prescribed in the public Liturgy,
according to the Act of Parliament, 1 Eliz. c. 2. and many subsequent Canons
and Constitutions, made in that behalf. Secondly, That he conformed himself to
those Rites and Ceremonies, which were prescribed in that Book, and unto such
as should be afterward ordained by the Queens Majesty, with the advice of her
Commissioners appointed, and authorized under the great Seal of England, for
causes Ecclesiastical, or of the Metropolitan of this Realm, as may be most for
the advancement of Gods Glory, the edifying of his Church, and the due
reverence of Christ's Holy Mysteries and Sacraments. Restrained to his appointed
Postures,
And thirdly, and more particularly, That in his reading of the Prayers and
Psalms, he turn his face toward the East, and toward the People in the reading
of the Lessons or Chapters, as appears plainly by the Rubric which directs him
thus, That after the reading of the Psalms, the Priest shall read two Lessons
distinctly, that the people may hear; the Priest that reads the two Lessons
standing, and turning himself so as he may best be heard of all such as be
present. The Psalms or Hymns to be indifferently said or sung at the will of
the Minister; but the Hymns for the most part sung with Organs, and sometimes
with other Musical Instruments; both in the Royal Chapels and Cathedral
Churches. Not permitted to use any Form of his own Composing.
Fourthly, That he makes use of no other Prayers in the Congregation; (and
therefore neither before nor after Sermon) then those which are prescribed in
the said Book of Common Prayer: it being specially provided in the Act
aforesaid, that no Priest, nor Minister shall use any other Rite, Ceremony,
Order, Form, or manner of Celebrating the Lords Supper openly, or privately, or
Mattens, Evening Song, Administration of the Sacraments, or other open Prayers
(that is to say, such Prayers as are meant for others to come unto or hear,
either in common Churches, Tied to officiate daily both at morning and evening,
or private Chapels, etc.) then is mentioned or set forth in the same Book.
Fifthly, That all Priests and Deacons shall be bound to say daily the Morning
and Evening Prayer, either privately or openly, except they be let by
Preaching, studying of Divinity, or some other urgent cause. And sixthly, That
the Curate that ministers in every Parish Church, or Chapel, being at home,
and not being otherwise reasonably let, shall say the same in the Parish
Church or Chapel where he ministers, and shall toll a Bell thereto at
convenient time, before he begin, that such as ar^ disposed, but
may come to hear Gods Word, and pray with him; so as in some cases it may be
said of the Priest, as the Father does of Christ, that he is, Os ipsum per quod
loquimur, The very mouth by which we speak unto our Father which is in Heaven.
And though it be intended in the Act of Parliament, and expressed in the Articles
of Religion, that the Prayers are to be made in such a tongue as may be
understood of the common people; yet it is not meant as is declared in the
Preface to the Book it self, With a liberty of officiating in the Latin tongue
at some times and places.
but that when men say Morning and Evening Prayers privately, they may say the
same in any language that they themselves understand. Nor was it meant but that
the Morning and Evening Service might be used in the Colleges and Halls of
either University in the Latin tongue, where all may be supposed to understand
it; as appears clearly by the constant and continual practice of Christ-Church
in Oxon, in which the first Morning Prayers commonly read about six of the
Clock, were in Latin: the Morning and Evening Service, with the Psalms of
David, being printed in Latin by themselves for that end and purpose.

Word, that belongs properly and originally (as the performance of all other
Divine Offices did of old) to the Bishops themselves, Presbyters not to Preach
without being Licenced,
as being the ordinary Pastors of the several and respective Diocesses; and to
the Priests no otherwise then by deputation, as Curates, and substitutes to the
Bishops, as may be proved out of the Instrument of their Institution. For when
a Clerk is to be admitted into any Benefice, he puts himself upon his knees;
and the Bishop laying one Hand upon his Head, and having the Instrument in the
other, repeats these words, viz. Te N. N. ad Rectoriam, de N. Rite and Canonice
instituimus, curam and regimen animarum Parochianorum ibidem tibi in Domino
committentes, and committimus per presents; that is to say, that he does
institute him into the said Benefice, according to the Laws and Canons;
committing to him by these presents, the care and Government of the Souls of
all the Parishioners therein: And therefore it concerns the Bishop not to
License any man to Preach to the Congregation, of whose good affections to the
Public, abilities in Learning, sobriety of Life and Conversation, and
conformity to the Government, Discipline, and form of Worship here by Law
established, he has not very good assurance. For though the Priest or
Presbyter by his Ordination has Authority to preach the word of God in the
Congregation, yet it is with this clause of Limitation, By whom they were to be
so licenced,
If he shall be so appointed; that is to say, sufficiently Licenced thereunto
and not otherwise. And none were Licenced heretofore, as was expressly ordered
in the injunctons of Edward VI. and Queen Elizabeth, but either by the Bishop
of the Diocese, who is to answer by the Law (for every Minister he admits into
the same) for that Diocese only: or by the Metropolitan of the Province, for
that Province alone; or finally by either of the Universities (upon the well
performing of some public exercise) over all the Kingdom. And why they were
directed to the reading of Homilies.
Considering therefore that every man that could pronounce well, was not found
able to endite, and every man that could endite, not being to be trusted in a
business of such weight and moment; it seemed good in the Wisdom of the first
Reformers to compile some good and profitable Sermons (called by the name of
Homilies) to be read carefully and distinctly on the Sundays and Holy days
for the instruction of the people.

11. Such course was taken for the peace and edification of the Reformers,
Preaching or Homilizing only once a day on the Sundays and Holy days.
, not only in the choice of the men to whom they gave Licenses to preach, but
in supplying the defect and want of such preaching by the Book of Homilies: and
they had as great a care too for the keeping the people in good stomach, not
cloying them with continual Preaching, or Homilizing: but limiting them to once
a day, as appears by the Rubric after the Nicene (or rather the
Constantinopolitan Creed.) One Sermon or Homily in the mornings of Sundays and
other Holy days, for the edification of the ^lder; and Catechizing by way of
question and answer in the afternoon, for the instruction of the younger, was
esteemed sufficient. Lectures upon the week days were not raised upon this
foundation, but were brought in afterward, borrowed by Travers and the ^est,
Lectures upon working days, by whom, and for what ends erected,
toward the latter end of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, from the new fashions of
Geneva; the Lecturer being super-added to the Parson, or Vicar, as the Doctor
was unto the Pastor in some foreign Churches. Nor were they raised so much out
of care and conscience, for training up the people in the ways of Faith and
Piety, as to advance a Faction, and to alienate the peoples minds from the
Government and Forms of Worship here by Law established. For these Lecturers
having no dependence upon the Bishops, and
nor taking the Oath of Canonical Obedience to them, nor subscribing to the
doctrine and established Ceremonies, made it their work to please those Patrons,
on whose arbitrary maintenance they were planted, Of the dangers which arose
from the Institution.
and consequently to carry on the Puritan interest, which their Patron drove
at. A generation of men neither Lay, nor Clergy, having no place at all in the
Prayers of the Church, where we find mention only of Bishops, Pastors, and
Curates; nor being taken notice of in the terms of Law, as being neither
Parsons, nor Vicars: or, to speak them in the vulgar proverb, neither flesh,
nor fish, nor good red herring: No creature in the world so like them as the
Bats, or Reremice; being neither Birds, nor Beasts, and yet both together. Had
these men been looked upon in time, before their numbers were increased, and
their power grown formidable, before the people went a madding after new
inventions, most of the mischiefs which have thence ensued might have been
prevented. And had there been more reading of Homilies in which the Reader
speaks the sense of the Church; and not so much of Sermonizing, in which the
Preacher many times speaks his own factious and erron^ous sense; the people
might have been trained up in no less knowledge, but in much more obedience
then they have been in these latrer times.

Rome, Of Sacraments and Sacramentals.
this Church has brought them back to two (as generally necessary to
salvation) Baptism, and the Holy Supper: Four of the rest, that is to say,
Marriage, Orders, Confirmation, and the Visitation (though not the Extreme
Unction) of the Sick being retained under the name of Sacramentals in our
public Liturgy: Of which the Book of Consecrating Archbishops and Bishops,
etc. is by the Act of Parliament 8 Eliz. c. 1. affirmed to be a Supplement, or
Additional only (added, put to, and annexed, as the words do vary) to the said
Book of Common Prayer. And of these four, two are reserved unto the Bishop,
that is to say, Confirmation, and the giving of Orders; the other two, viz.
Marriage, and the Visitation of the Sick, being common to both alike, though
executed in the most part by the Presbyter only. Of those reserved unto the
Bishop, the one is so reserved ad necessitatem operis, because it cannot be
done without him: the other ad honorem sacerdotii (as the Schools distinguish)
because it cannot be well done but by him. No orders to be given but by Bishops
only,
Touching the first, we have the general consent of all ancient Writers, and
the example of Coluthus, who took upon him the ordaining of Presbyters,
contrary to the Rules of the Church, and the Canons of the most famous
Councils. But when the business came to be examined, his Ordinations were
declared to be null and void, because he was a Presbyter only, and not a
Bishop; as is affirmed by Athanasius in Apol. 2. The other grounded on the 8th.
Chapter of the Acts, as St Cyprian in his 73. Epistle tells us; and
Confirmation reckoned for one of their peculiars.
where Peter and John are said to have laid hands on them in Samaria, which had
been before Baptized in the Name of the Lord Jesus, that they might receive the
Holy Ghost, and that by laying on of their hands they did receive the Holy
Ghost accordingly, verse 16, 17. Quod nunc quoque apud nos geritur, etc. Which
is also done, says St. Cyprian (and Cyprian flourisht in the middle of the
third Century) amongst our selves, when they which be already Baptized, are
brought unto the Prelates of the Church ( Praepositis Ecclesiae offeruntur)
that by our Prayer and Imposition of our hands they may receive the Holy Ghost,
and be strengthened by the Seal of the Lord. Upon which grounds (be^i^^^ ^he
great antiquity of it) it was retained by the first Reformers, as in the
Rubric before Confirmation, in the Common Prayer Book. And ^ad it been as
diligently practiced by the Bishops in the declining times of this Church, as
it was piously and religiously retained by them, it would have much conduced to
their sa^e standing in the Church, and procured a greater veneration to their
Persons also. The other two, viz. Marriage, The rest promisenously permitted to
the Presbyter also.
and the Visitation of the Sick, together with the Burial of the Dead, and the
Churching of Women after Childbirth, are left to the officiating of the
Priest, or Parochial Minister, unless the Bishop please to take that work upon
himself in some certain cases.

13. But as for Penance (one of the seven Sacraments in the Church Rome) we
must look upon in a double capacity. Penance how far retained in the Church of
England.
First, As it was solemnly performed on Ashwednesday, as a preparative to the
approaching Feast of Easter; the people humbling themselves before the Lord in
Sackcloth and Ashes, whence it had the name. And secondly, As imposed on such
particular persons, as lay under the censures of the Church. Touching the
first, it is related in the beginning of the Commination, that in the Primitive
Church there was a godly Discipline, Not only as commemorated on Ashwednesday
yearly,
That at the beginning of Lent, such persons as were notorious sinners were put
to open Penance, and punished in this world, that their Souls might be saved in
the day of the Lord, and that others admonished by their example might be the
more afraid to offend. The Restitution of which godly Discipline, though they
much desired; yet finding that the times were not like to bear it, they
contented themselves with prescribing a form of Commination, but
to be observed upon that day, containing a recital of Gods Curses thundered
out against impenitent Sinners, to be publicly read out of the Pulpit, by the
Priest or Presbyter; subjoyning thereunto one of the Penitential Psalms, with
certain Prayers which had been used in the Formularies of the times foregoing;
As judicially imposed on scandalous and notorious Sinners in the open
Consistory.
and then proceeding to the Epistle and Gospel (with the rest of the Communion
Service) appointed for the first day of Lent in the public Liturgy. As for the
other sort of Penance, there was not any thing more frequent in the practice of
the Church, and the dispensation of the Keys, then the imposing of it by the
Bishops and their Officers, upon Adulterers, Fornicators, and such as otherwise
have given scandal by their irregular course of life, or by their obstinate
inconformity to the Rites and Ceremonies here by Law established: upon
performance of which Penance in the face of the Church, or in the way of
Commutation for the use of the poor, they were to have the benefit of
Absolution, and consequently be restored to the peace and bosom of the Church.
And though there be no form prescribed in our Liturgy, for the reconciling of a
Penitent after the performance of his Penance, which I have many times wondered
at; yet so much care was taken in the Convocation of the year 1640. that no
Absolution should be given, but by the Bishop himself in person, or by some
other in Holy Orders, having Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, or by some grave
Minister, (being a Master of Arts at the least) and Beneficed within the
Diocese, to be appointed by the Bishop, the same to be performed in the open
Consistory, or some Church or Chapel, the Penitent humbly craving, and taking
it upon his knees, Can. 13. Which was as much as could be done in that point of
time.

Consecration of Churches truly Primitive.
the place of public Worship they call generally (according to the style of
the ancient Fathers) by the name of the Church. For consecrating or setting
apart whereof to Religious uses, I find so great authority in the Primitive
times, as will sufficiently free it from the guilt of Popery: Witness the
testimony which Pope Pius gives of his Sister Eutorepia, in an Epistle to
Iustus Viennensis, Anno 158. or thereabouts, for setting apart her own House
for the use and service of the Church: Witness the testimony which Metaphrastes
gives of Felix the first, touching his Consecrating of the house of Cicilia,
about the year 272. And that which Damasus gives unto Marcellinus, who
succeeded Felix, Honored with Dedication Feasts.
for consecrating the house of Lucinia for Religious uses: witness the famous
consecration of the Temple of the Holy Martyrs in Jerusalem, founded by
Constantine the Great, at which almost all the Bishops in the Eastern parts
were summoned, and called together by the Emperors Writ: and finally (not to
descend to the following times) witness the 89th Sermon of St. Ambrose,
entitled, De Dedicatione Basilicae, and
Preached at the Dedication of a Church built by Vitalianus and Majanus, and
the invitation of Paulinus, another Bishop of that Age, made by Sulpitius
Severus his especial Friend, Ad Basilicam quae pro rexerat, in nomine Domini
consummabitur, dedicandum, to be present at the Dedication of a Church of his
foundation: which Dedications, Those Feasts made annually,
as they were solemnized with Feastings, for entertainment of the company which
resorted to them; so were those Feasts perpetuated in succeeding Ages by an
annual Repetition, or Remembrance of them: such annual Dedication-Feasts being
called in England, and
Wakes, or Revels, and in some places only Feasts, according the style and
phrase of their several Countries. I must confess that there occurs no form of
such Consecration in our English Liturgies: Of the Form of Consecration
observed, but not prescribed since the Reformation.
those times were more inclinable to the pulling down of old Churches, then
building of new; witness the demolition of so many Hospitals, Chanteries, and
Free Chapels in the unfortunate minority of King Edward vi. But when the times
were better settled, and that new Churches began to be erected, and the old
ones to be repaired, some Bishops made a Form of Consecrating to be used by
themselves on such occasions. And others followed a Form composed by Bishop
Andrews; a man as much averse as any, from the Corruptions and Superstitions of
the Church of Rome. But if the Convocation of the Year 1640. had not been so
precipitated to a speedy conclusion by the tumults of unruly people, it is
probable, if not certain, that a Canon had been passed for digesting an uniform
order of such Consecrations, as there was made a body of Visitation-Articles
for the public use of all that exercised Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, which
every Bishop and Archdeacon had before fashioned for themselves.

15. Next to the Consecration of Churches, follows in course the What kind of
Images they are, which were prohibited by the Queens Injunctions.
not only required by several Canons and Injunctions of Queen Elizabeth's time,
the Canons of the Year 1603. and some Rubricks in the Book of Common Prayer;
but also by some Homilies which were made of purpose to excite the people
thereunto: that is to say, the Homilies of the right use of the Church, for
repairing and keeping clean the Church, and of the time and place of Prayer.
The question is, whether the use of painted Images on the Walls or Windows were
tolerated or forbidden by the Rule of the Reformation; They which conceive them
to have been forbidden by the Rules of the Church, allege for defense of their
opinion, the Queens injunction, published in the first year of her Reign, Anno
1559. the Articles of the Regal Visitation following thereupon, and the main
scope of the three Homilies against the peril of Idolatry. In the first of
which it was ordered, first, That to the intent that all Superstition, and
Hypocrisy crept into diverse men's hearts might vanish away, no Ecclesiastical
persons should set forth or extol the Dignity of any Images, Relics, or
Miracles; but declaring the abuse of the same, they shall teach that all
goodness, health, and grace ought to be both asked and looked for only of God
as the very author and giver of the same, and of none other. Number. 2. And
secondly, That they shall take away, utterly extinct, and destroy all Shrines,
coverings of Shrines, all Tables, Candlesticks, Trindals, and Rolls of Wax,
Pictures, Paintings, and all other Monuments of fained Miracles, Pilgrimages,
Idolatry, and Superstition; so that there remain no memory of the same, in
Walls, Glass-Windows, or elsewhere, within their Churches and Houses;
preserving and repairing nevertheless both the Walls and Glass-Windows: and
that they should exhort all their Parishioners to do the like, within their
several Houses, Number. 23. For which last, there follows afterward a more
special Injunction, Numb. 35. The Articles of the Regal Visitation,
According whereunto this Article was framed to the Visitation. viz. Whither in
all Churches, and Chapels, all Images, Shrines, Tables, Candlesticks,
Trindals, and Rolls of Wax, Pictures, Paintings, and other Monuments of feigned
and false Miracles, Pilgrimages, Idolatry, and Superstition, were removed,
abolished, and destroyed, Numb. 2. But these objections carried their own
answers in them, it being manifest by the words both of the Articles and
Injunctions, that it never was the meaning of the Queen, her Council, or
Commissioners, to condemn, abolish, or deface all Images, either of Christ
himself, or of any of the Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors, and other
godly Fathers in the Church of Christ; the abuse whereof is ordered to be
reformed by the first Injunction, and
but only to remove such Pictures of false and feigned Miracles, as had no
truth of being, or existence in Nature; and therefore were the more abused to
Superstition, and Idolatry in the times of Popery. In answer to such passages
as are alleged out the said Homilies, it is replied; first, that is confessed
in the beginning of the last of the said three Homilies, that Images in
Churches are not simply forbidden by the New Testament, Hom. Fol. 39. And
therefore no offense committed against the Gospel, if they be used only for
History, Example, and stirring up of pure Devotion in the souls of men; in
which respect called not unfitly by Pope Gregory, The Lay-mans Books. Secondly,
The Compilers of those Homilies were the more earnest in point of removing or
excluding Images, the better to wean the People from the sin of Idolatry, in
which they had been trained up from their very infancy, What is to be said in
answer to such passages as are found against them in the Book of Homilies.
and were not otherwise to be weaned from it, then by taking away the occasions
of it. And thirdly, All that vehemence is used against them; not as
intolerable in themselves, but as they might be made in those broken and
unsettled times an occasion of falling, before men could be fully instructed in
the right use of them; as appears plainly by these passages, viz. Our Images
also have been, and be, (and if they be publicly suffered in Churches, and
Chapels) ever will be also worshipped, and so Idolatry committed to them, p.
13. So hard it is, and indeed impossible any long time to have Images publicly
in Churches and Temples without Idolatry, fol. 33. And finally by the passage
which before we touched at, where after much vehemence, not only against
Idolatry and Worshipping of Images, but also against Idols and Images
themselves, the heats thereof are qualified by this expression, viz, I mean
always thus herein, in that we be stirred and provoked by them, to worship
them; and not as though they were simply forbidden by the New Testament,
without such occasion and danger, ibid. fol. 39. And thereupon it is first
alleged by those of contrary judgment, that all such as lived in times of
Popery, being long since dead, and the people of this last age sufficiently
instructed in the unlawfulness of worshipping such painted Images, they may be
lawfully used in Churches, without fear of Idolatry, which seems to have been
the main inducement for their first defacing. Secondly, Many of the Eastern
Churches, which notwithstanding do abominate the Superstitions of the Church of
Rome, retained the use of painted Images, though they reject those which were
cut, and carved. Thirdly, That Images are still used in the Lutheran Churches,
upon which our first Reformers had a special eye; and that Luther much reproved
Carolostadius for taking them out of such Churches, where before they had been
suffered to stand, letting him know, Ex mentibus hominum potius removendas,
that the worship of Images, was rather to be taken out of men's minds by
diligent and painful preaching, then the Images themselves to be so rashly, and
unadvisedly cast out of the Churches. That painted Images were not only
retained in the Chapels of the Queen, and of many great men of the Realm, in
most of the Cathedral Churches, and in some private Churches and Chapels also,
without any defacing (witness the curious painted Glass in the Cathedral Church
of Canterbury, the Parish Church of Faireford in the County of Gloucester, and
the Chapel of the Holy Ghost, near Basingstoke) but a rich and massy Crucifix
was kept for many years together, on the Table or Altar of the Chapel Royal in
Whitehal (as appears by Saunders and Du Chesne) till it was broke in pieces by
Pach, the Queens Fool (when no wiser man could be got to do it) upon the secret
instigation of Sir Francis Knollis: and finally, it appears by the Queens
Injunctions, that the Priests being commanded not to extol the dignity of any
Images, Relics, etc. and the people diligently to teach, that all Goodness,
Health, and Grace ought to be asked and looked for only at the hands of God,
whereby all Superstition might be taken out of their hearts, the Images might
lawfully remain as well in public Churches, as in private Houses, as they had
done formerly.

16. As for the times of public Worship, we must behold them Institution, The
Lords Day built upon the same foundation with the other Holy days,
and their Observation. And first, as for their Institution it is agreed on of
all hands, that the Annual Feasts, Saints Days, or Holy Days, as now commonly
called, do stand on no other ground then the Authority of the Church, which at
first ordained them; some in one age, and some in another, till they grow unto
so great a number, that it was thought fit by King Henry viii. and afterward
by King Edward vi. to abolish such of them as might best be spared. Nor stands
the Sunday, or Lords Day (according to the Doctrine of the Church of England)
on any other ground then the rest of the Holy days; for in the Homily touching
the time and place of Prayer, according to the Book of Homilies,
it is thus doctrinally resolved, viz. As concerning the time in which God has
appointed his people to assemble together solemnly, it does appear by the
fourth Commandment, etc. Which Example and Commandment of God, the godly
Christian people began to follow, after the Ascension of our Lord Christ, and
began to choose them a standing day in the week to come together in; yet not the
seventh day, which the Jews kept, but the Lords day, and
the day of the Lords Resurrection, the day after the seventh day, which is the
first day of the week, etc. This makes the matter clear enough, and yet the
Statute 5 and 6 of Edw. vi. in which all the Prelates did concur with the other
Estates, makes it clearer then the Homily does Forasmuch (says the Statute) as
men be not at all times so mindeful to laud and praise God, The Act of
Parliament, 5.6 of EDW. vi.
so ready to resort to hear Gods holy Word, and come to the holy Communion,
etc. as their bounden duty does require; therefore to call men to remembrance
of their duty, and to help their infirmities, it has been wholesomely
provided, that there should be some certain days and times appointed wherein
Christians should cease from all kinds of labor, and apply themselves only
and wholly unto the aforesaid holy works properly pertaining to true Religion,
etc. Neither is it to be thought that there is any certain times or definite
number of days prescribed in Holy Scripture: but the appointment both of the
time, and also of the number of days, is left by the Authority of Gods Word,
unto the Liberty of Christ's Church to be determined and assigned orderly in
every Country by the discretion of the Rulers and Ministers thereof, as they
shall judge most expedient to the setting forth of Gods Glory, and the
edification of their people. Now for the number and particularities of those
days which were required to be kept holy to the Lord, they are thus specified
and enumerated in the Common Prayer Book, confirmed by Parliament in that year.
These to be kept Holy Days, and no other; that is to say, all Sundays in the
Year, the Feast of the Circumcision of our Lord and Savior, the Feast of the
Epiphany, etc. Which specification and enumeration, is made also in the
aforesaid Statute.

What works of labor were permitted on the Lords Day, and the other Holy days,
the same Divine Offices prescribed for both; the diligent attendance of the
people required in both; the penalties upon such as wilfully and frequently did
absent themselves, were the same for both; and finally the works of necessary
labor no more restrained upon the one then upon the other. For first it is
declared in the foresaid Homily, that Christian People are not tied so
straightly to observe and keep the other Ceremonies of the Sabbath day, by the
Book of Homilies.
as were the Jews, as touching the forbearing of the work and labor in time of
great necessity, etc. Secondly, and more particularly in the Statute
beforementioned we find it thus, viz. That it shall be lawful for every
Husbandman, Fisherman, and to all and every other person or persons, of what
Estate, Degree, or Condition he or they be upon the Holy Days aforesaid (of
which the Lords Day is there reckoned for one) in Harvest, The Statute 5. and
6. of EDW. vi.
or at any other times in the Year, when necessity shall so require, to Labor,
Ride, Fish, or Work any kind of Work at their own will and pleasure. The
Injunctions of King EDW. vi.
Thirdly, It is ordered in the Injunctions of the said King Edw. vi. that it
shall be lawful for the people in time of Harvest to labor upon Holy and
Festival Days, and save that thing which God has sent; and that scrupulosity
to abstain from working on those days, and
does grievously offend God. Fourthly, We find the like in the Injunctions of
Queen Elizabeth, published with the advice of her Council, Of Queen ELIZ.
Anno 1559. Being the first year of her Reign, viz. That all persons, Vicars,
Curates, shall teach and declare unto their Parishioners, that they may with a
safe and quiet conscience after Common Prayer in the time of Harvest labor
upon the Holy and Festival Days, and save that thing which God has sent. And
if for any scrupulosity or grudge of Conscience, men shall superstitiously
abstain from working on those days, that then they should grievously offend
and displease God. And as for the practice of the Court, it was ordered by the
said King Edward, Practiced accordingly in the Court from that time to this.
That the Lords of the Council should upon Sunday attend the public affairs of
the Realm, and dispatch answers to Letters for the good order of the State, and
make full dispatches of all things concluded in the Week before: Provided, that
they be present at Common Prayers, and that on every Sunday night the Kings
Secretary should deliver him a memorial of such things as were to be debated in
the Privy Council the week ensuing. Which course of meeting in the Council on
Sunday in the afternoon, has been continued in the Court, from the time of the
said King Edward the vi. to the death of King Charles, without dislike or
interruption. If then the Country people in some times and cases were permitted
to employ themselves in bodily labor on the Sundays and other Holy Days; and
if the Lords of the Council did meet together on those days to consult about
affairs of State, as we see they did, there is no question to be made but that
all man-like exercises, all lawful Recreations and honest Pastimes were allowed
of also.

18. As for the duties of the people in those times and places, it Reverence
required of the people at their first entrance in to the Church*
that due and lowly reverence should be made at their first entrance into the
Church; the place on which they stood, being by Consecration made Holy Ground,
and the business which they came about being holy business. For this there was
no Rule nor Rubric made by the first Reformers, and it was not necessary that
there should; the practice of Gods people in that kind being so universal, Vi
Catholicae consuetudinis, by virtue of a general and continual usage, According
to the practice of the Primitive times,
that there was no need of any Canon to enjoin them to it: Nothing more
frequent in the Writings of the ancient Fathers then Adoration toward the East,
which drew the Primitive Christians into some suspicion of being Worshippers of
the Sun, Inde suspicio, quod innotuerit nos versus orientis regionem praecari,
as Tertullian has it. and
And though this pious custom began to be disused, and was almost discontinued,
yet there remains some footsteps of it to this very day. For first, It was
observed by the Knights of the most noble Order of the Garter, The example of
the Knights of the Garter, etc.
(who I am sure hate nothing more then Superstitious Vanities) at their
approaches toward the Altar in all the Solemnities of that Order. Secondly, In
the Offerings or Oblations made by the Vice Chancellor, the Proctors, and all
Proceeders in the Arts and Faculties at the Act at Oxon. And thirdly, By most
Country Women, who in the time of my first remembrance, and a long time after,
made their obeisance toward the East, before they betook themselves to their
Seats; though it was then taken (or mistaken rather) for a Courtesy made unto
the Minister; and
revived more generally in these latter times (especially amongst the Clergy)
by the Learned and Reverend Bishop Andrews, a man as much verst in Primitive
Antiquity, and as abhorrent from any thing which was merely Popish, as the
greatest Precisian in the Pack. Which point I find exceedingly well applied,
and pressed in the Speech made by this Archbishop, at the Censure of Dr.
Bastwick, Mr. Burton, on June 26. 1637. That example well enforced by
Archbishop LAUD,
Who speaking to such of the Lords as were Knights of the Garter, he accosts
them thus, And you (says he) my Honorable Lords of the Garter, in your great
solemnities, you do reverence, and to Almighty God I doubt not: but yet it is
versus Altar, toward the Altar, etc. And this your reverence you do when you
enter the Chapel, p. 47.
and when you approach nearer to offer, etc. And Idolatry it is not to worship
God toward his Holy Table; for if it had been Idolatry, I presume Queen
Elizabeth, and King James would not have practiced it, no not in this great
Solemnity. And being not Idolatry, but true Divine Worship, you will I hope
give a poor Priest leave to Worship God as your selves do. For if it be Gods
Worship, I ought to do it as well as you, and if it be Idolatry, you ought not
to do it more then I.

Kneeling and standing, when required.
it was next required by the Rubric, that they should reverently kneel at the
reading of the public Prayers, and in the receiving of the Holy Sacrament of
the Lords Supper; that they should stand up at the reading of the Apostles
Creed; and consequently at the Athanasian and Nicene also, which are as
Commentaries on that Text; as also at the frequent Repetitions of the Gloria
Patri, which is an Abridgement of the same. The reverence to be used at the
name of Jesus continued by Injunct. 52.
And in the next place it was required by the Queens Injunctions, That
whenever the Name of Jesus shall be in any Lesson, Sermon, or otherwise, in
the Church pronounced, that due reverence be made of all persons, young and
old, with lowness of courtesy, and uncovering the heads of the mankind, as
thereunto does necessarily belong, and heretofore has been accustomed. In
which it is to be observed, that though this Injunction was published in the
first year of the Queen, yet then this bowing at the Name of Jesus was looked on
as an ancient custom; not only used in Queen Mary's Reign, but also in King
Edwards time, and in those before. and
And in this case, and in that before, and in all others of that nature, it is
a good and certain rule, that all such Rites as had been practiced in the
Church of Rome, and not abolisht, nor disclaimed by any Doctrine, Law, or Canon
of the first Reformers, were to continue in the same state in which they found
them. But this commendable custom, together with all other outward reverence in
Gods public Service, being every day more and more discontinued, as the
Puritan Faction got ground amongst us, it seemed good to the Prelates, and
Clergy, assembled in Convocation, Anno 1603. to revive the same with some
enlargement, Afterward renewed by the Canon of the year* 1603.
as to the uncovering of the Head in all the acts and parts of public worship.
For thus we have it in the 18. Canon of that year, viz. No man shall cover his
head in the Church or Chapel in time of Divine Service, except he have some
Infirmity; in which case let him wear a night Cap or Coife. with
And likewise when the Name of Jesus shall be mentioned, due and lowly
reverence shall be done by all persons present, The Reasons for it.
as it has been accustomed; testifying by this outward Ceremony, and Gesture,
their inward Humility, Christian Resolution, and due acknowledgement, that the
Lord Jesus Christ the true and eternal Son of God is the only Savior of the
world, in whom alone all Graces, Mercies, and Promises of Gods love to mankind
for this life, and the life to come, are wholly comprised. In which Canon, we
have not only the Doctrine, that bowing is to be used to the Name of Jesus, but
the uses also; and not alone the custom, but the reasons of it: both grounded
on that Text of Scripture, Phil. 2.10. that at the Name of JESUS every knee
should bow, according to such expositions as were made thereof by St. Ambrose,
and others of the ancient Writers.

20. In matters which were merely doctrinal, and not practical also, The
moderate proceedings of the first Reformers,
the first Reformers carried on the work with the same equal temper, as they
did those which were either mixed or merely practical. And first, beginning with
the Pope, having discharged themselves from the Supremacy, which in the times
foregoing he had exercised over them in this Kingdom; I find no Declaration in
any public Monument, In reference to the Pope
or Records of the Church of England, that the Pope was Antichrist, whatsoever
some of them might say in their private Writings; some hard expressions there
are of him in the Book of Homilies, but none more hard then those in the
public Litany, first published by King Hen. viii. at his going to Bolongue,
and afterward retained in both Liturgies of King Edward vi. In which the
people were to pray for their deliverance from the tyranny of the Bishop of
Rome, and
and his detestable enormities, etc. This was conceived to be (as indeed it
was) a very great scandal and offense to all those in the Realm of England, who
were well affected to the Church of Rome; and therefore in the Liturgy of Queen
Elizabeth it was quite left out, the better to allure them to the Divine
Service of the Church as at first it did: And for the Church of Rome it self,
they beheld it with no other eyes, The Church of ROME.
then as a Member of the visible Church, which had for many hundred years
maintained the Fundamentals of the Christian Faith, though both unsound in
Doctrine and corrupt in Manners: Just as a man distempered in his Brain,
Diseased in all the parts of his Body, and languishing under many putrified
Sores, does still retain the being of a natural man as long as he has sense
and motion, and (in his lucid intervals) some use of Reason. They tell us in
the 19. Article, that the Church of Rome has erred not only in their living
and manner of Ceremonies, but in matters of Faith. But then they looked upon her
as a Member of the Visible Church, as well as those of Jerusalem, Antioch, and
Alexandria, which are there affirmed to have erred also. Err then she might,
and err she did indeed too grossly, and yet might notwithstanding serve as a
conduit-pipe to convey to us many of those Primitive Truths, and many of those
godly Rites and Ceremonies which she had superstitiously defiled. In which last
place it was a very pious rule, that in the Reformation of a Church, abuses
being taken away, the primitive Institution should be left remaining; Tollatur
abusus, Observed and applauded by K. JAMES.
maneat usus, as the saying is: and in the first, as piously observed by King
James in the Conference at Hampton Court, that in all Reformations, he would
not have any such departure from the Papists in all things, that because we in
some points agree with them, therefore we should be accounted to be in an
error. Let us then see how near the first Reformers did and might come unto the
Papists, and yet not join with them in their Errors to the betraying of the
Truth.

Pope they deprived of that unlimitted Supremacy, and the Church of Rome of
that exorbitant power, The Power of the Church asserted in the twentieth
Article.
which they formerly challenged over them; yet did they neither think it fit to
leave the Church without her lawful and just Authority; nor sa^e to put her out
of the protection of the Supreme Governor. Touching the first, it was resolved
in the 20. Article, " That the Church has power not only to decree Rites and
Ceremonies, but also in Controversies of Faith, as the English, Ecclesia habet
Ritus and Ceremonias Statuendi jus, and in fidei controversiis Authoritatem, as
it is in the Latin. And so it stands in the Original Acts of the Convocation,
Anno 1562. and published in the self same words both in Latin and English.
Afterward in the year 1571. by the power and prevalency of some of the
Genevian Faction the Articles were reprinted and this Clause left out. But the
times bettering, and the Governors of the Church taking just notice of the
danger which lay lurking under that omission; there was care taken that the
said clause should be restored unto its place in all following impressions of
that Book, as it has ever since continued: Nor was this part of the Article a
matter of speculation only, and not reducible to practice, In the 34th. reduced
to practice,
or if reducible to practice, not fit to be enforced upon such as gainsaid the
same. For in the 34. Article it is thus declared, That whosoever through his
private judgment willingly and purposely does openly break the Traditions and
Ceremonies of the Church, which be not repugnant unto the word of God, and be
ordained and approved by common Authority, ought to be rebuked openly (that
others may fear to do the like) as he that offends against the common order
of the Church, and
and hurts the the Authority of the Magistrate, and wounds the Consciences
of the weak Brethren. More power then this as the Sea of Rome did never
challenge; so less then this, was not reserved unto it self by the Church of
England. And as for the Authority of the Church in controversies of Faith, the
very Articles by which they declared that power (seconded by the rest of the
points which are there determined) is a sufficient Argument, Of the power
ascribed in Sacred Matters to the Kings of ENGLAND.
that they used and exercised that power which was there declared. And because
some objection had been made both by the Papists, and those of the Genevian
party, that a Papal power was granted, as at first to King Henry viii. under
the name of Supreme Head, so afterward to Queen Elizabeth and her Successors;
it was thought expedient by the Church to stop that clamor at the first; and
thereupon it was declared in the Convocation of the Prelates and Clergy (who
make the representative Body of the Church of England) in the 37. Article of
the year 1562. That whereas they had attributed to the Queens Majesty the chief
Government of all the Estates of this Realm, whether Ecclesiastical or Civil in
all cases, they did not give unto their Princes, the ministering either of Gods
Word, or of the Sacraments, but that only Prerogative which was known to have
been given always to all godly Princes, in Holy Scripture by God himself; that
is to say, that they should rule all Estates and Degrees committed to their
charge by God, whether they be Ecclesiastical or Temporal, and restrain with
the Civil Sword, the stubborn and evil doers. Less Power then this, as good
Subjects could not give unto their King, so more then this has there not been
exercised or desired by the Kings of England. Such power as was by God
vouchsafed to the godly Kings and Princes in Holy Scripture may serve
abundantly to satisfy even the unlimited desires of the mightiest Monarch,
were they as boundless as the Popes.

22. Next to the point of the Supremacy, esteemed the Principal Rome, The
Sacrament of the Lords Supper called frequently,
( primus and praecipuus Romanensis fidei Articulus) as is affirmed in the
History of the Council of Trent, the most material differences betwixt them and
us relate to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, and the natural efficacy of
good works, in which the differences betwixt them and the first Reformers seem
to be at the greatest; though even in those they came as near to them as might
stand with Piety. The Sacrament of the Lords Supper they called the Sacrament
of the Altar, The Sacrament of the Altar, as, viz. by the Act of Parliament,
as appears plainly by the Statute, 1 Edward vi. entitled, An Act against such
as speak unreverently against the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ,
commonly called the Sacrament of the ALTAR: For which consult the Body of the
Act it self. Or secondly, by Bishop Ridley (one of the chief Compilers of the
Common Prayer Book) who does not only call it the Sacrament of the Altar, by
affirming thus, that in the Sacrament of the Altar, is the natural Body and
Blood of Christ, etc. But in his Reply to an Argument of the Bishop of
Lincoln's, Bishop RIDLEY,
taken out of St. Cyril, he does resolve it thus, viz. The word Altar in the
Scripture signifies as well the Altar whereon the Jews were wont to oder their
Burnt Sacrifice, as the Table of the Lords Supper: and that St. Cyril means
by this word Altar, not the Jewish Altar, but the Table of the Lord, Bishop LA
TIMER,
etc. Acts and Mon. part 3. p. 492. and 497. Thirdly, By Bishop Latimer his
fellow Martyr who plainly grants, and
That the Lords Table may be called an Altar, and that the Doctors called it so
in many places, though there be no propitiatory Sacrifice, Some other Martyrs.
but only Christ, part 2. p. 85. Fourthly, By the several affirmations of John
Lambert, and John Philpot, two Learned and Religious men, whereof the one
suffered death for Religion under Henry viii. the other in the fiery time of
Queen Mary. This Sacrament being called by both, the Sacrament of the Altar in
their several times: for which consult the Acts and Monuments commonly called
the Book of Martyrs.

The Lords Table ordered to be placed where the Altar stood,
it was ordained in the Injunctions of Queen Elizabeth, no Altar should be
taken down, but by the oversight of the Curate of the Church, and the
Churchwardens, or one of them at least, and that the Holy Table in every
Church be decently made and set up in the place where the Altar stood, by the
Injunctions of Q. ELIZ, 1559. The Book of Orders, 1561
and there commonly covered as thereto belongs. It is besides declared in the
Book of Orders, Anno 1561. published about two years after the said Injunction,
That in the place where the Steps were, the Communion Table should stand; and
that there shall be fixed on the Wall over the Communion Board, and
the Tables of Gods Precepts imprinted for the same purpose. The like occurs in
the Advertisements published by the Metropolitan, and others the High
Commissioners, 1565. In which it is ordered, That the Parish shall provide a
decent Table, Advertis. of the year 1565.
standing on a frame for the Communion Table, which they shall decently cover
with a Carpet of Silk, or other decent covering, and with a white Lin^en Cloth
in the time of the administration, and shall set the Ten Commandments upon the
East-Wall over the said Table. All which being laid together, and
amounts to this, that the Communion Table was to stand above the steps, and
under the Commandments; therefore all along the Wall, on which the Ten
Commandments were appointed to be placed, which was directly where the Altar
had stood before. Now that the Holy Table in what posture soever it be placed,
should not be thought unuseful at all other times, but only at the time of the
Ministration; it was appointed by the Church in its first Reformation, that the
Communion-Service, At the same the second Service to be said on the Sundays
and Holy Days.
commonly called the Second Service, upon all Sundays and Holy Days, should
be read only at the Holy Table. For first, in the last Rubric before the
beginning of that Service, it is ordered, that the Priest standing at the Holy
Table shall say the Lords Prayer, with the Collect following, etc. And it is
ordered in the first Rubric after the Communion, That on the Holy Days (if
there be no Communion) shall be said all that is appointed at the Communion
until the end of the Homily; concluding with the general Prayer for Christ's
Church Militant here on earth, and one or more of the Collects before
rehearsed, as occasion shall serve. No place appointed for the reading of the
second Service, but only at the Altar, or Communion Table.

Altar; sed ubi est victima holocausti (as Isaac said unto his Father) But
where is the Lamb for the burnt-offering? The Lords Supper frequently called a
Sacrifice by
Genesis 22.7. Assuredly, if the Priest and Altar be so near, the Lamb for the
Burnt-Offering cannot be far off, even the most blessed Lamb of God; which
takes away the sins of the world, as the Scripture styles him, whose Passion
we find commemorated in the Sacrament, called therefore the Sacrament of the
Altar, as before is said: The Ancient Fathers
called for the same reason by St. Augustine in his Enchiridion, Sacrificium
Altaris, the Sacrifice of the Altar; by the English Liturgy in the Prayer next
after the participation; the Sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving (Sacrificium
laudis;) by Chrysostom, (...), the remembrance of a Sacrifice; by many Learned
Writers amongst our selves, By many Learned men amongst our selves.
a commemorative Sacrifice. For thus says Bishop Andrews in his answer to
Cardinal Bellarmine, c. 8. Tollite de Missa Transubstantiationem vestram nec
di^ nobiscum lis erit de Sacrificio, etc. Take from the Mass your
Transubstantiation, and we will have no difference with you about the
Sacrifice. And the King grants (he means the learned Prince, King James) the
name of a Sacrifice to have been frequent with the Fathers. Which Sacrifice he
sometimes calls Commemorationem Sacrificii, and sometimes Sacrificium
Commemorativum, A Commemorative Sacrifice. The like we find in Bishop Morton,
who in his Book of the Roman Sacrifice, l. 6. c. 5. called the Eucharist, a
representative and commemorative Sacrifice, in as plain terms as can be spoken.
Some of our godly Martyrs also,
But what need any thing have been said for the proof hereof, when the most
Reverend Archbishop Cranmer, one (and the chief) of the Compilers of the
public Liturgy, and one who suffered death for opposing the Sacrifice of the
Mass, distinguishes most plainly between the Sacrifice propitiatory, made by
Christ himself only, and the Sacrifice commemorative and gratulatory made by
Priests and People: for which consult his Defense against Bishop Gardener, lib.
5. p. 439. And finally the testimony of John Lambert, who suffered for his
Conscience in the time of King Henry viii. whose words are these: Christ (says
he) being offered up once for all in his own proper person, is yet said to be
offered up, not only every year at Easter, but also every day in the
Celebration of the Sacrament; because his Oblations once for all, made it
thereby represented, Act. Mon. p. 2.35. So uniform is the consent of our
Liturgy, our Martyrs, and our Learned Writers in the name of Sacrifice; and
so that we may behold the Eucharist or the Lords Supper. First, as it is a
Sacrifice, or the Commemoration of that Sacrifice offered unto God; by which
both we and the whole Church do obtain remission of our Sins, and all other
benefits of Christ's Passion. And secondly, In what respect.
As it is a Sacrament, participated by men, by which we hope, that being made
partakers of that Holy Communion we may be fulfilled with his Grace and
heavenly Benediction. Both which occur in the next Prayer after the Communion.
Look on it as a Sacrifice, and then the Lords Board not improperly may be
called an Altar, as it is properly called the Table in respect of the Sacrament.

25. With the like uniform consent we find the Doctrine of a Real Presence in
the Blessed Sacrament of the Lords Supper to be maintained and taught in the
first Constitution of this Church: A Real Presence proved
and this is first concluded from the words of Distribution, by
retained in the first Liturgy of King Edward vi. and formerly prescribed in
the ancient Missals, viz. The public Liturgy,
The Body and Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ which was given for thee, preserve
thy Body and Soul unto life everlasting. The Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ,
which was shed for thee, etc. Which words being thought by some precise and
scrupulous persons to incline too much toward Transubstantiation (and therefore
not unfit to justify a Real Presence) were quite omitted in the second Liturgy
of that King: the words of Participation, Take and eat this, etc. Take and
drink this, etc. being used in the place thereof. Which alteration
notwithstanding, it is affirmed by Bishop Ridley (one of the principal
Compilers of these two Books) that in the Sacrament of the Altar is the natural
Body and Blood of Christ. By Bishop RIDLEY.
And if there be the Natural Body, there must needs be a Real Presence in his
opinion. When this last Liturgy was reviewed by the command of Queen Elizabeth,
Anno 1558. the former clause was super-added to the other, which put the
business into the same state and condition in which we find it at the first.
And when by the Articles of Religion, agreed upon in Convocation, Anno 1562.
the Sacrifice of the Mass was declared to be a pernicious Imposture, a
blasphemous Figment, and that Transubstantiation was declared to be repugnant
to the plain words of Holy Scripture, By Mr. Alex. Nowel.
to overthrow the Nature of a Sacrament, and to have given occasion to many
Superstitions; yet still the Doctrine of a Real Presence was maintained as
formerly. Alexander Nowel, Dean of St. Paul's, was chosen Prolocutor for that
Convocation, and therefore as like to know the true intent and meaning of the
Church of England in every point which was there concluded, as any other
whatsoever; and yet he thought it no contradiction to any of them to maintain
and teach a Real Presence. For in his Catechism publicly allowed of in all the
Grammar Schools of this Realm, he first propounds this question, viz. Coelestis
pars and ab omni sensu externo long disjuncta, quaenam est? etc. that is to
say, What is the Heavenly, or Spiritual part of the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, which no sense is able to discover? To which the party Catechized
returns this answer, Corpus and Sanguis Christi, quae fidelibus in coena
dominica praebentur, ab illis accipiuntur, comeduntur, and bibuntur, coelesti
tantum and spirituali modo, and
vere tamen atque reipsa. That is to say, the heavenly or spiritual part is the
Body and Blood of Christ which are given to the faithful in the Lords Supper,
and are taken, eaten, and drank by them; which though it be only in an heavenly
and spiritual manner; yet are they both given and taken truly, and really, or
in very deed. Conform to which we have in brief the Suffrage of the Right
Learned Bishop Bilson, who lived the greatest part of his time with the said
Mr. Nowel, by whom we are told in his Book of True Subject. etc. p. 779. And he
tells it with a God forbid, By Bishop BILSON.
that we deny not, That the Flesh and Blood of Christ are truly present, and
truly received of the faithful at the Lords Table.

James, The same confirmed ^y the words of the Catechism
by whose appointment, with the consent of the Metropolitan, some of the
Bishops and other learned men of the Clergy, it was ordered in the Conference
at Hampton Court, that the Doctrine of the Sacraments should be added to the
Authorized Catechism of the Church where before it was not: in which addition
to the Catechism, it is said expressly, That the Body and Blood of Christ are
verily and indeed taken of the Faithful in the Lords Supper. Verily and indeed,
says the English Book, Vere and reipsa, or Vere and realiter, says the Latin
Translations; by which the Church does teach us to understand, that Christ is
truly and really present (though after a spiritual manner) in that Blessed
Sacrament. And that this was the Churches meaning will be made apparent, by the
Testimony of some of the most learned men, which have written since; two of
which I shall here produce, that out of the mouths of two such Witnesses, As
also by the testimony of Bishop ANDREWS.
the truth hereof may be established. The first of these shall be the most
eminent Bishop Andrews, a contemporary of the said Bishop Bilson, who in his
answer unto Cardinal Bellarmine, thus declares himself, Presentiam credimus non
minus quam vos veram, deinde presentiae nil temere definimus: We acknowledge
(says he) a presence as true and real as you do, but we determine nothing
rashly of the manner of it. The second shall be Bishop Morton, Bishop Morton.
as great an enemy to the Errors and Superstitions of the Church of Rome, as
any that ever wrote against it, who could not but be sixty years of age at the
death of Bishop Andrews; and he affirms expressly, That the question betwixt us
and the Papists is not concerning a Real Presence, which the Protestants (as
their own Jesuits witness) do also profess. Fortunatus, a Protestant, holding
that Christ is in the Sacrament most Really, Verissime, Realissime, as his
words* are. By which it seems it is agreed on on both sides (that is to say,
the Church of England, and the Church of Rome) that there is a true and real
Presence of Christ in the Holy Eucharist; the disagreement being only in the
modus presentiae.

27. The like Dispute is also raised de modo descensus, touching the Descending
into Hell, The Article of Christ's descent made figurative
which the Papists will have to be only partial, and to extend no farther then
to the upper Region of that infernal Habitation, called by them commonly Limbus
Patrum. The Calvinists will have it to be only figurative, no descent at all,
and they are sub-divided into three opinions. Calvin himself interprets it of
our Saviors Sufferings on the Cross, in which he underwent all those torments,
by
even to Desperation, which the damned do endure in Hell. Calvin,
Many of the Calvinian party understand nothing by Christ's Descent into Hell,
but his Descending into the Grave; and
and then his descending into Hell will be the same with his being buried,
Which Tautology in such a short summary of the Christian Faith cannot be easily
admitted. The Lord Primate,
And therefore the late Lord Primate of Ireland not liking either of their
opinions, will find a new way by himself; in which I cannot say what leaders
he had, but I am sure he has had many followers. And he by Christ's descending
into Hell, will have nothing else to be understood but his continuing in the
State of Separation between the Body and the Soul, but
his remaining under the power of death during the time that he lay buried in
the Grave, which is no more in effect though it differ somewhat in the terms,
then to say he dyed and was buried, and rose not again till the third day, as
the Creed instructs us; and then we are but where we were with the other
Calvinists. Justified to be Local,
But on the contrary, the Church of England does maintain a Local Descent, that
is to say, That the Soul of Christ at such time as his Body lay in the Grave,
did Locally Descend into the neathermost parts, in which the Devil and his
Angels are reserved in everlasting Chains of Darkness, unto the Judgment of the
great and terrible Day. And this appears to be the meaning of the first
Reformers, by giving this Article a distinct place by its self, both in the
Book of Articles, published in the time of King Edward vi. Anno 1552. and in
the Book agreed upon in the Convocation of the 5. of Queen Elizabeth, By the
Articles of the Church of ENGLAND.
1564. in both which it is said expressly in the self-same words, viz. As Christ
dyed for us and was buried, so also is it to be believed that he went down into
Hell: which is either to be understood of a Local Descent, or else we are tied
to believe nothing by it, but what explicitly or implicitly is comprehended
in the former Article, in which there is particular mention of Christ's
Sufferings, Crucifying, Death, and Burial. Now that this is the Churches
meaning, cannot be better manifested then in the words of Mr. Alexander Nowel
beforementioned; who for the reasons before remembered, cannot in reason be
supposed to be ignorant of the true sense and meaning of the Church in that
particular: and he accordingly in his Catechism publicly allowed of, with
reference to a Local Descent, The words of M^. Alexander Nowel.
does declare it thus, viz. Vt Christus corpore in terrae viscera; ita anima,
corpore separata, ad inferos descendit, etc. that is, As Christ descended in
his Body into the bowels of the earth, so in his Soul, separated from that
Body, he descended also into Hell; and
by means whereof the power and efficacy of his Death was not made known only
to the dead, but to the Devils themselves: insomuch that both the souls of the
unbelievers did sensibly perceive that condemnation, which was most justly due
to them for their incredulity: and Satan himself, the Prince of Devils, did as
plainly see, that his tyranny, and all the powers of darkness were oppressed,
ruined, and destroyed. Which Doctrine (when it began to be decryed, and the
Calvinian Gloss, to get ground upon it) was learnedly asserted by Dr. Thomas
Bilson, The works of Learned Bishop Bilson.
then Bishop of Winchester, in his Book, entitled A Survey of Christ's
Sufferings; in which he has amassed together, whatsoever the Fathers, Greek
and Latin, or any of the ancient Writers have affirmed of this Article, with
all the points and branches which depend upon it,

The necessity of Baptism maintained by the first ^eform^r^*
with some of the effects thereof by his descending into Hell, being thus
dispatched, we shall next look into that of Baptism, in which we shall
consider the necessity first, and afterward the efficacy of it: And first in
reference to the Necessity. The first Reformers did not only allow the
administration of this Sacrament in private houses, but permitted it to private
persons, even to women also. For it was ordered in the Rubric of Private
Baptism, That when any great need shall compel (as in extremity of weakness)
they which are present shall call upon God for his Grace, and say the Lords
Prayer if the time will suffer, and then one of them shall name the Child, and
dip him in the water, or pour water upon him, Justified in the Conference at
Hampton Court
saying these words, N. I Baptize thee in the name of the Father, etc. At which
passage when King James seemed to be offended in the Conference at
Hampton Court, because of the liberty which they gave to Women and Laics: It
was answered then by Dr. Whitgift, Archbishop of Canterbury, That the
administration of Baptism by Women and Lay Persons, was not allowed in the
practice of the Church: but enquired of, and censured by the Bishops in their
Visitations; and that the words in the Book inferred no such meaning. Against
which when the King excepted, urging and pressing the words of the Book, that
they could not but intend a permission and suffering of Women, and private
Persons to Baptize: It was answered by Dr. Babington, then Bishop of Worcester,
That indeed the words were doubtful, and might be pressed to that meaning, but
that it seemed by the contrary practice of this Church (censuring Women in this
case) That the Compilers of that Book did not so intend them, and yet
propounded them ambiguously, because otherwise perhaps the Book would not have
then passed in the Parliament. and
But then stood forth the Bishop of London, (Dr. Bancroft) and plainly said,
That it was not the intent of those Learned and Reverend men, who framed the
Book of Common Prayer by ambiguous terms, to deceive any; but did indeed by
those words intend a permission of private persons to Baptize in case of
Necessity, whereof their Letters were witnesses, some parts whereof he then
read; and withal declared, That the same was agreeable to the practice of the
ancient Church, as appeared by the Authority of Tertullian, and of S. Ambrose
on the 4th. of the Ephesians, who are plain in that point; laying also open the
absurdities and impieties of their opinions who think there is no necessity of
Baptism. And though at the motion of that King it was ordered that the words
Lawful Minister should be put into the Rubric ( First let the LAWFVL MINISTER,
Not gain said by any alteration in the public Rubric,
and them that be present, call upon God for his Grace, etc. The said LAWFVL
MINISTER shall dip it into the Water, etc. yet was the alteration greater in
sound then sense, it being the opinion of many great Clerks, that any man in
cases of extreme necessity (who can pronounce the words of Baptism) may pass in
the account and notion of a lawful Minister. and
Of the efficacy ascribed unto it by the Church.
So much for the necessity of Baptism. And as for the efficacacy, thereof, it
is said expressly in the 27. Article, To be a sign of Regeneration, or New
Birth, whereby, as by an Instrument, they that receive Baptism rightly, are
grafted into the Church; the promises of forgiveness of Sin, and of our
Adoption to be the Sons of God by the Holy Ghost, are visibly signed and
sealed; Faith is confirmed, and Grace is increased by virtue of Prayer unto
God: and, as expressly it is said in one of the Rubricks before Confirmation,
That it is certain by Gods word, that Children being Baptized, have all things
necessary for their Salvation, and be undoubtedly saved: that is to say (for so
it must be understood) in case they dye before they fall into the committing of
Actual Sins.

good works, and how far they conduce unto our Justification, Justification how
divided betwixt Faith and Works,
the breach was wider at the first breakings out of Luther then it has been
since: Luther ascribing Justification unto Faith alone, without relation unto
Works; and those of Rome ascribing it to good Works alone, without relation
unto Faith, which they reckoned only amongst the preparatives unto it. But when
the point had been long canvased, and the first heats were somewhat cooled,
they began to come more near unto one another. For when the Papists attributed
Justification unto Works alone, they desired to be understood of such good
Works as proceeded from a true and lively Faith: and when the Lutherans
ascribed it to Faith alone, they desired to be understood of such a Faith as
was productive of good Works, and attended by them. The Papists thereupon began
to cherish the distinction between the first and second Justification,
ascribing the first unto Faith only; the second (which the Protestants more
properly called by the name of Sanctification) to the works of Righteousness.
The Protestants on the other side distinguishing between Fides sola, and
solitaria, between Sola Fides, and Fides quae est Sola, intending by that
nicity; that, though Faith alone does justify a sinner in the sight of God:
yet that it is not such a Faith as was alone, In what respects ascribed to
Faith, by the Church of ENGL.
but stood accompanied with good Works. And in this way the Church of England
went in her Reformation, declaring in the 11, Article, That we are accounted
righteous before God, only for the Merits of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ
by Faith, and not for our own works or deservings. Which Justification by Faith
only is further declared to be a most wholesome Doctrine, and very full of
comfort; and
for which we are referred to the Book of Homilies. And in the Book of Homilies
we shall also find, In what to Works.
That we may well bear the name of Christian men; but we lack that true Faith
which belongs thereunto: For true Faith does evermore bring forth good Works,
(as St. James speaks) Show me thy Faith by thy Works. Thy Deeds and Works
must be an open testimony of thy Faith; otherwise thy Faith being without good
Works, is but the Devils faith, the faith of the wicked, a fantasy of Faith,
and not a true Christian Faith. And that the people might be be trained up in
the works of Righteousness, it is declared in the 7th. Article, That no
Christian man whatsoever is free from the obedience of the Commandments, which
are called Moral. According whereunto, it is ordered by the public Liturgy,
that the said Commandments shall be openly read in the Congregation upon
Sundays and Holy Days (contrary to the usage of all ancient Liturgies) the
people humbly praying God, To have mercy upon them for their transgression of
those Laws; and no less humbly praying him To incline their hearts to keep the
same. So that, though Faith must lead the way to our Justification; yet
holiness of life manifested in the works of Charity, and all other acts of
godly living, must open the way for us to the Gates of Heaven, and procure our
entrance at the same, as is apparent by the 25. of St. Matthews Gospel, from
verse 34. to 41.

30. Which being so, it may be well affirmed without any wrong Of the efficacy
of good Works,
that good Works are necessary to salvation; and not so only: but that they are
efficienter necessaria, as was maintained publicly in the Schools of
Cambridge, though it was much carpt at by some men that did not rightly and
distinctly understand the term. and
And secondly, It may be said without any wrong to the Free Grace and Merits of
Almighty God, that a reward is due for the Works of Righteousness, proceeding
from a lively Faith, in a man regenerate; The Reward belonging to them,
not that the Church ascribes any merit to the works of man, which may deserve
eternal life, either ex congruo, or condigno, as the Schoolmen phrase it; for
Deus non coronat in nobis merita nostra sed dona sua, as the Father has it. No
reward is due unto good Works, ratione operis, in reference to the work it
self: but ratione pacti and acceptationis (though Bellarmine be otherwise
minded) in respect of Gods merciful acceptance, and his most gracious promise
to reward the same. It was his grace and goodness only which moved him to
encourage our imperfect and weak obedience with the promise of eternal life:
yet having made the promise, he became our debtor, and
Non aliquid debendo, sed omnia promittendo, Deus se facit debitorem, as St.
Augustine tells us. And most agreeable it is to his heavenly justice, not to be
wanting to his promise. Such a Reward as this for the works of Righteousness,
as the Scriptures frequently do mention both in the Old Testament and New, Genesis
47. Psalm 19.11. Mat. 5.12. and 10.41, 42. Mark 9.41. Apoc. 22.11. so is the
same defended in the Church of England. And this appears first by the
Athanasian Creed, Of the Doctrine of the Church of ENGLAND in that particular.
incorporated into the body of our public Liturgy, as a part thereof. In the
close of which it is affirmed, That at Christ's coming unto Judgemenr all men
shall rise again with their bodies, and give an account of their own works,
that they which have done good shall go into life everlasting, and they that
have done evil into everlasting fire. And secondly, It appears as plainly by
the Collect for the 25. Sunday after Trinity, where the Church called on the
Lord, To stir up the wills of his faithful people, that they plenteously
bringing forth the fruits of good works, may of him be plenteously rewarded,
through Jesus Christ, In which we have not only a reward for the fruit of good
works, but a plentiful reward into the bargain, according to the quality of the
work it self, and the acceptableness of the person in the sight of God.

Predestination, and the points depending thereupon, The great Divisions in the
Church touching Predestination.
which have given matter of division to the Christian Church in all times and
ages, dividing between the general current of the Fathers till St. Augustines
time, and the learned men which followed him and his authority; between the
Jesuits and Franciscans on the one side, and the Dominicans on the other in
the Church of Rome; between the moderate and rigid Lutherans in the Church
Protestant; between the Remonstrants, and the Contra-Remonstrants in the
Schools of Calvin; and finally between the Sublapsarians, and the
Supra-Lapsarians, amongst the Contra-Remonstrants themselves. Of these the
Sublapsarian Calvinists (for of the dotages of the other I shall take no
notice) the Rigid Lutherans and the Dominican Friars pretend St. Augustine for
their Patron: and on the other side, the Remonstrants (commonly nicknamed
Arminians) The Moderate or Melancthonian Lutherans, together with the Jesuits
and Franciscans, appeal unto the general current of the ancient Fathers, who
lived and flourished ante mota certamina Pelagiana, The stating of the point by
the Church of ENGLAND,
before the starting up of the Pelagian Controversies. And to this general
current of the ancient Fathers, the Church of England most enclines; teaching
according to their Doctrine, that God from all eternity, intending to
demonstrate his power and goodness, designed the Creation of the World, the
making of man after his own Image, and leaving him so made, in a perfect
liberty to do or not to do what he was commanded; and that fore-knowing also
from all eternity, that man abusing this liberty, would plunge himself and his
posterity into a gulf of miseries, he graciously resolved to provide them such
a Savior who should redeem them from their sins; to elect all those to life
eternal, who by true Faith laid hold upon him, leaving the rest in the same
state in which he found them, for their incredulity. It is reported of Agilmond
the second, Illustrated by the story of Agilmond and Lamistus, Kings of
Lombardy.
King of the Lombards, that riding by a Fish Pond, he saw seven young Children
sprawling in it, whom their unnatural Mothers (as Paulus Diaconus conceived)
had thrown into it not long before. Amazed whereat, he put his Hunting Spear
amongst them, and stirred them gently up and down, which one of them laying
hold of, was drawn to Land, called Lamistus, from the word Lama; which in the
Language of that people signifies a Fish Pond, trained up in that Kings Court,
and finally made his Successor in the Kingdom. Granting that Agilmond being
forewarned in a Vision, that he should find such Children sprawling for life
in the midst of that Pond, might thereupon take a resolution within himself to
put his Hunting Spear amongst them; and that which of them soever should lay
hold upon it, should be gently drawn out of the water, adopted for his Son, and
made Heir of all his Kingdom: no humane Story could afford us the like parallel
case to Gods proceeding in the great work of Predestination to eternal life,
according to the Doctrine of the Church of England.

32. Now, that such was the Doctrine of the first Reformers, may Definition of
Predestination. Predestinatination how defined.
Predestination unto life (says the 17. Article) is the everlasting purpose of
God, whereby, (before the foundations of the world were laid) he has
constantly declared by his Council, secret to us, to deliver from curse and
damnation, those whom he has chosen in Christ out of mankind, and to bring
them by Christ to everlasting Salvation. In which Definition there are these
things to be observed; First, The definition explicated.
That Predestination does pre-suppose a curse or a state of Damnation, in which
all mankind was presented to the sight of God. Secondly, That it is an act of
his from everlasting, because from everlasting he foresaw that misery into
which wretched man would fall. Thirdly, That he founded it, and resolved for it
in the Man and Mediator Christ Jesus, both for the purpose and performance.
Fourthly, That it was of some special ones alone, Elect, called forth, and
reserved in Christ, and not generally extended unto all mankind. Fifthly, That
being thus elected in Christ, they shall be brought by Christ to everlasting
salvation. And sixthly, That this Council is secret unto us; for though there
be revealed to us some hopeful signs of our Election and Predestination unto
life: yet the certainty thereof is a secret hidden in God, and in this life
unknown to us. Nothing obscure in this Definition but these words, Whom he has
chosen in Christ; The explication justified by the ancient Fathers,
which being the very words of the Apostle, Ephesians. 1.4. are generally interpreted
by the ancient Fathers, of those who do believe in Christ, For thus St. Ambrose
amongst others, Sicut elegit nos in ipso, as he has chosen us in him; Prescius
enim Deus omnes scit qui credituri essent in Christum, For God (says he) by
his general Presence did foreknow every man that would believe in Christ: The
like says Chrysostom on the Text. And that our first Reformers did conceive
so, By Bishop LATIMER,
it appears by that of Bishop Latimer in his Sermon on the third Sunday after
the Epiphany, When (says he) we hear that some be chosen, and some be damned,
let us have good hope, that we be among the chosen, and live after this hope,
that is uprightly and godly; then shall we not be deceived. Think that God has
chosen those that believe in Christ; and Christ is the Book of Life: and
If thou believe in him, then art thou written in the Book of Life, and shall
be saved. Secondly, The Doctrine of Predestination, as before laid down, may be
further proved out of the last clause of the said 17. Article, The last clause
of the 17th. Article.
where it is said, That we must receive Gods promises in such wise as they be
generally set forth to us in holy Scripture; and that in all our doings, that
will of God is to be followed, which we have expressly declared to us in the
word of God. Then which nothing can be more repugnant to the Doctrine of
Predestination, delivered by the Contra-Remonstrants (whither Supra-lapsarian,
or Sub-lapsarian, is no great matter) which restrains Predestination unto Life
to a few particulars, without respect had to their Faith in Christ, or to
Christ's Sufferings and Death for them: which few particulars so predestined
to life eternal, shall (as they teach us) by an irresistible Grace, be brought
to God, and by the infallible conduct of the Holy Spirit, be preserved from
falling away from grace and favor.

Election or Predestination unto life, The Church why silent in the point of
Reprobation.
but in the point of Reprobation or Predestination unto death, she is utterly
silent; leaving it to be gathered upon Logical Inferences from that which is
delivered by her in the point of Election (for Contrariorum contraria est
ratio, as Logicians say) though that which is so gathered ought rather to be
called, a Dereliction, then a Reprobation. No such absolute irreversible, and
irrespective decree of Reprobation taught or maintained in any public Monument
or Record of the Church of England, by which the far greatest part of mankind
are prae-ordained (and consequently prae-condemned to the pit of Torments,
without respect had unto their sins, as the Supra-lapsarians, or to their
credulities, as generally is maintained by the Sublapsarians in the Schools of
Calvin. Much I am sure there is against it in the Writings of Bishop Hooper,
The absolute Decree unknown to Bishop HOOPER,
and Bishop Latimer, who took great pains in the first carrying on of the
Reformation; and therefore we may judge by them of the Churches meaning in that
particular. For in the Preface to a Book written by John Hooper, afterward
Bishop of Gloucester, containing an Exposition of the Ten Commandments, and
published, Anno 1550. we shall find it thus, viz. That Cain was no more
excluded from the promise of Christ, till he excluded himself, then Abel; Saul,
then David; Judas, then Peter; Esau, then Jacob: that God is said to have hated
Esau, not because he was dis-inherited of eternal Life, but in laying his
Mountains and his Heritage waste for the Dragons of the Wilderness, Mal. 1.3.
That the threatenings of God against Esau, (if he had not of his wilful malice
excluded himself from the promise of Grace) should no more have hindered his
Salvation, then Gods threatenings against Ninive, etc, That it is not a
Christian man's part to say, That God has written fatal Laws, as the stoic,
and with necessity of destiny, violently pulls the one by the hair into
Heaven, and thrusts the other headlong into Hell; that the cause of
Rejection, or Damnation is sin in man, which will not hear, neither receive the
promise of the Gospel, etc. And in a Sermon on the third Sunday after Epiphany,
By Bishop LATIMER,
we find Bishop Latimer speaking thus, viz. That if the most are damned, the
fault is not in God, but in themselves; for Deus vult omnes homines salvos
fieri, God would that all men should be saved, but they themselves procure
their own damnation, and despise the Passion of Christ by their wicked and
inordinate living. Thus also in his fourth Sermon Preached in Lincolnshire,
That Christ only, and no man else merited Remission, Justification, and eternal
felicity, for as many as will believe the same; that Christ shed as much Blood
for Judas, as for Peter; that Peter believed it, and therefore was saved; that
Judas would not believe, therefore was condemned; the fault being in him only,
and no body else. More of which passages might be gathered from the Writings of
those godly Martyrs, were not these sufficient. and
And though the Calvinian fancies in the points of Election and Reprobation got
so much ground on this Church, that they began to be obtruded on the people for
the Doctrines of it; yet were they vigorously opposed by some of our Confessors
in Prison in Queen Mary's days, by Dr. Harsnet, and Mr, Banret in the Pulpit;
and Peter Baro, and Dr. Overald in the Divinity Schools of Cambridge in Queen
Elizabeth's time; by Dr. Bancroft, then Lord Bishop of London, in the Conference
at Hampton Court, Anno 1603. being the first year of King James: and finally by
King James himself, By King James.
refusing (as he did) to admit the nine Articles of Lambeth, containing all the
points and particularities of the Calvinian Doctrines of Predestination, and
Reprobation, among the Articles of Religion here by Law established, when Dr.
Reynolds in that Conference did desire it of him: But nothing better proves the
Churches Doctrine in these points, than the Church it self; by holding sorth
the universal Redemption of all mankind, by the Death of Christ; the free
cooperation of the will of man, with the Grace of God in the chief acts of his
Conversion; the possibility of falling into grievous sins, Gods displeasure,
and consequently from the grace received: all which are utterly destructive of
Calvin's Doctrine in this point, and that not of the whole Machina only, but of
every part and parcel of that ruinous building, as will appear by the
particulars hereafter following.

34. And first the Universal Redemption of all mankind by the Universal
Redemption maintained by the Book of Articles.
has been so clearly and explicitly delivered by the Church of England, that
nothing can be more plain. For in the second Article it is said expressly, That
Christ suffered, was Crucified, Dead, and Buried, to reconcile his Father to
us, and to be a Sacrifice not only for Original Guilt, but also for the actual
sins of men. Agreeable whereunto, it is declared, Art. 31. That the offering of
Christ once made, is the perfect Redemption, Propitiation, and Satisfaction for
the sins of the whole world, both original and actual. In both which Articles,
as well the Sacrifice, as the effect and fruit thereof, which is the
Reconciliation of mankind to God the Father, is delivered in general terms,
without any Restriction put upon them. Neither the Sacrifice, nor the
Reconciliation are by the Articles either restrained to this man, or that, or
unto one part of the world only, (as for example, Intra partem donati) and not
to another, but extended to the whole world, says the 31. Article; to
mankind, or to men in general, as it is in the second. A clearer comment on
which Text we cannot possibly have (as to the understanding of the Churches
meaning) then that which may be found in the public Liturgy: For first in the
authorized Catechism of the Church of England, the party Catechized being asked
what he does learn in his belief, makes answer as to this particular, that he
believes in God the Father, Many plain passages in the Public* Liturgy,
who made him and all the world: And secondly, that he believes in God the Son,
who has redeemed him and all mankind, etc. It may be secondly proved in that
clause in the Letany, O God the Son, Redeemer of the world, have mercy upon us,
etc. Thirdly, By the Prayer of Consecration before the Communion, viz. Almighty
God our heavenly Father, which of thy tender mercy did give thy only Son
Jesus Christ to suffer death upon the Cross for our Redemption, who made there
(by his own Oblation of himself once offered) a full, perfect, and sufficient
Sacrifice, Oblation, and Satisfaction for the sins of the WHOLE WORLD, etc. And
fourthly, By the Prayer or Thanksgiving, after the Communion, in which we do
most humbly beseech the Lord to grant that by the Merits and Death of his Son
Jesus Christ, and through Faith in his Blood, we and all thy whole Church may
obtain remission of our Sins, and all other benefits of his Passion. Nor was it
without some meaning this way, that She selected those words of our Savior in
St. John's Gospel, viz. God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten
Son, etc. to be used in the preparation of the Communion; as She reiterated
some others, viz. O Lamb of God, that take away the sins of the world, etc.
incorporated into the Gloria in excelsis, at the end thereof. A truth so clear
in the delivery of this Church, that there needs no proof of it from the
Writings of private men: And the testimony of our ancient Martyrs.
or if there did, what could be more express than those words of Bishop Hooper,
viz. As the sins of Adam without privilege, or exception, extended and
appertained unto all Adam's, and every of Adam's Posterity; so did the promise
of Grace generally appertain as well to every, and singular of Adam's
Posterity, as to Adam himself, as in the Preface abovementioned: or what can
be more positive than that of Bishop Latimer in his first Sermon, preached in
Lincolnshire, viz. The promises of Christ our Savior are general, they pertain
to all mankind. He made a general proclamation, saying, Qui credit in me,
habet vitam aeternam, Whosoever believes in me has everlasting life?
especially being seconded with that which before we had, that Christ did shed
as much Blood for Judas, as he did for Peter; which puts the matter high enough
without all exception.

Free Will, the powers of nature and the celestial inferences of the Grace of
God, The freedom of the Will too much advanced by the (...).
in the conversion of a sinner, the Church of England ran after a middle way,
between the Rigid Lutherans, and the old Pelagians. It was the Heresy of
Pelagius to ascribe so much power to the will of man, in laying hold upon the
means of his Salvution, Vt gratiam Dei necessariam non putaret, that he thought
the Grace of God to be unnecessary, of no use at all. Decryed as much by Luther,
And Luther on the other side ascribed so little thereunto, that he published a
Book, entitled, De servo Arbitrio, touching the servitude of the will; in
which he held that there was no such thing as Free Will; that it was a mere
fiction, Et nomen sine re, a thing only titular, and
but of no existency in nature, that a man is forcibly drawn to heaven, Velut
inanimatum quiddam, No otherwise than a senseless stock, or an unreasonable
creature. The like we find to be declared by the Contra-Remonstrants, The
Contra Remonstrants.
in the Collatio Hagiensis, by whom there was no more ascribed to the will of
man in the work of his own Regeneration, or in the raising of himself from the
death of Sin, to the life of Righteousness, than they did ascribe unto him in
his generation to the life of nature, or in his Resurrection from the Dead to
life eternal. For thus they say, Sicut ad nativitatem suam nemo de suo quicquam
confert; neque ad sui exitationem ex mortuis nemo quicquam confert de suo, ita
etiam ad conversionem suam, nemo homo quicquam confert, sed est purum putum
opus ejus gratiae Dei in Christo, quae in nobis operatur, non tantum potentiam
credendi, sed etiam fidem ipsam. Which monstrous Paradox of theirs was
afterward inserted in the Canons of the Synod of Dort: against which that
divine saying of St. Augustine may be fitly used, The temper of St. Augusti^ in
it.
Si non est gratia Dei, quomodo salvat mundum, Si non est liberum Arbitrium
quomodo judicat mundum, If there be no Grace of God (says he) by what means
can he save the world; if there no Free Will in man, with what equity can he
condemn it. Of the same temper is the Doctrine of the Church of England:
Approved and imitated in the Articles of the Church of ENGL.
For first, she thus declares against the Pelagians in the first clause of the
10th. Article, That the condition of man after the fall of Adam is such, that
he cannot turn and prepare himself by his own natural strength and good Works
to Faith and calling upon God. And secondly, she declares thus against Luther
in the second clause of that Article, viz, That without the Grace of God by
Christ preventing us, that we may have a good will and working with us; when we
have that good will, we have no power to do good works, which are pleasing and
acceptable unto God: and thereupon it must needs follow, and
that by the freedom of man's will, cooperating with grace preventing, and by
the subsequent Grace of God cooperating with the will of man, we have a power
of doing such works as may be acceptable and pleasing to our heavenly Father:
which may be further evidenced by this Collect after the Communion, Her Public
Liturgy.
viz. Prevent us O Lord in all our doings, with thy most gracious favor, and
further us with thy continual help, that in all our works begun, continued, and
ended in thee, we may glorify thy Holy Name, and finally by thy Mercy obtain
life everlasting, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

36. Now that both the last clause of the Article, The Churches Doctrine
vindicated and explained by Bishop Hoop^^.
and the whole Collect in the Liturgy are to be understood no otherwise then as
it is before laid down, appears by this Gloss of Bishop Hooper on that Text of
St. John, viz. No man comes to me except my Father draw him, chap. 6.44. Many
(says he) understand the words in a wrong sense; and
as if God required no more in a reasonable man, than in a dead post, and mark
not the words which follow, Every man that hears and learneth of my Father
comes to me: God draws with his word, and the Holy Ghost, but man's duty is
to hear and learn, that is to say, to receive the grace offered, consent to the
promise, and not repugn the God that calls. The like occurs in Bishop
Latimers Sermon on the Sunday commonly called Septuagesima; by Bishop Latimer*
in which we find, That seeing the preaching of the Gospel is universal, it
appears that God would have all mankind saved; and that the fault is not in
him if they be damned: for it is written thus, Deus vult omnes homines salvos
fieri. God would have all men be saved; but we are so wicked of our selves,
that we refuse the same, and will not take notice when it is offered to us. It
cannot be denied, as also
but that the same Doctrine is maintained by the Arminians (as they call them)
and that it is the very same with that of the Church of Rome, as appears by the
Council of Trent, cap. De fructu justificationis, and merito bonorum operum,
Can. 3.4. But then it must be granted also, that it is the Doctrine of the
Melanctonian Divines, by the Lutheran Churches,
or Moderate Lutherans, as was confessed by Andreas vega, one of the chief
sticklers in the Council of Trent, who on the agitating of the point did
confess ingenuously, that there was no difference betwixt the Lutherans and
that Church touching that particular. and
And then it must be granted also, that it was the Doctrine of St. Augustine,
according to that divine saying of his, Sine gratia Dei praeveniente, ut
volimus, and subsequente ne frustra volimus, ad pietatis opera nil valemus: so
that if the Church of England must be Arminian, St. Augustine himself.
and the Arminians must be Papist, because they agree together in this
particular, the Melanctonian Divines among the Protestants, yea and St.
Augustine himself must be Papist also.

will, in laying or not laying hold upon those means which are offered by
Almighty God for our Salvation (...) cannot be denied, The Churches Doctrine in
the point of Falling away,
but that there is a freedom also of the will, in standing unto Grace received,
or departing from it: Certain I am that it is so resolved by the Church of
England in the 16th. Article for Confession, in which it is declared, That
after we have received the Holy Ghost, we may depart from Grace given, and fall
into sin, and by the grace of God we may arise again, and amend our lives;
which is the very same with that of the 14th. Article in King Edward's Book of
the year 1557. where plainly the Church teaches a possibility of falling or
departing from the grace of the Holy Ghost, which is given unto us; and that
our rising again, and the amending of our lives upon such a rising, is a matter
of contingency only, and no way necessary on Gods part to assure us of. Made
clear by some expressions of Bishop H^oper,
Conform to which we find Bishop Hooper thus discoursing in the said Preface
to his exposition of the Ten Commandments, The cause of Rejection or Damnation
(says he) is sin in man, which will not hear, neither receive the promise of
the Gospel; or else after he has received it, by accustomed doing of ill,
falls either into a contempt of the Gospel, and will not study to live
thereafter; or else hates the Gospel, because it condemns his ungodly life,
Of Bishop Latimer.
And we find Bishop Latimer discoursing thus in his eighth Sermon in
Lincolnshire, Those persons (says he) that be not come yet to Christ, or if
they were come to Christ, be fallen again from him, and so lost their
Justification (as there be many of us when we fall willingly into sin against
Conscience) we lose the favor of God, our Salvation, and finally the Holy
Ghost. And before ( c. 6.) thus, But you will say (says he) How shall I know
that I am in the Book of Life? How shall I try my self to be the Elect of God
to everlasting life? and
I answer, First, We may know that we may be one time in the Book, and another
time come out again, as it appears by David, who was written in the Book of
Life: but when he sinned, he at that time was out of the Book of the favor of
God, until he repented, and was sorry for his faults: so that we may be in the
Book one time, and afterward when we forget God and his Word, and do wickedly,
we come out of the Book, that is, out of Christ, who is the Book. Which makes
the point so clear and evident on the Churches part, that when it was moved by
Doctor Reynolds at Hampton Court, The Conference at Hampton Court.
that the words, Nec tolaliter, nec finaliter, might be added into the Clause
of that Article, the motion was generally rejected, and the Article left
standing in the same terms, in which it then stood. By which we may the better
judge of some strange expressions amongst the most Rigid sort of the
Contra-Remonstrants, especially of that of Roger Dontelock, by whom it is
affirmed, that if it were possible for any one man to commit all the sins over
again which have been acted in the world, it would neither frustrate his
Election, nor alienate him from the love and favor of Almighty God: for which
consult the Appendix to the Presseor Declaratio, Sententiae Remonstrantium,
Printed at Leyden, Anno 1616.

38. Such is the Doctrine of this Church, and such the Judgment The harmony
and consent in Judgment between Bishop Hooper and Bishop Ridley*
and right godly Martyrs in the Predestinarian Controversies, before remembered.
And though I have insisted on those two alone, yet in theirs I include the
Judgment of Cranmer, Ridley, and the rest of those learned men who labored in
the great work of the Reformation. Some difference there had been betwixt
Cranmer and Ridley, on the one side, and Hooper only on the other in matter of
Ceremony in which Hooper at the last submitted to the other two. But in all the
Doctrinal truths of their Religion there was a full consent between them: which
appears plainly in this passage of a Letter sent from Ridley to Hooper, when
they were both prisoners for the same cause, though in several places. and
But now my dear Brother (says he) for as much as I understand by your works,
which I have but super^icially seen, that we thoroughly agree, and wholly
consent together in those things which are the grounds and substantial points
of our Religion, against which the world so rages in these our days:
Howsoever in times past, in certain by-matters, and circumstances of Religion,
your Wisdom, and my simplicity (I grant) have a little jarred; each of us
following the abundance of his own sense and Judgment. Now I say, be you
assured, that even with my whole heart (God is my witness) in the Bowels of
Christ I love you in truth, and for truths sake, which abides in us, and I am
persuaded by the Grace of God, shall abide in us for evermore. Acts and Mon. in
Edw. vi. fol. 1366. Between Bishop Ridley and Archbishop Cranmer.
Now as Bishop Ridley thus declares himself to be of the same Judgment with
Bishop Hooper, so Cranmer the Archbishop does declare himself to be of the same
Judgment with Bishop Ridley: for being charged in his examination with
thinking otherwise in the point of the Sacrament then he had done about seven
or eight years before, he answers, That he then believed otherwise than he
did at that present, and that he did so till the Lord of London, Dr. Ridley,
did confer with him; and by sundry persuasions and Authorities of other
Doctors, drew him quite from his opinion, with whom he now agreed, ibid, fol.
1702. Which words though spoken only in relation to such points about the
Sacrament of the Altar, concerning which he was then examined by the Popes
Commissioners; yet do they signify withal that he relied very much on Ridleys
Judgment, and that they were as like to be accorded in all other matters of
Religion, as they were in that. And though Cranmer exercised his Pen for the
most part against the Papists, yet in his Book against Steven Gardener,
Concerning the Sacrament of Christ's Body and Blood, first published in the year
1551. he thus delivers his opinion in the present Controversies. For speaking
of the Sacrifice which was made by Christ, The judgment of Archbishop Cra^^^^
in the point disputed.
he lets us know, That he took unto himself not only their sins that many years
before were dead, and put their trust in him; but also all the sins of those
that until his coming again should truly believe his Gospel: so that now we may
look for no other Priest, nor Sacrifice to take away our sins, but only him and
his Sacrifice; that as he dying once was offered for all, so as much as
pertained unto him, he took all men's sins unto himself, fol. 372. Which is as
much as could be looked for from a man, who did not purposely apply himself to
the points in question. Finally, it were worth the learning to know why the
Paraphrases of Erasmus (a man of a known difference in Judgment from Calvin's
Doctrines in these points, should be translated into English by the care of our
Prelates; and being so translated, should be commended both by King Edward vi.
and Queen ELizabeth, to the diligent reading of their Subjects of all
conditions; which certainly they had not done, if they had not been thereunto
persuaded by those Bishops, and other learned men about them, who had a
principal hand in ^he Reformation, The authority ascri^ed to the Works of
Erasmus by our first Reformers.
which clearly shows how much, as well the Priest as the people were to ascribe
unto the Judgment of that learned man, and consequently how little unto that
of Calvin in the present Controversies.

39. So near this Church comes up unto the Church of Rome in Government, forms
of Worship, and some points of Controversy. The Points which still remain in
difference betwixt the Churches.
and stood in opposition unto one another, viz. In the Articles touching the
sufficiency of the Scripture, Justification, the merit of good Works, Works
done before Justification, Works of Supererogation, the Fallibility or
Infallibility of the Church of Rome; the Authority of General Councils,
Purgatory, Adoration of Images, Invocation of Saints, the Celebrating of Divine
Service in the vulgar tongues; the nature and number of the Sacraments,
Transubstantiation, the Communion in both kinds, the Sacrifice of the Mass,
the single life of Priests, the power of National Churches in ordaining
Ceremonies, and of the Civil Magistrate in matters of Ecclesiastical nature:
How far with in the possibility of Reconcilement.
In many of which it might be found no difficult matter to atone the
differences, whenever it shall please God to commit the managing of them to
moderate and prudent men, who prefer truth before opinion, and peace before the
prevalency of their several parties. But whether it be so in all, is a harder
question, and will remain a question to the end of the world, unless all
parties lay aside their private interest, and conscienciously resolve to yield
as much to one another as may stand with Piety. And then what reason can there
be, why the breaches in the walls of Jerusalem should not be made up? and being
made up, why Jerusalem should not be restored to its former Honor, of being a
City at unity within it self? The hopes of which may be the greater, because
there are so many points (so far forth as they stand comprised in the Book of
Articles) in which the first Reformers were so far from being at any difference
with the Church of Rome, that they did rather join with them, And in what
points they, join together against the Anabaptists and Sectaries.
in opposing the common enemy, Familists, Libertines, Anti-Trinitarians,
Anabaptists, and other Heretics of that age, who seemed to dig at the
foundation of the Christian Faith, and aim at the subversion of humane Society;
Of which sort are the Articles of the Holy Trinity, the Incarnation of the Son
of God, the Divinity of the Holy Ghost, of the Old Testament, of the three
Creeds, of Original Sin, of the Authority of the Church, of ministering in the
Congregation, of hindering the effect of the Sacraments by unworthy Ministers,
of Infant Baptism, and the Traditions of the Church; of the Consecration of
Bishops, and Ministers; of the Authority of the Civil Magistrate in making
Wars, and punishing Malefactors with Temporal Death; of the community of Goods,
and the exacting of an Oath to find out the truth: Of most of which it may be
said in St. Augustines language, His qui contra dicit, aut a Christi fide alie
nus est, aut est Hereticus; that he who shall deny to give his assent unto
them, is either an alien from the Faith, or at least an Heretic.

Articles, Liberty of Opinion left in other Points by the first Reformers,
in which, though there were differences between them in point of Judgment,
yet the Reformers thought not fit to determine of them positively upon either
side, but left them to the liberty of opinion, to be disputed, Pro and Con,
amongst learned men, according as their understandings fancy, or affections
should dispose them to it: some points there are of Phylological, and others of
Scholastical Divinity, in which there is Libertas opinandi, a liberty of
opinion left unto us, de quibus, sentire qu^e velis, and quae sentias loqui
liceat, in the words of Tacitus. In th^se and such as these St. Paul himself
seems to leave a latitude, when he gives way, Vt quilibet Abundet in suo sensu,
Romans 14.5. that is to say, Let every man abound in his own sense, as the
Rhemists read it; especially, If he be fully persuaded in his own mind
(touching the truth of what he writes) as our last Translation: (...)
Which liberty as some have taken, in closing with the Papists in some
particulars, which are not contrary to the Faith and Doctrine, or to the
established Government, and Forms of Worship of the Church of England, they are
not for so doing to be branded by the name of Papists; or their writings to be
censured and condemned for Popish, because perhaps they differ in those matters
from the Churches of Calvin's Platform, Veritas a quocunque est, est a spiritu
sancto, as divinely Ambrose. Truth is no more restrained to the Schools of
Calvin, then to those of Rome; some truths being to be found in each, but not
all in either. Their discretion in so doing:
And certainly in this the first Reformers did exceeding wisely, in not tying
up the judgments of learned men, where they might be freed; but leaving them a
sufficient scope to exercise their wits and Pens, as they saw occasion. Had
they done otherwise, and condemned every thing for Popish, which was either
taught or used in the times of Popery, they must then have condemned the
Doctrine of the Trinity it self, Approved and commended by King James.
as was well observed by King James in the Conference at Hampton Court: And
then said he, You (Dr. Reynolds) must go barefoot, because they wore hose and
shoes in times of Popery, p. 75. Besides which inconvenience it must needs
have followed, that by a general renouncing of all such things as have been
taught and used by the Church of Rome, the Confession of the Church of England,
must have been like that (both in condition and effect) which Mr. Craig
composed for the Kirk of Scotland, of which King James tells us, p. 39. that
with his, I renounce and I abhor his Detestations and Protestations, he did so
amaze the simple people, that they (not able to conceive all those things)
utterly gave over all, falling back to Popery, or still remaining in their
former ignorance.

41. Such was the Moderation which was used by our first Reformers, and on such
Principles and Positions, did they ground this Church. Which I have laid down
here at large, that so we may the better Judge of those Deviations, which
afterward were made by Factious and unquiet men; as also of the Piety of their
endeavors, who aimed at the Reduction of her to her first condition. If the
great Prelate, whom I write of, did either labor to subvert the Doctrine or
innovate any thing, either in the Public Government, or Forms of Worship,
here by Law Established, contrary to the Principles and Positions before
expressed; his Adversaries had the better Reason to clamor against him whilst
he lived, and to pursue their clamors till the very last. But on the other
side, if neither in his own person, or by the diligence and activity of his
subservient Ministers, he acted or suffered any thing to be justified in point
of Practice, or allowed any thing to be Preached or Prayed, or hindered any
thing from being Published or Preached, but what may be made good by the Rules
of the Church, and the complexion of the times in which he lived; those foul
Reproaches, which so unjustly and uncharitably have been laid upon him, must
return back upon the Authors, from whom they came, as stones thrown up against
the Heavens, do many times fall upon the heads of those that threw them. But
whither side deserved the blame for innovating in the Doctrine, Rites, and
Ceremonies of the Anglican Church, according to the first Principles and
Positions of it; will best appear by the course of the ensuing History,
Relation being had to this Introduction, which I have here placed in the front,
as a Lamp or Candle (such as we find commonly in the Porches of Great Men's
houses) to light the way to such as are desirous to go into them, that they may
enter with delight, converse therein with pleasure, and return with safety.

CYPRIANUS ANGLICUS: OR, THE HISTORY OF THE Life and Death, OF The most
Reverend and Renowned PRELATE WILLIAM By Divine Providence, Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury, Primate of all ENGLAND, and Metropolitan, Chancellor of the
Universities of Oxon. and Dublin, and one of the Lords of the Privy Council to
His late most SACRED MAJESTY King CHARLES Second MONARCH of Great-Brittain.

PART. I. Containing the History of his Life and Actions from the day of his
Birth, October. 7. 1573. to the day of his Nomination to the Sea of Canterbury,
August 6. 1633.

LONDON: Printed by E. Cotes for A. Seile, 1668.

THE LIFE OF The most Reverend FATHER in GOD WILLIAM Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury.
LIB. I. Extending from the time of his Birth, till his being made Bishop of
St. David's.
TO Recommend unto Posterity the Lives and Actions of eminent and famous
Persons, has always been esteemed a work becoming the most able Pens. Nothing
so much enobleth Plutarch, as his committing unto memory, the Actions and
Achievements of the most renowned Greeks and Romans; or added more unto the
fame of Diogenes Laertius, than that which he has left us of the Lives and
Apophthegms of the old Philosophers. Some pains have fortunately been taken in
this kind, by Paulus Iavius Bishop of Como, and by Matthew Parker Archbishop of
Canterbury, in the days of our Fathers. Nor can we be so little studdied in
the World, as not to know, that even particular persons (I speak not here of
Kings and Princes) have had their own particular and distinct Historians; by
whom their Parts and Piety, their Military Exploits, or Civil Prudence, have
been transmitted to the knowledge of succeeding ages. So that adventuring on
the Life of this famous Prelate, I cannot be without Examples, though without
Encouragements. For what Encouragements can there be to such a work, in which
there is an impossibility of pleasing all; more than an ordinary probability of
offending many; no expectation of Reward, nor certainty of any thing but
misconstructions, and Detractings, if not dangers also. Howsoever I shall give
my self the satisfaction, of doing my last duty, to the memory of a man so
Famous, of such a Public Spirit in all his actions, so eminently deserving of
the Church of England: With which profession of my Piety, and Ingenuity, I
shall not be altogether out of hope, but that my Labors in this Piece may
obtain a pardon, if they shall not reach to an Applause.

Anno Dom. 1573.
William Laud Archbishop of Canterbury, was born on the 7th. day of October,
An. 1573. A year remarkable for the buslings of the Puritan Faction, who before
they had served an Apprentiship in the Trade of Sedition, began to set up for
themselves; and seeing they could not have the countenance of Authority, to
justify the advancing of their Holy Discipline, resolved to introduce it by
little and little, as opportunity should be given them; which they did
accordingly. His Birth place, Reading, the principal Town of Berks, for Wealth
and Beauty; remarkable heretofore for a stately and magnificent Abbey, founded
and liberally Endowed by King Henry I. and no less eminent in these last Ages
for the Trade of Clothing, the Seminary of some Families of Gentry within that
County. And of this Trade his Father was, who kept not only many Lomes in his
house, but many Weavers, Spinners, and Fullers, at continual work; living in
good Esteem and Reputation amongst his Neighbors to the very last. His Mother
Lucy Webb, was Sister to Sir William Webb Lord Mayor of London, Anno 1591. the
Grandfather of Sir William Webb not long since deceased: She was first Married
to John Robinson a Clothier of the same Town also; but a Man of so good Wealth
and Credit, that he Married one of his Daughters to Dr. Cotsford, and another
unto Dr. Layfield, men of parts and worth; and left his youngest Son called
William, in so good a way, that he came to be Doctor of Divinity, Prebend of
Westminster, and Archdeacon of Nottingham, beside some other preferments which
he dyed possessed of. Having buried her Husband John Robinson, she was Re-marryed
unto Laud, this Archbishops Father, to whom she brought no other child than
this Son alone; as if she had satisfied that duty which was owing to her second
Marriage bed, by bringing forth a Son, who was to be the Patriarch (in a
manner) of the British Islands.

He was not born therefore of such Poor and Brev. 1. Lord Brook, p. 3.
obscure Parents, as the Publisher of his Breviat makes him, much less Brev. 1.
Lord Brook, p. 3.
E faece Plebis, of the dregs of the People, as both he and all the rest of the
Bishops were affirmed to be by the late Lord Brook (who of all others had least
Reason to upbraid them with it) in a book of his touching the nature of that
Episcopacy, which had been exercised in England. But granting that he had been
born of as poor and obscure Parents as those Authors make him; yet must it
needs add to the commendation of his Parts and Industry, who from so mean and
low a Birth, had raised himself into such an eminent height of Power and Glory,
that no Bishop or Archbishop, since the Reformation, had attained the like. The
greatest Rivers many times have the smallest Fountains, such as can hardly be
found out, and being found out, as hardly quit the cost of the discovery; and
yet by long running, and holding on a constant and continual course, they
become large, navigable, and of great benefit unto the Public. Whereas some
Families may be compared to the Pyramides of Egypt, which being built on great
Foundations, grow narrower and narrower by degrees, until at last they end in a
small Conus, in a point, in nothing. For if we look into the Stories of the
Times foregoing, we shall find, that poor and obscure Cottages have bred
Commanders to the Camp, Judges unto the Seats of Justice, Counselors to the
State, Peers to the Realm, and Kings themselves unto the Throne, as well as
Prelates to the Church: When such as do pretend to a Nobler Birth, do many
times consume themselves in effeminate Luxuries, and waste their Fortunes in a
Prodigal and Libidinous Course. Which brings into my mind the Answer made by
Mr. Pace (one of the Secretaries to King Hen. viii.) to a Nobleman about the
Court; For when the said Nobleman had told him, in contempt of Learning, That
it was enough for Noblemens Sons to wind their Horn, and carry their Hawk fair,
and to leave Study and Learning to the Children of mean men; Camld. Rens. p.
273. last Edit.
Mr. Pace thereunto replied, Then his Lordship, and the rest of the Noblemen,
must be content to leave unto the Sons of meaner Persons, the managing of
Affairs of Estate; when their own Children please themselves with winding their
Horns, and managing their Hawks, and other Follies of the Country.

But yet notwithstanding, such was the envy of the Times, that he was
frequently upbraided in the days of his Greatness, as well (in common Speech) a
scattered Libells, with the mean condition of his Birth. And I remember that I
found him once in his Garden at Lambeth, with more than ordinary Trouble in his
Countenance; of which not having confidence enough to enquire the Reason, he
showed me a Paper in his hand, and told me it was a printed Sheet of a
Scandalous Libel which had been stopped at the Press, in which he found himself
reproached with so base a Parentage, as if he had been raked out of the
Dunghill; adding withal, That though he had not the good fortune to be born a
Gentleman, yet he thanked God he had been born of honest Parents, who lived in
a plentiful condition, employed many poor People in their way, and left a good
report behind them. And thereupon beginning to clear up his Countenance, I told
him as presently as I durst, That Pope Sixtus the Fifth, as stout a Pope as
ever wore the Triple Crown, but a poor man's Son, did use familiarly to say, in
contempt of such Libells as frequently were made against him, That he was Domo
natus Illustri, because the Sunbeams passing through the broken Walls and
ragged Roof, illustrated every corner of that homely Cottage in which he was
born; with which facetiousness of that Pope (so applicable to the present
occasion) he seemed very well pleased.

1589.
But to go forwards with our Story. Having escaped a dangerous Sickness in his
Childhood, he was trained up (as soon as he was sitted for it) in the Free
Grammar School of Reading; in which he profited so well, and came on so fast,
that before he was sixteen years of age (which was very early for those times)
he was sent to Oxon* and entered a Commoner in St. John's College, and there
committed to the tuition of Mr. Buckeridge, one of the Fellows of that
College, and afterward the worthy President of it. It proved no ordinary
happiness to the Scholar, to be principled under such a Tutor, who knew as well
as any other of his time, how to employ the two-edged Sword of Holy Scripture,
of which he made good proof in the times succeeding, brandishing it on the one
side against the Papists, and on the other against the Puritans or
Nonconformists. In reference to the first, it is said of him in the general by
Bishop Godwin, (...) scribendo, quam conciona^do ve^^^^tem Ev^ng^^icam haud
sig^^^er sa^agi^ p^opug^are. Godwin Catal. ^pisc. 584.
That he endeavored most industriously, both by Preaching and Writing, to
defend and propagate the True Religion here by Law established: Which appears
plainly by his Learned and Laborious Piece, entitled, De potestate Papae in
Temporalibus, Printed at London, Anno 1614. in which he has so shaken the
Foundation of the Papal Monarchy, and the pretended Superiority of that See
over Kings and Princes, that none of the Learned men of that Party did ever
undertake a Reply unto it. With like success, but with less pains unto himself,
he managed the Controversy concerning Kneeling at the Lords Supper, against
those of the Puritan Faction; the Piety and Antiquity of which Religious
Posture in that Holy Action, he asserted with such solid Reasons and such clear
Authorities, in a Treatise by him published Anno 1618. that he came off without
the least opposition by that Party also. But before the publishing of these
Books, or either of them, his eminent Abilities in the Pulpit had brought him
into great credit with King James; insomuch that he was chosen to be one of the
four (Dr. Andrews Bishop of Chichester, Dr. Barlow Bishop of Rochester, and Dr.
King then Dean of Christchurch, and not long after Bishop of London, were the
other three) who were appointed to Preach before his Majesty at Hampton Court
in the Month of September 1606. for the Reductions of the two Melvins, and
other Presbyterian Scots, to a right understanding of the Church of England. In
the performance o^ which Service, he took for his Text those words of the
Apostle, Let every soul, etc. Romans 13.1. In canvasing whereof, he fell upon the
Point of the Kings Supremacy in Causes Ecclesiastical; which he handled Hist.
of Scot. lib. 7. p. 497.
(as the most Reverend Archbishop Spotwood (who was present at the Sermon) has
informed us of him) both learnedly and soundly, to the satisfaction of all the
hearers; but that the Scottish Ministers seemed very much grieved to hear the
Pope and the Presbytery so often equalled in their opposition to Sovereign
Princes. Hist. of the Church of Scotland, Lib. VII. page 497. And though the
other three, with the like abilities and elocution had discharged their parts,
yet gained they nothing on the Scots, who were resolved, like the deaf Adder in
the Psalmist, not to give ear unto the Charmers, charmed they never so wisely.
But whatsoever they lost in the opinion of that proud and refractory
Generation, they gained exceedingly on the King, and great Preferments for
themselves, Bishop Andrews being not long after removed to the Sea of Ely,
Bishop Barlow unto that of Lincoln, Dr. King preferred to the Sea of London,
and Dr. Buckridge to that of Rochester, where he continued till the year 1627.
when by the power and favor of this his present Pupil (then Bishop of Bath
and Wells) he was translated to the rich Bishopric of Ely, in which See he
died.

Of this man I have spoken the more at large, 1590.
that finding the temper of the Tutor, we may the better judge of those
ingredients which went to the making up of the Scholar. Having spent about a
year in his College, there was raised such a good report of him in the Town of
Reading, that partly by his own proficiencies, and partly by the good esteem
which was had of his Father, he was nominated by the Mayor and others of that
Corporation unto a Scholars place in that House, according to the Constitutions
of Sir Tho. White, the Honorable and sole Founder of it, who though he had
designed the Merchant-Taylors School in London for the Chief Seminary of his
College, yet being a man of a more public Spirit, than to confine himself to
any one place, he allowed two Fellowships to the City of Coventry, and as many
to Bristol, two also to the Town of Reading, and one to Tunbridg. Admitted a
Scholar of the House on this nomination, at the end of three years (according
to the Custom of that College) he was made one of the Fellows, 1593.
taking his Academical Degrees according to that custom also; by which custom
those of that Society are kept longer from taking their degrees in the Arts,
but are permitted to take their Degrees in Divinity much sooner than in other
Houses; so that although he proceeded not Master of Arts till the Month of July
1599. 1599.
yet at the end of five years only he took the Degree of Batchelour in
Divinity, without longer stay; during which interval he was first made Deacon,
and afterward was put into the Order of Priesthood by Dr. Young then Bishop of
Rochester, the Sea of Oxon. being vacant, in which vacancy it had continued for
the space of 11. years, that is to say, from the death of Bishop Underhill, An.
1592. till the Consecration of Dr. Bridges on the twelfth of February, An.
1603. The Patrimony of that Church being in the mean time much dilapidated and
made a prey (for the most part) to the Earl of Essex, to whom it proved as
miserably fatal, as the Gold of Toulouse did of old to the Soldiers of Caepio.

And now being fallen upon his Studies in Divinity, in the exercise whereof he
met with some affronts and oppositions, it will be necessary to take a short
view of the then present Estate of that University, that so we may the better
discern the Reasons of those affronts and oppositions under which he suffered.
Know then, that Mr. Lawrence Humphrey, one of the Fellows of Magdalen College,
being deprived of his Fellowship there in Queen Mary's time, betook himself to
the City of Zurich, a City of chiefest note amongst the Switzers, remarkable
for the Preachings and Death of Zuinglius; from whence, and from the
Correspondence which he had at Geneva, he brought back with him at his
returning into England on Queen Mary's death, so much of the Calvinian, both in
Doctrine and in Discipline, that the best that could be said of him, by Full.
Hist. lib. 9. p. 234.
one who commonly speaks favorably of all that Party, is, that he was a
moderate and conscientious Nonconformist. Immediately on his return he was by
Queen Elizabeth made President of Magdalen College, and found to be the
fittest man (as certainly he was a man of very good parts, and the Master of a
pure Latin Style) for governing the Divinity Chair, as her Majesty's Professor
in that Faculty; in which he continued till the year 1596. and for a great part
of that time was Vice Chancellor also. By which advantages he did not only
stock his College with such a generation of Non-conformists as could not be
wormed out in many years after his decease; but sowed in the Divinity Schools
such seeds of Calvinism, and labored to create in the younger Students such a
strong hate against the Papists, as if nothing but Divine Truths were to be
found in the one, and nothing but Abominations to be seen in the other. And
though Doctor John Holland Rector of Exceter College, who succeeded Humphries
in the Chair, came to it better principled than his Predecessor, yet did he
suffer himself to be borne away by the violent current of the times, contrary
in some cases to his own opinion.

And yet as zealous as Doctor Humphries showed himself against the Papists
(insomuch as he got the title of a Papisto Mastyx) he was not thought, though
seconded by the Lady Margarets Professor for that University, to make the
distance wide enough betwixt the Churches. A new Lecture therefore must be
founded by Sir Francis Walsingham Principal Secretary of Estate, a man of Great
Abilities in the Schools of Policy, an extreme hater of the Popes and Church of
Rome, and no less favorable unto those of the Puritan Faction. The design was
to make the Religion of the Church of Rome more odious, and the differences
betwixt them and the Protestants to appear more irreconcilable than before
they did. And that he might not fail of his purpose in it, the Reading of this
Lecture was committed to Doctor John Reynolds President of Corpus Christi
College, a man of infinite Reading, and as vast a Memory; who having lived
sometimes in one of our English Seminaries beyond the Seas, declared himself as
professed a Papist, and as eager in the pursuit of that way, as any other
whatsoever: But being regained unto this Church by his Brother William, who
lost himself in the encounter, he thought he could not sufficiently express his
detestation of the errors and corruptions in the Church of Rome, but by running
to the other extreme, and making himself considerable amongst the Puritans. On
which account, as he became very gracious to Sir Francis Walsingham, so was he
quickly made the Spiritual Head of the Puritan Faction; in which capacity he
managed their business for them in the Conference at Hampton Court, Anno 1603.
where he appeared the principal if not only Speaker, the other three (that is
to say, Spark, Chadderton, and Knewstubs) serving no otherwise than as Mutes
and Ciphers to make up the mess.

By the power and practices of these men, the disposition of those times, and
the long continuance of the Earl of Leicester (the principal Patron of that
Faction) in the place of Chancellor, the face of that University was so much
altered, that there was little to be seen in it of the Church of England,
according to the Principles and Positions upon which it was at first Reformed.
All the Calvinian Rigors in matters of Predestination, and the Points depending
thereupon, received as the Established Doctrines of the Church of England; the
necessity of the one Sacrament, the eminent dignity of the other, and the
powerful efficacy of both unto man's salvation, not only disputed, but denied;
the Article of Christ's local descent into hell, so positively asserted in two
Convocations, Anno 1552. and 1562. at first corrupted with false Glosses,
afterward openly contradicted, and at last totally disclaimed, because
repugnant to the Fancies of some Foreign Divines, though they at odds amongst
themselves in the meaning of it; Episcopacy maintained by halves, not as a
distinct Order from that of the Presbyters, but only a degree above them, or
perhaps not that, for fear of giving scandal to the Churches of Calvin's
Platform; the Church of Rome inveighed against as the Whore of Babylon, or the
Mother of Abominations; the Pope as publicly maintained to be Antichrist, or
the Man of Sin, and that as positively and magisterially as if it had been one
of the chief Articles of the Christian Faith; and then for fear of having any
good thoughts for either, the visibility of the Church must be no otherwise
maintained, than by looking for it in the scattered Conventicles of the
Berengarians in Italy, the Albigenses in France, the Huffites in Bohemia, and
the Wickliffists among our selves. Nor was there any greater care taken for the
Forms and Orders of this Church, than there had been for points of Doctrine,
the Surplice so disused in officiating the Divine Service of the Church, and
the Divine Service of the Church so slubbered over in most of the Colleges,
that the Prelates and Clergy assembled in Convocation, Anno 1603. were
necessitated to frame two Canons, that is to say, Can. 16, 17. to bring them
back again to the ancient practice; particularly, the bowing at the Name of
JESUS, commanded by the Injunctions of Queen Elizabeth, Anno 1559. and used in
most Churches of the Kingdom, so much neglected and decryed, that Airy Cant.
D^me. p. 469.
Provost of Queens College writ a Tract against it; the Habits of the Priests,
by which they were to be distinguished from other men, (not only by the Queens
Injunctions, but also by some following Canons made in Convocation) so much
despised, and laid aside, that Doctor Reynolds had the confidence to appear in
the Conference at Hampton Court in his Turkey Gown, and therefore may be thought
to have worn no other in the University: And in a word, H^oker Pref^ce.
the Books of Calvin made the Rule by which all men were to square their
Writings, his only word (like the ipse dixit of Pythagoras) admitted for the
sole Canon to which they were to frame and conform their Judgments, and in
comparison of whom the Ancient Fathers of the Church (men of Renown, and the
Glories of their several Times) must be held contemptible; and to offend
against this Canon, or to break this Rule, esteemed a more unpardonable Crime,
than to violate the Apostles Canons, or dispute the Doctrines and
Determinations of any of the four first general Councels; so as it might have
proved more safe for any man, in such a general deviation from the Rules and
Dictates of this Church, to have been looked upon as an Heathen or Publican,
than an Anti-Calvinist.

But Laud was of a stronger Metal than to give up himself so tamely, and being
forged and hammered on a better Anvil, would not be wrought on by the times, or
captivate his Understanding to the Names of Men, how great soever they appeared
in the eyes of others. Nor would he run precipitately into common Opinions (for
common Opinions many times are but common Errors) as Calderinus is reported to
have gone to (...), quia (...) in communes errores. Ludo. Vives in Aug. de
Civit. Dei. Nisi quod ex illa ipsa doctrina, catholici Patres and vet^res
Episcopi c^ll^g^r^nt.
Mass because he would not break company with the rest of his friends. His
Studies in Divinity he had founded on the Holy Scriptures, according to the
Glosses and Interpretations of the ancient Fathers; for doing which he had the
countenance and direction of a Canon made in Convocation, Anno 1571. by which
it was appointed, That in interpreting the Scriptures, they were to raise no
other Doctrines from them than what had been collected thence from the ancient
Fathers, and other godly Bishops of the Primitive times. Lib. Can. cap. De
con^^^at. p. 19.
And laying to this Line the established Doctrines and Determinations of the
Church of England, it was no hard matter to him to discern how much the Church
had deviated from her self, or most men rather from the Church, in those latter
times; how palpably the Articles had been wrested from the Literal and
Gramatical sense, to fit them to the sense of particular persons; how a
different construction had been put upon them, from that which was the true and
genuine meaning of the men that framed them, and the Authority which confirmed
them; and finally, that it would be a work of much glory, but of much more
merit, to bring her back again to her native Principles. But then withal, it
was as easy to discern how desperate an attempt it must needs appear for a
single man, unseconded, and not well befriended, to oppose himself against an
Army; how vain a thing to strive against so strong a stream, and cross the
current of the times; that the disease by long neglect was grown so natural and
habitual, that more mischief might be feared from the Medicine, than from the
Malady; that he must needs expose himself to many Censures and Reproaches, and
possibly to some danger also by the undertaking. But these last considerations
being weighed in the Scale of the Sanctuary, appeared so light, that he was
resolved to try his fortune in the work, and to leave the issue thereof unto
God, by whom Paul's planting and Apollo's watering do receive increase?

For being thus resolved upon the point, 1602.
it was not long before he had an opportunity to set it forwards. He had before
attained unto an high esteem for Arts and Oratory, and was conceived to have
made so good a proficiency in the Studies of Divinity also, that in the year
1602. he was admitted to read the Lecture of Mrs. May's Foundation, with the
general liking of that College. With the like general consent and approbation
he was chosen out of all the rest of that Society to be a Candidate for the
Proctorship in the University, into which Office he was chosen on the fourth of
May, 1603.
1603. which was as soon as he was capable of it by the University Statutes;
which Office he discharged with great applause as to himself, and general
satisfaction unto others. Doctor George Abbot Master of University College
(who afterward attained to the Sea of Canterbury) was at that time
Vice Chancellor of the University, whom with the rest of the Doctors and Heads
of Houses he accompanied to Woodstock Manor, to present themselves and tender
their most humble service to the most Mighty Prince King James, succeeding on
the 24th. of March before to the Crown of England: And in this year it was (but
whether in reading of the Lecture of Mrs. May's Foundation, or some other
Chapel Exercise, I am not able to say) he maintained the constant and
perpetual visibility of the Church of Christ, derived from the Apostles to the
Church of Rome, continued in that Church (as in others of the East and South)
till the Reformation. Dr. Abbot Master of University College, and
Vice Chancellor, was of a different opinion, and could not find any such
visibility of the Christian Church, but by tracing it as well as he could from
the Berengarians to the Albigenses, from the Albigenses to the Wickliffists,
from the Wickliffists unto the Hussites, and from the Hussites unto Luther and
Calvin; for proof whereof, we may consult a Book of his, entitled, The
Visibility of the Church, published in those busy Times when this impertinent
Question, viz. Where Was your Church before Luther? was as impertinently
insisted on by the Priests and Jesuits. This being his opinion also when he
lived in Oxon, he thought it a great derogation to his Parts and Credit, that
any man should dare to maintain the contrary, and thereupon conceived a strong
grudge against him, which no tract of time could either abolish or diminish.

In the next year, viz. 1604. he peformed his Exercise for Bachelor of
Divinity, in which he maintained these two Points: First, The necessity of
Baptism: 1604.
Secondly, That there could be no true Church without Diocesan Bishops: For
which last he was shrewdly ratled by Doctor Holland abovementioned, as one
that did endeavor to cast a bone of Discord betwixt the Church of England, and
the Reformed Churches beyond the Seas; and for the first it was objected, That
he had taken the greatest part of his Supposition out of Bellarmines Works, as
if the Doctrine of the Incarnation of the Son of God, or any necessary Truths,
were to be renounced because they are defended by that Learned Cardinal. But
misfortunes seldom come alone, if at the least it may be counted a misfortune
to be reproached for standing up in defense of truth: For not long after, viz.
Anno 1606. he was questioned by Dr. Airy, 1606.
being Vice Chancellor for that year, for a Sermon preached in St. Mary's
Church on the 26th. of October, as containing in it sundry scandalous and
Popish passages; the good man taking all things to be matter of Popery, which
were not held forth unto him in Calvin's Institutes; conceiving that there was
as much Idolatry in bowing at the Name of JESUS, as in worshipping the brazen
Serpent, and as undoubtedly believing that Antichrist was begotten on the Whore
of Babylon, as that Pharez and Zara were begotten on the body of Tamar. Which
advantage being taken by Doctor Abbot, he so violently persecuted the poor man,
and so openly branded him for a Papist, or at least very Popishly inclined,
that it was almost made an Heresy (as I have heard from his own mouth) for any
one to be seen in his company, and a misprision of Heresy to give him a civil
Salutation as he walked the Streets. But there will one day come a time, when
Doctor Abbot may be made more sensible of these Oppressions, when he shall see
this poor despised man standing upon the higher ground, and more above him in
respect of Power, than beneath in Place: So unsafe a thing it is for them that
be in Authority to abuse their Power, and carry matters on to the last
extremities, as if they had Fortune in a string, and could be sure to lead her
with them whithersoever they went.

This scandal being raised at Oxon, it was not long before it flew to Cambridge
also, at what time Mr. Joseph Hall (who died Bishop of Norwich about the year
1657.) was exercising his Pen in the way of Epistles, L. Decad. 3. (...).
in one of which inscribed to Mr. W. L. (the two first Letters of his Name) it
was generally supposed that he aimed at him, and was this that follows. I
would ( says he) I knew where to find you; then I could tell how to take
direct aims; whereas now I must pore and conjecture. To day you are in the
Tents of the Romanists, to morrow in ours; the next day between both, against
both. Our Adversaries think you ours, we theirs; your Conscience finds you
with both, and neither. I flatter you not: This of yours is the worst of all
tempers: Heat and Cold have their uses; Lukewarmness is good for nothing, but
to trouble the stomach. Those that are spiritually hot, find acceptance; those
that are stark cold, have a lesser reckoning; the mean between both is so much
worse, as it comes nearer to good, and attains it not. How long will you halt
in this indifferency? Resolve one way, and know at last what you do hold, what
you should. Cast off either your wings or your teeth, and loathing this
Bat-like Nature, be either a Bird or a Beast. To die wavering and uncertain,
your self will grant fearful. If you must settle, when begin you? If you must
begin, why not now? It is dangerous deferring that whose want is deadly, and
whose opportunity is doubtful. God cries with Iehu, Who is on my side, who?
Look at last out of your window to him, and in a resolute courage cast down the
Iezebel that has bewitched you. Is there any impediment which delay will
abate? Is there any which a just answer cannot remove? If you had rather waver,
who can settle you? But if you love not inconstancy, tell us why you stagger?
Be plain, or else you will never be firm, etc.

But notwithstanding these false bruits, and this smart Epistle, Doctor
Buckridge who had been his Tutor, and from whom he received his Principles, had
better assurance of his unfeigned sincerity in the true Protestant Religion
here by Law established, than to be so persuaded of him; he had not else
preferred him to the service of Bishop Neile, or recommended him to the
College, as the fittest man to succeed him in the Presidents place, when he
himself was at the point of his preferment to the Sea of Rochester. So also had
the whole Body of the University, when they conferred upon him his Degrees in
Divinity, which certainly they had never done, if either they had believed him
to have been a Papist, or at the least so Popishly affected as the Faction made
him. Neither could he have taken those Degrees (had it been so with him)
without a most perfidious dissimulation before God and Man; because in taking
those Degrees, he must both take the Oath of Supremacy, and subscribe to the
three Articles contained in the 36 Canon of the year 1603. In the first of
which he was to have abjured the Popes Authority, and in the next to have
declared his approbation of the Doctrine, Government, and Forms of Worship
established in the Church of England: Which may sufficiently serve to
over-balance the Depositions of Sir Nath. Brent and Doctor Featly, the first of
which deposed at his Trial, That whilst the Archbishop remained in Oxon, Cant.
Dome. p. 409.
he was generally reputed to be Popishly affected; the other, Not only that the
Archbishop was generally reported to be Popish when he lived in Oxon, but that
both he and others conceived so of him. But both these men were Abbot's
Creatures, and had received their Offices and Preferments from him; I need say
no more, For had he either been a Papist, or so strongly biassed on that side,
what should have hindered him from making an open Declaration of it, or stop him
from a reconciliation with the Church of Rome? His Fellowship was not so
considerable, but that he might presume of a larger Maintenance beyond the
Seas: Nor was he of such common parts, but that he might have looked for a
better welcome, and far more civil usage there than he found at home.
Preferments in the Church he had none at the present, nor any strong
presumptions of it for the time to come, which might be a temptation to him to
continue here against the clear light of his Understanding. And this may be a
further Argument, not only of his unfeigned sincerity, but of his constancy and
stedfastness in the Religion here established, that he kept his station; that
notwithstanding all those clamours under which he suffered, he was resolved to
ride out the storm, and neither to desert the Barque in which he sailed, nor
run her upon any of the Roman Shores. In this of a far better Temper than
Tertullian was, though as much provoked, of whom it is reported by Beatus
Rhenamus, That at first he only seemed to favor Montanus, or at the least not
to be displeased with his proceedings: But afterward being continually
tormented by the tongues and pens of the Roman Clergy, Injuria and contumelici,
R. E. Clericorum ex^gitatus in Montani parts transit. B Rhen. in Tertull.
he fell off from the obedience of the Church, and became at last a downright
Montanist. All which together make it plain, that it was not his design to
desert the Church, but to preserve her rather from being deserted, to vindicate
her by degrees from those Innovations which by long tract of time, and the
cunning practices of some men, had been thrust upon her. And being once
resolved on this, the blustering winds which so raged against him, did rather
fix him at the root, than either shake his resolution, or force him to desist
from his purpose in it: And therefore it was well resolved by Sir Edw. Dering,
C^ll^ct. of Speeches. p. 5
though his greatest enemy, That he was always one and the same man; that
beginning with him at Oxon. and so going on to Canterbury, he was unmoved and
unchanged; that he never complied with the times, but kept his own stand until
the times came up to him, as they after did. Such was the man, and such the
purpose of the man, whom his good friends in Oxon. (out of pure zeal no doubt
we must take it so) had declared a Papist.

During these Agitations and Concussions in the University, there happened an
accident at Wansteed in the County of Essex, which made as great a noise as his
being a Papist; but such a noise as might have freed him from that Accusation,
if considered rightly. In the year 1605. he had been made Chaplain to Charles
Lord Mountjoy Earl of Devonshire, a man in great favor with King James for his
fortunate Victory at Kinsale in Ireland, by which he reduced that Realm to the
obedience of this Crown, broke the whole Forces of the Rebels, and brought the
Earl of Tir-owen a Prisoner into England with him. For which great Services he
was by King James made Lord Lieutenant of that Kingdom, and one of the Lords of
his Privy Council, created Earl of Devonshire, and one of the Knights of the
most Noble Order of the Garter. This Gentleman being a younger Brother of
William Lord Mountjoy, and known only by the name of Sir Charles Blunt, while
his Brother lived, had bore a strong and dear affection to the Lady Penelope
Daughter of Walter Earl of Essex, a Lady in whom lodged all attractive Graces
of Beauty, Wit, and sweetness of Behavior, which might render her the absolute
Mistress of all Eyes and Hearts. And she so far reciprocated with him in the
like affection (being a complete and gallant man) that some assurances past
between them of a future Marriage. But her friends looking on him as a younger
Brother, considerable only in his depending at the Court, chose rather to
dispose her in Marriage to Robert Lord Rich, a man of an independent Fortune,
and a known Estate, but otherwise of an uncourtly disposition, unsociable,
austere, and of no very agreeable conversation to her. Against this Blunt had
nothing to plead in Bar, the promises which passed between them being made in
private, no Witnesses to attest unto it, and therefore not amounting to a
pre-Contract in due form of Law.

But long she had not lived in the Bed of Rich, when the old flames of her
affection unto Blunt began again to kindle in her, and if the Sonet in the
Arcadia, (A Neighbor mine not long ago there was, etc.) be not too generally
misconstrued, she made her Husband the sole instrument to acquaint him with it:
But whether it were so or not, certain it is, that having first had their
private meetings, they afterward converst more openly and familiarly with one
another, than might stand with honor unto either; especially when by the death
of his elder Brother, the Title of Lord Mountjoy, and the Estate remaining to
it, had accrued unto him: As if the alteration of his Fortune could either
lessen the offense, or suppress the fame. Finding her, at his coming back from
the Wars of Ireland, to be free from Rich, legally freed by a Divorce, and not
a voluntary separation only, a toro and mensa, as they call it; he thought
himself obliged to make her some Reparation in point of Honor, by taking her
into his Bosom as a Lawful Wi^e. Besides, he had some Children by her, before
she was actually separated from the Bed of Rich (some of which afterward
attained to Titles of Honor) whom he conceived he might have put into a
capability of a Legitimation, by this subsequent Marriage, according to the
Rule and Practice of the Civil Laws, in which it passes for a Maxim, That
subsequens Matrimonium legitimat prolem. And to that end he dealt so powerfully
with his Chaplain, that he disposed him to perform the Rites of that
Solemnization, which was accordingly done at Wansteed, December. 26. being the
Festival of St. Steven, Anno 1605.

Nor did he want some Reasons to induce him to it (besides the persuasion of
his Friends) which might have gained upon a man not so much concerned in it as
he was, and may be used for his excuse, if not for his justification also. He
found by the averment of the Parties, that some assurances of Marriage had
passed between them, before she was espoused to Rich; which though they could
not amount to a pre-Contract in Foro Iudicii, in a Court of Judicature; yet he
might satisfy himself in the truth thereof in Foro Conscientiae, in the Court
of his own private Conscience: And thereupon he might conclude, That being
satisfied in the reality and truth of those Assurances, and finding that Rich
had quitted his pretensions to her by a formal Sentence of Divorce, he might
conceive it lawful for him to perform that Service which was required at his
hands. He had found also three Opinions touching the lawfulness or unlawfulness
of such Marriages, which are made after a Divorce: The first, That such
Marriages are lawful unto neither Party, as long as either of them lives;
which is the Doctrine of the Papists, determined positively in the Council of
Trent: The second, That such Marriages are lawful to the Party wronged, but not
unto the Guilty also; which Opinion is maintained by some of the Calvinists,
and diverse of the Ancient Writers: The third, That both the innocent and the
guilty Party may lawfully marry if they please; which Maldonate (...) n. Mat.
19.9
makes to be the general Opinions of the Lutheran and Calvinian Ministers, as
also of some Catholic Doctors. And then why might he not conceive that course
most fit to be followed, in which all Parties did agree, than either of the
other two, which was commended to him but by one Party only. And though he
followed in this case the worst way of the three, ^et may it serve for a
sufficient Argument that he was no Papist, nor cordially affected unto that
Religion, because he acted so directly against the Doctrines and Determinations
of the Church of Rome. If any other considerations of Profit, Preferment, or
Compliance, did prevail upon him (as perhaps they might) they may with Charity
be looked on as the common incidencies of Humane frailty, from which the
holiest and most learned men cannot plead Exemption.

But whatsoever motives either of them had to put a fair color upon the
business, certain it is, that it succeeded well with neither: The Earl found
presently such an alteration in the Kings countenance toward him, and such a
lessening of the value which formerly had been set upon him, that he was put to
a necessity of writing an Apology to defend his action: But finding how little
it edified both in Court and Country, it wrought such a sad impression on him,
that he did not much survive the mischief, ending his life before the end of
the year next following. Nor did the Chaplain brook it long without such a
check of Conscience, as made him turn the Annual Festival of St. Steven into an
Anniversary Fast, humbling himself from year to year upon that day before the
Father of Mercies, and craving pardon for that Error which by the persuasions
of some Friends, and other the temptations of flesh and blood, he had fallen
into. And for this purpose he composed this ensuing Prayer.

^
BEhold thy Servant, O my God, and in the bowels of thy mercy have compassion on
me. Behold I am become a Reproach to thy holy Name, by serving my Ambition and
the sins of others; which though I did by the persuasion of other men, yet my
own Conscience did check and upbraid me in it. Lord I beseech thee for the
mercies of Jesus Christ, enter not into Judgment with me thy Servant; but hear
his blood imploring thy mercies for me: Neither let this Marriage prove a
Divorcing of my Soul from thy grace and favor; for much more happy had I been,
if being mindful of this day, I had suffered Martyrdom, as did St. Steven the
first of Martyrs, denying that which either my less faithful friends or less
godly friends had pressed upon me. I promised to my self that the darkness
would hide me, but that hope soon vanished away: Nor does the light appear more
plainly, than I that have committed that soul offense: Even so, O Lord, it
pleased thee of thy infinite mercy to deject me with this heavy Ignominy, that
I might learn to seek thy Name. O Lord how grievous is the remembrance of my
sin to this very day, after so many and such reiterated Prayers poured forth
unto thee from a sorrowful and afflicted Spirit. Be merciful, O Lord, unto me;
hearken to the Prayers of thy humble and dejected Servant, and raise me up
again, O Lord, that I may not die in this my sin, but that I may live in thee
hereafter, and living evermore rejoice in thee, through the merits and the
mercies of Jesus Christ my Lord and Savior. Amen. A brave example of a
penitent and afflicted Soul, which many of us may admire, but few will imitate.
And though I doubt not but that the Lord in mercy did remit this fault, yet was
he not so mercifully dealt with at the hands of men, by whom it was so
frequently and reproachfully cast in the way of his Preferment, that he was
fain to make the Duke of Buckingham acquainted with the story of it, 9 Bre. p.
4. and p. 6.
and by his means to possess King Charles his gracious Master with the truth
thereof: So long it was before his Enemies had desisted from pressing this
unhappy Error to his disadvantage.

The Earl of Devonshire being dead, he was by Doctor Buckridge his most
constant friend ( Anno 1608.) commended to the Service of Doctor Richard Neile,
1608.
then Bishop of Rochester, a man who very well understood the Constitution of
the Church of England, though otherwise not so eminent in all parts of
Learning, as some other Bishops of his time: But what he wanted in himself, he
made good in the choice of his Servants, having more able men about him from
time to time than any other of that age: Amongst which (not to reckon Laud, of
whom now I speak) were Doctor Augustine Linsell Bishop of Hereford, Doctor
Thomas Iackson President of Corpus Christi College in Oxon. and Dean of
Peterburrough, Doctor John Cosen Prebend of Durham, and Dean of Peterburrough
after Iackson, Doctor Benjamin Lany Master of Queens College in Cambridge, and
Dean of Rochester, Doctor Robert Newell his half Brother, Prebend of
Westminster and Durham, and Archdeacon of Buckingham, Doctor Gabriel Clarke
Prebend and Archdeacon of Durham, Doctor Eliazer Duncum one of the Prebends of
Durham also, Mr. Barlow a right solid man, but not possessed of any Dignity in
the Church to my best remembrance; and some others of good note, whose Names
and Titles I cannot presently call to mind. In the beginning of the Reign of
King James (by the power and mediation of Archbishop Bancroft) he was made
Clerk of the Closet to that King, that standing continually at his Elbow, he
might be ready to perform good offices to the Church and Churchmen: And he
discharged his trust so well, that though he lost the love of some of the
Courtiers, who were too visibly inclined to the Puritan Faction, yet he gained
the favor of his Master, by whom he was preferred to the Deanery of
Westminster, and afterward successively to the Bishoprics of Rochester,
Litchfield, Lincoln, and Durham, one of the richest in the Kingdom; which shows
that there was in him something more than ordinary, which made that King so
bountiful and gracious to him. Nor staid he there, but by the Power and Favor
of this his Chaplain, he was promoted in the Reign of King Charles to the Sea
of Winton, and finally exalted to the Metropolitan See of York, where at last
he died about the latter end of October 1640. None of his Chaplains received so
much into his Counsels as Doctor Laud (to which degree he was admitted in the
year 1608.) whom he found both an active and a trusty Servant, as afterward a
most constant and faithful friend upon all occasions.

The first Ecclesiastical Preferment which fell unto him was the Vicaridge of
Stamford in Northamptonshire: But having put himself into the Service of Bishop
Neile, he was by him preferred into the Rectory of Cuckstone in Kent, 1610.
toward the latter end of May 1610. On the acceptance thereof he gave over his
Fellowship in October following, that so he might more fully apply himself to
the service of his Lord and Patron. But Cuckstone proving an unhealthy place,
he exchanged it for another called Norton; a Benefice of less value, but
situate in a better and more healthy Air: His Patron in the mean time being
translated to the Sea of Litchfield on the end of September, whose Fortunes he
was resolved to follow, till God should please to provide otherwise for him:
For first the Bishop, before his going off from the Deanery of Westminster,
which he held in commendam with his Bishopric of Rochester, obtained for him
of King James, (to whom not otherwise known but by his Recommendation) the
Reversion of a Prebend in that Church; which though it fell not to him until
ten years after, yet it fell at last, and thereby neighbored him to the Court.
And on the other side, his good Friend and Tutor Doctor Buckridge being
nominated Successor unto Neile in the Sea of Rochester, laid a good ground for
his Succession in the Presidentship of St. John's College, thereby to render
him considerable in the University. But this was both suspected and feared by
Abbot, who being consecrated Bishop of Coventry and Litchfield on the third of
December 1609. and from thence removed to London in the end of January next
ensuing, resolved to hinder the design with all care and diligence: So natural
a thing it is to hate the man whom we have wronged; to keep him down, whom we
have any cause to fear, when we have him under. To which end he made great
Complaints against him to Thomas Lord Elsmer, Lord Chancellor of England many
years before, and newly then made Chancellor of that University, on the death
of the Lord Archbishop Bancroft, insinuating to him, That he was at the least a
Papist in heart, and cordially addicted unto Popery; That he kept company with
none but professed and suspected Papists; and, That if he were suffered to have
any place of Government in the University, it would undoubtedly turn to the
great Detriment of Religion, and Dishonor of his Lordship. The Chancellor
hereupon makes his Address unto the King, informing him of all which had been
told him concerning Laud, which was like to have destroyed his hopes as to that
design (notwithstanding his petition to the King to believe otherwise of him)
if Bishop Neile his constant and unmovable Friend, had not acquainted his
Majesty with the Abilities of the man, and the old grudge which Abbot had
conceived against him.

This Bar being thus removed, 1611.
the design for the Presidentship went on; in the obtaining whereof; he found a
greater difficulty than he had expected: Rawlinson, once a Fellow of the same
House, and afterward Principal of St. Edmonds Hall, appearing a Competitor for
it. Each of them having prepared his Party, the Fellows proceeded to an
Election May 10. Anno 1611. The Scrutiny being made, and the Election at the
point to be declared, one of the Fellows of Rawlinson's Party, seeing which way
the business was like to go, snatched up the Paper, and tore it suddenly in
pieces. The Nomination being thus unhappily frustrated, an Appeal was made unto
King James, who spent three hours in giving Audience to both parties; and upon
full consideration of the Proofs and Allegations on either side
(notwithstanding all the former practices and prejudices to incline him
otherwise) he gave Sentence in behalf of Laud; which happening on the 29th. of
August, being the day of the beheading of St. John Baptist, by whose Name that
College was entitled by the Founder of it, has given an occasion unto some
to look upon it as an Omen or Prognostication, that this new Head should suffer
death by being beheaded, as the other did. The King having thus passed Judgment
for him, he was thereupon sworn, and admitted President; and being so sworn and
admitted, he could not for example sake but inflict some punishment on the
party who had torn the Scrutiny: But knowing him for a man of hopeful Parts,
industrious in his Studies, and of a Courage not to be disliked, he not only
released him from the Censure under which he lay, but took him into special
Favor, trusted him in all his weighty businesses, made him his Chaplain, and
preferred him from one good Benefice to another, married him to his Brothers
Daughter, and finally promoted him to the very Presidentship (which had been
the first cause of that breach) and one of the best Deanries of the Kingdom. To
such others of the Fellows as had opposed him in his Election to that place, he
always showed a fair and equal countenance, hoping to gain them by degrees: But
if he found any of them to be untractable, not easily to be gained by favors,
he would find some handsome way or other to remove them out of the College,
that others not engaged upon either side might succeed in their places. But
notwithstanding all this care, the Faction still held up against him, the
younger fry inclining to the same side which had been taken by their Tutors.

But whiles these things were in agitation, there happened a great alteration in
the Church of England, by the death of the most Reverend Archbishop Bancroft,
who died on the second of November 1610. and with whom died the Uniformity of
the Church of England. A man he was of eminent parts, and of a most undaunted
spirit; one who well knew his work, and did it. When Chaplain only to the Lord
Chancellor Hatton, he piec'd himself with Doctor Whitgift, not long after his
first coming to the Sea of Canterbury, to whom he proved a great support in
gaining the Lord Chancellor for him, by whose assistance he was enabled to hold
out against the overruling Power of the Earl of Leicester, the Patron-General
of the Faction. In the year 1588. he Preached a Sermon at St. Paul's Cross, and
therein made an open Declaration of those manifold Dangers which the prevalency
of that Faction would bring upon the Church and State, if they might be
suffered; which blow he followed in a Book entitled, Dangerous Positions and
Proceedings published and practiced within this Island of Britain, under
pretense of Reformation, and for the Presbyterial Discipline: And in that Book
he made such a perfect discovery of their Plots and Practices, and so
anatomized them in every part, that he made them odious unto those who before
had been their greatest Patrons. In the year 1593. he published another
Treatise, entitled, A Survey of the Pretended holy Discipline, in which he so
dissected the whole Body of Calvin's Presbyterial Platform, showing the
incoherencies of it in it self, and the inconsistencies thereof with
Monarchical Government, that he took off the edge of many (and those Great ones
too) who had not only seemed to like it, but had longed for it: The Plot was so
laid down by Whitgift, that at the same time there should come out two other
Books, the one written by Doctor Thomas Bilson, Warden of the College near
Winton, for proof of the Antiquity and perpetual Government of the Church by
Bishops; the other by Doctor Richard Cosens a right Learned Civilian, in
justification of the Proceedings in the Ecclesiastical Courts. By which four
Books the Puritan Faction was so muzled, that they were not able to bark in a
long time after: Nor do they want their several and just Rewards for such good
performances, Bilson being first made Bishop of Worcester, and not long after
Bishop of Winton, Bancroft advanced to the Sea of London, and Doctor Cosens
Vicar General and Dean of the Arches, within few years after being consecrated
Bishop of London, on the eighth of May 1597. he kept such a watchful eye over
it, and held so strict a hand upon it, that from a receptactle and retreat of
the Grandees of the Puritan party, it became almost as free from Faction as any
other in the Kingdom: And knowing how much the Peace of this Church did depend
upon it, he managed a secret Corespondency with King James in Scotland,
insinuating unto him the necessity of conforming the Churches of both Kingdoms
in Government and Forms of Worship, and laying down a plot for restoring
Episcopacy to that Kirk, without noise or trouble: Which counsel being
advisedly followed by King James before his coming into England, was afterward
so well pursued (though not without some violent struggling of the Presbyterians
of that Kingdom) that on the 21. day of October in the year 1609. the designed
Bishops of Glascow, Brechen, and Gallo-Way received Episcopal Consecration in
the Chapel of London-house, by the hands of Doctor George Abbot then Bishop of
London, Doctor Lancelot Andrews Bishop of Ely, Doctor James Montague Bishop of
Bath and Wells, and Doctor Richard Neile then Bishop of Rochester; Bancroft
himself forbearing to lay hands upon them, for the avoiding of all scruples
amongst the Scots, as if he pretended any Jurisdiction or Authority over them.

In the mean time, Anno 1603. he carried a chief hand in the Conference at
Hampton Court, and had the sole management of the Convocation of the same year
also, in which he passed that excellent body of Canons and Constitutions
Ecclesiastical, to serve for a perpetual standing Rule to the Church of
England. Succeeding Whitgift in the Sea of Canterbury, Anno 1604. he resolved
to put the Canons into execution, and pressed it with so stout a courage, that
few had confidence enough to stand out against him: Some of them did, and those
he either deprived or silenced, and thereby terrified the rest to an open
Conformity. They saw too plainly that they must not dally with his patience, as
they did with Whitgifts; and that he was resolved to break them, if they would
not bow: And they did wisely in so bowing; for who could stand against a man of
such a spirit, armed with Authority, having the Law on his side, and the King
to friend, who had declared publicly in the Conf. at Hamp. p. 85.
Conference at Hampton Court, That if they would not conform, he would either
hurry them out of the Kingdom, or else do worse? In the year 1608. he was
chosen Chancellor at Oxon. and questionless would have set all things right in
that University, if Sickness and the stroke of Death had not prevented his
intendments. But die he must; and being dead, there was a Consultation amongst
some of the Bishops and other Great men of the Court, whom to commend unto King
James for his Successor in that See. They knew that Mountague and Abbot would
be venturing at it, but they had not confidence enough in either of them, both
of them being extremely popular, and such as would ingratiate themselves with
the Puritan Faction, how dearly soever the Church paid for it: And thereupon it
was resolved to fix on Andrews for the man; a man, as one says very well of
him, of Primitive Antiquity, in whom was to be found whatever is desirable in a
Bishop, even to admiration; Hist. of K. Charles by H. L. p 31.
to whom they found the King to be well affected, for taking up the Bucklers
for him against Cardinal Bellarmine. The Motion was no sooner made, but it was
embraced, and they departed from the King with as good assurance as if the
business had been done, and Andrews fully settled in the Throne of Canterbury.
In confidence whereof, some of them retired to their Country Houses, and others
lessened their accustomed diligence about the King, and thereby gave an
opportunity to the Earl of Dunbar (a powerful Minister of State) to put in for
Abbot, who had attended him in some Negotiations which he had with the Scots;
and he put in so powerfully in his behalf, that at last he carried it, and had
the Kings Hand to the passing of the public Instruments, before the other
Bishops ever heard of the Plot: But when they heard of it, there was no Remedy
but Patience; but it was Patience perforce, as the Proverb has it: For much
they feared that Abbot would unravel all the Web which Bancroft with such pains
had weaved, and that he was (as the same Author well observes) better qualified
with Merit for the Dignity, than with a spirit answering the Function. Follow
his Character to the end, and you shall be told, That in the exercising of his
Function he was conceived too facil and yielding: His extraordinary Remisness
in not exacting strict Conformity to the prescribed Orders of the Church in
point of Ceremony, seemed to resolve those Legal Determinations to their first
Principle of Indifferency, and led in such an habit of Inconformity, as the
future Reduction of those tender Conscienced men, to long discontinued
Obedience, was at the last interpreted an Innovation. If Andrews had succeeded
Bancroft, and Laud followed Andrews, the Church would have been settled to sure
on a Foundation, that it could not easily have been shaken; to the preventing
of those deplorable Miseries, which the Remiss Government of that Popular
Prelate did so unfortunately bring both on the Church and State.

1611.
But to go forward where we left, Laud was no sooner settled in the Presidentship
of his College, but he conceived himself advanced, one step at the least,
toward a Precedence in the Church, and therefore thought it was high time to
cast an eye upon the Court. His good Friend and Patron Bishop Neile, then being
of Rochester, had procured him a Turn before the King at Theobalds on the 17th.
of September 1609. and by the power and favor of the same man, being then
translated unto Litchfield, he was sworn one of his Majesty's Chaplains in
Ordinary on the third of November, Anno 1611. yet so that he continued his
dependencies on his former Lord, to whom he was as dear and necessary as before
he was; enjoying freely all the accomodations of his House, whenever his
occasions brought him to London. Having thus set foot within the Court, he
promised himself great hopes of some present preferment; but those hopes
deceived him. Nothing is more uncertain than Court Preferments: Some have them
suddenly at the first, and then continue at a stand without farther Additions,
as in the case of Doctor Young Dean of Winchester: Some attend long, and get
nothing, as in the case of Mr. Arthur Terringham, and many others; and some are
in the same case with the Apostles in St. John John 21. v. 3, 6.
when they went a fishing, of whom it is said, That having caught nothing all
the night, they cast their net the next morning on the right side of the Ship,
and then they were not able to draw it for the multitude of Fishes. And so it
was with this new Chaplain; many Preserments fell, but none fell to him; For
whenever any opportunity was offered for his Advancement, Archbishop Abbot
(who had before defamed him to the Lord Chancellor Egerton, and by his mouth
unto the King) would be sure to cast somewhat in his dish; sometimes
inculcating to him all his actings at Oxon. and sometimes rubbing up the old
sore of his unfortunate business with the Earl of Devonshire. These Artifices
so estranged the Kings Countenance from him, that having waited four years, and
seeing his hopes more desperate than at the first, he was upon the point of
leaving the Court, and retiring wholly into his College: But first he thought
it not amiss to acquaint his dear Friend and Patron Bishop Neile, both with his
resolution and the reasons of it. But Neile was not to be told what he knew
before; and therefore answered, That he was very sensible of those many
neglects which were put upon him, and saw too clearly that he had been too long
under a cloud; but howsoever advised him to stay one year longer, and that if
he had no better encouragement within that year, he would consent to his
retirement. In the mean time, to keep him up in heart and spirit, as he had
given him the Prebendary of Bugden belonging to the Church of Lincoln (to which
See he had been translated Anno 1613.) but the year before; so in the year of
his complaint, 1614.
which was 1615. he conferred upon him also the Archdeaconry of Huntington. It
had pleased God so to dispose of his Affairs, that before the year of
expectation was fully ended, his Majesty began to take him into his better
thoughts, and for a testimony thereof bestowed upon him the Deanery of
Gloucester, void by the death of the Reverend Right Learned Doctor Field, whose
excellent Works will keep his Name alive to succeeding Ages: A Deanery of no
very great value, but such as kept him up in reputation, and made men see he
was not so contemptible in the eyes of the King as it was generally imagined.

But before we follow him to Gloucester, we must take Oxon. in our way, in which
had happened no small alteration since we left it la^t: Doctor Henry Holland
Rector of Exceter College, and his Majesty's Professor for Divinity, having
left this Life in the end of the year 1611. it seemed good to Archbishop Abbot
to make use of his Power and Favor with King James, for preferring to that
place his elder Brother Doctor Robert Abbot, being then Master of Baliol
College, and Rector of Bingham in the County of Nottingham: He had before been
Fellow of it, and Doctor Lilly dying so opportunely for the furtherance of his
Preferment in the University, he succeeded Master in his place March 9. 1609.
being the next Month after his Brother had been advanced to the Sea of London:
A man he was of eminent Learning, as his Works declare, and a more moderate
Calvinian than either of his Predecessors, which he expressed by countenancing
the Sublapsarian way of Predestination; by means whereof he incurred the high
displeasure of the Supralapsarians, who until then had carried all before them,
without gaining any thing on those who liked well of neither: But depending
altogether on the will of his Brother, he thought he could not gratify and
oblige him more, than in pursuing his old quarrels against Laud and others,
whom he knew to be disrellished by him, which he thus pursued. It happened that
Laud preaching on Shrove-Sundar. Anno. 1614. insisted on some points which
might indifferently be imputed either to Popery or Arminianism, (as about that
time they began to call it) though in themselves they were no other than the
true and genuine Doctrines of the Church of England: And having occasion in
that Sermon to touch upon the Presbyterians and their Proceedings, he used some
words to this effect, viz. That the Presbyterians were as bad as the Papists:
Which being so directly contrary to the Judgment and Opinion of this Doctor
Abbot, and knowing how much Laud had been distasted by his Brother when he
lived in Oxon. conceived he could not better satisfy himself, and oblige his
Brother the Archbishop, than by exposing him (on the next occasion) both to
shame and censure, which he did accordingly: For being Vice Chancellor for the
year, and preaching at St. Peter's upon Easter Day in the afternoon. he pointed
at him so directly, that none of the Auditors were so ignorant, as not to know
at whom he aimed. Laud not being present at the first preaching of the Sermon,
was by his friends persuaded to show himself at St. Mary's on the Sunday after,
when it should come to be repeated (according to the ancient Custom of that
University) to whose persuasions giving an unwilling consent, he heard himself
sufficiently abused for almost an hour together, and that so palpably and
grossly, that he was pointed too as he sat: Some of the passages of which
Sermon I shall here subjoyn, because howsoever they might bring to him some
present and personal disgrace, yet they redowned at the last to the great Good
and Benefit of the University.

Some (said the Doctor in his Sermon) are partly Romish, partly English, as
occasion served them, that a man might say unto them, Noster es, an
Adversariorum? who under pretense of Truth, and preaching against the Puritan,
strike at the heart and root of the Faith and Religion now established amongst
us, etc. That they cannot plead they are accounted Papists, because they speak
against the Puritan, but because, being indeed Papists, they speak nothing
against them; If they do at any time speak against the Papists, they do but
beat a little about the bush, and that but softly too, for fear of waking and
disquieting the birds that are in it; they speak nothing but that wherein one
Papist will speak against another; as against Equivocation, and the Popes
Temporal Authority, and the like; and perhaps some of their blasphemous
speeches: But in the Points of Free Will, Justification, Concupiscence being a
sin after Baptism, Inherent Righteousness, and certainty of Salvation; The
Papists beyond the Seas can say they are wholly theirs; and the Recusants at
home make their brags of them. And in all things they keep themselves so near
the brink, that upon any occasion they may step over to them. Now for this
speech, that the Presbyterians are as bad as the Papists, there is a sting in
the speech, which I wish had been left out, for there are many Churches beyond
the Seas which contend for the Religion established amongst us, and yet have
approved and admitted the Presb^tery, etc. After which, having spoken somewhat
in justification of Presbyteries, he proceeded thus: Might not Christ say
(says he) What art thou, ROMISH or ENGLISH? PAPIST or PROTESTANT? Or what art
thou? A Mungrelor compound of both: A Protestant by Ordination, a Papist in
point of Free Will, Inherent Righteousness, and the like. A Protestant in
receiving the Sacrament, a Papist in the Doctrine of the Sacrament? What, do
you think there are two Heavens? If there be, get you to the other, and place
your selves there, for into this where I am ye shall not come.

It is not to be doubted but that he was much troubled at this harsh usage, and
might have been more troubled at it had he stood alone; had not some others of
eminent note, been handled in as ill a manner not long before. Howson, and
Corbet, both of Christ-Church, had been Praecursors in this case, to the
President of St. John Baptist, the Praecursor of Christ: Of these, the first,
being a grave and Reverend person, an ancient Doctor in Divinity, and one of
the Canons of the Church, had been Vicc-Chancellor of the University, when Laud
had but newly taken on him the Order of Priesthood; but none of these could
privilege him from feeling the dint of that man's spirit: For preaching at St.
Mary's in the year 1612. he took occasion to speak of the Geneva Notes on the
Bible, accusing them as guilty of misinterpretation touching the Divinity of
Christ and his Messiahship, (as my Author Church Hist. l. 10 p 59.
has it) as if symbolizing with Arrians and Jews against them both. Whereupon
he was suspended by this Dr. Abbot, Propter conciones publicas minus
Orthodoxas, and offensionis plenas; that is to say, for some public Sermons
being less Orthodox, and fuller of offense than they ought to have been. The
other, being a man of great wit and able parts, had been Proctor of the
University, in the same year in which Howson did incur this Censure: And
preaching the Passion Sermon at Christ Church, Anno 1613. insisted on the
Article of Christ's descending into Hell, and therein grated upon Calvin's
manifest perverting of the true sense and meaning of it: For which he was so
ratled up by the Repetitioner, not without Abbots setting on (as it was
generally conceived) that if he had not been a man of a very great courage it
might have made him ashamed of staying in the University; so dangerous a thing
it was to touch at any thing in which Geneva was concerned. But the best was,
that none of them sunk under the burden of these oppressions, if (like the
Camomile) they did not rise the higher by it. For Howson on the ninth of May,
1619. succeeded Dr. John Bridges in the Sea of Oxon. from thence translated
unto Durham, Anno 1627. and left behind him this commendation, (...), G^dw. in
Continuat.
that he was a very learned man, and plentifully endowed with all those virtues
which were most proper for a Bishop, as Godwin tells us of him in his
Continuation. Corbet, being made Dean of Christ Church in the year 1620.
succeeded Bishop Howson in the Sea of Oxon. and died Bishop of Norwhich, Anno
1635. And how it did succeed with Laud, the course of this ensuing History will
at large inform us.

For he being very sensible of so great an injury, thought it fit to prevent
the same by giving an account of It to the Bishop of Lincoln; which he did on
the Morrow after the Repetition, being the eighteenth day of April, desiring
his advice, whether he should sit down by the wrong, or make Abbot as sensible
of it as he was himself. What direction he received in it I am not able to say,
but as it seems he was advised to sit down with patience, not to exasperate
either of the Abbots, and thereby to provoke more enemies against him than he
had already. And I conceive that this Advice was given unto him, because I
cannot find that he stirred any further in it; the rather in regard that Abbot
was nominated not long after to the Bishopric of Salisbury in the place of Dr.
Henry Cotton, who died on the seventh of May next following. And yet this
Bishopric was not carried so clearly for him, notwithstanding his Brothers
great power and credit in the Court: but that a very strong opposition was made
against him; which being overcome at last, he received Episcopal Consecration
on the third of December, leaving the choice to Dr. John Prideaux, Rector of
Exeter College, who proved a vehement assertor of all the Calvinian Rigours in
the matter of Predestination, and the Points depending thereupon; as appears by
his first Lecture, De Absoluto Decreto, and the rest which followed.

Dr. Abbot being thus removed to an higher sphere, it seemed not good to Laud
to pursue the quarrel, but patiently to attend the year of his expectation;
before the expiring whereof the King bestowed upon him the Deanery of Gloucester,
as before was said. At the bestowing of which Deanery his Majesty told him, that
he had been informed that there was scarce ever a Church in England so ill
governed, and so much out of order as that was, requiring him in the general to
reform and set in order what he found amiss. Being thus forewarned, and withal
forearmed, he makes have to Gloucester, where he found the Church in great
decay, many things out of order in it, the Communion Table standing almost in
the midst of the Quire, contrary to the posture of it in his Majesty's
Chapel, and of all the Cathedral Churches which he had seen. Which being
observed, he called a Chapter of the Prebends, and having acquainted them with
his Majesty's Instructions, easily obtained their consent to two Chapter Acts:
The one, for the speedy Repairing of the Church where it was most necessary:
The other, for transposing the Communion Table to the East end of the Quire,
and placing it all along the Wall, according to the situation of it in other
Cathedral or Mother Churches, which Transposition being made, he recommended to
the Prebendaries, the Quire men, Choresters, and the Underofficers of the
Church the making of their humble reverence to Almighty God, not only at their
first entrance into the Quire, but at their approaches toward the holy Table;
according to the laudible custom of the Primitive times, retained still in the
sollemnities of the Knights of the Garter at the Act in Oxon. in the Chapels
of his Majesty, and diverse great persons in the Realm. His Majesty's
instructions, the Contents of the two Chapter Acts, and how he had proceeded on
them, I find certified under his hand in two Letters; The one, to his good
Friend the Bishop of Lincoln, bearing date March 3. 1616. The other, unto the
Bishop of Gloucester (who had showed himself offended at his proceedings)
bearing date on the twenty seventh of February then next foregoing.

The Bishop of Gloucester at that time was Dr. Miles Smith, once of Brazen-Nose
College, a great Hebrician, and one that took as much pains as any in the last
Translation of the Bible, as a reward for which he received this Bishopric.
But then withal he was a man that spared not to show himself upon all
occasions in favor of the Calvinian party; and more particularly in
countenancing the Lecturers within his Diocese against the lawful Minister of
the Parish when ever any complaint of their proceedings was made unto him. No
sooner had he heard what the new Dean had done about the Communion Table but he
expressed his dislike of it, and opposed it with all the power he had; But
finding that he could not prevail according unto his desires, he is said to
have protested unto the Dean, and some of the Prebends, that if the Communion
Table were removed, or any such Innovations brought into that Cathedral, he
would never come more within those Walls; which Promise or Protestation he is
said by some to have made good, and not to have come within that Church to his
dying day: Which if he did forbear upon that occasion, he must needs show
himself a man of great pertinacity, and one that feared not to give a public
scandal to the Church, and the Court to boot; This transposition being made in
the declining of the year 1616. his Palace standing near the walls of that
Cathedral, and he not dying till the year 1624. which was eight years after.
Seeing how little he prevailed, one White his Chaplain takes upon him in a
Letter written to the Chancellor of that Diocese, to acquaint him with the
strange Reports which were come unto them touching the situation of the
Communion Table in the place where the High Altar stood before, and that low
obeisance were made to it, assuring him how much the secret Papists would
rejoice, in hope that that which they long looked for was now near at hand; In
which Letter he also challenged and upbraided the Prebends, and other Preachers
of that City, that they did not offer either by word or deed to resist the Dean
in those proceedings; admiring that no man should have any spark of Elias
Spirit to speak a word in Gods behalf, that the Preachers should swallow down
such things in silence, and that the Prebends should be so faint hearted as to
shrink in the first wetting, especially having the Law on their side against it.

It was not long before this Letter was made a Libell: Either the Letter it
self, or a Copy of it, being cast into the Pulpit at St. Michaels Church, where
Prior the Sub-Dean used to preach; to the end that he and others of the
Prebendaries might take notice of it. Found by the Parish Clerk, and by him put
into the hands of the Curate, by them communicated unto others, who took Copies
of it, and in short time divulged over all the City. The City at that time much
pestered with the Puritan Faction, which was grown multitudinous and strong by
reason of the small abode which the Dean and Prebendaries made amongst them,
the dull connivance of their Bishop, and the remiss Government of their
Metropolitan, so that it seemed both safe and easy to some of the Rabble to
make an outcry in all places that Popery was coming in; that the translating of
the Communion Table into an Altar, with the worship and obeisance which were
done to it, were Popish superstitions, and the like. Jones, one of the Aldermen
of the City, and a Justice of the Peace withal, caused some of the principal
dispersers of this Libellous Letter to be brought before him, committed some of
them to prison, and threatened to bind the rest to their good behavior. But
fearing lest his own power might not be sufficient to crush that Faction which
had begun to gather strength by long connivance, he advised that the business
might be referred to the High Commissioners, as men more able to deal with
them. Notice hereof being given to the new Dean by some Letters thence, bearing
date Feb. 21. he addressed this Letter above mentioned to the Bishop of
Gloucester: In which he desired such Favor and Equity at his hands, as that his
Lordship would join to reform such Tongues and Pens as knew not how to submit
to any Law but their own; that of necessity he was to acquaint his Gracious
Majesty, not only with the thing it self, but with the entertainment which it
found among Turbulent Spirits; and that he doubted not but that his Majesty
would be well pleased to hear how careful his Lordship showed himself in
preserving the Order and Peace of the Church. But fearing that the Bishop,
whose Chaplain was the sole cause of the mischief, would not be very forward to
redress it, he dispatched the other Letter, above mentioned, to the Bishop of
Lincoln, and in that Letter he desired his Lordship (having first moved that
the High Commission would be pleased to take some speedy order in it) to let
him have his lawful assistance to the end, that so long as he did nothing but
what was established and practiced in the Church of England, he might not be
brought into contempt by turbulent Spirits, at his first entrance on that
place, and so be disinabled to do that good service which he owed to the Church
of Christ; withal propounding to his Lordship, that if it stood with his good
liking, his Majesty might be made acquainted with the first success of his
endeavors for reforming such things as he found most amiss in that Church, etc.

Whilst these things were thus agitated in the Reformation of the Church of
Gloucester, there were other Actings in the Court, touching the Reformation of
some things in the University of Oxon. Laud had before informed the Bishop of
Lincoln concerning the course usage which he had from Dr. Abbot, as before was
said. Which being represented to his Majesty, it was withal insinuated to him
what dangers would proceed by the training up of young Students in the Grounds
of Calvinism, if some directions were not issued from his Majesty for the
course of their studies; that there was no readier way to advance the
Presbyterial Government in this Kingdom than by suffering young Scholars to be
seasoned with Calvinian Doctrines; that it was very hard to say, whether of the
two, either the Puritan, or the Papist were more destructive of Monarchical
Government; and finally, that for want of subscription to the three Articles
contained in the 36. Canon, not only Lecturers, but diverse other Preachers, in
and about the University, positively maintained such points of Doctrine as were
not maintained or allowed by the Church of England. Which matter his Majesty
having taken into consideration, by the advice of such Bishops and others of
the Clergy, as were then about him, upon the eighteenth of January he dispatched
these Directions following to the Vice. Chancellor, the Heads of Colleges and
Halls, the two Professors, and the two Proctors of the University, to be
carefully and speedily put in execution.

JAMES REX.
1. That it was his Majesty's pleasure that he would have all that take any
degree in Schools, to subscribe to the three Articles in the 36th Canon. 2.
That no Preacher be allowed to preach in the Town, but such as are every way
conformable both by subscription and every other way. 3. That all Students do
resort to the Sermons in St. Mary's, and be restrained from going to any other
Church in the time of St. Mary's Sermons; and that provision be made that the
Sermons in St. Mary's be diligently made and performed, both before-noon and
afternoon. 4. That the ordinary Divinity Act be constantly kept with three
Replicants. 5. That there be a greater Restraint of Scholars haunting
Town-houses, especially in the night. 6. That all Scholars, both at the
Chapels, and at the Schools, keep their Scholastical Habits. 7. That young
Students in Divinity be directed to study such books as be most agreeable in
Doctrine and Discipline to the Church of England, and encited to bestow their
times in the Fathers, and Councils, Schoolmen, Histories, and Controversies,
and not to insist too long upon Compendiums and Abreviatures, making them the
Grounds of their study in Divinity. 8. That no man, either in Pulpit or
Schools, be suffered to maintain Dogmatically any point of Doctrine that is not
allowed by the Church of England. 9. That Mr. Vice Chancellor, and the two
Professors, or two of the Heads of Houses, do at such time as his Majesty
resorts into those parts wait upon his Majesty, and give his Majesty a just
account how these his Majesty's Instructions are observed. 10. Let no man
presume, of what condition or degree soever, not to yield his obedience to
these his Majesty Directions, lest he incur such censures as the Statutes of
this University may justly inflict upon such transgressors.
This was the first step toward the suppressing of that Reputation which Calvin
and his Writings had attained unto in that University; and a good step it might
have been, if Dr Goodwin, Dean of Christ Church, who was then Vice Chancellor,
had not been Father-in-law to Prideaux, or rather if Prideaux himself had
approved the Articles, or that Dr. Benfield of Corpus Christi, the other
Professor for Divinity, a grave but sedentary man, had been active in it. But
howsoever being published, though it went no farther, it gave such a general
Alarm to the Puritan Faction, that the terror of it could not be forgotten in
20. years after: Certain I am, that in the year 1636. it was charged by H.
Burton of Fryday-street for an Innovation, one of the many Innovations
introduced by Laud, and others of the Prelatical party, to subvert Religion.
But leaving them to the folly of their own affrightments, let us look back unto
the King, who being confident that he had left the University in a ready way
for coming to an Unity in matters of Doctrine, prepared for his Journey into
Scotland, with a like confidence of effecting an Uniformity in Forms of
Worship: A matter of consequence and weight, and therefore to be managed by
able Ministers, such as knew how to wind and turn the Presbyterians of that
Kingdom, if matters should proceed to a Disputation. The known Abilities of
Laud marked him out for one; which though it were like to bring a great Charge
upon him, yet he preferred the Reputation before the Charge, and cheerfully
embraced the Service. Nor was it more welcome unto him, than grateful to the
Bishop of Lincoln, assured thereby not only of a trusty Friend, but of a
sociable Companion, for that tedious Journey. His Majesty having filled up the
List of his Attendants, on the 14th. day of March began his Journey,
accompanied by the Queen and Prince as far as Theobalds, and from thence went
forward with his Train before appointed. By the way he called in at the City of
Lincoln, where it is not to be doubted but that the Bishop gave him as
magnificent an Entertainment as the Place and Country would afford: And from
this place it was that he dated his Instructions of the 14th. of April, to the
Lord John Digby, then going Ambassador into Spain, to Treat upon and Conclude a
Marriage between Prince Charles, and the Infanta Maria the Second Daughter of
that King; one of which Articles was to this effect, That the Espousals being
made in Spain according to the Order of the Council of Trent, the Marriage
should be solemnized in England, where there should be such a Solemnization as
by the Laws of this Realm should make the Marriage valid, and take away all
scruple touching the Legitimation of the Issue. Which temperament seems to me
to have very much in it of Laud's hand and spirit.

In the beginning of May 1617. his Majesty was come as far as Barwick, 1617.
and from thence visiting the West parts of Scotland, came at last to
Edinburgh, where he soon found that he might have saved himself a great part of
his care, and taken such of his Chaplains with him as came next to hand; the
Presbyterian Scots not being to be gained by Reason, as he had supposed: For he
was scarce settled in that City, when the Presbyters conceiving that his coming
was upon design to work an Uniformity between the Churches of both Kingdoms,
set up one Struthers to preach against it, who laid so lustily about him in the
chief Church of Edinburgh, that he not only condemned the Rites and Ceremonies
of the Church of England, but prayed God to save Scotland from the same. Laud,
and the rest of the Chaplains who had heard the Sermon, acquainted his Majesty
with those passages; but there was no remedy: The Scots were Scots, and
resolved to go their own way whatsoever came of it. For though the Archbishop
of St. Andrews had forewarned them, that they should not irritate his Majesty,
whom they should find a gracious Prince, Hist. Scotl. l. 7. p. 531.
and one that would hear Reason, and give way unto it; yet this prevailed
nothing with them; they were resolved neither to give Reason to him, nor take
any from him, but only to gain time by delays and artifices: For they knew
well, that his Majesty had no resolution to stay long amongst them, and that
when he was gone they might do what they listed: And therefore when his
Majesty, in a Speech made to them at St. Andrews, had told them, That it was a
Power belonging to all Christian Princes to order matters in the Church; N^m.
p. 534.
and that he would never regard what they approved or disapproved, except they
brought him a Reason which he could not answer; all that they did was to
require a little time of Consultation, which being granted, they returned with
this Resolution, That if his Majesty would grant them a free Assembly, they
would therein satisfy his Majesty in all the Points he had propounded. Patrick
Galloway, one of the chiefest amongst them, passing his word for the
performance. But when the King was gone, and the day of the Assembly come,
those promises vanished in the smoke; so that the King gained nothing by that
chargeable Journey, but the neglect of his Commands, and a contempt of his
Authority. His Majesty therefore took a better course, than to put the point to
Argument and Disputation; which was to beat them by the Belly, and to withdraw
those Augmentations which he had formerly allowed them out of his Exch^quer:
Which Pill so wrought upon this indigent and obstinate People, that the next
year, in an Assembly held at Perth, they passed an Act for admitting the five
Articles for which his Majesty had been courting them for two years together.

But whatsoever the King lost by the Journey, I am sure the Bishop of Lincoln
got well by it: For James the Bishop of Durham dying during the Kings abode in
Scotland, his Majesty bestowed upon him that wealthy Bishopric; one of the
wealthiest in Revenues, but Absolutely the greatest in Power and Privileges.
Into this Bishopric being canonically confirmed on the ninth of October, he
presently set himself on work to repair the Palaces and Houses belonging to it,
which he had found in great decay; but he so adorned and beautified them in a
very short space, that they that saw them could not think that they were the
same. ^
Three thousand pounds he is affirmed by Bishop Godwin to have disbursed only
upon this account, having laid out before no less than a thousand Marks on the
Episcopal Houses of the Sea of Lincoln, besides a good round Sum on the House
of Bromley, the Habitation and Retreat of the Bishops of Rochester. But that
which gave him most content was his Palace of Durham-house in the Strand, not
only because it afforded him convenient Room for his own Retinue, but because
it was large enough to allow sufficient Quarters for Buckridge Bishop of
Rochester, and Laud Dean of Gloucester, which he enjoyed when he was Bishop of
St. David's also; some other Quarters were reserved for his old servant Doctor
Linsell, and others for such Learned men of his Acquaintance as came from time
to time to attend upon him; insomuch as it passed commonly by the name of
Durham College. A man of such a strange composition, that whether he were of a
larger and more public Soul, or of a more uncourtly Conversation, it were hard
to say.

But to return again to Laud: Finding his Majesty resolved to pass through
Lancashire; and other Counties of the North-west of England, in his way to
London, he obtained leave to go directly unto Oxon. and on the second of August
was inducted into the Rectory of Ibstock in the County of Leicester; a Rectory
belonging to the Patronage of the Bishop of Rochester, of whom he had it in
exchange for his Kentish Benefices. At his return unto the College, he was
joyfully welcomed by his Friends, and cheerfully received after so long an
absence by the greatest part of that Society: But that which seemed most
agreeable to him at his coming home, was the good News he heard from Gloucester,
how all things had been quieted there, and that there was no fear or danger of
any further opposition to be made against him; for the Rabble being terrified
by the severe proceedings of Alderman Jones, and more affrighted at the noise
of being brought into the Court of High Commission, began to grow more sensible
of the error which they had committed, the ^ury of their first heats being
abated, and Reason beginning by degrees (as it is ordinary in such cases) to
take place of Passion. Nothing else memorable in this year, as in relation to
his Story, but some misfortunes which befell the Archbishop, his perpetual
enemy; the greatest whereof (though perhaps not took most to heart) was the
death of his Brother the Bishop of Salisbury, which produced great sorrow to
his Friends, the rather in regard of the manner and occasion of it: For after
his advancement to the Sea of Sarum, being then near sixty years of Age, he
married the Widow of one Doctor Cheynell a Physician, who had been one of his
Contemporaries in Baliol College; the news whereof being presented (with some
circumstances to his disadvantage) to his Brother the Archbishop of Canterbury,
he received from him such a sharp and bitter Letter, so full of Reproaches and
Revilings, that not being able to bear the burden of so great an insolency, he
presently took thought upon it, and as presently died, leaving this life on the
second of March, the year almost expiring with him.

The Archbishop had been off the hooks ever since the affront (as he conceived)
was put upon him in burning his Chaplain Doctor Mockett's Book, entitled, De
Politia Ecclesiae Anglicanae, which had given no small Reputation to the Church
of England beyond the Seas; for which severity though many just Reasons were
alleged, yet it was generally conceived, that as the Book fared the worse for
the Authors sake, so the Author did not speed the better for his Patron the
Archbishops sake, betwixt whom, and Doctor James Montague then Bishop of
Winchester, there had been some differences, which the rest of the Court
Bishops were apt enough to make some use of to his disadvantage.

But having thus fallen upon the burning of this Book, I shall speak something
of it here, because of some particulars in it which may conduce unto our Story
in the times succeeding. This Doctor Mocket being Chaplain to Archbishop Abbot,
and Warden of All Souls Colledged in Oxon. had published in the Latin tongue
the Liturgy of the Church of England, the Public Catechisms, the 39.
Articles, the Book of Ordination of Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, and many
Doctrinal Points extracted out of the Book of Homilies; together with Bishop
Iewel's Apology, Mr. Noel's Chatechism, and his own Book De Politia, etc. A
Collection which the good man published in a pious zeal, for gaining Honor to
this Church amongst Foreign Nations: But then this Zeal of his was accompanied
with so little Knowledge in the Constitution of this Church, or so much biassed
toward those of Calvin's Platform, that it was thought fit not only to call it
in, but to expiate the Errors of it in a public Flame: For first, his Extracts
out of the Book of Homilies were conceived to be rather framed according to his
own Judgment, which inclined him toward the Calvinian Doctrines, as his Patron
did; than squared according to the Rules and Dictates of the Church of England:
And possible enough it is, that some just offense might be taken at him, for
making the Fasting-days appointed in the Liturgy of the Church of England, to
be commanded and observed ob Politicas solum Rations, for politic
Considerations only, as insinuated p. 308. whereas those Fasting-days were
appointed in the first Liturgy of King Edward vj. Anno 1549. (with reference
only to the Primitive Institution of those several Fasts) when no such Politic
Considerations were so much as thought on. But that which I conceive to have
been the true cause why the Book was burned, was, that in publishing the 20th.
Article, concerning the Authority of the Church, he totally left out the first
Clause of it, viz. Habet Ecclesia Ritus sive Ceremonias, statuendi jus; and in
Controverfiis Fidei Authoritatem: By means whereof, the Article was apparently
falsified, the Churches Authority disavowed, and consequently a wide gap opened
to dispute her Power in all her Canons and Determinations of what sort soever.
I note this here, because of the Relation which it has to some following
passages in the year 1637. when we shall find Laud charged by those of the
Puritan Faction, for adding this omitted Clause to the rest of that Article.

1618.
In the next year (1618.) we find not a little done at home, but much more
abroad; the Puritan Faction being discountenanced here, and the Calvinists
encouraged there. The Sabbatarian Doctrines by the diligence of Archbishop
Whitgift, and the severity of Justice Popham, had been crushed at their first
starting out; and afterward not daring to implore the Countenance of
Authority, they got footing again in diverse places by the cunning of the
Puritan Faction, the ignorant confidence of some of their Lecturers, and the
misguided zeal of some public Ministers of Justice: And they prevailed so far
at last, that the Annual Festivals being turned into days of Labor, and the
Lords day wholly taken up in Religious Duties, there was no time left for
lawful Recreations amongst the People: Which being made known unto King James
as he passed through Lancashire the last Summer, he gave some present Order in
it, for the ease and comfort of his good Subjects in that County; and that it
might not serve only for the present, but the times to come, he published his
Royal Declaration to the same effect, bearing date at Greenwich May 24. of this
present year: In which Declaration there are three things to be observed; viz.
the Motives, the Liberties, and the Restrictions. First, for the Motives which
induced that King to this Declaration, they were chiefly four. 1. The general
Complaints of all sorts of People, as he passed through Lancashire, of the
Restraint of those innocent and lawful Pastimes on that day, which by the
Rigors of some Preachers and Ministers of Justice, had been laid upon them. 2.
The hindrance of the Conversion of many Papists, who by this means were made to
think, that the Protestant Religion was inconsistent with all harmless and
modest Recreations. 3. That by debarring them from all man-like Exercises on
those days, on which only they were freed from their daily Labors, they were
made unactive, unable, and unfit for Warriors, if either himself or any of his
Successors should have such occasion to employ them. 4. That men being hindered
from these open Pastimes, betook themselves to Tipling-houses, and there abused
themselves with Drunkenness, and censured in their Cups his Majesty's
Proceedings both in Church and State. Next for the Liberties which were
indulged upon that day, his Majesty declares his Pleasure, That after Divine
Service being ended, his good People should not be discouraged or let from
any lawful Recreations, such as Dancing either Men or Women, Archery for Men,
Leaping, Vaulting, or any other such harmless Recreations, not from having of
May-games, Whitsun-Ales, and Morris-dances, and the setting up of May-poles,
and other sports therewith used; and that Women shall have leave to carry
Rushes to the Church, for the decoring of it, according to their old Custom,
with this Proviso notwithstanding, That under the general term of Lawful
Recreations, he intended neither Bearbaiting nor Bull-baiting, Interludes, nor
(at all times in the meaner sort of People prohibited) Bowling. And last of
all, for the Restrictions, they were these that follow: 1. That these Pastimes
should be no impediment or let to the public Duties of that day. 2. That no
Recusant should be capable of the benefit of them. 3. Not such as were not
diligently present at the time of all Divine Offices, which the day required.
And, 4. That the benefit thereof should redound to none but such as kept
themselves in their own Parishes. Such was the substance of his Majesty's
Declaration about Lawful Sports, which raised great clamor at the present, but
greater when revived in the Reign of King Charles (at what time we shall find
Laud charged for the Re-publishing of it) so much the greater, by how much the
more the Sabbatarian Doctrines had prevailed amongst us,

This being done for the discountenancing of the Calvinian Faction here at
home, we must next see what was done abroad on the same account; that which was
done abroad in relation to it, being of great concernment to this Church, and
therefore necessary to be known in reference to the person of whom I write. The
Bishops and conformable Clergy of Scotland had passed two Acts in the Assembly
held at Aberdeen, Hist. (...) Scot. ^^l. 5^0.
Anno 1616. the one, for making one Uniform Order or Form of Worship, to be
prepared by some Bishops, and other Learned men amongst them, by them to be
presented to the King, and being by the King approved, to be by him commended
to the use of that Kirk: The other for consulting the Registry of their forme^
Assemblys, and extracting out of them such Canons, as being ratified by the
stamp of Royal Authority, might pass for current in the same. To speed this
business, and strike the Iron whilst it was hot, his Majesty made that
chargeable Journey into Scotland, which before we spoke of, with an intent to
press them personally to the receiving of some few of the English Ceremonies,
which had been offered to the consideration of the late Assembly, the better to
advance his hopes of introducing by degrees the Liturgy of the Church of
England: Which Ceremonies being reduced to five Articles, and propounded to
them at his being there, found such success, and put the King upon such
Councels as have been formerly declared. But what he could not compass in the
year foregoing, he obtained in this; those Articles being passed in an Assembly
held at Perth in the Month of August, and are these that follow.

1. That for the more reverend Receiving of the Holy Communion, the same should
be celebrated to the People thereafter kneeling, and not sitting, as had been
the Custom since the Reformation of Religion. 2. If any good Christian visited
with sickness which was taken to be deadly, should desire to receive the
Communion at home in his house, the same should not be denied to him, lawful
warning being given to the Minister the night before, and three or four of good
Religion and Conversation being present to Communicate with him. 3. That in
case of necessity tried and known to the Minister, it should be lawful to
Administer Baptism in private Houses, the same being always Ministered after the
form in which it should have been in the Congregation: A public Declaration of
it to be made the next Sunday after. 4. That the days of the Birth, Passion,
Resurrection, and Ascension of our Savior Christ, and of the coming down of
the Holy Ghost, in regard of those inestimable Benefits which the Church of God
had received on them, should be publicly Solemnized in the Congregation, the
Ministers making choice of fit Texts of Scripture agreeable to the Occasions*
for their several Sermons. 5. That the Minister in every Parish, having
Catechized all Children above eight years of age, according to the short
Catechism used in the Church, and taught them to repeat by heart the Lords
Prayer, the Creed, and the Ten Commandments, should present them to their
Bishops in their Visitations, by them to be blessed with Prayers for the
increase of Grace, and continuance of Gods heavenly Gifts upon them.
And this indeed was a great step to the work of Uniformity so much desired;
which had it been pursued as vigorously by the Bishops of Scotland, as by the
King it had been piously begun, the Service which was sent into that Kirk
almost twenty years afte^, had been better welcomed by the Scots, and drawn
less danger upon Laud, (who was then Archbishop) for his pious Actings in the
same.

But on the other side, the condemning of the five Arminian Articles (as they
commonly called them) at the Synod of Dort, was altogether as much unpleasing
as the others had been grateful to him; for well he saw the great dangers which
might thence ensue to the Church of England, whose Doctrines were openly
confronted, and her Discipline secretly undermined, by the Decisions and
Determinations of that Synodical Assembly: In which regard, it will not be
unnecessary to make a brief Relation of those stirs and differences which
happened in the Belgic Churches, from the time that Doctor Jacob van Harmine was
made one of the Divinity Professors in the University of Leyden, Concerning
which we are first to know, That at the Alteration of Religion in those
Provinces, the French (who were most active in it) brought with them Calvin's
Platform, both for Doctrine and Discipline (as commonly the one makes way to
bring in the other) according unto which the Belgic Confession was drawn up in
the year 1567. Which notwithstanding, such of their Ministers as better liked
the Melancthonian Doctrines in the points of Predestination, Grace, Free Will,
etc. than they did the other, spared not to publish their Opinions as they saw
occasion, as well before as after the establishing of the said Confession, and
did it without check or censure: Amongst which we may first reckon Anastasius
Veluanus, in a Book of his entitled, Odegus Laicorum, or the Lay-mans Guide,
published in the year 1554. and much commended by Henricus Antonides the
Divinity Reader in the University of Franeker; after whom followed, in the same
Opinions, Johannes Isbrandi, who openly professed himself an Anti-Calvinian;
Clemens Martini, who took his Principles from Hardinbergius, one of the first
Reformers of the Church of Embden; Gellius Sueranus in West-Friesland, who
looked upon those of the other Persuasion as Innovators in that Church;
Holmanus the Divinity Reader in Leyden; Cornelius Menardi, a man of good esteem
amongst them; and generally all the Ministers successively in the Province of
Vtrecht, some of which had maintained these Doctrines before the birth of Jacob
van Harmine (better known in these later times by the name of Arminius) and all
of them before such time as any public notice had been taken of him; by which
it seems, that these Doctrines were of a long standing, and had took deep
rooting in these Churches, though they had not gained such a large and general
spreading over them as they after did.

For in the year 1603. the Learned Iunius, one of the Professors for Divinity
in the University of Leyden, being then deceased, the Curators or Overseers of
that University made choice of this Van Harmine, the Pastor (as they phrase it)
of the Church of Amsterdam, to succeed in his place: But the Inhabitants of
that Town, amongst whom he had served in the Ministry for the space of 15.
years and mo^^ were so affected to the man, that they would by no means yield
unto his departure, till overruled by the entreaties of some, and the power of
others: A matter very unpleasing to the Rigid Calvinians informing against him
to the State for several Heterodoxies repugnant to the received Doctrine of
those Churches. Arminius for six years before, had by exchange of Letters
betwixt him and Iunius, maintained the Melancthonian Doctrines in those points
of Controversy before remembered; which Papers being dispersed abroad in
several Copies (but not published till after his death, and then published by
the name of Amica Collatio, etc.) gave the Calvinians some fair Color for
their information: But the business being heard at the Hague, he was acquitted
by his Judges, dispatched for Leyden, and there confirmed in his place; toward
which, the Testimonial Letters, sent from the Church of Amsterdam, did not help
a little; in which Letters he stands commended for a man of unblamable life, ^
sound Doctrine, and fair behavior, as may be seen at large in the Oration
which was made at his Funeral, in the Divinity Schools of Leyden, on the 22. of
October, Anno 1609. During his sitting in that Chair, he drew unto him a great
part of that University, who by the Piety of the man, his powerful Arguments,
his extreme diligence in the place, and the clear light of Reason, which
appeared in all his Discourses, were so wedded unto his Opinions, that no time
nor trouble could divorce them: For Arminius dying in the year 1609. as before
was said, the heats betwixt his Scholars, and those of the contrary persuasion,
were rather increased than abated; the more increased, for want of such a
prudent Moderator as had before saved and preserved these Churches from a
public Rupture.

The Breach between them growing wider, each side thought fit to seek the
Countenance of the State, and they did accordingly; For in the year 1610. the
Followers of Arminius address their Remonstrance (containing the Antiquity of
their Doctrines, and the substance of them) to the States of Holland, which was
encountered presently by a Contra-Remonstrance, exhibited by those of Calvin's
Party. From hence the names of Remonstrants, and Contra-Remonstrants, so
frequent in their Books and Writings; till the Remonstrants were condemned in
the Synod of Dort, and either forced to yield the cause or quit their Country;
each Party in the mean time had the opportunity to disperse their Doctrines, in
which the Remonstrants gained exceedingly upon their Adversaries. For the whole
Controversy being reduced to these five Points, viz. the Method of
Predestination, the Efficacy of Christ's Death, the operations of Grace, both
before and after man's Conversion, and perseverance in the same; the Parties
were admitted to a public Conference at the Hague in the year 1611. in which
the Remonstrants were conceived to have had much the better of the day. But
these Tongue-Combates did produce a further mischief than was suspected at the
first; For the Calvinians hoping to regain by Power what they lost by Argument,
put themselves under the Protection of Maurice van Nassaw, Prince of Orange,
Commander General of the Forces of the United Provinces, both by Sea and Land.
The Remonstrants on the other side applied themselves unto John Olden
Barnevelt, a principal Counselor of State, and of great Authority in his
Country: Who fearing the Greatness of the Prince, and having (or thinking that
he had) some cause to doubt that he aimed at an absolute Soverainty over those
Estates, did cheerfully entertain the offer, in hope to form such a Party by
them, as, with the help of some other good Patriots, might make a sufficient
Counter-ballance against that design. But Barnevelts projects being discovered,
he was first seized on by the Prince, together with Grotius, Liedenburgius, and
others of his chief Adherents; and that being done, he showed himself with his
Forces before such Towns and Cities as had declared in favor of them; Reducing
them under his Command, changing their Magistrates, and putting new Garrisons
into them. Next followed the Arraignment and death of Barnevelt, contrary to
the Fundamental Laws both of his native Country, and the common Union; whose
death occasioned a general dejection (as well it might) amongst those of the
Remonstrant Party; and their dejection animated the Calvinians to refer their
differences to a National Council, which thereupon was intimated to be held at
Dort, one of the principle Towns of Holland.

This Council being thus resolved on, their next care was to invite to their
assistance some Divines out of all the Churches of Calvin's Platform, and none
else; which did sufficiently declare, that they intended to be both Parties and
Judges, as in fine it proved* For unto this Convention assembled the most Rigid
Calvinists, not only of the United Provinces, but also of all the Churches of
High Germany, and amongst the Switz, and from the City of Geneva whom it most
concerned. From France came none, because the King, upon good Reason of State,
had commanded the contrary; and the Scots much complained that they were not
suffered by King James to send their Commissioners thither with the rest of the
Churches: For though King James had nominated Balcanquel to that employment in
the name of the Kirk, yet that could give them no contentment. From England,
the King sent Dr. George Carleton Bishop of Landaff, Dr. Ios. Hall Dean of
Worcester, Dr. John Davenant Master of Queens College and Lady Margarets
Professor in Cambridge, and Dr. Sam. Ward Master of Sydney College in the same
University. And this he did, that by the Countenance of his power, and by the
Presence of his Divines, he might support the Party of the Prince of Orange,
and suppress his Adversaries. On the third of November they began the Synod:
But things were carried there with such inequality, that such of the
Remonstrants as were like to be elected, by their several Classes, were cited,
and commanded to appear as Criminals only, and being come, could not be
suffered to proceed to a Disputation, unless they would subscribe to such
conditions as they conceived to be destructive to their Cause, and their
Conscience too: Which being refused, they were expelled the House by Bogerman
(who sat President there) in a most fierce and bitter Oration, condemned
without answering for themselves; and finally, for not subscribing to their own
condemnation, compelled to forsake their native Country, with their Wives and
Children, and to beg their bread even in desolate places. What influence those
quarrels had amongst our selves, and what effects that Synod did produce in
the Church of England we shall see hereafter, when the same Points come to be
agitated and debated on this side of the Seas.

His Majesty, having thus made himself the Master of his Designs, both at home
and abroad, and being recovered from a dangerous sickness which had fallen upon
him at New Market, in the year 1619. resolved on such a work of Magnificent
Piety, as might preserve his name and memory of succeeding Ages: To which end
upon Midlent Sunday, Anno 1620. accompanied by the Prince, attended by the
Marquess of Buckingham, the Bishops, Lords, and most of the principal Gentlemen
about the Court, he intended to visit St. Paul's. From Temple Bar he was
conducted in most solomn manner by the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of London; and
at his entrance into the Church, received under a Canopy by the Dean and
Canons, attired in rich Copes, and other Ecclesiastical Habits; Being by them
brought into the Quire, he heard with very great Reverence and Devotion the
Divine Service of the day most solemnly performed with Organs, Cornets, and
Sagbuts, accompanied and intermingled with such excellent voices that seemed
rather to enchant than chant. The Divine Service being done, he went unto a
place prepared, where he heard the Sermon at the Cross, preached by the
eloquent and religious Prelate, Dr. John King, Lord Bishop of London. The
Sermon being ended, the Collation began; His Majesty attended with all the
Lords, and the rest of his Train, being entertained by the said Lord Bishop at
a sumptuous Banquet, with no less honor to himself than content to his
Majesty. But there was more intended by this Visit than Pomp and Ostentation
only. For his Majesty having taken a view of the Ruinous Estate in which he
beheld that goodly Fabric, issued not long after a Commission for repair
thereof; and somewhat was done in it both by Bishop King and Bishop Mountain:
But the carrying one of this work was reserved to another man; For a breach
following not long after between Spain and England, and wars soon following on
that breach, a stop was made to all proceedings in that work till the year
1631. At what time Laud, being Bishop of London, obtained a like Commission
from the hands o^ King CHARLES, and set his heart so much upon it, that in few
years he had made a mighty Progress in it, of which more hereafter.

And here it was once feared, 1620.
that this present History might have ended without going further; for on the
second of April, as he past from London toward Oxon, he took up his Inn at
Wickam upon the Rode; where he fell suddenly dead, and was not without much
diff^culty, and Gods special favor, restored unto his former being. But God
reserved him to a life more eminent, and a death more glorious; not suffering
him to dye obscurely, like a traveller, in a Private Inn, but more
conspicuously, like a Martyr, on the Public Theater; for on the 22. of January
he was installed Prebend in the Church of Westminster, after no less than ten
years expectation of it; And on the last of the same Month he sat as Dean of
Gloucester in the Conv^cation. The Prince Elector Palatine, who married the
Kings only Daughter in the year 1612. had the last year most inconsiderately
took upon him the Crown of Bohemiah; not taking with him the Kings Counsel in
it as he might have done, but giving him an account o^ it on the Post-Fact
only. The Emperor exasperated with this Usurpation (as by him reputed) gave up
his Country for a prey, assigning the Electoral Dignity with the Upper
Palatinate to the Duke of Bavaria, and the Lower to the King of Spain, who had
possessed themselves of diverse good Towns and pieces in it.

For the recovery whereof, and the Preservation of the rest, in which his
Daughter and her Children were so much concerned; it pleased his Majesty to
call a Parliament, to begin on the thirtieth day of January, accompanied with a
Convocation (as the custom is) on the morrow after. The business of their
Conveening being signified unto them by the King, the Parliament at their first
sitting, which ended March 27. bestowed upon his Majesty two Subsidies, but
they gave no more; which rather served to stay his stomach than allay his
hunger. They had some turns to serve upon him before they would part with any
more money, if they did it then. But the Clergy dealt more freely with him in
their Convocation, because they had no other ends in it than the expressing of
their duty and good affections. In testimony whereof they gave him three entire
Subsidies of four shillings in the pound at their first sitting; and would not
have been wanting to his Majesty in a further addition, in the second or third,
if his Majesty had required it of them. Encouraged with which supplies, and the
hopes of greater, he sent some Regiments of old English Soldiers for the
defense and preservation of the Lower Palatinate, under the Command of that
Noble Soldier, Sir Horatio Vere.

When the Commons bestowed upon him the said two Subsidies, he took them only
as a bit to stay his stomach, as before was said, giving himself some hopes
that at the next Session they would entertain him with a better, and more
costly dinner; but then they meant that he should pay the reckoning for it. For
at their reassembling on the seventeenth of April, instead of granting him the
supplies he looked for, they fell to pick quarrels with his Servants, and one
of his chief Ministers of State, not only questioning Sir Giles Mompesson, and
Sir Francis Michael, but even the Lord Chancellor Bacon also. These men
(supposing them to have been as criminal as their enemies made them) were
notwithstanding such as acted under his Commissions, and therefore not to have
been punished by his own Authority only. The giving of them over to the Power
of the Parliament not only weakened his own Prerogative, but put the House of
Commons upon such a Pin, that they would let no Parliament pass (for the times
to come) without some such Sacrifice. And so foll Bacon, Lord Chancellor of
England, Lord Verulan, and Viscount of St. Albans; a man of good and bad
qualities, equally compounded, one of a most strong brain, and a Chimical head;
designing his endeavors to the perfecting of the Works of Nature, or rather
improving Nature to the best advantages of life, and the common benefit of
mankind. Pity it was he was not entertained with some liberal Salary,
abstracted from all affairs both of Court and Judicature, and furnished with
sufficiency both of means, and helps for the going on in his design, which had
it been, he might have given us such a body of Natural Philosophy, and made it
so subservient to the public good, that neither Aristotle nor Theophrastus
amongst the Ancients, nor Paracelsus, or the rest of our later Chimists would
have been considerable. In these Agitations held the Parliament till the fourth
of June, without doing any thing in order to his Majesty's Service, who
thereupon adjourned them till the fourteenth of November following, before
which time we find Laud mounted one step higher, and ready to take place
amongst the Bis^ops in the House of Peers: And therefore here we will conclude
the first Part of our present History.

THE LIFE OF The most Reverend FATHER in GOD WILLIAM Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury.
LIB. II. Extending from his being made Bishop of St. David's till his coming to
the Sea of Bath and Wells.
IT is an observation no less old than true, Anno Dom. 1621.
that Patience and Perseverance overcome all difficulties: And so it happened
unto Laud. He had with most incredible patience endured the baffles and
affronts which were put upon him by the power and practices of his enemies. Nor
did he show less patience in his so long and chargeable attendance at the
Court, for which he had so small regard, that he was rather looked upon as the
Bishop of Durhams Servant than the Kings. But notwithstanding these cross winds
he was resolved to ride it out, neither to shift his sails, nor to tack about,
but still to keep his way, and to stem the current till he had gained the Port
he aimed at. His Majesty had been made acquainted by long experience with his
great abilities, his constancy, courage, and dexterity, for managing affairs of
moment. And thereupon entering into speech with him, in the beginning of June he
was pleased to take notice of the long and unrewarded service which he had done
him, telling him, that he looked on the Deanery of Gloucester but as a Shell
without a Kernel. This gave him the first hopes of his growing Fortunes. On
Sunday the nineteenth of that Month he preached before the King at Wansteed,
that being the first of those Sermons, which are now in Print. And on St.
Peter's day next following, there was a general expectation about the Court that
he should have been made Dean of Westminster, in the place of Williams; who
having been sworn Privy-Counsellor on the tenth of that Month, and nominated to
the Sea of Lincoln, was on the tenth of July, honored with the Custody of the
great Seal of England upon the Deprivation of the Lord Chancellor St. Albans,
which before we spoke of: but Williams so prevailed at Court, that when he was
made Bishop of Lincoln, he retained this Deanery in Commendam, together with
such other Preferments as he held at that time; That is to say, A Prebend and
Residentiary place in the Cathedral Church at Lincoln, and the Rectory of
Walgrave in Northamptonshire, so that he was a perfect Diocese within himself,
as being Bishop, Dean, Prebend, Residentiary, and Parson; and all these at
once. But though Laud could not get the Deanery, yet he lost nothing by the
example; which he made use of in retaining not only his Prebends place in the
same Church of Westminster, and his Benefices in the Country (that being an
ordinary indulgence to such as were preferred to the smaller Bishopsricks) but
also the Presidentship of his College in Oxon, which he valued more than all
the Rest. For that his own expectation might not be made as frustrate, as was
that of the Court, his Majesty nominated him the same day to the Sea of St.
David's, in former times the Metropolitan City of the Welsh or British. But
though he was nominated then, he could not receive the Episcopal Character till
five Months after; the stay was long, but the necessity unavoydable, by reason
of a deplorable misfortune which had befallen Archbishop Abbot, and was briefly
this:

The Archbishop had long held a dear and entire Friendship with Edward Lord
Zouch, a person of an eminent and known Nobility; On whom he pleased to bestow
a visit in his house at Bramshall, invited to see a Deer hunted, that he might
take the fresh air, and revive his Spirits; a Cross-bow was put into his hand
to shoot one of the Deer: but his hand most unhappily swerving, or the Keeper
as unfortunately coming in his way, it so pleased God (the Disposer of Humane
Affairs) that he missed the Beast, and shot the Man. On which sad accident,
being utterly incapable of consolation, he retired himself to Guilford, the
place of his birth; there to expect the Issue of his woeful Fortunes in an
Hospital of his own Foundation. The news of this wretched misadventure (as ill
news flies far) came the same day to the Lord Keeper Williams; and he as
hastily dispatches this Advertisement of it to the Marquess of Buckingham. My
most Noble Lord,
AN unfortunate occasion of my Lords Grace, his killing of a man casually (as
it is here constantly reported) is the cause of my seconding of my yesterdays
Letter unto your Lordship. His Grace upon this Accident is by the Common Law of
England to forfeit all his Estate unto his Majesty, and by the Canon Law (which
is in force with us) irregular ipso facto, and so suspended from all
Ecclesiastical Function, until he be again restored by his Superior, which (I
take it) is the Kings Majesty in this Rank and Order of Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction. If you send for Doctor Lamb, he will acquaint your Lordship with
the distinct Penalties in this kind. I wish withal my heart his Majesty would
be as merciful as ever he was in all his life; but yet I held it my duty to let
his Majesty know by your Lordship, that his Majesty is fallen upon a matter of
great Advice and Deliberation. To add affliction unto the afflicted (as no
doubt he is in mind) is against the Kings Nature: To leave virum sanguinum, or
a man of blood, Primate and Patriarch of all his Churches, is a thing that
sounds very harsh in the old Councils and Canons of the Church. The Papists
will not spare to descant upon one and the other. I leave the knot to his
Majesty's deep Wisdom to advise and resolve upon. A rheum fallen into mine eye,
etc.


Which Letter bearing date July 27. 1621. points us directly to the time of
this woeful Accident.

Being thus pre-judged and pre-condemned, the miserable man must needs have had
a hard bout of it, if his cause had been referred to an hearing in Chancery:
But King James was as compassionate as just, and as regardful of the Church as
he was compassionate to the man. Advising therefore with his Council, and some
chief Clergymen about him, though more with his own gracious disposition, he
after issued a Commission to the Lord Keeper Williams, the Bishops of London,
Winchester, St. David's, and Exon, as also unto Hubbert and Dodderidge, two of
the Justices of the Courts at Westminster Hall, Martin and Steward, Doctors of
the Civil Laws, men of great Eminence and Abilities in their several Studies,
to make Inquiry into the Fact: And having made Inquiry into the Fact, they were
to give their Resolution unto His Majesty, whether the Archbishop had been made
irregular by that sad accident, as it was commonly reported. In the managing of
which great Cause, there was much variety of Opinions amongst the Delegates;
some making him obnoxious to Irregularity, and others as much laboring to
acquit him of it: Amongst these last were Doctor Andrews then Bishop of
Winchester, and Sir Henry Martin then Dean of the Arches, and not long after
Judge of the Prerogative Court, to whose Authority and Judgment the rest of the
Commissioners did in time conform. Martin for his part had received his Offices
and Preferments from him, and therefore in an honest Gratitude thought himself
obliged to bend the Law (as much as possibly he could) to his best Advantage:
But Andrews had no such impulsives, there being between them some disgust,
which might have rather prevailed with him to have been his Enemy: First
therefore he was willing not to stand too rigidly upon the strictness of the
Canons, for fear lest others of the Bishops, and himself amongst them, either
through ignorance or incogitancy, might commit some acts, which without a fair
and mild construction, might render them as uncanonical as that poor man was:
And then he saw, that if the Archbishop at that time had been pronounced
irregular, and the Sea made void, Williams being then Lord Keeper, and in great
favor with his Majesty and the Marquis too, would have stepped into it; of whom
he knew too much, to venture that great charge and trust of the Church of
England to his Care and Government; the dangerous Consequences whereof he was
able to foretell, without the Spirit of Prophecy. Nor was this conjecture of
his without very good grounds, Williams declaring in his said Letter to the
Marquis, That his Majesty had promised him upon the relinquishing of the Seal,
one of the best places in this Church. And what place could be more agreeable to
his affection than the Chair of Canterbury? Nor was this unfortunate Prelate
less befriended in this desperate plunge by Sir Edward Coke, a man of most
profound Learning in the Laws of this Land, who being asked the Question,
Whether a Bishop might lawfully hunt in his own or in any other Park? (in which
point lay the greatest pinch of the present difficulty) returned this Answer
thereunto; viz. That by the Law a Bishop at his death was to leave his Pack of
Dogs (by the French called Mart de Chiens, in some old Records) to be disposed
of by the King at his Will and Pleasure. And if the King was to have the Dogs
when the Bishop died, there is no question to be made, but that the Bishop
might make use of them when he was alive.

By reason of this intercurrence, the new Elected Bishops could not receive the
Episcopal Character till November following; on the eleventh day of which
Month, the Lord Keeper Williams was Consecrated Bishop of Lincoln, in the
Chapel of King Henry, by virtue of a Commission under the Broad Seal, directed
to certain other Bishops, according to the Statute of King Henry viij. And on
the Sunday following, by virtue of a like Commission directed to the Bishops of
London, Worcester, Chichester, Ely, Landaff, and Oxon. Doctor Laud Lord Elect
of St. David's, Doctor Davenant Lord Elect of Salisbury, and Doctor Carry Lord
Elect of Exceter, received Episcopal Consecration in the Chapel of
London-House. The next day after he took his place amongst the Bishops in the
House of Peers, the Parliament having been re-assembled some few days before:
But there was little for them to do as the case then stood; The Commons were so
far from gratifying the King with fresh Supplies, who before had gratified them
in the destruction of such Ministers as were near unto him, that they
entertained him with Petitions and Remonstrances touching the danger, threatened
to our Religion, by the growth of Popery; in which they were so far transported
beyond their bounds, as to propose unto the King, the taking of the Sword into
his Hands against the Spaniard, and the Marrying of his dear Son the Prince to
a Lady of the Reformed Religion: Of this the King had speedy notice; and in a
Letter sent to Sir Thomas Richardson, then Speaker of the House of Commons, he
lets them know how sensible he was of their encroachments, how bold they had
made themselves with the King of Spain; forbidding them to deal hereafter in
Affairs of State, or meddle with the Marriage of his Son the Prince;
concluding, That if any such Petition or Remonstrance should be brought unto
him, he would neither vouchsafe the Answering or the Reading of it. The Commons
startled with this Letter, and thinking to have made a benefit of the Kings
Necessities, cry out against it as a violation of their Ancient Privileges;
and on the nineteenth day of December then next ensuing, drew up the following
Protestation, and caused it to be entered on Record in their Journal Books, viz.
The PROTESTATION of the COMMONS.
THe Commons now Assembled, being justly occasioned thereunto, concerning
sundry Liberties, Franchises, and Privileges of Parliament, amongst others
here mentioned, do make this Protestation here following: That the Liberties,
Franchises, Privileges, and Jurisdictions of Parliaments, are the ancient and
undoubted Birthright and Inheritance of the Subjects of England; and the
maintenance and making of Laws, and redresses of Mischiefs and Grievances,
which daily happen within this Realm, are proper Subjects and matter of Debate
in Parliament; and that in the handling or proceeding of those businesses.
every Member of the House of Parliament has and of right ought to have freedom
of Speech, to Propound, Treat, Reason, and bring to conclusion the same; and
that the Commons in Parliament have like freedom and liberty to Treat of those
Matters in such Order as to their Judgments shall seem fittest: and that every
Member of the said House has like freedom from all Impeachments, Imprisonment,
and Molestation (other than by Censure of the House it self) for or concerning
any Speaking, Reasoning, or Declaring of any Matter or Matters touching the
Parliament, or Parliament business; and that if any of the said Members be
complained of, or questioned for any thing done or said in Parliament, the same
is to be showed to the King by the Advice and Assent of all the Commons
assembled in Parliament, before the King give credence to any private
Information.



More was the King startled at the news of this Protestation (whereof he had
Intelligence before it came unto the Vote) than the Commons were upon the
Reading of his Majesty's Letters. He saw his Prerogative invaded, his Paternal
Right disputed, a popular State growing up in the midst of a Monarchy, and at
the present a great Faction formed against him, which if not speedily
suppressed might prove unresistable. Way he found none to extricate himself out
of these troubles, but to proceed vigorously in the Treaty for the Match with
Spain, which he conceived to be the only expedient to compose all Differences,
and recover the Patrimony of his Children. For should he break off with that
King, and declare for a present War against him, as had been desired, he was to
cast himself entirely on the Love of his People, of whose Affections and
Designs their present Actions gave just cause to be distrustful. He therefore
first gives Order on the nineteenth of December (being the very day on which
the Protestation was Voted at Westminster) to Adjourn the Parliament to the
8th. of February, under pretense that the Members might retire into the
Country, for keeping Hospitality, and entertaining their Neighbors in the
Christmas Holydays, according to the laudable Custom of the English Nation: But
having thus dismissed them to their several Countries, without noise or
trouble, it was not his intent or purpose that they should come together again
at the time appointed; according to which Resolution he Disolves the
Parliament, and by his Proclamation bearing date the ninth of January,
discharges the Members of both Houses from any further attendance.

The Dissolving of this Parliament, and the Transactions in the same,
administered much variety of Discourse in all parts of the Kingdom. It was
observed by some, That his Majesty had broken one of the strongest Ligaments of
the Regal Power, by delivering up his Servants and Ministers into the hands of
his People in Parliament, which was a thing not used by any of his
Predecessors; That neither Wolsey's exorbitant Power, or Cromwell's contempt of
the Nobility, under Henry viii. or Leicesters Tyranny and Oppressions under
Queen Elizabeth, were ever suffered to be canvased or condemned in Parliament;
That the King got nothing by that unhappy condescension, but the laying himself
open to all disadvantages which a Prince abandoning his Ministers, or abandoned
by them, might have just reason to expect; That when Princes begin to fall so
much beneath themselves, as to manage Pen-Combate with their Subjects, they put
themselves as it were upon equal ground, and stand on the same Level with their
Vassals, and by the loss of their Authority, get nothing but the Reputation of
an able Writer. And then the Reason of these his yieldings being brought in
Question, they were by some imputed to a natural timidity or want of Courage,
which rendered him unable to hold out long, when he encountered those who would
put him to it: Others ascribed it to his wants, and his wants unto his
prodigality, which made his Exchequer always empty; and Money must be had,
whatever it cost him. But those who thought they came most near unto the mark,
discoursed of him as a man that loved not business, and loved no business less
than that of Parliaments; That it was usual with him, when he called a
Parliament, and had given them their Errand, as he thought, to retire to
Theobalds, Hampton Court, or Windsor, and sometimes further off, to Royston, or
New Market, as his pleasure carried him; That by this means the Commons, not
having opportunity of Access to his Person, were forced upon a plausible
necessity of making their Addresses to him by Messages, Remonstrances, and
Petitions; That those Remonstrances and Petitions did beget their Answers, and
their Answers did beget Replies which ended commonly in Exasperations on either
side.

But nothing was so much admired at, as the increasing of the Privileges of
the House of Commons, as well in nature as in number. And thereupon it was
observed, that the Commons had mistook themselves in the very ground on which
they built their Protestation; That the known Privileges of the Commons were
only liberty of speech in Debate and Conference; Freedom from all Arrests for
themselves and their Servants, and opportunity of access to his Majesty's
Person, as their occasions did require; That even those Privileges could not
be called the undoubted Birthright and Inheritance of the Subjects of England,
because they were no otherwise exercised and enjoyed than from one Parliament
to another, by the grace and goodness of their Kings; That were it otherwise,
it must needs be a great impertinency in their Speaker (at the first opening of
every Parliament) to put himself upon his knees, and humbly to beseech his
Majesty, in behalf of the House of Commons, to indulge them the continuance of
those Privileges which were of right their own before; That they had been as
much mistaken in making the House of Commons (by involving both Houses in the
name of Parliament) to be of equal Power and Privilege with the House of
Peers, the contrary whereof being so well known; That the Peers and People
being summoned to Parliament by several Writs, the Peers were called only ad
consulendum, to counsel and advise the King, in matters of most concernment to
the Church and State; And that the People were called only ad consentiendum and
faciendum, to give consent, and yield obedience to such things as were ordained
in the Great Council of the Peers; That even the Peers themselves had no
general warrant to meddle in all Affairs of State, but in such only as his
Majesty commend and propound to them; And therefore that these words in the
Writ, Super arduis regni negotiis, are not left at large, but limited and
restrained by the word quibusdam, to such particulars, and such only, in which
the King required their Counsels.

But nothing seemed so new or strange, as that no Member of the said House
should be impeached, imprisoned, and molested, other than by Censure of the
House it self, for or concerning any speaking, reasoning, or declaring of any
matter or matters touching the Parliament, or Parliament business. A Privilege
not heard of in Queen Elizabeth's time, when in the 35. of her Reign She
imprisoned no less than five of the Members at a clap, not only without their
leave, but against their liking; And held them in so strict a durance, that the
Commons did not think it safe to move her Majesty to restore them to their
former liberty. And therefore that they were to show under what rust and
rubbish of Antiquity this Privilege had so long been hidden, and how it came
to be found out at last, when no body heard of it, or looked after it. The like
discoursed also of the following Privilege, which had been long buried in the
same grave, and never came till now to a resurrection, viz. That the King is to
take no private information of any complaint, concerning matters said or done
in that House, till it be shown unto him by the House it self; of which it was
affirmed, that it was as contrary to the Presidents and Practice of former
times as the other was: That when the Queen had laid an Imposition upon
Currants, and that this Imposition had been complained of by some Merchants to
the House of Commons, she had present notice given her of it by some of her
Servants in that House, that showing her dislike thereof to Sir Robert Cicill,
principal Secretary of State, he signified the same unto the House, telling
them it was a Noli me tangere, a point not fit for them to touch at; and that
if they desisted not from entertaining that complaint, he must acquaint her
Majesty with it, as in duty bound. Nor was there any better ground for that
other branch, touching their Liberty and Freedom in breaking of all matters
which came under their Cognizance in such method and order as to them seemed
fittest; but that they did intend to lay it as a foundation for preferring
their own business before the Kings in all times to come.

I had not dwelt so long upon these Discourses, nor on the former passages
between his Majesty and the House of Commons, as being Exotical to my business:
but that they were the chief occurrences of this first Parliament, of which our
new Bishop was a Member. And though the sitting was but short, not above a
Month; yet it afforded him a liberal prospect into the Humors and Affections,
the Counsels and Designs of the House of Commons, of which he was not to be
taught how to make such use, as should prove most to the advantage of the
Church and State. But that which chiefly did concern him to take notice of, was
the interposing and embracements of that House in the cause of Religion; which
if it were so much in danger by the extraordinary increase of Popery, as they
gave it out, it must be much to the Reproach both of himself and the rest of
the Bishops, that none of them had neither perspicuity enough to see it, or
Zeal enough to give warning of it. And therefore he must needs conceive, that
Religion was made use of only for a blind or Curtain to screen some dark design
from the public view, which had not yet attained to so ripe a confidence as to
show it self abroad in the open light. The Mystery of iniquity had long been
working in this Church, not so much in the Popish as the Puritan Faction. Who
seeing they had no more prevailed against it by their open batteries than the
Roman Emperors had done on the Primitive Church by their persecutions,
resolved upon more secret (and consequently more dangerous) practices to attain
their ends. In order whereunto they had perpetually alarmed this King (from his
first coming to the Crown) with continual dangers from the Papists; for which
the Gun-powder-treason gave them too much ground. Nor would they suffer any
Session of Parliament pass from that time forward, in which the dangerous
practices of Priests, Jesuits, etc. did not sound in his ears. And this they
did, not so much because they saw any such visible increase of Popery, as was
by them pretended from time to time: but that they thought it the best way to
carry on their other projects, which they were in hand with. For well they
knew, that when the thoughts both of King and People were totally taken up with
the apprehension of the dangers which were feared from the Papists, the Puritan
Party in the mean time might gather strength without being noted or observed.
But because these interposings of the Commons in the cause of Religion, became
to be more eagerly pursued in some following Parliaments, we shall refer the
further consideration of them to another time.

The Parliament being ended, 1622.
we must follow our new Bishop to his Diocese, whom we will wait upon to St.
David's (a poor City God wot) situate on the Promontory in Pembroke-shire, by
the Ancients called Ortopitae, in a safe place, and far enough from the Saxons,
whom the Welsh most feared: but incommodious enough for all the rest of the
Clergy to repair unto. Nor did it prove so safe for the Bishop, and other
Inhabitants of it, as had been presumed, in respect of sundry other Nations who
have often spoiled and defaced it. For standing near the Sea it had been
frequently visited and spoiled by the Danes, Norwegians, and other Pirates;
insomuch that the Bishops were enforced to remove their dwelling to
Caermarthen, a fair Market Town, and beautified with a goodly Collegiate
Church, not far from which, in a Village called Aberguilly, the Bishop has his
ordinary place of Residence. This brought the City of St. David's, small enough
before, to the condition of a Village, there being nothing almost remaining of
it but the Church, the ruins of the Bishops Palace, and some Houses
appertaining to the Canons of it. The Church, as now it stands, (if any of it
be now left standing) was the work of Bishop Peter the forty eighth Bishop of
this Diocese, and by him dedicated by the name of St. Andrew and St. David;
though now St. Andrew be left out, and St David bears the name, (as before it
did) in reference to St. David, who first removed the Archiepiscopal See from
Caer-leon thither. The place at that time by the Welsh called Menew, whence the
Latins borrow their Menevenses, by which name these Bishops are entitled.
From this removal of the Sea, which happened in 519. the Bishops hereof were for
some time the Metropolitans, and for a long time the supreme Ordinaries of the
Welsh or British. For although Archbishop Samson, the twenty sixth from St.
David, in the year 910. or thereabouts, had carried the Archiepiscopal Pall
(and therewithal the Archiepiscopal dignity) to Dole in Bretagne, by reason of
an extreme Pestilence, then raging amongst the Welsh; yet his Successors,
though they lost the name, reserved the power of an Archbishop. Nor did the
residue of the Welsh Bishops receive their Consecration from any other hand
than his till the Reign of Hen. I. At what time Bernard, the forty sixth Bishop
of this See, was forced to submit himself to the Church of Canterbury.

But our Bishops Journey into Wales was not so much to visit S. David's, (in
which Church he had been before installed by Proxy) as to bestow a visitation
upon his Diocese, and therein to take order for the rectifying of such things
as he found amiss. A Diocese containing the whole Counties of Pembroke,
Cardigan, Caermarthen, Radnor, and Brecknock, with some small parts of
Monmouth, Hereford, Montg^mery, and Glamorgan Shires. For managing whereof the
Bishop has under him four Archdeacons, that is to say, of Cardigan,
Caermarthen, Brecknock, and St. David's; distributing amongst them all the
Parishes which belong to this Diocese, amounting to no more (in so great a
quantity of ground) than 308. of which 120. are accounted for Impropriations.
But then we are to understand this number, of Parochial Churches, not taking
into the Account such subordinate Chapels as had been built in several
Parishes for the case of the People, which might very much increase the
reckoning. And yet he added one more to them of his own foundation; and such a
one as for the elegancy of the building, and richness of the Furniture,
exceeded all the rest together. Chapels he found none at his Episcopal house
of Aberguilly, and one he was resolved to bestow upon it, proportionably to
such a Family as was fit for a Bishop of St. David's to have about him; which
being finished, he provided it of Rich Furniture, and Costly Utensils, and
whatsoever else was necessary or convenient for the Service of God; the very
Plate designed for the celebrating of the holy Supper amounting to one hundred
fifty five pounds eighteen shillings four pence. Insomuch that if Felix the
Proconsul had been still alive, he might have cried out now, as he did in the
time of Julian the Apostate, viz. Vide quam praetiol^s va^is administrant
Mariae. F^l^^. Socrat. Hist. Eccl. lib. 3.
Behold in what rich Vessels they administer to the Son of Mary. But this
unhapy Age has given us Felix's enough to reckon this amongst his crimes, and
so they do his solemn Consecration of it, performed by himself in person,
according to an order firmly drawn up by the most learned Bishop Andrews, then
whom there could not be a greater enemy to the Errors, Superstitions, and
Corruptions of the Sea of Rome. I know it was objected, Cant. D^^^* p. 504
that neither Gratian, nor the Roman Pontifical, conceive such Consecrations
necessary to a Private Chapel; but then they are to be understood of such
Chapels only as are meant for prayers, and in propriety of speech are no more
than Oratories; and not of such as are intended for Preaching, Ministering the
Sacraments, and other acts of Divine Worship as this Chapel was. Et tani ad
Sacramenta quam Sacramentalia, tum Coenae Dominicae, tum etiam Baptismatis
Sacri in ^andem ministrantur, etc.
And this appears so plainly by the Authentic Instrument of the Dedication,
that no man who has seen the same can make question of it.

I have laid all these things together, from his Consecration in November 1621.
till his return toward London on the fifteenth of August 1622. though the
building and consecrating of this Chapel was the work of some following years,
and that there interveened a business of another nature betwixt the end of the
Parliament and the beginning of his Journey. The Treaty for a Match with Spain
was conceived to be very forwards, and the Parliament had ended in disgust for
declaring against it, which much increased the Audaciousness of the Papists,
and the discontents of the Puritan Faction. And though the Projects of these
last were not yet ripe enough for a present discovery, yet so it happened, that
one Knight, a young Divine of Broadgates in Oxon. (now better known by the name
of Pembroke College) broke out a little before his time into such expressions
as plain enough declared the purpose of all the rest. For preaching at St.
Peter's on Palm Sunday in the Afternoon (being the fourteenth day of April) on
those words of the Apostle, viz. Let every soul be subject, etc. Romans 13.1. he
broacht this dangerous Doctrine: viz. That the Inferior Magistrate had a
lawful power to order and correct the King if he did amiss. For illustration of
which Doctrine he used that speech of Trajans unto the Captain of his Guard:
Accipe hunc gladium, quem pro me si been imperavero distringes; sin minus
contra me; That is to say, Receive this Sword, which I would have thee use for
my defense if I govern well; but if I rule the Empire ill, to be turned against
me. For this being called in question by Dr. Pierce, one of the Canons of
Christ Church, being then Vice Chancellor, he was commanded to deliver a Copy
of his Sermon, which he did accordingly; and Letters presently were dispatched
to the Bishop of St. David's, as the only Oxford Bishop then about the King, to
make his Majesty acquainted with it. It was his Majesty's pleasure, that both
the Preacher and the Sermon should be sent to the Court. Where being come, he
was very strictly examined about the Doctrine he had Preached, and how he came
to fall upon it: He laid the fault of all upon some late Divines of foreign
Churches, by whom he had been so misguided; Especially on Pareus a Divine of
Heidelberg, who in his Commentary on the Epistle to the Romans had positively
delivered, all which he had vented in his Sermon, even to that very saying of
the Emperor Trajan. On this acknowledgment, it pleased the King of his special
goodness to remit the error of the Preacher, considering him as a young man,
and easily seduced by so grave an Author; but then withal he gave such order
in the Point, That the said Book of Pareus should be publicly burnt, not only
in both the Universities, but also after the end of the Sermon at St. Paul's
Cross London, on some Sunday following; which Sentence was accordingly executed
at Oxon. in St. Mary's Churchyard, on the sixth of June, in a frequent
Assembly of the Vice Chancellor, Doctors, Procters, Heads of Houses, Regents,
Non-Regents, and many others, whom curiosity or desire of satisfaction did
allure unto it. The like done at St. Paul's Cross also on Sunday the 23d. of
June next following; Mountain then Bishop of London, Preaching there upon that
occasion. The like was done at Cambridge also, but the time I know not.

But yet the business staid not here: The University of Oxon. thought
themselves concerned to acquit the whole Body from that Censure, which the
Error of one Member might have drawn upon it; and thereupon it was thought fit,
that the most seditious Maxims and Positions, which in that point had been
delivered by Pareus, should be extracted out of that Book; and being so
extracted, should be presented to the Vice Chancellor, and by him referred unto
the Judgment of the University: Which being done, a Convocation was assembled
on the 25th. day of June, in which the said Maxims and Positions were by an
unanimous consent condemned as false, seditious, impious, and destructive of
all Civil Government. Nor did the University think they had done enough in
looking back on Times past only, if they provided not also for the preventing
of the like mischiefs for the time to come; and thereupon it was declared by
the said University; First, That according to the Canon of Holy Scripture it
was not lawful for the Subject to resist his Sovereign by force of Arms, or to
make War against him, either Offensive or Defensive, whether it were for the
cause of Religion, or upon any other Pretense whatsoever. Secondly, That all
Doctors, Masters of Arts, Batchelors of Law, and Batchelors of Physic, living
within the verge of the University, should subscribe to those Censures and
Decrees: and, Thirdly, That whosoever did hereafter take any Degree in any
Faculty whatsoever, should first acknowledge the truth and justice of those
Censures, by his Subscription to the same; and should withal take his Corporal
Oath (the form of which Oath was then prescribed) That he did not only from his
heart condemn the said Doctrines of Pareus; but that he would neither preach,
teach, or maintain the same, or any of them for the future. And ^or the better
avoiding of the like inconveniences which Knight had run himself upon, by that
preposterous course of Study which was then generally used in that University,
Order was given that his Majesty's Instructions of the 18th of June 1616.
should be published in all the Chapels of Colleges, and some public place in
every Hall, that all young Students in Divinity might take notice of them: And
this produced by little and little such an alteration, that the name of Calvin
(which before had carried all before it) began to lessen by degrees; his
Reasons more looked upon than his Affirmations, and the Doctrines of the Church
of England more closely followed than they had been formerly.

Nor did his Majesty so much neglect his own safety, or the peace and happiness
of his People, as not to take such order in it as might prevent the like false,
factious, and seditious Preachings for the time to come. He found by this
example, that diverse young Students, by reading of late Writers and ungrounded
Divines, might and did broach unprofitable, unsound, seditious and dangerous
Doctrines, to the scandal of this Church, and disquieting of the State and
present Government; That the falling off of some to Popery, and of others to
Anabaptistry, or to some other kind of separation from the Church, could not so
rationally be imputed to any other thing than to the lightness, affectedness,
and unprofitableness of that kind of Preaching, which had been of late years
too much taken up in Court, University, City, and Country; That too many
Preachers were noted to be soaring up in points of Divinity too deep for the
capacities of the people; That others ignorantly meddled in Civil matters, as
well in the private meetings of several Parishes and Corporations, as in the
Public of the Kingdom, for the venting of their own distaste, or smoothing up
of those idle fancies, which in this blessed time of so long a Peace, does boil
in the brains of an unadvised People; That many of their Sermons were full of
rude and undecent railings, not only against the Doctrines, but even against
the persons of Papists and Puritans: And finally, that the People never being
instructed in the Catechism, and fundamental Grounds of Religion; for all these
aerie novellisms which they received from such Preachers, were but like new
Table-books, ready to be filled up, either with the Manuals and Catechisms of
the Popish Priests, or the Papers and Pamphlets of Anabaptists, Brownists, and
other Puritans. His Majesty thereupon taking the Premises into his Princely
Consideration, which had been represented to him by sundry grave and reverend
Prelates of this Church, thought it expedient to cause some certain Limitations
and Cautions, concerning Preachers and Preaching, to be carefully digested and
drawn up in Writing: Which done (so done as Laud appears to have a hand in the
doing of it) and being very well approved by the King, he caused them to be
directed to the Archbishops of Canterbury and York, by them to be communicated
to the Bishops of their several Provinces, and by those Bishops to be put in
execution in their several Diocesses. Which Directions bearing date of the
fourth of August, 1622. being the 20th. year of his Majesty's Reign, I have
thought convenient to subjoin, and are these that follow, viz. I. That no
Preacher under the Degree and Calling of a Bishop, or Dean of a Cathedral or
Collegiate Church (and they upon the Kings days only, and set Festivals) do
take occasion by the Expounding of any Text of Scripture whatsoever, to fall
into any set course or common place, otherwise than by opening the coherence
and division of his Text, which shall not be comprehended and warranted in
essence, substance, effect, or natural inference, within some one of the
Articles of Religion set forth 1562. or in some one of the Homilies set forth
by Authority in the Church of England, not only for a help of non-preaching,
but withal as a pattern, as it were, for the Preaching Ministers; and for their
further instruction for the performance thereof, that they forthwith read over
and peruse diligently the said Book of Articles, and the two Books of Homilies.
II. That no Parson, Vicar, Curate, or Lecturer, shall Preach any Sermon or
Collation hereafter, upon Sundays and Holy Days in the Afternoons, in any
Cathedral or Parish Church throughout this Kingdom, but upon some part of the
Catechism, or some Text taken ^ut of the Creed, or Commandments, or the Lords
Prayer, (Funeral Sermons only excepted) and that those Preachers be most
encouraged and approved of, who spend their Afternoons Exercise in the
Examination of Children in their Catechisms, which is the most ancient and
laudable Custom of Teaching in the Church of England. III. That no Preacher of
what Title soever, under the degree of a Bishop or Dean at the least, do from
henceforth presume to Preach in any popular Auditory, the deep Points of
Predestination, Election, Reprobation, or of the universality, efficacity,
resistibility, or irresistibility of Gods Grace; but rather leave those Themes
to be handled by Learned Men, and that modestly and moderately, by Use and
Application, rather than by way of positive Doctrine, as being fitter for
Schools and Universities, than for simple Auditories. IV. That no Preacher, of
what Title or Denomination soever, shall presume from henceforth in any
Auditory within this Kingdom, to declare, limit, or bound out by way of
positive Doctrine, in any Lecture or Sermon, the Power, Prerogative,
Jurisdiction, Authority, or Duty of Sovereign Princes, or therein meddle with
matters of State, and reference between Princes and People, than as they are
instructed in the Homily of Obedience, and in the rest of the Homilies and
Articles of Religion, set forth (as before is mentioned) by Public Authority:
but rather confine themselves wholly to these two Heads of Faith and Good Life,
which are all the subject of the ancient Sermons and Homilies. V. That no
Preacher, of what Title or Denomination soever, shall causelessly, and without
any invitation from the Text, fall into any bitter Invectives, and undecent
railing Speeches against the Papists or Puritans: but wisely and gravely, when
they are occasioned thereunto by the Text of Scripture, free both the Doctrine
and Discipline of the Church of England from the aspersions of either
adversary, especially when the Auditory is suspected to be tainted with the one
or the other infection. VI. Lastly, That the Archbishops and Bishops of the
Kingdom (whom his Majesty has good cause to blame for their former
remisseness) be more wary and choice in Licencing of Preachers, and Verbal
Grants made to any Chancellor, Official, or Commissary to pass License in this
Kingdom: And that all the Lecturers throughout the Kingdom (a new body severed
from the ancient Clergy of England, as being neither Parson, Vicar, or Curate)
be licensed henceforward in the Court of Faculties, only upon recommendation of
the party from the Bishop of the Diocese under his hand and seal, with a Fiat
from the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, and a confirmation under the Great Seal
of England; and that such as transgress any of his directions be suspended by
the Bishop of the Diocese, or in his default by the Lord Archbishop of that
Province* Ab officio and beneficio, for a year and a day, until his Majesty by
the advice of the next Convocation prescribe for some further punishment.


No sooner were these Instructions published, but strange it was to hear the
several descants and discourses which were made upon them; How much they were
misreported amongst the People, and misinterpreted in themselves; those very
men who saw no just reason to condemn the Action being howsoever sure to
misconstrue the end. For though they were so discreetly ordered, that no good
and godly man could otherwise than acknowledge that they tended very much to
Edification; Yet such Interpretations were put upon them, as neither could
consist with his Majesty's meaning, nor the true sense of the Expressions
therein used. By some it was given out, that those Instructions did tend to the
restraint of Preaching, at the lest as to some necessary and material points;
by others, that they did abate the number of Sermons, by which the People were
to be instructed in the Christian Faith; by all the Preachers of that Party,
that they did but open a gap for Ignorance and Superstition to break in by
degrees upon the People. Which coming to his Majesty's Ears, it brought him
under the necessity of making an Apology for himself, and his actions in it.
And to this end having summed up the reasons which induced him to it, he
required the Archbishop of Canterbury to communicate them to his Brother of
York; by both to be imparted to their several Suffragans, the inferior Clergy,
and to all others whosoever, whom it might concern: which notwithstanding, it
lay so heavy on the stomach of H. Burton (at that time a Waiter in the Court,
and afterward beneficed in Friday-street) that it would not down with him for
many years. Inso^much that in his seditious Sermon, Entitled, For God and
King, Anno 1636. he charge it for an Innovation in Religion, that the Bishops
then about King James, (of which Laud was one) procured an order from him to
inhibit young Ministers from preaching those Doctrines (those saving Doctrines
as he calls them) of Election and Predestination, and that none but Bishops and
Deans should handle those Points; which he is confident to have been done by
them for no other reason, But thereby the more easily to make way for the
accomplishing of their plot, for the introducing of Popery, so long in
hammering. So impossible was it for that King, (and as impossible for his Son
and Successor) assisted by the gravest and most moderate Counselors, to fix on
any thing conducible to the peace and happiness of the Church, but what must be
traduced, and made odious in the sight of the People by the reports and
artifices of those troublesome Spirits.

Now as his Majesty and the Church were exercised on the one side by the
Puritan Faction, so were they no less troubled and disquieted by the Popish
Party on the other. The Priests and Jesuits, upon the breaking up of the
Parliament, and the proceedings of the Treaty, grew to such an height of
confidence that they openly began to practice on some persons of Honor for
seducing them and their dependants to the Sea of Rome. Amongst whom there was
none more aimed at than the Countess of Buckingham, whom if they could gain
unto their Party, they doubted not but by her means to win the Marquess, and by
his power to obtain a tolleration at the least of their Superstition. The Lady
beginning to stagger in her resolutions, and Fisher the Jesuit (who had
undertaken the task) continually pressing her by fresh arguments to declare her
self, it came at last to the Kings knowledge, who was not wanting to discourse
with her for her satisfaction. At that time Dr. Francis White, Rector of St.
Peter in Cornhill, was reader of the Divinity Lecture in the Church of St.
Paul, by which he had gained an high esteem amongst his Auditors, not only for
his honest Zeal against the Papists, in those (as they were then thought)
Pendulous times: but for a notable dexterity in the managing of all points of
Controversy. No man thought fitter than this Doctor to encounter Fisher. And
to that end, in the beginning of this year, he was desired by the Marquess to
hold a Conference with the Jesuit, at which his Mother being present, might
hear what answers would be given to such Objections as had been made against
this Church, and the Religion here by Law established. One Conference not being
enough to conclude the business, another followed not long after, to which the
King himself did vouchsafe his presence; so great was his desire to free this
Honorable Lady from the Fishers net. But in that second Conference (consisting
altogether of particular points) there had been nothing said touching an
infallible, visible Church, which was the chief and only point in which the
Party doubting required satisfaction. And that she might have satisfaction in
that matter also, it pleased his Majesty to add a third Conference to the
former on the twenty fourth of May next following, not to be managed by the
same parties, but by our Bishop on the one side, and the said Fisher on the
other; the Lord Keeper Williams (who put in a word or two sometimes) and diverse
other persons of Honor being also present.

How well he sped in that encounter, the Printed Conference, which came out
about two years after, and the justification of it published in the year 1637.
do most clearly evidence, or shall be shown hereafter in due time and place.
Certain I am, that he gained so much by that days work on the Marquess of
Buckingham, that from that time forwards he was taken into his especial
favor; For he himself tells us in his Breviate on Whitsunday, June the
eighth, That the Marquess was pleased to enter into a nearer respect to him,
the particulars whereof were not for paper; That on the fifteenth of that Month
he had the honor to be made the Marquiss's Confessor (which was to give him in
effect) the Key of his heart; that on the Morrow after, being Trinity Sunday,
the Marquess having thus prepared himself, received the Sacrament at Greenwich.
Which if he had not forborne for a long time before, this Memorandum in the
Breviate must have been impertinent; and finally, that on the eleventh of
January, the Marquess and he were at some private Consultation, in the inner
Chamber at York-House, on which he prays God to bestow his blessing. Nor was
the King less pleased with his performance at that time, than the Marquess was.
On the Report whereof, he gave him order to digest the substance of it into
Form and Method, to make it ready for his hearing in convenient time; and was
content to give him access no less than thrice in the Christmas holydays, that
he might hearken to it with the more attention. That King had never the command
of so strong a patience as to hold out against a second or third reading, if he
had not found some high contentment in the first. In which Conjuncture, it was
no hard matter for him to obtain the renewing and enlarging of his Commendam by
the addition of the Parsonage of Creek in Northamptonshire, into which he was
instituted and inducted, in the end of January.

We are now drawing unto a new and strange adventure, greater than which was
never undertaken and performed by a Prince of England. The Treaty for the Match
with Spain, beginning in the year 1617. was afterward more vigorously
prosecuted by King James, upon a hope of bringing back the Palatinate with it;
But while he fed himself with hopes, the Spaniards and Bavarians, had devoured
the Country, leaving but three Towns ( Heidelberge, Frankendale, and Manheime)
to keep possession for the Prince Elector, in the name of the rest. Which the
King finding at the last, and seeing that one delay begat another, without
promising any end to his Expectations; it was by him resolved, without the
privity and consent of his Council, that the Prince himself should go in Person
into Spain, that he might either speed the business, or break of the Treaty:
Nor wanted the Prince strong impulsives to induce him to it. He was now past
the two and twentieth year of his Age, and was so bent upon the Match, that he
began to grow impatient with his Fathers Ministers for not ripening it unto an
issue; For it is evident by Digbys Letter unto Calvert Hidden w^rks of d^rk. p.
47*
dated October. 28. 1623. (this last then Secretary of State) not only that King
James did infinitely desire the Match, but that the Prince desired it as much
as he and by Calverts Letter unto Digby, on the fifth of this present January,
That he could have no rest for his young Master, I^. p. 25.
for being called on early and late to hasten the dispatch of all. Some
Messages and dispatches had been brought by Porter out of Spain about three
days before, which winged his feet, and added Spurs to the design. The Journey
being thus agreed on, was in the very nature of it, to be made a secret; and
therefore not communicable to the Lords of the Council for fear of staying him
at home, or rendering him obnoxious to the danger of an interception as he past
through France; which mischief if it had befaln him, he must either have
submitted unto such conditions, or suffered under such restraints as might seem
intolerable in themselves, but absolutely destructive of his present purpose;
which may the rather be believed by reason of the like proceedings of that King
with the present Prince Elector Palatine; who posting disguised through France,
in hope to get the Command of Duke Bernards Army, was stayed in the middle of
his Journey by that Kings command, and kept so long under Restraint that he
lost the opportunity of e^fecting that which he desired.

It is not to be thought but that much danger did appear in the undertaking,
but Love, which facilitates impossibilities, overcomes all dangers. On the
eighteenth day of February, accompanied by the Duke of Buckingham, Mr. Endimion
Porter, and Mr. Francis Cottington, he took Ship at Dover, and landed safe at
Boloigne a Port of Picardy. Advanced on his way as far as Paris, his Curiosity
carried him to the Court, to see a Masque, at which he had a view of that
incomparable Princess, whom he after married. But he was like to have paid dear
for this curiosity; For no sooner had he left the City, but the French King
upon Advertisement of his being there, dispatched away many of his Servants in
pursuance of him, commanding them not only to stay his Journey, but to bring
him back unto the Court. But he rides fast who rides upon the wings of Love and
Fear, so that the Prince had past Bayonne (the last Town of France) without
being overtaken by them; and posting speedily to Madrid he entered the Lord
Ambassadors Lodging without being known to any but his Confidents only. That
Danger being thus escaped, he cast himself upon another; For having put himself
into the Power of the King of Spain, it was at the courtesy of that King
whither he should ever return or not; it being a Maxim among Princes, that if
any one of them without leave sets foot on the ground of another, he makes
himself ipso facto to become his Prisoner. Richard the First of England passing
in disguise through some part of the dominions of the Archduke of Austria was
by him took prisoner, and put unto so high a Ransom, that the Archduke is
said to have bought the Earldom of Styria, or Styrmark, with some part of the
money, and to have walled Vienna with the rest. Nor wanted the Spaniards some
Examples of a latter date, which might have justified his detention there, had
they been so minded, and those too borrowed from our selves. Philip the first
of Spain (one of the Predecessors of the King then Reigning) being cast by
tempest on the Coast of England, was here detained by King Henry the Seventh
till he had delivered up the Earl of Suffolk, who had put himself under his
protection. In like manner Mary Queen of Scots being forced by her Rebellious
Subjects to flee into this Realm, was presently seized on as a Prisoner, and so
continued till her lamentable and calamitous death. And what could more agree
with the rules of Justice, and the old known practice of Retaliation, then that
the English should be punished by the rigor of their own severities.

Such were the Dangers which the Princes person was exposed to by this
unparalleled adventure, not otherwise to be commended (in most men's opinions)
but by the happy success of his Return. And yet there were some fears of a
greater danger than any could befall his Person by Sea or Land; that is to say,
the danger of his being wrought on to alter his Religion, and to make shipwreck
of his Faith; and this by some uncharitable persons is made the ground of the
design, to the indelible reproach of those who were supposed to have had a hand
in the contrivement of the Plot. Amongst those the Marquess stands accused by
the Earl of Bristol, as appears by the first Article of the Charge which was
exhibited against him in the Parliament of the year 1626. And our new Bishop
stands reproached for another of them by the Author of the book entitled,
Hidden works of darkness, etc. Hidden works, p. 34.
But then it cannot be denied, but that his Majesty and the Prince must be the
Principals in this Fact, this Hidden work of darkness, as that Author calls it;
Buckingham and St. David's being only accessaries, and subservient instruments.
But who can think they durst have undertaken so soul a business, which could
not be washed off but by their blood, had not the King commanded, and the Prince
consented? Now for the King, there is not any thing more certain than the great
care he took that no danger should accrue to the Religion here by Law
established by the Match with Spain. And this appears so clearly by the
Instructions which he gave to Digby at the first opening of this Treaty, as if
it had been written with a beam of the Sun: The matter of Religion (says he)
is to us of most principal consideration; for nothing can be to us dearer than
the honor and safety of the Religion we profess: And therefore seeing that
this Marriage and Alliance (if it shall take place) is to be with a Lady of a
different Religion from us; it becomes us to be tender, as on the one part, to
give them all satisfaction convenient; so on the other, to admit nothing that
may blemish our Conscience, or detract from the Religion here established. And
to this point he stood to the very last, not giving way to any alteration in
this, or tolleration of that Religion; though he was pleased to grant some
personal graces to the Recusants of this Kingdom, and to abate somewhat of the
Rigor of those Capital Laws which had been formerly enacted against Priests
and Jesuits.

Next for the Prince, he had been brought up, for some years then last past, at
the feet of this most learned and wise Gamaliel; by whom he was so fortified in
the true Protestant Religion, established by the Laws of this Realm, that he
feared not the encounter of the strongest Adversary; and of this the King was
grown so confident, that when Maw and Wren, the Princes Chaplains, were to
receive his Majesty's Commands at their going to Spain, there to attend upon
their Master, he advised them not to put themselves upon any unnecessary
Disputations, but to be only on the defensive part, if they should be
challenged. And when it was answered, That there could be no reason to engage
in such Disputations where no Moderator could be had; The King replied, That
Charles should moderate between them and the opposite party. At which when one
of them seemed to smile upon the other, the King proceeded, and assured them,
that Charles should manage a point in Controversy with the best studied Divine
of them all; and that he had trained up George so far as to hold the
Conclusion, though he had not yet made him able to prove the Premises. By which
it seems that his Majesty conceived no such fear on the Princes part, as that
he could be practiced or disputed out of his Religion; and that he had no such
fear of Buckingham neither, but that he would be able to stand his ground,
notwithstanding any Arguments which were brought to move him. And he that is so
far confirmed as to stand his ground, will never yield himself though he may be
vanquished. It was not then to be believed, that me so principled and
instructed, as not to be forced out of their Religion, should take such pains
to be perverted, or seduced upon worldly policies, as well against their
Science, as against their Conscience. Had they gone thither on that Errand,
what could have hindered them from putting the design in execution; having in
Spain sit opportunity to effect it, at home the Kings Authority to confirm and
Countenance it, and the whole power of his Catholic Majesty (which was offered
more than once or twice) to justify and defend the misrule against all the
world. That they brought back the same Religion which they carried with them,
is a strong Argument to any man of Sense and Reason that they went not into
Spain of purpose to betray it there.

Let us next look upon the proofs which are offered to us; for Laud being privy
to this journey, whereof his being of Council to ^ervert the Prince, and draw
him to the Church of Rome, there is no proof offered: For first I find it
charged, that he wrote a Letter unto Buckingham on the fifth day after his
departure, and maintained a constant Correspondence with him when he was in
Spain: And secondly, That he was privy to some Speeches which his Majesty had
used to the Prince at his going hence. His Majesty in some of his printed Books
had maintained that the Pope was Antichrist; and now he feared that this might
be alleged against him in the Court of Rome, to hinder the Popes Dispensation,
and obstruct the Marriage: For the removal of which bar, he commands the Prince
to signify (if occasion were) to all whom it might concern, That his Majesty
had writ nothing in that Point concludingly, Cant. D^^m. p. 276.
but by way of Argument. That Laud was present at this Conference betwixt his
Majesty and the Prince, has no proof at all: He might be made acquainted with
it on the post-fact, when the Prince returned; and yet because he was made
acquainted with this passage, though upon the post-fact, it must be hence
concluded as a matter certain, That he was one of the Cabinet Council, and
privy to the Princes going into Spain: and secondly, as a matter probable, That
he suggested this distinction unto King James, to please the Pope, and promote
the Match. As little strength there is in the second proof, touching his
Writing to the Marquis on the fifth day after his departure: Hi^d Works* c. 34.
and Brev. p. 3.
But then it was not till the fifth, before which time the Princes Journey into
Spain was made the general Discourse of all Companies, the ordinary Subject of
all Tongues and Pens; communicated by word of mouth, by Letters, and by what
means not? Nor can those following Letters, which he received from Buckingham
when he was in Spain, convince him of being privy to that Journey, when it was
in project and design; there being many others also, who both received and
dispatched Letters frequently from that very same person, so far from being of
the Council as to that particular, that they were not of the Court at all: So
ordinary is the fate of such sorry Arguments, to conclude nothing at all, or
that which is nothing to the purpose.

But what need more be said to confute this Calumny on which I have so long
insisted, than the great Care which was immediately taken by the King and his
Bishops, to maintain the Reputation of the Church of England in the Court of
Spain? No sooner had his Majesty notice that the Prince was come in safety to
the Court of that King, but order presently was taken for Officers of all
Qualities, and Servants of all sorts to be sent unto him, that so he might
appear in Public with the greater luster. Nor was it the least part of his
Royal Care, to accommodate him with two such Chaplains as should be able to
defend the Doctrine of this Church against all Opponents. And that there might
appear a face of the Church of England in the outward Forms of Worship also,
his Majesty was pleased by the Advice of the Bishops then about him (of which
Laud was one) to give the said Chaplains, Maw and Wren, these Instructions
following, dated at Newmarket, March 10.

I. That there be one convenient Room appointed for Prayer; the said Room to be
employed during their abode to no other use. II. That it be decently adorned
Chappel-wise, with an Altar, Fonts, Palls, Linen Coverings, Demy-Carpet, four
Surplices, Candlesticks, Tapers, Chalices, Pattens, a fine Towel for the
Prince, other Towels for the Household, a Traverse of Waters for the Communion,
a Basin and Flaggons, two Copes. III. That Prayers be duly kept twice a day:
That all reverence be used by every one present, being uncovered, kneeling at
due times, standing up at the Creeds and Gospel, bowing at the Name of JESUS.
IV. That the Communion be celebrated in due form, with an Oblation of every
Communicant, and admixing Water with the Wine: the Communion to be as often
used as it shall please the Prince to set down; smooth Wafers to be used for
the Bread. V. That in the Sermons there be no Polemical Preachings to inveigh
against them, or to confute them; but only to confirm the Doctrine and Tenets
of the Church of England, by all positive Arguments, either in Fundamental or
Moral Points; and especially to apply themselves in Moral Lessons to Preach
Christ Jesus Crucified. VI. That they give no occasions (or rashly entertain
any) of Conference or Dispute (for fear of dishonor to the Prince, if upon any
offense taken, he should be required to send away any one of them): but if the
Lord Ambassador or Mr. Secretary wish them to hear any that desire some
information, then they may safely do it. VII. That they carry the Articles of
our Religion in many Copies, the Books of Common Prayer in several Languages,
store of English Service-Books, the Kings own Works in English and Latin.
Such were his Majesty's Instructions to the said two Chaplains: and being
such, they do concludingly demonstrate, That there was no design in the King or
Prince, or in any of the Court or Court-Bishops, of what name soever, to alter
the Religion here by Law established; or that the Prince was posted into Spain
of purpose that he might be perverted or debauched from it.

But the best is, that he which gave the Wound has made the Plaster; and such
a Plaster as may assuredly heal the Sore without troubling any other
Chyrurgeon. It is affirmed by him who published the Breviate, p. 14.
Breviate of our Bishops Life, That he was not only privy to this Journey of
the Prince and Buckingham into Spain, but that the Journey was purposely
plotted to pervert him in his Religion, and reconcile him to Rome: And this he
makes apparent by the following Prayer, found amongst others in the Bishops
Manual of Devotions; than which there can be nothing more repugnant to the
Propositions, ^or proof of which it is so luckily produced. Now the said Prayer
(...) thus verbatim; viz. O Most merciful God and gracious Father, the Prince
has put himself to a great Adventure: I humbly beseech thee, make clear the
way before him; give thine Angels charge over him; be with him thy self in
Mercy, Power, and Protection, in every step of his Journey, in every moment of
his Time, in every Consultation and Address for Action, till thou bring him
back with Safety, Honor, and Contentment, to do thee service in this place.
Bless his most truly and faithful Servant the Lord Duke of Buckingham, that he
may be diligent in Service, provident in Business, wise and happy in Counsel,
for the honor of thy Name, the good of the Church, the preservation of the
Prince, the contentment of the King, the satisfaction of the State: Preserve
him, I humbly beseech thee, from all Envy that attends him; and bless him, that
his eyes may see the Prince safely delivered to the King and State; and after
it to live long in happiness, to do thee and them service, through Jesus Christ
our Lord. Amen. And with this Prayer (so plainly destructive of the purpose for
which it was published) I shut up the Transactions of this present year.

We will begin the next with the dismission of the Archbishop of Spalato, a man
defamed by the Italians at his coming hither, and as much reproached by the
English at his going hence: His name was Marcus Antonius de Dominis, Archbishop
of Spalato in Fact, and Primate of Dalmatia in Title: Such anciently and of
right those Archbishops were, till the Bishop of Venice being made a Patriarch
by Pope Eugenius the Fourth, Anno 1450. assumed that Title to himself, together
with a Superintendency over all the Churches of that Country, as subordinate to
him. He had been long conversant with the Fathers and Ancient Councils; By this
Light he discerned the Darkness of the Church of Rome, and the blind Title
which the Popes had for their Supremacy. Inclining to the Protestant Religion,
he began to fear that his own Country would prove too hot for him at the last;
and therefore after he had sat in the Sea of Spalato about fourteen years, he
quitted his Preferments there, and betook himself for Sanctuary to the Church
of England, Anno 1616. Extremely honored at his first coming by all sorts of
people; entertained in both Universities with solemn Speeches; presented,
complemented, feasted, by the great Lords about the Court, the Bishops, and
some principal Persons about the City: Happy was he that could be honored with
his Company, and satisfied with beholding his comely presence, though they
understood not his Discourses. Commended by King James at first for a constant
Sojourner and Guest to Archbishop Abbot, in whose Chapel at Lambeth he
assisted at the Consecration of some English Bishops. Made afterward by the
King the Master of the Savoy, and Dean of Windsor, and by himself made Rector
of West-Illesby in the County of Berks: A Revenue not so great as to bring him
under the suspicion of coming hither out of Covetousness, for the sake of
filthy Lucre; nor so contemptible, but that he might have lived plentifully and
contentedly on it. During his stay here, he published his learned and elaborate
Book entitled, De Republica Ecclesiastica, never yet answered by the Papists,
and perhaps unanswerable. He had given great trouble to the Pope by his
defection from that Church, and no small countenance to the Doctrine of the
Protestant Churches by his coming over unto ours. The foundring of so great a
Pillar, seemed to prognosticate, that the Fabric of that Church was not like
to stand. And yet he gave greater blows to them by his Pen, than by the
defection of his person; the wound so given, being conceived to be incurable.

In these respects, those of that Church bestirred themselves to disgrace his
person, devising many other causes, by which he might be moved or forced to
forsake those parts, wherein he durst no longer tarry: but finding little
credit given to their libellous Pamphlets, they began to work upon him by more
secret practices, insinuating, That he had neither that Respect nor those
Advancements which might encourage him to stay; That the new Pope Gregory the
Fifteenth was his special Friend; That he might choose his own Preferments, and
make his own Conditions, if he would return. And on the other side they
cunningly wrought him out of credit with King James, by the Arts of Gundamore,
Ambassador at that time from the King of Spain; and lessened his esteem
amongst the Clergy, by some other Artifices: So that the poor man, being in a
manner lost on both sides, was forced to a necessity of swallowing that
accursed bait, by which he was hooked over to his own destruction. For having
solicited King James by several Letters (the last of them bearing date on the
third of February) to license his departure home, he was by the King
disdainfully turned over to the High Commission, or rather to a special
Commission directed to Archbishop Abbot, the Lord Keeper Lincoln, the Bishops
of London, Durham, and Winchester, with certain of the Lords of the Privy
Council. These Lords assembling at Lambeth on the 30th. of March, and having
first heard all his Excuses and Defenses, commanded him to depart the Realm
within twenty days, or otherwise to expect such punishment as by the Laws of
the Land might be laid upon him, for holding Intelligence by Letters, Messages,
etc. with the Popes of Rome. To this Sentence he sorrowfully submitted,
protesting openly, That he would never speak reproachfully of the Church of
England, the Articles whereof he acknowledged to be sound and profitable, and
none of them to be Heretical, as appears by a Book entitled, SPALATO's
Shiftings in Religion, published (as it was conceived) by Laud's especial
Friend, the Lord Bishop of Durham. How well, or rather how ill he performed
this promise, and what became of him after his return to Rome is not now my
business. The man is banished out of England, and my History leads me next into
Spain, not Italy.

The Church of England had a great stock at that time to be driven in Spain,
and many of the Romish Factors were desirous to be trading in it. No sooner was
the Princes Train of Lords and Gentlemen come to the City of Madrid. but the
King of Spain assigned a day for his Reception. A Reception so Magnificent, so
full of State, and Royal Pomp, that it redounded infinitely to the honor of
the Spanish Court, and the satisfaction of the Prince. Never was King of Spain
on the day of his inauguration received into that City with a more general
concourse of all sorts of people, and greater signs of Joy and Gallantry; then
the Prince was conducted through it to the Palace Royal. In which his Quarters
being assigned him, there wanted no allurements on their parts to win him to a
fair esteem of their Religion, and to put some high value also on their Court
and Nation. Nor was the Prince wanting for his part in all fit compliances, by
which he might both gain on them, and preserve himself; for by his Courtly Garb
he won so much on the affections of the Lady Infanta, and by his Grace and
circumspect behavior got so much ground upon that King and his Council, that
the Match went forward in good earnest. A dispensation for the Marriage was
procured from Gregory the fifteenth then sitting in the Sea of Rome. The
Articles of the Marriage with all the circumstances thereof were agreed upon,
and solemnly sworn to by both Kings. Nothing remained to bring the whole
business to a joyful issue but the Consummation. But before that could be
obtained, the Prince must try his fortunes in an harder Conflict than any he
had learnt in the Schools of Love.

The change of his Religion was much hoped for by the Court of Spain at his
first coming thither. To perfect which he was plied from time to time with many
persuasive Arguments by many persons of great Honor about that King. And many
of the most learned Priests and Jesuits made their Addresses to him, with such
Rhetorical Orations, with such insinuating Artifices, and subtle Practices, as
if they had a purpose rather to conquer him by kindness, than by disputation.
Nor stop they there, but dedicated many Books unto him, to gain him fairly to
their Party; invited him to behold their solemn Processions to captivate his
outward senses; and carried him to the most Religious places, famous for their
magnificent Fabrics, and pretended Miracles. In which conjuncture of designs,
it is not to be thought but that the Pope bestirred himself in gaining to his
Church a Prince of such parts and greatness. For first he writes unto the
Bishop of Conchen, Inquisitor general of Spain, not to be wanting to the
opportunity which God had put into his hands. The next day, being the twentieth
of April, he addressed his lines unto the Prince, extolling the piety of his
Predecessors, their Zeal unto the Catholic Church, and to the head thereof the
Pope, inviting him by all the blandishments of Art, to put himself upon the
following of their brave examples. Never had Prince a harder game to play than
Prince Charles had now: He found himself under the Power of the King of Spain,
and knew that the whole business did depend on the Popes dispensation, with
whom if he complied not in some handsome way, his expectation might be
frustrate, and all the fruits of that long Treaty would be suddenly blasted. He
therefore writes unto the Pope in such general terms as seemed to give his
Holiness some assurances of him: but being reduced unto particulars, signified
nothing else but some civil complements; mixed with some promises of his
endeavors to make up the breaches in the Church, and restore Christendom to an
happy and desirable peace. Which notwithstanding was after reckoned amongst his
crimes, by such as rather would not, then did not know the necessity which lay
upon him, of keeping at that time a plausible correspondence with the Catholic
party.

But these Temptations and Allurements, these Artifices and Insinuations,
prevailed so little with the Prince, that he still kept his stand, and was
found impregnable; carrying himself with such a prudent Moderation in these
Encounters, that he came off always without Envy, but not without Glory. And
that it might appear on what grounds he stood, it was thought fit to let them
see that he professed no other Religion than what was agreeable to the Rules of
Antiquity, and not much abhorrent from the Forms then used in the Church Rome.
And to this end, by the prudent care of the Lord Keeper Williams, the English
Liturgy was translated into Spanish; so many Copies of the book then Printed
being sent into Spain, as gave great satisfaction both to the Court and Clergy.
The work performed by a converted Dominican (...). p. 47.
who was gratified for his pains therein by a good Prebend, and a Benefice, as
he well deserved. And this I must needs say was very seasonably done; For till
that time the Spaniards had been made believe by their Priests and Jesuits,
that when the English had cast off the Pope, they had cast off all Religion
also. That from thenceforth they became mere Atheists; and that the name of God
was never used amongst them, but with a purpose to expose it to profanation. An
Argument whereof may be the extreme squeamishness of the Constable of Castile,
sent into England in the beginning of the Reign of King James, (...) Hist. of
S^al ^. 530.
to swear the peace between both Kings. Who understanding that the business was
to be performed in the Chapel, where some Anthems were to be sung, desired,
that whatsoever was sung, Gods name might not be used in it; and that being
forborne, he was content they should sing what they listed. And when the Earl of
Nottingham, attended by many Gentlemen of worth and quality went into Spain, to
take the like Oath of the Catholic King, it was reported by his followers at
their coming back, how much it was commiserated by the Vulgar Spaniards that so
many goodly persons should be trained up in no other Religion than to worship
the Devil.

But let us leave the Prince, and return for England, where the King had as
hard a game to play; For having left such a Pawn in Spain he was in a manner
bound to his good behavior, and of necessity to gratify the Popish Party in
this Kingdom with more than ordinary Favors. He knew no Marriage could be made
without the Popes Dispensation, and that the Popes Dispensation could not be
obtained without indulging many graces to his Catholic Subjects. To smooth his
way therefore to the point desired, he addresseth several Letters to the Pope
and Cardinals, in which he gives him the title of most holy Father; and imploys
Gage, as his Agent in the Court of Rome, to attend the business. At home he
discharges all such Priests and Jesuits as had been formerly imprisoned;
inhibiting all Processes, and Superseding all proceedings against Recusants;
and in a word suspends the execution of such penal Laws as were made against
them. The People hereupon began to cry out generally of a Toleration, and
murmur in all places against the King, as if he were resolved to grant it. And
that they might not seem to cry out for nothing, a Letter is dispersed abroad,
under the name o^ Archbishop Abbot. In this Letter his* Majesty is told, That
by granting any such Toleration he should set up the most damnable and
Heretical Doctrine of the Church of Rome, the whore of Babylon; That it would
be both hateful to God, grievous to his good Subjects and contradictory to his
former Writings, in which he had declared their Doctrines to be Superstitious,
Idolatrous, and detestable; That no such toleration could be granted but by
Parliament only, unless it were his purpose to show his people that he would
throw down the Laws at his pleasure; That by granting such a Toleration, there
must needs follow a discontinuance of the true Profession of the Gospel, and
what could follow thereupon, but Gods heavy wrath and indignation both on
himself and all the Kingdom; That the Prince was not only the Son of his Flesh,
but the Son of his People also, and therefore leaves him to consider what an
error he had run into, by sending him into Spain without the privity of his
Council, and consent of his Subjects; And finally, That though the Princes
return might be safe and prosperous, yet they that drew him into that dangerous
and desperate Action would not escape unpunished.

This was the substance of the Letter, whosoever was the Writer of it. For
Abbot could not be so ill a Statesman (having been long a Privy Counselor) as
not to know, that he who sits at the Helm must stear his course according
unto wind and weather; And that there was a very great difference betwixt such
personal indulgencies, as the King had granted in that case to his Popish
Subjects, and any such Public Exercise of their Superstitions, as the word
Toleration does import; and howsoever, that it was a known Maxim in the Arts
of Government, that necessity overrules the Law, and that Princes many times
must act for the public good, in the infringing of some personal and
particular rights which the Subjects claim unto themselves. Nor could he be so
ignorant of the Kings affections as to believe, that the King did really intend
any such toleration, though possibly he might be content, on good reason of
State, that the people should be generally persuaded of it: For well he knew
that the King loved his Sovereignty too well to quit any part thereof to the
Pope of Rome, and consequently to part with that Supremacy in Ecclesiastical
matters (as needs he must have done by a Toleration) which he esteemed the
fairest Flower in the Royal Garland. In which respect, King James might seem to
be made up of Caesar and Pompey; as impatient of enduring an equal, as of
admitting a Superior in his own Dominions. Or had he been a greater stranger
at the Court than can be imagined, yet could he not be ignorant, that it was
the Kings chief interest to preserve Religion in the same state in which he
found it; and could not fear but that he would sufficiently provide for the
safety of it. Upon which Premises, it may be rationally inferred, that Abbot
was only the reputed Author of this Bastard Letter, and not the natural Parent
of it.

Nor was the Toleration more feared by the English Protestants, than hoped for
by the Papists here, and presumed by the Pope himself. In confidence whereof,
he nominated certain Bishops to all the Episcopal Sees of England to exercise
all manner of Jurisdiction in their several and respective Diocesses, as his
false and titular Bishops did in the Church of Ireland. The intelligence
whereof being given to the Jesuits here in England, who feared nothing more
than such a thing, one of them, who formerly had free access to the Lord Keeper
Williams, acquaints him with this mighty secret; assuring him, that he did it
for no other reason, but because he knew what a great exasperation it would
give the King, and consequently how much it would incense him against the
Catholics. Away with this Intelligence goes the Lord Keeper to the King, who
took fire thereat as well as he, and though it was somewhat late at night,
commanded to go to the Spanish Ambassador, and to require him to send unto the
King his Master to take some course that those proceedings might be stopped in
the Court of Rome; or otherwise that the Treaty of the Match should advance no
further. The Lord Keeper finds the Ambassador ready to send away his Packet,
who upon hearing of the news commanded his Currier to stay till he had
represented the whole business in a Letter to the King his Master. On the
receiving of which Letter, the King imparts the same to the Popes Nuncio in his
Court. Who presently sends his dispatches to the Pope, acquainting him with the
great inconveniences and unavoidable dangers of this new design; which being
stopped by this device, and the Treaty of the Match ending in a rupture not long
after, the same Jesuit came again to the Lord Keepers Lodging, and in a fair
and facetious manner thanked him most humbly for the good office he had done
for that Society, for breaking and bearing off which blow all the friends they
had in Rome could find no buckler. Which Story as I heard from his Lordships
own mouth (with no small contentment) so seemed he to be very well pleased with
the handsomness of the trick which was put upon him.

Laud was not sleeping all this while. It was not possible that a man of such
an Active Spirit should be out of work, and he had work enough to do in being
the Dukes Agent at the Court. The Marquess was made Duke of Buckingham, at his
being in Spain, to make him more considerable in the eye of that Court: and
this addition to his honors was an addition also to that envy which was borne
against him. Great Favorites have for the most part many enemies, such as are
carefully intent upon all occasions which may be made use of to supplant them.
Which point the Duke had so well studied; that though he knew himself to be a
very great Master of the Kings affections: yet was he apprehensive of the
disadvantages to which this long absence would expose him. It therefore
concerned him nearly to make choice of some intelligent and trusty friend, whom
he might confide in (and he was grown more confident of Laud than of any other)
from whom he might receive advertisement of all occurrences, and such advice as
might be most agreeable to the complexion of affairs. Nor did it happen
otherwise than he expected, for long he had not been in Spain, when there were
many fearings of him in the Court of England, many strange whisperings into the
ears of the King concerning the abuse of his Royal Favors; the general
discontentments which appeared in the people for the Princes Journey into
Spain; the sad consequents which were feared to ensue upon it in reference to
his Person, and the true Religion; that the blame of all was by the People laid
on the Duke, and that it was safest for his Majecty to let it rest where they
had laid it. But nothing could be thought more strange unto him, than that the
Lord Keeper Williams, and the Lord Treasurer Cranfield should be of Counsel in
the Plot, both of them being of his raising, and both (in the style of Court)
his Creatures. Of all which practices and proceedings Laud gives intelligence
to the Duke, and receives back again Directions in his actings for him. (Pity
it is that none of these reciprocal Letters have been found to make up the
Cabala, and to enrich the treasures in the Scrinea Sacra) From hence proceeded
the constancy of affection which the Duke carried to him for ever, after the
Animosity between Laud and Williams; the fall of Cranfield first, and of
Williams afterward; Laud by his diligence and fidelity overtopping all.

The news of these practices in the Court, made the Duke think of leaving
Spain, where he began to sink in his Estimation; and hasting his return to
England, for fear of sinking lower here than he did in Spain. Some clashings
there had been betwixt him and the Conde d' Olivarez, the Principal Favorite of
that King; and some Caresses were made to him by the Queen of Bohemia, inviting
him to be a Godfather to one of her Children. In these disquiets and
distractions he puts the Prince in mind of the other Game he had to play;
namely, the Restitution of the Palatinate, which the Spaniard would not suffer
to be brought under the Treaty of the Match; reserving it (as they pretended,
and perhaps really intended) to be bestowed by the Infanta after the Marriage,
the better to ingratiate her self with the English Nation. Which being a point
of too great moment to depend upon no other assurance than a Court-Complement
only, it was concluded by the Prince, That since he could not prevail in the
one, he would not proceed to the Consummation of the other. But then it did
concern him so to provide for his own sa^ety, that no intimation might be made
of the intended Rupture, till he had unwinded himself out of that Labyrinth
into which he was cast: For which cause having desired of his Father, that some
Ships might be sent to bring him some, he showed himself a more passionate
Lover than ever formerly, bestowed upon the Lady Infanta many rich Jewels of
most inestimable value, and made a Proxy to the Catholic King, and Don
Charles his Brother, in his name to Espouse the Lady. Which Proxy being made
and executed in due form of Law, on the Fourth of August 1623. was put into the
Hands of Digby (on the Fifteenth of September after made Earl of Bristol) by
him to be delivered to the King of Spain within ten days after the coming of
the Dispensation from the new Pope Urban, which was then every day expected.
But no sooner had he took his leave, and was out of danger, but he dispatched a
Post unto him, commanding him not to deliver up the Proxy until further Order:
And having so done, he hoised Sails for England.

Arriving at Portsmouth on Sunday the fifth of October, he rides Post the next
day to London, and after Dinner on the same day to the Court at Royston; his
welcome home being celebrated in all Places with Bells and Bonfires, and other
accustomed Expressions of a Public Joy. Being come unto the Court, they
acquaint his Majesty with all that happened, informing him that no assurance of
regaining the Palatinate could be had in Spain, though the Match went forwards.
His Majesty thereupon dispatches Letters to the Earl of Bristol on the eighth
of October, requiring him not to deliver up the Proxy, and so not to proceed
to the Espousals, till the Christmas Holy Days; and in the mean time to press
that King to a positive Answer, touching the Palatinate. The expectation
whereof not being answered by success, a Parliament is summoned to begin on the
17th. of February then next following, to the end that all things might be
governed in this Great Affair by the public Counsel of the Kingdom. Not long
after the beginning whereof, the Duke decla^ed before both Houses (more to the
disadvantage of the Spaniard than there was just ground for) how unhandsomly
they had dealt with the Prince when he was in Spain; how they had fed him with
delays; what indignities they had put upon him; and finally, had sent him back,
not only without the Palatinate, but without a Wife; leaving it to their
prudent consideration what course to follow. It was thereupon Voted by both
Houses, That his Majesty should be desired to break off all Treaties with the
King of Spain, and to engage himself in a War against him for the recovery of
the Palatinate, not otherwise to be obtained. And that they might come the
better to the end they aimed at, they addressed themselves unto the Prince,
whom they assured, That they would stand to him in that War, to the very last
expense of their Lives and Fortunes; and he accordingly (being further set on
by the Duke) became their instrument to persuade his Father to hearken to the
Common Votes and Desires of his Subjects, which the King (pressed by their
continual Importunities) did at the last (but with great unwillingness) assent
to: Such was the conduct of this business on the part of the English.

Look we next what was done in Spain; and we shall find in Letters from the
Earl of Bristol, Digby ^^ Calvert, Iul. 25.
That as soon as news was come to Spain, that King James had sworn the Articles
of the Treaty (which was done on the 26th. of July) the Lady Infanta by all the
Court, with the Approbation of that King, and her own good-liking, was called
La Princessa d' Inglaterra; That as such, she gave her self the liberty of
going publicly to such Comedies as were presented in the Court, (which before
was not allowable in her:) to Colver^ Dec. 28.
That as such also, not only he himself (as the Kings Ambassador) was
commanded to serve her; but the Duke, and all the English were admitted to kiss
her hands, as her Servants and Vassals; That after the Princes departure, there
was no thought of any thing but of providing Presents for the King and him, the
settling of the Princesses Family, and making Preparations for the Journey on
the first of March; That the Princess also had begun to draw the Letters which
she intended to have written the day of her disposories to the Prince her
Husband, and the King her Father in Law; That besides such assurances as were
given by the Count of Olivarez, and other Ministers of that King, the Princess
had made the business of the Palatinate to be her own, and had therein most
expressly moved the King her Brother, and written to the Conde of Olivarez to
that effect, and had set her heart upon the making of her self grateful and
welcome to the King and Kingdom, by overcoming the difficulties that appeared
in it: In which respect it was very truly said by Digby, in one of his Letters
to King James, to K. James, October. 24.
That it would be held a point of great dishonor to the Infanta, if the Powers
called for by her Friends should be detained on the Princes part; and that
whosoever had deserved ill, she certainly had deserved neither disrespect nor
discomforts. Add hereunto, That the Popes Dispensation coming to the Court of
Spain in the beginning of December, that King caused Bonfires to be made in all
the parts of his Realms, intending on that day (in satisfaction of the Oath
which he had made to the Prince) to proceed to the Espousals with all due
solemnity. H^dd. Works. p. 6^.
Which being the true state of this affair, as far as I am able to look into
it, I shall refer it to the judgment of the equal Readers, whether this poor
Lady were more dishonored and discomforted by her own Brother and his
Ministers, if they meant not really and effectually to satisfy all
expectations touching either Treaty; or by the English, if they did.

But it is now time to leave these Foreign Negotiations, and keep close at
home, where we shall find the Priests and Jesuits as busy in seducing the
people, and the Lay-Papists as audacious in hearing and frequenting Masses, as
if they had been fortified by a Toleration. But it pleased God to put some
Water into their Wine, and abate the fervor of those heats, by letting them
feel the strokes of his heavy hand, when they looked not for it. Being
assembled in a fair and capacious Room at Hunsdon House in the Blackfriars, to
hear the Sermon of one Drury a Jesuit, their numbers were so great, and their
weight so heavy, that the Floor sunk under them. Most lamentable were the cries
of those which fell under that Ruin, 94 of them (of which the Preacher himself
was one) being killed outright; most of the rest so miserably bruised and
maimed, that the condition of the dead was esteemed far happier than that of
the living: A matter of great astonishment to their Party here; and that it
might not be so abroad, they thought it good to shift the Scene, and change the
Actors, publishing to that end a Pamphlet, which they dispersed in diverse parts
of France and Italy, containing a Relation of Gods Judgments shown on a sort of
Protestant Heretics, by the fall of an House in St. Andrews Parish in Holborn,
in which they were assembled to hear a Geneva Lecture, October 26. A. D. 1623.
So wickedly wise are those of that Generation, to cheat their own Souls, and
abuse their Followers. And yet the Pamphleteer says well, That this disaster
happened on the 26th of October; for so it did according to the Old Style and
Account of England: But it was on the fifth day of November, according to the
New Style and Account of Rome. And this indeed may seem to have somewhat of
Gods Judgment in it, That the intended blowing up of the Parliament, to the
unavoidable destruction of the King, Prince, Prelates, Peers, and the chiefest
Gentry of the Nation, on the fifth day of our November, should on the fifth day
of their own be recompensed or retaliated by the sinking of a Room in which
they met, to the present slaughter of so many, and the maiming of more.

But leaving them to their ill Fortunes, it was not long before Buckingham
found the truth of such Informations as he had received touching those ill
Offices which had been done to him in his absence, from some whom he esteemed
his Friends. Hereupon followed an estranging of the Dukes Countenance from the
Lord Keeper Williams, and of his from the Bishop of St. David's, whom he looked
upon as one that stood in the way betwixt him and the Duke: with which the Duke
was not long after made acquainted. But these displeasures were not only shown
in offended Countenances, but brake out within little time into sharp
Expostulations on either side. The Duke complained to Laud, December 15. That
the Lord Keeper had so strangely forgotten himself to him, as he seemed to be
dead in his affections; and began to entertain some thoughts of bringing him by
a way which he would not like, to a remembrance of his duty: and on the
eleventh of January the Lord Keeper meets with Laud in the Withdrawing Chamber,
and fell into very hot words with him, of which the Duke has an account also
within three days after. But Williams seeing how unable he was to contend at
once with Wit and Power, applied himself with so much diligence to regain the
Favor of the Duke, that in the beginning of February a Reconciliation was made
between them, the Duke accepting his submission, and learning from him, That
his great Favors unto Laud, were the chief reasons which had moved him unto
that forgetfulness. And that the benefit of this Reconciliation might extend to
all who were concerned in the displeasures, Williams engages to the Duke to be
friends with Laud, and did accordingly bestow some Complements upon him; but
such as had more ceremony than substance in them. From henceforth nothing but
an appearance of fair weather between these Great Persons, though at last it
brake out again more violently into open Storms. The Wound was only skinned,
not healed; and festred the more dangerously, because the secret Rancour of it
could not be discerned. In the mean time Laud was not wanting to himself in
taking the benefit of this Truce: Ab^ot had still a spite against him, and was
resolved to keep him down as long as he could; to which end he had caused him
to be left out of the High Commission (and Williams was not forward to put him
in) though never a Bishop that lived about London was left out but himself, and
many who lived not there put in: Of which Indignity he complained to the Duke,
by his Letter bearing date November 1. 1624. and was remedied in it.

During the heat of these Court-combats, the Parliament beforementioned was
assembled at Westminster, on the seventeenth of February; upon whose humble
Petition and Advice his Majesty dissolved the Treaties, and engaged himself in
a War with Spain: But this he had no sooner done, when they found into what
perplexities they had plunged themselves by this Engagement; there being
nothing more derogatory to the Honor and Prosperity of a King of England, than
to be cast on the necessity of calling Parliaments, which renders them
obnoxious to the power and pride of each popular spirit, and makes them less in
Reputation both at home and abroad: For first they Petitioned him for a Fast,
which he also granted. They had desired the like in some former Parliaments,
and Sessions of Parliaments, as they had done also in Queen Elizabeth's time;
but could never obtain the same from either. It was then told them, That there
were weekly Fasts appointed to be kept by the Laws of the Land, which if they
did observe, as they ought to do, there would be no need of Solemn Fasts to
begin their Parliaments. The blame of which Answer, in the Parliament
immediately foregoing this, was by the Puritan Faction cast upon the Bishops
(who at the same time had opposed some Proposition tending to some Restraints
on the Lords day, not imposed before) as men whose Pride hindered all such
Religious Humiliations, and whose Profaneness made them Enemies to all Piety.
But the King having now cast himself into the arms of his People, had brought
himself to a necessity of yielding to their desire, and thereby left a fair
President both for them to crave, and his Successor to grant the like: So that
from this time forward, till the last of King Charles, we shall see no
Parliament, nor Session of Parliament, to begin without them; though that King
checked some times at the importunity.

So far his Majesty had gone along with them, in yielding unto their desires;
but he must go a little further. And therefore, secondly, They thought it not
enough that his Majesty had made a Public Declaration for the real and utter
Dissolution of the said Treaties; but it must be declared also by Act of
Parliament, That the said two Treaties were by his Majesty Dissolved: Which
gave them some color of Pretense in the following Parliament to claim a share
in managing the War (which the Dissolving of these Treaties had occasioned) and
of being made acquainted with the Enterprise which was then in hand. But for
this time they were contented to have engaged the King for the future War,
toward the carrying on of which, and more particularly (as the Act expresses)
for the Defense of this Realm of England, Act of Parl. A. 11 Jac. 21. c. 34.
the Securing of the Kingdom of Ireland, the Assistance of his Majesty's
Neighbors the States of the United Provinces, and other his Majesty's Friends
and Allies, and for the setting forth of his Royal Navy; they granted to him
three Subsidies, together with three Fifteenths and Tenths, to be paid before
the t^nth of May which should be in the year 1625. Which though it be affirmed
in the said Act to be the greatest Aid which ever was granted in Parliament to
be levied in so short a time; yet neither was the time so short as it was
pretended, there being almost fifteen Months between the dissolving of the
Treaties, and the last payment of the Moneys. Nor did the King get any thing by
it, how great soever the said Aid was supposed to be. For, thirdly, before the
King could obtain this Act, he was fain to gratify them with some others,
amongst which that entitled, An Act for the general quiet of the Subject
against all pretext of Concealments whatsoever, was the most considerable. An
Act of such a grand Concernment to the Peace and Happiness of the Subject, and
of such Disprofit to the King in his Gifts and Graces to his Servants, that it
was affirmed by Justice Dodderidge at the Oxon. Assizes next ensuing, That his
Majesty had bought those Fifteenths and Subsidies at ten years purchase. Nor
fourthly, did one penny of this Money, so dearly paid for, accrue unto his
Majesty's particular use, or was to come into his Coffers; it being ordered in
the Act aforesaid, That the said Moneys, and every part and parcel of them,
should be paid to certain Commissioners therein nominated; and that the said
Commissioners should issue and dispose the same, according as they should be
warranted by George Lord Carew, Foulk Lord Brook, and certain other
Commissioners to the number of ten, nominated and appointed for a Council of
War; by them to be expended in the Public Service. And albeit the Grant of the
said Fifteenths, Tenths, and Subsidies, might possibly be the greatest Aid
which had been given in Parliament for so short a time; yet did this greatness
consist rather in tale than weight, the Subsidy-Books being grown so low (for
those of the Fifteenths and Tenths do never vary) that two entire Subsidies in
the time of Queen Elizabeth came to more than all.

More nobly dealt the Clergy with him in their Convocation, because it came
into his own Co^lers, and without Conditions. For taking into consideration
(amongst other motives) the great Expenses at which his Majesty was then, and
was like to be hereafter, as well for the support of his Royal Estate, as for
the necessary Defense of this Realm of England, and other his Dominions,
whereby was like to grow the safety of Religion both at whom and abroad; they
granted to him four entire Subsidies, after the rate of 4 s. in every Pound;
which was indeed the greatest Aid that was ever given by Convocation in so
short a time; the Subsidies of the Clergy being fixed and certain, those of the
Laity diminishing and decreasing daily. A Burden which must needs fall
exceeding heavy on many poor Vicars in the Country, whose Benefices are for the
most part of small yearly value, and yet rated very high in the Kings Books
(according unto which they are to be Taxed); Insomuch as I knew several
Vicaridges, not worth above 80 l. per Annum, which were charged higher than the
best Gentlemen in the Parish, whose yearly Revenues have amounted unto many
Hundreds. Laud who had sometimes been Vicar of Stamford in Northamptonshire (as
before is said) was very compassionate of the case of these poor men; for whose
case he devised a course in this present Session; which being digested into
form, he communicated to the Duke of Buckingham, who very readily promised to
prepare both the King and Prince for the passing of it. This done, he imparted
it also to the Lord Keeper Williams, and the Bishop of Durham, who looked upon
it as the best service which had been done for the Church many years before,
and advised him to acquaint the Archbishop with it: But Abbot either disliking
the Design for the Authors sake, or being an enemy to all Counsels which had
any Author but himself, instead of favors returned him frowns; asking him,
What he had to do to make any suit for the Church? And telling him withal,
That never any Bishop attempted the like at any time, and that no body would
have done it but himself; That he had given the Church such a wound, in
speaking to any Lord of the Layty about it, as he could never make whole again;
And finally, That if the Lord Duke did fully understand what he had done, he
would never endure him to come near him again. St David's replies very mildly,
That he thought he had done a very good office for the Church, and so did his
betters too; That if his Grace thought otherwise, he was sorry that he had
offended: But hoped that he had done it out of a good mind, and for the support
of many poor Vicars abroad in the Country, who must needs sink under the
payment of so many Subsidies; and therefore that his error might be pardonable,
if it were an error. Thus soundly ratled he departs, and acquaints the Duke
with the success, for fear some ill offices might be otherwise done him to the
King and Prince. So miserable was the case of the poorer Clergy, in living
under such an High Priest, who though he was subject to the same infirmity, was
altogether insensible of those heavy pressures which were laid upon them: It
being his Felicity, but their unhappiness, that he was never Parson, Vicar, nor
Curate; and therefore the less careful or compassionate of their hard condition.

Before the rising of this Parliament (which was on the twenty ninth of May)
came out a book of Dr. Whites, entitled, A Reply to Jesuit Fishers Answer to
certain Questions propounded by his most Gracious Majesty King JAMES. D. Whites
Preface to his Reply, etc.
The occasion this: His Majesty being present at the second Conference betwixt
White and Fisher, beforementioned, observed in his deep Judgment how cunning
and subtle the Jesuit was, in eluding such Arguments as were brought against
him, and of how little strength in particular questions he was when he came to
the confirmation of his own Tenets. And thereupon it pleased him to have nine
Questions of Controversy propounded to the Jesuit, that he might in writing
manifest the Grounds and Arguments whereupon the Popish Faith in those Points
were builded. Now the nine Points were these that follow: 1. Praying to Images.
2. Prayings and Oblations to the blessed Virgin Mary. 3. Worshipping and
Invocation of Saints and Angels. 4. The Lyturgie and private Prayers for the
Ignorant in an unknown tongue. 5. Repetition of Pater-nosters, Aves, and
Creeds, especially affixing a kind of merit to the number of them. 6. The
Doctrine of Transubstantiation. 7. Communion under one kind, and the abetting
of it by Concomitancy. 8. Works of Supererogation, especially with reference to
the treasure of the Church. 9. The opinion of Deposing Kings, and giving away
their Kingdoms by Papal power, whether directly or indirectly? To these nine
Questions the Jesuit returned a close and well-wrought Answer, the unraveling
whereof was by the King committed to this Dr. White, for his encouragement and
reward made one of his Majesty's Chaplains in Ordinary, and Dean of Carlisle.
This book being finished at the Press about the beginning of April, and
forthwith published to others, was very welcome to most moderate and learned
men; the rather in regard that the third of those Conferences, which was that
between Laud and Fisher, was subjoyned to it.

Concerning which the Reader may please to call to mind, that this Conference
had been digested and read over to the King in the Christmas Holidaies as
before is said. But why it staid so long before it was published, why published
in the name of R. B. (Mr. Richard Bailey) afterward President of St. John
Colledgs and Dean of Sarisbury, being at that time one of his Chaplains, and
not in his own; and finally, why it came not out not as a distinct book of it
self, but as an Appendix unto Whites, himself is better able to tell us than
any other, and he tells it thus: Epist. dedi^at. to the King, 16^7.
The cause (says he) why the discourse upon this Conference staid so long
before it could endure to be pressed. It was neither my Idleness, nor my
unwillingness to right both my self and the cause against the Jesuit which
occasioned this delay; For I had then most Honorable Witnesses, and have some
yet living, that this discourse was finished long before I could persuade my
self to let it come into public view: And this was caused partly by reason
there was about the same time three Conferences held with Fisher, of which this
was the third; and could not therefore conveniently come abroad into the world
till the two former were ready to lead the way, which till now they were not.
And this is in part the reason also why this Tract crept into the end of a
larger work; For since that work contained in a manner the substance of all
that passed in the two former Conferences; and that this third in diverse points
concurred with them, and depended on them, I could not think it Substantive
enough to stand alone. But besides this affinity between the Conferences, I was
willing to have it pass, as silently as it might, at the end of another work,
and so perhaps little to be looked after, because I could not hold it worthy
(nor can I yet) of that great duty and service which I owe to my dear mother
t^^ Church of England. As for the Reasons why it was published i^ the name of
R. B. Chaplain to the Bishop, rather than his own, it neither was his own
desire, (though the Breviate tells us that it was) nor for fear of being
engaged thereby against his friends the Papists, as is there affirmed. His
Reasons, whatever they were, were proposed by others, and approved by
Authority, by which it was thought fit that it should be set out in his
Chaplains name, and not his own. To which he readily submitted. But of this
Conference we shall speak further, when we come to the defense and engagements
of it, Anno 1637.

The seasonable publishing of these two Books did much conduce to the
advancement of his Majesty's Service. The Commons at that time had been
hammering a sharp Remonstrance against the Papists, as if there were no enemies
of the Religion here established to be feared but they. In the Preface to which
Petition, they took notice of so many dangers threatened both to the Church and
State by the power and practices of the Papist, as if the King had took no care
to preserve the one, or suppress the other: Which Petition, being brought to
the House of Lords, was there so abbreviated, that the Preamble was quite left
out, and the many branches of it reduced to two particulars: First, That all
Laws and Statutes, formerly made against Jesuits, Seminary Priests, and other
Popish Recusants, might from thenceforth be put into execution. Secondly, That
he would engage himself by his Royal Word, that upon no occasion of Marriage or
Treaty, or other request in that behalf, etc. he would slaken the execution of
the Laws against them. Which Petition being presented to his Majesty by a
Committee of both Houses on the tenth of April; after some deliberation he
returned this Answer to it, viz. That the Laws against Jesuits and Popish
Recusants should be put into due execution from thenceforth, etc. And it
appeared by the coming out of these said two Books within few days after, that
as his Majesty had granted them their desires, in causing the said Laws against
Priests and Jesuits to be duly executed; so he had taken special care, not
only to preserve Religion in her Purity, by confuting the most material
Doctrines of the Church of Rome: but to preserve his people also from being
seduced by the practices of the Priests and Jesuits.

Which notwithstanding the Commons remaining still unsatisfied, betook
themselves to the framing of another Petition, in which it was desired that all
such persons as were either Papists, or suspected to be Papists, or had not
received the Communion within the space of one whole year, or whose Wives, or
any of their Servants were Recusants, or suspected to be so, might be removed
from all Commissions of charge and trust, from being Justices of the Peace, or
bearing any Office in the Common Wealth. But this Petition was not made ready
for the Lords till the twentieth of May next following, and being then reported
to them by the Archbishop of Canterbury, they did proceed no further in it. The
Commons in the mean time had been wholly busied in the Prosecution of the Lord
Treasurer Cranfield, whom at last they brought unto his Sentence. A Gentleman
he was by birth, but had his breeding in the City, from whence by his own wit
and industry he preferred himself into the Court, where he was first made
Master of the Wardrobe, afterward Master of the Wards, and finally advanced by
the power and favor of the Duke, (one of whose Kinswomen he had married) to
the office of Lord Treasurer, and the honor of being made the first Earl of
Middlesex. In this Office he had disobliged the Prince, when he was in Spain,
by dissuading and diverting those Large Supplies which were required for the
maintaining of his Port in a Foreign Kingdom. And he had disobliged the Duke,
by joining in some secret practices to make him grow less and less in his
Majesty's Favor. They had both served the turn of the Commons, in drawing the
King by their continual importunities to dissolve the Treaty. And the Commons
must now serve their turn in prosecuting this man to his final destruction:
Which they pursued so effectually, that in the end he was sentenced in the
House of Lords to be deprived of the Office of Lord High Treasurer of England,
to be fined fifty thousand Pounds, and remain a Prisoner in the Tower during
his Majesty's will and pleasure. It was moved also to degrade him from all
Titles of honor, but in that the Bishops stood his Friends and dashed the
motion.

So Cranfield sell, and Williams did not stand long after. Laud was now brought
into an higher degree of credit with the Duke of Buckingham than he was before,
by means whereof he came to be of great power and authority with him. Insomuch
that when the Duke fell sick of an Ague in the beginning of May, he was extreme
impatient in his Fits till Laud came to visit him; by whom he was so charmed
and sweetened, that at first he endured his Fits with patience, and by that
patience did so break their heats and violences, that at last they left him.
From this time forwards he was not used only as a Confessor, but a Counselor
also employed by him; in considering and advising whether the great endowments
belonging to the Hospitals founded in the dissolved house of Carthusian Monks
(commonly, but corruptly, called the Charter House) might not be inverted to
the maintenance of an Army for the present Wars, as well for his Majesty's
advantage, as the case of the Subject. And to this Proposition (as it seems) he
returned a Negative, for I find not that the business advanced any further. He
liked not any inversions or alienations of that nature, lest being drawn into
example, the Lands of Colleges or Cathedral Churches might in like manner be
employed unto secular uses. Besides, he could not choose but know, that a
project had been set on foot about ten years before, for the Entituling of the
King to all Sutton's Lands; which probably might have succeeded, if Coke, then
being Lord Chief Justice, and one of the Trustees for erecting the Hospital,
had not stood stoutly to his trust. By which though he got the Kings
displeasure, yet amongst others he preserved the reputation of an honest man.
And Laud might very well conclude, that he who durst oppose the King when he
was in his favor, would be found more intractable at this time when he was in
disgrace; which rendered him the less sollicitous to appear in a business not
otherwise approved of by him: But in another point, which was more to his
liking, and lay within the sphere of his activity, he gave him as much
satisfaction as he had desired. This was the giving him the heads of Doctrinal
Puritanism, that is to say, the Heads of such Doctrines as were maintained by
those of the Puritan Faction, though not maintained by them as Puritans, but as
Calvinists only. The Duke had a desire to know them, and he served him in it. I
must needs say, the name of Doctrinal Puritanism is not very ancient, but
whether first taken up by the Archbishop of Spalato at his being here, ^
I am not able to say; Nor am I of opinion, that Puritan and Calvinian are
terms convertible. For though all Puritans are Calvinians, both in doctrine and
practice, yet all Calvinians are not to be counted as Puritans also; whose
practices many of them abhor, and whose inconformities they detest, though by
the error of their Education, or ill direction in the Course of their Studies,
they may, and do agree with them in some points of Doctrine. But I must take
the word as it stands in the Breviate, and so let it go.

These Doctrinal heads, being ten in number, related to the indisp^nsible
morality of the Lords-day-Sabbath, the indiscrimination of Bishops and
Presbyters, the Power of Sovereign Princes in Ecclesiastical matters, the
Doctrine of Confession and Sacerdotal Absolution, and the five Points so much
disputed, about Predestination and the Concomitants thereof. Which last Points
having been hotly agitated, for twenty years last past, in the Belgic
Churches, did now begin to exercise the Church of England upon this occasion.
The Priests and Jesuits having been very busy of late in gaining Proselites,
and sowing their erroneous Doctrines, had got a haunt in a Village of the
County of Essex, called Stanford-Rivers. The Rector of that Church was Richard
Montague, ^
Bachelor of Divinity, Prebend of Windsor, and one of the Fellows of Eaton
College; a man exceedingly well versed in all the Learning of Greeks and
Romans, and as well studied in the Fathers, Councils, and all other ancient
Monuments of the Christian Church. Desirous to free his Parish from this haunt,
he left some Propositions at the house of one of his Neighbors, which had been
frequently visited with these Night-Spirits, with this Declaration thereunto,
that if any of those which ranged that walk could convince him in any of the
same, he would immediately subscribe and be a Papist. After long expectation,
instead of answering to his queries, one of them leaves a short Pamphlet for
him, entitled, A new Gag for the Old Gospel, in which it was pretended, that
the Doctrine of the Protestants should be confuted out of the very words of
their own English Bibles. This book he was required to answer, and found it no
such knotty piece, but that it might be cleft in sunder, without Beetle or
Wedges. But in perusing of that book, he found, that besides some few Doctrines
which properly and truly did belong to the Church of England, there were
crowded into it all Points of Calvinism, such Heterodoxies, and outlandish
Fancies, as the Church of England never owned. And therefore in his Answer to
that Popish Gagger he severed or discriminated the opinions of particular men,
from the Authorized Doctrines of this Church; leaving the one to be maintained
by their private Fautors, and only defending and maintaining the other. And
certainly had he not been a man of a mighty Spirit, and one that easily could
contemn the cry and clamours which were raised against him for so doing, he
could not but have sunk remedilesly under the burden of disgrace, and the fears
of Ruin which that performance drew upon him.

This Book came out about the latter end of December, and coming out made such
a general amazement amongst those of the Calvinian Party, that they began to
fear the sad consequents of it. The opening of this secret was of such
importance, that if the Author and his Book were not speedily crushed, they
must no longer shroud their private opinions under the name of the received
Doctrine of the Church of England; excluded from that Sanctuary, they could
find no place of strength and sa^ety, in which they should not be exposed to
assaults and dangers. And that the Author and the Book might be crushed
together, it was thought fit that Yates and Ward, two of the Lecturers or
Preachers in Ipswich should gather out of his Book some especial Points tending
to Popery and Arminianism (as they conceived) to be presented to the Censure of
the following Parliament. Having got a Copy of the Information intended to be
made against him, he flies for refuge to King James, now grown more moderate,
and (since the death of Mountague the late Bishop of Winton) into a better
liking of those opinions, which he had labored to condemn at the Synod of
Dort. His Majesty knew the man, and his great abilities, and was well pleased
with his performance against the History of Tithes; where he had beaten the
(then thought) matchless Seldom at his own weapon, and showed himself the
greater Philologer of the two: Upon which ground he looked upon him as the
fittest man to encounter Baronius, against whom the right learned Casanbon had
some preparatory velitations before his death, but made no further progress in
it. Mountague, flying to King James, as before is said, had presently his
discharge or quietus est, as to his Majesty's good opinion both of him and
Epist. dedicat^ to Appello Caes^.
the book it self. And more than so, his Majesty took notice that the
Information was divulged, and the Clamor violent, and therefore gave him leave
to make an Appeal from the said Defamers unto his own mos^ Sacred Cognizance in
public, and to represent his just defense against their slanders and false
surmises unto the world. And that the queaziness of the times might the better
brook it, he gave express order unto Dr. White, then Dean of Carlisle, (cried
up, when Lecturer of St. Paul's, for the stoutes^ Champion of this Church
against those of Rome) for the authorizing and publishing thereof, which was
done accordingly. This Book he entitled by the name of APPELLO CAESAREM, or a
just APPEAL from two unjust INFORMERS: But the King dying before it was
finished at the Press, it was presented to King Charles, in the first entrance
of his Reign, and there we shall be sure to hear further of it.

In the mean time it may not be unnecessary to enquire what the said Informers
( Yates and Ward) might and did mean by Popery and Arminianism, with which two
crimes they charged the Answer to the Gagger. And first we find upon due
search, That by Popery they understood all such Points of Doctrine, as being
determined by this Church, hold some correspondence and agreement with the
Doctrines of the Church of Rome; or being not determined by this Church, are
left at liberty for every man to please himself in his own opinion, how hear
soever he may come to such compliance. Of the first sort they reckoned for
points of Popery; The Doctrine of the Perpetual Visibility of the Church of
Christ; The Local Descent of Christ into Hell, The Lawfulness of Images,
Signing with the Sign of the Cross, Confession and Sacerdotal Absolution, The
Real Presence, The Reward of Good Works, The Sacrament of Orders; quarrelling
even with very words, Sacrifice, Altar, and the like: All which upon a perfect
Examination, will be found to be the genuine Doctrines, and to speak nothing
but the Language of the Church of England, as we have punctually discovered in
our Introduction. Amongst the last I reckon the Disputes concerning Evangelical
Counsels, Antichrist, and Limbus Patrum, of which the Church of Engl^nd has
determined nothing; and therefore the Appellant was left at liberty to follow
his own Judgment, and to choose what guides he pleased to direct his Judgment in
those particular Debates. Yet such was the temper of those Times, that
whosoever held any of the Points aforesaid, or any other controverted with the
Church of Rome, contrary to the sense of Calvin, must presently be accused of
Popery. He that adhered unto the Tendries of the Ancient Fathers, in such
particulars as the Church was pleased to leave undetermined; or bound himself
in matters publicly resolved on, to vindicate this Church to her genuine
Tenants, was presently made Subject to all those Clamors and Reproaches, which
the Tongues and Pens of that Predominating Faction could either raise upon him,
or asperse him with. Laud had found good experience of it when he lived in
Oxon. and so had Houson and Corbet too, as before was noted. But none of them
were able to break through those difficulties, till Mountague took the Work in
hand; who being well backed, and having the Ice somewhat broke before him,
waded with confidence and courage through the midst of those Waters, which
otherwise might have overwhelmed the most tried Adventurer.

In the next place it will be no hard work to find what they meant by
Arminianism; under which name they comprehend the Melancthonian Doctrine of
Predestination, The Universal Redemption of Mankind by the Death of Christ, The
cooperation of the Will of Man with the Grace of God; and, The Possibility of
falling from Grace received: All which appear by plain and evident proofs in
our said Introduction, to have been the true original and native Doctrines of
this Church at her first Reformation. But Calvinism had so overspread the face
of this Church, by Humphries long sitting in the Chair at Oxon. and the
discountenancing of Peter Baro at Cambridge, that the natural Doctrines and
Determinations of it were either so forgotten, that they were not known, or
else so overpowred, that none durst undertake to own them. And so it stood till
the breaking out of the Predestinarian Quarrels in the Belgic Churches,
between Arminius and his Followers on the one side, and the Rigid Calvinians on
the other. The Books which had been written on both sides, being purposely
dispersed abroad, to encourage and increase their several Parties, crossed over
the Seas into England also; where being diligently studied, either out of
curiosity, or desire of Knowledge, they awaked many out of that dead sleep in
which they were, to look with better eyes into the true and native Doctrines of
this Church, than before they did. Amongst the first which publikly appeared
that way at Oxon. after the coming out of the said Books, were Laud and Houson,
whom Abbot then Doctor of the Chair, and Vice Chancellor also, exposed to as
much disgrace as by his Place and Power he could lay upon them. Amongst the
first at Cambridge were Tompson, a Dutchman by original (if I be not mistaken
in the man) and Richardson the Master of Trinity College. The first of these
had writ a Book touching Falling away from Grace, entitled, De Intercisione
Gratiae, and Iustificationis; to which Abbot of Oxon. abovementioned returned
an Answer. The other being a corpulent man, was publicly reproached in S.
Mary's Pulpit in his own University, by the name of a Fat-bellied Arminian. By
that name they were called in Holland, which adhered not unto Calvin's
Doctrine, though many had formerly maintained these Opinions in those Churches,
before van Harmine came to the Chair of Leyden. And by that name they must be
called in England also, though the same Doctrines had been here publicly
Authorized and Taught before he was born. So that the entitling of these
Doctrines to the name of Arminius, seems to be like the nominating of the great
Western Continent by the name of America; of which first Christopher Columbus,
and afterward the two Cabots, Father and Son, had made many great and notable
Discoveries, before Americus Vestputius ever saw those Shores. Howsoever these
Doctrines must be called by the name of Arminianism, and by that name Mountague
stands accused by the two Informers, though he protests in his Appeal, That he
had never seen any of the Writings of Arminius; and that he did no otherwise
maintain those Doctrines, than as they were commended to him by the Church of
England, and justified by the unanimous Consent of the Ancient Fathers. But of
this man, and the pursuance of these Quarrels, we shall hear more shortly.

These matters being thus laid together, let us look back on some former
Passages which preceded Mountagues Disputes. The Commons had obtained their
ends, in dissolving all Treaties with the King of Spain; but lost their hopes
of Marrying the Prince to a Lady of their own Religion. His Majesty would not
look beneath a Crown, to find a Marriage for his Son; and no Crown could
afford him a better Wife for his Son, than a Daughter of France. The Prince had
seen the Lady at the Court in Paris, and the King as much desired to see her in
the Court of England. Upon this ground the Earl of Holland is dispatched
privately into France, to see how the Queen Mother and her Ministers, who then
Governed the Affairs of that King, would approve the Match; to which at first
they seemed so chear^ully inclined, that they did not seem to stand upon any
Conditions: But no sooner had they found, that the Breach between his Majesty
and the King of Spain was grown irreparable, and that both sides prepared for
War, but they knew how to make their best advantage of it. They thought
themselves to be every way as considerable as the Spaniards were; and would
abate nothing of those Terms which had been obtained by the Spaniards, in
reference either to the Princess her self, or in favor of the English
Catholics: And to these Terms, when they saw no better could be gotten, his
Majesty and the Prince consented. But such a Spirit of Infatuation was at that
time upon the People, that they who on the 23d. of February before had
celebrated the Dissolving of the Treaties with Spain with B^lls and Bonfires,
on the 21st. of November following did celebrate with like Solemnities and
Expressions the like Match with France. And in this Match Hidden (...). p. 73.
Laud is accused to have a hand, or at the least to have showed his good
affections to promote it. An heavy Crime, and proved by as infallible proofs;
that is to say, his writing to and receiving Letters from the Duke, at such
time as the Duke was sent to the Court of France, to attend the new Queen into
England. And what else Ib. p. 69.
could this Match and those Letters aim at, but to carry on the same design to
bring in Popery, and by that means to stand their ground, and retain all those
Privileges and Immunities, which the Popish Party had procured by the former
Treaties? To such absurdities are men swayed, when Prejudice and Prepossessions
overruled the Balance.

1625.
We must begin the next year with the Death of King James, and therefore think
it not amiss to take a brief view of the Condition of the Church and State, at
the time of his departing from us. He had spent all his life in Peace, but died
in the beginning of a War: A War which had been drawn upon him by dissolving
the Treaties, to which he was as it were constrained, by the continual
importunity of the Prince and the Duke of Buckingham. The Duke knew well, that
he could not do a more popular act, than to gratify the Commons in that
business; and had easily possessed the Prince with this opinion, That as his
future Greatness must be built on the Love of his People, so nothing could
oblige them more, than to be instrumental in dissolving the present Treaties.
But herein they consulted rather their own private Passions, than the public
Interest of the Crown; and they shall both pay dear enough for it in a very
short space: For there is nothing more unsafe for a King of England, than to
cast himself upon the necessity of calling Parliaments, and depending on the
Purse of the Subject; by means whereof he makes himself obnoxious to the humor
of any prevailing Member in the House of Commons, and becomes less in
Reputation both at home and abroad. The Church he left beleaguered by two great
Enemies; assaulted openly by the Papist on the one side, undermined by the
Puritans on the other. Of the audaciousness of the Papists we have spoke
already, abated somewhat by the Fall at Blackfriars, more by the dissolving
the two Treaties about four Months after. For though they made some use of the
French by this new Alliance, yet they resolved to fasten no dependence upon
that Crown; insomuch that many of those, who greedily embraced such Favors as
were obtained for them by the Treaties with the King of Spain, would not accept
the same when they were procured by the Match with France; for which being
asked the Reason, they returned this Answer, That they would not change an old
Friend for a new, of the continuance of whose Favors they could have no
certainty; and who by suffering Heretics in his own Dominions, declared
himself no fit Protector for the Catholic Cause.

More secret were the Puritans; but nothing the less dangerous, because more
secret. Finding they could effect nothing in Queen Elizabeth's time, either by
their public clamours, or their open practices, they cunningly wrought
themselves into a State-Faction, and played their Game under the color of
Advancing the Civil Liberties of the Subject, and the preservation of Religion
here by Law established: To which end they continually alarmed this King with
fears and dangers from the Papists (as before was said) that all men's eyes
being turned that way, they might carry on their own designs without discovery.
In which they imitated the old stratagem or some politic Captains, who having
made great noise, and prepared all things ready for an Assault on the one side
of a Town besieged, and thereby drawn all the strength of the Town to make good
that side, suddenly caused it to be fallen upon in another place, which they
found destitute and unprovided of all defense. But having served their
Appreticeships in the Reign of this King, we shall find them strong enough in
the first Parliament of his Son and Successor, to set up for themselves.
Hitherto they had worked under the ground like Moles or Wants, without being
discovered; but then they began to cast up the Earth before them: and having
prepared a Bill for making way to their Lord's Day- Sabbath, under color of
suppresing unlawful Pastimes and Assemblies, they pressed that King to it, and
obtained it; some further addition to which Act they procured in his third
Parliament also. Yet still they kept on foot their pretended Zeal against the
Papists, and seemed exceeding sensible of the Dangers which were threatened by
them; not so much to advance their own Party, then grown strong enough (as they
had done formerly); but to make it serve them as a Property to put by the
Business of the King in the Grant of Subsidies, whenever he required it of
them,

In this condition of Affairs King James departs this Life at Theobalds, on
Sunday the 27th. of March; his Disease no other than an Ague; which though it
fell on him in the Spring, yet it crossed the Proverb, and proved not
Medicinal, but Mortal. His Character has been given by many others, and
therefore I may well spare mine, looking upon him only in his zeal to the
Church, and his affections unto Learning. His zeal to Unity and Uniformity in
the Church, appeared in England by the Conference at Hampton Court, Anno 1603.
by his directions sent to the University of Oxon, 1616. by those to the
Archbishops and their several Suffragans, 1622. In Scotland, by his Restitution
of Episcopacy, Anno 1610. by the Articles of Perth, 1618. and by the Grounds
laid for the Public Liturgy and Canons, at the Assembly in Aberdeen, Anno
1616. Had he been well followed by his Bishops, and other Public Ministers in
his several Kingdoms, he would have left the Church established on so sure a
Foundation, that neither secret Practices could have undermined it, nor open
Batteries have distressed it. His great affections unto Learning do appear as
visibly, by the encouragement which he gave unto it both in his Person and
Example. In the beginning of his Reign, Anno 1603. he graciously received the
Vice Chancellor of Oxon. together with the Doctors, Proctors, and Heads of
Houses, at his Manor of Woodstock: And within two years after, Anno 1605. he
accepted a Solemn Entertainment from them, performed in all manner of
Scholastic Exercises, Divinity, Law, Physic, and Philosophy; in all of which
he showed himself of such great Abilities, that he might have governed in those
Chairs, as well as all or any of his three Professors. Being informed how small
and insufficient their old Salary was, he added to his Professor for Divinity,
and his Successors in that place, the next Prebend of Christ-church, as soon as
any should be void, and the Rectory of Evelme in the County of Oxon. to the
Doctor of the Chair for Law, the Corpse of a good Prebend in the Church of
Salisbury; and to the Professors place for Physic, the Government of an
Hospital in Evelme aforesaid, being within ten miles of the University.

Encouraged by which Examples, two Mathematick Lectures were founded by Sir
Henry Savile Provost of Eaton, and Warden of Merton College; An History
Lecture by William Cambden, one of the Kings at Arms, by the name of
Clarencieux; A Lecture in Natural Philosophy, by Sir William Sidley Knight and
Baronet; In Moral Philosophy, by Doctor Thomas White one of the Residentiaries
of St. Paul's, and Prebend of Christ-Church; All of them of a liberal and large
Endowment. After all which an Anatomy Lecture was set up by Richard Tomlins of
the City of Westminster, as necessary as any of the rest, though not so
plentifully Endowed. The poor man casting in his Mite (almost all he had)
amongst those Rich Offerings. But the powerful Influences of his Learning and
Government produce a further operation than the Instituting of a few particular
Lectures; even to the Building and Endowing of some, and Beautifying of many
other Colleges in that University; Witness that fair and Uniform College,
built by Nicholas Wadham and Dorothy his Wife, Anno 1612. The turning of
Broadgates Hall into Pembroke College, built and endowed at the Charges of
Thomas Tisdale of Glymton in the Court of Oxon. appropriated in a manner to the
Free-Grammar-School of Abingdon, Anno 1624. Witness the raising of the old
Schools to a goodly and magnificent Structure, the adding of a new Quadrangle
unto Merton College by the prudent care of Sir Henry Savil; the reducing of
Exeter, and the making up of Jesus College into form Quadrangular, by adding
of a neat Chapel and a fair Hall to each; of which the Chapel of Jesus
College (being built together with the Hall, at such time as Sir Eubule
Thelwall was Principal of it) was Consecrated by the Right Reverend Doctor
Houson then Bishop of Oxon, May 28. 1621. The other built at the sole Charges
of Doctor Hackwell Archdeacon of Surrey, received Consecration from the same
hands, October 5. 1624. And finally, Witness a large and capacious piece of
Ground, enclosed with a beautiful Quadrangular Wall, for a Physick-Garden, the
first Stone whereof was laid in a Solemn Assembly of the whole University on
St. James his day, July 25. 1622. Not to say any thing of the great cost
bestowed in beautifying the Quires of Christ-Church and Magdalens, the setting
up of a fair new Organ in the Chapel of St. John's College, by the
procurement of our Laud, the then President of it, Anno 1618. The like fair
Organ made and set up in Christ-Church, and the old one given to St. Mary's for
the public use of the University, about six years after. Such and so many
Benefactions in one University, and that too in so short a space, as none of
the former Times can parallel, so let it be the wonder and amazement of all
Ages following.

But the King dies, though his Munificence survive him. It was then
Midlent-Sunday, and the Court-Sermon at Whitehall (according to the ancient
Custom) in the afternoon: At what time the sad News passing through London,
began to be rumored in the Court, as Laud was going into the Pulpit to preach
before the Lords of the Council, the Officers of the Household, and the rest of
that great Concourse of all sorts of People which usually repaired thither at
those Solemn Sermons. Before he was come to the middle of it, the certainty of
the Kings death (more generally known amongst them) the confusion which he saw
in the faces of all the Company, his own griefs, and the dolorous complaints
made by the Duke of Buckingham, occasioned him to leave the Pulpit, and to
bestow his pains and comforts where there was more need. He did not think (as I
believe few wise men do) that the carrying on of one particular Sermon was such
a necessary part of Gods business, as is not to be intermitted upon any
occasion, nor was this ever charged upon him amongst his crimes. The sense of
this great loss being somewhat abated, he was requested by the Duke to draw up
some Remembrances, of the Life, Reign, and Government of the King Deceased,
which he accordingly performed and presented to him: But they are but
Remembrances or Memorials only, like the first lines of a design or Picture,
which being polished and perfected by a skil^ul Workman, might have presented
us with the true and lively Pourtraiture of that gracious Prince. But who will
undertake to finish what Laud began? I must therefore leave the deceased King
to those Memorials, and those Memorials to be found in his Breviate, p. 5. But
there was another Pourtraiture provided for that King before his Funeral. His
Body being brought from Theobalds unto Sommerset-house, where a Royal and
Magnificent Hearse was erected for him, visited and resorted to by infinite
multitudes of people, for some Weeks together. From Sommerset-house his Body
was carried in great State, on Saturday the seventh of May, to St. Peter's
Church in Westminster, where it was solemnly interred. The Funeral Sermon
preached by the Lord Keeper Williams, and printed not long after by the name of
Great Britains Solomon; which afterward administered the occasion of some
discourse, which otherwise might have been spared.

Thus is James dead and buried, but the King survives, his only Son Prince
Charles being immediately proclaimed King of Great Britain, France, and
Ireland, first at the Court Gates, by Sir Edward Zouch Knight Marshal, most
solemnly the next day at London, and afterward by degrees in all the Cities
and Market Towns of the Kingdom. At his first entrance on the Crown he found
himself engaged in a war with the K. of Spain, the mightiest Monarch of the
West, for which he was to raise great Forces both by Sea and Land. He was also
at the Point of Marriage with the Daughter of France, and some proportionable
preparations must be made for that. Nor was King James to be interred without a
solemn and magnificent Funeral, answerable in the full height to so great a
Prince. All which must needs exact great Sums of money, and money was not to be
had without the help of a Parliament, which he therefore gave order to be
called in the usual manner. But in the midst of these many and great
preparations he forgets not the great business of the Church. He had observed
the multitudinousness of his Fathers Chaplains, and the disorder of their
waitings, which puts him on a Resolution of reducing them to a lesser number,
and limiting them to a more certain time of attendance than before they were.
He knew well also what an influence the Court had always on the Country; by
consequence how much it did concern him in his future Government that his
Officers and Servants should be rightly principled, according to the Doctrine,
Government, and Forms of Worship established in the Church of England. And
therefore that he might be served with Orthodox and Regular men, Laud is
commanded to prepare a Catalogue of the most eminent Divines, and to
distinguish them by the two Letters of O and P. according to their several
persuasions and affections. And that being done, he is directed by the Duke and
the Kings appointment to have recourse to the most learned Bishop Andrews,
Breviate p. 6.
to know of him what he thought fitting to be done in the Cause of Religion;
Especially in reference to the five Articles condemned not long since in the
Synod at Dort, and to report his answer with convenient speed. A Convocation
was of course to accompany the ensuing Parliament. And it was fit not only that
the Prelates should resolve beforehand what Points they meant to treat on when
they were assembled, but that his Majesty also might have time to consider of
them.

These seasonable cares being thus passed over, he hastens both his own
marriage, and his Fathers Funeral: The first he sollemnized by Proxy in the
Church of Nostre Dame in Paris, on Sunday the first of May according to the
Style of England. The news whereof being brought to the Court, on the Wednesday
following was celebrated in the Streets of London, the Liberties and out-parts
of it, with more than ordinary Expressions of Joy and Gladness. The Proxy made
to Claud. de Lorain, Duke of Chevereux, one of the younger Sons of the Duke of
Guise; from which House his Majesty derived himself by his great Grandmother
Mary of Lorain, Wife of James the Fifth. The Funeral he attended in his own
Person, as the principal Mourner: Which though it were contrary to the Custom
of his Predecessors, yet he chose rather to express his Piety in attending the
dead Body of his Father to the Funeral Pile, than to stand upon any such old
niceties and points of State. This was the third Funeral which he had attended
as the principal Mourner, which gave some occasion to presage that he would
prove a man of sorrows, and that his end would carry some proportion to those
mournful beginnings. The Intervall before the coming of his Queen he spent in
looking to his Navy, and drawing his Land Forces together for that Summers
service: But hearing that his Queen was advancing toward him he went to
Canterbury, and rested there on Trinity Sunday the twelfth of June. That night
he heard the news of her safe arrival at the Port of Dover, whom he welcomed
the next morning into England with the most cheerful signs of a true a^fection.
From thence he brought her unto Canterbury, and from thence by easy Stages to
Gravesend, where entering in their Royal Barge, attended by infinite companies
of all sorts of People, and entertained by a continual peal of Ordnance all the
way they passed, he brought her safely and contentedly unto his Palace at
Westminster. The Lords and Ladies of the Court having presented to her the
acknowledgement of their humble duties, such Bishops as were about the Town (as
most of them were, in regard of the Parliament and Convocation) were admitted
to the kiss of her hand, whom she most graciously received.

For on the Saturday before, being June the eighteenth, the Parliament had took
beginning. Which fell out not unseasonably, that the French Lords might see
with what Royal Magnificence he was attended by the Prelates, Peers, and other
Officers of State (besides his own Domestic Servants) to the Parliament House.
At their first meeting he put them in mind of the War, in which they had
engaged his Father, and of the promise they had made to stand to him in it with
their lives and fortunes; That both his Land and Sea Forces were now in
readiness to set forwards; And, That there wanted nothing but a present supply
of money to quicken and expedite the affair; That the eyes of all Christendom
were fixed upon him; And that if he should miscarry in his first attempt, it
would blemish all the honor of his future actions; And therefore, That they
should endeavor to deliver him out of that War in which they had encumbered (he
hoped it would never be said that they had betrayed) him. In answer whereunto,
the Commons past a Bill of two Subsidies only, so short of that excessive
charge which the maintenance of so great a Fleet and Army required at their
hands, that being distributed amongst the Officers, Soldiers, and Mariners, it
would scarce have served for Advance-money to send them going. Which
notwithstanding, he very graciously accepted of it, taking it as an earnest of
their good affections, in reference to the greater Sums which were to follow.
In order whereunto he audited his account unto them, as well for such moneys as
had remained undisbursed of the former aides, as for the defraying of such
further Charges as his present Fleet, consisting of 120 Sail, and a
considerable Land Army, must needs lay upon him. The particulars of which
account stood thus: viz. 32000 pounds for securing of Ireland; 47000 pounds for
strengthening the Forts; 37000 pounds for the repair of the Navy; 99000 pounds
upon the four English Regiments in the States Country; 62000 pounds laid out
for Count Mansfield; Total 287000 pounds. Besides which he sent in a demand of
200000 pounds and upwards upon the Navy; 48000 pounds upon the Ordnance; 45000
pounds in Charges of the Land men; 20000 pounds a month to Count Mansfield; and
46000 pounds to bring down the King of Denmark; the total of which latter Sum
amounts to 339000 pounds. Both Sums make no less than 626000 pounds, to which
the Grant of two Subsidies holds but small proportion.

But the Commons had other game to follow. Their Grievances must first be
heard: A List whereof they had presented to King JAMES toward the end of the
former Parliament; of which the greatest part were still unredressed. To these
his Majesty vouchsafed a very gracious, and for the most part a full and
satisfactory Answer. Amongst which Grievances, a sober and discreet man would
not think to find, that the building of all houses in London, and the parts
adjoining, in one uniform way, with a face of brick toward the streets should
be passed for one, then which there could not be a greater ornament to that
City, or a greater honor to his Majesty's Government. And to that his Majesty
returned this Answer: That there had much good come by such a reformation of
Building in his Fathers time, and therefore that he was resolved to go on with
the work. Which Resolution so much tending to the glory of the English Nation,
and no objection being ready for his other Answers, the matter of Grievances
could no longer be insisted on; especially in such a time when the concernments
of the State, his Majesty's honor, and all the motives which induced them to
engage him in this present War, ought in all reason to precede their
Grievances, had they been greater than they were. But then they had some
Religious Grievances, which required a more speedy redress than any which
concerned them in their Civil Interesses. The Lords day was pretended to be
much profaned by unlawful pastimes, and People frequently resorted out of their
own Parishes to feast in Revels. Of this a remedy is desired by Act of
Parliament. Had any such Bill been offered in King James his time, it would
have found a sorry welcome; but this King being under a necessity of compliance
with them, resolved to grant them their desires in that Particular, to the end
that they might grant his also in the aid required, when that obstruction was
removed. The Sabbatarians took the benefit of this opportunity for the
obtaining of this grant (the first that ever they obtained by all their
struglings) which of what consequence it was we shall see hereafter.

But then the Doctrine of the Church was more in danger than ever. In former
Parliaments they were afraid of the Papists only: But now there was as much
danger to be feared from Arminianism as before from Popery. An Information had
been made by Yales and Ward, as before is said, against some passages in
Mountagues Answer to the Romish Gagger; and he had agravated his offense by
justifying all his Popish, and Arminian Tenants in a book newly published,
called Appello Caesarem. It could not be denied, but that this book was
Licenced by Dr. White, then Dean of Carlisle, by whom it was affirmed to be
agreeable to the Public Faith, Doctrine, and Discipline established in the
Church of England. But White they said was now turned black, and what is the
Established Doctrine of the Church of England compared with Calvin's Doctrine in
his Institutions? What Trifles are the Articles of Religion, agreed on by the
Bishops and Clergy, in two several Synods held in London, compared with the
determinations of the Synod of Dort, which Mountague (that bold man) had
despised and vilified? This was a matter which became the care of the House of
Commons, and Mountague is cited to appear before them on the seventh of July.
Being brought unto the Bar, the Speaker declared to him the pleasure of the
House, which was, that they would refer his Censure to the next meeting; and
that in the interim he should stand committed to the Sergeants Ward; and entered
bail for his appearance to the value of two thousand pound. His Majesty had
present notice of this occurrence; Brevi^te p. 6.
And being very sensible of this new incroachment, he thereupon caused
intimation to be made unto them, that he was not pleased with their proceedings
against Mountague, being one of his Chaplains; adding withal that he conceived
his Servants to be as capable of protection from all imprisonments and arrests,
as any of the Servants of the Knights and Burgesses. It was not long before
Laud found an opportunity to give Mountague notice of his Majesty's great care
of him, and affection to him. Which must needs be a Sovereign Cordial to the
man, notwithstanding that the Commons were so stiff in their Rigors toward him
that his bail-bond of 2000 pound did remain uncancelled.

Notice hereof being given to Laud, he considered of the sad effects and
consequents which might follow on it, communicating those his fears to some
other Bishops: By whom it was thought fit that Mountagues case, and not his
only, but the case of the Church it self, should be commended to the care and
power of the Duke of of Buckingham. According unto which Advice and Resolution,
three of them framed and signed the ensuing Letter. But before this Letter was
delivered, Mountague had taken so much care of himself, as to prepare his way
by a Letter of his own, bearing date July 29. In which Letter he first laid
open the state of his case, desiring that by his Majesty's Power he might be
absolutely freed from those who had neither any Authority over his person, as
being one of his Majesty's Servants; nor over his Book, as being commanded by
his Father, and authorized by himself. Which being said, he makes this resolute
declaration, That if he could not really and thoroughly answer whatsoever was or
could be imputed to him in any of his Books, he would no further desire favor
and protection of his Majesty, or his Grace, but willingly would be left unto
the power of his Enemies. Which Letter being sent before to prepare the way,
this of the said three Bishops followed within four days after.

May it please your Grace,
(...) p. 156.
WE are bold to be Suitors to you in the behalf of the Church of England, and a
poor Member of it, Mr. Mountague, at this time not a little distressed. We are
not strangers to his person, but it is the Cause which we are bound to be
tender of. The cause we conceive (under correction of better Judgment) concerns
the Church of England nearly; for that Church, when it was reformed from the
superstitious opinions broached or maintained by the Church of Rome, refused
the apparent and dangerous Errors, and would not be too busy with every
particular School-Point. The Cause why she held this mederation was, because
she could not be able to preserve any unity among Christians, if men were
forced to subscribe to curious particulars disputed in Schools. Now may it
please your Grace, the opinions which at this time trouble many men in the late
Book of Mr. Mountague, are some of them such as are expressly the resolved
Doctrine of the Church of England, and those he is bound to maintain. Some of
them are such as are fit only for Schools, and to be left at more liberty for
learned men to abound in their own sense, so they keep themselves peaceable,
and distract not the Church. And therefore to make any Man subscribe to
School-opinions may justly seem hard in the Church of Christ, and was one great
fault of the Council of Trent. And to affright them from those opinions in
which they have (as they are bound) subscribed to the Church, as it is worse in
it self, so may it be the Mother of greater danger.

May it please your Grace farther to consider, That when the Clergy submitted
themselves in the time of Henry the Eighth, the submission was so made, that if
any difference Doctrinal or other fell in the Church, the King and the Bishops
were to be Judges of it in the National Synod or Conv^cation; the King first
giving leave under his Broad Seal to handle the Points in difference: But the
Church never submitted to a^y other Judge, neither indeed can she though she
would. And we humbly desire your Grace to consider, and then to move his most
Gracious Majesty (if you shall think fit) what dangerous consequences may
follow upon it; For first if any other Judge be allowed in matter of Doctrine
we shall depart from the Ordinance of Christ, and the continual Course and
Practice of the Church. Secondly, If the Church be once brought down beneath
her self, we cannot but fear what may be the next stroke at it. Thirdly, It
will some way touch the honor of his Majesty's dear Father, and our most Dread
Sovereign of glorious and ever blessed memory, King James, who saw and approved
all the opinions of this Book: And he in his rare Wisdom and Judgment would
never have allowed them if they had crossed with truth and the Church of
England. Fourthly, We must be bold to say, that we cannot conceive what use
there can be of Civil Government in the Commonwealth, or of Preaching or
External Ministry in the Church, if such fatal opinions, as some which are
opposite and contrary to these delivered by Mr. Mountague are, shall be
publicly taught and maintained, Fifthly, We are certain that all or most of
the contrary opinions were treated of at Lambeth, and ready to be published,
but then Queen Elizabeth of famous memory, upon notice given, how little they
agreed with the Practice of Piety, and obedience to all Government, caused them
to be suppressed; and so they have continued ever since, till of late some of
them have received countenance at the Synod of Dort. Now this was a Synod of
that Nation, and can be of no Authority in any other National Church, till it
be received there by public Authority. And our hope is, That the Church of
England will be well advised, and more than once over, before she admit a
foraign Synod, especially of such a Church as condemns her Discipline and
manner of Government, to say no more.

And further we are bold to commend to your graces Wisdom this one particular.
His Majesty (as we have been informed) has already taken this business into
his own care, and most worthily referred it in a right course t^ Church
consideration. And we well hoped that without further trouble to the State, or
breach of unity in the Church, it might so have been well and orderly composed,
as we still pray it may. These things considered, we have little to say for Mr.
Mountagues person: only thus much we know, He is a very good Scholar, and a
right honest man: A man every way able to do God, his Majesty, and the Church
of England great service. We fear he may receive discouragement, and (which is
far worse) we have some cause to doubt this may breed a great backwardness in
able men to write in defense of the Church of England, against either home or
foraign Adversaries, if they shall see him sink in Fortunes Reputation, or
health, upon occasion of his Book. And this we most humbly submit to your
Graces Judgment, and care of the Churches peace and welfare; So commending your
Grace to the Protection of Almighty God,

We shall ever rest at Your Graces Service, Io. Rossens. Io. Ox^n. Guil.
Meneven.
August 2. 1625.

After this no more news of Montague in the present Parliament, Adjourned by
his Majesty on the eleventh of July (by reason of the Plague) to Ox^n, there to
be reassembled on the first of August. Which time being come, his Majesty puts
them again in mind of his pressing occasions, acquaints them with the necessity
of setting out the Fleet, then ready for Service; That the eyes of his
Confederates were fixed upon him; and that they would separate and dissolve if
it did not sp^edily set forwards. But then the dangers which they feared from
the growth of Popery, stood as much in his way, as Mountague and the Grievances
had done before. For the securing t^em from all such fears, an humble Petition
and Remonstrance must be first prepared, which they framed much after the same
manner with that which had been o^^ered to King James, in the year 1621. In
this they showed the King the dangers which were threatened to the Church and
State, by the more than ordinary increase of Popery; and o^fered him such
Remedies, as they conceived most likely, to prevent the mischiefs. And unto
this Petition they procured the Peers also to join with them, But the King
easily removed this obstruction, by giving them such a full and satisfactory
answer, on the seventh of A^gust, that they could not choose, before their
Rising, which followed within five days after, but Vote their humble Thanks to
be returned unto his Majesty, for giving such a Gracious Answer to their said
Petition. This they had reason to expect from his Majesty's Piety; but then
they had another Game which must be followed, before the Kings Business could
be heard. In the two former Parliaments they had fleshed themselves, by
removing Bacon from the Seal, and Cranfeild from the Treasury: And somewhat
must be done this Parliament also, for fear of hazarding such a Privilege by a
discontinuance. Williams came first into their eye, whom they looked on as a
man not only improper for the Place, but also as not having carried himself in
it with such integrity as he should have done; and him the Lawyers had most
mind to, that they might get that Office once again into their possession. This
Williams fearing, so applied himself to some leading Members, that he diverted
them from himself to the Duke of Buckingham, as a more noble Prey, and fitter
for such mighty Hunters than a silly Priest. Nor was this Overture proposed to
such as were either deaf or tongue-tied; for this great Game was no sooner
started, but they followed it with such an Outcry, that the noise thereof came
presently to his Majesty's ears; who finding by these delays and artifices,
that there was no hope of gaining the Supplies desired, on the 12th. of the
same August dissolved the Parliament. He may now see the error he had run into
by his breach with Spain, which put him into a necessity of making War, and
that necessity compelled him to cast himself in a manner on the Alms of his
People, and to stand wholly in like manner at their Devotion.

The Parliament being thus dissolved, his Majesty progresseth toward the West,
to set forward his Navy, and Laud betakes himself unto his Diocese, this being
the year of his Triennial Visitation. He took along with him in this Journey
such Plate and Furniture as he had provided for his new Chapel at Aberguilly,
which he Consecrated on Sunday August 28. Here he continued, by reason that the
Sickness was hot in London, and not cooled in Oxon. till he was fain to make
his way back again through Ice and Snow, as he writes in his Letters to the
Duke from Windsor, December 13. At his return he found no small alteration in
the Court. The Lord Keeper Williams stood upon no good terms with the Duke in
the life of King James; but he declined more and more in Favor after his
decease. The Duke had notice of his practicing against him in the last
Parliament, and was resolved to do his errand so effectually to the King his
Master, that he should hold the Seal no longer; and he prevailed therein so
far, that Sir John Suckling, Controller of His Majesty's Household, was sent to
him (being then at a House of the Lord Sandys's in the Parish of Bray near
Windsor) to require him to deliver up the Seal to his Majesty's use; which
being very unwillingly done, the Custody of the Great Seal, on Sunday the
second of October, was committed to Sir Thomas Coventry his Majesty's Attorney
General, whom Heath succeeded in that place. But my Lord was not gone, though
the Keeper was: He still remained Lord Bishop of Lincoln, and Dean of
Westminster, holding still both his other Dignities and Preferments before
recited: So that he might have lived as plentifully as the greatest, and as
contentedly as the best, had he not thought that the fall was greater from the
top of the Stairs unto the second or third Step, than from the second or third
to the lowest of all. But as he sell, so Laud ascended: Neil his good Friend,
then Bishop of Durham, had fallen sick in the beginning of the Spring, at whose
request he was appointed to wait upon his Majesty as Clerk of the Closet; in
which Service though he continued not long, yet he made such use of it, that
from that time forwards he grew as much into the Kings Favor, as before he had
been in the Dukes; becoming as it were his Majesty's Secretary for all Church
Concernments.

His Majesty having set forward his Navy (which setting out so late, could not
be like to make any good Return) was not unmindful of the Promise he had made
in Parliament, in answer to the Petition of the Lords and Commons, concerning
the great dangers threatened to the Church and State by the Growth of Popery; to
which end he caused a Commission to be issued under the Great Seal, for
executing the Laws against Recusants, which he commanded to be published in all
the Courts of Justice at Reading (to which Town the Term was then removed) that
all his Judges and other Ministers of Justice might take notice of it, as also
that all his Loving Subjects might be certified of his Princely Care and Charge
for the Advancement of true Religion, and Suppression of Popery and
Superstition: Which done, he directed his E^^. Regia p. 12.
Letters of the 15th. of December, to his two Archbishops, signifying how far
he had proceeded, and requiring them in pursuance of it, That no good means be
neglected on their part for discovering, finding out, and apprehending of
Jesuits and Seminary Priests, and other Seducers of his People to the Romish
Religion; or for repressing Popish Recusants, and Delinquents of that sort,
against whom they were to proceed by Excommunication, and other Censures of the
Church, not omitting any other Lawful means to bring them forth to public
Justice. But then withal his Majesty takes notice of another Enemy, which
threatened as much danger to the Church as the Papists did: And thereupon he
further requires the said two Archbishops, That a vigilant care be taken with
the rest of the Clergy, for the repressing of those who being ill affected to
the true Religion here established, they keep more close and secret their ill
and dangerous affections that way, and as well by their example, as by secret
and underhand sleights and means, do much encourage and increase the growth of
Popery and Superstition in sundry parts of this Kingdom. And therefore he did
not only require, that none of them might have any manner of Covert,
Protection, Countenance, or connivence from them, or any of the rest, as they
tendered his Royal Commandment in that behalf: but that all possible diligence
be used, as well to unmask the false shadows and pretenses of those who may
possibly be won to Conformity; letting all men know, That he could not think
well of any that having Place and Authority in the Church, do permit such
persons to pass with impunity; much less if they give them any countenance, to
the emboldening them or their adherents.

On the receiving of these Letters, I^id. p 15.
Abbot transmits the Copies of them to his several Suffragans, and to our
Bishop of St. David's amongst the rest, requiring him to conform therein to his
Majesty's Pleasure, and to see the same executed in all parts of his Diocese.
On the receipt whereof, the Bishop commands his Chancellor, Archdeacons, and
other Ecclesiastical Officers within his Diocese of St. David's. That all
possible care be taken of such as are any way backward in Points of Religion,
and more especially of known and professed Recusants, that they may be
carefully presented, and Proceedings had against them to Excommunication,
according to form and order of Law; and that there be a true List and Catalogue
of all such as have been presented and proceeded against, sent to him yearly
after Easter, by him to be presented to the Archbishop of Canterbury, as had
been required. No Command given unto his Chancellor, and other Officers, to
look into the Practices and Proceedings of the Puritan Faction; for which I am
able to give no reason, but that he had received no such Direction and Command
from Archbishop Abbot, whose Letter pointed him no further (it is no hard
matter to say why) than to the searching out, presenting, and Excommunicating
the Popish Recusants. And in what he commanded, he was obeyed by his
Chancellor, returning to him in June following the names of such Recusants as
lived within the Counties of Caermarthen and Pembroke, the chief parts of his
Diocese.

The Kings Coronation now draws on, for which Solemnity he had appointed the
Feast of the Purification of the Blessed Virgin, better known by the name of
Candlemas day. The Coronations of King Edward vi. and Queen Elizabeth, had been
performed according to the Rites and Ceremonies of the Roman Pontificals; That
at the Coronation of King James had been drawn in haste, and wanted many things
which might have been considered of in a time of leisure. His Majesty therefore
issues a Commission to the Archbishop of Canterbury, and certain other
Bishops, whereof Laud was one, to consider of the Form and Order of the
Coronation, and to accomodate the same more punctually to the present Rules and
Orders of the Church of England. On the fourth of January the Commissioners
first met to consult about it; and having compared the Form observed in the
Coronation of King James, with the public Rituals, it was agreed upon amongst
them to make some Alterations in it, and Additions to it. The Alteration in it
was, that the Unction was to be performed in forma Crucis, after the manner of
a Cross, which was accordingly done by Abbot when he officiated as Archbishop
of Canterbury in the Coronation. The Additions in the Form consisted chiefly in
one Prayer or Request to him in the behalf of the Clergy, and the clause of
another Prayer for him to Almighty God; the last of which was thought to have
ascribed too much Power to the King, the first to themselves, especially by the
advancing of the Bishops and Clergy above the Laity. The Prayer or Request
which was made to him, followed after the Unction, and was this, viz. Cant
Doom. 69.
Stand, and hold fast from henceforth the Place to which you have been Heir by
the Succession of your Forefathers, being now delivered to you by the Authority
of Almighty God, and by the hands of us and all the Bishops, and Servants of
God: And as you see the Clergy to come nearer to the Altar than others, so
remember that in place convenient you give them greater honor; that the
Mediator of God and Man may establish you in the Kingly Throne, to be the
Mediator between the Clergy and the Laity, that you may Reign for ever with
Jesus Christ the King of Kings; and Lord of Lords, who with the Father and the
Holy Ghost lives and reigns for ever. Amen.

The Clause of that Prayer which was made for him, had been intermitted since
the time of King Henry vi. and was this that follows; viz. Hist. K. Chapter 20.
Let him obtain favor for the People, like Aaron in the Tabernacle, Elisha in
the Waters, Zacharias in the Temple: Give him Peter's Key of Discipline, and
Paul's Doctrine. Which Clause had been omitted in times of Popery, as intimating
more Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction to be given to our Kings, than the Popes
allowed of; and for the same reason was now quarreled at by the Puritan
Faction.

It was objected commonly in the time of his fall, That in digesting the form
of the Coronation, he altered the Coronation Oath, making it more advantageous
to the King, and less beneficial to the People than it had been formerly; from
which calumny his Majesty cleared both himself and the Bishop, when they were
both involved by common Speech in the guilt thereof. For the clearer
manifestation of which truth, I will first set down the Oath it self, as it was
taken by the King; and then the Kings Defense for his taking of it. Now the
Oath is this.

The Form of the CORONATION OATH.
SIR (says the Archbishop) Will you grant, keep, and by your Oath confirm to
your People of ENGLAND the Laws and Customs to them granted by the Kings of
ENGLAND, (...) Collect(...).
your Lawful and Religious Predecessors; and namely, the Laws, Customs, and
Franchises granted to the Clergy, by the Glorious King St. Edward your
Predecessor, according to the Laws of God, the true Profession of the Gospel
established in this Kingdom, and agreeable to the Prerogative of the Kings
thereof, and the Ancient Customs of this Land?

The King Answers, I grant and promise to keep them.

Archbishop. Sir, Will you keep Peace and Godly Agreement entirely (according
to your Power) b^th to God, the Holy Church, the Clergy, and the People?

Rex. I will keep it.

Archbishop. Sir, Will you (to your Power) cause Justice, Law, and Discretion
in Mercy and Truth, to be executed in all your ^udgments *

Rex. I will,

Archbishop. Sir, Will you grant to hold and grant to keep the Laws and
rightful Customs which the Comm^nal^y of this your Kingdom have? and will you
de^end and uphold them to the honor of God, so much as in you lies?

Rex. I grant and promise so to do.

Then one of the Bishops reads this Admonition to the King before the People
with a loud voice. Our Lord and King, we beseech you to pardon, and to grant,
and to preserve unto us, and the Churches committed to our charge, all
Canonical Privileges, and due Law and Justice; and that you would protect and
defend us, as every good King in his Kingdom ought to be a Protector and
Defender of the Bishops and the Churches under their Government.

The King answers, With a willing and devout heart I promis^ and grant my
pardon, and that I will preserve and maintain to you and the Churches comm^^ted
t^ ^^ur charge, all Canonical Privileges, and due Law and Justice; and that I
will be your Protector and Defender to my power by the Assistance of God, as
every good King ought in his Kingdom, in right to protect and de^end the
Bishops and Churches under their Government.

The King arises, and is lea^ to the Communion Table, where he makes a sole^n
Oath in ^ight of all the People, to observe the Premises, and laying his Hand
upon the Book, says, The things which I have before promised, I shall perform
and keep, So help me G^^ and the Contents of this Book.

Such was the Coronation Oath accustomably taken by the Kings of England: Which
notwithstanding, it was objected by the Lords and Commons in the time of the
Long Parliament, (...) the same which ought to have been taken by him. And for
proof thereof an antiquated Oath was found, and published in a Remonstrance of
theirs, bearing date the twentieth of May 1642. To which his Majesty made this
Answer, That the Oath which he took at his Coronation was warranted, and
enjoined by the Customs of his Predecessors; E^act Coll^^t of Edw. Hu^^. 290.
and that the Ceremony of their and his taking of it they might find in the
Records of the Exchequer. And this it is, etc.

Now in performing the Solemnities of the Coronation, the Abbot anciently; and
for more than one hundred years last past, the Deans of Westminster had a
special place. To them belonged the Custody of the old Regalia, that is to say,
the Crown, Sword, Scepter, Spurs, etc. of King Edward Surnamed the Confessor,
kept by them in a secret place of Westminster Abbey, not easily acce^^able to
any, but such as know the mystery of it: never brought forth but at the
Coronation of a King; or his going to Parliament. Williams the late Lord Keeper
was at this time Dean. But being under the Kings displeasure, was commanded to
forbear his attendance at the Coronation, and to depute one of the Prebends in
his place. This put him into some dispute within himself. He had no mind to
nominate Laud, being then one of the Prebendaries of that Church, because he
looked upon him as his Corrival and Supplanter in the Dukes good Grace; and to
have named other of a lower order, there being a Bishop in the number, would
have subjected him to some discourse and misconstruction; He therefore very
wisely sent unto his Majesty the names, degrees, and dignities of all the
Prebends, leaving it unto him alone to make the Election; who thereupon without
any Hesitancy or deliberation deputed Laud unto the Service. Laud, being thus
nominated and deputed, prepared all things ready for that great Solemnity. And
finding the Old Crucifix among the Regalia, he caused it to be placed on the
Altar, as in former times. The Coronation being ended, his Majesty going in his
Robes to Westminster Hall, did there deliver them to Laud (representing in that
Pomp the Dean of Westminster) together with the Crown, Scepter, and the Sword
called Cortena, to be laid up with the rest of the Regalia in their old
repository; which he receiving from the King, returned into the Abbey Church,
offered solemnly on the Altar in his Majesty's name (as by his place he was to
do) and so laid them up.

Two things there were remarkable in this Coronation, which seemed to have
something in them of Presage. Senhouse, who had been once his Chaplain, when
Prince of Wales, and was now Bishop of Carlisle, had the honor to preach upon
the day of that great Solemnity. An eloquent man he was reputed, and one that
could very well express a passion: but he had chosen such a Text, as was more
proper for a Funeral than a Coronation; his Text being this, viz. I will give
thee a Crown of life, Apoc. 2.10. and was rather thought to put the new King in
mind of his Death than his duty in Government; and to have been his Funeral
Sermon when he was alive, as if he were to have none when he was to be buried.
It was observed also, that his Majesty on that day was clothed in White,
contrary to the Custom of his Predecessors, who were on that day clad in
Purple. And this he did not out of any necessity, for want of Purple Velvet,
enough to make a Suite, (for he had many yards of it in his outward Garment)
but at his own choice only, to declare that Virgin Purity with which he came to
be espoused unto his Kingdom. White (as we know) is the color of the Saints,
who are represented to us in White Robes by St. John in the Revelation; and
Purple is the Imperial and Regal color, so proper heretofore unto Kings and
Emperors, that many of the Constantinopolitan Emperors were called
Porphyrogenites, because at their first coming into the world they were wrapped
in Purple. And this some looked on also as an ill Presage, that the King laying
aside his Purple, the Robe of Majesty, should cloth himself in White, the Robe
of innocence; as if thereby it were fore-signified, that he should divest
himself of that Regal Majesty which might and would have kept him safe from
affront and scorn, to rely wholly on the innocence of a virtuous life, which
did expose him finally to calamitous ruin.

No sooner were the Pomps of the Coronation ended, but the Second Parliament
began; at the opening whereof, on Monday the sixth of February, our Bishop of
St. David's preached before his Majesty, the Lords, etc. in the Abbey Church. He
was appointed to have preached in the beginning of the former Parliament, on
Saturday the eighteenth of June; but that turn being otherwise supplied, he
preached the same Sermon the next day before his Majesty at Whitehall, his Text
then, Psalm. 75.2, 3. When I shall receive the Congregation, I will judge
according unto right, etc. But now he chose for the Theme or Subject of his
discourse the 3, 4, 5 verses of the 112 Psalm, viz. Jerusalem is like a City
that is at unity in it self, etc. In which, considering Jerusalem as a Type of
the Church and State, he first beholds it as a type of the State, or Civil
Government. Where he considered That Ordo Politicus, the wise ordering of the
people in Concord and Unity was simply the strongest Wall of a State: But break
Unity once, and farewell all strength. And therefore disjoynted Factions in a
State when they work upon Division, are Publica irae divinae incendia, S^r. 3.
p. 102
the public kindlings of Gods Anger, and they burn down all before them. And
God seldom suffers these to fire a State till himself be heated first with the
sins of the State: But then he will divide them in Jacob, and scatter them in
Israel, Genesis 49. Nay scatter Jacob and Israel it self for them. Which said in
general, he descended to a more particular application, putting his Auditory in
mind of those words of Tacitus, That nothing gave the Romans (powerful enemies
though they were) more advantage against the ancient Britains than this, Page
104.
Quod Factionibus and studiis trahebantur; That they were broken into Factions,
and would not so much as take counsel and advice together: And they smarted for
it. But I pray what is the difference for men not to meet in counsel, and to
fall to pieces when they meet? If the first were our Forefathers error, God
of his mercy grant this second be not ours. And for the Church, that is as the
City too, just so, Doctrine and Discipline are the Walls and the Towers of it:
P. 107.
But be the one never so true, and the other never so perfect, they come both
short of Preservation, if that body be not at unity in it self. The Church,
take it Catholic, cannot stand well, if it be not compacted together into an
holy unity with Faith and Charity. And as the whole Church is in regard of the
affairs of Christendom, so is each particular Church in the Nation and Kingdom
in which it sojourns. If it be not at unity in it self, it does but invite
Malice, which is ready to do hurt without any invitation: and it ever lies with
an open side to the devil and all his batteries. So both Church and State, then
happy, and never till then, when they are at unity within themselves, and one
with another. Well, both State and Church owe much to Unity; and therefore very
little to them that break the peace of either. Father forgive them they know
not what they do. But if unity be so necessary, how may it be preserved in
both? How? I will tell you. Would you keep the State in Unity? In any case take
heed of breaking the peace of the Church. The peace of the State depends much
upon it; For divide Christ in the minds of men, P. 109.
or divide the minds of men about their hopes of Salvation in Christ, and tell
me what unity there will be. Let this suffice so far as the Church is an
ingredient into the unity of the State. But what other things are concurring to
the unity of it, the State it self knows better than I can teach.

This was good Doctrine out of doubt. The Preacher had done his part in it, but
the hearers did not; the Parliament not making such use of it as they should
have done. At such time as the former Parliament was adjourned to Oxon, the
Divinity School was prepared for the House of Commons, and a Chair made for the
Speaker in or near the place, in which his Majesty's Professor for Divinity did
usually read his public Lectures, and moderate in all public Disputations.
And this first put them into conceit, that the determining of all Points and
Controversies in Religion did belong to them. As Vibius Rufus in the Story,
having married Tullies Widow, and bought Caesar's Chair, conceived that he was
then in a way to gain the Eloquence of the one, and the power of the other. For
after that we find no Parliament without a Committee for Religion, and no
Committee for Religion but what did think it self sufficiently instructed to
manage the greatest Controversies of Divinity which were brought before them:
And so it was particularly with the present Parliament. The Commons had scarce
settled themselves in their own House, but Mountague must be called to a new
account for the Popery and Arminianism affirmed to have been maintained by him
in his books. In which Books if he had defended any thing contrary to the
established Doctrine of the Church of England, the Convocation, of the two, was
the fitter Judge. And certainly it might have happened ill unto him, the King not
being willing to engage too far in those Emergences, (as the case then stood)
if the Commons had not been diverted in pursuit of the Duke of Buckingham;
which being a more noble game, they laid this aside, having done nothing in it
but raised a great desire in several Members of both Houses to give themselves
some satisfaction in those doubtful Points. To which end a Conference was
procured by the Earl of Warwick, to be held at York House, between Buckeridge
Bishop of Rochester, and White Dean of Carlisle, on the one side: Morton then of
Lichfield, and Preston then of Lincoln's Inn (of whom more hereafter) on the
other; The Duke of Buckingham, the Earl of Pembroke, many other Lords, and many
other persons of inferior quality being present at it. To this Conference,
which was holden on the eleventh of this February, another was added the next
week on the seventeenth. In which Mountague acted his own part in the place of
Buckeridge, the Concourse being as great, both for the quality and number of
the persons, as had been at the former. And the success was equal also. The
Friends and Fautors of each side giving the victory to those (as commonly it
happens in such cases) whose cause they favored.

After this we hear no more of Mountague, but the passing of some Votes against
him in the April following; which ^eats being over, he was kept cold till the
following Parliament: And then he shall be called for. In the mean time the
King perceiving that the Commons had took no notice of his own occasions, gave
order to Sir Richard Weston (then Chancellor of his Exchequer) to mind them of
it; by whom he represented to them the return of the last years Fleet, and the
want of Money to satisfy the Mariners and Soldiers for their Arr^ars; That he
had prepared a new Fleet of forty Sail ready to set forth, which could not stir
without a present supply of money; And that without the like supply, not only
his Armies, which were quartered upon the Coasts, would disband or mutiny, but
that the Forces sent for Ireland would be apt to rebel; and therefore he
desired to know, without more ado, what present supply he must depend upon
from them, that accordingly he might shape his course. These Propositions being
made, Clem. Coke a younger Son of Sir Edward Coke (who had successively been
Chief Justice of either Bench) obstructs the Answer by this rash and unhandsome
expression, That it was better to dye by a Foreign Enemy, than to be destroyed
at home. Which general words were by one Turner, a Doctor of Physic, and then
a Member of that House, restrained and applied more particularly to the Duke of
Buckingham. The Commons well remembered at what Point they were cut off in the
former Parliament, and carefully watched all advantages to resume it in this.
They had begun a great clamor against him on the first of March, for staying a
French Ship, called the St. Peter of Newhaven; and Turner now incites them to a
higher distemper, by six Queries raised about him, that is to say, First,
Whether the King had not lost the Regality of the Narrow Seas since the Duke
became Admiral? Secondly, Whether his not going as Admiral in this last Fleet
was not the cause of the ill success? Thirdly, Whether the Kings Revenue has
not been impaired through his immense liberality? Fourthly, Whether he has not
engrossed all Offices, and preferred his Kindred to unfit places? Fifthly,
Whether he has not made sale of places of Judicature? Sixthly, Whether the
Recusants have not dependence on his Mother and Father in Law?

1626.
For this days work Coke was severely reprehended by his Father, who could not
be persuaded to look upon him for a long while after: But Turner, having none
whom he stood in fear of, escaped not only without a private reprehension, but
without any public Censure. His Majesty thereupon complained by Weston to the
House of Commons, who were so far from censuring the offense, that they seemed
rather willing to protect the Offenders. And yet this was not all the affront
they had done him neither. For seeming well satisfied with his Majesty's
gracious Answer to their Petition against Recusants, which they received from
him at Oxon in the former Parliament, they now resolved to see what execution
had been done upon it. And to that end they appoint a Committee for Religion,
and that Committee substitutes a Sub-Committee; which Sub-Committee were
empowered to search the Signet Office concerning such indulgencies as had been
granted to the Papists since the end of that Parliament, and to examine the
Letters of the Secretaries of State, leaving his Majesty nothing free from
their discovery as to that particular: A point which never was presumed on in
preceding times. And which seemed worst of all in the present conjuncture, they
had voted him three Subsidies, and three fifteens, but voted them with such a
clog that they should not pass into a Bill till their Grievances were both
heard and answered. Which Grievances what they were both in weight and number,
as it was not known unto themselves; so did his Majesty look upon it, not only
as a thing dilatory in it self, but as a baffle put on him and his proceedings.

These indignities coming thus upon the neck of one another, he caused the
Lords and Commons to come before him at White Hall, March 29. 1626. where first
he signified unto them, by the mouth of the Lord Keeper, how sensible he was of
those affronts which were put upon him, touching upon every one of them in
particular, and aggravating each of them in their several kinds, letting them
also know, That as he loved his people, so he regarded his honor; and that if
he were sensible of his Subjects Grievances, of his own he was sensible much
more. The Keeper also had Command to tell them, in his Majesty's Name, That the
Duke had acted nothing of Public Employment, without his Majesty's Special
Warrant; That he had discharged his Trust with abundant both Care and Fidelity;
That since his Return from Spain he had been sedulous in promoting the Service
and Contentment of the Commons House; And therefore, That it was his express
Command, That they desist from such Vnparliamentary Proceedings, and resign the
Reformation of what was amiss to his Majesty's Care, Wisdom, and Justice. Which
Speech being ended, his Majesty says as follows: I must withal put you in
mind of Times past; you may remember my Father, moved by your Counsel, and won
by your Persuasions, brake the Treaties: In these Persuasions I was your
Instrument toward him; and I was glad to be instrumental in any thing which
might please the whole Body of this Realm: Nor was there any in greater favor
with you, than this man whom you so traduce. And now when you find me so sure
entangled in War, as I have no honorable and safe Retreat, you make my
Necessity your Privilege, and set what rate you please upon your Supplies: A
Practice not very obliging unto Kings. Mr. Coke told you, It was better to die
by a Foreign Enemy, than to be destroyed at home. Indeed I think it more
honorable for a King to be invaded and almost destroyed by a Foreign Enemy,
than to be despised at home.

But all this did not edify with the House of Commons. So little were they
moved with the Eloquence of the one, and the smart Expressions of the other,
that both their own Members remained uncensured, and the Prosecution of the
Duke was followed with more violence then before it was. But for all this his
Majesty and the Duke might thank themselves. His Majesty had power in his own
hands to have righted himself, according to the practice of Queen Elizabeth,
and others of his Majesty's Royal Predecessors in the times foregoing. But by
complaining in this manner to the House of Commons, he chose rather to follow
the Example of King James, who in like manner had complained of one Piggot, for
some seditious words by him spoken in the House of Commons, Anno 1607. and with
like success. He that divests himself of a natural and original Power to right
the injuries which are done him, in hope to find redress from others
(especially from such as are parcel guilty of the Wrong) may put up all his
gettings in a Seamstress Thimble, and yet never fill it. All that which both
Kings effected by it, was but the weakening of their own Power, and the
increasing of the others, who had now put themselves upon this Resolution, not
to suffer any one of their Members to be questioned, till themselves had
considered of his Crimes. By which means they kept themselves close together,
and emboldened one another to stand it out against the King to the very last.
And of this Maxim, as they made use in this present Parliament, in the Case of
Coke, Turner, Diggs, and Eliot (which 2 last had been imprisoned by the Kings
Command) so was it more violently and pertinaciously insisted on in the Case of
the Five Members, impeached of High Treason by the Kings Attorney January 14.
1641. the miserable effects whereof we find two sensibly. And as for their
prosecuting of the Duke, the Commons might very well pretend, that they had and
should do nothing in it, for which as well his Majesty as the Duke himself, had
not given encouragement. They had both joined together against Cranfeild the
late Lord Treasurer, and to revenge themselves on him, had turned him over to
the power and malice of his Enemies in the House of Commons. The Commons had
served their turns on Cranfeild, and will now serve their own turns on the Duke
himself, let the King do the best he could to preserve him from them. So unsafe
a thing it is for Princes to deliver any of their Servants into the hands of
their People, and putting a Power out of themselves, which they cannot call
back again when it most concerns them.

At the same time the Earl of Bristol, being charged with Treason by the Duke,
exhibited against him certain Articles in the House of Peers, in which he
accused him of the like Crime, in reference to his Actings in the Spanish
business. This made good sport amongst the Commons for a time; but at last
s^aring either the Weakness of Bristol's Charge, or the insufficiency of his
Proofs, they resolved to follow their own way; and to that end a large
Impeachment was drawn up against him, and presented to the Lords on the eighth
of May, managed by six of the ablest Lawyers in the House, that is to say,
Glanvile, Herbert, Seldom, Pym, Wansford, and Sherland; the Prologue made by
Sir Dudly Diggs, and the Epilogue by Sir John Eliot. The principal Branches of
this Impeachment related to his engrossing of Offices, his buying the Places of
Lord Admiral, and Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports; His not guarding the Seas;
His stay of a Ship called the St. Peter of Newhaven, and of the East India
Fleet; Lending his Majesty's Ship called the Vantgard to the French King, which
the French King employed against Rochel; His selling of Honors and Offices;
procuring Honors for his Kindred; His diminishing the Revenues of the Crown;
and his applying Physic to King James in the time of his Sickness. To every
one of these there was returned in Writing a particular Answer by the Duke
himself: And then addressing his Discourse unto the Peers, he humbly referred
it to their Judgment, how full of danger and prejudice it was, to give too
ready an ear, and too easy a belief unto a Report or Testimony without Oath,
which are not of weight enough to condemn any. With like humility he
acknowledged, how easy a thing it was for him in his younger years, and
unexperienced, to fall into thousands of Errors, in th^se ten years wherein he
had the honor to serve so great and so open-hearted a Sovereign Master. But
still he hoped the fear of God, his sincerity in the true Religion established
in the Church of England (though accompanied with many weaknesses and
imperfections, which he is not ashamed humbly and heartily to confess) his
carefulness not willingly to offend so good and gracious a Master, and his love
and duty to his Country, had restrained and preserved him from running into any
heinous misdemeanors and crimes. Which said, and having craved the benefit of
two several Pardons, the one granted in the last Parliament of King James, the
other at the Coronation of King Charles, he added, That he could not choose but
hope so much in their Lordships Justice and Honor, that they would acquit him
of and from those Misdemeanors, Offenses, Misprisions, and Crimes wherewith he
had be charged; and for his own part, he both hoped and would daily pray, That
for the future he might so watch over all his Actions, both public and
private, as not to give cause of just offense to any person.

Of these Proceedings his Majesty was exceeding sensible: He saw himself
wounded through the Dukes sides; That his Fathers Favors and his own were the
greatest Crimes of which the Duke had been impeached; and, That their Regal
Authority, in bestowing Offices and Honors on whom they pleased, was not only
questioned, but controlled. With which disturbances being very much perplexed
and troubled, he receives a Letter written to him from an unknown Person, in
which he first met with a Recital of the several Interests and Affections which
were united in this Prosecution against the Duke; Cabal.
and after that this Application to himself, and his own Concernments, viz.
These men (says the Writer of the Letter) either cannot or will not remember,
That never any noble man in favor with his Sovereign, was questioned in
Parliament, except by the King himself in case of Treason, or unless it were in
the nonage and tumultuary times of Richard the Second, Henry vi. or Edward vi.
which happened to the destruction both of King and Kingdom. And that not to
exceed our own and Fathers Memory, in King Henry viii. his time, Wolseys
exorbitant Power and Pride, and Cromwels contempt of the Nobility and the Laws,
were not yet permitted to be discussed in Parliament, though they were most
odious and grievous to all the Kingdom: And that Leicesters undeserved Favor
and Faults, Hattons insufficiency, and Releighs Insolences, far exceed what
yet has been objected against the Duke; yet no Lawyer durst abet, nor any man
else begin any Invectives against them in Parliament. And then he adds (some
other Passages intervening) That it behooves his Majesty to uphold the Duke
against them, who if he be but discourted, it will be the Corner stone on which
the demolishing of his Monarchy will be builded: For if they prevail with this,
they have hatched a thousand other Demands to pull the Feathers of the Royalty;
they will appoint him Counselors, Servants, Alliances, Limits of his Expenses,
Accounts of his Revenue; chiefly, if they can (as they mainly desire) they will
now dazzle him in the beginning of his Reign. How true a Prophet this man
proved, the event has showed, and the King saw it well enough; and therefore
since he could not divert them from that pursuit, on the 15th of June he
dissolved the Parliament.

I have been the more punctual and particular in relating these Proceedings of
the Commons against the Duke, by reason of that Influence which Laud either
had, or is reported to have had, in managing his Cause against them. Brevi^te
p. 7.
For first it is affirmed by the Publisher of this Bishops Breviate, That the
Copy of the Kings Speech made in behalf of the Duke, March 29. was of Lauds
enditing; and, That the Original Copy thereof under his own hand was given in
evidence against him at the time of Trial. Secondly, That he likewise penned
the Kings Speech to the House of Peers, touching the Duke, and the Commitment
of the Earl of Arundel, May the 11th. In which he spoke concerning the
preservation of the Honor of Noblemen, against the vile and detestable
Calumnies of those of the Lower House, by whom the Duke had been accused, as
before was said. Most grievous Crimes indeed, if they had been true; for a
Subject to assist his Prince, and a Servant to be aiding to his Master, in
penning a short Speech or two, when either the pressure of Affairs, or
perplexities of mind might require it of him. But for the truth of this there
is no proof offered, but that the Copies of both Speeches (the Original Copies,
Pa. 8.
as he calls them) were found in the Archbishops Study, as probably they might
have been in the Studies of many other men, if they had been searched; For who
can rationally suppose, That his Majesty, who was the Master of such a pure and
elegant Style, as he declared himself to be in his Discourse with Henderson at
Newcastle, and his Divine Essays made in Prison, when he could have no other
helps but what he found in himself, should stand in need of the Expressions of
another man in matters of so great concernment? Or if it be to be supposed, it
makes exceedingly to the honor and commendation of this our Bishop, as well in
point of Secrecy as unfeigned Fidelity, that his Majesty should pick out him
from all other men, to be his Penman or Chief Secretary in such weighty
businesses. Then again, it is affirmed, That he not only corrected and amended
the Dukes Answer to the Impeachment which was made against him by the Commons,
but that he also penned that Speech which the Duke subjoined unto his Answer. A
Crime of the same nature, and proved by the same Mediums as the others was; and
such as rather might have served for a strong assurance both of his honest
Fidelity to his Friend and Patron, and the even temper of his own mind in the
managing of it. For if we may believe the Author of the first History of the
Life and Reign of King Charles, Hist. King Charles, p. 50.
as I think we may, this Answer of the Duke was so in-laid with Modesty and
Humility, that it became a new Grievance to his Adversaries, and was like to
have a powerful influence toward the conversion of many, who expected a Defense
of another and more disdainful Spirit.

Thus have we brought two Parliaments unto an end; but we hear nothing of the
Convocations which were summoned with them. Nothing indeed of the first
Convocation, but the passing of a Grant for three Subsidies, toward the
Advancement of his Majesty's Service. In the second we find something more, Chapter
Hist. lib. 2.
though no Subsidies are granted in it. On the fifth Sunday in Lent, Goodman
then Bishop of Gloucester preached before his Majesty, and pressed so hard upon
the Point of the Real Presence, that he was supposed to trench too near the
borders of Popery, which raised a great clamor both in Court and Country: The
matter of which Sermon was agitated pro and con in the Convocation, March 29.
without determining any thing on either side. But his Majesty out of a desire
to satisfy both himself and his Houses of Parliament, touching that
particular, referred the consideration of it to Abbot Archbishop of Canterbury,
Andrews Bishop of Winchester, and Laud Bishop of St. David's; who meeting and
considering of it, on the twelfth of April, returned this Answer to the King;
Breviate.
That some things in that Sermon had been spoke less warily, but nothing
falsely; That nothing had been innovated by him in the Doctrine of the Church of
England: But howsoever, That they thought very fit that Goodman should be
appointed to Preach again before his Majesty, for the better explaining of his
meaning, and showing how and in what Particulars he had been mistaken by his
Auditors: Which he accordingly performed. But nothing was of such concernment
to a Convocation, as the cause of Mountague, vexed and molested by the Commons
in both the Parliaments, for supposed Popery and Arminianism, matters merely
Doctrinal: And possibly it may be admired, that they should do nothing in a
matter of their own peculiar, having his Majesty to Friend; for it appears in
the Letter of the three Bishops beforementioned, to the Duke of Buckingham,
That his Majesty had taken that business into his own care, and had most
worthily referred it in a right course to Church-consideration. And it appears
also by the Breviate, page 8. That on Sunday, April 22. of this present year,
his Majesty had commanded all the Bishops to come before him, and reprehended
such as came (being fourteen in number) for being silent in Causes which
concerned the Church, and had not made known unto him what might be profitable
or unprofitable for it, the Cause whereof he was so ready to promote. But then
we are to call to mind, that Laud not long since had been sent by the Duke of
Buckingham to consult with Andrews, and learn of him what he thought fitting to
be done in the Cause of the Church, and more especially in the Five Articles,
so hotly agitated between the Remonstrants and Contra-Remonstrants in the
Belgic Provinces. And it appears by the event, That Andrews did not hold it
fit for any thing to be done in that particular, as the case then stood; the
truth in those Opinions not being so generally entertained amongst the Clergy,
nor the Archbishop and the greater part of the Prelates so inclinable to them,
as to venture the determining of those Points to a Convocation.

But that which was not thought fit in that present Conjuncture for a
Convocation, his Majesty was pleased to take order in by his Royal Edict. Many
Books had been written against Mountague by Carleton Bishop of Chichester,
Sutcliffe Dean of Exeter, Yates and Rouse; by which the differences were rather
increased than diminished. Which coming to his Majesty's notice, it pleased him
by the Advice of his Bishops, to signify by his Proclamation of June 14. Not
only to his own People, but to all the World, his utter dislike of all those,
who to show the subtilty of their Wits, or to please their own Humors, or vent
their own Passions, do or shall adventure to stir or move any new Opinions, not
only contrary but differing from the sound and Orthodoxal Grounds of the true
Religion, sincerely Professed and happily Established in the Church of England;
and also to declare his full and constant Resolution, That neither in matter of
Doctrine nor Discipline of the Church, P^i^. R^gi^, s^^t. 3. p. 1.
nor in the Government of the State, he will admit of the least Innovation; but
by Gods assistance will so guide the Scepter of these his Kingdoms and
Dominions (by the Divine Providence put into his hand) as shall be for the
comfort and assurance of his sober, Religious, and well-affected Subjects, and
for the repressing and severe punishing of such as out of any sinister
respects, or disaffection to his Person or Government, shall dare either in
Church or State to distract or disquiet the Peace thereof. His Majesty
thereupon commands all his Subjects (the Clergy most especially) both in
England and Ireland, That from thenceforth they should carry themselves so
wisely, warily, and conscionably, that neither by Writing, Preaching, Printing,
Conferences, or otherwise, they raise any doubts, or publish or maintain any
new Inventions or Opinions concerning Religion, than such as are clearly
grounded and warranted by the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of England
heretofore published, and happily established by Authority: Straightly charging
all Archbishops and Bishops in their several Diocesses, as also all Counselors
of State, Judges, and Ministers of Justice, speedily to reclaim and repress all
such Spirits as shall adventure hereafter to break this Rule of Sobriety, and
due Obedience to his Majesty, his Laws, and this Religious Duty to the Church
of God, or in the least degree attempt to violate this bond of Peace; adding
withal this intimation of his Royal Pleasure, That whosoever from thenceforth
should take the boldness wilfully to neglect this his Majesty's gracious
Admonition, and either for the satisfying of their unquiet and restless
Spirits, or for expressing of their rash and undutiful Insolences, should
wilfully break that Circle of Order, which without apparent danger both to
Church and State may not be broken, his Majesty will proceed against them with
that severity as upon due consideration had of their Offenses and Contempts,
they and every one of them should deserve, etc.

Such was the tenor of his Majesty's Proclamation of June 14. And the effect
thereof was this. The House of Commons in pursuance of their Quarrel against
Mountague's Books, had referred the consideration of it to their Committee for
Religion, from whom Pym brought a Report on the eighteenth of April, concerning
some Arminian and Popish Tenants comprised in them. It was thereupon Voted in
that House, 1. That he had disturbed the Peace of the Church, by publishing
Doctrines contrary to the Articles of the Church of England, and the Book of
Homilies. 2. That there are diverse Passages in his Book ( especially against
those he calls Puritans) apt to move Sedition betwixt the King and his
Subjects, and between Subject and Subject, 3. That the whole frame and scope of
his Books is to discourage the well affected in Religion, from the true
Religion established in the Church, and to incline them, and as much as in him
lay, to reconcile them to POPERY. This gave great animation to the opposite
Party, who thought it a high point of Wisdom to assault the man whom they
perceived to have been smitten with this terrible Thunderbolt, and not to lose
the opportunity of a Parliament-time (when the Press is open to all comers) for
publishing their Books against him. Some of them we have named already; besides
which there appeared so many in the List against him, viz. Goad, ^eatly, Ward,
Wotton, Prynne, and Burton, that the Encounter seemed to be betwixt a whole
Army and a single Person. (...) virum. L^can.
Laud and some of those Bishops on the other side, encouraged by his Majesty's
Proclamation, endeavored to suppress those Books, which seemed to have been
published in defiance of it; some of them being called in, some stopped at the
Press; some Printers questioned for Printing, as the Authors were for writing
such prohibited Pamphlets. Burton and Prynne amongst the rest were called into
the High Commission, and at the point to have been censured, when a Prohibition
comes from Westm^nster-Hall to stay the Proceedings in that Court, contrary to
his Majesty's Will and Pleasure, expressed so clearly and distinctly in the
said Proclamation: Which Prohibition they tendered to the Court in so rude a
manner, that Laud was like to have laid them by the heels for their labor.
From henceforth we must look for nothing from both these hot-spurs but desire
of revenge, a violent opposition against all Persons whatsoever, who did not
look the same way with them, and whatsoever else an ill-governed Zeal could
excite them too.

And now being fallen upon these men, it may not be amiss to say something of
them in this place, considering how much they exercised the patience of the
Church and State in the Times succeeding. Burton had been a Servant in the
Closet to his Sacred Majesty when he was Prince of Wales; and being once in the
Ascendent, presumed that he should culminate before his time. He took it very
ill that he was not sent as one of the Chaplains into Spain when the Prince was
there; but worse, that Laud then Bishop of St. David's, should execute the
Office of Clerk of the Closet at such time as Bishop Neil was sick, and he be
looked on no otherwise than as an underling still. Vexed with that Indignity,
as he then conceived it, he puts a scandalous Paper into the hands of the King,
for which, and for some other Insolences and factious carriage, he was
commanded by him to depart the Court; into which being never able to set foot
again, he breathed nothing but rage and malice against his Majesty, the
Bishops, and all that were in place above him, and so continued till the last;
it being the custom of all those whom the Court casts out, to labor by all
means they can to outcast the Court. Prynne lived sometimes a Commoner of
Oriall College, and afterward entered himself a Student in Lincoln's Inn, where
he became a great follower of Preston, then the Lecturer there: Some parts of
Learning he brought with him, which afterward he improved by continual Study;
and being found to be of an enterprising nature, hot-spirited, and eager in
pursuit of any thing which was put into him, he was looked upon by Preston as
the fittest person to venture upon such Exploits, which a more sober and
considerate man durst not have appeared in. Being once put into the road, it
was not possible to get him out of it again by threats or punishments; till
growing weary of himself, when he had no Enemy in a manner to encounter with,
he began to look up at the last, and settled on more moderate and quiet courses,
becoming in the end a happy Instrument of Peace both to Church and State. And
now I am fallen on Preston also, I shall add something of him too, as being a
man which made much noise in the World about this time. A man he was (beyond
all question) of a shrewd Wit and deep Comprehensions; an excellent Master in
the Art of Insinuation, and one who for a long time sat at the Helm, (...).
Hist. lib. (...).
and steared the Course of his Party, as one well observes. Toward the latter
end of the Reign of King James he was brought into the Court by the Duke of
Buckingham, in hope to gain a Party by him: There he was gazed on for a time,
like a new Court-Mete^r; and having flashed and blazed a little, went out
again, and was forgotten, in case he did not leave, as most Meteors do, an ill
smell behind him. Much was he cried up by his Followers in the University,
City, and all places else, as if he might have chosen his own Mitre, and had
been as likely a man as any to have been trusted with the Great Seal in the
place of Williams: but he was not principled for the Court, nor the Court for
him; For long he had not been in that School of Policy, but he found other men
as wise and cunning as himself, and that he could not govern there with such an
absolute Omni-regency, as he had done in the Families of private Gentlemen in
most parts of the Kingdom. Nor was it long before the Duke began to have some
suspicion of him, as one not to be trusted in his Majesty's Service, when it
seemed any way to cross with the Puritan Interest, which he drove on with so
much openness in the Court, as was not proper for a man of so famed a cunning.
But that which lost him at the last, was a Letter by him written to a great
Peer of the Realm, in which he spoke disadvantageously enough, if not
reproachfully of the Court; and signified withal how little hope there was of
doing any good in that place, for the advancement of the Cause. Which Letter,
or a Copy of it, being unluckily dropped out of his Pocket, was taken up, and
forthwith carried to the Duke: The shame and grief of which mischance, gave him
so much trouble, that he withdrew by little and little, and at last betook
himself wholly to his old affectation of a Popular Greatness. By reason of his
Lectures in Cambridge and Lincoln's Inn, he was grown powerful in the
University, and had gained a strong Party in the City, but died about the time
that Laud succeeded Mountain in the Sea of London. And it was well for him that
he died so opportunely; Laud was resolved that there should be no more but one
Bishop of that City, and would have found some way or other to remove him out
of Lincoln's Inn, to the end he might have no pretense of raising or increasing
any Faction there, to disturb the Public. But before Laud shall come from St.
David's to London, he must take Bath and Wells in his way, to which we are now
ready to wait upon him.

THE LIFE OF The most Reverend FATHER in GOD WILLIAM Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury.
LIB. III. Extending from his being made Bishop of Bath and Wells till his
coming to the Sea of Canterbury.
IT happened during the Sitting of the late Parliament, Anno Dom. 1626.
that Doctor Arthur Lake Bishop of Bath and Wells, a man of great Learning and
exemplary Piety, departed this Life; into whose Place his Majesty on the
twentieth of June nominates our Bishop of St. David's: In pursuance of which
Nomination, his Majesty on the 26th. of July Signed the Writ of Conge d'eslire
to the Dean and Chapter, warranting them thereby to proceed to a new Election;
and therewith sent his Letters Missive (according to the usual Custom) in
behalf of Laud. On Wednesday, August the 16th. they Elect him Bishop of that
See; and on September 18. their Election is confirmed in due form of Law; his
Majesty on the morrow after, restoring the Temporalties of that Bishopric from
the time of his Predecessors death. And now he is actually possessed not only
of the Jurisdiction, but of the Rents, Profits, and Emergencies belonging to a
Bishop of Bath and Wells; a double Title, but relating to a single Diocese, and
that Diocese confined to the County of Somerset. The Bishops seat originally at
Wells, where it still continues, and in respect whereof this Church is called
in some Writers, Fontanensis Ecclesia. The style of Bath came in but upon the
by. The church of Wells first built by Ina King of the West Saxons, Anno 704.
and by him dedicated to St. Andrew, after endowed by Kenulfe another King of
the same people, Anno 766. and finally made a Bishops See in the time of Edward
the elder, Anno 905. The first that bore that title being Adelmus, before Abbot
of Glastenbury. The present Church, in place where that of Ina had stood
before, was built most part of it by Bishop Robert, the eighteenth Bishop of
this See, but finished and perfected by Bishop Ioceline Surnamed d' Wellis.
Johannes d' Villula, the sixteenth Bishop, having bought the Town of Bath of
King Henry the First for five hundred Marks, transferred his Seat unto that
City 1088. Hence grew a jar betwixt the Monks of Bath and the Canons of Wells
about the Election of the Bishop. At last the difference was thus composed by
that Bishop Robert, whom before I spoke of, that from thenceforward the Bishop
should be denominated from both places, and the precedence in the Style should
be given to Bath; that on the vacancy of the Sea, a certain number of Delegates
from both Churches should elect their Prelate, who being elected should be
installed in them both; both of them to be reckoned as the Bishops Chapter, and
all his Grants and Patents confirmed in both. And so it stood until the Reign
of King Henry VIII. at what time the Monastery of Bath being dissolved, there
passed an Act of Parliament for the Dean and Chapter of Wells to make one sole
Chapter to the Bishop, 35 Hen. 8. C. 15.

To welcome him to this new honor his Majesty commanded him to draw up certain
Instructions to be communicated to the Archbishops, Bishops, and the rest of
the Clergy of this Realm upon this occasion. The late Parliament being
dissolved without acting any thing in order to his Majesty's Service, he was
necessitated by the urgency of his affairs to try his Fortune on the subject in
the way of Loan, which seemed to have some Regality in it; For whereas the
Parliament had passed a Bill of three Subsidies and three fifteens, and that
the said Parliament was dissolved before the Bill passed into an Act, his
Majesty was advised that he had good grounds to require those Subsidies of the
Subjects which the House of Commons in their names had assented to, and yet not
to require them by the name of Subsidies, but only in the way of Loan, till the
next Parliament should enable him to make payment of it, or confirm his levying
of those moneys by a subsequent Act. The Sum required to be raised was 173411
pound, which was conceived to equal the three Subsidies, which had been voted
for him in the House of Commons, though it never passed into an Act: or
otherwise to make up that Sum which the present necessity of setting out his
Fleet required. He had before pawned the Plate and Jewels of the Crown, and
sold as much Land to the City of London, (which would neither lent gratis, nor
take those Lands in way of Mortgage) as brought in 120000 pound upon easy
purchases. All which he was ready to expend, or had before expended on the
public safety. But that not being able to make such necessary provisions as
were required, both to secure himself at home, and succor his Confederates and
Allies abroad, he was forced to fall upon this course. To which end he issues
out his Letters of Commission, bearing date the thirteenth of October, directed
to certain Lords, Knights, and Gentlemen in their several Counties. In which
they were required to acquaint the People, that his dear Uncle the King of
Denmark was brought into great distress; That without present Succor the Sound
would be lost, his Garrison in Stoade broken by the Emperors Forces, (which
then straightly besieged it;) the Eastland Trade (which maintains our Shipping)
and the Staple of Hamborough (which vents our Cloth) would both be gotten from
him; As also that the two great Kings of Spain and France, together with the
Pope, were joined to rout out our Religion; That their Admirals, the Duke of
Guise, and Don Frederick d' Toledo, were at that present before Rochel,
endeavoring to block it up; And that they have store of Land-men ready on the
Coast of Britain, with them and other Forces to invade us. Upon which grounds
they were required by all plausible and powerful means to persuade the People
to pay the Taxes severally imposed upon them; with many other directions
tending to advance the Service.

It was observed of Queen Elizabeth, that when she had any business to bring
about amongst the people, she used to tune the Pulpits, as her saying was; that
is to say, to have some Preachers in and about London, and other great
Auditories in the Kingdom, ready at command to cry up her design, as well in
their public Sermons as their private Conferences: Which course was now
thought fit to be followed in preparing the people toward a dutiful compliance
to these his Majesty's desires. Breviate.
And to that end Laud received a Command from his Majesty by the Duke of
Buckingham, to reduce certain instructions into Form, partly Political, partly
Ecclesiastical, in the Cause of the King of Denmark, not long before beaten,
and now much distressed by Count Tilly, to be published in all Parishes within
the Realm. To this he cheerfully conformed, and brought the said Instructions
to the Duke within two days after, being the sixteenth of September. And
having read them over first to the Duke, and after to the King himself, he
received from both a very favorable acceptance. On the next day they were
communicated to the Lords of the Council, who approved them also. By whose
advice he sent them to the Archbishop of Canterbury, requiring him by his
Letters, bearing date September 29. to see them published and dispersed in the
several Diocesses of his Province. The like Letters he also writ to the
Archbishop of York; And they accordingly gave order to their several and
respective Suffragans, To see them made known to the worthy Preachers and
Ministers in their Diocese, and so far as their Lordships might in their own
persons, to put these things in execution, and to call upon the Clergy which
was under them, in their Preachings and private Conferences to stir up all
sorts of people to express their Zeal to God, their Duty to the King, and their
Love unto their Country, and one to another; that all good and Christian-like
course might be taken for the preservation of true Religion both in this Land,
and through all Christendom. Now the tenor of the said Instructions was as
follows:

Most Reverend Father in God, right trusty and right well-beloved Counselor,
We greet you well.
WE have observed that the Church and the State are so nearly united and knit
together, that though they may seem two bodies, yet indeed in some relation
they may be accounted but as one, inasmuch as they both are made up of the same
men, which are differenced only in relation to Spiritual or Civil ends. This
neerness makes the Church call in the help of the State, to succor and support
her, whenever she is pressed beyond her strength: And the same nearness makes
the State call in for the service of the Church, both to teach that duty which
her Members know not, and to exhort them to, and encourage them in that duty
which they know. It is not long since we ordered the State to serve the Church,
and by a timely Proclamation settled the peace of it: And now the State looks
for the like assistance from the Church, that she and all her Ministers may
serve God and us, by preaching peace and unity at home, that it may be the
better able to resist Foreign Force uniting and multiplying against it. And to
the end that they to whom we have committed the Government of the Church under
us, may be the better able to dispose of the present occasions, we have, with
the Advice of our Council, thought fit to send unto you these Instructions
following, to be sent by you to the Bishops of your Province, and such others
whom it may concern, and by them and all their Officers directed to all the
Ministers throughout the several Diocesses, that according to these punctually
they may instruct and exhort the people to serve God and us, and labor by
their Prayers to divert the dangers which hang over us. The danger in which we
are at this time is great. It is increased by the late blow given our good
Uncle the King of Denmark, who is the chief Person in those parts that opposed
the spreading Forces of Spain. If he cannot subsist, there is little or nothing
left to hinder the House of Austria from being Lord and Master of Germany: And
that is a large and mighty Territory, and such as should it be gotten, would
make an open way for Spain to do what they pleased in all the West part of
Christendom. For besides the great strength which Germany once possessed would
bring to them, which are two strong already, you are to consider first how it
enables them by Land, in that it will join all or the most part of the
Spaniards now distracted Territories, and be a means for him safely and
speedily to draw down Forces against any other Kingdom that shall stand in his
way. Nor can it be thought the Low Countries can hold out longer against him if
he once become Lord of the upper parts. And secondly, You are to weigh how it
will advantage him by Sea, and make him strong against us in our particular,
which is of easy apprehension to all men. And besides, if he once get Germany
he will be able, though he had no Gold from India, to supply the necessity of
those Wars, and to hinder all Trade and Traffic of the greatest Staple
Commodities of this Kingdom, Cloth and Wool, and so make them of little or no
value.

You are to know therefore that to prevent this, is the present care of the
King and State, and there is no probable way left but by sending Forces and
other Supplies to the said King of Denmark our dear Uncle, to enable him to
keep the Field, that our Enemies be not Masters of all on the sudden. You are
further to take notice how both we and the whole State stand bound in Honor
and Conscience to supply the present necessity of the King of Denmark. For this
quarrel is more nearly ours, the recovery of the Ancient Inheritance of our
dear Sister and her Children. The King of Denmark stands not so near in blood
unto her as we do: Yet for her and our sakes that brave and valiant King has
adventured into the field, and in that engagement has not only hazarded his
Person, but, as things go now, it may turn to some danger to his own Kingdom,
and Posterity, should he not receive aid and succor from us without delay:
Which should it happen (as God forbid) will be one of the greatest dishonours
that ever this Kingdom was stained withal. Nor is danger and dishonor all the
mischief that is like to follow this disaster; For if it be not presently
relieved, the Cause of Religion is not only likely to suffer by it in some one
part (as it has already in a fearful manner in the Palatinate) but in all
places where it has gotten any footing. So that if we supply not presently our
Allies and Confederates in this case, it is like to prove the extirpation of
true Religion, and the re-planting of Romish Superstition in all the
neighboring parts of Christendom. And the coldness of this State shall suffer
in all places as the betrayer of that Religion elsewhere, which it professes
and honors at home, which will be an imputation never to be washed off. And
God forbid this State should suffer under it.

Neither may you forget rightly to inform the People committed to your charge,
that this War which now grows full of danger was not entered upon rashly and
without advice, but you are to acquaint them, that all former Treaties by a
peaceable way were in the latter end of our dear Father of ever blessed memory
dissolved as fruitless, and unfit to be longer held on foot; And this by the
Counsel of both Houses of Parliament then sitting: so those two great and
honorable Bodies of Peers and People represented in Parliament led on this
Counsel and course to a War with Spain. To effect this, they desired our aid
and assistance, and used us to work our said dear Father to entertain this
course. This upon their Persuasions, and Promises of all Assistance and Supply,
we readily undertook and effected, and cannot now be left in that Business, but
with the Sin and Shame of all men. Sin, because Aid and Supply for the Defense
of the Kingdom, and the like Affairs of State, especially such as are advised
and assumed by Parliamentary Council, are due to the King from his People, by
all Law both of God and Men: And shame, if they forsake the King, while he
pursues their own Council, just and honorable, and which could not under God
but have been as succesful, if it had been followed and supplied in time, as we
desired and labored for. One thing there is which proves a great hinderance of
this State, and not continued among the People, without great offense against
God, detriment both to Church and State, and our great disservice in this and
all other Business. It is breach of Unity, which is grown too great and common
amongst all sorts of men. The danger of this goes far; for in all States it
has made way for Enemies to enter. We have by all means endeavored Union, and
require of you to Preach it, and Charity the Mother of it, frequently in the
ears of the People. We know their Loyal hearts, and therefore wonder the more
what should cause destracted Affections. If you call upon them (which is your
duty) we doubt not but that God will bless them with that Love to himself, to
his Church, and their own Preservation, which alone will be able to bind up the
scatterings of divided Affections into Strength. To this end you are to lay
before them what Miseries Home-divisions have brought upon this and many other
Kingdoms, and to exhort all men to embrace it in time. The Danger it self,
besides all other Christian and Prudent Motives, is of force enough (where it
is duly considered) to make men join in all amity against a common Enemy, a
great and growing Enemy: And to do it in time, before any secret and cunning
working of his may use one part in a division to weaken the other.

And in the last place (but first and last and all times to be insisted on) you
are to call upon God your selves, and to incite the People to join with you in
humble and hearty Prayers unto God, That he would be pleased now, after long
affliction of his dear People and Children, to look in mercy both upon them and
us, and in particular for the Safety of the King of Denmark, and that Army
which is left him, That God would bless and prosper him against his and our
Enemies. Thus you are to strengthen the hearts and hopes of our Loyal Subjects
and People, in and upon God. And whereas the greatest confidence men have in
God, arises not only from his Promises, but from their experience likewise of
his Goodness, you must not fail often to recall to the memory of the People,
with thankfulness, the late great Experience we have had of his Goodness
toward us: For the three great and usual Judgments, which he darts down upon
disobedient and unthankful People, are Pestilence, Famine, and the Sword. The
Pestilence did never rage more in this Kingdom than of late; and God was
graciously pleased in mercy to hear the Prayers which were made unto him, and
the ceasing of the Judgment was little less than a Miracle. The Famine
threatened us this present year; and it must have followed, had God rained down
his Anger a little longer upon the Fruits of the Earth: But upon our Prayers he
stayed that Judgment, and sent us a blessed Season, and a most plentiful
Harvest. The Sword is the thing which we are now to look to; and you must call
the People to their Prayers again, against that Enemy, That God will be pleased
to send the like deliverance from this Judgment also; That in the same Mercy he
will vouchsafe to strengthen the hands of his People; That he will sharpen
their Sword, but dull and turn the edge of that which is in our Enemies hands;
that so while some Fight, others may Pray for the Blessing. And you are to be
careful that you fail not to direct and hearten our Loving People in this and
all other necessary Services, both of God, his Church, and Us: That we may have
the comfort of our Peoples Service; the State, Safety; the Church, Religion;
and the People, the enjoying of all such Blessings as follow these. And we end
with doubling this Care upon you, and all under you in their several Places.

Given at our Palace at Westminster in the Second year of our Reign, September
21. 1626.

Such were the Instructions issued by his Majesty's Command, in the present
exigent: The dexterous performance of which Service, as it raised Laud higher
in his Majesty's good Opinion of him, than before he was; so was it recompensed
with a Place of greater neerness to him, than before he had. For on that very
day which gives date to the said Instructions, the most Learned and Reverend
Bishop Andrews, Bishop of Winton. and Dean of his Majesty's Chappel-Royal,
departed this Life at his Episcopal House in Southwark; whose Funerals were
solemnized in St. Saviors Church on the eleventh day of November following,
Buckeridge then Bishop of Rochester, bestowing his last duty on him in a
Funeral Sermon. A man he was of such extraordinary Abilities, that I shall
rather choose to express his Character by the Pen of others, than my own. Thus
then says one of our late Historians: Hist. of K. Chapter by H. L. p 62.
This year we lost the stupendiously profound Prelate Doctor Andrews Bishop of
Winchester, an excellent Disputant, in the Oriental Tongues surpassing knowing;
so studiously devoted to the Doctrine of the Ancient Fathers, as his extant
Works breath nothing but their Faith; nor can we now read the Fathers, more
than we should have done in his very Aspect, Gesture, and Actions; so venerable
in his Presence, so grave in his Motions, so pious in his Conversation, so
primitive in all. Another goes a little further, and tells us of him, That the
World wanted Learning to know how Learned he was; Chapter Hist. B. 11. p. 126.
so skilled in all (especially Oriental Languages) that some conceive he might
(if then living) almost have served as an Interpreter-General at the Confusion
of Tongues. In his life time he only published two Books in Latin, viz. His
Apology against Cardinal Bellarmine, and that which he called Tortura Torti,
in behalf of King James; and a small Tract entitled, Determinatio Theologica,
de jure-jurando exigendo, quarto, Printed at London, 1593. And in English
nothing but a small Volume of Sermons, which he acknowledged for his own. The
Book of Catechetical Doctrine, published in his life by others, but without his
privity and consent, he always professedly disavowed, as containing only some
imperfect Collections, which had been taken from his mouth by some ignorant
hand, when he was Reader of the Catechism Lecture in Pembroke Hall. But after
his decease, ninety six of his Sermons were collected with great care and
industry, published in Print, and Dedicated to his Sacred Majesty by Laud then
Bishop of London, and Buckeridge at that time Bishop of Ely, 1628. For Felton
of Ely dying the year before, Buckeridge had been translated thither by the
Power and Favor of that his dear Friend and quondam Pupil, Curle Dean of
Litchfield, and one of the Residentiaries of Salisbury, succeeding after his
Translation in the Sea of Rochester. By the same hands some other Pieces of
his, both in English and Latin, were very carefully drawn together, and
published with the like Dedication to his Sacred Majesty, Anno 1629. He that
desires to hear more of him, let him first consult the Funeral Sermon before
mentioned, extant at the end of the great Volume of his Sermons; and afterward
peruse his Epitaph in the Church of St. Mary's Over-rhe, transcribed in Stows
Survey of London of the last Edition. After his death the Sea of Winton was
kept vacant till the latter end of the year next following; the profits of it
being in the mean time taken up for his Majesty's use, and answered into the
Exchequer, according to an ancient Custom (but more old than commendable) used
frequently by the Kings of England, since the time of William surnamed Rufus,
from whom it is said to have took beginning.

But the Deanery of the Chapel had not been void above nine days, when Laud was
nominated to it, and was actually admitted into that Office on the sixth day of
October following, by Philip Earl of Montgomery Lord Chamberlain of his
Majesty's Household, before whom he took the usual and appointed Oath. He had
before observed a Custom (as ill though not so old as the other) used in the
Court since the first entrance of King James. The Custom was, That at what part
soever of the Public Prayers the King came into his Closet (which looked into
the Chapel) to hear the Sermon, the Divine Service was cut off, and the Anthem
sung, that the Preacher might go into the Pulpit. This the new Dean disliked,
as he had good reason, and thereupon humbly moved his Majesty, that he would be
present at the Liturgy, as well as the Sermon every Lords day; and that at
whatsoever part of Prayers he came, the Priest who Ministered should proceed to
the end of the Service: To which his Majesty most readily and religiously
condescended, and gave him thanks for that his seasonable and pious Motion. As
for the Deanery of the Chapel, it was of long standing in the Court, but had
been discontinued from the death of Dr. George Carew Dean of Windsor, (the
Father of George Lord Carew of Clopton, and Earl of Totness) Anno 1572. till
King James his coming to this Crown, at what time Bancroft, then Bishop of
London, conceiving into what dangers the Church was like to run, by the
multitude of Scots about him, thought it expedient that some Clergymen of Note
and Eminence should be attendant always in and about the Court. And thereupon
it was advised, that to the Bishop Almoner and the Clerk of the Closet a Dean
of the Chapel should be added, to look unto the diligent and due performance
of Gods Public Service, and order matters of the Quire. According to which
resolution, Dr. James Mountague was recommended to the King for the first Dean
of the Chapel in his time; succeeded in that place by Andrews, and he now by
Laud.

But to proceed, 1627.
Whilst matters went on thus smoothly about the Court, they met with many
Rubbs in the Country, some of the Preachers did their parts according as they
were required by the said Instructions, amongst whom Sibthorp, Vicar of Brackly
in Northamptonshire, advanced the Service, in a Sermon preached by him at the
Assizes for that County. The scope of which Sermon was to justify the
Lawfulness of the general Loan, and of the Kings imposing Taxes by his own
Regal Power, without consent in Parliament, and to prove, that the people in
point of Conscience and Religion ought cheerfully to submit to such Loans and
Taxes without any opposition. The Licencing of which Sermon (when it was
offered to the Press) being refused by Archbishop Abbot, and some exceptions
made against it, the perusing of it was referred to Laud, April 24. 1627, by
whom, after some qualifications and corrections, it was approved, and after
published by the Author, under the name of Apostolical Obedience. About the
same time Manwaring, Doctor in Divinity, one of his Majesty's Chaplains in
Ordinary, Cant. Doom, p. 245.
and Vicar of the Parish Church of St. Giles in the Fields, published two
Sermons of his preaching on the same occasion, the one before the King, the
other in the hearing of his own Parishioners. These Sermons he entitled by the
name of Religion and Allegiance, both of them tending to the justification of
the lawfulness of the Kings imposing Loans and Taxes on his people without
consent in Parliament; Page 83.
and that the imposition of such Loans and Taxes did so far bind the
Consciences of the Subjects of this Kingdom, that they could not refuse the
payment of them without peril of eternal damnation. But neither the Doctrine of
these Preachers, or of any other to that purpose, nor the distress of the King
of Denmark, nor the miserable estate of Rochel, did so far prevail amongst the
people; but that the Commissioners for the Loan found greater opposition in it
than they did expect. Many who had been Members in the two former Parliaments
opposed it with their utmost power, and drew a great part of the Subjects, in
all Countries some, to the like refusal. For which refusal some Lords, and many
of the choice Gentry of the Kingdom, and others of inferior sort were
committed unto several Prisons, where they remained till the approach of the
following Parliament. Insomuch that the Court was put upon the necessity of
some further Project. The Papists would have raised a Provision for the setting
forth both of Ships and Men, for the defense of the Narrow Seas, and working on
the Kings wants, flattered themselves with the hope of a Toleration for it. But
old Sir John Savill of Yorkshire, who had been lately taken into his Majesty's
Council, had found out a plot worth two of that; conceiving, that a Commission
to proceed against Recusants for their thirds, H^st. King Charles, p. 63
due to his Majesty by Law, would bring in double the Sum which they had
offered. To this the King readily condescended, granting him and some others a
Commission for that purpose for the Parts beyond Trent; as unto certain Lords
and Gentlemen for all other Counties in the Kingdom. By which means, and some
moneys raised upon the Loan, there was such a present stock advanced, that
with some other helps which his Majesty had, he was enabled to set forth a
powerful Fleet, and a considerable Land Army for the relief of the Rochellers,
whose quarrel he had undertaken upon this occasion.

The Queen at her first coming into England had brought with her a compl^at
Family of French to attend her here, according to the Capitulations, between
the Commissioners of both Kings, before the Marriage. But the French Priests,
and some of the rest of her Domestics were grown so insolent, and had put so
many affronts upon his Majesty, that he was forced to send them home within few
days after he had dissolved the foregoing Parliament. In which he had done no
more than what the French King had done before him, in sending back all the
Spanish Courtiers which his Queen brought with her. But the French King not
looking on his own Example, and knowing on what ill terms the King stood both
at home and abroad, first seized on all the Merchants Ships, which lay on the
River of Bordeaux, and then brake out into open war. So that the King was
necessitated to make use of those Forces against the French which were designed
to have been used against the Spaniard, and to comply with the desires of the
Rochellers, who humbly sued for his protection and defense. But the Fleet, not
going out till after Michaelmas, found greater opposition at Sea than they
feared from the Land; being encountered with strong Tempests, and thereby
necessitated to return without doing any thing, but only showing the Kings good
will and readiness toward their assistance. But the next Fleet, and the
Land-Army before mentioned, being in a readiness, the Duke of Buckingham
appeared Commander general for that Service, who hoped thereby to make himself
of some consideration in the eyes of the People. On the twenty seventh of June
he hoised Sails for the Isle of The, which lay before the Port of Rochel, and
embarred their trade; the taking whereof was the matter aimed at: And he had
strength enough both for Sea and Land to have done the work, if he had not
followed it more like a Courtier than a Soldier: For having neglected those
advantages which the victory at his Landing gave him, he first suffered himself
to be complemented out of the taking of their chief Fort, when it was almost at
his mercy; and after stood unseasonably upon point of Honor, in facing those
Forces which were sent from the French King to raise the Siege, when he might
have made a safe retreat unto his Ships without loss or danger. So that well
beaten by the French, and with great loss of Reputation among the English, he
came back with the remainder of his broken Forces in November following, as
dearly welcome to the King as if he had returned with success and triumphs.

During the preparations for this unfortunate attempt, on Sunday the twenty
ninth of April it pleased his Majesty to adm^t the Bishop of Bath and Wells for
one of the Lords of his most honorable Privy Council; An honor which he would
not have accepted with so great cheerfulness if his dear Friend, the Lord
Bishop of Durham, had not been sworn at or about the same time also. So
mutually did these two Prelates contribute their assistances to one another,
that as Neile gave Laud his helping hand to bring him first into the Court, and
plant him in King James his favor: So Laud made use of all advantages in
behalf of Neile to keep him in favor with King Charles, and advance him
higher. The Fleet and Forces before mentioned being in a readiness, and the
Duke provided for the Voyaye, it was not thought either safe or fit that the
Duke himself should be so long absent, without leaving some assured Friend
about his Majesty by whom all practices against him might be either prevented
or suppressed, and by whose means the Kings affections might be always
inflamed toward him; To which end Laud is first desired to attend his Majesty
to Portsmouth, before which the Navy lay at Anchor, and afterward to wait the
whole Progress also; the Inconveniences of which journeys he was as willing to
undergo as the Duke was willing to desire it. The Church besides was at that
time in an heavy condition, and opportunities must be watched for keeping her
from falling from bad to worse. No better her condition now in the Realm of
England than anciently in the Eastern Churches, when Nectarius sat as Sup^^me
Pastor in the Chair of Constantinople; Greg. N^z. Orat. 46.
of which thus Nazianze writes unto him; The Arians (says he) were grown so
insolent, that they make open profession of their Heresy, as if they had been
authorized and licenced to it; The Macedonians so presumptuous, that they were
formed into a Sect, and had a Titular Bishop of their own* The Apollinarians
held their Conventicles, with as much safety and esteem as the Orthodox
Christians. And for Eunomius, the bosome-mischief of those times, he thought so
poorly of a general connivence, that at last nothing would content him but a
toleration, The cause of which disorders he ascribes to Nectarius only. A man,
as the Historian says of him, S^crat. H^st. Lib. 5. c. 8.
of an exceeding fair and plausible demeanor, and very gracious with the
people: one that chose rather (as it seems) to give free way to all men's
fancies, and suffer every man's proceedings, than draw upon himself the envy of
a stubborn Clergy, and a factious Multitude. Never was Church more like to
Church, Bishop to Bishop, time to time, (the names of the Sects and Heresies
being only changed) than those of Constantinople then, and of England now. A
pregnant evidence, that possibly there could not be a greater mischief in a
Church of God than a Popular Prelate.

This, though his Majesty might not know, yet the Bishops which were about him
did, who therefore had but ill discharged their duty both to God and man, if
they had not made his Majesty acquainted with it; he could not choose but see by
the practices and proceedings of the former Parliaments to what a prevalency
the Puritans were grown in all parts of the Kingdom; and how incompatible that
humor was with the Regal interest. There was no need to tell him from what
fountain the mischief came, how much the Popularity and remiss Government of
Abbot did contribute toward it. Him therefore he sequestreth from his
Metropolitical Jurisdiction, confines him to his house at Ford in Kent, and by
his Commission, bearing date the ninth day of October, 1627. transfers the
exercise of that Jurisdiction to Mountain Bishop of London, Neile Bishop of
Durham, Buckeridge Bishop of Rochester, Houson Bishop of Oxon, and Laud Bishop
of Bath and Wells; To whom, or any two or more of them, he gives authority to
execute and perform all and every those Acts, matters, and things, any way
touching or concerning the Power, Jurisdiction, or Authority of the Archbishop
of Canterbury in causes or matters Ecclesiastical, as amply, fully, and
effectually, to all intents and purposes, as the said Archbishop himself might
have done. And this his Majesty did to this end and purpose, that the
Archiepiscopal Jurisdiction, being committed to such hands as were no favorers
of that Faction, there might some stop be given to that violent current which
then began to bear all before it. Nor did his Majesty fail of the end desired;
For though Abbot (on good reasons of State) was restored unto his Jurisdiction
toward the latter end of the year next following: Yet by this breathing time,
as short as it was, the Church recovered strength again. And the disgrace put
upon the man did so disanimate and deject the opposite Party, that the Balance
began visibly to turn on the Churches side.

During the time that this Commission was in force, some Beneficed persons in
the Country, who in themselves were well affected to ancient orders, and now in
more assurance of Protections than before they were* adventured on removing the
Communion Table from the middle of the Church or Chancel, and setting it
(according to the pattern of the Mother Churches) where the Altar formerly had
stood. Amongst the rest one Titly, Vicar of Grantham (a ^oted Town upon the
Road) in the County of Lincoln, having observed the situation of the holy
Table, as well in his Diocesans Chapel, as in the Cathedral mother Church,
transposed the Table from the midst of the Chancel in his Parish Church, and
placed it Altar-wise at the East end of it. Complaint hereof being made by some
of that Town to the Bishop of Lincoln, he presently takes hold of the
opportunity to discourage the work; not because he disliked it in point of
judgment (for then his judgment and his practice must have crossed each other)
but because Titly had Relation to the Bishop of Durham. And for the Bishop of
Durham he had no good thoughts, partly because he kept his stand in the Court,
out of which himself had been ejected, and partly by reason of the intimacy
betwixt him and Laud, whom he looked on as his open and professed enemy. And
then how was it possible that he should approve of Titly, or his action either,
conceiving that it might be done by their or one of their appointments, or at
the least in hope of better preferment from them? Hereupon he betakes himself
unto his Books, and frames a Popular Discourse against placing the Communion
Table Altar-wise, digests it in the Form of a Letter to the Vicar of Grantham;
but sends it unto some Divines of the Lecture there, by them to be dispersed
and scattered over all the Country. But of this Letter more hereafter, when we
shall find it taken up for a Buckler against Authority, and laid in Bar against
the proceedings of the Church and the Rules of it, when such transposing of the
Table became more general, not alone practiced, but prescribed. But the noise
of this Letter not flying very far, at the first hindered not the removing of
the Table in the Parish Church of St. Nicholas in the Borough of Abingdon; the
occasion this: One Blucknall, dwelling in that Parish, bestowed upon it,
amongst other Legacies, an annual Pension to be paid unto the Curate thereof,
for reading duly prayer in the said Church according to the Form prescribed in
the English Liturgy. For the establishing of which Gifts and Legacies to the
proper use and uses intended by him, a Commission was issued out of the High
Court of Chancery, according to the Statute 43 Eliz. Directed amongst others to
Sir Ed. Clark Knight. Sam. Fell Doctor in Divinity, George Purefez, and Richard
Organ Esquires; who by their joint consent made this Order following: viz. And
that the Table given by Mr. Blucknall should not by the multitude of People
coming to Service, or otherwise by sitting or writing upon it, or by any other
unreverent usage, be profaned, spoiled, or hurt; We do order and decree, that
the said Table shall continually stand at the upper end of the Chancell, upon
which a Carpet (by him given) should be laid, where it shall continually stand
close to the upper Skreen (there being of old within that Skreen a kind of
Vestry for keeping the Plate, Books, and Vestments which belong to the Church)
and there to be covered with the Carpet aforesaid, and in no place else. Which
Order, together with many others, for settling and disposing the said Gifts and
Legacies, were made at Abingdon on the twenty fifth of April, 1628. and
afterward confirmed under the Great Seal of England. This being the only
Table, as I conceive, whose posture in that place is ratified by Decree in
Chancery.

Now as some private Beneficed persons, during the Suspension of the said
Archbishop, did thus adventure on the one side; so diverse Commissaries,
Officials, Surrogates, and other Ecclesiastical Officers, began to carry a more
hard hand on the Puritan Party (their great Friend and Patron being thus
discountenanced) than they had done formerly. Amongst these none more active
than Lamb, Sibthorp, Allen, and Burden, according to their Power and Places;
the three last having some relation to Lamb, as Lamb had to the Episcopal Court
at Peterborough, and thereby a near neighborhood to the Bishop of Lincoln,
then keeping in his House at Buckden in the County of Huntingdon; at whose
Table being entertained (as they had been many times before) they found there
Morison Chancellor to that Bishop, and Prigeion one of the Officers of the
Court at Lincoln. C^. Hist. ^ib. 1^. p. 155.
Their Discourse growing hot against the Puritans, the Bishop advised them to
take off their heavy hand from them; informing them, That his Majesty hereafter
intended to use them with more mildness, as a considerable Party, having great
influence on the Parliament, without whose concurrence the King could not
comfortably supply his Necessities: To which he added, That his Majesty had
communicated this unto him by his own mouth, with his Resolutions hereafter of
more gentleness to men of that Opinion. Which words, though unadvisedly spoken,
yet were not thought, when first spoken by him, to be of such a dangerous and
malignant nature, as to create to him all that charge and trouble, which
afterward be^el him upon that occasion; For some years after, a breach being
made betwixt him and Lamb, about the Officials place of Leicester, which the
Bishop had designed to another person, Lamb complains of him to some great men
about the Court, for revealing the Kings Secrets committed to his trust and
privacy, contrary to the Oath taken by him as a Privy Counselor. The Bishop
was conceived to live at too great a height, to be too popular withal, and
thereby to promote the Puritan Interest, against the Counsels of the Court.
This Information was laid hold on, as a means to humble him, to make him
sensible of his own duty, and the Kings displeasure; and a Command is given to
Noy (then newly made his Majesty's Atturney-General) to file a Bill, and
prosecute against him in the Star Chamber, upon this delinquency. Though the
Bishop about two or three years since had lost the Seal, yet he was thought to
have taken the Purse along with him; reputed rich, and one that had good
Friends in the Court about the King, which made him take the less regard of
this prosecution. By the Advice of his Counsel he first demurred unto the Bill,
and afterward put in a strong Plea against it; both which were overruled by
Chief Justice Richardson, to whom by Order of the Court they had been referred:
Which artifices and delays, though they gained much time, yet could he not
thereby take off the edge of the Attorney, grown so much sharper toward him by
those tricks in Law. And in this state we shall find the business about ten
years hence, when it came to a Sentence; having laid so much of it here
together, because the occasion of the Suit was given much about this time.

About the same time also came out a Book entitled, A Collection of Private
Devotions, or, the Hours of Prayer, composed by Cozens one of the Prebends of
Durham, at the Request, and for the Satisfa^ction, as it was then generally
believed, of the Countess of Denbigh, the only Sister of the Duke, and then
supposed to be unsettled in the Religion here established, if not warping from
it: A Book which had in it much good matter, but not well pleasing in the form;
said in the Title page to be framed agreeably to a Book of Private Prayers
Authorized by Queen Elizabeth, Anno 1560. After the Calendar it began with a
Specification of the Apostles Creed in Twelve Articles, the Lords Prayer in
Seven Petitions, the Ten Commandments, with the Duties enjoined, and the Sins
prohibited by them; The Precepts of Charity, The Precepts of the Church, The
Seven Sacraments, The Three Theological Virtues, The Three kinds of Good Works,
The Seven Gifts of the Holy Ghost, The Twelve Fruits of the Holy Ghost, The
Spiritual and Corporal Works of Mercy, The Eight Beatitudes, Seven deadly Sins,
and their contrary Virtues, and the Quatuor novissima: After which (some
Prefaces and Introductions intervening) followed the Forms of Prayer for the
first, third, sixth, and ninth Hours, as also for the Vespers and Compline,
known here in former Times by the vulgar name of Canonical Hours: Then came the
Litany, The Seven Penitential Psalms, Preparatory Prayers for Rec^iving the
Holy Communion, Prayers to be used in time of Sickness, and of the near
approach of Death, besides many others. The Book approved by Mountain then
Bishop of London, and by him Licenced for the Press (with the Subscription of
his own hand to it): Which notwithstanding, it startled many at the first,
though otherwise very moderate and sober men, who looked upon it as a
Preparatory to usher in the Superstitions of the Church of Rome. The Title gave
offense to some, by reason of the correspondence which it held with the Popish
Horaries; but the Frontispiece a great deal more, on the top whereof was found
the Name of JESUS, figured in three Capital Letters (IHS) with a Cross upon
them, incircled with the Sun, supported by two Angels, with two devout Women
praying toward it.

It was not long before it was encountered by Prynne and Burton, of whom we
shall have occasion to speak more hereafter. Prynn's Book (for of the other
there was but little notice taken) was Printed by the name of A Brief Survey
and Censure of Cozens his Cozening Devotions, Anno 1628. In which he charge
it for being framed in general according to the Horaries and Primers of the
Church of Rome? but more particularly, to be directly molded, framed, and
contrived according to Our Ladies Primer or Office Printed in Latin at Antwerp,
1593. and afterward in Latin and English, Anno 1604. Next he objects, That the
Book of Latin Prayers published by Queen Elizabeth, 1560. was called Orarium
(not Horarium) sive Libellus Precationum (that is to say, A Book of Prayers):
That in that Book there was mention of no other hours of Prayer than first,
third, and ninth; and that in the second and third Editions of the same Book,
published in the years 1564. and 1573. there occurred no such distribution into
hours at all; which (said he) reproacheth all the Specifications
before-remembred by the name of Popish trash and trumpery, stolen out of
Popish Primers and Catechisms, not mentioned in any Protestant Writers; and
then proceeds to the canvasing of every Office, and the Prefaces belonging to
them, which with the like infallible Spirit he condemns of Popery. But for all
this violent opposition, and the great clamors made against it, the Book grew
up into esteem, and justified it self, without any Advocate; insomuch that many
of those who first startled at in regard of the Title, found in the body of it
so much Piety, such regular Forms of Divine Worship, such necessary
Consolations in special Exigencies, that they reserved it by them as a Jewel of
great Price and value. But of this Author and his Book, the following
Parliament, to whom Prynne dedicates his Answer, will take further notice.

But before that Parliament begins, we must take notice of some Changes then in
agitation amongst the Governors of the Church. His Majesty in the June
foregoing had acquainted Laud with his intent of nominating him to the Sea of
London in the place of Mountain, whom he looked on as a man unactive, and
addicted to voluptuousness, and one that loved his ease too well to disturb
himself in the concerments of the Church. He also looked upon that City as the
Retreat and Receptacle of the Grandees of the Puritan Faction; the influence
which it had, by reason of its Wealth and Trading, on all parts of the Kingdom;
and that upon the Correspondence and Conformity thereof, the welfare of the
whole depended: No better way to make them an example of Obedience to the rest
of the Subjects, then by placing over them a Bishop of such Parts and Power as
they should either be unable to withstand, or afraid to offend. In order unto
this design, it was thought expedient to translate Neile (whose accommodations
Laud much studied) to the Sea of Winchester, then vacant by the death of
Andrews, and to remove Mountain unto Durham in the place of Neile: But the
putting of this design into execution did require some time. Such Officers of
State as had the management of the Kings Revenue, thought it not fit in that
low ebb of the Exchequer, that the Church of Winton should be filled with
another Bishop, before the Michaelmas Rents at least (if not some following
Pay-days also) had flowed into his Majesty's Coffers. Which though it were no
very long time, compared with the Vacancies of some former Reign; yet gave it
an occasion to some calumniating Spirits to report abroad, That this Bishopric
was designed to be a Subsistence for one of the Queen of Bohemia's younger
Sons, who was to hold it by the Name of an Administrator, according to an ill
Custom of some Princes amongst the Lutherans. But this Obstruction being passed
by, Neile with great cheerfulness in himself, and thankfulness unto the King,
proceeded in his Translation to the Sea of Winton; his Election being ratified
by his Majesty, and confirmed in due form of Law, before the end of the next
year, 1627. In Mountains hands the business did receive a stop: He had spent a
great part of his Life in the air of the Court, as Chaplain to Robert Earl of
Salisbury, Dean of Westminster, and Bishop Almoner; and had lived for many
years last past in the warm City of London. To remove him so far from the
Court, and send him into those cold Regions of the North, he looked on as the
worst kind of Banishment, next neighbor to a Civil death: But having a long
while strived in vain, and understanding that his Majesty was not well pleased
with his delays, he began to set forward on that Journey, with this Proviso
notwithstanding, That the utmost term of his Removal should be but from
London-House in the City, to Durham-House in the Strand. And yet to beget more
delays toward Laud's Advancement, before he actually was confirmed in the Sea
of Durham, the Metropolitan See of York fell void by the death of the most
Reverend Prelate Doctor Toby Matthews: This Dignity he affected with as much
ambition, as he had earnestly endeavored to decline the other; and he obtained
what he desired: But so much time was taken up in passing the Election,
facilitating the Royal Assent, and the Formalities of his Confirmation, that
the next Session of Parliament was ended, and the middle of July well near
passed* before Laud could be actually Translated to the Sea of London.

These matters being in agitation, and the Parliament drawing on apace, on
Tuesday the fifth of February he strained the back-sinew of his right Leg, as
he went with his Majesty to Hampton Court, which kept him to his Chamber till
the fourteenth of the same; during which time of his keeping in, I had both the
happiness of being taken into his special knowledge of me, and the opportunity
of a longer Conference with him than I could otherwise have expected. I went to
have presented my service to him as he was preparing for this Journey, and was
appointed to attend him on the same day seven-night, when I might presume on
his return. Coming precisely at the time, I heard of his mischance, and that he
kept himself to his Chamber; but order had been left amongst the Servants, that
if I came he should be made acquainted with it; which being done accordingly, I
was brought into his Chamber, where I found him sitting in a Chair, with his
lame leg resting on a Pillow. Commanding that no body should come to interrupt
him till he called for them, he caused me to sit down by him, inquired first
into the course of my Studies, which he well approved of, exhorting me to hold
my self in that moderate course in which he found me. He fell afterward to
discourse of some passages in Oxon. in which I was specially concerned, and
told me thereupon the story of such oppositions as had been made against him in
that University, by Archbishop Abbot, and some others; encouraged me not to
shrink, if I had already, or should hereafter find the like. I was with him
thus, remotis Arbitris, almost two hours: It grew toward twelve of the clock,
and then he knocked for his Servants to come unto him. He dined that day in his
ordinary Dining Room, which was the first time he had so done since his mishap.
He caused me to tarry Dinner with him, and used me with no small respect, which
was much noted by some Gentlemen ( Ephilston, one of his Majesty's Cup-bearers,
being one of the Company) who dined that day with him. A passage, I confess,
not pertinent to my present Story, but such as I have a good precedent for from
Philip de Comines, who tells us as impertinently of the time (though he
acquaint us not with the occasion) of his leaving the Duke of Burgundies
Service, to betake himself to the Employments of King Lewis xi.

It is now time to look into the following Parliament, in the preparation
whereunto (to make himself more gracious in the eyes of the People) his Majesty
releaseth such Gentlemen as had been formerly imprisoned about the Loan; which
in effect was but the letting loose of so many hungry Lions to pursue and worry
him: For being looked upon as Confessors, if not Martyrs for the Commonwealth,
upon the merit of those sufferings they were generally preferred before all
others to serve in Parliament; and being so preferred, they carried as
generally with them a vindicative Spirit, to revenge themselves for that
Restraint, by a restraining of the Prerogative within narrower bounds. At the
opening of this Parliament, March 17. the Preaching of the Sermon was committed
to the Bishop of Bath and Wells, who showed much honest Art in persuading them
to endeavor to keep the Unity of the Spirit in the bond of Peace, Ephesians. 4.3.
which he had taken for his Text: In which, first laying before them the
excellency and effects of UNITY, he told them, amongst other things, Sermon. 6.
p. 247.
That it was a very charitable tie, but better known than loved; a thing so
good, that it was never broken but by the worst men; nay, so good it was, that
the very worst men pretended best when they broke it; and that it was so in the
Church, never yet Heretic renting her Bowels, but he pretended that he raked
them for Truth: That it was so also in the State, seldom any unquiet Spirit
dividing her Union, but he pretends some great abuses, which his integrity
would remedy: O that I were made a Judge in the Land, that every man which has
any Controversy might come to me, that I might do him Justice: and yet no
worse a man than David was King when this cunning was used, 1 Samuel 15. That
Unity both in Church and Commonwealth was so good, that none but the worst
willingly broke it; That even they were so far ashamed of the breach, that they
must seem holier than the rest, that they may be thought to have had a just
cause to break it. And afterward coming by degrees to an Application, Good God
(says he) what a preposterous Thrift is this in men, to sow up every small
rent in their own Coat, and not care what rents they not only suffer, but make
in the Coat of Christ? What is it? Is Christ only thought fit to wear a torn
Garment? Or can we think that the Spirit of Unity, which is one with Christ,
will not depart to seek warmer clothing? Or if he be not gone already, why is
there not Unity, which is where ere he is? Or if he be but yet gone from other
parts of Christendom, in any case (for the passion, and in the bowels of Jesus
Christ I beg it) let us make stay of him here in our parts, etc. Which Sermon
(being all of the same piece) so well pleased the Hearers, that his Majesty
gave command to have it Printed. How well it edified with the Commons, when
they came to read it; and what thanks he received from them for it, we shall
clearly see before we come to the end of this present Session.

The Sermon being ended, his Majesty set forwards to the House of Peers, where
sitting in his Royal Throne, and causing the Commons then assembled to come
before him, he signified in few words, That no man (as he conceived) could be
so ignorant of the Common necessity, as to expostulate the cause of this
Meeting, and not to think Supply to be the end of it; That as this necessity
was the product and consequent of their Advice (he means in reference to his
first engaging in the War with Spain) so the true Religion, the Laws and
Liberties of this State, and just Defense of his Friends and Allies, being so
considerably concerned, would be, he hoped, Arguments enough to persuade
Supply; That he had taken the most ancient, speedy, and best way for Supply, by
calling them together; in which if they should not do their duties, in
answering the quality of his occasions, he must then take some other course for
the saving of that, which the folly of some particular men might hazard to
lose; That notwithstanding the distractions of the last Meeting, he came
thither with no small confidence of good success; assuring them that he would
forget and forgive whatsoever was past, and hoping that they would follow that
sacred Advice lately inculcated, To maintain the UNITY of the Spirit in the
bond of Peace. Which being said, the Lord Keeper took his turn to speak, as the
Custom is, in which Speech he chiefly labored to lay before them the
formidable Power of the House of Austria, the mighty Preparations made by the
King of Spain, the Distractions at the present in the Netherlands, the Dangers
threatened by the French King to those of the Reformed Religion in his
Dominions, and the necessity which lay upon the King to provide for the support
thereof, as well as for the Peace and Preservation of his own Estate;
concluding with several reasons to invite them to assist his Majesty with a
bountiful and quick supply according to the exigency of his affairs.

But all this, little edi^ied with the House of Commons, or rather with the
prevailing Party in it, which comes all to one. For so it happens commonly in
all great Councils, that some few leading Members, either by their diligence or
cunning, out-wit the rest, and form a party strong enough, by casting a mist
before their eyes, or other subtle Artifices to effect their purpose. And so it
fared in this last Parliament with the House of Commons, which though it
contained amongst the rest as dutiful Subjects as any were in the world, (in
his Majesty's own acknowledgment of them) yet being governed by some men which
had their interesses apart from the Crown, they are put upon a resolution of
doing their own business first, and the Kings at leisure. And their own
business it must be to secure the plots and practices of the Puritan Faction by
turning all men's eyes upon such dangers as were to be feared from the Papists;
and in the next place, to make such provision for themselves, that it should
not be within the power of the Royal Prerogative to lay any restraint upon
their persons. No sooner had they obtained their Fa^t (without which nothing
could be done) but they moved the Lords to join with them in a Petition for the
suppres^ing of Popery, which they conceived to make the Wall of Separation
betwixt God and them; to which they found their Lordships willing to consent,
and his Majesty no less willing to satisfy them in all parts thereof than they
could desire. Cant. D^^m,
For calling both houses before him on the fourth of April. He told them he
liked well of their beginning with Religion, and hoped their Consultations
would succeed the happier; That he was as careful of Religion, and should be as
forward in it, as they could desire; That he liked well of the Petition, and
would make use of those and all other means for the maintenance and propagation
of that true Religion wherein he had lived, and by the grace of God was
resolved to dye; And finally, That for the particulars, they should receive a
more full answer hereafter (as they shortly did.) Which said, he put them in
remembrance, That if Provisions were not speedily made, he should not be able
to put a ship to sea this year. But though his Majesty gave so full and
satisfactory an answer to every particular branch of the said Petition, that
Sir Benjamin Ruddiard moved the House to tender their humble thanks to his
Majesty for it; yet to the close of his Majesty's Speech, touching the speedy
making of provisions for that Summers Service, they returned no answer. They
must first know whether they had any thing to give or not, whether they are to
be accounted as Slaves or Freemen, to which two doubts the late imprisonment of
their Members, for not paying the Loan required of them, gave them ground
enough.

These weighty Questions being started, their own property and Liberty must
first be settled, before they could be persuaded to move a foot toward his
Majesty's supplies; Five Subsidies they had voted for him, but it passed no
further than the Vote; For seeing that there was to be a trust on the one side
or the other, it was resolved, that the honor of it should be theirs. The
agitating of which Points, with those which depended thereupon, took up so much
time, that before the Lords could be brought to join with the Commons, and both
together could obtain their desires of the King, there was spent as far as to
the seventh of June; and it was ten days after before they had prepared the
Bill of Subsidies for the Kings Assent. His Majesty's Letter for the Lords,
Bill. Reg. Sect. ^^. N. 19.
Nothing in all this business did so trouble his Majesty as their insisting on
this point: That in no case whatsoever, though it never so nearly concerned
matters of State and Government, he of his Privy Council should have power to
commit any man to prison without showing the cause, and that cause to be
allowed or disallowed as his Majesty's Judges should think fit on the Habeas
Corpus, of which his Majesty well observed in a Letter by him written to the
Peers on the twelfth of May, That by showing the cause of the Commitment, the
whole Service many times might happen to be destroyed; and that the cause also
might be such, and of a nature so transcending the Rules of Law, that the
Judges had no capacity in a Court of Judicature to determine in it. The
intermitting of which power, being one of the constant Rules of Government,
practiced for so many Ages within this Kingdom, would (as he said) soon
dissolve the very frame and foundation of his Monarchy, and therefore that with
out the overthrow of his Sovereignty he could not suffer these powers to be
impeached. But what reason soever he had to allege for himself, he was so bent
on his desires to relieve the Rochellers, and keep that honor up abroad which
he lost at home; that at the last he condescended unto their desires, and
confirmed the prayer of their Petition by Act of Parliament.

Nor would they rest upon that point. They thought they had not done themselves
right enough in disputing their Property with the King in Parliament if they
suffered it to be preached down in the Court and Country. Manwaring therefore
(of whose Sermons we have spoke before) must be brought in for an example unto
others. Whose charge, being drawn up by the Commons, was reported to the Peers
by Pym June 13. The Book of his two Sermons produced before them, the passages
which gave offense openly read, and aggravated to the very height. And though
the poor man, on his knees, with tears in his eyes, and sorrows in his heart,
had most humbly craved pardon of the Lords and Commons for the errors and
indiscretions he had committed in the said two Sermons, yet could he find no
other mercy than, 1. To be imprisoned during the pleasure of the House. 2. To
be fined one thousand pounds to the King. 3. To make such an acknowledgment of
his offense at the Commons Bar as it should please them to prescribe. 4. To be
suspended from his Ministry for three years to come. 5. To be disabled from
ever preaching at the Court. 6. To be incapable of any further. Ecclesiastical
preferment, or secular Office. And finally, That his Majesty should be moved to
call in the said Book by Proclamation, and cause it to be publicly burnt. An
heavy Sentence I confess, but such as did rather affright than hurt him. For
his Majesty looking on him in that conjuncture as one that suffered in his
cause, preferred him first to the Parsonage of Stamford-Rivers in Essex, (void
not long after by the promotion of Mountague to the Sea of Chiches^er)
afterward to the Deanery of Worcester; and finally to the Bishopric of St.
David's. This was indeed the way to have his Majesty well served, but such as
created some ill thoughts amongst the Commons for his Majesty's Indulgence to
him.

But they had a greater game to fly at, than to content themselves with so poor
a Sacrifice. The day before, complaint was made unto the Commons, that Laud,
Bishop of Bath and Wells, had warranted those Sermons to the Press, and him
they had as good a mind ^o as to any other. There had been some liftings at him
in the Court by Sir John Cook, who had informed against him to the Lord
Treasurer then being: ^revi^^e. p. 13.
And by the Lord Treasurer to the Duke, where the business stopped. And there had
been some liftings at him in the Country also, there being some mutterings
spread abroad, that some Sacrifices must be made for expiating the ill success
in the Isle of The, and that he was as like as any to be made the Sacrifice.
Which coming to his ears from two several persons, he thought fit to acquaint
his Majesty with it; who thereupon returned this most gracious answer, That he
should not trouble himself with such reports, till he saw him forsake his other
friends. Had he stood still upon that principle he had never fallen. Such
Princes as forsake their Servants, will be forsaken by their Servants in their
greatest need, and neither be well served at home, nor observed abroad. But it
appeared by the event, that those mutterings were not made without some ground,
and that somewhat was then plotting toward his destruction. For Manwaring was
no sooner censured, but Lauds cause was called to the report, some days before
(viz. June 11.) they had voted the Duke of Buckingham to be the cause of all
the grievances; and now they were hammering a Remonstrance, both against him,
and all that depended on him. In which Remonstrance, having first besprinkled
the King with some Court holy water, for granting their Petition of Right, they
make bold to represent unto him, That there was a general fear conceived in his
people of some secret working and combination to introduce into this Kingdom
innovation and change of holy Religion. Which fear proceeded (as they said)
from the increase of Popery in this Kingdom, and the extraordinary favors and
respects which they of that Religion found in the Court from persons of great
quality and power there, unto whom they continually resort, more especially by
name from the Countess of Buckingham the Dukes Mother. Secondly, From some
Letters written by his Majesty to stop all legal proceedings against Recusants,
and the Compositions which had been made with some of them for such fines and
penalties as were laid upon them by the Laws, which seemed in their opinion
little less than a Toleration. Thirdly, From the daily growth and spreading of
the Faction of the Arminians, that being (as they thought his Majesty knew) but
a cunning way to bring in Popery; the professors of those opinions being common
disturbers of the Protestant Churches, and Incendiaries of those states wherein
they have gotten any head, being Protestants in show, but Jesuits in opinion
and practice. Of which growing Faction Neile Bishop of Winchester, and Laud
Bishop of Bath and Wells, are named particularly for the principal Patrons.
Fourthly, From some endeavors to suppress the diligent teaching and
instructing the people in the true knowledge of Almighty God by disparaging
pious, painful, and Orthodox Preachers. Fifthly, From the miserable condition
of the Kingdom of Ireland, in which without control the Popish Religion is
affirmed to be openly professed, Popish Superstition being generally exercised
and avowed, Monasteries, and Nunneries newly erected, etc, In the last place
they lay before him their former grievances, now redressed; the design of
raising moneys by the way of Excise, and of bringing in some Regiments of
German horse, though never put into execution; a Commission of Lieutenancy
granted to the Duke of Buckingham; they supposed decay of Trade in all parts of
the Kingdom; the improvident consumption of the stock of Gunpowder; the loss of
the Regality of the Narrow Seas; the taking of many Merchants Ships by the
Pirates of Dunkirk, etc. The cause of all which mischiefs is imputed to the
excessive power of the Duke of Buckingham, and his abusing of that power.

This Remonstrance being thus digested, it was presented to his Majesty,
together with the Bill of Subsidies, on the seventeenth of June. ^ill. Reg.
Sect. 157. N^m. 3.
At the receiving thereof his Majesty was pleased to use these words: That on
his Answer to their Petition of Right he expected no such Declaration from
them, which contains diverse points of state touching the Church and
Commonwealth, that he conceived they did believe he understood them better than
themselves: But that since the reading thereof, he perceived they understood
those things less than he imagined; and that notwithstanding he would take them
into such consideration as they deserved. Nor was it long after his Majesty's
receiving of this Remonstrance, but that they were drawing up another to take
away his right to Tonnage and Poundage. Which coming to his Majesty's
knowledge, he resolved to be beforehand with them, and dissolve the Parliament,
which was done accordingly June 26. At the dissolving whereof his Majesty gave
this further censure on the said Remonstrance, viz. That the acceptableness
thereof unto him every man might judge, and that he would not call in question
the merit of it, because he was sure no wise man could justify it. And
possibly it had escaped without any further censure, if the Commons for the
ostentation of their Zeal and Piety had not caused it to be Printed, and
dispersed abroad, with which his Majesty being acquainted, he commanded it to
be called in by Proclamation, as tending to the defamation of his Person and
Government.

But no sooner was the Parliament ended, but he gave order unto Laud (whom he
^ound to be much concerned in it) to return an answer thereunto; which he, who
knew no better Sacrifice than obedience, did very cheerfully perform; which
Answer for so much as concerns Religion, the Preamble and Conclusion being laid
aside, we shall here subjoyn.

And first (says he) that Remonstrance begins at Religion, and fears of
innovation in it; Innovation by Popery; but we would have our Subjects of all
sorts to call to mind what difficulties and dangers we endured not many years
since for Religions sake; That we are the same still, and our holy Religion is
as precious to us as it is or can be to any of them, and we will no more admit
innovation therein than they that think they have done well in fearing it so
much. It is true, that all effects expected have not followed upon the
Petitions delivered at Oxon, but we are in least fault for that; for supply
being not afforded us, disenabled us to execute all that was desired, and
caused the stay of those legal proceedings which have helped to swell up this
Remonstrance: Yet let all the Counties of England be examined, and London, with
the Suburbs with them, neither is there such a noted increase of Papists, nor
such cause of fear as is made; nor has any amounted to such an odious
tolerating, as is charged upon it, nor near any such. For that Commission so
much complained of, both the matter and intent of it are utterly mistaken; for
it does not dispense with any penalty, or any course to be taken with any
Papists for the exercise of their Religion, no nor with the Pecuniary Mulets or
nonconformity to ours; it was advised for the increase of our profits, and the
returning of that into our Purse, which abuse or connivency of inferior
Ministers might perhaps divert another way, if that or any other shall be
abused in the execution, we will be ready to punish upon any just complaint.
The next fear is the daily growth and spreading of the Arminian Faction, called
a cunning way to bring in Popery: but we hold this Charge as great a wrong, to
our Self and Government, as the former; For our People must not be taught by a
Parliament Remonstrance, or any other way, that we are so ignorant of Truth, or
so careless of the profession of it; that any opinion, or faction, or whatever
it be called, should thrust it self so far, and so fast into our Kingdom
without our knowledge of it: this is a mere dream of them that wake, and would
make our loyal and loving People think we sleep the while. In this Charge there
is great wrong done to two eminent Prelates that attend our Person; for they
are accused, without producing any the least show or shadow of Proof against
them; and should they, or any other, attempt Innovation of Religion, either by
that open or any cunning way, we should quickly take other Order with them, and
not stay for your Remonstrance.

To keep on this, our people are made believe, That there is a restraint of
Books Orthodoxal: but we are sure since the late Parliament began, some whom
the Remonstrance calls Orthodox, have assumed unto themselves an unsufferable
Liberty in Printing. Our Proclamation commanded a Restraint on both sides, till
the Passions of men might subside and calm; and had this been obeyed as it
ought, we had not now been tossed in this Tempest: And for the distressing and
discountenancing of Good Preachers, we know there is none, if they be (as they
are called) Good. But our People shall never want that Spiritual Comfort which
is due unto them; and for the Preferments which we bestow, we have so made it
our great Care to give them, as Rewards of Desert and Pains; but as the
Preferments are ours, so will we be judge of the Desert Our self, and not be
taught by a Remonstrance. For Ireland, we think in case of Religion, it is not
worse than Queen Elizabeth left it; and for other Affairs, it is as good as we
found it, nay, perhaps better; and we take it as a great disparagement to our
Government; that it should be voiced, That new Monasteries, Nunneries, and
other Superstitious Houses, are Erected and Replenished in Dublin, and other
great Towns of that our Kingdom: For we assure our self, our Deputy and Council
there will not suffer God and our Government so to be dishonored, but we
should have some account of it from them; and we may not endure to have our
good People thus misled with Shows. There is likewise somewhat considerable, in
the time when these Practices to undermine true Religion in our Kingdoms, are
set on foot. The Remonstrance tells us it is now, when Religion is opposed by
open force in all Parts: But we must tell our People, There is no undermining
Practice at home against it, if they practice not against it that seem most to
labor for it; for while Religion seems to be contended for in such a Factious
way, which cannot be Gods way, the heat of that does often melt away the Purity
which it labors earnestly (but perhaps not wisely) to preserve. And for Gods
Judgments, which we and our People have felt, and have cause to fear, we shall
prevent them best by a true Religious Remonstrance of the amendment of our
Lives, etc.

This, and the rest of the Answer to the said Remonstrance, is all what I find
acted by Laud in reference to the present Parliament. For, That he should be a
chief means for the dissolving of this, of a principal Instrument in the
untimely breaking off of the former, I find no proof offered, though he stands
charged with the one in the further Articles of his Impeachment, and of the
other on the ba^e suspicion of a private Person. As little proof I find of
another Article, in which he stands accused for saying, That this Parliament
was a Factious Parliament, and had cast many Scandals upon his Majesty, and had
used him like a Child in his Minority; styling them PURITANS, and commending
the Papists for harmless and peaceable Subjects: For which, if any Evidence had
been brought against him, he might have been condemned by some for his
Indiscretion, but by none ^or Treason. Nor did the Parliament Act more against
Church or Churchmen, than what is formerly related? but only in receiving
certain Articles against one Burgess Vicar of Witney, in the County of Oxon. By
which it did appear, That the man was sharp set against the Puritans, whom he
accused of breaking every one of the Ten Commandments, reproached them with
many bitter Exasperations, and finally impeached Calvin, Beza, and all the
Ministers of the Reformed Churches, both in France and Scotland, for committing
many Treasons against those Princes under whom they lived. But these Matters
not being Actionable at the Common Law, nor punishable (as the times then were)
in way of Parliamentary Proceedings; the poor man, after a long and chargeable
Attendance, was at last dismissed. Little or nothing done in the Convocation
which accompanied this Parliament, but the granting of five Subsidies, toward
the Support of his Majesty's Royal Estate, and the Defense of his Kingdoms: So
much the more acceptable to his Majesty, because the Grant seemed in a manner
to exceed their Abilities, and came not clogged with any self ends, or
particular Interesses. Kings are Gods Deputies on Earth, and like him, love a
cheerful Giver, above all those who either do it grudgingly, or upon constraint.

No sooner was the Parliament ended, but Laud prepares for his Translation to
the Sea of London, the Conge d' eslire being issued out on the first of July,
the Election within few days returned, and publicly confirmed with the
accustomed Formalities on St. Swithin's day, being the fifteenth of that Month.
London, the Kings Chamber, and the chief City of the Realm; equal in bigness
unto any, but in Trade Superior unto all in these Parts of Christendom; one of
the Metropolitan Sees of the Ancient Britains, and next in Dignity and
Antiquity to the Sea of Canterbury amongst the Saxons. The first Bishop of it,
called Melitus, received his Episcopal Consecration Anno 606. from whom Laud
was in number the 88th. as he had been the 89th. Bishop of St. David's, another
of the Metropolitan Sees of the Britains. The Cathedral Church, best known by
the name of St. Paul's in London, was founded first by Ethelbert, the first
Christian King of Kent, and the six Monarchs of the Saxons; afterward much
beautified and enlarged by Erkenwald the fourth Bishop: Which Church of theirs
being 500 years after destroyed by fire, that which now stands was built in the
place thereof by Maritius, Richardus his Successor, and certain other of the
Bishops, a great part of it at their own Charge, and the Residue by a general
Contribution over all the Kingdom. The Bishops next in Place and Dignity to the
Metropolitans, and also Deans of the Episcopal College for the Province of
Canterbury; by which Office he is not only to preside over the rest of the
Bishops at Synodical Meetings, in case the Metropolitan be dead or absent; but
to receive his Mandates for assembling Synods, and other businesses of the
Church; and having so received them, to intimate the power and effect thereof
to the Suffragan Prelates. As for the Diocese of London, it contains in it the
whole Counties of Middlesex and Essex, so much of H^rtford-shire as was
anciently possessed by the East Saxons, together with the peculiar Jurisdiction
of the Church of St. Albans; divided into 623 Parishes (of which 189 are
Impropriations) and those distributed amongst five Archdeacons, that is to say,
of London, Middlesex, Essex, Colchester, and the Archdeacon of St. Albans for
that Circuit only.

His own Translation being past, his next Employment of that nature was his
assisting at the Consecration of Mountague, nominated by his Majesty to the Sea
of Chichester in the place of Carleton, who died about the latter end of the
Parliament; which Action in the King seemed more magnanimous than safe: For
though there was much magnanimity in preferring the man, whom he beheld as well
in his personal Sufferings, as his great Abilities; yet was it not held safe
for him (as his case then stood) to give such matter of Exasperation to the
House of Commons, of whom he did expect a Supplement to the former Subsidies
within few Months after. Nor did the business pass so clearly on Mountagues
side, but that he found a rub in his way, which was like to have hindered his
Preferment for the present time, but possibly enough for the times to come. It
is an ancient Custom, that the Elections of all Bishops in the Province of
Canterbury be solemnly confirmed by the Archbishop, or his Vicar General, in
the Court of the Arches, held in St. Mary's Church in Cheapside, commonly
called by the name of Bow Church; at and before which Confirmation, there is
public notice given to all manner of Persons, That if they have any thing to
object either against the Party elected, or the legality of his Election, he
should come and tender his Exceptions at the time appointed, or else for ever
after to hold his peace: Which signification being made, as Mountague stood
ready to be Confirmed, one Jones a Bookseller, accompanied with a Rabble of the
poorer sort, excepted against him as a man unfit to be made a Bishop, charging
him with Popery, Arminianism, and some other Heterodoxies, for which his Books
had been condemned in the former Parliament. It happened well that Brent the
Vicar General, either for disaffection to the man, or on some necessary
avocation, had devolved his Office for that time on Doctor Thomas Reives his
Majesty's Advocate, a man of better Principles in himself, and of more Learning
in the Laws than the other was: For no sooner had Jones offered his Exceptions
against the Party Elected, but Reives had found a way to evade the danger, and
frustrate the bold man of his design, for putting a present stop to the
Confirmation; For neither were the Exceptions tendered in writing, signed by the
hand of any Advocate, nor presented by any of the Proctors authorized to attend
that Court; all which Formalities were to have been observed by Jones in the
present Act, but that the man was hurried on with more Zeal than Knowledge.
Which Rub thus happily removed August 22. Mountague hastens all he could to his
Consecration, which was performed on Sunday the 24th. at the Archbishops house
in Croyden, Laud amongst other Bishops assisting at it.

And it is possible enough, That if he had not made such haste as he did, he
might have had a worse rub in it than he had before. Scarce was the
Consecration finished, when news came to Croyden of the unfortunate death of
the Duke of Buckingham, murdered the day before at Portsmouth by one John
Felton a Lieutenant, who thought himself neglected in the course of his
Service. The Duke had wholly set his heart on the Relief of Rochel, then
blocked up by the French both by Sea and Land, in hope thereby to redeem the
Honor he had lost at the Isle of The, and to ingratiate himself with the
People of England. On the twelfth of August he set forwards from Portsmouth,
near which the Navy lay at Anchor, and where he had appointed the Rendezvous
for his Landforces to assemble and meet together. The interval of time betwixt
that and his death he spent in putting all things into Readiness, that he was
almost at the point of going on Board, when Feli^n cut him off in the midst
of his Glories. The wretch in such a general confusion might have saved
himself, if either curiosity in attending the issue, or some consternation in
his countenance upon the horror of the Fact, had not betrayed him to a present
discovery. Taken upon suspicion, and questioned about the Murder, he made no
scruple to avow it, as a meritorious Act, of which he had more cause to glory
than to be ashamed: And being afterward more cunningly handled by one of his
Majesty's Chaplains (sent to him from the Court of purpose to work him to it)
he confessed plainly and resolvedly, That he had no other motive to commit that
Murder, but the late Remonstrance, in which the Duke had been accused for being
the Cause of all the Grievances and Mischiefs in the Commonwealth. This news
was brou^^t unto the King as he was at the Public Morning-Prayers in ^is
Presence Chamber, the Court being then at Southwick, not far from Portsmouth;
which he received with such a steadfast Countenance, so unmoved a Pa^ience, that
^e withdrew not from the place till the Prayers were ended.

It is not to be doubted but that his Majesty was much afflicted in the loss of
so dear a Servant, in whose bosom he had lodged so much of his Counsels, and to
whose Conduct he had so fully recommended the Great Concernments of the
Kingdom. But such was the constancy of his Temper, and the known evenness of
his Spirit, that in the midst of all those sorrows he neither neglected his
Affairs abroad, nor his Friends at home: For notwithstanding this sad accident,
the Fleet set forwards under the Command of the Earl of Lindsey, whose coming
within sight of Rochel was welcomed by those in the Town with all the outward
expressions of Hope and Joy: But his desires to do them Service were without
Success: For when he came, he found the Haven so strongly barred, that though
he gallantly attempted to force his way, and give Relief to the Besieged; yet
finding nothing but impossibility in the Undertaking, he discharged his
Ordnance against the Enemy, and went off with safety: Which being perceived by
those of the Town, who had placed their last hopes in this Attempt, they
presently set open their Gates, casting themselves upon the Mercy of their
Natural Prince, whose Government and Authority they had for so many years
before both opposed and slighted. And on the other side, being well assured of
that infinite anguish and disconsolation which Laud (his now most trusty
Servant) must needs suffer under, by the most barbarous Assassination of so
dear a Friend, he dispatched Elphiston his Cup Bearer with a gracious Message
to comfort him in those disquiets of his Soul; and on the neck of that, a
Letter of his own handwriting to the same effect. He looks upon him now as his
Principal Minister, well practiced in the Course of his Business, of whose
fidelity to his Person, and perspicacity of Judgment in Affairs of State, he
had found such good proof: And therefore at the first time that Laud could find
himself in a condition to attend upon him, he used many gracious Speeches to
him, not only to wipe off the Remembrance of that sad Misfortune, but to put
him into such a Power by which he might be able to protect himself against all
his Enemies. He was before but an inferior Minister in the Ship of State, and
had the trimming of the Sails, the super-inspection of the Bulgings and
Leakings of it. Now he is called unto the Helm, and steers the Course thereof
by his sage Directions.

Having obtained this height of Power, he casts his eye back on his Majesty's
Proclamation of the fourteenth of June, Anno 1626. Of which though he had made
good use in suppressing some of those Books which seemed to foment the present
Controversies; yet he soon found, as well by his own Observation, as by
Intelligence from others, That no such general notice had been taken of it as
was first expected: For being only published in Market Towns (and perhaps very
few of them) the Puritan Ministers in the Country did not conceive themselves
obliged to take notice of it. And much less could it come to the ears of
Students in Universities, for whose restraint from meddling, either by Preaching
or Writing, in the Points prohibited, it might seem most necessary. He knew,
that by the Laws of the Land all Ministers were to read the Book of Articles
audibly and distinctly, in the hearing of their Parishioners, when they first
entered on their Cures; and that by the Canons of the Church, all that took
Orders or Degrees were publicly to subscribe unto them. A Declaration to the
same effect before those Articles must needs give such a general signification
of his Majesty's pleasure, that no body could from thenceforth pretend
ignorance of it, which must needs render his transgression the more
inexcusable. Upon which prudent considerations he moved his Majesty that the
Book of Articles might be reprinted; and such a Declaration placed before them
as might preserve them from such misconstructions as had of late been put upon
them, and keep them to their native literal and Grammatical sense. His Majesty
approved the Counsel as both pious and profitable, and presently gave order,
that all things should be done according as he had advised. A Declaration of
great influence in the course of our Story, and therefore here to be subjoyned
in its proper place.

By the King.
(...). Reg. Sect. 4. N^m. 3.
BEing by Gods Ordinance, according to Our just Title, Defender of the Faith,
and Supreme Governor of the Church within these Our Dominions, We hold it most
agreeable to Our Kingly Office, and Our own Religious Zeal, to conserve and
maintain the Church committed to Our charge in the Unity of true Religion, and
in the bond of Peace: and not to suffer unnecessary Disputations, Alterations,
and Questions to be raised which may nourish Faction both in the Church and
Commonwealth; We have therefore upon mature deliberation, and with the Advice
of so many of Our Bishops as might conveniently be called together, thought fit
to make this Declaration following: That the Articles of the Church of England
(which had been allowed, and authorized heretofore, and which Our Clergy
generally have subscribed unto) do contain the true Doctrine of the Church of
England agreeable to Gods Word: which We do therefore ratify and confirm,
requiring all Our loving Subjects to continue in the Uniform Profession
thereof, and prohibiting the least difference from the said Articles; which to
that end We command to be reprinted* and this Our Declaration to be published
therewith.

That We are Supreme Governor of the Church of England, and that if any
difference arise about the External Policy, concerning Injunctions, Canons, or
other Constitutions whatsoever, thereunto belonging; the Clergy in their
Convocation is to order and settle them, having first obtained leave under Our
Broad Seal so to do: And We approving their said Ordinances and Constitutions,
providing that none be made contrary to the Laws and Customs of the Land. That
out of Our Princely care that the Churchmen may do the work which is proper
unto them; the Bishops and Clergy, from time to time, in Convocation, upon
their humble desire, shall have license under Our Broad Seal, to deliberate of,
and to do all such things, as being made plain by them, and assented by Us,
shall concern the settled continuance of the Doctrine and Discipline of the
Church of England established; from which We shall not endure any variation or
departing in the least degree. That for the present, though some differences
have been ill raised, We take comfort in this, that all Clergymen within Our
Realm have always most willingly subscribed to the Articles established, which
is an Argument to Us, that they all agree in the true usual literal meaning of
the said Articles, and that even in those curious Points, in which the present
differences lie, men of all sorts take the Articles of the Church of England to
be for them; which is an argument again, that none of them intend any desertion
of the Articles established. That therefore in these both curious and unhappy
differences which have for many hundred years, in different times and places,
exercised the Church of Christ, We will that all further curious search be laid
aside, and these disputes be shut up in Gods Promises, as they be generally set
forth unto Us in holy Scriptures; and the general meaning of the Articles of
the Church of England according to them. And that no man hereafter shall either
Print or Preach to draw the Article aside any way, but shall submit to it in
the plain and full meaning thereof: And shall not put his own sense or Coment
to be the meaning of the Article, but shall take it in the literal and
Grammatical sense. That if any Public Reader in either Our Universities, or
any Head or Master of a College, or any other person respectively in either of
them, shall affix any new sense to any Article, or shall publicly read,
determine, or hold any public Disputation, or suffer any such to be held
either way, in either the Universities or Colleges respectively; or if any
Divine in the Universities shall Preach or Print any thing either way, other
than is established in Convocation with Our Royal Assent: He, or they, the
Offenders, shall be liable to Our displeasure, and the Churches Censure in Our
Commission Ecclesiastical, as well as any other: and We will see there shall be
due execution upon them.

No sooner were the Articles published with this Declaration, but infinite were
the clamours which were raised against it by those of the Calvinian Party. Many
exclaimed against it for the depths of Satan, some for a Iesuitical Plot to
subvert the Gospel: For what else could it aim at (as they gave it out) but
under color of silencing the disputes on either side, to give encouragement
and opportunity to Arminians here to sow their tears, and propagate their
erroneous Doctrines. And what effects could it produce, but the suppressing of
all Orthodox Books, the discouraging of all godly and painful Ministers,
thereby dete^red from preaching the most comfortable Doctrines of man's election
unto life; The Arminians in the mean time gathering strength, and going on
securely to the end they aimed at. And to give the better color to these
suspicions, a Letter is dispersed abroad, pretended to be written to the Rector
of the Jesuits in Bruxells the chief City of Brabant. In which the Writers
lets him know, with what care and cunning they had planted ^ere that Sovereign
drug Arminianism, which they hoped would purge the Protestants from their
Heresies, and that it begin to flourish and bear fruit already; That for the
better preventing of the Puritans, the Arminians had locked up the Dukes ears,
etc. with much of the like impudent stuff, which no sober man did otherwise
look on than a piece of Gullery. Upon which grounds, a Petition was designed
for his Sacred Majesty, by some of the Calvinian Party in and about the City of
London, For the revoking of the said Declaration, by which they were deterred
(as the matter was handled) from preaching the saving Doctrines of Gods Free
Grace in Election and Predestination: Cant. Doom,
And this (say they) had brought them into a very great straight; either or
incurring Gods heavy displeasure, if they did not faithfully discharge their
Embassage in declaring the whole Counsel of God; or the danger of being
censured as violaters of his Majesty's said Act, if they preached those constant
Doctrines of our Church, and confuted the opposite Pelagian and Arminian
Heresies, both preached and Printed boldly without fear of censure. And
thereupon they pray on their bended knees, that his gracious Majesty would take
into his Princely consideration the forenamed Evils and Grievances under which
they groaned, and, as a wise Physician, prescribe and apply such speedy
Remedies as may both cure the present Maladies, and secure the peace of Church
and Commonwealth, from all those Plagues which their Neighbors had not a
little felt, and more may fear if the Council of his Majesty's Father to the
States of the United Provinces were not better followed.

But this Petition being stopped before it came to the King, they found more
countenance from the Commons, in the next Parliamentary meeting, than they were
like to have found at the hands of his Majesty. For the Commons conceiving they
had power to declare Religion as well as Law, (and they had much alike in both)
they voted this Anti-Declaration to be published in the name of that House:
M^n^script Narrat. of Pa^^ 1628.
viz. We the Commons now assembled in Parliament, do claim, profess, and avow
for truth the sense of the Articles of Religion which were established in
Parliament the thirteenth year of Queen Elizabeth, which by the public Acts of
the Church of England and the general and current exposition of the Writers of
our Church have been delivered to us, and we reject the sense of the Jesuits,
Arminians, and all others wherein they differ from us. Which Declaration of the
Commons, as it gave great animation to those of the Calvinian Party, who
entertained it with the like ardency of affection, as those of Ephesus did the
Image of DIANA which fell down from heaven; so gave it great matter of
discourse to most knowing men. The Points were intricate and weighty, such as
in all Ages of the Church had exercised the wits of the greatest Scholars.
Those which had taken on them to declare for truth that which they took to be
the sense and meaning of the Articles, in those intricate Points, were at the
best no other than a company of Lay Persons, met together on another occasion;
who, though they might probably be supposed for the wisest men, could not in
reason be relied on as the greatest Clerks. And therefore it must needs be
looked on as a kind of Prodigy, that men unqualified, and no way authorized
for any such purpose, should take upon them to determine in such weighty
matters, as were more proper for a National or Provincial Council: But being it
proceeded from the House of Commons, whose power began to grow more formidable
every day than other, no body durst adventure a Reply unto it; till Laud
himself, by whose procurement his Majesty's Declaration had been published,
laying aside the Dignity of his Place and Person, thought fit to make some
Scholia's, or short notes upon it. Which not being published at that time in
Print (for ought I have either heard or seen) but found in the rifling of his
Study amongst the rest of his Papers, I shall present unto the Reader in these
following words:

And first (says he) the Public Acts of the Church in matters of Doctrine are
Canons and Acts of Councils, Cant. Doom. p. 163.
as well for expounding as determining; The Acts of the High Commission are not
in this sense Public Acts of the Church, nor the meeting of a few or more
Bishops Extra Concilium unless they be by lawful Authority called to that work,
and their decision approved by the Church. Secondly, The current Exposition of
Writers is a strong probable argument, De sensu Canonis Ecclesiae vel Articuli;
yet but probable: The current Exposition of the Fathers themselves have
sometimes missed Sensum Ecclesiae. Thirdly, Will you reject all sense of
Jesuit or Arminian? May not some be true? May not some be agreeable to our
Writers, and yet in a way that is stronger than ours to confirm the Article?
Fourthly, Is there by this Act any Interpretation made or declared of the
Articles or not? If none, to what end the Act? If a sense or interpretation be
declared, what Authority have Laymen to make it? For interpretation of an
Article belongs to them only that have power to make it. Fifthly, It is
manifest there is a sense declared by the House of Commons, the Act says it, (
We avow the Article, and in that sense, and all other that agree not with us in
the aforesaid sense, we reject (these, and these go about misinterpretation of
a sense; Ergo, there is a Declaration of a sense; yea, but it is not a new
sense declared by them, but they avow the old sense declared by the Church) the
public Authentic Acts of the Church, etc.) yea, but if there be no such
public Authentic Acts of the Church, then here is a sense of their own
declared under the pretexts of it. Sixthly, It seems against the Kings
Declaration, 1. That say, We shall take the general meaning of the Articles:
This Act restrains them to consent of Writers. 2. That says, The Articles shall
not be drawn aside any way, but that we shall take it in the literal and
Grammatical sense: This Act ties us to consent of Writers, which may, and
perhaps do, go against the literal sense; for here is no exception; so we shall
be perplexed, and our consent required to things contrary. Seventhly, All
consent in all Ages, as far as I have observed, to an Article or Canon, is to
it self as it is laid down in the body of it, and if it bear more senses then
one, it is lawful for any man to choose what sense his judgment directs him to,
so that it be a sense secundum Analogiam fidei, and that he hold it peaceably
without distracting the Church, and this till the Church that made the Article
determine a sense: And the wisdom of the Church has been in all Ages, or in
most* to require consent to Articles in General, as much as may be, because
that is the way of unity; and the Church in high points requiring assent to
particulars, has been rent; as De Transubstantiatione, etc.


It is reported of Alphonso King of Castile, Surnamed the Wise, that he used
many times to say (never the worse for so saying) That if he had stood at God
Almighties Elbow when he made the world, he would have put him in mind of some
things which had been forgotten, or otherwise might have been better ordered
than they were. And give me leave to say, with as little wisdom, (though with
no such blasphemy) that if I had stood at his Lordships Elbow when he made
these Scholia's, I would have put him in mind of returning an answer to that
Clause of the said Declaration, in which it is affirmed, That the Articles of
Religion were established in Parliament in the thirteenth of Queen Elizabeth.
But I would fain know of them whether the Parliament they speak of, or any
other since or before that time, did take upon them to confirm Articles of
Religion, agreed on by the Clergy in their Convocations, or that they appointed
any Committee for Religion to examine the Orthodoxie of those Articles, and
make report unto the House. All which was done in that Parliament was this, and
on this occasion. Some Ministers of the Church so stiffly wedded to their old
Mumsimus of the Mass; and some as furiously prosecuting their new Sumpsimus of
inconformity, it was thought fit that between those contending parties, the
Doctrine of the Church should be kept inviolate. And thereupon it was Enacted,
That every person under the degree of a Bishop, which did or should pretend to
be a Priest or Minister of Gods holy Word and Sacraments in the Church of
England, should before Christmas next following, in the presence of his
Diocesan Bishop, testify his assent and subscribe to the said Articles of the
year 1562. Secondly, That after such subscribing before the Bishop, he should
on some Sunday in the Forenoon in the Church or Chapel where he served, in
time of Divine Service read openly the said Articles, on pain of being deprived
of all his Ecclesiastical Promotions as if he were then naturally dead.
Thirdly, That if any Ecclesiastical person should maintain any Doctrine
contrary to any of the said Articles, and being Convented before his Bishop,
etc. and should persist therein, it should be just cause to deprive such person
of his Ecclesiastical Promotions. Fourthly, That all persons to be admitted to
any Benefice with cure, should likewise subscribe to the said Articles, and
publicly read the same in the open Church, within two months after their
Induction, with declaration of their unseigned assent to the same, on the pain
aforesaid. In all which there was nothing done to confirm these Articles, but
only a pious care expressed for reformation of such disorders as were like to
rise amongst the Ministers of the Church by requiring their subscription and
assent unto them under such temporal punishments, which at that time the Canons
of the Church had not laid upon them.

But it is time to leave these follies of my own, and return to our Bishop, who
had thus seasonably manifested both his Zeal and Judgment in reference to the
peace of the Church in general; nor showed he less in reference to the peace of
that Universitie, which had the happiness and honor of his Education. The
Proctorship had before been carried by a combination of some houses against the
rest; the weaker side calling in strangers and non-residents to give voices for
them. For remedy whereof a Letter in another year was procured from the Earl
of Pembroke, then Chancellor of that University, by which it was declared,
that only such as were actually Residents should be admitted to their Suffrages
in the said Elections; which Letter was protested against by the Proctors for
the year 1627. as knowing how destructive it was of their plot and party: And
on the other side, such Colleges as had many Chappelries, and other places,
which were removable at pleasure, invested many which came out of the Country
in the said Offices and Places one after another, thereby admitting them for
the time into actual residence. In which estate things stood when the great
competition was, April 23. 1628. betwixt Williamson of Magdalens, and More of
New-Colledge on the one side, and Bruch of Brazen-nose, with Lloyd of Jesus
College on the other side. These last pretending foul play to be offered to
them (as indeed it was not very fair) made their appeal unto the King; before
whom the proceedings being heard and examined, Williamson and Lloyd were
returned Proctors for that year, the last pretending Kindred to the Duchess of
Buckingham. And to prevent the like disorders for the time to come, it was
resolved by the King, with the Advice of his Council, but of Laud especially,
that the Proctors should from thenceforth be chosen by their several
Colleges, each College having more or fewer turns, according to the number
and greatness of their Foundations. To which end a Cycle was devised,
containing a perpetual Revolution of three and twenty years, within which
Latitude of time, Christ-Church was to enjoy six Proctors, Magdalen five,
New-Colledge four, Merton, All Souls, Exeter, Brazen-Nose, St. John's, and
Wadham Colleges to have three a piece; Trinity, Queens, Orial, and Corpus
Christi to have only two; the rest, that is to say, University, Baliol,
Lincoln, Jesus, and Pembroke, but one alone; which Cycle was so contrived, that
every College knew their turn before it came, and did accordingly resolve on
the fittest man to supply the place. And for the more peaceable ordering of
such other matters in the University, as had relation thereunto, some Statutes
were digested by Laud, and recommended by the King to the said University,
where they were cheerfully received, without contradiction, and Entered on
Record in the Public Registers in December following. Yet was not this the
only good turn which that University recieved from him in this Year: For in the
two Months next ensuing, he procured no fewer than 260 Greek Manuscripts to be
given unto the Public Library; that is to say, 240 of them by the Munificence
of the Earl of Pembroke, and 20 by the Bounty of Sir Thomas Row, then newly
returned from his Negotiations in the Eastern parts.

And now the time of the next Parliamentary Meeting, which by diverse
Adjournments had been put off till the twentieth of January, was near at hand.
And that the Meeting might be more agreeable to his Intendments, his Majesty
was advised to smooth and prepare his way unto it* first by removing of some
Rubs, and after by some popular Acts of Place and Favor. Savill of Yorshire, a
busy man in the House of Commons, but otherwise a politic and prudent Person,
he had taken off at the end of the former Parliament, by making him one of his
Privy Council, and preferring him to be Comptroller of his Household, in the
place of Suckling then deceased; and at the end of the last Session had raised
him to the honor of Lord Savill of Pontfract. Competitor with Savill in all
his Elections for that County, had been Sir Thomas Wentworth of Wentworth
Woadhouse, a man of most prodigous Parts, which he had made use of at first in
favor of the Popular Faction, and for refusing of the Loan had been long
imprisoned. He looked on the Preferments of Savill (his old Adversary) with no
small disdain, taking himself to be, as indeed he was, as much above him in
Revenue, as in Parts and Power. To sweeten and demulce this man, Sir Richard
Weston then Lord Treasurer, created afterward Earl of Portland, used his best
endeavors; and having gained him to the King, not only procured him to be one
of his Majesty's Privy Council, but to be made Lord President of the North, and
advanced unto the Title of Viscount Wentworth; by which he over-topped the
Savills both in Court and Country. Being so gained unto the King, he became the
most devout Friend of the Church, the greatest Zealot for advancing the
Monarchical Interest, and the ablest Minister of State both for Peace and War,
that any of our former Histories have afforded to us. He had not long
frequented the Council Table, when Laud and he, coming to a right understanding
of one another, entered into a League of such inviolable Friendship, that
nothing but the inevitable stroke of Death could part them; and joining hearts
and hands together, cooperated from thenceforth for advancing the Honor of the
Church, and his Majesty's Service.

These Matters being carried thus, to assure himself of two such Persons, in
which he very much pleased himself, his Majesty must do something also to
please the People; and nothing was conceived could have pleased them more, than
to grant them their desires in matters which concerned Religion, and bestow
Favors upon such men as were dear unto them. In pursuance of his gracious
Answer to the Lords and Commons, touching Priests and Jesuits, the growth of
Popery, and obstinacy of Recusants, he had caused his Proclamation to be issued
on the third of August, for putting the Laws and Statutes made against Jesuits,
Priests, and Popish Recusants, in due Execution: And now he adds another to it,
dated on the eleventh day of December, for the Apprehension of Richard Smith a
Popish Priest, styling and calling himself the Bishop of Chalcedon, a dangerous
man, and one who under color of a Foreign Title, exercised all manner of
Episcopal Jurisdiction in the Church of England. Hist. of K. Charles.
And on the other side, Archbishop Abbot, a great Confident of the Popular
Party in the House of Commons, is sent for to the Court about Christmas, and
from out of his Barge received by the Archbishop of York and the Earl of
Dorset, by them accompanied to the King, who giving him his Hand to kiss,
enjoined him not to fail the Council Table twice a week. And so far all was
well, beyond all exception; but whether it were so in the two next also, has
been much disputed. Barnaby Potter, Provost of Queens College in Oxon. a
thorow-pac'd Calvinian (but otherwise his ancient Servant) is preferred to the
Bishopric of Carlisle, then vacant by the Translation of White to the Sea of
Norwich. Mountague's Book, named Appello Caesarem, must be called in also; not
in regard of any false Doctrine contained in it: but, for being the first cause
of those Disputes and Differences which have since much troubled the quiet of
the Church; His Majesty hoping, That the occasion being taken away, men would
no longer trouble themselves with such unnecessary Disputations. Whether his
Majesty did well in doing no more, if the Book contained any false Doctrine in
it; or in doing so much, if it were done only to please the Parliament, I take
not upon me to determine: But certainly, it never falls out well with
Christian Princes, when they make Religion bend to Policy, or think to gain
their ends on men by doing such things as they are not plainly guided to by the
Light of Conscience, And so it happened to his Majesty at this present time;
those two last Actions being looked on only as Tricks of King-craft, done only
out of a design for getting him more love in the hearts of his People than
before he had. Against the calling in of Mountague's Book, it was objected
commonly to his disadvantage, That it was not done till three years after it
came out, till it had been questioned in three several Parliaments, till all
the Copies of it were dispersed and sold; and then too, That it was called in
without any Censure either of the Author or his Doctrines; That the Author had
been punished with a very good Bishopric, and the Book seemingly
discountenanced, to no other end but to divert those of contrary persuasion
from Writing or Acting any thing against it in the following Parliament. And as
for Potter, what could he have done less in common gratitude, than to prefer
him to a Bishopric, for so many years Service as Potter in his time had done
him both as Prince and King. So true is that of the wise Historian, Inviso s^m
^^princip^^c^u ^ene facta, ce^ m^le f^cta premu^t T^cit. H^st.
When Princes once are in discredit with their Subjects, as well their good
Actions as their bad are all accounted Grievances.

For notwithstanding all these preparatory actions, the Commons were resolved
to begin at the same Point where before they ended. The Parliament had been
Prorogued as they were hammering a Remonstrance against Tonnage and Poundage,
which animated Chambers, Rouls, and some other Merc^ants, to refuse the
payment; for which refusal some of their Goods was seized by Order from the
Lord Treasurer Weston, and some of them committed Prisoners by the Kings
Command. These matters so possessed their thoughts, that a week was passed
before they could resume their old care of Religion, or think of Petitioning
his Majesty for a Public Fast: but at last they fell upon them both. To their
Petition for a Fast (not tendered to his Majesty till the thirtieth of January)
he returned this Answer the next day, viz. That this Custom of Fasts at every
Session was but lately begun; That he was not so fully satisfied of the
necessity of it at this time; That notwithstanding, for the avoiding of
Questions and Jealousies, he was pleased to grant them their Request, with this
Proviso, That it should not hereafter be brought into President but on great
occasions: And finally, That as for the form and times thereof he would advise
with his Bishops, and then return unto both Houses a particular Answer. But so
long it was before that Answer came unto them, and so perverse were they in
crossing with his Majesty's Counsels, that the Parliament was almost ended
before the Fast was kept in London and Westminster, and dissolved many days
before it was to have been kept in the rest of the Kingdom. And for Religion,
they insisted on it with such importunity, that his Majesty could no longer
dissemble his taking notice of it, as a mere artifice and diversion to stave
him off from being gratified in the Grant of Tonnage and Poundage, which he so
often pressed them to. And thereupon he lets them know, That he understood the
cause of their delay in his business to be Religion, of the preservation
whereof none of them should have greater care than himself; and that either it
must be an Argument he wanted Power to preserve it (which he thought no body
would affirm) or at the least, That he was very ill counseled, if it were in
so much danger as they had reported.

This notwithstanding, they proceed in their former way. His Majesty had
granted several Pardons to Mountague, Cosens, Manwa^ring, and Sibth^rp,
beforementioned. These Pardons must be questioned, and the men summoned to
appear: And Information is preferred by Jones against Mountague's Confirmation
in the Sea of Chichester, which after many disputes is referred to a Select
Committee. Complaint is made against Neile Bishop of Winton. for for saying to
some Divines of his Diocese, That they must not Preach against Papists now, as
they had done formerly. Marshall and Moor, two Doctors in Divinity (but such as
had received some displeasures from him) are brought in to prove it. Upon him
also it was charged, That the Pardons of Mountague and Cosens were of his
procuring: Insomuch that Eliot pronounced positively, That all the Dangers
which they feared, were contracted in the person of that Bishop; and thereupon
desired, That a Motion might be made to his Majesty to leave him to the Justice
of that House. Many Reports come flowing in to the Committee for Religion, of
turning Tables into Altars, adoring toward or before them, and standing up at
the Gospels and the Gloria Patri, which must be also taken into consideration.
The Articles of Lambeth are declared to be the Doctrines of this Church, and
all that did oppose them to be called in question. Walker delivered a Petition
from the Booksellers and Printers, in complaint of the Restraint of Books
written against Popery and Arminianism; and the contrary allowed of, by the
only means of the Bishop of London; and, That diverse of them had been
Pursevanted for Printing of Orthodox Books; and, That the Licencing of Books
was only to be restrained to the said Bishop and his Chaplains. Hereupon
followed a Debate amongst them about the Licencing of Books, which having taken
up some time, was referred to the Committee also, as the other was. By these
Embraceries the Committee for Religion had Work enough, more than they knew how
to turn their hands to. But before they could bring any thing to perfection,
his Majesty was so exasperated by their rigorous Proceedings against the
Farmers of his Customs, the Imprisoning of Acton Sheriff of London, their
Voting down his Right to Tonnage and Poundage, and their threatening Speeches
against the Lord Treasurer Weston, whom he highly favored; That on the second
of March he Adjourned the House, and on the tenth of the same Month Dissolved
the Parliament. At which Adjournment some of the Members carried themselves in
such an undutiful (I must not say a seditious) manner, that they locked up the
Doors of the House, put the Keys into one of their Pockets, excluded the Kings
Messenger from coming in to deliver his Errand, compelled the Speaker to return
to his Chair, and held him there by strong hand, till they had thundered out
their Anathema's, not only against such as should dare to Levy the Tonnage and
Poundage, but those also who should willingly pay it, before it had been
granted by Act of Parliament; for which Contempts and Disobediencies, the
principal Sticklers were convented by the Lords of the Council, and after
brought before the Justices of his Majesty's Bench, by whom they were not only
fined, but committed unto several Prisons, notwithstanding all they could
pretend or plead from the Petition of Right, which they so much stood on. So
hard a thing it is to find a cord so strong as to bind the Prerogative, when
Kings have either Power or Will to make use thereof.

1629.
During this last Parliament, Leighton, a Scot by birth, a Doctor of Physic by
Profession, a fiery Puritan in Faction, dedicated a most pestilent Book unto
them called Sions Plea: In this Book he incited them to kill all the Bishops,
and to smite them under the fifth Rib; inveighing also against the Queen, whom
he branded by the name of an Idolatress, a Canaanite, and the Daughter of Heth.
And that this general Doctrine might not be Preached without a particular
Application, a Paper was cast into the yard belonging to the House of the Dean
of St. Paul's, March 2. to this effect; viz. Laud look to thy self; be assured
thy Life is sought, as thou art the fauterer of all Wickedness: Repent thee,
repent thee of thy monstrous sins, before thou be taken out of the World, etc.
And assure thy self, neither God nor the World can endure such a vile
Counselor to live, or such a Whisperer. Another was found at the same time and
place against the Lord Treasurer, who now is made the Scapegoat, to bear all
those faults in Civil Matters which formerly had been imputed to the Duke of
Buckingham. It was no need to bid them have a care of themselves, after two
such Warnings: Leighton is therefore brought into the Star Chamber as soon as
he could be apprehended, where he was Sentenced to have his Ears cropp'd, his
Nose slit, his Forehead stigmatized, and to be whipped: But between the
Sentence and Execution he made his escape out of the Fleet, though by better
hap to the Warden, than to himself, he was retaken in Bedfordshire, and
underwent the punishment appointed for him; but this happened not till November
29. 1630. The rest of this Year (in reference to our present Story) was of
little Action, Laud falling into a burning Fever on the fourteenth of August,
at the House of Windebank his old Friend, by which he was brought to such a low
and weak estate, that he was not able to reach to his own House till October
20. nor to put himself into the Service of his Place till the end of March. Yet
such was the Activeness of his Spirit, that though his Body was infirm, yet his
Thoughts were working. He saw the Church decaying both in Power and Patrimony:
Her Patrimony dilapidated by the Avarice of several Bishops, in making havoc
of their Woods to enrich themselves; and more than so, in filling up their
Grants and Leases to the utmost term, after they had been nominated to some
other Bishopric, to the great wrong of their Successors. Her Power he found
diminished partly by the Bishops themselves, in leaving their Diocesses
unregarded, and living altogether about Westminster, to be in a more ready way
for the next Preferment; partly by the great increase of Chaplains in the
Houses of many private Gentlemen: but chiefly by the multitude of Irregular
Lecturers, both in City and Country, whose work it was to undermine as well the
Doctrine as the Government of it. For the preventing of such mischiefs as might
hence ensue, some Conference had passed betwixt him and Harsnet, who lately had
succeeded Mountain (before he had half warmed his Chair) in the Sea of York;
and certain Considerations were resolved upon to be propounded to the King, for
the peace and well-ordering of the Church; which being reduced into form, and
by Laud presented to his Majesty, were first signed by his Majesty's Royal
Hand, and published in December following by the Title of His Majesty's
Instructions to the most Reverend Father in God George Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury, containing certain Orders to be observed and put in execution by
the several Bishops in his Province: Which said Instructions were as ^olloweth
CHARLES REX.
I. That the Lords the Bishops be commanded to their several Sees, there to
keep Residence; excepting those which are at necessary Attendance at Court. II.
That none of them Reside upon his Land or Lease that he has Purchased, nor on
his Commendam, if he hold any; but in one of his Episcopal Houses, if he have
any such: And that he waste not the Woods where any are left. III. That they
give Charge in their Triennial Visitations, and at other convenient times, both
by themselves and their Archdeacons, That the Declaration for settling all
Questions in difference, be strictly observed by all Parties. IV. That there be
a special Care taken by them all, That their Ordinations be Solemn, and not of
unworthy Persons. V. That they take great Care concerning the Lecturers in
their several Diocesses, for whom We give these Special Directions following.
1. That in all Parishes the afternoon Sermons be turned into Catechizing by
Question and Answer, where and whenever there is not some great cause
apparent to break this ancient and profitable Order. 2, That every Bishop
Ordain in his Diocese, That every Lecturer do read Divine Service according to
the Liturgy Printed by Authority, in his Surplice, and before the Lecture. 3.
That where a Lecture is set up in a Market Town, it may be Read by a Company of
Grave and Orthodox Divines near adjoining, and in the same Diocese; and that
they Preach in Gowns, and not in Cloaks, as too many do use. 4. That if a
Corporation do maintain a single Lecturer, he be not suffered to Preach till he
profess his willingness to take upon him a Living with Cure of souls, within
that incorporation, and that he do actually take such Benefice or Cure so soon
as the same shall be fairly procured for him.
VI. That the Bishops do encourage and countenance the grave and Orthodox
Divines of their Clergy, and that they use all means by some of their Clergy,
or others, that they have knowledge how both Lecturers and Preachers within
their Diocesses behave themselves in their Sermons, that so they may take order
for any abuse accordingly. VII. That the Bishop suffer none under Noblemen, and
men qualified by the Law, to have any private Chaplain in his house. VIII. That
they take especial care, that Divine Service be diligently frequented, as well
for the Prayers and Catechism, as Sermons; and take particular notice of all
such as absent themselves as Recusants, or otherwise. IX. That every Bishop,
who by Our Grace and Favor, and good opinion of his Service, shall be
nominated by Us to another Bishopric, shall not from that day of nomination
presume to make any Lease for three Lives, or one and twenty years, or
Concurrent Lease, or any way renew any Estate, or cut any wood or timber, but
merely to receive the Rents due, and so quit the place; For we think it a
hateful thing that any man's leaving the Bishopric should almost undo his
Successor. And if any man shall presume to break this Order, We will refuse him
at Our Royal Assent, and keep him at the place which he has so abused. X. And
lastly, We command you to give Us an account every year on the second of
January of the performance of these Our Commands.


The Reader may think strange that in the second of these Instructions we
should find any Bishop under a supposition of having no Episcopal house for his
habitation; concerning which he is to know that the Bishops of Oxon at that
time had no house left belonging to their Episcopal See, either in the City, or
in the Country: but dwelt at their Parsonage houses which they held in
commendam, as before Dr. Bridges, who had no commendam within the Diocese, did
for the most part in hired houses. For though at the foundation of the
Bishopric of Oxon, in the Abbey of Oseney the King appointed Gloucester Hall
for the Bishops Palace; yet when that foundation was dissolved, and the Bishops
See removed to Christ Church, the Grant of Gloucester Hall was dissolved also.
The Bishops thereupon retired to some Country house within the Diocese, which
appertained unto them in the right of their See, as long as any of their
Mannours, Land, and Houses were left unsould. But they being finally made a
prey to the Lust and Sacrilege of some great persons, they have since lived
for the most part in hired houses, or on their Commendams (if they had any
such) within their Diocesses, till the year 1632. when Dr. John Bancroft was
made Bishop of Oxon, who having at or about that time obtained of the King that
the Vicaridge o^ Cudsden, about five miles from Oxon, being of his own proper
Patronage and Donation, might be annexed for ever unto his Episcopal See, built
there at the persuasion of our Bishop of London, a very fair and convenient
house, with a decent Chapel thereunto, to be the ordinary dwelling place of
himself, and his Successors. But the house proved almost as short lived as the
Founder, being burned down by Colonel Leg, during the short time that he was
Governor of Oxon, for fear it might be made a Garrison by the Parliament
Forces; though with as much reason, and more piety, he might have garrisoned it
for the King, and preserved the house.

But to proceed, No sooner were these Instructions come to the hands of
Archbishop Abbot, but they were presently dispersed, and communicated to the
Su^ra^an Bishops. In this he acted only Ministerially, and durst do no
otherwise, but when he came to act Authoritatively, in his own capacity he
betrayed the cause; he neither liked the third Instruction for observing his
Majesty's Declaration before the Articles, that being looked on as an Artifice
to bring in Arminianism. Nor was he pleased with any of the Limitations
concerning Lecturers, to whom (as the chief sticklers in the Puritan Cause) he
was always favorable; which last affection he was so unable to conceal,
(...). D^^m, p. 513.
that when the Dean and Archdeacon of Canterbury had suspended Palmer and
Vdnay, two of the Lecturers in that Diocese, whom they found obstinately
inconformable to the Kings Directions; He restored them not long after to their
several Lectures, inhibiting the Archdeacon from his Jurisdiction, and exposing
all that Acted in it to contempt and scorn. And if an Archbishop could be so
unsatisfied for putting these Instructions into execution, as his place
required, there is no question to be made, but various descants and reports
would be raised upon them by most sorts of People. The Country Gentlemen took
it ill to be deprived of the liberty of keeping Chaplains in their houses, from
which they had not been debarred by the Laws of the Land. The Laws indeed had
taken order, that no persons under the Degree of a Baron, (some Judges and
great Offices excepted only) should qualify any of their Chaplains for a
dispensation to hold more than one Benefice with Cure of Souls, or to be
dispensed with for not residing on such Cures as they were preferred to. And
they had taken order how many Chaplains every such person, according to his
Rank and Degree in the Scale of Nobility, should be enabled to qualify to
those ends and purposes: but otherwise all persons had been left at liberty to
keep as many as they would, and as long as they pleased, without any comptroll.
Nor were the Chaplains better pleased than their Masters were. For having lived
upon hard commons, and perhaps under some smart Discipline also in their Halls
and Colled^es, they thought that they had spent their studies to good purpose
by finding ease and a full belly in these Gentlemen's houses, from whom there
was some possibility of preferment also, which better Scholars then themselves
might have otherwise hoped for. Such of the Bishops as were possessed of the
poorer Bishoprics were as much troubled as the other, and thought it the worst
kind of banishments to be confined unto the Country; complaining privately,
that now the Court-Bishops had served their own turns upon the King, they cared
not what miseries their poor brethren were exposed unto; who if they were
constrained to live in their Episcopal houses, or in any other place within
their Diocesses, must be constrained also to keep up such a Port, and maintain
such open Hospitality as their Revenues could not bear. Nor was it thought a
less injury to them, that they could not make the best of their time, but were
required to be good husbands for another man, who was to enjoy the place which
they were to leave; when they were fain to take it as it came to their hands,
without any prevention going before, or satisfaction following after.

But greater were the clamours of the Puritan Faction, reviving all, which had
been made against the like Instructions in the time of King James, and the late
Declaration published by the King reigning. For what less could be aimed at in
them than suppressing the Divine Ordinance of Preaching, or at the least, a
dreadful diminution of the number of Sermons; And what could follow thereupon,
but negligence in the Priests, ignorance in the People, Popery and Superstition
in the mean time gaining ground on both. Spending the afternoons in teaching
the Catechism was a work fitter for a Pedagogue than a preaching Minister, who
rather were ordained to provide strong meats for men, than milk for babes; and
yet such was the strictness of the said Instructions, in looking to the
observance of the late Declaration, that they were not suffered to set strong
meats before the people, though men of ripe years, and somewhat more than
children in their understandings. Preaching must be restrained hereafter to
Gods Will revealed, to Faith in Christ, and Moral duties toward God and men:
but as for his secret Will and Purpose in the unfathomable depths of
Predestination, those must be kept sealed up under lock and key, and none but
the Arminians have the opening of them. And yet the grief had been the less if
Lecturers had been left to their former liberty, and not tied up to Gown and
Surplice, or fettered with Parochial cures, and consequently with Subscriptions
and Canonical Oaths; badges of Antichrist, and professed enemies to the pure
Freedom of the Gospel. Where might a man repair with comfort to hear Gods Word
preached in truth and simplicity, the Sacraments administered in their original
nakedness; to hear Christ speaking in his Prophets, and the Prophets speaking
to the People if this world went on? But notwithstanding these secret Murmurs
on the one side, and the open Clamours of the other, Laud was resolved to do
his duty, who summoning all the Ministers and Lecturers about the City of
London to appear before him, made a solemn Speech, in which he pressed the
necessity of his Majesty's said Instructions for the good of the Church, and of
their cheerful obedience to them; He directed Letters also to every Archdeacon
in his Diocese requiring them to see them published to all the Clergy, and to
give him an exact account at the end of their Visitations how they were
observed; especially insisting on the third Instruction, For keeping the Kings
Declaration, that so the differences and disputes in those prohibited points
might be laid aside. The like care taken also by the rest of the Bishops, but
slackning by degrees when the heat was over; and possibly in short time after
they had not been looked into at all, if Abbot had continued longer in the Sea
of Canterbury: or that his Majesty had not enjoined the Bishops to give him an
exact account of their proceedings in the said particulars, not once for all,
but Annually once in every year, on the second of January. Which care being
taken for the peace and happiness of the Church of England, we will lay hold
upon this opportunity for crossing over into Ireland, and taking a short view
of the state of Religion in that Country; which from henceforth shall be looked
into more than has been formerly.

Concerning which we are to know, that when the Reformation was advanced in the
Church of England, the first care was to let the people have the Bible, the
public Liturgy, and certain godly Homilies in the English tongue; as
appears by the Statutes 2, 3. Edw. vi. 5, 6. Edw. vi. and 1 Eliz. Secondly,
The like care was taken of the Welsh; For whose Instruction it was further
ordered, partly by the Queen, and partly by Act of Parliament, in the fifth of
her Reign, that as well the Bible as the Common Prayer Book should be
Translated, Printed, and Published in that Language; one Book of each sort to
be provided for every several Church at the Charge of the Parish. Which being
Printed at the first in the large Church-Volume, was afterward reduced to a
more portable bulk for Domestical uses by the cost and charge of Rowland
Heylyn, Citizen and Alderman of London, about the beginning of the Reign of
this King. But for Ireland no such care was taken. The Acts of the Supremacy,
and of the Consecrations of Archbishops and Bishops were received there as
before in England, the English Liturgy imposed on them by order from hence,
and confirmed by Parliament in that Kingdom. Which notwithstanding not only the
Kernes, or natural wild Irish, but many of the better sort of the Nation,
either remain in their old barbarous ignorance, or else adhere unto the Pope,
or finally to their own superstitious fancies, as in former times. And to say
truth, it is no wonder that they should, there being no care taken to instruct
them in the Protestant Religion, either by translating the Bible, or the
English Liturgy, into their own Language, as was done in Wales; but forcing
them to come to the English Service, which they understood no more than they
did the Mass. By means whereof the Irish are not only kept in continual
ignorance, as to the Doctrine and Devotions of the Church of England: but those
of Rome are furnished with an excellent argument for having the Service of the
Church in a Language which the Common people understand not. And though
somewhat may be pleaded in excuse thereof, during the unquietness of that
Kingdom under Queen Elizabeth, who had the least part of it in her possession;
yet no sufficient plea can be made in defense of it for the time succeeding,
when the whole Country was reduced, and every part thereof lay open to the
course of Justice. So that I cannot look upon it without great amaz^m^nt, that
none of the Bishops of that Church should take care herein, or recommend the
miserable condition of that people to the Court of England.

Now as Popery continued by this means in the Realm of Ireland, so Calvinism
was as strongly rooted in that part thereof, which professed the Doctrine and
Religion of the Church of England. And touching this we are to know also, that
the Calvinian Doctrines being propagated in both Universities by such Divines
as lived in exile in Queen Mary's time; one Peter Baroe a Frenchman obtained to
be the Lady Margarets Professor in the Divinity Sc^ools at Cambridge. This man
approving better the Melancthonian Doctri^^ of Predestination than that of
Calvin, publicly taught it in t^ose Schools, and gained in short time very
many followers. Whitaker was at that time her Majesty's Professor for Divinity
there, and Perkins at the same time was of no small note, both Calvinists in
these points of Doctrine, and both of them supralapsarians also. Betwixt these
men and Baroe there grew some disputes, which afterward begat some heats, and
those heats brake out at last into open Factions. Hereupon Whitaker, Perkins,
Chaderton, and others of the same opinion, thought it expedient to effect that
by power which they were not able to obtain by Argument. And to that end
Preoccupate the most Reverend Archbishop Whitgift with most sad complaints
touching the Rupture made by Baroe in that University. For remedy whereof, the
Archbishop calls unto him Fletcher the Lord Elect of London, Vaughan the Lord
Elect of Bangor, Tyndal Dean of Ely, and such Divines as came from Cambridge,
who meeting at his house in Lambeth on the twenty sixth day of November, Anno
1595. did then and there conclude upon certain Articles, for regulating
disputations in those points of Controversy. Which Articles, being nine in
number, are these that follow: I. God from all eternity has predestined
certain men unto life, certain men he has reprobated. II. The moving or
efficient cause of Predestination unto life, is not the foresight of Faith, or
of perseverance, or of God-works, or of any thing that is in the person
predestined. but only the good will and pleasure of God. III. There is
predetermined a certain number of the Predestinate which can either be
augmented or diminished. IV. Those who are not predestined to salvation,
shall be necessarily damned for their sins. V. A true living and justifying
faith, and the Spirit of God justifying, is not extinguished, falls not away,
it vanishes not away in the Act either finally or totally. VI. A man truly
faithful, that is, such a one who is enduced with a justifying Faith, is
certain with the full assurance of faith, of the remission of his sins, and of
his everlasting salvation by Christ. VII. Saving grace is not given, is not
granted, is not communicated to all men; by which they may be saved if they
will. VIII. No man can come unto Christ unless it shall be given unto him, and
unless the Father shall draw him; and all men are not drawn by the Father that
they may come to the Son. IX. It is not in the will or power of every one to be
saved.


These Articles being brought to Cambridge so discouraged Baroe, that when the
ordinary time of his public readings was expired, he forsook that place, and
not many years after died in London. His Funeral being attended (by order from
Bishop Bancroft) by most of the Eminent Divines about that City, which shows
that both the Bishop, and the most eminent Divines of London, were either
inclinable to his opinions, or not so averse from them, as not to give a solemn
attendance at the time of his Funeral. The news of which proceedings being
brought to the Queen, she was exc^edingly offended, conceiving it a deep
intrenchment upon her Prerogative, that any such Declaration should be made in
matter of Religion without her Authority. Once was she at a point to have them
all indicted of a Praemunire, but the high esteem she had of Whitgift, whom she
commonly called her black husband, reprieved all the rest from the danger of
it. Howsoever such a strict course was taken for suppressing the said Articles,
that a Copy of them was not to be found in Cambridge for a long time after;
though after the Queens death they began to peep abroad again, and became more
public. Nor was King James better conceited of them than Queen Elizabeth was;
for when it was moved by Dr Reynolds at Hampton Court that the nine Orthodoxal
Assertions (as he pleased to call them) which were concluded on at Lambeth
might be admitted into the confession of the Church of England, the King so
much disliked the motion, that it was presently rejected without more ado. But
that which the Calvinians could not get in England they effected at the last in
Ireland; where the true and genuine Doctrines of the Church of England had been
less looked after than at home. For in the year 1615. a Parliament and
Convocation being holden in Dublin, it was resolved on by the Archbishop,
Bishops, and the rest of the Clergy then assembled, that a Book of Articles
should be framed to be the Public Confession of that Church for succeeding
times; the drawing up whereof was committed to Doctor James Usher (afterward
Archbishop of Armagh, and Lord Primate of Ireland) a Rigid Calvinist, but
otherwise the ablest Scholar of that Nation: And he accordingly fashioning the
Doctrine for that Church by his own Conceptions, Ushers L^se p. 49.
inserted into the said Book of Articles the nine Conclusions made at Lambeth,
to be the standing Rule (as he thought and hoped) of that Church for ever.

And yet they did not stay there neither. The Sabbatarian Doctrines had been
broached by Bownd in the same year wherein the nine Articles had been made at
Lambeth: Which being opposed by Archbishop Whitgift, and never admitted in this
Church, were by the cunning of that Faction, and the zeal or diligence of this
man, incorporated into the Body of the Articles for the Church of Ireland; in
which it is declared for a Doctrinal Point, That the first day of the Week,
which is the Lord's Day, is wholly to be dedicated to the Service of God; and
therefore we are Bound therein to rest from our common and daily Business, and
to bestow that leisure upon holy Exercises, both Public and Private. And
because he concluded in himself that the Pope was Antichrist, that also must be
made an Article of this Confession, in which we find it in these words, viz.
The Bishop of Rome is so far from being the Supreme Head of the Universal
Church, that his Works and Doctrines do plainly discover him to be the Man of
Sin, foretold in the Holy Scripture, whom the Lord shall consume with the
Spirit of his mouth, and abolish with the brightness of his coming. And
hereunto, That the Plantation of the Scots in Vlster (unhappily projected in
the time of King James) brought in so much Puritanism such a contempt of
Bishops, such a neglect of the Public Liturgy, and other Divine Offices of
this Church, that there was nothing less to be found amongst them than the
Doctrine, Government, and Forms of Worship established in the Church of
England. The Papists in the mean time increasing more and more, grew at the
last to so great a confidence, by the clashings here in England betwixt the
King and his Parliaments, that they gave themselves great hope of a Toleration:
And possibly enough they might have obtained somewhat like it, if the Irish
Bishops had not joined together in a Protestation to the contrary, and caused
it to be published in the Pulpit by the Bishop of Derry, with infinite
Acclamations of the Protestant Hearers. Howsoever, the lost hopes had so far
emboldened them, that they set up some Religious Houses even in Dublin it self,
showed themselves openly in their Friars Habits, and publicly affronted not
only the Mayor, but the Archbishop of that City. This coming to his Majesty's
knowledge, he caused his pleasure to be signified to the Lords of his Council,
Bi^^. R^gia. p. 31.
That Order should be taken there, That the House where the said Seminary
Friars appeared in their Habits, and wherein the Reverend Archbishop and the
Mayor of Dublin received their first Affront, be speedily demolished, and be
the Mark of Terror to the Resisters of Authority; and that the rest of the
Houses erected or employed there or elsewhere, to the use of Superstitious
Societies, be converted to Houses of Correction, and to set the People on work,
or to other Public uses, for the Advancement of Justice, good Arts, or Trade.
Which Order of the Council Table bears date 31 January 1629.

That part of the Remonstrance of the House of Commons which related to the
Affairs of Ireland, first alarmed Laud to take the Business of that Church into
consideration. And that he might be the better informed in all Particulars
which concerned it, he took order with Doctor William Beadle, Cant. Doom.
designed unto the Bishopric of Killmore, to give him an exact Account of the
Estate of that Church, as soon as he could make any perfect Discovery of it.
This Order of the Council Table reinforced that case, and quickened the dispatch
of Beadle for his satisfaction, from whom he received a Letter dated April the
first, Anno 1630. In which he signified, That he had not been unmindful of his
Lordships commands, which he was now the better able to perform, because (says
he) I have been about my Diocese, and can set down out of my knowledge and view
what I shall relate, and shortly, to speak much ill matter in few words. Which
said, he lets his Lordship know, That the Estate of his Church was very
miserable; That the Cathedral Church of Ardagh (united to the Sea of Killmore)
one of the most ancient in Ireland, and said to be built by St. Patrick,
together with the Bishops House there, was down to the ground; That the Church
at Killmore had been built, but without Bell or Steeple, Font or Chalice; That
the Parish-Churches were all in a manner ruined, or unroofed and unrepaired;
That the People, saving a few British Planters here and there, (which are not
the tenth part of the Remnant) were obstinate Recusants; That there was a
Popish Clergy, more numerous by far than the English Clergy; That they were in
full Exercise of all Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical by their Vicars-general and
Officials, who were so confident as to Excommunicate those that come to the
Courts of the Protestant Bishops; That the Popish Primate for Ireland lived
within two miles of his House, and the Bishops in another part of his Diocese
further off; That every Parish had their Priest, and some two or three apiece,
and so their Massing-houses also; and that Masses are sometimes said in their
Churches; That there were Friars in diverse places, who went about, though not
in their Habit, who by their importunate begging did impoverish the People;
That Poverty was much increased, as well by their paying double Tithes both to
their own Clergy and the English, as by the dearth of Corn, and the death of
their Cattle; That the Oppressions of the Courts Ecclesiastical (which was
reckoned for another cause of the common poverty) were not indeed to be
excused, which for his part he had a purpose to reform; That in each Diocese
there were some seven or eight Ministers of good sufficiency; but being
English, they neither understood the Tongue of the People, nor could perform
any Divine Offices, nor converse with them as they ought, and consequently
could give no stop to the growth and increase o^ Popery; That most of the said
Ministers held two, three, four, or more Vicaridges apiece; and that sometimes
one man was Clerk of three or four Parishes, which were ordinarily bought,
sold, and let to Farm: And finally, That by those and such other means, his
majesty was King as to the Hearts and Consciences of that People; but so, that
it remained wholly at the Popes Discretion.

Here was sufficient work for a Reformation; and we shall see Laud taking care
of it in convenient time. But first we must look back to England, where we
shall find a new Honor attending on him. On Saturday, (...) C^arles.
being the tenth of April, William Lord Herbert Earl of Pembroke, Lord Steward
of his Majesty's Household, and Chancellor of the University of Oxon. died
suddenly at his House called Baynards-Castle, having then made up the ^i^tieth
year of his life, beyond which it had been foresignified by some Learned
Mathematicians that he should not live. This News being brought to Oxon. the
same night, or else betimes on Sunday morning, La^d's friends not only in St.
John's, but in other Colleges, so bestirred themselves, that before noon there
was a Party strong enough to confer that honorable Office on him. Frewen of
Magdalen College being then Vice Chancellor, was at that time as far as
Andover in a Colledge-Progress, where hearing accidentally of the Earls
decease, he made such haste back again to Oxon. that he came thither before the
end of Evening Prayer; and finding his own College in so good a posture,
advised with some other Heads of Houses, whom he knew to have the same
Inclinations, to make sure work of it; by whom it was agreed, That a
Convocation should be called the next day, to speed the business before any
other Competitor should appear against him. Nor did they make more haste than
good speed in it, some Agents coming thither before night in behalf of Philip
Earl of Montgomery, Brother to the Earl deceased; and they so well discharged
their Trust, that those of the Welsh Nation generally, Prideaux, and some other
Heads of Houses who were of the Calvinian Party, and the four Colleges
belonging to the Visitation of the Bishop of Lincoln (that is to say, Baliol,
Orial, Lincoln, and Brazennose) were wholly in a manner for him; that Bishop
stickling in the Cause, not so much out of love to him, as hate to Laud. But
all their diligence could not carry it as they desired, the Election passing
clear for the Bishop of London, of which he was presently advertised by the
University. On his receiving of which Message, he presently addressed himself
unto the King, acquainted him with what had happened, and humbly submitted the
Place unto his disposal. To which his Majesty most graciously returned this
Answer, That he knew none more worthy of it than himself; and that he should
rath^r study how to add further Honors to him, than take any from him. On
which encouragement, he appointed Wednesday the twenty eighth of the same Month
for the Solemnity of his Investiture in that O^fice, which was performed in a
frequent Convocation of that University, held at London-House, to the great
contentment o^ both Parties.

To add a further Honor to him, (...) R^gia, ^ect. 5. (...)
it pleased his Majesty to send him the joyful news, under his Royal Signature,
of the Princes Birth, born at his Majesty's House of St. James's on Saturday
May the twenty ninth, about one of the Clock in the afternoon. He had the
happiness of seeing the Royal Infant in the first hour of his Birth, and the
honor afterward to Baptize him. By ancient Privilege belonging to the Sea of
Canterbury, those Archbishops are Ordinaries of the Court; his Majesty's
Household, wheresoever the same shall be, being reckoned to be his Parishioners,
or of his peculiar. But Abbot being at that time infirm, or otherwise of no
desirable Company, this Office was devolved on Laud, as Dean of the Chapel;
and he accordingly performed it. The Birth of this young Prince, as it gave
cause of great Rejoycings to all good Subjects, so it gave no small matter of
discouragement to the Puritan Faction, who had laid their Line another way, and
desired not that this King should have had any Children: Insomuch that at a
Feast in Fryday-street, when some of the Company showed great joy at the news
of the Queens first being with Child, a leading man of that Faction (whom I
could name, were it worth the while) did not stick to say, That he could see no
such cause of joy as the others did. Which said, he gave this Reason for it;
That God had already better provided for us than we had deserved, in giving
such a hopeful Progeny by the Queen of Bohemia, brought up in the Reformed
Religion; whereas it was uncertain what Religion the Kings Children would
follow, being to be brought up under a Mother so devoted to the Church of Rome.
And I remember that being at a Town in Glocestershire, when the news came of
the Princes Birth, there was great Joy showed by all the rest of the Parish, in
causing Bonfires to be made, and the Bells to be rung, and sending Victuals
unto those of the younger sort, who were most busily employed in the public
Joy: But so, that from the rest of the Houses, being of the Presbyterian or
Puritan Party, there came neither Man, nor Child, nor Wood, nor Victuals; their
doors being shut close all the evening, as in a time of general mourning and
disconsolation.

It was not long after the Birth of this new Prince, that the Feoffees for
buying in Impropriations were called in question. The Project took beginning
about four years since, when Preston Governed the Affairs of the Puritan
Faction; at what time it was resolved amongst them, to set up stipendary
Lectures in all or most Market Towns, where the People had commonly less to do,
and consequently were more apt to Faction and Innovation than in other places;
and of all Market Towns, to choose such as were Privileged for sending
Burgesses to the High Court of Parliament: Which that it might be done with the
less charge to the People, who commonly love that Religion best which comes
cheapest to them, it was agreed to raise a common Stock amongst them, for
buying in such Impropriations as were remaining in the hands of the Laity. To
this end they erected a kind of Corporation amongst themselves, consisting of
twelve Persons, Clergymen, Citizens, and Lawyers, enabling them to receive and
expend such Moneys as their Emissaries should bring in from their several
Circuits. Their names, Gouge, Offspring, Sibbs, and Davenport, Ministers; Air,
Brown, White, and Sherland, Lawyers; Geering, Davis, Harwood, and Bridges,
Citizens; to whom was afterward added Rowland Heylyn Aldernian of the City of
London, by the name of Treasurer to the Company, that there might be a casting
Voice amongst them, as occasion served. Great were the Sums of Money which the
Piety of the Design, and the Diligence of their Limitaries brought in from
their several Walks; most men admiring, all applauding the nobleness of such a
Popular and Religious Act. But so it happened, that one of the Fellows of
Magdalen College, resorting frequently to a Town in Glocestershire, where one
of these new Lectures had been founded by them, observed these two things:
First, That the Impropriation of that place remained in the same Lay-hands as
before it did; and therefore that the Lecturer must receive his Stipend from
the Profits of some other Parish: And secondly, he observed, That the man there
planted in that Lecture was one of a notorious Inconformity, found upon further
search to have been hunted from one Diocese to another, till at last he was
Silenced upon that account by the High Commission. This gave him the first hint
of making a more diligent Inquiry into that Design; and the more he looked into
it, the worse he liked it. He knew so much of some, and heard so much of all
the rest which were trusted in the Conduct of it, that he could hope for no
good to the Church of England, from any thing of their projectment; For if such
public mischiefs be presaged by Astrologers from the Conjunctions of Jupiter
and Saturn, though the first of them be a Planet of a most sweet and gentle
Influence; what Dangers, what Calamities might not be feared from the
Conjunction of twelve such Persons, of which there was not one that wished well
to the present Government.

Having gone thus far in the Discovery, it pleased the President of his
College, being then Vice Chancellor, to appoint him to Preach the Act Sermon
at St. Mary's on Sunday in the afternoon, July 11. 1630. To which appointment
he submitted, resolving to deliver something in that great concourse of People
from all parts of the Kingdom, which might serve to undeceive them in that
Particular. He had chosen for his Text those words in the thirteenth of St.
Matthew, viz. But while men slept, the enemy came and sowed tares amongst the
wheat, and went his way. Beginning to draw toward the end of his Sermon, he
thus began to unfold the Arras, and show the Portraicture thereof in as lively
Colors as he could, Planting, says he, also many Pensionary Lecturers in so
many places where it need not, and upon days of common labor, will at the best
bringing forth of fruit, appear to be a tare indeed, though now no wheat be
counted tares, etc. We will proceed a little on further in the proposal of some
things to be considered. The Corporation of Feoffees for buying in
Impropriations to the Church; Does it not seem in the appearance to be an
excellent piece of Wheat? A noble and gracious point of piety? Is not this
Templum Domini, Templum Domini? But blessed God, that men should thus draw near
unto thee with their mouths, and yet be far from thee in their hearts! For what
are those entrusted in the managing of this great business? Are they not the
most of them the most active and the best affected men in the whole cause, and
Magna Partium momenta, Chief Patrons of the Faction? And what are those whom
they prefer? Are they not most of them such as must be serviceable to their
dangerous innovations? And will they not in time have more preferments to
bestow, and therefore more dependencies than all the Prelates in the Kingdom,
etc. Yet all this while we sleep and slumber, and fold our hands in sloth, and
see perhaps, but dare not note it.

No sooner were these words delivered, but a general consternation showed it
self in the looks of his Auditors. Some honest and well meaning men seemed much
to pity his misfortune in being put (as it was then generally, but falsely,
thought) on that odious task by some higher power, of purpose to discourage
such a pious work which good men rejoiced at. But greater was the clamor of
the Puritan Faction, who in a meeting held that night conceived no punishment
great enough to inflict upon him which either Law, Malice, or Revenge could
expose him to. Being thus alarmed on the one side, and threatened by the other,
he sent a Copy of his Sermon to the Bishop of London, not long before made
Chancellor of that University; and signified in a Letter therewith sent, that
he was both able and ready to make good his charge, whenever it should be
required. This information came opportunely to his Lordship, with whom the King
had used some Speech (as appears by his Breviate p. 12.) about restoring
Impropriations to the Church, which this new project seemed to frustrate. And
thereupon he entered it in the Memorandum at the end of his Breviate, viz. To
overthrow the Feoffment, dangerous both to Church and State, going under the
specious pretense of buying in Impropriations. The Preacher in the mean time
making a further search into the business, observed these particulars, first,
That no Impropriation by them bought, was laid unto the Parish Church, and
settled upon the present Incumbent, as was first expected, that being utterly
destructive of their design. Secondly, That a great part of that Revenue was
spent in maintaining a daily Lecture in the Church of St. Antholins at six a
clock in the Morning, to serve for a Seminary for the training up of such
Novices as were to be sent into the Country. Thirdly, That another part of it
was laid out, not only for the support of silenced Ministers, during their own
lives, but of their Wives and Children also after their decease, than which
there could not be a greater tie to unite men to them, and make them sticklers
in the Cause. Fourthly, These Pensions neither were so settled, nor their
Lectures so well established in their several places: but that the one might be
withdrawn, and the other removed, at the will and pleasure of their Patrons, if
they grew slack and negligent in the holy cause, which fastened a dependence on
them to the very last. It was not long before Noy, that Renowned Lawyer, was
made his Majesty's Attorney General, to whom the Preacher was commanded to
deliver a particular of all such passages as he had observed in the carrying on
of this design; the Feoffees thereupon being called into the Court of
Exchequer, the Feoffment damned, the Impropriations by them bought confiscated
to his Majesty's use, and the merit of the cause re^erred to a further censure.
And though the Sentence past not on them in the Court of Exchequer, Anno 1632.
yet I have laid all here together, that so I might proceed to the rest of my
business with the less disturbance.

For whilst the business of these Feoffees was under a more strict enquiry,
some things were acted by this Bishop, which brought him into the like danger
of an Inquisition. St. Catherine Creed Church in London being ruinous, and in
great decay, had in some places been taken almost down to the ground, and
rebuilt again by the Parishioners at such time as Mountain was their Bishop,
who suffered it to be made use of for Religious Offices without any new
consecration of it, which coming to the knowledge of Bishop Laud, he caused it
for a time to be suspended from all Divine Service, Sermons, and Sacraments,
till it was reconsecrated by himself. Which Office he solemnly performed on
Sunday January 16. An infinite number of people of all sorts drawing together
to behold that Ceremony to which they had so long been strangers, ignorant
altogether of the Antiquity and the necessity of it. The like done also at the
Church of St. Giles in the Fields on the Sunday after; which had been generally
repaired, and for the greatest part new built in the time of his Predecessor
also; Divine Service, Preaching, and Administration of the Sacraments being
used therein, without any such dedication of it, contrary to the practice of
the Primitive times and the Ancient Canons. And that we may lay these things
together, the next year after, June the seventh, he consecrated a new Church at
Hammersmith, built at the charges of that Village; and the next ^ear after
that, July the seventeenth, a new Church built at Stanmore magna, in the County
of Middlesex, erected at the sole cost and charges of Sir John Wolstenholm, one
of the Farmers of the Customs, who made that day a sumptuous and magnificent
Feast for the entertainment of all such persons of quality as resorted thither
to behold the Consecration. It was my chance to bestow a visit on his Lordship
at his house in Fulham, as he was preparing to set forwards to this last
Consecration; and being one of his Chaplains was at that time absent, and that
he was of ordinary course to make use of two, he took me along with him to
perform the Office of the Priest in the solemnity, in which his Chaplain Bray
was to Act the Deacons. I observed all the Circumstances and religious
Ceremonies which were used by him in that sacred Action from his first coming
into the Church till his going out, but could see nothing in it savouring of
that Superstition which had raised so much talk amongst ignorant People, and
afterward was certified by Willingham at the time of his trial in reference to
the consecration of St. Katherine Creed Church. The Antiquity of which
Consecrations has been shown in our Introduction performed by the Fathers at
such times when the Church hated nothing more than superstitious vanities, or
the accumulating of unnecessary and fruitless Ceremonies. The form and manner
of it left by our first Reformers to the care and discretion of the Bishops
whom it most concerned; Presuming that nothing would be done by them which
would not be consistent with the Rules of Piety, and the ancient practice of
the Church in the times foregoing. And such a Form was that which this Bishop
now made use of, digested first by the learned Andrews for his own particular
use, but afterward copied out, approved and followed (though possibly not
without some alterations) by most Bishops else.

Nor did he take care only of the Fabric, the material Church, to make it fit
and ready for Gods public Service: but that Gods public Service should be so
done in it, as might most tend to the edification of the Mystical Church, the
body aggregate of Gods People. His Majesty had took special care, as well by
his Proclamation of the fourteenth of June, 1626. as by his Declaration before
the Articles, 1628. for the silencing of all disputes touching Predestination,
and the points depending thereupon, which had begun to threaten such a general
disturbance to the peace of the Church. But neither Proclamation, nor
Declaration could persuade the Calvinian Party unto any such silence, which
they interpreted to be a plain betraying of Gods Cause into the hands of his
enemies. Somewhat is to be done to conjure down these unruly Spirits, which
otherwise would not be confined within their Circle. Mady, the Lecturer of
Christ-Church near Newgate, must needs fly out upon the Point of Election, and
the motives to it. For this contempt he is called before the Bishop of London,
and on some further misbehaviour prohibited from preaching any more within that
Diocese. Burges (who afterward pulled down the Cross in St. Paul's Churchyard)
must needs add scorn to his contempt; telling his Auditors, that if their
Minister preached Popery or Arminianism they might change their dwellings, and
not trouble the peace and order of their Church. For which about the same time
he is questioned also. White, and some others, in that Diocese suspended by
this Bishop on the same occasion.

From the City pass we to the Court. Where toward the end of the same Month we
find Davenant Bishop of Sarum preaching a Lent Sermon before the King, and
therein falling upon some of those prohibited points, even before his face, for
which the King being much offended (as he had good reason) he caused him to be
called before the Lords of his Council. The cause is managed against him by
Archbishop Harsnet ( Laud all the while walking by in silence) who gravely laid
before him as well the Kings Piety in setting forth the said Declaration, as
the greatness of his, the said Davenants, offense, in making so little
reckoning of it. Davenant at first endeavors many defenses to make good his
Action, but at last wisely casts himself upon this submission, he tells the
Lords, in answer to one of Harsnets objections, Chapter Hist. lib. 11. p. 140.
That he was sorry he did no sooner understand his Majesty's intention, which
if he had done before, he would have taken some other matter to treat of, which
might have given none offense; and that for the time to come he would conform
himself as readily as any other to his Majesty's Command. Arundel, Earl
Marshal, bids him hold to that, as his safest plea, and that he should proceed
to no further defense; a bad cause not being made the better by two much
handling. To this counsel he conforms himself. And being afterward admitted to
the kiss of his Majesty's hand (which his attendance might deserve, though his
Sermon did not) his Majesty declared to him his Resolution, That he would not
have this high Point meddled withal or debated, either the one way or the
other, because it was too high for the Peoples understanding; and that other
Points which concerned Reformation and Newness of life, were more needful and
profitable. I hope the lower Clergy will not say hereafter as some did of old,
That Laws are like the Spiders Cobwebs, which suffer the great flies to break
through, and lay hold only upon those of the smaller size.

1^31.
From the Court let us go to Oxon. where we find the next year beginning (in a
manner) with a Sermon preached at St. Mary's Church by one Hill of Heart-hall,
Cant. Doom. p. 173.
May 24. point blank enough against his Majesty's Declaration, and more than
bitter enough against those of different persuasion from him, whom he charged
with handling Scriptures worse than poor Christians were by the Turk at Tunis,
enforcing them to the vassallage of the foulest errors, not without some
reflection on the Higher Powers by whom they were mischieved into honor. For
which indiscretion being convented before the Vice Chancellor, and Heads of
Houses, (but not without the Chancellors privity) he confessed his fault, and
craved pardon for the same, which he obtained on his submission made in the
Convocation the sixteenth of July following. But worse it fared not long after
with Ford of Magdalen Hall, Hodges of Exeter College, and Thorn of Baliol,
who in their several Sermons had not only committed the like error, but charged
their Renovation of some ancient order in the Church, to be no other than plain
Innovation. Questioned for this by Smith, then Warden of Wadham College, and
Vice Chancellor of that University, they appeal from him to the Convocation.
The Proctors, having unadvisedly received the Appeal, were at the point to have
named Delegates when Smith appealed to the King: But they took their aim amiss
when they shot this bolt; For both his Majesty and the Chancellor were alike
concerned in it; the King, to justify his Declaration; the other, to preserve
his own power and dignity; neither of which could have been done, but by
defending Smith in his lawful acting. On the twenty third of August all Parties
interessed in the Cause appeared before the King at Woodstock, who after a full
hearing of both sides, it was ordered thus, That the three Delinquents should
be expelled the University; Doughty and Bruch, the two Proctors, should be
deprived of their places: Prideaux and Wilkinson (this last then Principle of
Magdalen Hall) being checked for stickling so much in it, and glad they were
that they escaped without further censure. But they showed not the same mercy
which they found; for Rainsford of Wadham College, preached at St. Mary's in
August following in defense of Universal Grace, and Man's Election unto life,
from Faith foreseen. No man more forward than Prideaux to appeach him of it, on
whose complaint and prosecution he was sentenced to a public acknowledgment of
his offense in a form prescribed; which was as much as had been done in the
case of Hill. So that the Rigid Calvinians can pretend no just ground for that
so great Calumny, that none but they were censured from preaching those
prohibited Doctrines; those of the Arminian Party (as they commonly called
them) going off unpunished.

From Oxon. cross we into Ireland, where we shall see Lauds care as great for
preserving the Kings Authority and the Churches peace as it was in England.
Usher, the Lord Primate of that Church, had published a Book this same year in
the Latin Tongue, called, The History of Gotteschalchus: for which he was
after much extolled by Twist of Newbury, as professed a Calvinian as himself,
in a Letter of his dated May 29. 1640. For, having first commended him for his
great learning and various reading manifested in his Book De Primodiis
Britannicarum Ecclesiarum, he magnifies next his singular wisdom for taking an
occasion to insert therein the History of the Pelagian Heresy, coming so
opportunely in his way; and then he adds, that his History of Gotteschalchus
was a piece of the like nature, and came forth most seasonable, so much the
more because it seemed to give some check to a Book written by Vossius, a right
Learned man, which had been much cried up by the Remonstrants. Downham then
Bishop of Derry had somewhat before that published a Discourse about
Perseverance, wherein some Passages were found directly thwarting his Majesty's
most pious purpose in the said Declaration: But Vsh^r's Book being writ in
Latin, gave the less offense. Nor seemed it fit to put any public disgrace on
a man to whom the Government of the whole National Church had been committed by
King James of most Blessed Memory. By questioning and suppressing Downham's
Book, he might be made as sensible of his Error in writing the aforesaid
History, as if his own had been made subject to the like condemnation. His
Majesty therefore gives him Order, by Letters bearing date at Woodstock, August
24. (the next day after the said Sentence of Thorn, Hodges, etc.) to call in
Bishop Downham's Book, who thereupon sent out Warrants, and caused all the
Books that were unsent into England, to be seized on: But so long it was before
the King had notice of it, and so long after that, before his Letters came to
the Lord Primates hands, which was not till the fifteenth of October following,
that almost all the Copies were dispersed in England and Ireland, before the
coming out of the Prohibition. And for preventing of the like for the time to
come, a Command is laid on Beadle Bishop of Killmore (which shows that Usher
was not thought fit to be trusted in it) to have an eye unto the Press, and to
take care that nothing hereafter should be published contrary to his Majesty's
said Directions: So Beadle in his Letter to the Bishop of London, dated
November 8. 1631. Which care being taken for the Peace of that Church, and
nothing else presented to us on that side of the Sea to detain us any longer
there, we will hoise Sail again for England, where we find more Work.

More Work indeed, and far the greatest not only of this present year, but the
greatest of this Bishops Life: A Work before in project, but in project only.
None had the Courage or the Power to carry it on so far as he: He could not
rest under the shade of those vast Ruins of St. Paul's Church (his own
Cathedral) without continual thought, and some hopes withal of repairing those
deformities in it, which by long time had been contracted. Of the first
Founding of this Church by Ethelbert King of Kent, the first Christian King and
the sixth Monarch of the Saxons; and the Enlargement of the same by Erkenwald
the fourth Bishop of it, we have spoke already: And now we are to know, That
their old Fabric being much wasted by Fire in the time of the Conqueror,
Mauritius then Bishop of London, Anne 1083. began the Foundation of that most
magnificent Pile now standing, viz. all the Body of the Church, with the South
and North cross Isles. Toward which Work he made use of a great part of the
Materials of the old Palatine Castle (standing in the same place where the
Covent of the Black-Friars was after built) great part whereof had perished by
the same Fire also. But the Foundations which this worthy Bishop had laid,
being suitable to his mind, were so vast, as the Historian observes, Hujus
laboriosi operis impe^sam ^^a^^misi: ad post^^os.
That though he prosecuted the Work twenty years, he left the performing
thereof to the care of Posterity: amongst which, none more transcendently
a^fected to this business, than his next Successor Richard Beaumis, In
Ecclesiae su^, and Aedificio^um ad Sedem suam spec^an^ium Structura magnam
impendit pecuniam Godw. in Catal Epise.
who bestowed the whole Revenue of his Bishopric upon it, supporting himself
and his Family by other means. And after him (some other Bishops succeeding
between them) that Richard, who was Treasurer to King Henry ii. being made
Bishop of London in the first year of King Richard, bestowed great Sums of
Money in the Reparation of this Church, and the Episcopal Houses which belonged
unto it. But all this Charge was principally laid out on the main Body of the
Church, and the Crossed Isles thereof, the Choire not holding Proportion with
so vast a Structure: So that resolving to make it fairer and more capacious
than before, they began with the Steeple, which was finished in Anno 1221. (5
Hen. 3,) In which year the Dedication of it was celebrated with great
magnificence, the King himself, Otho the Popes Legate, Edmond Archbishop of
Canterbury, Roger surnamed Niger then Bishop of London (a chief Advancer of the
Work) with five other Bishops, besides infinite multitudes of the Nobility,
Gentry, Citizens, and others of the Common People from all parts of the Land,
being present at it.

Nor is it to be thought that the Charges of that stately and magnificent
Structure was supported by the Bishops only, or issued out of such Revenues as
belonged unto the Dean and Chapter; but that the Clergy and People generally,
both of England and Ireland, contributed largely to the Work; the People of
those Times, out of their Devotion to Gods Service, being easily incited to
further all Works of this nature as occasion offered. And this appears by the
sundry Letters of several Bishops of both Nations, to the Clergy under their
Jurisdiction, for recommendation of that business to their particular
Congregations, many of which are extant still upon Record. Nor were the People
stirred on only by the solicitation of their Priests, or the exhortatory
Letters of their several Prelates; but by the grants of such Indulgences, and
relaxation from their several and respective Penances, which in those Letters
were extended unto all sorts of People, who with a cheerful heart and liberal
hand did promote the Service: By means whereof some men contributed Materials,
others sent in Money; and many Masons, Carpenters, and other Artificers, who
were to labor in the Work, bestowed their pains and toil upon it for less
consideration and reward than in other Buildings. Besides which, Henry de Lacy
Earl of Lincoln is said to have been a principal Benefactor to that part of it
which was then called the New-Work, in a Chapel whereof, dedicated to St.
Dunstan, we find his body to be interred. And so was Ralph de Baldock also,
both while he was Dean, and when he was Bishop of this Church; whose Body was
also buried in another part of the New-Work, called Our Ladies Chapel.

But this vast Pile, the Work of so long time, and so many Ages, was on the
fourth of June, Anno 1561. in danger to be suddenly consumed by a violent Fire,
beginning in the Steeple, and occasioned by the negligence of a Plummer, who
left his pan of coals unquench'd at his going to dinner. A Fire so violent,
that in the space of few hours it consumed not only the Steeple where it first
began, but did spread it self to the upper Roof of the Church and Isles,
totally burning all the Rafters, and whatsoever else was of combustible nature.
The Queen knew well, as well as any, that the Revenues of that Church were so
dilapidated, that neither the Bishops themselves, nor the Dean and Chapters,
were able to repair the least part of those Ruins which the Fire had made: And
thereupon out of a deep apprehension of that lamentable Accident, forthwith
directed her Letters to the Lord Mayor of London, requiring him to make some
speedy Order for its repair; and to further the Work, gave out of her Purse
1000 Marks in Gold, as also a Warrant for 1000 Load of Timber to be taken out
of her Woods, and elsewhere. Nor were the Citizens slack herein; for having
given a large Benevolence, they added three whole Fifteens to be speedily paid
for that purpose; all which amounted to three thousand two hundred forty seven
pound sixteen shillings two pence halfpenny. The Clergy of England within the
Province of Canterbury, freely contributed the fortieth part of all such Church
Livings as were charged with First Fruits, and the thirtieth part of all their
Benefices not so charged; those of London only excepted, who besides the
thirtieth part of such as paid First Fruits, gave the twentieth part of all the
rest: Which Contribution of the Clergy amounted to one thousand four hundred
sixty one pound thirteen shillings and eleven pence; whereunto was added, by
the benevolence of the Bishop of London, at several times, coming in all to
nine hundred five pound one shilling and eleven pence; By the Dean and Chapter
one hundred thirty six pound thirteen shillings and four pence: and made of the
surplusage of Timber one hundred nineteen pound three shillings and nine pence;
Given by the Justices and Officers of the Common Pleas thirty four pound five
shillings; and by those of the Kings Bench seventeen pound sixteen shillings
eight pence: All which together made no more than six thousand seven hundred
and two pound thirteen shillings and four pence. And yet with this small Sum
(such was the cheapness of those Times) the Work was carried on so
prosperously, that before the Month of April 1566. all the Roofs of Timber
(whereof those large ones of the East and West, framed in Yorkshire, and
brought by Sea) were perfectly finished and covered with Lead; the adding of a
new Steeple being thought unnecessary (because too chargeable) though diverse
Models have been made and presented of it.

The whole Roof being thus Repaired, the Stone-work of it stood as before it
did, sensibly decaying day by day, by reason of the corroding quality of the
Sea-coal smoke, which on every side annoyed it: Which being observed by one
Henry Farley, about the middle of the Reign of King James, he never left
soliciting the King by several Petitions and Addresses, to take the Ruinous
Estate thereof into his Princely Consideration, till at last it was resolved on
by the King. And to create the greater Veneration to so good a Work, he
bestowed that magnificent Visit on it, described at large in the first Book of
this History, Anno 1620. The product and result whereof was, the issuing out a
Commission under the Great Seal of England, bearing date the sixteenth day of
November then next following, directed to Sir Francis Jones Knight, then Lord
Mayor of London, George Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, Francis Lord Verulam
then Lord Chancellor of England, and diverse others, to the number of sixty
Persons and upwards: Which Commission importing, That this Church being the
greatest and most eminent (as also one of the principal Ornaments) of the
Realm, and in much decay, any six or more of these Commissioners, whereof three
to be of the said Kings Privy Council, should meet to make Particulars of the
decay, and likewise what Houses, Cellars, etc. had been built near it, either
to the annoyance of it, or the Churchyard: And moreover to Inquire what Lands,
Rents, etc. had been given toward its Repair, or Sums of Money collected to
that purpose, and not accordingly employed: And further to consider of the most
fit and proper means to raise money to carry on the said Repair: And lastly, to
appoint Surveyors and other Officers of their Work, and to make Certificate of
their Proceedings therein, into the Chancery. Upon the Meeting of which
Commissioners, and diligent search made into the Particulars aforementioned,
it was acknowledged that the Bishop of London had the whole care of the Body of
that Church, and the Dean and Chapter of the Choires: But that which each of
them enjoyed to this purpose, was so little, that they yearly expended double
as much upon the Roof and other parts decayed, to preserve them from present
ruin. Which being made evident to the Commissioners, as also that in former
times, even from the very first foundation thereof, it had been supported
partly out of the large Oblations of those that visited the Shrines and
Oratories therein, and partly from Public Contributions in all parts of the
Kingdom; It was concluded to proceed in the same way now, as had been done
formerly. And that it might proceed the better, the King himself, and many of
the principal Nobility and Gentry, declared by their Superscriptions (for the
encouragement of others to so good a Work) what Sums they resolved to give in
pursuance of it: Doctor John King, then Bishop of London, subscribing for 100
l. per Annum as long as he should continue in that See. Mountain who succeeded
not long after in that Bishopric, procured with great charge and trouble some
huge massy Stones to be brought from Portland, for the beginning of the Work:
But money coming slowly in, and he being a man of small activity, though of
good affec^ions, the heat of this great business cooled by little and little,
and so came to nothing.

But Laud succeeding him in the Sea of London, and having deservedly attained
unto great Authority with his Majesty, no sooner saw his Office settled both at
home and abroad, but he possessed him with a Loyal and Religious Zeal to pursue
that Work, which King James had so piously designed, though it went not much
further than the bare design. Few words might serve to animate the King to a
Work so pious, who aimed at nothing more than the Glory of God, in the
Advancement of the Peace and Happiness of the Church of England: And therefore
following the example o^ his Royal Father, he bestowed the like Visit on St.
Paul's, whither he was attended with the like Magnificence, and entertained at
the first entrance into the Church with the like Solemnity. The Divine Service
being done, and the Sermon ended, which tended principally unto the promoting
of a Work so honorable both to his Majesty's Person; and the English Nation;
his Majesty took a view of the Decays of that Church, and there Religiously
promised not to be wanting in the Piety of his best Endeavors, to the Repair
of those Ruins which Age, the Casualties of Weather, or any other Accidents
had brought upon it. In order whereunto, in the beginning o^ this year he
issued out his Royal Commission under the Great Seal of England, bearing date
the tenth of April in the seventh year of his Reign, directed to Sir Robert
Ducy Lord Mayor of the City of Londan, George Lord Archbishop of Canterbury,
Thomas Lord Coventry Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, etc. William Lord Bishop of
London, Richard Lord Bishop of Winton, John Lord Bishop of Ely, etc. Nicholas
Rainton, Ralph Freeman, Rowland Heylyn, etc. Aldermen of the City of London,
Edward Waymack, and Robert Bateman Chamberlain of the said City of London. In
which Commission the said King taking notice of this Cathedral, as the
goodliest Monument and most ancient Church of his whole Dominions, as also that
it was the principal Monument of the City of London, the Imperial Seat of this
his Realm; and moreover, That the Commissions issued out by his Royal Father
(as heretofore had been observed) were slackned by reason of his death; but he
resolving to go on therewith effectually, declared as follows: viz. 1. That
all Money brought in for Repair thereof, should be paid into the Chamber of
London. 2. That William Laud then Bishop of London offered to allow 100. l. per
Annum out of the Revenues of that Bishopric, during his continuance therein.
3. That a Register-Book should be made of all Subscriptions for Contributions
thereunto, as had been done in King James his time. 4. That the Judges of the
Prerogative Court, and all Officials throughout the several Bishoprics in
England and Wales, upon the Decease of any Person Intestate, should be excited
to remember this Church, out of what was proper to be given to pious uses: And
lastly, That Commissions should be issued throughout the whole Kingdom. Which
Commissions were executed in the Country with care and diligence, and seconded
so strongly by the power and solicitation of this pious Prelate, that the
money came flowing in apace; so much being raised by Legacies, by money given
to pious uses, and other free and voluntary Contributions, before the issuing
out of those Commissions, as enabled the grand Commissioners to begin the work.
Insomuch that on the sixteenth of December, Anno 1632. they found that there
had been brought into the Chamber of London the Sum of 5416 li. 13 s. 6 d. And
in April next ensuing the Work was begun: The houses adjoining to and near the
Church being compounded for, and plucked down, a great part of the Churchyard
paled in for Masons to work in, and an order given to Inigo Jones, Surveyor
general of his Majesty's Works, on the twenty sixth of June next following, to
prepare Scaffolding for the same. Which Preparations being made, the first
stone of this new Work was solemnly laid by our Bishop himself, the second by
Sir Francis Windebanke, his Majesty's principal Secretary of State, and the
third by Sir Henry Martin Knight, then Judge of the Prerogative Court, and the
fourth by the said Inigo Jones, chief Surveyor of that Fabric; each of them
giving money liberally amongst the Workmen, the better to encourage them to
proceed therein with all honest speed. The Quire or Chancel being first
finished, the work was carried on to the North part of the Cross Isle, and so
un^o the Western part or main body of the Cross Isle, and so unto the Western
part or main body of the Church. This worthy Prelate continuing the Piety of
his endeavors toward the completing of this stately and Magnificent
Structure, as well when he was Archbishop of Canterbury (to which dignity he
was promoted in September following) as when he was Bishop of London, and was
more nearly concerned in the affairs of that Church.

And though it be affirmed by a late Historian, Hist of K. Chapter ^y (...).
that many had no fancy to the work because he promoted it; yet on the contrary
it is known, that had not he promoted it there were not many would have had the
fancy to a work of that nature. Some men in hope of favor and preferment from
him, others to hold fair quarter with him, and not a few for fear of incurring
his displeasure, contributing more largely to it than they had done otherwise;
if otherwise they had contributed at all. Certain I am, that the Regular Clergy
were so forward in it, that being called together by their several Ordinaries,
few of them gave so little as a single tenth, many a double Subsidy, most in
the middle betwixt both, to be paid in three, four, or five years, as the work
continued. Which joined together amounting to a liberal sum, not reckoning in
the Deans and Chapters, whom it more nearly did concern to support that Fabric
than those of the Parochial Clergy. And yet it cannot be denied, but that it
met with many rubs, and mighty enemies. The Puritan Ministers and their
Adherents inveighed against it as the repairing and adorning of a Rotten
Relic; insinuating to the people (as they found occasion) that it was more
agreeable to the Rules of Piety to demolish such old Monuments of Superstition
and Idolatry than to keep them standing. For remedy whereof order was given to
such as preached at St. Paul's Cross, and other public places both in City and
Country, to represent unto their hearers all those several motives which might
not only serve to justify, but endear the work; nor wanted there some zealous
Patriots (or such as were desirous to be so accounted) on the other side, who
gave it out to be a cheat, a mear Court device to procure money for the King
without help of Parliaments; which project if it might succeed, the King (said
they) would grow too absolute, Bibl. Reg. S^ct. 3. ^. 14.
and take unto himself an Arbitrary form of Government; the People for want of
Parliaments being left remediless; which false report coming to his Majesty's
ears, he was compelled to make this Declaration of himself in all such
following Commissions as were dispatched into the Country, that he had not only
commanded, That the work of Reparation should begin, but had caused an entrance
to be made into it, and that he was constantly resolved to follow it till it
was brought to perfection, whereof he required the Commissioners to satisfy
all his loving Subjects of the clearness of his Royal Intention therein, and to
assure them in his Name, that all rumors and imaginations, as of diverting the
money to any other purpose, was but the fancies of men either grossly
malevolent, or causelessly jealous and distrustful.

The Subject being thus assured, the Clergy active, and the Nobility giving
good example unto all the rest, the work was so followed by the care of this
powerful Prelate, that before the year 1640. the whole body of it was finished,
and the Tower or Steeple Scaffolded to the very top, with an intent to take it
down to the very Arches, and raise it to a more stately height than it had at
the present, with four great Pinacles (at each Corner one) the Arches being
thought unable to support the burden of such a Steeple as before was fired.
And though the public Contribution which was brought into the Chamber of
London amounted to the Sum of 101330 li. 4 s. 8 d. yet there was something more
done in it by the Munificence of the King, and the bounty of the private
Subject. His Majesty to g^ve life to the Work had sent in first and last 10295
li. 5 s. 6 d. toward the said Sum, with part whereof he caused a stately
Portico to be erected at the West end of the Church, raised on Corinthian
Pillars, where he placed the Statues of his Royal Father King James, and
himself, for a lasting memorial of this their advancement of so glorious a
work. Which Portico was intended to be an Ambulatory for such as by usual
walking in the body of the Church profaned the place, and disturbed the Divine
Service in the Choire. And on the other side, Sir Paul Pindar Knight (sometime
Ambassador from King James at Constantinople) first repaired the decaies of
that goodly Partition, made at the West end of the Choire, adorning the outward
Front thereof with fair Pillars of black Marble, and Statues of those Saxon
Kings who had been Founders and Benefactors to that Church; beautified the
inward part thereof with Figures of Angels, and all the Wainscoat work with
Figures and Carving, viz. of Cherubins, and other Images richly gilded; adding
also fine sorts of hangings for the upper end thereof, and afterward bestowed
4000 li. in repairing the South part of the Cross Isle. But as this Bishop
fell, the work fell with him; the yearly Contribution abating in the year 1641.
when he was plunged into his troubles, from 15000 li. and upward, to little
more than 1500 li. and after by degrees to nothing, which clearly shows upon
what Wheel the whole Engine moved, whose soul it was, which gave both life and
motion to that great design. A work of such a vast Magnificence as required a
large and open heart, commensurate in some manner to the greatness of it; not
to be entertained by a man of such narrow comprehensions, as were ascribed unto
him in a Speech made by one of the Peers, when he first fell into his troubles.
So easy a thing it is to disgrace the man whom the weight of his afflictions
have once made incapable of standing up against such reproaches as the Pens or
Tongues of his Revilers shall accumulate on him.

Better success he had in another of his undertakings, though not of such a
public nature, or of so general a concernment to the honor of the Church and
State. He had received his breeding and first Preferments in St. John's College
in Oxon. which he resolved to gratify for the charge of his Education, by
adding a second Quadrangle unto that of the first Foundation. The other great
work he carried on by the public Purse, contributing little more unto it
(besides his annual pension of 100 li.) but his power and diligence. But this
he means to carry on at his own proper Costs, his Majesty most graciously
contributing some timber toward it out of Shot-over woods, of which the Lord
Treasurer endeavored (but in vain endeavored) to have made a stop. Some
Benefactor had before enricht the College with a Public Library, which made
one side to his new Building, the other three he added to it of his own. That
on the North consisted altogether of several Chambers, for the accommodations
of the Fellows and other Students. That on the East of a fair open walk below,
supported upon curious Pillars, and bearing up a beautiful Gallery, opening out
of the Library, for meditation and discourse: confronted on the other side with
the like open walk below, and a suitable Fabric over that raised up against the
Eastern wall of the Ancient Buildings. The whole composure fashioned in an
excellent Symetry according to the exactest rules of Modern Architecture; not
only graceful in it self, and useful to that private house, but a great
ornament also to the University. St. John's in Cambridge shall boast no longer
of its precedence before this in a double Quadrangle; In which it stands
equalled at the least, if not surmounted also by this of Oxford. On the twenty
third of July, in this present year, he laid the first stone of this new
building, not intermitting it (but only during the unseasonableness of the
following Winters) till he had brought it to an end, according to his first
design and proposition. Nor did these public buildings take him off in the
least degree from doing the Office of a Bishop. His eye was always watchful
over the Churches peace. And to preserve his own Diocese both in peace and
order, he bestowed this year a personal Visitation on it; beginning at
Brentwood in Essex, on the thirtieth of August, and so went on from place to
place, till he had visited and regulated the whole Clergy of it in their
several Deanries, and Precincts. And for performing of that Office he laid
aside the dignity of a Privy Counselor, and his attendance on the person of
his gracious Sovereign, in being an example of a careful and prudent Pastor to
the rest of his brethren.

In the late Agitations at Woodstock before the King* he let fall some words,
which were interpreted to the disparagement of the married Clergy. 1 Cor. 7.7.
He was a single man himself, and wished perhaps as St. Paul once did, That all
men else (that is to say, all men in holy Orders) would remain so likewise. And
some occasion being offered at that time to speak about the conveniences or
inconveniences of a married Clergy, he made some declaration of himself to
this effect, that in disposing of all Ecclesiastical Promotions he would prefer
the single man before the married, supposing the abilities of the persons were
otherwise equal; which limitation notwithstanding it gave much matter of
discourse, and not a little ground of scandal to many very honest and
well-minded men, who began presently to fear the sad consequents of it. This
general murmur could not but come unto his ears, and found him very sensible of
the Inconveniences which might grow upon it. For he soon wiped off that
reproach, by negotiating a Marriage between Mr Thomas Turner, one of his
Chaplains, and a Daughter of Windebanke his old friend, (at whose house he had
so long lain sick, as before is said.) And that the satisfaction in this point
might appear the greater, he officiated the whole Service of their Marriage in
his own Chapel at London House, joining their hands, and giving the Nuptial
Benediction, and performing all other Ecclesiastical Rites which belonged to
the solemnization of Matrimony by the Rules of this Church. This was the answer
which he made to his own Objection, and indeed it was so full and home, that
the Objection seemed not to require any further answer. Nor was it long before
Windebanke found how well his cheerfulness in yielding to that Match had been
entertained. He was at that time one of the Clerks of the Signet, as his Father
Sir Thomas Windebanke had been before him: But our Bishop did not mean he
should dwell there always. They had been Cotemporaries at St. John's College,
their acquaintance from their very Childhood, their persons much of the same
stature; a like facetiousness in both for wit and company. In which respects
Laud had commended him to the good Graces of the Duke when he was alive. But
the Duke doing nothing for him, left Laud in a capacity to supply the want; by
whose power and favor with the King he was advanced unto the honorable Office
of the principal Secretary of State, in the place of Dudly Lord Carlton
Viscount Dorchester. Dorchester died on Ash Wednesday Morning, Anno 1631. And
of Windebanke he writes thus in his Breviate, viz. June 15. 1632., Mr. Francis
Windebanke my old friend was sworn Secretary of State, which Place I obtained
for him of my gracious Master King Charles.

About the same time also Sir Francis Cottington, who succeeded the Lord
Treasurer Weston in the place of Chancellor, was made Successor unto Nanton in
the Mastership of the Wards and Liveries. No sooner was he in this place, but
some difference began to grow betwixt him and Coventry, Lord Keeper of the
Great Seal of England, about the disposing of such Benefices as belonged to the
King, in the Minority of his Wards: Coventry pleaded a joint interest in it
according to the Privilege and usage of his Predecessors, it standing formerly
for a rule, that he of the two which first heard of the vacancy, and presented
his Clerk unto the Bishop, should have his turn served before the other. But
Cottington was resolved to have no Competitor, and would have either all or
none. During which Competition betwixt the parties, Laud ends the difference by
taking all unto himself. Many Divines had served as Chaplains in his Majesty's
Ships, and ventured their persons in the Action at the Isle of The, during his
Majesty's late engagements with France and Spain; some reward must be given
them for their Service past, the better to encourage others on the like
occasions for the time to come. It is cold venturing in such hot Services
without some hope of Reward. And thereupon he takes occasion to inform his
Majesty, that till this Controversy were decided he might do well to take
those Livings into his own disposing for the reward of such Divines as had done
him service in his Wars, or should go forth hereafter on the like employments.
Which Proposition being approved, his Majesty committed the said Benefices unto
his disposal, knowing full well how faithfully he would discharge the trust
reposed in him for the advancement of his Majesty's Service, the satisfaction
of the Suitors, and the Churches peace. Neither did Cottington seem displeased
at this designation: As being more willing that a third man should carry away
the prize from both, than to be overtopt by Coventry in his own Jurisdiction.
By the accession of this power as he increased the number of his dependents, so
he gained the opportunity by it to supply the Church with regular and
conformable men, for whom he was to be responsal both to God and the King.
Which served him for a Counter-Ballance against the multitude of Lecturers
established in so many places, especially by the Feoffees for impropriations,
who came not to their doom till February 13. of this present year, as before
was said.

But greater were the Alterations amongst the Bishops in the Church than
amongst the Officers of Court, and greater his Authority in preferring the one
than in disposing of the other. Buckeridge his old Tutor, dying in the Sea of
Elie, makes room for White, then Bishop of Norwich, and Lord Almoner, to
succeed in his place; A man who having spent the greatest part of his life on
his private Cures, grew suddenly into esteem by his zealous preachings against
the Papists, his Conferences with the Jesuit Fisher, and his Book wrote
against him by command of King James. Appointed by that King to have a special
eye on the Countess of Denbigh (whom the Priests much labored to pervert) he
was encouraged thereunto with the Deanery of Carlisle, advanced on that very
account to the Bishopric thereof by the Duke her brother. The Duke being dead,
his favor in the Court continued, remove to Norwich first and to Ely
afterward. Corbet of Oxon. one of Lauds fellow sufferers in the University,
succeeds him in the Sea of Norwich; and Bancroft, Master of University
College, is made Bishop of Oxon. Kinsman he was to ever renowned Archbishop
Bancroft, by whom preferred unto that Headship, and looked upon for his sake
chiefly, though otherwise of a good secular living in this Succession. The
Bishopric of small Revenue, and without a House, but Laud will find a remedy
for both in convenient time. The Impropriate Parsonage of Cudesdens five miles
from Oxon. belonged to the Bishop in the right of his See, and he had the
Donation of the Vicaridge in the same right also. The Impropriation was in
Lease, but he is desired to run it out without more renewing, that in the end
it might be made an improvement to that slender Bishopric. The Vicaridge in
the mean time falling, he procured himself to be legally instituted and
inducted, and by the power and favor of our Bishop of London obtains an
annexation of it to the Sea Episcopal, (the design of bringing in the
impropriation going forwards still) and builds that beautiful house upon it,
which before we mentioned. The Sea of Bristow was grown poorer than that of
Oxon. both having been dilapidated in Queen Elizabeth's time, though by diverse
hands. To improve the Patrimony thereof, his Majesty had taken order, that
Wright, then Bishop of that Church, should suspend the renewing of a Lease of a
very good Farm, not very far distant from that City, well Housed, and of a
competent Revenue, to serve as a Demesne to the following Bishops; for which he
was to be considered in some other Preferment. Houson of Durham being dead,
Morton removes from Lichfield thither, A man who for the greatest part of his
time had exercised his Pen against the Papists: but gave withal no small
contentment to King James, by his learned Book in defense of the three harmless
Ceremonies against the Puritans. Wright follows him at Lichfield, and Cook
(brother to Secretary Cook) follows Wright at Bristoll, tied to the same
conditions, and with like encouragement. The Secretary had formerly done our
Bishop some bad Offices. But great Courtiers must sometimes pay good turns for
injuries, break and be pieced again, as occasions vary. The like care also
taken by him for mending the two Bishoprics of Asaph and Chester, Breviate. p.
28.
as appears by his Breviate.

Nor were these all the Alterations which were made this year; Archbishop
Harsnet having left his life the year before, care must be taken for a sit man
to succeed at York; a man of an unsuspected trust, and one that must be able to
direct himself in all emergencies. Neiles known sufficiencies had pointed him
unto the place, but he was warm at Winton, and perhaps might not be persuaded
to move toward the North, from whence he came not long before with so great
contentment; Yet such was the good man's desires to serve his Majesty, and the
Church in what place soever, though to his personal trouble and particular
loss; that he accepted of the offer, and was accordingly translated in the
beginning of this year, or the end of the former. Two Offices fell void by this
remove, one in the Court, which was the Clerkship of the Closet: and another in
the Church of Winton, which was that of the Bishop. To the Clerkship of the
Closet he preferred Dr. William Iuxon, (whom before he had made President of
St. John's College) and recommended to his Majesty for the Deanery of Worcester,
to the end that he might have some trusty friend to be near his Majesty,
whenever he was forced by sickness, or any other necessary occasion, to
absent himself. So that Windebanke having the Kings ear on one side, and the
Clerk of the Closet on the other, he might presume to have his tale well told
between them; and that his Majesty should not easily be possessed with any
thing to his disadvantage. To find another sit man for Winton must be his chief
business, whom it concerned to plant such a Bishop in that See as might be
pliant and subservient unto his desires. The Bishop of Winton by his place is
Visitor of five considerable Colleges in the University of Oxon. that is to
say, Magdalens, New College, Corpus Christi, St. John's, and Trinity; by which
means he is able to draw a great party after him, and such as might much curb
the power of the Chancellor if they should cross with one another. Therefore to
make sure work at Oxford he thought it most conducible to his peace and power
to prefer Curle from Bath and Wells to the Sea of Winton, which being
accordingly effected, Pierce is removed from Peterborough to the Church of
Wells, upon the like consideration as Wright about the same time was translated
to Lichfield. There was a rich Parsonage, called Castor, which belonged to his
Patronage as Bishop of Peterborough, about three or four miles from that small
City, designed whenever it fell void to serve for a perpetual commendam to
the Bishops of it. And falling void, it was so ordered by the care of our
Bishop of London, that Pierce should wave the preferment of a friend unto it,
and take it for the present unto himself, leaving it afterward to his
Successors. For his Reward therein he was preferred to Bath and Wells, and
Peterborough procured by Laud for his old Friend and Fellow Servants Doctor
Augustine Lyndsell, for whom he formerly had obtained the Deanery of Litchfeild:
And to say truth, the man deserved it, being a very solid Divine, and a learned
Linguist, to whom the Christian World remains indebted for Theophylact's
Comment on the Epistles, and the Catena upon Job, published by him in Greek and
Latin.

His Majesty's Printers, at or about this time, had committed a scandalous
mistake in our English Bibles, by leaving out the word Not in the Seventh
Commandment. His Majesty being made acquainted with it by the Bishop of London,
Order was given for calling the Printers into the High Commission, where upon
Evidence of the Fact, the whole Impression was called in, and the Printers
deeply fined, as they justly merited. With some part of this Fine Laud causes
a fair Greek Character to be provided, for publishing such Manuscripts as Time
and Industry should make ready for the Public view; of which sort were the
Catena and Theophylact set out by Lyndsell.

This mentioning of the High Commission conducts me toward the Star Chamber,
where we shall find a Censure passed on Sherfeild the Recorder of Sarum,
wherein our Bishop was as active as in that before; which because it drew upon
him some clamor, and such a clamor as not only followed him to his death, but
has been since continued in sundry Pamphlets, I shall lay down the occasion of
it, and the true Reasons of his Earnestness and Zeal in that prosecution. This
Sherfeild being Recorder of Sarum, as before is said, was one of the
Parishioners of the Parish Church of St. Edmonds, in one of the Windows whereof
the Story of the Creation was expressed in old painted Glass, in which there
was a Representation of God the Father in the shape of an Old Man, after which
form the Painters of those Elder Times did most commonly draw him. This Window,
which had continued in the Church without any offense from the first setting of
it up, till the year 1629. or thereabouts, became a great eyesore to this man,
whom nothing would content but the defacing of those Pictures, in such a way as
might best please his own humor, and affront Authority. Davenant at that time
was Bishop of Sarum, and lived for the most part in his Palace there; a man of
known disaffections to the Church of Rome, and all the Superstitious Vanities
and Corruptions of it. Had he been made acquainted with it, there is no
question to be made, but that he either would have gratified the man, in
causing the said window to be taken down in a peaceable way; or else have given
him such good Reasons to the contrary, as might have qualified the peccancy of
the present Humor. But Sherfeild being the Recorder, and thinking he had the
Law in his ^ands, as well as he had it in his head, must go another way to
work, and bring the Business to be agitated in a Parish Vestry, which Bastard
Elderships began to grow so much in use in most Corporate Towns, that
countenance and connivence in short time would have made them Legitimate. The
Elders of the Vestry being as willing to embrace the business, as he was to
commend it to them, enabled him at the next Church-Session, in the Month of
January 1629. to ease his Conscience of that burden, by taking down the
offensive Window, and setting up another of plain white Glass in the place
therereof: And yet this gave him no content, unless he might show a more than
ordinary Zeal, in defacing those Images which he was ordered to take down; and
did accordingly deface them, beating down the Pictures with his Staff in such a
violent and scandalous way, as was disrelished by most moderate men of his own
Persuasion. The noise of so foul a misdemeanour growing louder and louder, it
came at last unto the Court; whereupon an Information was exhibited against him
in the Star Chamber by the Kings Attorney, not ripened for a Hearing till the
latter end of this present year, and then brought to Sentence. The Affront done
to the Diocesan, and the erecting of a new Eldership in despite of Authority,
had been crime sufficient to bring him under the Censure of the
High Commission: But taking power unto himself of Reforming what he thought
amiss in the face of the Church, and proceeding to the execution of it in a way
so dangerous, so full of ill example to the rest of the Zealots, made him more
properly subject to the Court of Star Chamber, and to as heavy a Censure there
as that Court could legally inflict for the like Disorders. For what Security
could be hoped for in Church or State, if every man should be a Sherfeild, and
without asking leave of the Prince or Prelate, proceed to such a Reformation as
best pleased his Fancy? If suffered to go on in defacing Windows, they would
be spirited in short time to pull down Churches; there being commonly no stop
in such Tumultuary Reformations, till every man be wearied in his own
confusions. And somewhat there was also in it which was looked upon as a great
discouragement to the moderate Papists, from thinking favorably of our
Churches, or resorting to them; and to some moderate Protestants also, in
beautifying and adorning Churches after such a manner, as without giving just
offense, might draw the greater Estimation to those sacred Places. In which
respect, Laud did not only aggravate the Crime as much as he could, in
reference to the dangerous Consequences which might follow on it: but showed
how far the use of painted Images, in the way of Ornament and Remembrance,
might be retained in the Church; not justifying the painting of God the Father
in the shape of an Old Man (as he was commonly misreported) but only laying
down the Reason which induced some Painters to that Representation, which they
grounded on Daniel 7.9. where God the Father is not only called the Ancient of
Days, to signify his Eternity before all time (which was so much insisted on
by the Earl of Dorset) but described after the similitude of an Old Man, the
hair of whose head was like the pure wool. In fine, though Sherfeild found
some Friends, yet they were but few, the major part concurring in this Sentence
on him, that is to say, to be fined a thousand pounds to the King, deprived of
his Recordership, bound to his good behavior for the time to come, as also to
make a public Acknowledgment of his Offense, not only in the Parish Church of
St. Edmonds, where it was committed; but in the Cathedral Church it self; that
the Bishop, in contempt of whose Authority he had played this Pageant, might
have Reparation.

This Censure being past on Sherfeild on the eighth of February, Order is given
to Noy the Atturney-General to make preparation for another, but of greater
consequence. We showed before how busy Prynne had made himself in some present
Controversies, and with what insolence he carried himself from the
High Commission. Prepared with confidence and success for a further Calamity,
he publishes a small Pamphlet called Lame GILES his Halting, An Appendix
against Bowing at the Name of JESUS, a larger Book called Anti-Arminianism, and
notably bestirs himself in discovering a mistake (an Imposture it must needs be
called) in the Historical Narration published 1631. against which he never lest
exclaiming, till he had procured Archbishop Abbot (with whom he was grown very
gracious) to call it in: But not contented with that Triumph, he prepares
another Pageant for us in the end of Michaelmas Term this year, known by the
name of Histrio-Mastyx, in which he seemed to breath nothing but Disgrace to
the Nation, Infamy to the Church, Reproaches to the Court, Dishonor to the
Queen, and some things which were thought to be tending to the destruction of
his Majesty's Person. Neither the Hospitality of the Gentry in the time of
Christmas, nor the Music in Cathedrals and the Chapels Royal, nor the Pomps
and Gallantries of the Court, nor the Queens harmless Recreations, nor the
Kings solacing himself sometimes in Masks and Dances, could escape the venom
of his Pen; expressed for the most part in such bitter Language, and frequently
interlaced with such dangerous Aggravations and Insinuations, that it was not
possible for the Author to escape uncensured. This Book being brought before
the Lords of the Council toward the end of January, and found too tedious for
their Lordships to be troubled with it, it pleased his Majesty to give order,
that the Book should be committed to the Reading of one of the Prebends of
Westminster, with command to draw out of it and digest such particular Passages
as tended to the danger or dishonor of the King or State. On the finishing and
return of which Collection, Prynne is committed to the Tower on Sunday being
Candlemas day, and on the morrow after the Collector received a further Order
to review his Notes, and deduct out of them such Logical Inferences and
Conclusions as might and did naturally arise on those dangerous Premises: One
Copy of the same to be le^t for the Lords of the Council, and another with Noy
the Atturney-General, and the rest of his Majesty's Council-Learned in the Laws
of this Realm; which Papers gave such satisfaction to the one, and such help to
the other, that when the Cause was brought to hearing in the Star Chamber, they
repeated his Instructions only, as Discovery of the Prelates Trial, p. 129.
Prynne himself informed against him to the House of Commons. What was done
further in this business, we shall see hereafter.

This business being put into a course, our Bishop offers some Considerations
to the Lords of the Council, concerning the Dishonor done to the Church of
England by the wilful negligence of some Chaplains and other Ministers, both in
our Factories and Regiments beyond the Seas; together with the Inconveniences
which redounded to it from the French and Dutch Congregations settled in many
places amongst our selves. He had long teemed with this Design, but was not
willing to be his own Midwife when it came to the Birth; and therefore it was
so contrived, that Windebank should make the Proposition at the Council Table,
and put the Business on so far, that the Bishop might be moved by the whole
Board to consider of the several Points in that weighty Business: who being
thus warranted to the execution of his own desires, presented two Memorials to
their Lordships, at the end of this year, March 22. The one relating to the
Factories and Regiments beyond the Seas; the other to the French and Dutch
Plantations in London, Kent, Norfolk, Yorkshire, Hampshire, and the Isle of
Axhelme. He had observed, not without great indignation, how Tenacious the
French and Dutch Churches were of their own received Forms, both in Worship and
Government; as on the other side, how ignoble and degenerous the English had
shown themselves, in neglecting the Divine Service of this Church in their
several Factories, where they were licenced to make use of it by the Power and
Countenance of that State in which they Traded. The Earl of Leicester being
sent this year to negotiate some Affairs with the King of Denmark, and
Anstrother ready to come from the Court of the Emperor, they were appointed by
his Majesty to meet at Hamborough, there to expect the coming of Pennington
with some Ships to conduct them home. The English driving a great Trade in that
Town, were by the Magistrates thereof indulged all the Privileges of an
English Church: but they retained nothing of a Church of England, governing
themselves wholly by Calvin's Platform, which they had taken up in England.
The two Ambassadors being met, but the Ships not come, the Elders of the Church
humbly desired their Lordships to do them so much honor in the eyes of the
People, as to vouchsafe their presence at the English Church; and that their
Lordships Chaplains might be ordered to Exercise in the Congregation. This
Motion being cheerfully embraced by both, the Earl of Leicester's Chaplain
first mounts the Pulpit, and after a short Psalm, according to the Genevian
fashion, betakes himself unto his Sermon. The like was done by Johnson,
Anstrothers Chaplain, (for I remember not the name of the other) when it came
to his turn. The Ships being come, and staying for a change of wind, the like
courtesy was desired of Pennington, Admiral of that little Fleet for the
present Service. Pennington told them that he had no Chaplain, that there was
in the Ship one Dr. Ambrose his Friend and Kinsman, who had borne him company
in that Voyage; and that he doubted not but that he would readily hearken to
them, if they made the motion. The motion being made and granted, Ambrose
attends his Admiral to the place of Exercise, where he took up his stand very
near the Pulpit. The Congregation being filled, and the Psalm half done, a
Deacon is sent to put him in mind of going into the Pulpit; of whom he desires
to be accommodated with a Bible, and a Common Prayer Book; The Deacon offered
him a Bible, but told him that they had no such thing as a Common Prayer Book,
and that the Common Prayers were not used amongst them: Why then, said Ambrose,
the best is, that I have one of my own; which being presently taken out of his
pocket, he began with the Sentences, and invitation, and was scarce entered into
the Confession, when all the Church was in an uprore. The Elders thereupon in a
great amaze sent back the Deacon, to desire him to go into the Pulpit, and not
to trouble them with that which they were not used to. Ambrose replied, That if
they were an English Church they were obliged to serve God by the English
Liturgy; and that if they would have no Prayers they should have no Sermon,
and so proceeded on with the rest of the Liturgy; which Message being delivered
to the Elders, the Deacon was sent back the third time, requiring him to desist
from that unnecessary Service. On the receiving of which Message he puts the
book into his pocket, and goes out of the Church, the two Ambassadors
following him, and the Admiral them; to the great honor of himself, and the
confusion of Johnson (from whose mouth I received the story) and the other
Chaplain, being thus showed their error in not doing the like.

That our Bishop was ever made acquainted by the said Johnson with this
passage, I am not able to say; but whether he were or not, he had too much
ground for what he did, in offering to their Lordships his considerations for
regulating Divine Service in that and all other Factories, Employments, and
Commands of the English Nation. That is to say, First, That the Colonels of the
English Regiments in the Low Countries should entertain no Minister as Preacher
to their Regiments but such as should conform in all things to the Church of
England, to be commended to them by their Lordships, the Advice of the
Archbishop of Canterbury and York being taken in it. Secondly, That the Company
of Merchants there residing, or in any other parts, shall admit no Minister as
Preacher to them but such as are so qualified, and so commended, as a^oresaid.
Thirdly, That if any Minister has gotten himself by indirect means to be so
commended, and should be afterward found to be unconformable, and should not
conform himself within three months, upon warning giving him by the said
Colonels or Deputy Governor of the Factors under whom he lives, he shall be
dismissed from his employment, and a more orderly man recommended to it.
Fourthly, That every Minister or Chaplain in any Factory, or Regiment, whether
of English or Scots, shall read the Common Prayers, Administer the Sacraments,
Catechize the Children, and perform all other public Ministerial duties,
according to the Rules or Rubricks of the English Liturgy, and not otherwise.
Fifthly, That if any Minister or Preacher, being the Kings born Subject, should
with any bitter words, or writings, in Print or otherwise, defame the Church of
England by Law established, notice thereof is to be given to the Ambassador
there, and by him to this State, by whom the party so offending should be
commanded over again to answer for his said offenses; the like to be done also
in derogating from the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church, and in Preaching,
Writing or Printing any thing prejudicial to the Temporal State and Government
of the Realm of England. Sixthly, That no Colonel or Deputy Governor should
permit their Minister or Preacher, in the case of sickness, or necessary
absence, to bring in any to preach or officiate for him, but such an one for
whose conformity he would be accountable. Seventhly, That no Deputy Governors
should be sent to Delfe, or any other place of Residence for the English
Merchants, but one that, being conformable to the Church of England both in
Doctrine and Discipline, would take care also, that such as be under him, shall
perform all Church duties before expressed; that the party so designed shall be
presented to their Lordships by the Merchant Adventurers, giving assurance of
his fitness and sufficiency for that charge, and that some of the chief of the
Merchants be sent for to the board, and made acquainted with this order.
Eighthly, That as often as the said Merchants shall renew their Patents, a
clause for the due observation of these Instructions (or so many of them at the
least as should seem necessary to their Lordships) to be inserted in the same.
Ninthly, That all his Majesty's Agents there from time to time have these
Instructions given them in Charge, and that once a year they be required to
give the Board an account of the Progress of the business, that further order
might be taken if occasion be. Tenthly, That the English Ministers in Holland,
being his Majesty's born Subjects, be not suffered to hold any Classical
meetings, but howsoever not to assume the power of Ordination; from which if
they should not be restrained, there would be a perpetual Seminary for breeding
up men in Schism and Faction, to the disturbance of this Kingdom.

In reference to the French and Dutch Churches here in England he proceeded in
another method; first, representing the occasion of their settling here, their
several abuses of that Favor, together with the manifold dangers and
inconveniences which might thence arise; and next advising such agreeable
remedies as he thought most proper for the cure. And first he represented to
them the great piety of this State in giving liberty to those Nations to enjoy
the freedom of their own Religion, at London and elsewhere in this Kingdom;
when being under persecution in their own Countries they could not enjoy the
same at home. Secondly, That it was not the meaning of this State then, or at
any other time since, that the first Generation being worn out, their Children,
and Childrens Children, being naturally born Subjects of this Realm, should
still remain divided from the rest of the Church, which must needs alienate
them from the State, and make them apt to any innovation which may sort better
with their humor: Thirdly, That they still keep themselves as a distinct body
of themselves, marrying only in their own Tribe with one another; by means
whereof it must needs follow, that as they are now a Church within a Church, so
in short time they might grow to be a Commonwealth in the midst of a
Kingdom. Fourthly, That these bodies standing thus divided from the Church and
State are planted for the most part in such Haven Towns as lay fittest for
France and the Low Countries; which may be a shrewd temptation to them to take
such advantages to themselves, or to make use thereof for others as occasion
offers. Fifthly, That the example is of ill consequence in Church Affairs to
the Subjects of England, many being confirmed by it in their stubborn ways,
and inconformities, but in London chiefly. Sixthly, That neither French nor
Dutch Church be longer tolerated in this Kingdom than the Subjects of this
Kingdom be suffered to enjoy the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of
England in those several parts beyond the Seas where they have their abode. The
dangers and inconveniences being thus laid down, he proceeds to the Remedies.
And first he does advise, That the number of them in all places of the Kingdom
be fully known, to the end a better Judgment might be made of the way by which
they are to be reduced to the rest of the Kingdom. Secondly, That a Command be
issued to this purpose from the State it self, and that it be avowedly (and not
perfunctorily) taken in all places where they do reside, and a Certificate
returned of the men of most credit and wealth amongst them. Thirdly, That if
they will continue as a distinct body both from State and Church, they should
pay all duties double as strangers used to do in this Realm, and not be capable
of such immunities as the Natives have, as long as they continue so divided
from them. Fourthly, That when it shall be thought convenient to reduce them to
the same condition with the rest of the Subjects, they should then be warned in
an Ecclesiastical way (excepting such as be new Comers) to repair diligently
to their Parish Churches, and to conform themselves to their Prayers and
Sacraments; which if they should refuse to do, then to proceed against them by
Excommunication, and so unto the Writ de Excommunicato capiendo, for a terror
to others. Fifthly, and lastly, That if this course prevail not with them, a
Declaration to be made by the State to this effect, That if they will be as
natives, and take the benefit of Subjects they must conform themselves to the
Laws of the Kingdom, as well Ecclesiastical as Temporal; That being the
likeliest way to make them capable of the inconveniences they should run unto
by their refusal and perverseness. Such were the considerations offered by him
to the Lords of the Council, for advancing the peace and honor of this Church
both at home, and abroad. But long it will not be before we shall behold him
sitting in the Chair of Canterbury, acting his own counsels, bringing these
Conceptions to the birth, and putting the design into execution, of which more
hereafter.

These matters standing in this state, 1633.
we must at last look toward Scotland; for the receiving of which Crown his
Majesty and the Court prepare the beginning of this year. But besides the Pomp
and Splendour of a Coronation, which the people with great importunity had long
pressed upon him, there were some other Loadstones which made the Needle of his
Compass point so much to the North. Concerning which the Reader may be pleased
to know, that at the first Alteration of Religion in the Kirk of Scotland, the
Scots petitioning for aid from Queen Elizabeth to expel the French,
Religionis cultui and ritibus cum Anglu commumbas subscrip^erunt. Bach. H^st.
Scot. l. 19.
obliged themselves by the subscription of their hands to embrace the Liturgy,
Rites, and Ceremonies of the Church of England. According whereunto, an
Ordinance was made by their Reformers, that in all Parishes of that Realm
Preface to the ^cots Liturgy.
the Common Prayer should be read weekly on Sundaies, and other Festival days,
with the Lessons of the Old and New Testament, conform to the order of the Book
of Common Prayer of the Church of England; it being well known, that for diverse
years after, they had no other order for Common Prayer but that which they
received from hence. But as Presbytery prevailed, so the Liturgy sell: the
fancy of Extemporary Prayers growing up so fast in the minority of King James,
that it soon thrust all Public Forms out of use and credit. In which confused
estate it stood till the coming of that King to the Crown of England, where he
much pleased himself with the Sobriety and Piety of the public Liturgy. This
made him cast his eyes more sadly on the Kirk of Scotland, where for want of
some such public Forms of Prayers the Ministers prayed so ignorantly, that it
was a shame to all Religion to have God spoke to in that barbarous manner, and
sometimes so seditiously that their Prayers were plain Libells against
Authority, or stuffed with lies made up of all the false reports in the Kingdom.
For remedy whereof, after he had restored, and settled the Episcopal
Government, he procured the General Assembly of that Kirk, held at Aberdeen,
Anno 1616. to pass an Act for Authorizing some of the Bishops, and diverse
others, to compile a Public Liturgy for the use of that Kirk; which being
presented unto the King, and by him approved, should be universally received
over all the Kingdom. To prepare the way unto them, his Majesty gave order the
next Spring after, That the English Liturgy should be Officiated day by day in
his Chappel-Royal in the City of Edenborough; and in the year following 1618.
obtained the five Articles beforementioned (as so many chief Ingredients for
the Common Prayer Book) to be passed at Perth: by which Encouragements, the
Commissioners which were appointed to compile the Book, went so luckily
forwards, that it was not long before they brought it to an end, and sent it to
King James by Archbishop Spotswood; who not only carefully perused every
Passage in it, but caused it to be revised by some of the Bishops of that
Kingdom, which were then in England, in whose Judgments he reposed especial
confidence. Fitted according to his mind, he sent it back again to those from
whose hands he received it, to be by them commended to the use of the Church;
which undoubtedly had took effect, if the Breach with Spain, and the Death of
that King, which followed not long after, had not unfortunately interrupted the
Success of the business.

In this condition of Affairs King Charles succeeded in the Crown, engaged in a
War with the King of Spain, and standing upon no good terms with his People at
home; so that the business of the Liturgy seemed to be laid asleep, if not
quite extinct. But in the year 1629. having agreed his differences with the
Crown of France, and being in a good way toward an Accommodation with the King
of Spain, the Scottish Bishops were again remembered of their Duty in it, who
dispatched Maxwell, then one of the Preachers of Edenborough, to the Court
about it: Maxwell applying himself to Laud, then Bishop of London, from whom he
received this positive Answer, That if his Majesty would have a Liturgy settled
there, H^^d. W^rks, p. 155.
different from what they had already, it was best to take the English
Liturgy, without any variation from it; that so the same Service Book might
pass through all his Majesty's Dominions. Maxwell replying, That the Scottish
Bishops would be better pleased to have a Liturgy of their own, but such as
should come near the English both in Form and Matter, the Cause was brought
before the King, who on a serious consideration of all Particulars, concurred
in Judgment for the English. And on these terms it stood till this present
year, Laud standing hard for admitting the English Liturgy without alteration;
the Scottish Bishops pleading on the other side, That a Liturgy made by
themselves, and in some things different from the English Service, would best
please their Countrymen, whom they found very jealous of the least dependence
on the Church of England. But because Letters writtten in the time of Action,
are commonly conceived to carry more truth in them, than Relations made upon
the post-fact for particular ends; take here this short Remembrance in one of
his Letters to the Earl of Traquaire, dated September 11. 1637. where we find
this Passage: And since (says he) I hear from others, That some exception is
taken, because there is more in that Liturgy in some few particulars, Ibid. p.
169.
than is in the Liturgy of England, Why did they not admit the Liturgy of
England without more ado? But by their refusal of that, and the dislike of
this, it is more than manifest they would have neither, and perhaps none at all,
were they left to themselves.

But besides this, there was another Invitation which wrought much upon him in
order to the present Journey: At his first coming to the Crown, the great
Engagements then upon him, want of Supply from England, and small help from
Scotland, forced him to have recourse to such other ways of assistances as were
offered to him; of which this was one. In the Minority of King James, the Lands
of all Cathedral Churches and Religious Houses which had been settled on the
Crown by Act of Parliament, were shared amongst the Lords and great men of that
Kingdom (by the connivence of the Earl of Murrey, and some other of the
Regents) to make them sure unto that side: And they being thus possessed of the
same Lands, with the Regalities and Tithes belonging to those Ecclesiastical
Corporations, Lorded it with Pride and Insolence enough in their several
Territories, holding the Clergy to small Stipends, and the poor Peasant under a
miserable Vassalage and subjection to them, not suffering them to carry away
their nine parts, till the Lord had carried off his Tenth; which many times was
neglected out of pride and malice, those Tyrants not caring to lose their
Tithe, so that the poor man's Crop might be left unto spoil and hazard. King
James had once a purpose to revoke those Grants; but growing into years and
troubles, he left the following of that Project to his Son and Successor:
Having but little help from thence to maintain his Wars, by the Advice of some
of the Council of that Kingdom, he was put upon a course of resuming those
Lands, Tithes, and Regalities into his own hand, to which the present Occupants
could pretend no other Title than the unjust Usurpation of their Predecessors.
This to effect, he resolves upon an Act of Revocation, Commissionating for that
purpose the Earl of Annandale, and the Lord Maxwell (afterward Earl of
Niddisdale) to hold a Parliament in Scotland, for Contribution of Money and
Ships against the Duynkirkers; and arming Maxwell also with some secret
Instructions for passing the said Act of Revocation, if he found it feasible.
Being on the way as far as Barwick, Maxwell was there informed, That his chief
errand being made known, had put all at Edenborough into Tumult; That a rich
Coach which he had sent before to Dalkeith was cut in pieces, the poor Horses
killed, the People seeming only sorry that they could not do so much to the
Lord himself. Things being brought unto this stand, the King was put to a
necessity of some second Counsels, amongst which none seemed more plausible and
expedient to him, than that of Mr. Archibald Achison, who from a puisne Judge
in Ireland, was made his Majesty's Procurator or Solicitor-General in the
Kingdom of Scotland; who having told his Majesty, That such as were Estated in
the Lands in question, had served themselves so well by the bare naming of an
Act of Revocation, as to possess the People* (whom they found apt to be
inflamed on such Suggestions), That the true intendment of that Act was to
revoke all former Laws for suppressing of Popery, and settling the Reformed
Religion in the Kirk of Scotland: And therefore, That it would be unsafe for
his Majesty to proceed that way. Next he advised, That instead of such a
General Revocation as the Act imported, a Commission should be issued out under
the Great Seal of that Kingdom, for taking the Surrendries of all such
Superiorities and Tithes within the Kingdom, at his Majesty's Pleasure: And
that such as should refuse to submit unto it, should be Impleaded one by one;
to begin first with those whom he thought least able to stand out, or else most
willing to conform to his Majesty's Pleasure: Assuring him, That having the
Laws upon his side, the Courts of Justice must and would pass Judgment for him.

The King resolved upon this course, sends home the Gentleman, not only with
Thanks and Knighthood (which he had most worthily deserved) but with
Instructions and Power to proceed therein; and he proceeded in it so
effectually to the Kings Advantage, that some of the impleaded Parties being
cast in the Suit; and the rest seeing, that though they could raise the People
against the King, they could not raise them against the LaWs, it was thought
the best and safest way to compound the business. Hereupon, in the year 1630.
Commissioners are sent to the Court of England, and amongst others, the Learned
and right Noble Lord of Marcheston (from whose mouth I had this whole Relation)
who after a long Treaty with the King, did at last agree, That the said
Commission should proceed as formerly; and, That all such Superiorities and
Tithes as had been or should be surrendered, should be re-granted by the King on
these Conditions: First, That all such as held Hereditary Sheriffdoms, or had
the Power of Life and Death over such as lived within their Jurisdiction,
should quit those Royalties to the King. Secondly, That they should make unto
their Tenants in their several Lands, some permanent Estates, either for their
Lives, or one and twenty years, or some such like Term; that so the Tenants
might be encouraged to Build and Plant, and improve the Patrimony of that
Kingdom. Thirdly, That some Provisions should be made for augmenting the
Stipends of the Clergy. Fourthly, That they should double the yearly Rents
which were reserved unto the Crown, by their former Grants. And finally, That
these Conditions being performed on their parts, the King should settle their
Estates by Act of Parliament. Home went the Commissioners with joy for their
good success, expecting to be entertained with Bells and Bonfires: but they
found the contrary; the proud Scots being generally resolved, rather to put all
to hazard, than to quit that Power and Tyranny which they had over their poor
Vassals, by which name (after the manner of the French) they called their
Tenants. And hereunto they were encouraged underhand by a Party in England,
who feared that by this Agreement the King would be so absolute in those
Northern Regions, that no Aid could be hoped from thence, when the necessity of
their designs might most require it: Just as the Castilians were displeased
with the Conquest of Portugal by King Philip the Second, because thereby they
had no place left to retire unto, when either the Kings displeasure, or their
disobedience, should make their own Country to hot for them.

Such was the face of Church and State when his Majesty began his Journey for
Scotland to receive the Crown; a Journey of great expense on both sides, but of
small profit unto either. On the thirteenth day of May he advanced toward the
North; but by such leisurely Removes, that he recovered not the City of York
till the twenty fourth, into which he made a Solemn and Magnificent Entrance,
attended by the Flower of the English Nobility, the principal Officers of his
Court, and some of the Lords of his Privy Council. He was received at his first
entrance into Scotland with a gallant body of that Nation, consisting for the
most part of the like Ingredients, and so conducted into Edenborough on the
tenth of June. Edenborough, the chief City of the Realm of Scotland, and indeed
the Summa totalis of that Kingdom, extended a whole mile in length from the
Palace-Royal of Holy-Rood-House, lying at the foot of the Hill, to a fair and
ancient Castle mounted on the top thereof. From this Castle the King was to
descend the Street in a Royal Pomp, till he came to his Palace (as the Kings of
England commonly on the like occasion ride from the Tower through London to the
Court of Whitehall) where the Solemnities of the Coronation were to be
performed. The day designed for it was the eighteenth of June, the concourse of
People beyond expression, and the expressions of their Joy in gallantry of
Apparel, sumptuous Feastings, and Acclamations of all sorts, nothing inferior
to that concourse. But this was only the Hosanna of his first Reception; they
had a Crucifige for him when he came to his Parliament. It was conceived at his
Majesty's first going toward the North, that he would have settled the English
Liturgy in that Church, at his being there: but he either carried no such
thoughts with him, or, if he did, he kept them to himself as no more than
thoughts, never discovering any such thing in his words or actions. The Scots
were of another temper, than to be easily won to any thing which they had no
mind to; and a less mind they could have to nothing than the English Liturgy.
King James had taken order at his being in Scotland, Anno 1617. That it should
constantly be read twice every day in his Chappel-Royal for that City; and gave
command that the Lords of his Privy Council, and the Lords of Session, should
be present at it on the Sundays, and there receive the Holy Communion,
according to the form prescribed in the Common Prayer Book: And this he did
unto this end, That as well the Citizens of Edenborough, as such as came
thither upon Business, might by degrees be made acquainted with the English
Forms, and consequently be prepared for the receiving of such a Liturgy as the
King, with the Advice of his Bishops, and other Learned Men (according to the
Act of the Assembly at Aberdeen) should commend unto them: But these Directions
being either discontinued, or carelessly followed after his decease, and the
five Articles of Perth not pressed so diligently on the People as they might
have been, the Scots were generally as great Strangers to the Liturgy of the
Church of England, as when King James first came amongst us.

His Majesty could not be so ill served, as not to be well enough informed how
things went in Scotland; and therefore was not to venture rashly upon such a
business, wherein he might receive a foil. He thereupon resolves to proceed no
further in Matters which concerned the Church, than to pass an Act of
Ratification, an Act Confirmatory of such Laws and Statutes, relating unto
Church-concernments, as by King James had been obtained with great charge and
cunning. And though he carried this Act at last, yet was it not without a far
greater opposition than he had reason to expect from that Convention: But the
Commission of Surrendry did so stick in their stomachs, that they could not
choose but vent their disaffections on the first occasion. Nor would they suffer
him to enjoy the benefit of that Act, so hardly gotten, with Peace and Honor;
but followed him into England with a pestilent Libel, in which they charged him
to have carried that Act by corrupting some, and a plain downright buying of
the Voices of others. This was the first taste which they gave the King of
their malevolency toward his Person and Government; but it shall not prove to
be the last. His Majesty had another business to effect at his being there, for
which he needed not their Assistance, and for that reason did not ask it: This
was the raising of the City of Edenborough to a See Episcopal, which before was
only a Borough Town, belonging anciently to the Diocese and Jurisdiction of St.
Andrews. The Metropolitan of St. Andrews was willing for the common good to
yield unto this diminution of his Power and Profit; and that the whole County
of Lothian, extending from Edenborough-Fryth to the Town of Barwick, should be
dismembered from his own Diocese, to serve as a Diocese to this Bishop of new
Election. And on the other side, the Duke of Lenox, whose Ancestors had long
enjoyed the Priory of St. Andrews, with a great part of the Lands belonging to
it, was willing to let his Majesty have a good penyworth of some part of those
Lands, to serve as a Patrimony to this new Episcopal See, and the Bishop of it:
Which Provision being thus made and settled, Forbesse a right grave and solid
Divine, is made the first Bishop of this City, his Cathedral fixed in the
Church of St. Giles (being the fairest in the Town), a Dean appointed for that
Church, some Ministers of Edenborough and the Parts adjoining, being nominated
for the Canons or Prebends of it. A design pious in it self, and purposely
intended to inure the Edenburghers to the Fatherly Government of a Bishop, who
by tempering the exorbitancies of the Ministers there, might by degrees prepare
the People to such impressions of Conformity as his Majesty, by the Council and
Consent of the rest of the Bishops, should graciously be pleased to imprint
upon them. But such ill luck his Majesty had with that stubborn Nation, that
this was looked upon also as a general Grievance, and must be thought to aim at
no other end than Tyranny and Popery, and what else they pleased.

We have almost done our work in Scotland, and yet hear nothing all this while
of the Bishop of London; not that he did not go the Journey, but that there was
little to be done at his being there, but to see and be seen: And yet it was a
Journey which brought him some access of Honor, and gave him opportunity of
making himself known to those of best Quality of that Kingdom. He had been in
Scotland with King James; but then he waited only as a private Chaplain. He is
now looked upon as the third Bishop of England in Place, and the greatest in
Power; a Counselor of State, and the Kings great Favorite. He entered Scotland
as a Privy-Counsellor of England only; but returned thence as a Counselor for
that Kingdom also: to which Office he was sworn on the fifteenth of June. Nor
did he show himself less able in that Church, than in the Council Chamger;
being appointed by his Majesty to Preach before him on the last of that Month:
in which some question may be made how he pleased the Scots, although it be out
of question that he pleased the King. The greatest part of the following July
was spent in visiting the Country, and taking a view of the chief Cities, and
most remarkable Parts and Places of it: Which having seen, he made a Posting
Journey to the Queen at Greenwich, whither he came on Saturday the twentieth of
July, crossing the Water at Blackwall, and looking toward London from no
nearer distance: But in this Act he laid aside the Majesty of his Predecessors,
especially of Queen Elizabeth of Famous Memory, of whom it was observed, That
she did very seldom end any of her Summer Progresses, but she would wheel about
to some end of London, to make her passage to Whitehall through some part of the
City; not only requiring the Lord Mayor and Aldermen, in their Scarlet Robes
and Chains of Gold, to come forth to meet her: but the several Companies of the
City to attend solemnly in their Formalities as she went along. By means
whereof she did not only preserve that Majesty which did belong to a Queen of
England; but kept the Citizens (and consequently all the Subjects) in a
reverent Estimation and Opinion of her. She used the like Arts also in keeping
up the Majesty of the Crown, and Service of the City, in the Reception and
bringing in of Foreign Ambassadors; who if they came to London by Water, were
met at Gravesend by the Lord Mayor, the Aldermen, and Companies in their
several Barges, and in that Solemn manner conducted unto such Stairs by the
Water side, as were nearest to the Lodgings provided for them: But if they were
to come by Land, they were met in the like sort at Shooters-Hill, by the Mayor
and Aldermen, and thence conducted to their Lodgings, the Companies waiting in
the Streets in their several Habits. The like she used also in celebrating the
Obsequies of all Christian Kings, whether Popish or Protestant, with whom she
was in Correspondence; performed in such a Solemn and Magnificent manner, that
it preserved her in the estimation of all Foreign Princes, though differing in
Religion from her, besides the great contentment which the People took in those
Royal Pomps. Some other Arts she had of preserving Majesty, and keeping
distance with her People; yet was so popular withal, when she saw her time,
that never Majesty and Popularity were so matched together. But these being
laid aside by King James, who brooked neither of them; and not resumed by King
Charles, who loved them not much more than his Father did; there followed first
a neglect of their Persons, which Majesty would have made more Sacred; and
afterward a mislike of their Government, which a little Popularity would have
made more grateful.

Laud having no such cause of hastening homewards, returned not to his House at
Fulham till the twenty sixth of the same Month: But he came time enough to hear
the news of Abbot's Sickness, and within few days after, of his Death, which
happened on Sunday morning the fourth of August, and was presently signified to
the King, being ^hen at Greenwich. A man he was that had tasted both of good
and ill Fortune in extremes; C^. H^st. ^. 11. p. 128.
affirmed by the Church Historian (for I shall only speak him in the words of
others) to be a grave man in his Conversation, and unblameable in his Life: but
said withal to have been carried with non amavit gentem nostram, forsaking the
Birds of his own feather, to fly with others; and generally favoring the Laity
above the Clergy, in all Cases which were brought before him: Hist. of K.
C^arles. p. 131.
Conceived by one of our State Historians, to be too facil and yielding in the
exercising of his Function; by whom it also affirmed, That his extraordinary
remisness, in not exacting strict Conformity to the prescribed Orders of the
Church in point of Ceremony, seemed to resolve those legal Determinations to
their first Principle of Indifferency, and to lead in such an habit of
Inconformity, as the future reduction of those tender-conscienc'd men to long
discontinued Obedience, was interpreted an Innovation. By the first Character
we find what made him acceptable amongst the Gentry; by the last, what made him
grateful to the Puritan, in favor of which men he took so little care of the
great Trust committed to him, and gave them so many opportunities of increasing
both in Power and Numbers, that to stop t^em in their full career, it was found
necessary to suspend him from his Metropolitical Jurisdiction, as before was
noted.

It is reported, That as Prince Henry, his Majesty, then Duke of York,
Archbishop Abbot, with many of the Nobility were waiting in the Privy Chamber
for the coming out of King James; the Prince, to put a jest on the Duke his
Brother, took the Archbishops Square Cap out of his hands, and put it on his
Brothers head, telling him, that if he continued a good Boy, and followed his
Book, he would one day make him Archbishop of Canterbury. Which the Child took
in such disdain, that he threw the Cap upon the ground, and trampled it under
his feet, not being without much difficulty and some force taken off from that
eagerness. This though first it was not otherwise beheld than as an Act of
Childish Passion, yet when his Brother Prince Henry died, and that he was Heir
apparent to the Crown, it was taken up by many zealous Churchmen for some ill
presage unto the Hierarchy of Bishops; the overthrow whereof by his Act and
Power did seem to be fore-signified by it. But as their fears in that were
groundless, so their conjectures were no better grounded than their fears,
(there never being a greater Patron of the Episcopal order than he lived and
died) but whether there might not be some presage in it in reference to the
Archbishops person, the diminution of his Dignity and fall of his Power, may be
best judged by this suspension and the consequents which followed on it: And
though he lived not long under the disgrace, yet in the interval of time he saw
so much of his Authority devolved on Laud, that he grew more and more
discontented, and was ready in a manner to have made himself the head of the
Puritan Faction.

It is related by a late Writer, That toward his death he was not only
discontented himself, but that his house was the Rendezvous of all the
Malcontents in Church and State, that he turned Midnight to Noonday-by
constant keeping of Candles lighted in his Chamber and Study; as also that such
Visitants as repaired unto him called themselves Nicodemites, because of their
secret coming to him by night. I know how much that Author has been mistaken
in other things, but I see nothing in this which may not be consistent with the
truth of History. Certain I am, his Chaplains were successively declared
Calvinians, his Secretary a professed Patron of the Puritan Faction, his doors
continually open to the Chiefs of that party, and such as stickled in that
cause; and amongst others to him by whose Suggestion (if we may take his own
report) the Historical Narration was called in, for the great danger which it
threatened to the grounds of Calvinism.

For his compliance with the Gentry against the Clergy, this reason is
alleged from his own mouth, Chapter Hist. P. 11. p. 128.
That he was so severe to the Clergy on purpose to rescue them from the
severity of others, and to prevent the punishment of them by lay Judges to
their greater shames; which leaves the poor Clergy under a greater obloquy than
any which their enemies had laid upon them. But the truer reason of it was,
that having never been Parson, Vicar, nor Curate, he was altogether ignorant of
those afflictions which the Clergy do too often suffer by the pride of some,
and the Avarice of others of their Country Neighbors, and consequently showed
the least compassion toward them when any of them had the hard fortune to be
brought before him. And for his compliance with the Puritans against the Church
this reason is alleged by others, viz. That he showed the greater favor to
them, to keep the balance even betwixt them and the Papists; as Laud was
thought to be indulgent to the Papists, the better to keep down the pride and
prevalency of the Puritan Faction. But the truer reason of it was, That he had
been always inclinable to them from his first beginnings; insomuch that when
he went Chaplain into Scotland with the Earl of Dunbar, (employed by King James
in some negotiation about that Church) he was upon the point of betraying the
cause, if Hodgskins, (afterward one of the Residentiaries of York) who went
Chaplain with him, had not preacquainted the Earl with his tergiversation.

And as he labored to be Popular upon both accounts, so he endeavored a more
particular correspondence with the Gentry of Kent, but most especially of his
own Diocese. It had been formerly the custom of his Predecessors to spend the
grea^est part of the long vacations in the Palace of Canterbury; met at the
first entrance into the Diocese with a body of five hundred horse, conducting
them to Canterbury with great love and duty; feasting the Gentry; relieving the
poor City, entertaining their Tenants, and by them liberally furnished on the
other side with all sorts of provisions. Abbot affected not this way, and
therefore never bestowed any such visit upon his Diocese, but when he was
confined to his house at Ford by the Kings appointment; and yet resolved upon a
course which carried some equivalence with it toward his design. For once or
twice in every year (and sometimes oftener) at the end of the term he would
cause enquiry to be made in Westminster Hall, the common Rendezvous in St.
Paul's Church, and the Royal Exchange, for all such Gentlemen of his Diocese as
lodged in and about the City of London, dispersing several Tickets from one to
another, by which they were invited to a general entertainment at his house in
Lambeth, the next day after the end of the present term, where he feasted them
with great bounty and familiarity. A course as acceptable to the Kentish Gentry
as if he had kept open Hospitality in his Palace at Canterbury; because it
saved them both the trouble of attending on him, and the charge of sending
Presents to him, both which had been expected if he had spent any part of the
year amongst them. But this he discontinued also for three or four years, or
more, before his death, fearing (as his affairs then stood) that it might
render him obnoxious to some misconstructions, which he was willing to avoid.

To bring his Story to an end, I shall say no more, but that he had his Birth
at Guilford, the chief Town of Surrey, and the best part of his breeding in
Baliol College in Oxon. whereof he was Fellow, and from thence preferred to be
Master of University College, and Dean of Winton. Other preferments he had
none till he came to Lichfield, of which he was consecrated Bishop on the third
of December, Anno 1609. from thence translated unto London within few Months
after, and within twelve Months after that to the Sea of Canterbury. Marks of
his Benefaction we find none, in places of his Breeding, and Preferments; but a
fair Hospital, well built, and liberally endowed in the place of his Birth. To
which the woeful man retired in the first extremity of those afflictions which
his misfortune at Bramzill had drawn upon him; and to this place he designed
his body whenever it should please God to translate him out of the Church
Militant to the Church Triumphant, which happened on the fourth of August, as
before was said.

The End of the First Part.
CYPRIANUS ANGLICUS: OR, THE HISTORY OF THE Life and Death, OF The most
Reverend and Renowned PRELATE WILLIAM By Divine Providence, Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury, Primate of all ENGLAND, and Metropolitan, Chancellor of the
Universities of Oxon. and Dublin, and one of the Lords of the Privy Council to
His late most SACRED MAJESTY King CHARLES Second MONARCH of Great-Brittain.

PART. II. Carrying on the History from his Nomination to the Metropolitical
See of Canterbury, August 6. 1633. to the day of his Death and Burial, Jan. 10.
1644.

LONDON: Printed by E. Cotes for A. Seile, 1668.

THE LIFE OF The most Reverend FATHER in GOD WILLIAM Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury.
LIB. IV. Extending from his being made Archbishop of Canterbury to the end of
the Parliament and Convocation, Anno 1640.
CANTERBVRY was anciently the principal City of the Kingdom, and afterward of
the County of Kent, situate about seven miles from the Sea, and neighboured by
a little River, capable only of small boats, and consequently of no great use
for the wealth and trading of the place. It was made an Archiepiscopal See at
the first planting of the Gospel amongst the English, Augustine the Monk who
first preached the one, being the first Archbishop of the other. For though that
Dignity was by Pope Gregory the Great designed for London, yet Augustine the
Monk (whom he sent hither on that Errand) having received this City in gift
from the King, resolved to six himself upon it without going further. Merlin
had prophesied as much, if those Prophesies be of any credit, signifying, that
the Dig^^^^ Lo^di (...)nabit Do(...) M^th. West. in Hist. ^lo.
Metropolitan dignity which was then at London, should in the following times
be transferred to Canterbury. Ethelbert; then King of Kent, having thus given
away the Regal City, retires himself unto Reculver, where he built his Palace
for himself and his Successors in that Kingdom, leaving his former Royal Seat
to be the Archiepiscopal Palace for the Archbishops of Canterbury. The
Cathedral, having been a Church before in the Britains time, was by the said
Archbishop Augustine repaired, Consecrated and Dedicated to the name of Christ,
which it still retains, though for a long time together it was called St
Thomas, in honor of Thomas Becket, one of the Archbishops hereof, who was
murdered in it. The present Fabric was begun by Archbishop Lanfranck and
William Corboyle; and by degrees made perfect by their Successors. Take
Canterbury as the Seat of the Metropolitan, it has under it twenty one
Suffragan Bishops, of which seventeen are in England, and four in Wales: But
take it as the Seat of a Diocesan, and it contains only some part of Kent, to
the number of 257 Parishes, (the residue being in the Diocese of Rochester)
together with some few particular Parishes dispersed here and there in several
Diocesses; it being an ancient privilege of this See, that wheresoever the
Archbishops had their Manors or Advousons, the place forthwith became exempt
from the Ordinary, and was reputed of the Diocese of Canterbury. The other
Privileges of this See are, that the Archbishop is accounted Primate and
Metropolitan of ALL England, and is the first Peer of the Realm: having
precedence of all Dukes, not being of the Royal blood, and all the great
Officers of the State. He has the Title of Grace afforded him in common
speech, and writes himself Divina Providentia, where other Bishops only use
Divina Permissione. The Coronation of the King has anciently belonged unto
him: It being also formerly resolved, that wheresoever the Court was, the King
and Queen were Speciales, and Domestici Pa^^ch^am D^mi^i Archiepiscopi.
the proper and Domestical Parishioners of the Archbishop of Canterbury. It
also did belong unto him in former times to take unto himself the Offerings
made at the holy Altar by the King and Queen, wheresoever the Court was, if he
were present at the same; and to appoint the Lent Preachers: but these time
has altered, and the King otherwise disposed of. Abroad in General Councils he
had place at the Popes Right foot: At home this Royal Privilege, That those
which held Lands of him were liable for Wardship to him, and to compound with
him for the same, though they held other Lands in chief of our Lord the King.
And for the more increase of his power and honor it was Enacted, 25 Hen. viii.
and 21. That all Licenses and Dispensations (not repugnant to the Law of God)
which heretofore were sued for in the Court of Rome, should be hereafter
granted by the Archbishop of Canterbury and his Successors. As also in the 1
Eliz. and 2. That by the Advice of the Metropolitan or Ecclesiastical
Commissioners, the Queens Majesty might ordain and publish such Rites and
Ceremonies, as may be most for the Advancement of Gods glory, the Edifying of
his Church, and the due Reverence of Christ's holy Sacraments. To this high
dignity Laud succeeds on the death of Abbot, nominated unto it by the King on
the sixth of August, the Election returned and presented to his Majesty from
the Dean and Chapter, on the twenty fifth of the same, and the translation
fully perfected on the nineteenth of September then next following, on which
day he kept a solemn and magnificent Feast at his house in Lambeth, his State
being set out in the great Chamber of that house, and all persons standing bare
before it after the accustomed manner; his Steward, Treasurer, and Comptroller,
attending with their white staves in their several Offices.

Thus have we brought him to his height, and from that height we may take as
good a prospect into the Church under his direction, as the advantage of the
place can present unto us. And if we look into the Church as it stood under his
direction, we shall find the Prelates generally more intent upon the work
committed to them, more earnest to reduce this Church to the ancient Orders,
than in former times; the Clergy more obedient to the Commands of their
Ordinaries, joining together to advance the work of Uniformity recommended to
them, the Liturgy more punctually executed in all the parts and offices of it;
the Word more diligently preached, the Sacraments more reverendly administered,
than in some scores of years before; the people more conformable to those
Reverend Gestures in the House of God, which, though prescribed before, were
but little practiced; more cost laid out upon the beautifying and adorning of
Parochial Churches, in furnishing and repairing Parsonage houses, than at or in
all the times since the Reformation; the Clergy grown to such esteem, for parts
and power, that the Gentry thought none of their Daughters, to be better
disposed of than such as they had lodged in the Arms of a Churchman; and the
Nobility grown so well affected to the State of the Church, that some of them
designed their younger Sons to the Order of Priesthood, to make them capable of
rising in the same Ascendent. Next, if we look into the Doctrine, we shall find
her to be no less glorious within, than beautified and adorned to the outward
eye; the Doctrines of it publicly avowed and taught, in the literal and
Grammatical sense, according to the true intent and meaning of the first
Reformers; the Dictates and Authorities of private men (which before had
carried all before them) subjected to the sense of the Church; and the Church
hearkening to no other voice than that of their great Shepherd speaking to them
in his holy Scriptures; all bitternesses of spirit so composed and qualified on
every side, that the advancement of the great work of Unity and Uniformity
between the parties went forwards like the building of Solomon's Temple without
the noise of Axe or Hammer. If you will take her Character from the mouth of a
H. ^f K. Chapter l^ H. ^^ p. 242.
Protestant he will give it thus: He that desires to pourtray England (says
he) in her full structure of external glory, let him behold the Church shining
in transcendent Empyreal brightness, and purity of Evangelical Truths. Her
Religious Performances, her holy Offices, ordered and regulated agreeable to
the strict expedient of such Sacred Actions. Her Discipline, Model, suitable to
the Apostolic Form. The set and suit of her whole Tribe, renowned ^or Piety
and Learning, are all those in so super-eminent a degree, that no Church on
this side of the Apostolic, can or could compare with her in any one: All Arts
and Sciences highly honored, and consequently their Academies to flourish. To
which last part of the Character let me add thus much, That the Universities
never had such a flourishing time for number of Students, civility of
Conversation, and eminence in all parts of Learning, as when the influences of
his Power and Government did direct their Studies.

If you will take her Character from the Pen of a Pre^ace (...), sent. 20.
Jesuit, you shall find him speaking, amongst many falsehoods, these undoubted
Truths; viz. That the Professors of it, they especially of greatest Worth,
Learning and Authority, love Temper and Moderation; That the Doctrines are
altered in many things; as for example, the Pope not Antichrist, Pictures,
Free Will, Predestination, Universal Grace, Inherent Righteousness, the
preferring of Charity before Knowledge, the Merit (or Reward rather) of good
Works; the 39 Articles seeming patient, if not ambitious also of some Catholic
sense; That their Churches begin to look with a new face, their Walls to speak
a new Language, and some of their Divines to teach, That the Church has
Authority in determining Controversies of Faith, and interpreting the
Scriptures; That men in talk and writing use willingly the once fearful names
of Priests and Altars, and are now put in mind, That for Exposition of
Scripture they are by Canon bound to follow the Fathers. So far the Jesuit may
be thought to speak nothing but truth; but had he tarried there, he had been no
Jesuit: And therefore to preserve the Credit of his Order, he must fly out
further, and tell us this, viz. That Protestantism waxes weary of it self;
That we are at this time more unresolved where to fasten, than in the infancy
of our Church; That our Doctrine is altered in many things, for which our
Progenitors forsook the then visible Church of Christ, amongst which he reckons
Limbus Patrum, Prayer for the Dead, Justification not by Faith alone, The
possibility of keeping Gods Commandments, and the accounting of Calvinism to be
Heresy at the least, if not also Treason. Which Points the Jesuit cannot prove
to have been positively maintained by any one Divine in the Church of England;
and yet those foolish men began to fancy such a misconstruction of that
Ingenuity and Moderation which they found in some Professors of our Religion,
whom they affirmed to be of greatest Worth, Learning, and Authority, as to
conceive that we were coming toward an Agreement with them, even in those
Superstitions and Idolatries which made the first Wall of Separation between
the Churches. Upon which hope (as weak and foolish as it was) the late
Archbishop of Canterbury was no sooner dead, but one of their Party came to
Laud, whom they looked upon as his Successor, seriously tendered him the offer
of a Cardinals Cap, and avowed Ability to perform it; to whom he presently
returned this Answer, That somewhat dwelt within him which would not suffer him
to accept the Offer, till Rome were otherwise than it was: And this being said,
he went immediately to his Majesty, Brev^ate, p. 18.
acquainting him both with the Man, and with his Message, together with the
Answer which he made unto it. The like he also did when the same Offer was
reinforced a fornight after; upon which second Refusal, the Tempter left him,
and that not only for that time, but for ever after.

But to proceed: To welcome him to his new great Charge, he received Letters
from his Majesty, dated upon the very day of his Confirmation, upon this
occasion. It had been ordered by the ancient Canons of the Church, That none
should be admitted Deacon or Priest, who had not first some certain place where
he might use his Function. And it was ordered by the Canons of the year 1603.
in pursuance of the said old Canons, Can. 33.
That no person should be admitted into Sacred Orders, except he shall at that
time exhibit to the Bishop, of whom he desires Imposition of Hands, a
Presentation of himself to some Ecclesiastical Preferment then void in that
Diocese; or shall bring unto the said Bishop a true and undoubted Certificate,
That either he is provided of some Church within the said Diocese, where he may
attend the Cure of Souls, or of some Ministers Place vacant, either in the
Cathedral Church of that Diocese, or of some other Collegiat Church therein
also situate, where he may execute his Ministry; or that he is a Fellow, or in
right as a Fellow, or to be a Conduct or Chaplain in some College in either of
the Universities; or except he be a Master of Arts of five years standing, that
lives in either of them at his own charge. And hereunto was added this
Commination, That if any Bishop shall admit any person into the Ministry, that
has none of these Titles as is aforesaid, then he shall keep and maintain him
with all things necessary, till he do prefer him to some Ecclesiastical Living;
and on his refusal so to do, he shall be suspended by the Archbishop, being
assisted with another Bishop, from giving of Orders by the space of a year.
Which severe Canon notwithstanding, some Bishops of the poorer S^^s, for their
private benefit, admitted many men promis^uously to Holy Orders, so far from
having any Title, that they had no Merit. By means whereof the Church was
filled with indigent Clerks, which either thrust themselves into Gentlemen's
Houses to teach their Children, and sometimes to officiate Divine Service at
the Tables end; or otherwise to undertake some Stipendary Lecture, wheresoever
they could find entertainment, to the great fomenting of Faction in the State,
the Danger of Schism in the Church, and ruin of both. It had been formerly
ordered by his Majesty's Instructions of the year 1629. "That no private
Gentleman, not qualified by Law, should keep any Chaplain in his House: Which
though it were somewhat strictly inquired into at the first, yet not a few of
them retained their Chaplains, as before: For remedy whereof for the time to
come, it was thought fit to tie the Bishops from giving Orders unto any which
were not qualified according to the foresaid Canon; which was conceived to be
the only probable means of diminishing the number both of such petit Lecturers,
and such Trencher-Chaplains; the English Gentry not being then come to such
wild extremities, as to believe that any man might exercise the Priests Office,
in ministering the Sacraments, Praying, Preaching, etc. which was not lawfully
Ordained by some Bishop or other. Now his Majesty's Letter to this purpose was
as follows.

CHARLES REX.

MOst Reverend Father in God, Right Trusty and Right Entirely-beloved
Counselor, We greet you well. There is nothing more dear to us than the
preservation of true Religion, as it is now settled and established in this Our
Kingdom, to the Honor of God, the great Comfort of Our Self and Our Loyal
People: and there can nothing more conduce to the Advancement thereof, than the
strict observations of such Canons of the Church as concern those who are to
take Orders in their several Times; more especially of keeping that particular
Canon which enjoins, That no man be made a Priest without a Title: For We find,
that many not so qualified, do by favor or other means procure themselves to
be Ordained, and afterward for want of Means wander up and down, to the
scandal of their Calling; or to get Maintenance, fall upon such Courses as were
most unfit for them, both by humouring their Auditors, and other ways
altogether unsufferable. We have therefore thought fit, and We do hereby
straightly command, require, and charge you, to call such Bishops to you as are
now present in or near Our City of London, and to acquaint them with this Our
Resolution. And further, That you fail not in the beginning of the next Term,
to give notice of this Our Will and Pleasure openly in Our High-Commis^ion
Court; and that you call into your said Court every Bishop respectively, that
shall presume to give Orders to any man that has not a Title, and there to
censure him as the Canon aforesaid does enjoin (which is, to maintain the Party
so Ordered till he give him a Title) and with what other Censure you in Justice
shall think fit. And Our further Will is, That nothing shall be reputed a Title
to enable a man for Orders, but that which is so by the Ancient Course of the
Church, and the Canon Law, so far forth as that Law is received in this our
Church of England. And as you must not fail in these our Directions, nor in any
part of them; so We expect that you give us from time to time a strict Account
of your Proceedings in the same.

Given under Our Signet at Our Palace of Westminster, September. 19. in the ninth
year of Our Reign. 1633.

On the Receipt of these Letters, which himself had both advised and digested,
he called such of his Suffragan Bishops who were then about London to come
before him, acquaints them with the great scandal which was given the Church,
the danger of Schism and Faction which might thence arise, and the more than
ordinary displeasure which had been taken by his Majesty and the Lords of his
Council, at such unlawful and uncanonical Ordinations; he required them
therefore to be more careful for the time to come, and not to give the like
offense to his Sacred Majesty, who was resolved to see the Canons of the Church
in that particular more punctually observed than they had been formerly, and to
call all such to an account who should presume hereafter to transgress therein:
Which said, he gave to each of them a Copy of his Majesty's Letters, and sent
the like Copies unto all the rest of his Suffragan Bishops, enclosed in Letters
of his own; in which Letters having declared unto them as much as he spoke unto
the rest, touching his Majesty's pious Care to redress that Mischief, he
requires them and every one of them, Bibl. Regi^, sect. 3. c. 11. p. 332.
That at all times of Ordination they be very careful to admit none into Holy
Orders, but such men as for Life and Learning are fit, and which have a Title
for their maintenance, according to the Laws and the ancient Practice of the
Church, assuring them that his Majesty had commanded him to let them know, That
he would not fail to call for an account of those his Letters, both from him
and them; and therefore, That he did not doubt but that they would have a
special care both of the good of the Church, and his Majesty's Contentment in
it. The like Letters were sent from his Majesty, by his procurement, to the
Archbishop of York, who was as sensible of the inconvenience as himself could
be. And though nothing was required in either of the said Letters, but what had
been provided for in the Canon of 1603. yet was it as much inveighed against as
if it had been a new device, never heard of formerly. The reason was, because
that neither any Lecture, nor any possibility of being entertained as a
Chaplain in the Houses of Noblemen, or others of the inferior Gentry, could be
allowed of for a Title, and consequently no Orders to be given hereafter under
those Capacities. But notwithstanding those Reproaches, the Archbishops so
bestirred themselves, and kept such a strict eye on their several Suffragans,
that from henceforth we hear but little of such vagrant Ministers and
Trencher-Chaplains (the old brood being once worn out) as had pestred and
annoyed the Church in those latter Times.

It is to be observed, That the Archbishops Letter to his several Suffragans
bears date on the eighteenth of October, which day gives date also to his
Majesty's Declaration about Lawful Sports, concerning which we are to know,
That the Commons in the first Parliament of his Majesty's Reign had gained an
Act, That from thenceforth there should be no Assembly or Concourse of People
out of their own Parishes on the Lords day, or any Bull-baiting, Bear-baiting,
Enterludes, Common Plays, or any other unlawful Exercises or Pastimes in their
own Parishes on the same: Which being gained, they obtained another in the
third Parliament, for inhibiting all Carriers, Waggoners, Drovers, Pack-men,
for Traveling on the said day with their Horses, Wagons, Packs, etc. As also,
That no Butcher should from thenceforth kill or sell any Victual upon that day,
either by himself or any other, under the several Penalties therein contained.
And though it was not his Majesty's purpose in those Acts to debar any of his
good Subjects from any honest and harmless Recreations, which had not been
prohibited by the Laws of the Land; or that it should not be lawful for them,
in case of necessity, to buy a piece of Meat for the use of their Families, the
Butchers Shop not being set open as on other days: yet presently some Public
Ministers of Justice began to put another sense upon those Acts, than ever came
within the compass of his meaning. For at the Summer Assizes held in Exon,
(...). D^om, p. 153.
Anno 1627. an Order was made by Walter then Chief Baron, and Denham one of the
puisne Barons of the Court of Exchequer, for suppressing all Revels,
Church-Ales, Clerk-Ales, which had been used upon that day; requiring the
Justices of the Peace within the said County to see the same put in execution;
and that every Minister in his Parish Church should publish the said Order
yearly, on the first Sunday in February. The like Order made in the same year
also for the Counties of Somerset and Dorset, and probably enough for some of
the other Counties of that Western Circuit; none of them in those squeasie and
unsettled Times being questioned for it. And then in reference to the Statute
of the Third of this King, a Warrant is granted in the Month of April 1629. by
Richard Dean then Lord Mayor of London, p. 132.
for apprehending all Porters carrying Burdens, or Watermen plying at their
Oars, all Tankerd-bearers carrying Water to their Masters Houses, all Chandlers
and Hucksters which bought any Victuals on that day of the Country-Carriers,
all Vinteners, Alehouse-keepers, Strong watermen, and Tobacco-sellers, which
suffered any Person to fit drinking on that day (though possibly they might do
it only for their honest necessities). In which as Dean out-went the Statute*
so Raynton in the same Office, Anno 1633. over-acted Dean, prohibiting a poor
woman from selling Apples on that day in St. Paul's Churchyard, within which
place he could pretend no Jurisdiction, and for that cause was questioned and
reproved by Laud then Bishop of London.

But none so lastily laid about him in this kind, as Richardson the Chi^^
Justice of his Majesty's Bench, who in the Lent-Assizes for the County of
Somerset, Anno 1631. published the like Order to that which had been made by
Walter for the County of Devon; not only requiring that the Justices of the
Peace in the said County should see the same to be duly put in execution: but
also (as the other had done before) that publication should be made thereof in
the Parish-Churches by all such Ministers as did Officiate in the same; with
which encroachment upon the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, in imposing upon men
in Holy Orders the publishing of Warrants and Commands from the Secular Judges,
Laud being then Bishop of London, and finding his Majesty's Affairs in a
quieter condition than they had been formerly, was not meanly offended, as he
had good reason so to be, and made complaint of it to the King, who thereupon
commanded Richardson to revoke the said Order at the next Assizes. But
Richardson was so far from obeying his Majesty's Command in that particular,
that on the contrary he not only confirmed his former Order, but made it more
peremptory than before: Upon complaint whereof by Sir Robert Philips, and other
chief Gentlemen of that County, his Majesty seemed to be very much moved, and
gave Command to the Bishop of London to require an Account from the Bishop of
Bath nnd Wells then being, how the said Feast-days, Church-Ales, Wakes, or
Revels, were for the most part celebrated and observed in his Diocese. On the
Receipt of which Letters the Bishop calls before him 72 of the most Orthodox
and ablest Clergymen amongst them, who certified under their several hands,
That on the Feast-days (which commonly fell upon the Sunday) the Service of God
was more solemnly performed, C^nt. (...), p. 14^.
and the Church was better frequented both in the forenoon and afternoon, than
upon any Sunday in the year; That the People very much desired the continuance
of them; That the Ministers in most Places did the like, for these Reasons
specially; viz. For preserving the memorial of the Dedication of their several
Churches; For civilizing the People; For composing Differences, by the
mediation and meeting of Friends; For increase of Love and Unity, by those
Feasts of Charity; For Relief and Comfort of the Poor (the Richer part in a
manner keeping open House), etc. On the Return of which Certificate, so
seasonably seconding the Complaint and Information of the Gentry, Richardson
was again convented at the Council Table, and peremptorily commanded to reverse
his former Orders at the next Assizes for that County; withal receiving such a
rattle for his former Contempt by the Bishop of London, that he came out
blubbering and complaining, That he had been almost choked with a pair of Lawn
Sleeves.

Whilst these things were thus in agitation, one Brabourne a poor Schoolmaster
in the Diocese of Norfolk, being seduced and misguided by the continual
inculcating of the Morality of the Lord's Day- Sabbath from the Press and
Pulpit, published a Book in maintenance of the Seventh-day- Sabbath, as it was
kept amongst the Jews, and prescribed by Moses, according to Gods Will and
Pleasure signified in the Fourth Commandment. This Book at the first not daring
to behold the Light, went abroad by stealth; but afterward appeared in public
with an open confidence, an Epistle Dedicatory to his Majesty being placed
before it. His Majesty extremely moved with so lewd an impudence, and fearing
to be thought the Patron of a Doctrine so abhorrent from all Christian Piety,
gave Order for the Author to be Censured in the High Commission. Brabourne
being thereupon called into that Court, and the Cause made ready for an
Hearing, his Error was so learnedly confuted by the Bishops and other
judicious Divines then present, that he began to stagger in his former Opinion;
which hint being taken by their Lordships, he was admonished in a grave and
Fatherly manner to submit himself unto a Conference with such Learned men as
should be appointed thereunto; to which he cheerfully consented, and found such
benefit by that Meeting, that by Gods Blessing he became a Convert, and freely
conformed himself to the Orthodoxal Doctrine of the Church of England,
concerning the Sabbath and Lord's Day: Which Tendences of some of the People to
downright Judaism, grounded upon the Practices and Positions of the
Sabbatarians, and seconded by the petulancy of some Public Ministers of
Justice, in debarring his good Subjects in keeping the ancient Dedication-Feast
of their several Churches, occasioned his Majesty to think of the reviving of
his Royal Fathers Declaration about Lawful Sports; To which end he gave Orders
to the Archbishop of Canterbury to cause the same to be reprinted, word for
word, as it had issued from the Press in the time of his late Royal Father,
Anno 1618. at the end whereof he caused this Declaration of his own sense to be
super-added; that is to say: Now out of a like Pious Care (says his Sacred
Majesty) for the Service of God, and for suppressing of any humors that oppose
the Truth, and for the case, and comfort, and recreation of Our well-deserving
People, We do Ratify and Publish this Our Blessed Fathers Declaration; the
rather, because of late in some Counties of Our Kingdom we find, that under
pretense of taking away Abuses, there has been a general forbidding, not only
of ordinary Meetings, but of the Feasts of the Dedication of Churches, commonly
called Wakes. Now Our express Will and Pleasure is, That these Feasts with
others shall be observed, and that our Justices of the Peace in their several
Divisions shall look to it, both that all Disorders there may be prevented or
punished; and that all neighborhood and freedom, with manlike and lawful
exercises be used. And We further command Our Justices of Assize in their
several Circuits, to see that no man do trouble or molest any of Our l^yal and
dutiful People, in or for their Lawful Recreations, having first done their
Duty to God, and continuing in Obedience to Us and Our Laws. And of this We
command all Our Judges, Justices of the Peace as well within Liberties as
without, Mayors, Bailiffs, Constables and other Officers, to take notice, and
to see observed as they tender Our displeasure. And We further Will, That
Publication of this Our Commmand be made by Order from the Bishops, through all
the Parish Churches of their several Diocesses respectively. Given at our
Palace at Westminster, Oct. 18. in the ninth year of Our Reign, 1633.

His Majesty had scarce dried his Pen, when he dipped it in the Ink again, upon
this occasion: The Parishioners of St. Gregory's in St. Paul's Churchyard had
bestowed much cost in beautifying and adorning their Parish Church; and having
prepared a decent and convenient Table for the holy Sacrament, were ordered by
the Dean and Chapter of St. Paul's, as being Ordinaries of the place, to dispose
of it in such a Posture, in the East end of the Chancel, as anciently it had
stood, and did then stand in the Mother Cathedral. Against this some of the
Parishioners (not above five in number) appeal unto the Dean of the Arches, and
the Dean and Chapter to the King. The third day of November is appointed for
debating the Point in controversy before the Lords of the Council; his Majesty
sitting as chief Judge, accompanied with Laud Archbishop of Canterbury, Lord
Keeper, Lord Archbishop of York, Lord Treasurer, Lord Privy Seal, Lord Duke of
Lenox, Lord High Chamberlain, Earl Marshal, Lord Chamberlain, Earl of
Bridgewater, Earl of Carlisle, Lord Cottington, Mr. Treasurer, Mr.
Comptroller, Mr. Secretary Cook, Mr. Secretary Windebanke. The cause being
heard, and all the Allegations on both sides exactly pondered, his Majesty
first declared his dislike of all Innovations, and receding from ancient
Constitutions, grounded upon just and warrantable reasons, etc. And afterward
gave Sentence in behalf of the Dean and Chapter. But because this Order of his
Majesty in the case of St. Gregory's was made the Rule, by which all other
Ordinaries did proceed, in causing the Communion Table to be placed Altarwise
in the Churches of their several and respective Diocesses, I will subjoyn it
here verbatim as it lies before me.

At Whitehall, Novem. 3. 1633.
This day, was debated before his Majesty sitting in Council the question and
difference which grew about the removing of the Communion Table in St.
Gregory's Church, near the Cathedral Church of St. Paul, from the middle of the
Chancel to the upper end, and there placed Altarwise in such manner as it
stands in the said Cathedral and Mother Church, (as also in other Cathedrals,
and in his Majesty's own Chapel) and as is consonant to the practice of
approved Antiquity; which removing and placing of it in that sort was done by
order of the Dean and Chapter of St. Paul's, who are Ordinaries thereof, as was
avowed before his Majesty by Doctor King, and Doctor Montfort, two of the
Prebends there. Yet some few of the Parishioners, being but five in number, did
complain of this act by appeal to the Court of Arches, pretending that the Book
of Common Prayer, and the 82 Canon, do give permission to place the Communion
Table where it may stand with most fitness and convenience. Now his Majesty
having heard a particular relation, made by the Counsel of both parties, of
all the carriage and proceedings in this cause, was pleased to declare his
dislike of all innovation and receding from ancient Constitutions, grounded
upon just and warrantable reasons, especially in matters concerning
Ecclesiastical Orders and Government, knowing how easily men are drawn to
affect Novelties, and how soon weak Judgments in such cases may be overtaken
and abused. And he was also pleased to observe, that if those few Parishioners
might have their wills, the difference thereby from the foresaid Cathedral
Mother Church, by which all other Churches depending thereon ought to be
guided, would be the more notorious, and give more subject of discourse and
disputes that might be spared, by reason of the nearness of St. Gregory's
standing close to the Wall thereof. And likewise, for so much as concerns the
Liberty by the said Common Book or Canon, for placing the Communion Table in
any Church or Chapel with most convenience, that liberty is not so to be
understood, as if it were ever left to the discretion of the Parish, much less
to the particular fancy of any humorous person, but to the judgment of the
Ordinary, to whose place and Function it does properly belong to give direction
in that point, both for the thing it self, and for the time, when, and how
long, as he may find cause. Upon which consideration his Majesty declared
himself, that he well approved and confirmed the Act of the said Ordinary, and
also gave commandment, that if those few Parishioners before mentioned, do
proceed in their said Appeal, then the Dean of the Arches (who was then
attending at the hearing of the cause) should confirm the said Order of the
aforesaid Dean and Chapter.


Of this last Declaration there was no great notice took at first, the danger
being remote, the case particular, and no necessity imposed of conforming to
it. But the other was no sooner published then it was followed and pursued with
such loud outcries as either the Tongues or Pens of the Sabbatarians could
raise against it. Some fell directly on the King, and could find out no better
names for this Declaration, than a Profane Edict, a maintaining of his own
honor, and a Sacrilegious robbing of God. A Toleration for profaning the
Lords day. Affirming, That it was impossible that a spot of so deep a dye
should be emblanched, though somewhat might be urged to qualify and alleviate
the blame thereof. Others, and those the greatest part, impute the Republishing
of this Declaration to the new Archbishop, and make it the first remarkable
thing which was done presently after he took possession of his Graceship, as
Burton does pretend to wit it in his Pulpit Libell. And though these Books came
not out in Print till some years after, yet was the clamor raised on both at
the very first, increasing every day more and more as the reading of it in
their Churches had been pressed upon them. To stop the current of these
clamours, till some better course might be devised, one who wished well both to
the Parties and the Cause, fell on a fancy of Translating into the English
Tongue a Lecture or Oration made by Dr. Prideaux at the Act in Oxon. Anno 1622.
In which he solidly discoursed both of the Sabbath and Sunday, according to the
judgment of the ancient Fathers, and the most approved Writers of the
Protestant and Reformed Churches. This Lecture thus translated was ushered also
with a Preface: In which there was proof offered in these three Propositions,
First, That the keeping holy of one day of seven is not the moral part of the
fourth Commandment. Secondly, That the alteration of the day is only an humane
and Ecclesiastical Constitution. Thirdly, That still the Church has power to
change the day, and to transfer it to some other. Which as they are the general
Tendries of the Protestant, Lutheran, and Calvinian Writers beyond the Seas, so
were they briefly touched at and maintained in the Doctors Lecture; which came
out thus translated in the next Candlemas Term, under the Title of The Doctrine
of the Sabbath, delivered in the Act at Oxon. An. 1622. By D. Prideaux, his
Majesty's Professor for Divinity in that University. The name of Prideaux was
so Sacred that the Book was greedily bought up by those of the Puritan Faction,
presuming they should find in it some invincible Arguments to confirm both the
Party and the Cause. But when they found how much they had deceived themselves
in that expectation, and that nothing could be writ more smartly against them
and their Lords-day-Sabbath; as it did very much cool their courage, and abate
their clamours: so did it no less tend to the diminution of that high esteem
and veneration which before they had harbored of the man. What followed
afterward, when the reading of the book was pressed, and the clamours
multiplied by such as refused to read it, future time shall show.

These passages concerning England being laid together, we must look back into
the North, which still took up a great part of his Majesty's thoughts. He had
observed how much his Fathers Pious Order for officiating by the English
Liturgy in the Chapel Royal of that Kingdom, had been discontinued and
neglected, imputing thereunto the opposition which he found amongst them at his
late being there. And being resolved to pursue his said Fathers most Religious
purpose of settling an uniformity of Divine Worship in all the Churches of
these Kingdoms, he thought it most expedient to pursue the same Method also, to
the end that the people being prepared by little and little might the more
willingly admit of that, or some other Liturgy like unto it, when he should
think it reasonable to commend it to them. In order whereunto he sends to
Ballentine, then Bishop of Dumblaine, and Dean of the Chapel of that Kingdom,
these Instructions following, to be observed in the Chapel Royal of Holy Rood
house in the City of Edinburgh.

CHARLES REX,
I. Our express Will and Pleasure is, Bibl. Regia. sect. 11. p. 2.
That the Dean of Our Chapel that now is, and his Successors shall be
assistant to the Right Reverend Father in God the Archbishop of St. Andrews at
the Coronation so often as it shall happen. II. That the Book of the Form of
Our Coronation, lately used, be put in a little Box, and laid into a Standard,
and committed to the care of the Dean of the Chapel successively. III. That
there be Prayers twice a day with the Choires as well in Our absence as
otherwise, according to the English Liturgy, till some other course be taken
for making one that may fit the Customs and Constitutions of that Church. IV.
That the Dean of the Chapel look carefully, that all that receive the blessed
Sacrament there, receive it kneeling; and that there be a Communion held in
that Our Chapel the first Sunday of every Month. V. That the Dean of Our
Chapel that now is, and so successively, come duly thither to Prayers upon
Sundaies, and such Holidaies as the Church observes, in his Whites, and preach
so whenever he preach there; and that he be not absent thence but upon
necessary occasion of his Diocesses or otherwise according to the course of his
preferment. VI. That these Orders shall be Our warrant to the Dean of Our
Chapel, that the Lords of Our Privy Council, the Lords of the Session, the
Advocate, Clerk, Writers to the Signet, and Members of Our College of Justice,
be commanded to receive the holy Communion once every year at the least in that
Our Chapel Royal, and kneeling, for example sake to the Kingdom; and we
likewise command the Dean aforesaid, to make report yearly to Us how We are
obeyed therein, and by whom, as also if any man shall refuse, in what manner he
does so, and why. VII. That the Copes which are consecrated for the use of Our
Chapel be delivered to the Dean to be kept upon Inventory by him, and in a
Standard provided for that purpose, and to be used at the Celebration of the
Sacrament in Our Chapel Royal. To these Orders we shall hereafter add others,
if we find others more necessary for the Service of God there.
Together with these directions, bearing date the eighth of October, he sends a
Letter of the same Date, to the said Bishop of Dumblaine, requiring him to put
them speedily in execution, and all things to be carefully performed by him as
he was directed; commanding also that he should certify the Lords of the
Council there, if any person, who had been formerly appointed to communicate in
the said Chapel Royal, should either neglect or refuse conformity to his
Majesty's pleasure, to the end that the Council might take such further order
in it, as had been directed by his Majesty in some former Letters. But knowing,
or at the least suspecting, that Ballentine might have somewhat more of the
Presbyter than the Bishop in him (as indeed he had) he gave a Warrant under his
hand to his Grace of Canterbury, Ibid. ^r 4.
Requiring him to hold correspondency with the said Bishop of Dumblaine, that
the said Bishop might from time to time receive his Majesty's directions for
ordering of such things as concerned his Service in that Chapel. He had before
a Primacy in the Church of England, and a strong influence on the Government of
the Church of Ireland. This Warrant gives him some just ground of a
superintendency over the Kirk of Scotland also, which from henceforth was much
directed by his power and wisdom, as will appear by that which follows in its
proper place.

Mean while we will behold such alterations as by his power were made in the
Pre^erments of the Church of England; which in the beginning of this year
lamented the death of Bishop Godwin, made Bishop of Landaff in the year 1601.
from thence translated unto Hereford, Anno 1617. A man whose memory shall be
precious in succeeding times for his indefatigable pains and travel in
collecting the Catalogue of Succession of all the Bishops of this Church since
the first planting of the Gospel amongst the Saxons, not pretermitting such of
the British Church as by the care and diligence of preceding Writers, or any
old Monument and Record, had been kept in memory. For his Successor in that See
Iuxon, then Dean of Worcester, and Clerk of his Majesty's Closet, as before was
said, is recommended and elected. But before the business had proceeded to
confirmation there was a Supersedeas to it by Lauds preferment to the
Metropolitan See of Canterbury; who having a great confidence in him, and no
less a^fection to his Person than confidence of his Wisdom and Moderation,
commended him so efficaciously to his Majesty's Favor, that he made him not
only Bishop of London, but Dean o^ the Chapel Royal also. It had been Lauds
great care, as he grew into credit with his Majesty, to give a stop to such
corruptions as had been used too frequently in the Court, about Church
Preferments, which made him the less acceptable to many which were near the
King in Place and Service, who formerly had been on the taking hand, and made a
market of the Church as they had occasion. Goodman of Gloucester having staid in
that Diocese long enough to be as weary of them as they were of him, affected a
remove to the Sea of Hereford, and had so far prevailed with some great Officer
of State, that his Money was taken, his Conge d' es^ire issued out, his
Election passed. But the Archbishop coming opportunely to the knowledge of it,
and being ashamed of so much baseness in the man, who could pretend no other
merit than his money, so labored the business with the King, and the King so
rattled up the Bishop, that he was glad to make his peace, not only with the
Resignation of his Election, but the loss of his Bribe. At last, that Church a
third time vacant, that is to say, by the death of Godwin, the promotion of
Iuxon and the Resignation of Goodman, was recommended to the Government of Dr.
Augustine Lindsel, not long before made Bishop of Peterborough, and now
succeeded in that See by Francis Dee, Doctor in Divinity, and Dean of
Chichester. Now begins Wren to come in play, Chaplain to his Majesty when
Prince of Wales, and chosen by King James to be one of the two which were to
follow him into Spain amongst the rest of his Retinue, as before was said. He
had seen Maw, who went Chaplain with him into Spain, to be preferred first to
the Mastership of Trinity College, and afterward to the Bishopric of Bath
and Wells, Anno 1628. himself remaining in his place in Peterhouse as his
highest dignity. In the year 1628. he was at the la^t made Dean of Windsor, and
Register of the most noble Order of the Garter, in the place of Beaumont. And
on that place he dwelt so long, that his well-willers gave it out, that Laud
was afraid of his abilities, and would not suffer him to rise, for fear that he
might rise too high both in power and favor, and overtop him in the Court. But
these surmises proved as groundless as they were unjust: For this year he was
made Successor unto Iuxon as Clerk of the Closet, a place of great nearness to
the King, and being once on the Ascendent he went up apace, succeeding Lindsel
in the Sea of Hereford, Anno 1634. and Corbet in the Church of Norwich, Anno
1635. When Iuxon was advanced to the Treasurers Staff, he was made Dean of the
Chapel in his place, Anno 1636. Successor unto White in the Sea of Ely, Anno
1638. and questionless had mounted higher had the times been favorable. Nor
was he less fortunate in his Successors, leaving the Deanery of Windsor to Dr.
Christopher Wren his younger brother; his Clerkship of the Closet to Dr.
Richard Steward, Dean of Chichester; and the Mastership of Peterhouse to John
Cosens of Durham.

We must conclude this year, and begin the next with some proceedings against
Prynne, the Preparations to whose censure we have heard before. Candlemas Term
brings him at last unto his trial in the Court of Star Chamber, being first
pre-condemned by the Gentlemen of his own Profession, and afterward sentenced
by that Court. The Gentlemen of the four Societies presented their Majesty's
with a Pompous and Magnificent Masque, to let them see that Prynnes leaven had
not sowred them all, and that they were not poisoned with the same infection.
In which as they all joined together to perform that Service, so gave they such
contentment to his Sacred Majesty, that he desired them to make a
Representation of it to the City of London: Which they accordingly performed
with no less honor to themselves, and delight to the People, than shame and
sorrow unto him who had given the occasion. But greater shame and sorrow fell
upon him when he came to his Censure. Richardson, Chief Justice of his
Majesty's Bench, highly extolled his Majesty's mercy in bringing him rather
unto his trial in a Criminal than a Capital way; declaring openly, that if he
had been turned over to his Tribunal, he must have put himself upon a Jury, of
whom no mercy could be hoped for so great an Offender. The Earl of Dorset,
being Lord Chamberlain to the Queen, aggravated his offense in aspersing with
such foul reproaches a Lady of such eminent Virtue and exemplary Piety, that
her very dreams were more in heaven than most women's Prayers. The Archbishop
having been bred in St. John's College in Oxon. where the younger Students used
yearly to present some show or other Dramatick Exercise to the University,
spoke much in commendation of Academical Enterludes, and the great benefit
which redounded to the Actors in them, by training them in an Art of speaking,
a modest confidence of Behavior, the strengthening of the Memory in the
repeating of their parts, and the enriching them with a stock of Latin Verses,
out of one approved Author or other, which were their own for ever after. In
fine, they generally concurred in this Censure of him, Discovery of the
Prelates Tyranny, p. 119.
viz. To be fined five thousand pound to the King; expelled the University of
Oxon. and Lincoln's Inn; degraded and disabled from his Profession in the Laws;
to stand in the Pillory, first in the Palace yard in Westminster, and three
days after in Cheapside, and in each place to lose an Ear, (though this last
part of his Censure was much moderated in the execution;) to have his Book,
called Histrio-Mastyx, publicly burnt before his face by the hand of the
Hangman, and remain prisoner during life.

But all this was so far from working any remorse in him, 1634.
that it rather hardened him in his ways. For in June following, as soon as he
could provide himself of Pen, Ink and Paper, he writes a most sharp and
Libellous Letter to the Lord Archbishop, touching his Censure in that Court,
and that which the Archbishop in particular had declared against him. With this
Letter the Archbishop acquaints his Majesty, and his Majesty commands him to
refer it to Attorney Noy. Noy sends for Prynne, and demands of him whether the
Letter were of his own handwriting or not; to which Prynne cunningly replied,
That he could make no answer to that demand, unless he saw the Letter, and
might read the same. No sooner was the Letter put into his hands, and Noys back
turned a little toward him, but presently he tore it all to pieces, and flung
the pieces out of the window, to the end it might not rise in judgment against
him if the Attorney should proceed to an Ore tenus, as he meant to do. With
this affront, and the principal passages of the Letter, the Attorney acquaints
their Lordships in open Court, but there was no remedy. For being there was no
proof of the misdemeanour but the Letter it self, and that the Letter could not
be brought in evidence as it should have been, the Archbishop thought it a more
noble Act to remit the crime than to trouble the Court, or any of his Majesty's
Ministers in the prosecution. But herein Prynne sped better than some others
who had before been snarling at him, and labored to expose him both to scorn
and danger. No sooner had he mounted the Chair of Canterbury, but one Boyer,
who not long before had broke prison, to which he had been committed for
felony, most grossly abused him to his face, accusing him of no less than High
Treason. For which being brought into the Star Chamber, the next Michaelmas
Term he was there censured by their Lordships as the Crime deserved. And
presently on the neck of this, one Green a poor decayed Printer, for whom his
Grace then Bishop of London had procured a Pension of five pound per Annum, to
be paid by the Company of Stationers yearly as long as he lived, adventured
into the Court of St. James's with a great Sword by his side, desperately
swearing, That it the King did not do him Justice against the Archbishop, he
would take another course with him. For this committed unto Newgate; but how
long he staid there, and what other Punishment he suffered, or whether he
suffered any other, or not, let them seek that list.

And that the other Sex might whet their tongues upon him also, the Lady
Davies, the Widow of Sir John Davies Atturney-General for King James in the
Realm of Ireland, scatters a Prophecy against him. This Lady had before spoken
something unluckily of the Duke of Buckingham, importing, that he should not
live till the end of August, which raised her to the Reputation of a Cunning
Woman amongst the ignorant people: and now she Prophesies of the new
Archbishop, That he should live but few days after the fifth of November; for
which, and other Prophesies of a more mischievous nature, she was after brought
into the Court of High Commission; the Woman being grown so mad, that she
phancied the Spirit of the Prophet Daniel to have been infused into her Body:
And this she grounded on an Anagram which she made of her Name, viz. ELEANOR
DAVIES, REVEAL O DANIEL: And though the Anagram had too much by an L, and too
little by an S; yet she found Daniel and Reveal in it, and that served her
turn. Much pains was taken by the Court to dispossess her of this Spirit; but
all would not do, till Lamb then Dean of the Arches shot her through and
through, with an Arrow borrowed from her own Quiver: For whilst the Bishops and
Divines were reasoning the Point with her out of Holy Scripture, he took a Pen
into his hand, and at last hit upon this excellent Anagram, viz. DAME ELEANOR
DAVIES, NEVER SO MAD A LADY: Which having proved to be true by the Rules of
Art, Madam, said he, I see you build much on Anagrams, and I have found out one
which I hope will fit you; This said, and reading it aloud, he put it into her
^ands in Writing, which happy Fancy brought that grave Court into such a
laughter, and the poor Woman thereupon into such a confusion, that afterward
she grew either wiser, or was less regarded. This ended as succesfully as he
could desire: but he sped worse with another of his Female Adversaries. The
Lady Purbeck, Wi^e of John Villers Viscount Purbeck, the elder Brother by the
same Venture to the Duke of Buckingham, had been brought into the
High Commission, Anno 1627. for living openly in Adultery with Sir Robert
Howard, one of the younger Sons of Thomas the first Earl of Suffolk of that
Family. Sentenced among other things to do Penance at St. Paul's Cross, she
^scaped her Keepers, took Sanctuary in the Savoy, and was from thence conveyed
away by the French Ambassador. The Duke being dead, all further prosecution
against her died also with him; which notwithstanding, the proud woman being
more terrified with the fear of the Punishment, Hist. K. C. p. 141.
than the sense of the Sin, vented her malice and displeasure against the
Archbishop (who had been very severe against her at the time of her Trial) when
he was come unto his Greatness; spending her tongue upon him in words so full
of deep disgrace and reproach unto him, that he could do no less than cause her
to be laid in the Gatehouse: But being not long after delivered thence by the
Practice of Howard aforementioned, Howard was seized upon, and laid up in her
place; which Punishment (though it was the least that could be looked for) he
so highly stomach'd, that as soon as the Archbishop was impeached by the House
of Commons, and committed to Custody by the Lords (which happened on Friday
December 18. 1640.) he petitioned for Relief against the Archbishop, and some
other of the High Commissioners by whom the Warrant had been signed. The Lords
upon the reading of it imposed a Fine of 500 l. on the Archbishop himself, and
250 l. apiece upon Lamb and Duck, and pressed it with such cruel rigor, that
they forced him to sell his Plate to make payment of it; the Fine being set on
Monday the 21. of December, and ordered to be paid on the Wednesday after.

But these Particulars have carried me beyond my year: I return therefore back
again; and having showed what Actings had been set on foot both in England and
Scotland, must now cross over into Ireland, where we find Wentworth made Lord
Deputy in the place of Faulkland. We told you formerly of some dearness which
was growing between him and Laud then Bishop of London, at his first Admission
to the place of a Privy-Counsellor. Toward the latter end of January, Anno
1630. Wentworth being then Lord President of the Council established for the
Northern Parts, bestowed a Visit on him at London-House, where they had some
private Conference touching the better Settlement of Affairs both in England
and Ireland, of which Kingdom Wentworth not long after was Created Lord Deputy.
He staid somewhat longer from his Charge than he would have done, to be present
at the Censure of Williams Bishop of Lincoln, informed against in the
Star Chamber by his Majesty's Atturney-General, for some dangerous and
disgraceful words which he was reported to have spoken of his Majesty's
Government, and revealing some Secrets which his Majesty had formerly committed
to his Trust as a Privy-Counsellor: But Williams found so many shifts to put
off the Trial, that the Deputy was fain to leave him in the same estate in
which he found him, Cant. Doom, p. 82.
and hoised Sail for Ireland. Scarce was he settled in his Power, but he began
to reform some things which he beheld as blemishes in the face of that Church.
In the Chapel of the Castle of Dublin, the chief Seat of his Residence, he
found a fair large Pue at the end of the Choire, erected for the use of his
Predecessors in that place; the Communion Table in the mean time being thrust
out of doors. This Pue he commands to be taken down, and the Holy Table to be
restored to its ancient place, where the Altar formerly had stood. In
Christ-Church the Cathedral of that City, to which the Lord Deputies repair on
Sundays and Holydays for Gods Public Worship, he found the Holy Table
situated in the middle of the Choire or Chancel, and day by day profaned by
Boys and Girls, who sat upon it: This Table he caused to be removed also, as
he did the other. And whereas the Earl of Cork had built a stately Monument for
his Wife and some of her Ancestors, but chiefly for himself and his own
Posterity, at the East end of the Choire in St. Patrick's Church, being the
second of that City, the Lord Deputy required him to take it down, or otherwise
to satisfy the Archbishop of Canterbury in the standing of it.

Of all these things he gave Order to his Chaplain Bramhall to give the
Archbishop an Account, which Bramhall did accordingly in his Letters of the
tenth of August 1633. In which Letters he gave this testimony also of the
Deputies Care, That it was not possible for the Intentions of a mortal Man, to
be more serious and sincere in those things that concerned the good of the
Irish Church, than his Lordships were. And that he might lay a sure foundation
to proceed upon, he procured the University of Dublin to make choice of Laud,
then being Lord Elect of Canterbury, for their Lord and Chancellor. To this
they cheerfully assented, passed the Election on the fourteenth of September,
Anno 1633. being but six days before his actual Confirmation into the
Metropolitical and Supreme Dignity of the Church of England. Nor was it long
before they found on what a gracious Benefactor they had placed that Honor: He
had been told by Ryves, his Majesty's Advocate (who formerly had exercised that
Office in the Realm of Ireland) of the deplorable condition of that Church in
the respect of Maintenance. Most of the Tithes had been appropriated to
Monasteries and Religious Houses, afterward vested in the Crown, or sold to
private Subjects, and made Lay-Fees; The Vicaridges for the most part
Stipendary, and their Stipends so miserable sordid, that in the whole Province
of Connaught most of the Vicars Pensions came but to 40 s. per Annum, and in
many places but 16. The Bishoprics at that time were many in number, but of
small Revenue, having been much dilapidated in the change of Religion, some of
them utterly unable to maintain a Bishop, and no good Benefice near them to be
held in Commendam. Ca^t. D^^m, p. 104.
This had been certified unto him by Letters from the Lord Primate about three
years since; and it had been certified also by Beadle Bishop of Killmore, That
the Churches were in great decay, and that some men of better quality than the
rest were possessed of three, four, five, or more of those V^caridges, to the
great disservice of the Church, and reproach to themselves.

These things he could not choose but look on as great discouragements to
Learning, and such as could produce no other effects than Ignorance in the
Priest, and Barbarism in the People. Scandalous Benefices make for the most
part scandalous Ministers, as naked Walls are said in the English Proverb to
make giddy Houswifes. Where there is neither Means nor Maintenance for a
Learned Ministry, what a gross night of Ignorance must befall those men who were
to hold forth the Light to others? And if the Light it self be Darkness, how
great a Darkness must it be, which does follow after it? That Observation of Ad
te^^i^^^^m benefici ^um necessario sequitur ign^rantia S^cerdotum. Panor.
Panormitan, That poor Churches will be filled with none but ignorant Priests,
being as true as old, and as old as lamentable. For remedy whereof, he took an
opportunity to move his Majesty to restore all such Impropriations to the
Church of Ireland, as were then vested in the Crown. The Exchequer was at that
time empty, the Revenue low, which might seem to make the Proposition the more
unseasonable: But so great was his Majesty's Piety on the one side, the Reasons
so forcible on the other, and the Lord Deputy of that Kingdom so cordially
a^fected to advance the Work, that his Majesty graciously condescended to it,
and sound his Ministers there as ready to speed the business, as either of them
could desire. Encouraged by which Royal Example, the Earl of Cork, who from a
very small beginning had raised himself to a vast Revenue in that Kingdom,
Rebuilt some Churches, and Repaired others; restored some of his
Impropriations to those several Churches; and doubtless had proceeded further,
if a difference had not happened betwixt the Lord Deputy and him, about the
removing of the Monument which he had erected for himself and his Posterity, in
one of the principal Churches of the City of Dublin, as before was said. And as
for the improving of the Bishoprics, as Ossory and Kilkenny, Killmore and
Ardagh, Down and Connor, and possibly some others had before this been joined
together; so was it advised by the Primate, That Kilfenore should be joined
unto that of Killalow, lying contiguous to each other; Both which being joined
by a perpetual union, were thought sufficient to make an indifferent Competency
for an Irish Bishop.

But all this Care had been to little or no purpose, if some course were not
also taken to preserve Religion, endangered on this side by Popery, and on that
by Calvinism; each side unwillingly contributing to the growth of the other.
The perverse oppositions of the Calvinist, made the Papist obstinate; and the
insolences of the Papists, did both vex and confirm the Calvinists. Betwixt
them both, the Church of England was so lost, that there was little of her
genuine and native Doctrine to be found in the Clergy of that Kingdom. The
Papists being first suppressed, it was conceived to be no hard matter to reduce
the Calvinians to Conformity; and to suppress the Papists, it was found
expedient, That the standing Army should be kept in continual Pay, and that
Moneys should be levied on the Papists themselves for the payment of it: In
order whereunto, the Bishop of Killmore beforementioned, had given an Account
unto his Grace then Bishop of London, touching the dangerous condition of that
Church by the growth of Popery; and now he finds it necessary to give the like
Account unto the new Lord Deputy. Him therefore he informs by Letters dated
November 5. 1633. (which was not long after he had personally assumed the
Government, and received the Sword) to this effect; C^nt. Do^m, p. 4^7.
viz. That in that Crown the Pope had a far greater Kingdom than his Majesty
had; That the said Kingdom of the Pope was governed by the new Congregation de
propaganda Fide, established not long since at Rome; That the Pope had there a
Clergy depending on him, double in number to the English, the Heads of which
were bound by a corporal Oath to maintain his Power and Greatness against all
Persons whatsoever; That for the moulding of the People to the Popes Obedience,
there was a great rabble of Irregular Regulars, most of them the younger Sons
of Noble Houses, which made them the more insolent and uncontrollable; That the
Pope had erected an University in Dublin, to confront his Majesty's College
there, and breed up the Youth of the Kingdom to his Devotion, one Harris being
Dean thereof, who had dispersed a Scandalous Pamphlet against the Lord Primates
Sermon preached at Wansteed (one of the best Pieces that ever came from him)
Anno 1629. That since the Dissolving of their new Frieries in the City of
Dublin, they had Erected them in the Country, and had brought the People to
such a sottish negligence, that they cared not to learn the Commandments as God
spoke and left them; but flocked in Multitudes to the hearing of such
Superstitious Doctrines as some of their own Priests were ashamed of; That a
Synodical Meeting of their Clergy had been held lately at Drogheda in the
Province of Vlster, in which it was decreed, That it was not lawful to take the
Oath of Allegiance; And therefore, That in such a conjuncture of Affairs to
think that the bridle of the Army might be taken away, must be the thought not
of a Brainsick, but of a Brainless man: which whosoever did endeavor, not
only would oppose his Majesty's Service, but expose his own neck to the Skeanes
of those Irish cutthroats. All which he humbly refers to his Lordships
seasonable Care and Consideration. Upon this Information, the Deputy obtains
his Majesty's leave to hold a Parliament in that Kingdom, which he managed with
such notable dexterity, that he made himself Master of a Power sufficient to
suppress the Insolences of the Papists, and yet exceedingly prevailed upon
their Affections. From which time forwards the Popish Recusants in that Kingdom
were kept in stricter duty, and held closer to loyal Obedience, for fear of
irritating so severe a Magistrate, than ever they had been by any of his
Predecessors.

This Parliament brought with it a Convocation, as a thing of course; and in
that somewhat must be done to check the spreading of Calvinism in all parts of
that Church. The Articles of Religion agreed upon in Convocation Anno 1615.
were so contrived by Usher the now Lord Primate, That all the Sabbatarian and
Calvinian Rigours were declared therein to be the Doctrines of that Church;
Most grievous Torments immediately in his Soul affirmed to be endured by
Christ, which Calvin makes to be the same with his descent into Hell; The
abstenencies from eating Flesh upon certain days, declared not to be Religious
Fasts: but to be grounded only upon Politic Ends and Considerations; All
Ministers adjudged to be Lawfully called, who are called unto the Work of the
Ministry by those that have Public Authority given them in the Church (but
whether they be Bishops or not, it makes no matter, so that he be Authorized
unto it by their several Churches): The Sacerdotal Power of Absolution made
declarative only, and consequently quite subverted; No Power ascribed unto the
Church in Ordaining Canons, or censuring any of those who either carelessly or
maliciously do infringe the same; the Pope made Antichrist, according to the
like Determination of the French Hugonots made at Gappe in Dolphine: And
finally, such a silence concerning the Consecration of Archbishops and Bishops
(expressly justified and avowed in the English Book) as if there were not a
different Order from the Common Presbyters. All which, being Usher's own
Opinions, were dispersed in several places of these Articles for the Church of
Ireland, approved of in that Convocation, and finally confirmed by the Lord
Deputy Chichester in the Name of King James. By means whereof these two great
mischiefs did ensue; First, A great matter of division which it caused to the
Priests and Papists of the Realm, that in three Kingdoms, under the Obedience
of one Sovereign Prince, there should be three distinct and contrary
Professions, and yet pretending every one to the same Religion. And secondly,
Whenever the Points were agitated here in England against the Sabbatarian and
Calvinian Rigours, the Disputants were forthwith choked by the Authority of
these Articles, and the infallible Judgment of King James, who confirmed the
same. If therefore the Archbishop meant to have Peace in England, the Church of
Ireland must be won to desert those Articles, and receive ours in England in
the place thereof.

This to effect, it was not thought expedient by such as had the managing of
that design, to propose any abrogation or repealing of the former Articles,
which had so many Friends and Patrons in that Convocation, that it was moved
severally both in the House of the Bishops, and in that of the Clergy, to have
them ratified and confirmed in the present Meeting. And questionless it had
been carried in that way, if it had not seasonably been diverted by telling the
Promoters of it, That those Articles had already received as much Authority as
that Church could give them, and that by seeking to procure any such
Confirmation, they would weaken the Original Power by which they stood. This
blow being thus handsomely broken, their next work was to move the Primate, That
for the avoiding of such scandal which was given the Papists, and to declare
the Unity in Judgment and Affections between the Churches, a Canon might be
passed in approbation of the Articles of the Church of England. To this the
Prelate being gained, the Canon was drawn up and presented to him; and being by
him propounded, was accordingly passed, one only man dissenting when it came to
the Vote, who had pierced deeper into the bottom of the Project than the others
did. It was desired also by Bramhall, not long before the Lord Deputies
Chaplain, but then Bishop of Derrie, That the whole Body of Canons made in the
year 1603. might be admitted in that Church: But the Primate was ever so afraid
of bowing at the Name of JESUS, and some other Reverences required in them,
which he neither practiced nor approved, that he would by no means hearken to
it, which bred some heats between him and Bramhall, ending at last in this
Temperament, That some select Canons should be taken out of that Book, and
intermingled with some others of their own composing. But for the Canon which
approved and received the Articles of the Church of England, it was this that
follows; viz. Of the Agreement of the Church of England and Ireland in the
Profession of the same Christian Faith.
FOr the manifestation of our Agreement with the Church of England, in the
Confession of the same Christian Faith, and Doctrine of the Sacraments, We do
receive and approve the Book of Articles of Religion, agreed upon by the
Archbishops and Bishops, and the whole Clergy, in whole Convocation holden at
London, Anno Dom. 1562. for the avoiding of diversities of Opinions, and for
the establishing of Consent touching true Religion. And therefore if any
hereafter shall affirm, That any of those Articles are in any part
Superstitious and Erroneous, or such as he may not with a good Conscience
Subscribe unto, Let him be Excommunicated, and not Absolved before he make a
public Revocation of his Error.



Such was the Canon passed in this Convocation, for the approbation and
reception of the Articles of the Church of England: Which Canon was no sooner
passed, confirmed, and published, but the Primate and his Party saw the danger
which they had cast themselves into by their inadvertency; and found too late,
That by receiving and approving the English Articles, they had abrogated and
repealed the Irish. To salve this sore, it concerned them to bestir themselves
with their utmost diligence, and so accordingly they did. For first the
Primate, and some Bishops of his opinions, required subscription to the
Articles of both Churches of all such as came to be ordained at the next
Ordination. But it went no further than the next, for if the Papists made it a
matter of Derision to have three Confessions in the three Churches of his
Majesty's Kingdoms; Judgment of the Lord Primate, p 121.
How much more matter must it give them of scorn and laughter, that there
should be two different Confessions in the same Church, and both subscribed
unto, but as one and the same.

The Primate next applies himself to the Lord Deputy, Judge. ^. Pri. Ilid. 112.
beseeching him that the former Articles might receive a new Ratification by
Act of Parliament for preventing all innovations in the Religion there
established: But he found but little comfort there, the Lord Deputy threatening
to cause the said Confession to be burnt by the hand of the hangman; if at the
least the Scots Commissioners may be believed; amongst whose Articles against
him I find this for one. Finding no better hopes on that side of the Sea, he
dispatcheth his Letters of Advice to his Friends in England, one to an
Honorable Person amongst the rest, assuring them that though by a Canon passed
in that Convocation they had received and approved the Articles of England; yet
that the Articlers of Ireland were ever called in, might well be reckoned for a
fancy. The like affirmed in a Certificate made by Bernard, and Pullen, two
Members of the Lower House in this Convocation, Ols. ol serve. p. 42.
where it is said, That whosoever do aver that the said Articles were
abolished, are grossly mistaken and have abused the said Convocation in
delivering so manifest an untruth. And to back this, another Certificate must
be gained from one who comes commended to us under the Title of a most eminent,
judicious, and learned person, Judge. of L. Pri p. 121.
who having considered of the matter, Conceives that both Confessions were
consistent; and that the Act of the Synod was not a Revocation of the Irish
Articles, but an approbation of the English, as agreeing with them.

But all this would not serve the turn, or save those Articles from being
brought under a Repeal by the present Canon. For first, it appears by the
Canon, That they did not only approve, but receive the Articles of the Church
of England. Their approbation of them, had they gone no further, had been a
sufficient manifestation of their agreement with the Church of England in the
Confession of the same Protestant Religion: But their receiving of the same
does intimate a superinducing of them upon the other, and is equivalent both in
Fact and Law to the Repealing of the old. For otherwise St. Paul must needs be
out in the Rules of Logic when he proved the Abrogating of the old Covenant by
the superinduction of a new; For having affirmed, that God by speaking of a New
Covenant, had Dicendo autem novum, veteravit prius, etc. Heb. 8 13.
antiquated and made void the first, (or made the first old as our English read
it;) he adds immediately, That that which is old, decays, and is ready to
vanish away; that is to say, as Diodati descants on it, The old being
disanulled by the new, there must necessarily follow the abolishment of its use
and practice. Nor find they any other abrogation of the Jewish Sabbath then by
the superinducing of the Lords day for the day of worship. By means whereof the
Sabbath was lessened in authority and reputation by little and little, and in
short time was absolutely laid aside in the Church of Christ; the fourth
Commandment, by which it was at first ordained, being still in force. So then
according to these grounds the Articles of Ireland were virtually, though not
formally, abrogated; or else it must be granted, that there were two
Confessions in the same one Church, different both in form and matter, and
contrary in some points unto one another, which would have been so far from
creating an uniformity between the Churches in the concernments of Religion,
that it would have raised a greater disagreement within Ireland it self than
was before between the Churches of both Kingdoms. And certainly the gaining of
this point did much advantage the Archbishop, conducing visibly to the
promotion of his ends and Counsels in making the Irish Clergy subject to the
two Declarations, and accountable for their breaking and neglect thereof, that
is to say, his Majesty's Declaration about Lawful Sports, and that prefixed
before the book of Articles for appeasing Controversies. Take for a farewell
this acknowledgment of a late Historian, Chapter Hist. B. 11. p. 128.
speaking as well the sense of others as his own, A Convocation (concurrent
with a Parliament) was called (says he) and kept at Dublin in Ireland, wherein
the thirty nine Articles of the Church of England were received in Ireland, for
all to subscribe unto. It was adjudged fit, seeing that Kingdom complies with
England in the Civil Government, it should also conform thereunto in matters of
Religion. And thereupon he thus concludes, That in the mean time the Irish
Articles concluded formerly in a Synod, 1616. (mistaken for 1615.) (wherein
Arminianism was condemned in terminis terminantibus, and the observation of the
Lords day resolved Iure divino) were utterly excluded.

But leaving Ireland to the care of the Lord Deputy, and the Bishop of Derry,
who under him had the chief managing of the affairs of that Church; let us see
how the new Archbishop proceeds in England, where he had so many plows going at
once, too many, as it after proved, to work well together. For not thinking he
had done enough in order to the peace and uniformity of the Church of England,
by taking care for it here at home, his thoughts transported him with the like
affection to preserve it from neglect abroad. To which end he had offered some
considerations to the Lords of the Council, as before was said, Anno 1622.
relating to the regulation of Gods public Worship amongst the English
Factories, and Regiments beyond the Seas, and the reducing of the French and
Dutch Churches, settled in diverse parts of this Realm, unto some conformity. In
reference to the first, he had not sat long in the Chair of Canterbury when
he procured an Order from the Lords of the Council, bearing date October. 1.
1633. By which their English Churches and Regiments in Holland (and afterward
by degrees in all other Foreign parts and plantations) were required strictly
to observe the English Liturgy with all the Rites and Ceremonies prescribed in
it. Which Order contained the sum and substance of those considerations which
he had offered to the Board touching that particular. With which the Merchant
Adventurers being made acquainted, with joint consent they made choice of one
Beaumont (reputed for a learned, sober, and conformable man) to be Preacher to
their Factory residing at Delf, Forbes, a Scot by birth, who formerly had been
Preacher to the Society, being either dead, or other wise departed to avoid
conformity. And that this man might be received with the better welcome a
Letter is sent with him to the Deputy Governor, subscribed by the Archbishop
himself, in which he signifies both to him and the rest in his Majesty's name,
Cant. Doom, p. 407.
That they were to receive him with all decent and courteous usage fitting his
person and calling, allowing him the ancient Pension which formerly had been
paid to his Predecessors. Which said in reference to the man, he lets them know
that it was his Majesty's express command, that both he, the Deputy, and all
and every other Merchant, that is or shall be residing in those parts beyond
the Seas, do conform themselves to the Doctrine and Discipline settled in the
Church of England: and that they Frequent the Common Prayer with all Religious
duty and reverence at all times required, as well as they do Sermons; and that
out of their company they should yearly about Easter, as the Canons prescribe,
name two Churchwardens, and two Sides-men, which may look to the Orders of the
Church, and give an account according to their office. It was also required
that these present Letters should be registered and kept by them, that they
which come after might take notice what care his Majesty had taken for the well
ordering of the said Company in Church affairs; and that a Copy of the same
should be delivered to the said Beaumont, and to every Successor of his
respectively, that he and they might know what his Majesty expected of them,
and be the more inexcusable if they disobey it. With this Dispatch, bearing
date the seventeenth of June, this present year 1634. away goes Beaumont into
Holland, taking with him these Instructions for his own proceedings; that is to
say, That he should punctually keep and observe all the Orders of the Church of
England, as they are prescribed in the Canons and the Rubricks of the Liturgy;
and that if any person of that Company shall show himself refractory to that
Ordinance of his Majesty, he should certify the name of any such offender, and
his offense to the Lord Bishop of London for the time being, who was to take
order and give remedy accordingly. Which Order and Instructions given to
Beaumont in private, were incorporated also in the Letter, least otherwise he
might be thought to act any thing in it without good Authority. And he
accordingly proceeded with such honest zeal, and was so punctual in observing
his Majesty's pleasure and commands, that for a reward of his good service he
was preferred unto a Prebends place in the Church of Canterbury, though by the
unhappy change of times, it brought more reputation than advantage with it.

And now at last we have the face of an English Church in Holland, responsal to
the Bishops of London for the time being, as a part of their Diocese, directly
and immediately subject to their Jurisdiction. The like course also was
prescribed for our Factories in Hamborough, and those further off, that is to
say, in Turkey, in the Moguls Dominions, the Indian Islands, the Plantations in
Virginia, the Barbados, and all other places where the English had any
standing Residence in the way of trade. The like done also for regulating the
Divine Service in the Families of all Ambassadors, residing in the Courts of
Foreign Princes for his Majesty's Service; as also in the English Regiments,
serving under the States. The superinspection of which last was referred to
Boswel his Majesty's Resident at the Hague, and his Successors in that place;
as he and all the rest of the Ambassadors, in what place soever, were to be
ordered by the care of the Lords of the Council; and they to be accountable
therein to his Sacred Majesty, as the Supreme Ordinary. The English Agents and
Ambassadors in the Courts of Foreign Princes had not been formerly so
regardful of the honor of the Church of England, as they might have been, in
designing a set Room for religious uses, and keeping up the Vestments, Rites
and Ceremonies, prescribed by Law in performance of them. It was now hoped that
there would be a Church of England in all Courts of Christendom, in the chief
Cities of the Turk, and other great Mohammedan Princes, in all our Factories and
Plantations in every known Part of the world, by which it might be rendered as
diffused and Catholic as the Church of Rome.

In reference to the regulating of the French and Dutch Churches here amongst
our selves, he conceived himself in a capacity of putting his own Counsels in
execution, either as Bishop of the Diocese, or Archbishop of the Province of
Canterbury. He had considered of the dangers which those Foreign Churches drew
on this, by standing divided and dismembered from the rest of the body; and of
the countenance and encouragement which was given to the Puritan Faction in the
promoting of Schism. There was no Traverse to be made to this Dilemma, but
either they were or were not of the same Religion with the Church of England.
If they were not of the same Religion why should they, being strangers, borne
in other Countries, or descending from them, expect more Liberty of Conscience
than the Papists had, being all Natives, and descending from English Parents?
If of the same, why should they not submit to the Government and Forms of
Worship, being the outward acts and exercises of the Religion here by Law
established? It was now as when they first fled into this Land from the Fire
and Faggot; from which their own Countries having felt no Persecution for forty
or fifty years last past, were at this time freed: And therefore if they did not
like the Terms of their staying here, they might return from whence they came,
in peace and safety, with thanks to God and the good English Nation, for the
long and comfortable Entertainment they had found amongst them. Upon these
grounds, and such Considerations as had before been offered to the Lords of the
Council, before he had sat a whole year in the Chair of Canterbury, he caused
these three Articles to be tendered to the French Congregation in that City, and
the two Dutch Congregations in Sandwich and Maidston, Apr. 14. 1634. 1. What
Liturgy do you use? or whether you have not the Dutch or French in use? 2. Of
how many Descents for the most part they were born Subjects? 3. Whether such as
are born Subjects, will conform to the Church of England? For Answer to the
Articles (after some fruitless Pleas touching their Exemptions) they obtained
time till the fifth of May; against which time, with the consent of their
several Churches, they prepared these several Answers. To the first it was
answered, That they had that Liturgy which all the Churches of the French
Tongue ( both in France, and in the United Provinces of the States) have had
since the blessed Reformation, and which their Churches (refuged here) have had
this sixty or seventy years, or more: That the English Liturgy was Translated
into French, but that they used it not; and that they knew not whether it were
Translated in Dutch or not. To the second it was answered, That the greatest
part of the Heads of the Families were not born here, but about a third part;
because that the greatest part of the old ones were Strangers born, and many
others are newly come since a few years. But to the third they desired to be
excused from making any Answer at all, foreseeing (as it was pretended) a
dissipation of their Churches, in reference to the maintenance of their
Ministry and relief of their poor, if such Conformity should be pressed, which
they endeavored to avoid by all means imaginable. But before these Answers
were returned, it was thought fit to consult with the Coetus (as they style it)
of the French and Dutch Churches in London, who were concerned as much as they,
and who by reason of their wealth and number governed all the rest; by whom
they were advised to suppress those Answers, and to present their Declinator,
fixing themselves upon their Privileges, and challenging the Exemption granted
them by King Edward vi. confirmed by several Acts of Council in the Reigns of
Queen Elizabeth, King James, and his Sacred Majesty.

This Declinator no way satisfied his Grace of Canterbury. He knew, none
better, That Acts of Council were not like the Laws of the Medes and Persians,
but might be changed and varied as occasion served; That the Letters Patents
granted by King Edward vi. to the first Congregation of Strangers under John A
Lasco (by which they were Licenced to use their own Forms both of Worship and
Government, without any disturbance) were vacated by the departure of the said
Congregation in the time of Queen Mary; and that the French and Dutch Churches
now in England, could pretend no succession unto that in the time of King
Edward vi. And therefore as soon as Brent returned from his Visitation (of
which we shall hear more anon) and had a while reposed himself after that long
Journey, he was dispatched to Canterbury with these Injunctions, viz. 1. That
all the Natives of the Dutch and Walloon Congregations in his Graces Diocese,
are to repair to their several Parish Churches where they inhabit, to hear
Divine Service and Sermons, and perform all Duties and Payments required in
that behalf: And 2. That all the Ministers, and all other of the same Walloon
or French Congregations, which are Aliens born, shall have and use the Liturgy
used in the English Churches, as the same is or may be faithfully Translated
into French or Dutch. These two Injunctions being given on the nineteenth of
December, with time for conforming thereunto till the first of March, were
presently communicated by the Kentish to the London Churches, and by those of
London to the rest in the Province of Canterbury, requiring them to send their
Deputies to consult together with them in this Common Danger. There were at
that time ten Churches of Strangers in this Province; that is to say, two in
London, two in Norwich, and one apiece in Canterbury, Sandwich, Maidstone,
Southampton, Colchester, and Yarmouth, who were to send their sufficient
Deputies, consisting of Ministers and Lay Elders, to make this Synod. But
because the time might be elapsed before these Deputies from so many Places
could meet together, and resolve upon any Conclusion; it was determined by the
Coetus, that those of Kent, whom it most immediately concerned, should address
themselves to the Archbishop, and desire his favor for the enjoying of their
Privileges, as in former times; whose Propositions being heard, and their
Reasons pondered, he answered, That it was his purpose to make a General
Visitation of all his Province, and that he would begin at home; That he did
nothing but what had been communicated to the King, and resolved by the
Council; That neither the Letters Patents of King Edward vi. nor any Reasons by
them alleged, should hinder him from proceeding in the said Injunctions; That
their Churches were nests and occasions of Schism, which he would prevent in
Kent as well as he could; That it were better there were no Foreign Churches
nor Strangers in England, than to have them thereby to give occasion of
prejudice or danger to the Church Government of it; That they endeavored to
make themselves a State in a State, and had vaunted, That they feared not his
Injunctions; but, That he hoped the King would maintain him in it, as long as
he Governed by the Canons; That the dissipation of their Churches, and
maintenance of two or three Ministers, was not to be laid in the same Balance
with the Peace and Happiness of the Church of England; That their ignorance in
the English Tongue, ought not to be used for a pretense for their not going to
their Parish Churches, considering that it was an affected Ignorance, and they
might avoid it when they would: And finally, That he was resolved to have his
Injunctions put in execution, and that they should conform to them at their
peril by the time appointed.

Finding no hope of Good this way, they expect the Sitting of the Synod on the
fifth of February; to which the Deputies made a Report of their ill Successes;
and thereupon it was resolved, That a Petition in the name of all the Foreign
Churches, should be presented unto the King; which way they found as
unsuccessful as the other was* For his Majesty having read the Petition,
delivered it to the Earl of Pembroke, commanding him to give it to one of the
Secretaries. And though Pembroke, either out of love to the Cause, or hate to
the Archbishops Person, chose rather to deliver it to Cook than Windebank; yet
neither Cook himself, nor Weckerly his chief Clerk (a Walloon by birth) who
had very much espoused the Quarrel, could do any thing in it. The next course
was to back that Petition with a Remonstrance, containing the chief Reasons
which they had to urge in their own behalf; and that Remonstrance to be put
into his Majesty's hands by the Duke of Soubize, a Prince of great Descent in
France, and a chief stickler in the Wars of the Hugonots against their King: In
which Reasons, when they came to be examined more particularly, there was
nothing found material, but what had formerly been observed and answered;
except it were the fear of a Persecution to be raised in France, when it should
there be known, how much the French Churches in this Kingdom had been
discountenanced and distressed. And this they after aggravated by some fresh
Intelligence which they had from thence, by which they were advertised of some
words of the great Cardinal Richelieu, to this effect, viz. That if a King of
England, who was a Protestant, would not permit two Disciplines in his Kingdom,
why should a King of France, a Papist, permit two Religions? Great workings had
been in the Court upon this occasion; though all which was effected by it, was
but the present qualification of the second Injunction; His Majesty on good
Reason of State insisting so strongly on the first, that it could not be
altered. But as for the second Injunction, it was qualified thus, viz. That the
Ministers, and all others of the French and Dutch Congregations, which are not
Natives, and born Subjects to the Kings Majesty, or any other Stranger that
shall come over to them, while they remain Strangers may have and use their own
Discipline, as formerly they have done; yet it is thought fit that the English
Liturgy should be Translated into the French and Dutch, for the better fitting
of their Children to the English Government. But before the Injunction thus
qualified could be sent to Canterbury, the Mayor and Brethren of that City were
put upon a Petition in their behalf, insisting, amongst other things, on the
great Charge which would fall upon them, if the relief of the poor French,
which formerly had been maintained on the common Purse of that Church, should
be cast upon the several Parishes; and the great want of Work which would
happen to their own Poor in that City, if the Manufactures of the French should
be discontinued. To which Petition they received a favorable Answer in respect
of themselves; but without any alteration of his Graces purpose in such other
points of it as concerned those Churches. A Temperament was also used in regard
of the Ministers which did Officiate in those Churches; it being condescended
to on the suit of their Deputies, That such of their Ministers as were English
born should continue in their Place and Ministry, as in former times: but that
hereafter none should be admitted to be Ministers in their Congregations, but
such as were Strangers. Which Condescensions notwithstanding, It was directed
by the Coetus of the London Churches, That by no means the Kentish Foreigners
should publish the said Injunctions in their Congregations; and that if the
prosecution of them should be strictly urged, they would then think upon some
other course to bear of that blow. And by this Tergiversation they gained so
much time, that the final Decree was not passed upon them till the 26th of
September 1635. when to the former Injunction they found this Clause or Proviso
added, viz. That the Natives should continue to contribute to the maintenance
of their Ministry, and the Poor of their Church, for the subsisting thereof;
and that an Order should be obtained from his Majesty, if it were desired, to
maintain them in their Manufactures, against all such as should endeavor to
molest them by Informations. Some time was spent about the publishing of this
Decree, the Ministers and Elders of those Churches refusing to act any thing in
it: But at the last it was published in the French Church at Canterbury by one
of their Notaries, and in Sandwich by the Chanter or Clerk of the Congregation,
with Order to the Ministers and Churchwardens of the several Parishes, to take
notice of such of the Natives as resorted not diligently to their Parish
Churches.

This proved a leading Case to all the other French and Dutch Churches on this
side of the Seas, though they opposed it what they could. For no sooner was the
News of these Injunctions first brought to Norwich, when a Remonstrance was
presented to Corbet (who was then Bishop of that Diocese) and by him
transmitted to the Archbishop; in which they had expressed such Reasons against
the tenor of the same, as we have met with formerly in this Narration. But the
Archbishops Visitation of that Diocese in the year next following, Anno 1635.
put an end to that business; the Injunction being published in the Churches of
Strangers in that City, before any publication of them had been made in
Canterbury. Nor was the like done only in all the Churches of Strangers in the
Province of Canterbury, but in those of York, where the Archbishop kept them to
a harder Diet; for having seen what had been done by Brent in his Visitation,
and having no such powerful Sollicitors as the Coetus of the London Churches to
take off his edge, he denied them the Exercise of any Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction of their own; injoins them the use of the English Liturgy in the
French Tongue, with Obedience to all the Laws and Ordinances of the Church of
England; to receive the Sacrament once a year in the Church of the Parish where
they dwell, and to perform all their Christenings, Marriages, and Burials
there, or else none of their Congregations to be permitted. But notwithstanding
all this care of the Metropolitans, the business went forward more or less, as
the Ministers and Churchwardens stood affected in their several Parishes. And
in most Parishes the Ministers and Churchwardens were so well pleased with
that indecency which they had amongst them, in respect of any Superiors in
Church-concernments, to whom they might be made accountable for Life or
Doctrine, that generally they wished themselves in the same condition: And
being freed from their greatest fear, of having the Poor of those Churches cast
upon them in their several Parishes, they seemed not much sollicitous whether
they came to the Church or not, to hear the Sermons, receive the Sacraments, or
perform any other part of Public Worship; especially if they were not
scrupulous in paying to the Minister his accustomed Dues, and yielding to such
Rates and Taxes as the Churchwardens laid upon them for Parochial uses. If any
Minister began to look too strictly to them, they would find some means to take
him off by Gifts and Presents, or by some powerful Letter from some of the
Grandees residing in London, and sometimes from a neighboring Justice, whose
displeasure must not be incurred. And that they might not want encouragement to
stand it out as long as they could, the leading men of the Genevian Faction in
most parts of the Realm, did secretly solicit them not to be too forwards in
conforming to the said Injunctions, assuring them of such Assistances as might
save them harmless, and flattering them with this Opinion of themselves, That
the Liberty of the Gospel, and the most desirable Freedom of the Church from
Episcopal Tyranny, depended chiefly on their Courage and Resolution. What was
done afterward in pursuance of the said Injunctions, shall be told elsewhere:
all which Particulars I have laid together, that the Proceedings of his Grace
in this weighty business (so much calumniated and defamed) might be presented
to the Reader without interruption.

It was once said by Telesinus to Caj. Marius, That he did well to scour the
Country; but Italy would never want Wolves, so long as Rome continued so fit a
Forest to afford them shelter. In like manner the Archbishop knew full well how
small a Progress he should make in his Reformation, for reducing the French and
Dutch to a Communion with the Church of England, and the Church of England to
it self, if London were not brought to some Conformity. Which City having a
strong influence on all parts of the Kingdom, was generally looked on as the
Compass by which the lesser Towns and Corporations were to steer their Course,
the practice of it being pleaded upon all occasions, for Vestries, Lectures,
and some other Innovations in the State of the Church. And to this nothing more
concurred, than that the Beneficed Clergy being but meanly provided for, were
forced to undertake some Lectures, or otherwise to connive at many things,
contrary to their own Judgment and the Rules of the Church; in hope that
gaining the good will thereby of the Chief of their Parishes, they might be
gratified by them with Entertainments, Presents, and some other helps to mend
their Maintenance. The Lecturers in the mean time, as being Creatures of the
People, and depending wholly on the Purse of the wealthier Citizens, not only
overtopped them in point of Power and Reputation, but generally of Profit and
Revenue also. Not that these Lecturers were maintained so much by the Zeal and
Bounty of their Patrons, as by a general Fraud, which for many years last past
had been put upon the Regular Clergy, by the diminishing of whose just Dues in
Tithes and Offerings, such Lecturers and Trencher-Chaplains had been fed and
cherished. For the better understanding whereof, we are to know, That in the
year 1228. Roger Niger Bishop of London* ordained by a Synodical Constitution,
That the Citizens should pay of every pounds Rent by the year, of all Houses,
Shops, etc. the Sum of 3 s. 5 d. as time out of mind had formerly been paid.
Which 3 s. 5 d. did arise from the Offerings upon every Sunday and thirty of
the principal Holydays in the same year, after the Rate of one halspeny for
every twenty shillings Rent of their Houses, Shops, etc. This Order of Roger
Niger remaining in force till the year 1397. and the C^^^gy being kept to such
Rates for the Rents of Houses, as at the first making of the same, it was
decreed by Thomas Arundell then Bishop of Canterbury, That as the Rent
increased, so the Offerings or Tithes should increase also; That the said Order
should be read in every Parish Church four times in the year, and a Curse laid
upon all those who should not obey it. Confirmed by Pope Innocent vii. and
Nicholas v. with a Proviso, That the said Oblations should be paid according to
the true yearly value of the Shops and Houses. It so remained until the twenty
fifth year of Henry viii. at what time many of the former Holydays being
abrogated by the Kings Authority, the yearly Profit of the Clergy found a great
abatement; the greater, in regard of the variances which arose betwixt them and
their Parishioners, about the payment of their Dues; the People taking the
advantage of some Disorders which the Clergy at that present had been brought
unto, by acknowledging the King for the Supreme Head of the Church of England.
Upon this variance a Complaint is made unto the King, who refers the whole
matter to Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury, Audley Lord Chancellor, Gardener
Bishop of Winton, Cromwell Chief Secretary of Estate, Fitz-Iames and Norwich
Chief Justices of the several Benches, by whom it was concluded, That from
thenceforth 2 s. 9 d. only should be paid out of every pound for the Rents of
Houses, Shops, etc. And to this Order the Citizens did not only consent, as
they had good reason, but bound themselves by an Act of Common Council to
perform the same; the said Decree confirmed by Act of Parliament in the twenty
seventh, and afterward in the thirty seventh of that King, with a power given
to the Lord Mayor to commit to Prison every person whatsoever who should not
pay his Tithes and Dues according to that Proportion.

But contrary to the true intent and meaning of the said Decrees, and the
several Acts of Parliament which confirmed the same, the covetous and
unconscionable Landlords, who had the Fee-simple, or some long Leases at the
least, of such shops and houses, devised many base and fraudulent ways to put
a cheat upon the Law, and abuse the Clergy; reserving some small sum in the
name of a Rent, and covenanting for other greater Sums to be paid quarterly or
half yearly in the name of Fines, Annuities, Pensions, Incomes, Interest money,
etc. Finding these Payments so conditioned and agreed upon to be too visible a
cheat, some were so wise as to take their Fines in gross, when they sealed
their Leases, some inconsiderable Rent being charged upon them; others so
cunning as to have two Leases on foot at the same time, one at a low
contemptible Rent to gull the Incumbent of his dues, the other with a Rent four
or five times as great to keep down the Tenant; and some by a more cleanly kind
of conveyance (reserving a small Rent as others did) caused their Tenants to
enter into several bonds for the payment of so much money yearly with reference
to the term which they had in their Leases. By which Devises and deceits the
house-Rents were reduced to so low a value, that some Aldermen, who do not use
to dwell in Sheds and Cottages, could be charged with no more than twenty
shillings for a whole years Tithe; the Rent reserved amounts after that
proportion but to seven pounds yearly. The Clergy by the Alteration of
Religion had lost those great advantages, which had before accrued unto them by
Obits, Mortuaries, Obventions to the Shrines and Images of some special Saints,
Church Lands, and personal Tithes according to men's honest gain, which last was
thought to have amounted to more than the Tithe of houses. Being deprived of
the one, and abused in the other, they were forced in the sixteenth of King
James, Anno 1618. to have recourse to the Court of Exchequer, by the Barons
whereof it was declared, that according to the true intent of the said Acts the
Inhabitants of London and the Liberties thereof ought to pay the Tithe of their
houses, shops, etc. after the rate of two shillings nine pence in the pound
proportionable to the true yearly value of the Rent thereof. In order whereunto
it was then ordered by the Court, that a Shed, which had been built and made a
convenient dwelling house, should pay twenty four shillings nine pence yearly
in the name of a Tithe, as was afterward awarded by Sir Henry Yelverton, upon
a reference made unto him, that one Rawlins, who paid forty shillings yearly to
his Landlord in the name of a Rent, and twelve pound by the name of a fine,
should from thenceforth pay his Tithe to the Incumbent of the Parish in which
he dwelt, after the rate of fourteen pound yearly.

This and the like Arbitrements about that time gave them some hope of finding
more relief from the Court of Exchequer than they could expect from the Lord
Mayor; who being at the first made Judge in the business for the ease of the
Clergy, carried himself rather like a party concerned in it than an equal
Umpire. But there was no contending with the Purse of the City; For though the
proceedings of the City Landlords were declared to be unjust and Sacrilegious
under the hands of many Bishops, and most of the Heads of Houses in both
Universities, Anno 1620. yet the business going on from bad to worse, they were
necessitated to cast themselves at the feet of King Charles, and to petition
for a remedy of these growing mischiefs, which otherwise in some tract of time
might become insupportable. Which Petition being taken into consideration by
his Sacred Majesty, he was graciously pleased to refer the same to the Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury, the Lord Keeper Coventry, the Earl Marshal, the Lord
Bishop of London, the Lord Cottington, Mr. Secretary Windebank, and Chief
Justice Richardson, or any five, or three of them, of which the Lord Archbishop
to be always one, requiring, and thereby authorizing to call before them all
parties concerned in the business, and after a full hearing and examination
thereof, to end if they could, or otherwise to report to his Majesty where the
Impediment lay, that so his Majesty might take such further order therein as in
his Princely wisdom he should think most meet. Which reference, being made the
fifteenth of May of this present year, was carried on with such equality, and
moderation, that the rich Landlords had no reason to complain of any obliquity
or partiality in the conduct of it: But having been accustomed to ^eed on the
Churches Bread, and to have the poor Clergy obnoxious them, they could with no
patience entertain the thoughts of relinquishing their former diet, or suffer a
deserving Clergy to enjoy their own. Nothing more feared, than that the Clergy
by this means would grow too rich; They who conceived two thousand pound of
yearly Rent not enough for an Alderman, think one hundred pound per annum (as
was affirmed by one of that number) to be too much for a Minister. And should
the Clergy once grow rich they would become more absolute, and independent, not
so obsequious to them as they had been formerly, and consequently more apt to
cross them in their opposition or neglect of established Orders. And in this
state the business stood when Iuxon the Bishop of London was advanced to the
Treasurers Staff in the end of March 1635. which much encreast the hopes of the
one, and the fears the other. Some of the Clergy had the hap to better their
condition, and improve their Benefices by the appearing of so many powerful
persons in their behalf; and possible enough it is that some expedient would
have been resolved on by the Refer^ees to the general content of both parties
(his Grace of Canterbury being very sollicitous in behalf of the Clergy) if the
troubles which brake out soon after in Sc^tland, and the preparations for the
War, which ensued upon it, had not put the business to a stand, and persuaded
both the King and Council to an improfitable compliance with that stubborn
City, from which he reapt nothing in conclusion but neglect and scorn. So
frequently have the best designs been overthrown, not so much by the puissance
and might of the adverse party, as through defect of Constancy and Resolution
to go through with them.

Mention was made in the Narrative of our Archbishops late proceeding against
the Congregations of the French and Dutch, of somewhat which was done in order
to it, in the Metropolitical Visitation of the Province of Canterbury.
Concerning which we are to know, that in the beginning of the year 1634. he
resolved upon that Visitation. And having some distrust of Brent his Vicar
General, he pr^pared one of his Confidents to be a joint Commissioner with him,
that he might do no hurt, if he did no good. But afterward, being more assured
of Brent than before he was, he resolved to trust him with himself, and not to
fetter him with any such constant Overseer to attend his actings. The Articles
for his Visitation, Printed for the use of Churchwardens and Sides-men in their
several Parishes, had little in them more than ordinary. But he had given
directions to his Vicar General to enquire into the observation of his
Majesty's Instructions of the year 1629. to command the said Churchwardens to
place the Communion Table under the Eastern Wall of the Chancel, where formerly
the Altar stood; to set a decent Rail before it to avoid profaneness; and at
the Rail the Communicants to receive the blessed Sacrament. It had been
signified to the Archbishop, that a Dog in one place or other (but I remember
not the name) had run away with the Bread appointed for the holy Communion; and
that the Communion Wine had been brought unto the Table in many places, in
Pint-pots and Bottles, and so distributed to the people. The placing of a Rail
before the Table would prevent all infamies of the first sort, and he hoped the
Ministers would take order to reform abuses of the last. Williams, at that time
Bishop of Lincoln, had placed the Table of his own Chapel in the state of an
Altar, and ^urnis^ed it with Plate and other costly Utensils, beyond most
others in the Kingdom. The Table stood in the same posture in the Cathedral
Church of Lincoln, of which he was both Bishop and Residentiary; and in the
Collegiate Church of Westminster, whereof he was Dean. The Chancel of St.
Martins Church in the Town of Leicester had been made a Library, Cant. Doom, p.
92.
which he when he was in his good humors persuaded the people to remove, to
trim and prepare the said Choire with Railes and such other Ornaments as were
fitting for it, and then to place therein their Communion Table, all whicn they
accordingly performed. But understanding of the Order of the third of November,
made by his Majesty and the Lords of his Council in the Case of St. Gregory's,
he untwisteth all this Line again. For a Certificate being presented to him by
the Vicar, Churchwardens, and some others of the Parish, That the place where
the Table stood before, was far more fit, by reason of the more capacity to
receive the Communicants, and the more audibleness of the Ministers voice, and
the Proximity of it to the place where Morning and Evening Prayer had been
appointed to be read, than the Chancel was; he gave them leave to remove the
Communion Table to the place where it formerly stood, especially at such times
as they received the Communion. All which by his Letters of the nineteenth of
December 1633. he signifies to Burden, one of Lambs Surrogates in the
Archdeaconry of Leicester, requiring him not to be troublesome or molestfull to
the said parties in any thing concerning the Premises. Which Letter Burden
sends to Lamb, and Lamb communicates to his Grace of Canterbury; who thereupon
resolves to make that Diocese the Scene of his first Visitation.

The Diocese of Lincoln was anciently larger than it is, the Bishopric of Ely
being taken out of it in the Reign of King Henry the First, Anno 1109. and
those of Oxon. and Peterborough by King Henry the Eighth, Anno 1541. But as it
is, it is the largest of the Kingdom, both for the quantity of ground, and the
number of Parishes, containing in it the whole Counties of Lincoln, Leicester,
Buckingham, Bedford, Huntington, and that part of Hertfordshire which belonged
to the Kingdom of Mercia. In which Counties are contained 1255 Parishes divided
(though not equally) between six Archdeacons, that is to say, the Archdeacons
of Lincoln, How, Leicester, Buckingham, Bedford, and Huntingdon; each of them
having his several Commissaries, and every Commissary one or more Surrogates,
to officiate under him in times of necessary absence. Within this great Diocese
he begins, first laying a Suspension on the Bishop and the six Archdeacons, by
which they were inhibited from the exercise of their Jurisdiction, as long as
that Visitation lasted. And after sending out a Citation to all the Ministers
and Churchwardens of that Diocese, he required them to appear at certain times
and places before his Vicar General and the rest of the Commissioners
authorized for the several Archdeaconries of the same. But the Bishop was too
stout to yield at the first assault, pretending an exemption from such
Visitations by old Papal Bulls. The Archbishop being herewith startled, was
not long after very well satisfied in that particular, by a Paper which was
tendered to him, asserting his Metropolitan Right against those Pretenses,
collected out of Histories and old Records. Which being compared with the
Originals, and found to contain nothing but undoubted truths, the Bishop is
commanded to appear before the Lords of the Council, where his Papal Bulls were
so well baited by the Archbishop and his Counsel, that not being able to hold
any long play, they ran out of the Field, leaving the Bishop to shift for
himself as well as he could. This Bar removed, the Vicar General proceeds to
the Visitation, and in all places gives command to the Churchwardens, not only
to return their Presentiments, according to the Articles of the Visitation; but
to transpose the Communion Table to the East end of the Chancel, and to ^ence
it with a decent Rail, to avoid profaneness, according unto such Directions as
he had received from the Lord Archbishop. He further signified, That they were
to take especial care of certifying the names of all the Lecturers in their
several and respective Parishes; as also, Whether the said Lecturers, and all
other Preaching Ministers within that Diocese, did carefully observe his
Majesty's Instructions published in the year 1629. Their knowledge in which
Particulars, with a Certificate of their doings about the removing of the
Communion Table, together with their Presentiments to the several Articles which
were given them in charge, to be returned unto him by a time appointed. Which
Charge thus given, and the Visitation carried to another Diocese, he leaves the
prosecution of it (as afterward in all other places) to the care of the
Bishop. But the Bishop having other designs of his own, was no sooner
discharged of that Suspension which was laid upon him, but he resolves to visit
his Diocese in person, to show himself to those of his Clergy, and gain the
good affections of those especially who adhered to Calvin and Geneva: Insomuch
that meeting in the Archdeaconry of Buckingham, with one Doctor Bret, a very
grave and reverend man, but one who was supposed to incline that way, he
embraced him in his Episcopal Arms with these words of St. Augustine, viz.
Quamvis Episcopus major est Presbytero, Augustinus tamen minor est Hieronymo:
Intimating thereby, to the great commendation of his modesty amongst those of
that Faction, That the said Bret was as much greater than Williams, as the
Bishop was above a Priest. And in compliance with that Party, he gave command
for Railing in the Communion Table (as appears by the Extract of his
Proceedings in the Archdeaconry of Leicester) not placed at the East end of the
Chancel, with a Rail before it: but in the middle thereof, as it stood before,
with a Rail about it. And by that kind of half-compliance, as he retracted
nothing from his own Opinion, in his Letter to the Vicar of Grantham; so he
conceived, That he had finely frustrated the design of his Metropolitan, and
yet not openly proceeded against his Injunction.

The Visitation thus begun, 1635.
was carried on from year to year, till it had gone over all the Diocesses in
the Province of Canterbury. In the prosecution whereof, the Vicar General
having given the Charge, and allowed time to the Churchwardens to return a
Certificate of their doings in pursuance of it, the further execution of it was
left to the Bishops in their several Diocesses; in which it went forwards more
or less, as the Bishops were of spirit and affection to advance the Work,
either in reference to the transposing of the Table, or the observation of his
Majesty's Instructions abovementioned, which had not the least place in the
business of this Visitation. Wright Bishop of Coventry and Litchfield having
given order by his Chancellor for the transposing of the Tables in most parts
of his Diocese, began at last to cast his eyes on the Churches of the Holy
Trinity and St. Michael the Archangel in the City of Coventry; concerning which
he prescribed these Orders: 1. That the Ground at the upper end of the
Chancells be handsomely raised by three steps, that the Celebration of the
Sacrament may be conspicuous to all the Church. 2. That the Ground so raised at
both Churches, the Communion Table should be removed close to the East-wall of
the Chancels. 3. That in both Churches all new Additions of Seats in the
Chancels be taken away, and the P^ws there reduced as near as may be to the
ancient form. But the Citizens of Coventry found a way to take off his edge,
notwithstanding that he had received not only his Majesty's Command, but
encouragements also in pursuance of it (his Majesty spending at the least a
fortnight in that Diocese, in the year 1636. at such time as the Bishop came to
wait upon him in Tutbury Castle): For they so far prevailed upon him at his
being in Coventry, that in the presence of the Mayor and some others of the
Fraternity, he appointed, That the Communion Table should be removed from its
ascent of three Steps, unto the Body of the Chancel, during the Administration
of the Blessed Sacrament, commanding Bird, who had the Officiality of the
place, not to trouble them in it. Bird not being well pleased with so much
levity in the Bishop, gives notice of it unto Latham the Bishops Register in
Lichfield, by whom it was signified to Lamb, by Lamb to the Archbishop, and by
him to the King; from whom it is to be supposed that the Bishop could receive
small thanks for his disobedience. In Essex the business met with a greater
difficulty. Aylet Official there under the Chancellor of London, had caused
many of the Communion Tables within the verge of his Jurisdiction to be
transposed and railed in, and the People to come up and kneel and receive at
the Rail. Opposed at first in some of the greater Towns, because they found it
otherwise in the Churches of London, whose example they conceived might be a
sufficient warrant for them in that particular: But much more were they moved
to stand out against him, upon sight of one of the Articles for the
Metropolitical Visitation, by which they conceived that they had leave to
remove their Table at the time of Celebration, and place it as it might be most
convenient for the Parishioners to come about it and receive the Sacrament.
Aylet complains of this to Lamb, finding himself thereby under an imputation of
crossing the Article delivered by his Graces Visitors, and following after his
own Inventions, without any Authority. For remedy whereof, and to save all that
he had done from returning back again to the same estate in which he found it,
he desires to know his Graces Pleasure and Lambs Directions. More constantly,
and with better fortune, is the business carried on by Pierce in his Diocese of
Bath and Wells. No sooner had his Majesty signified his Pleasure in the Case of
St. Gregory's, but he issues out a Commission to some of his Clergy, to
inquire into the State of all the Parish Churches within that Diocese; and on
the return of their Account, gives Order for the rectifying of such things as
they found amiss, especially in the posture of the Holy Table. And that it
might be seen, that his Commands were not only countenanced by Power, but
backed by Reason, he prepares certain Motives and Considerations to persuade
Conformity; as, viz. 1. That it was Ordered by the Queens Injunctions, That the
Communion Table should stand where the Altar did. 2. That there should be some
difference between the placing of the Lords Table in the Church, and the
placing of a Man's Table in his House. 3. That it was not fit the People should
sit above Gods Table, or be above the Priest when he Consecrateth. 4. That when
the Communion Table stands thus, the Chancel would be the fairer, and so there
would be more room for the Communicants. 5. That the Table standing thus, the
face of the Minister would be better seen, and his voice more audibly and
distinctly heard, than if it stood upon a Level in the midst of the Chancel.
And 6. That it was expedient that the Daughters should be like their Mother,
and that the Parochial Churches should conform themselves in that particular to
their own Cathedrals. But that which seemed to be the most popular Argument to
persuade Obedience, was the avoiding of those Prophanations which formerly the
Holy Table had been subject to; For should it be permitted to stand as before
it did, Churchwardens would keep their Accounts on it, Parishioners would
dispatch the Parish business at it, Schoolmasters will teach their Boys to
Write upon it, The Boys will lay their Hats, Sachels, and Books upon it, Many
will sit and lean irreverently against it in Sermon time, The Dogs would piss
upon it and defile it, and Glasiers would knock it full of Nail-holes. By which
means he prevailed so far, that of 469 Parishes which were in that Diocese, 140
had conformed to his Order in it, before the end of the Christmas Holydays in
this present year, Anno 1635. without any great reluctance in Priest or People.
The first strong Opposition which he found in the business, came from a great
and populous Parish called Beckington, where Hewish Incumbent of the place, was
willing of himself to have obeyed his Directions in it: but the Churchwardens
of the Parish were determined otherwise. For this being sent for by the Bishop,
he gave them Order by word of mouth, to remove the Table to the East end of the
Chancel, and to place a decent Rail before it: Which they refusing to perform,
were cited to appear in the Bishops Court, before Duck the Chancellor of that
Diocese, on the ninth of June, by whom they were commanded to remove such Seats
as were above the Communion Table, to obey the Bishops former Directions, and
to return a Certificate of all that they had done therein by the sixth of
October then next following: and for default thereof, were on the same day
Excommunicated by the Bishop in person. But the Churchwardens being rich,
well-backed, and disaffected to the Service, appealed from their Diocesan to
the Dean of the Arches; at whose request, upon some hope given of their
Conformity, they were absolved for a Month, and admonished to submit to that
which had been enjoined them. Continuing in their obstinacy, he Excommunicates
them again, and they again appeal to the Dean of the Arches; where finding ^o
Relief, they presented a Petition to the Archbishop, with no less than a
hundred hands unto it, and afterward to the King himself, but with like
success. Pierce had done nothing in that case, but what he had been warranted
to do by their Authority, and therefore was by their Authority to be
countenanced in it. There is an ancient Privilege belonging to the Church of
England, That he who stands obstinately Excommunicated for forty days, upon
Certificate thereof into the Court of Chancery, shall be attached with a Writ
De excommunicato capiendo, directed to the Sheriff, for his Apprehension; by
him to be committed to Prison without Bail or Mainprise (as our Lawyers call
it) till he conf^rm himself, and seek Absolution. By virtue of this Writ these
obstinate persons were laid up in the Common Gaol, after they had remained
Excommunicate above a twelvemonth; which shows with how great patience they had
been forborne. And then at last, perceiving what ill counsel they had followed,
and into what perplexities they had cast themselves, they made their submission
to their Bishop, by whom they were enjoined to do Penance for their Contempt,
and obstinate standing out against the Sentence of the Court, in a form
prescribed: The Penance to be done in the great Church of Bath, their own
Parish Church at Beckington, and in the Parish Church of Frome-Selwood the next
Market Town adjoining to it; and thereupon the Parties to be Absolved. Which
Opposition thus suppressed, prepared the People in most other places of that
Diocese for a more ready conformity, than otherwise the Diocesan might have
found amongst them: So true is that of the Historian, That the Resistancies of
the Subject being once suppressed, add strength to that Authority which they
sought to crush. How he behaved himself in reference to his Majesty's
Instructions, we shall see hereafter, when he is brought upon the stage on that
occasion; and we shall see hereafter also, how much or how little was done in
order to the purpose of this Visitation, by the rest of the Bishops.

Nor was there only care taken for rectifying such things as were found amiss
in Parochial Churches: but to inquire also into the State and Actions of the
Mother Cathedrals, by which all other Churches which depended on them, were to
be regulated and directed. And they found work enough in many of them;
especially in those W^erein there was a want of Statutes for the Common
Government. There are in England twenty six Cathedral or Episcopal Sees, of
which thirteen are reckoned of the old foundation, and the other moiety of the
new; those of the old foundation such as anciently had been founded in Secular
Canons, as they still continue. Of which sort are the Churches of S. Paul in
London, together with those of Chichester, Salisbury, Wells, Exeter, Lincoln,
Lichfield, Hereford, and the four Welsh Bishoprics, in the Province of
Canterbury, and none but the Metropolitical See of York in the other Province,
all of which had their ancient Statutes, and required no alteration in them
except Hereford only. Those of the new foundation (as they commonly called
them) were such as had been founded on Monastic Orders, which being dissolved
by King Henry the Eighth, he founded them a new in a Dean and Chapter of
Secular Priests, of which sort were the Churches of Canterbury, Winchester,
Ely, Worcester, Rochester, Norwich, and the four new Bishoprics by him founded
in the Abbeys of Oxon. Peterborough, Gloucester, and Bristol, together with
those of Durham, Carlisle, and Chester, (this last of his foundation also) in
the other Province. For each of which Churches there was made a draught of
Statutes, but never perfected or confirmed; and therefore either kept or broken
at the Deans discretion, as it conduced most to his advantage from time to
time; which proved the unavoydable occasion of many differences between the
Deans and Prebendaries of those several Churches; the Deans affecting an
arbitrary and absolute Government, and the Prebends looking on themselves as
Brethren, not as Subjects to him. The perfecting of these Statutes to serve as
a standing Rule to both for the times succeeding, took up much of his thoughts,
and certainly he had effected it for all those Churches in convenient time, if
the disturbances which happened in Scotland first, and in England afterward, had
not diverted and disabled him from that performance.

He began first with Canterbury his own Cathedral, Cant. Doom, p. 79.
where he found the Table placed at the East end of the Choire by the Dean and
Chapter, and Adoration used toward it by their appointment; as was attested
upon Oath by Dr. Blechinden, one of the Prebends of that Church at the time of
his Trial. Which having found in so good order, he recommended to them the
providing of Candlesticks, Basins, Carpet, and other Furniture for the adorning
of the Altar, and the more solemn celebrating of the blessed Sacrament. And
that these things might be perpetual to succeeding Ages, he composed a new body
of Statutes for the Government of that Cathedral, which was sent thither under
the Great Seal, with his own hand subscribed to every leaf. In which there was
this Statute amongst the rest, (which the Deans, Prebends, and Officers there
were bound by Oath to observe) That at their coming in and going out of the
Choire, Summ^ R^verentia ad^rare D^um versus Al^t^r^*
and all approaches to the Altar, they should by bowing toward it, make due
reverence to Almighty God. The like he did at Winton also, in this present
year, where he required them by Brent his Vicar General, to provide four C^pes,
to rail in the Communion Table and place it Altarwise, to bow toward it, and
daily to read the Epistles and Gospels at it; the said Epistles and Gospels to
be read by none but such as were in holy Orders, contrary to the late practice
of that Church, where the said Office was performed by their lay Vicars at the
will and pleasure of the Dean. To bind them to it for the present, certain
Injunctions were left with them by Brent under the Seal of his Office. And that
they might not fall again to their old confusions, a Book of Statutes was
composed also to the use of that Church, for the rectifying of such disorders
as had grown therein under the Government of Abbot, Morton, and Young the
present Dean thereof a Scot by Nation, and one that never rightly understood
the Constitution of the Church of England. The like Injunctions given by Brent
to the Church of Chichester, to provide Copes by one a year for Gods public
Service, till they were sufficiently furnished with them; with the like
Adorations toward the Communion Table, as before at Winchester. The Statutes of
Hereford being imperfect, he caused to be cast in a new mold, and sent them
thither under the Broad Seal for their future Reglement to be there sworn to
and observed. In which it was required, First, That every Residentiary should
officiate twice every year under the pain of paying forty shillings to be laid
out on Ornaments of the Church. (...) p. 8^.
Secondly, That they should officiate on Sundaies and Holidaies in their Copes.
Thirdly, That they should stand up at the Creeds and Gospel, and Doxologies,
and to bow so often as the name of Jesus was mentioned, and that no man should
be covered in the Church. Fourthly, That every one should bow toward the Altar.
Fifthly, That the Prayer before their Sermons should be made according to the 55
Canon, which as it shows to what disorders they were grown in point of
practice, and how they had deviated from the Rules of the Church; so may it
serve to verify that old Observation, Ex malis maritus ^onae na^cuntur leges.
Adag.
That many times corrupt Manners and evil Customs do beget good Laws. At
Worcester Manwaring, who succeeded Iuxon in that Deanery, prevented Brent, and
acted many things of himself without any Injunction; For having erected a fair
Table of Marble, standing on four well-fashioned Columns, he covered the Wall
behind the same with Hangings of Azure-coloured Stuff, having a white silk Lace
upon every Seam, and furnished it with Palls and Fronts, as he had observed in
his Majesty's and some Bishops Chapels; and ordered the Kings Scholars, being
forty in number, who formerly used to throng tumultuously into the Choire, to
go in Rank, by two and two, and make their due obeisances at their coming in.
Such Copes as belonged anciently to that Church, which had been lent many times
unto common Actors, or otherwise Sacrilegiously profaned, he caused to be
burned, the Silver extracted out, and laid up in the Treasury, toward the
buying of new ones, as more money ^^me in.

In many other Churches the Deans and Prebends had been contented to put that
money into their Purses, which might better have been expended on some public
Ornaments. And that he might proceed to a Reformation on the better grounds, he
took order to be furnished with a just account of their present condition, what
Vestments, and Utensils they had, and what they wanted. From Lincoln it was
certified, I^id. p. 81.
That the Communion Table was not very decent, and the Rail before it worse;
that the Organs were old and naught, and that the Copes and Vestments were
imbezeled, and none remained. From Norwich, That the Hangings of the Choires
were old, and the Copes fair, but wanted mending. From Gloucester, That there
wanted Copes, and that many things were grown amiss since he left that Deanery.
From Lichfield, That the Furniture of the Altar was very mean, care therefore
to be taken in it for more costly Ornaments. The like account from other
places, which drew on by degrees such Reformation in Cathedral Churches that
they recovered once again their ancient splendor, and served for an example to
the Parish Churches which related to them. Nor did the Archbishop stand alone
in point of judgment as to these particulars. He had therein the testimony and
assent of two such Bishops then which there could be none more averse from
Popery, or any thing that tended to it. A difference happening between the
Minister and Churchwardens in a Parish of Wilts, about the placing of the
Table, which the Minister desired to transpose to the end of the Chancell, and
the Churchwardens to keep it as it stood before, the business was referred to
Davenant, then Bishop of Salisbury, who on a full consideration of the matter,
declared in favor of the Incumbent, and by a Decree under his Episcopal Seal
settled the Table in the place where the Altar stood, as the Minister desired
to have it. In which Decree there are these two passages to be observed; Archb.
Sp* June 16. 1637.
First, That by the Injunction of Queen Elizabeth, and by Canon 32 under King
James, the Communion-Tables should ordinarily be set and stand with the side to
the East Wall of the Chancel. And secondly, That it is ignorance to think that
the standing of the holy Table in that place does relish of Popery. This for
the placing of the Table. And then as for the bowing and adoring toward it, we
have this Authority from the Pen of Morton, then Bishop of Durham, in a Book by
him written of the Romish Sacrifice. The like difference (says he) may be
discerned between their manner of Reverence in bowing toward the Altar for
adoration of the Eucharist only, and ours in bowing as well when there is no
Eucharist on the Table as when there is, which is not to the Table of the Lord,
but to the Lord of the Table, to testify the Communion of all the faithful
Communicants therewith, even as the people of God did in adoring him before the
Arc his footstool, Psalm 99. And here we also may observe, that though
Davenant made not his Decree till the seventeenth of May 1637. when the
business of the Table had been settled in most parts of the Kingdom, yet
Mortons book came out this year, Anno 1635. at the first breaking out of those
oppositions which were made against it.

Yet did not the Archbishop think he had done sufficiently if he should leave
the case to be ruled only by Injunctions and Decrees, unless he added vigor to
them by his own example. When he was Bishop of S. David's, he built a new
Chapel to his House of Aberguilly, and furnished both the Chapel and the
Altar in it with Hangings, Palls, Fronts, Plate, and other Utensils, to a very
great value. According unto which beginning he continued till the end of his
Race. When he came first to Lambeth-house, where he found the Chapel lie so
nastily, Cant. Doom, p. 462.
(as his own words are) the Windows so defaced, and all things in it so
disordered, that he was much ashamed to see it, and could not resort unto it
without disdain; the Images in the Windows being broken in many places, and
most deformedly patcht up with ordinary Glass, he caused to be repaired, and
beautified according to their former Figure, his Glasiers Bill amounting to no
less than 148 li. 7 s. 6 d. With like care, but with far less Charges, he
repaired the ruined Windows in the Chapel of his house in Croyden, where he
spent the greatest part of his Summers, and whither he retired at other times
for his ease and privacy. And as for the Communion Table, which he found
standing in the middle of the Chapel, a very sorry one in it self, he ordered
it to be removed to some other Room, p. 66.
and caused a new one to be made, placed where the Altar sometimes stood,
shadowed over-head with a very fair Frieze, and fenced with a decent and costly
Rail, the guilding of the one, and the curious workmanship of the other,
together with the Table it self, amounting to 33 pounds, and upwards; Copes,
Altar-cloaths, Plate, and other necessaries which belonged to the adorning of
it he had been Master of before in his other Chapels, and therefore was it the
less charge in completing this. He put himself to some cost also in repairing
and beautifying the Organs, which he found very much out of tune, and made
great use of them in the celebrating of Divine Service on Sundaies and
Holidaies, when his leisure could permit him to be present at it; some
Gentlemen of his Majesty's Chapel assisting many times to make up the Consort
when the solemnity required it. According unto which example of their Lord, and
Chancellor, the principal Colleges in Oxon. beautified their Chapels,
transposed their Tables, fenced them with Railes, and furnished them with
Hangings, Palls, Plate, and all other necessaries. Yet neither his own Example,
nor the Authority of the said two Bishops, nor practice of the Deans and
Chapters in so many Churches, or the Governors of those principal Colleges,
so stopped the mouths of diverse railing Rabshakehs of the Puritan Faction, as not
to spit their venom and reproaches on them. Witness for all, that scurrilous
passage of H. B. in his seditious Sermon, p. 163.
called, For God and the King; How then (says he) will our new Masters, our
Innovators, make good the bringing in of these things afresh into Cathedrals,
and forcing all petty Churches to conform thereunto? Would the Prelates thus
make the Mother Cathedrals (thus by themselves made and adopted Romes
daughters) their Concubines, whereon to beget a new bastard Generation of
sacrificing, idolatrous, Mass-Priests throughout the Land, which our good Laws,
and all our learned and pious Divines have proclaimed illegitimate? So he. More
of this foul stuff might be found elsewhere, but that I hate the raking in such
dirty puddles.

The business of the Table going on in so good a way, that of the Declaration
about Lawful Sports seemed to be at a stand. Such Ministers as had readily
obeyed the Mandates, and published the several Orders of the secular Judges in
their several Churches, did obstinately refuse the publishing of this
Declaration, when required to do it by their Bishops; and that they might not
be thought to stand out against them without some good ground, they alleged
some reasons for themselves, which when they came to be examined, had no reason
in them. First, they alleged, That there was no express order in the
Declaration, that the Minister of the Parish should be pressed to the publishing
of it. But then withal they should consider, that the Bishops were commanded
to take order for the publishing of it in their several Parishes; and whom
could they require to publish it in the Parish Churches but the Ministers only?
Bound to them by an Oath of Canonical obedience at their admission to their
Cures. So that the Bishops did no more than they were commanded in laying the
publication of this Declaration on the back of the Ministers; and the Ministers
by doing less than they were commanded infringed the Oath which they had taken,
rendering themselves thereby obnoxious to all such Ecclesiastical Censures as
the Bishops should inflict upon them. It was alleged secondly, That the
publishing of this Declaration was a work more proper for the Constable or
Tything-man, or the Churchwardens at the least, than it was for the Ministers:
But then it was to be considered, that the Constable or Tything-man were
Lay-officers merely, bound by the Law to execute the Warrants of the Judges and
Justices, but not the Mandates of the Bishops, so far from being Proper
Instruments in such a business, that none of the Judges thought it fit to
command their Service in publishing their Orders against Ales and Revels. And
though the Churchwardens had some relation to Church Matters, and consequently
to the Bishop in the way of Presentiments; yet was he not bound to execute any
such Commands, because not tied by an Oath of Canonical obedience, as the
Ministers were. Or were it otherwise, yet does it happen many times in Country
Villages, that the Churchwardens cannot read, and therefore not to be employed
in publishing such Declarations, which require a more knowing man than a silly
Villager. And last of all it was alleged, that the Ministers of all others
were most unfit to hold the Candle for lighting and letting in such a course of
licenciousness, as was indulged on the Lords day, by the said Declaration. But
then it was to have been proved, that any of the Sports allowed of in it, might
have been brought within the compass of such Licentiousness, which neither the
Word of God, nor the Canons of the Christian Church, nor any Statutes of the
Realm had before forbidden. Or had it been as they pretended, that the Command
was contrary to the Law of God, and could not be obeyed with a sa^e conscience;
yet this was only a preten^^, their reading of the Book being no more an
argument of their approbation of any thing therein contained, than when a
common Crier reads a Proclamation, the Contents whereof perhaps he likes not.

The Business being at this stand, it was thought fit that the Bishops should
first deal with the Refusers in a Fatherly and gentle way, but adding menaces
sometimes to their persuasions if they saw cause for it; and that in the mean
season some discourses should be writ and published to bring them to a right
understanding of the truth, and their several duties: which burden being held
of too great weight for any one to undergo, and the necessity of the work
requiring a quick dispatch, it was held fit to divide the employment betwixt
two. The Argumentative and Scholasticall part referred to the right learned Dr.
White, then Bishop of Ely, who had given good proof of his ability in Polemical
matters in several Books and Disputations against the Papists. The Practical
and Historical, by Heylyn of Westminster, who had gained some reputation for
his Studies in the ancient Writers by Asserting the History of S. George,
maliciously impugned by those of the Calvinian Party upon all occasions. Both
of them, being enjoined their tasks, were required to be ready for the Press
against Michaelmas Term; at the end whereof both books came out, The Bishops
under the Title of A Treatise of the Sabbath day, containing a defense of the
Orthodoxal Doctrine of the Church of England against Sabbatarian Novelty, The
other called, The History of the Sabbath, was divided into two Books or Parts;
The first whereof began with the Creation of the World, and carried on the
Story till the destruction of the Temple; The second, beginning with our
Savior Christ and his Apostles, was drawn down to the year 1633. when the
publishing of this Declaration was required. But going different ways to work
they did not both encounter the like success. The Bishops Book had not been
extant very long, when an Answer was returned unto it by Byfield of Surrey,
which Answer occasioned a Reply, and that Reply begat a Rejoinder. To Heylyns
Book there was no Answer made at all, whether because unanswerable, or not
worth the Answering, is to me unknown. And though it is not to be doubted, but
that the Arguments of the one, and the Authorities of the other, prevailed with
some to lay aside their former obstinacy and averseness; yet did there still
remain too many, who stopped their ears, like the deaf Adder in the Psalmist,
and would not hear the voice of the Charmers, charmed they never so sweetly. By
which it did appear too plainly, That there was some Association had and made
amongst them, to stand it out to the last, and put some baffle or affront upon
their Superiors, by whose Command the reading of the Book was imposed upon
them. And thereupon it was resolved, That the Bishops in their several
Diocesses should go to work more roundly with them, and either bring them to
Conformity, if it might be done; or otherwise, to proceed against them by
Ecclesiastical Censures.

But whilst these things were acting on the Stage of England, the Bishops of
Scotland were as active in drawing of a Book of Canons, and framing a Public
Liturgy for the use of that Church. Both Undertakings warranted by the Act of
a General Assembly held at Aberdeen, Anno 1616. and the one brought to a good
forwardness before the death of King James: But being discontinued by the
Accidents and Debates before-remembred, it pleased his Majesty at the last to
yield unto the importunity of the Scottish Bishops, in having a Liturgy of
their own, differing in some things from that of the Church of England, to show
the independency and self-subsistence of their Kirk; but agreeing with it in
the main, to testify the Conformity between the Churches: Which being thus
condescended to, they were ordered to proceed with all speed and diligence,
which they did accordingly. But the Canons being the shorter work, were first
brought to an end; for the compiling whereof, his Majesty gives these Reasons
in his large Declaration. First, That he held it but exceeding necessary, that
there should be some Book extant to contain the Rules of the Ecclesiastical
Government; so that as well the Clergy as the Laity might have one certain
standing Rule, to regulate the Power of the one, the Obedience and Practice of
the other. Secondly, That the Acts of General Assemblies were Written only, and
not Printed; and therefore could not come to the knowledge of many: So large
and voluminous, that it was not easy to Transcribe them, insomuch that few of
the Presbyters themselves could tell which of them were authentical, which not:
So unsafely and uncertainly kept, that they knew not where to address
themselves for consulting with them: That by reducing those numerous Act, (and
those not known unto themselves) to such a paucity of Canons, published and
exposed to the public view, no man should be ensnared by ignorance, or have
just reason to complain of their multiplicity. And finally, That not one in all
that Kingdom did either live under the Obedience of the Acts of those General
Assemblies, or did know what they were, or where to find them. Upon which
grounds, the Book of Canons being drawn up and presented to him, he gave a
Warrant under his Hand to the Archbishop of Canterbury, requiring him, together
with the Bishop of London, to peruse the same, to see that they were well
fitted to the Church Government, and as near as conveniently might be to the
Canons of the Church o^ England; giving them, and either of them full power to
alter any thing in the said Canons, as they found most fitting. Which being
done as he commanded, and the Book made ready for the Press, he passed his
Royal Confirmation of it, under the Great Seal o^ the Kingdom, in this manner
following.

CHARLES REX.

WE (...) of Our Royal Care for the Maintenance of the present Estate and
Government of the Church of Scotland, have diligently and with great content
considered all the Canons and Constitutions after following; and finding the
same such as We are persuaded will be profitable, not only to our whole Clergy,
but to the whole Church of that our Kingdom, if so they be well observed, Have
for Us, Our Heirs, and Lawful Successors, of Our especial Grace, certain
Knowled^^* and mere ^otion, given, and by these presents do give Our (...)
Ass^^t unto all the said Canons, Orders and Constitutions, (...) all and every
thing in them contained, as they are afterward set (...).

And further, We do not only by Our Prerogative Royal, and Supreme (...) in
Causes Ecclesiastical, Ratify and Confirm by these Our Letters Pat^nts the
said Canons, Orders and Constitutions, and all and every thing in them
contained: But likewise We command by (...) ^uthority Royal, and by these
Letters Patents, the same to be diligently observed and executed by all Our
Loving Subjects of that Our Kingdom, both within the Province of St. Andrews
and ^lascow; in all points wherein they do or may concern every or any of them,
according to this Our Will and Pleasure hereby expressed and declared. And for
the better observation of them, We straightly Charge and Command all Our
Archbishops, Bishops, and all others tha^ exercise any Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction within that Our Realm, to see the same Canons, Orders and
Constitutions to be in all points duly observed; not sparing to execute the
Penalties in them severally mentioned, upon any that shall willingly break or
neglect to observe the same, as they tender the Honor of God, the Peace of the
Church, the Tranquillity of the Kingdom, and their Service and Duty to Us their
King and Sovereign.

Given at Our Manor of Greenwich, 23 May 1635.

These Canons when they came abroad, were presently quarrelled and disclaimed
by the Scottish Presbyters: Quarrelled in reference to the subject matter
comprehended in them: Disclaimed, because imposed upon them without their own
approbation and consent. The points most quarrelled at, were these. 1. That
whosoever should affirm, That the Kings Majesty had not the same Authority in
Causes Ecclesiastical, that the Godly Kings had among the Jews, or the
Christian Emperors in the Primitive Church; or impugn in any part his Royal
Supremacy in Causes Ecclesiastical, was to incur the Censure of
Excommunication. 2. The like Censure to be inflicted on those who should
affirm, That the Worship contained in the Book of Common Prayer, and
Administration of the Sacraments (though at the making of these Canons there
was no such Book of Common Prayer recommended to them); or, That the Government
of the Church by Archbishops and Bishops, or the form of Making and
Consecrating Archbishops and Bishops, etc. did contain any thing repugnant to
the Scriptures, or was corrupt, superstitious, or unlawful in the Service and
Worship of God. 3. That the Ordinations were restrained to four times in the
year; that is, the first Weeks of March, June, September, and December. 4. That
every Ecclesiastical Person at his Admission should take the Oath of Supremacy,
according to the form required by Parliament; and the like Oath for avoiding
Symonie, required in the Book of Consecration. 5. That every Presbyter shall
either by himself, or by another Person lawfully called, read or cause Divine
Service to be done, according to the form of the Book of that Common Prayer,
before all Sermons; and that he should Officiate by the said Book of Common
Prayer, in all the Offices, Parts and Rubricks of it (when as yet none of them
had seen the said Book or Liturgy). 6. That no Preacher should impugn the
Doctrine delivered by another in the same Church, or any near adjoining to it,
without leave from the Bishop; which they conceived to be the way to pin their
whole Religion on the Bishops Sleeves 7. That no Presbyter should hereafter
become Surety or Cautioner for any Person whosoever, in Civil Bonds and
Contracts, under pain of Suspension. 8. That whatsoever remained of the Bread
and Wine prepared for the Communion, should be distributed to the poorer sort
which receive that day, to be eaten and drunken of them before they go out of
the Church. 9. That Presbyters are enjoined to Minister the Sacrament of
Baptism in private Houses, and upon every day alike, in case of infirmity; and
that the People were required not to receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper
but upon their knees. 10. That in all Sentences of Separation a Thoro and
Mensa, there shall be a Caution inserted (and given accordingly) That the
Persons so separated should live continently and chastely, and not contract
Marriage with any Person, during each others life (which seemed to put the
innocent Party into as bad a condition as the guilty, contrary to the Judgment
of the Reformed Churches). 11. That no private Meeting be kept by Presbyters,
or any other Persons whatsoever, for expounding Scripture, or for consulting
upon matters Ecclesiastical: Such matters to be handled only in the Lawful
Synods held by Bishops. 12. That under pain of Excommunication, no Presbyter or
Layman, jointly or severally, make Rules, Orders, or Constitutions in Causes
Ecclesiastical; or to add or detract from any Rubricks or Articles, or other
things now established, without the Authority of the King or his Successors.
13. That National or General Assemblies were to be called only by the Kings
Authority; That the Decrees thereof should bind as well the Absent as the
Present in Matters Ecclesiastical; and, That it should not be lawful for the
Bishops themselves, in such Assemblies, or otherwise, to alter any Articles,
Rubric, Canon Doctrinal or Disciplinary whatsoever, without his Majesty's
leave first had and obtained. 14. That no man should cover his Head in time of
Divine Service, except with a Cap or Night-coife in case of infirmity; and that
all Persons should reverently kneel when the Confession and other Prayers were
read, and should stand up at the saying of the Creed. 15. That no Presbyter or
Reader be permitted to conceive Prayers ex tempo^e, or use any other form in
the Public Liturgy or Service, than is prescribed, under the pain of
Deprivation from his Benefice or Cure. 16. That by this Prohibition the
Presbyters seemed to be d^barred from using their own Prayers before their
Sermons, by reason that in c. 3. number. 13. it is required, That all Presbyters
and Preachers should move the People to join with them in Prayer, using some
few and convenient words, and should always conclude with the Lords Prayer (
which in effect was to bind them to the form of bidding Prayer, prescribed in
the 55 th. Canon of the Church of England). 17. That no man should Teach either
in Public School or Private House, but such as shall be allowed by the
Archbishop of the Province, or Bishop of the Diocese, under their Hand and
Seal; and those to License none but such as were of good Religion, and obedient
to the Orders of the Church. 18. That none should be admitted to read in any
College or School, except they take first the Oath of Allegiance and
Supremacy. 19. That nothing ^e hereafter Imprinted, except the same be seen and
allowed by the Visitors appointed to that purpose; the Penalty thereof (as in
all like Cases in which no Penalty is expressed) being left to the discretion
of the Bishops. 20. That no Public Fast should be appointed upon Sundays (as
had been formerly accustomed) but on the Weekdays only; and them to be
appointed by none but His Majesty. 21. That for the Ministering of the Sacrament
of Baptism, a Font should be prepared, and placed somewhat near the entry of
the Church, as anciently it used to be, with a Cloth of fine Linen, which
shall likewise be kept all neatly. 22. That a comely and decent Table for
Celebrating the Holy Communion should be provided, and placed at the upper end
of the Chancel or Church, to be covered at the times of Divine Service with a
Carpet of decent Stuff, and at the time of Ministration with a white Linen
Cloth; And that Basins, Cups, or Chalices of some pure Metal shall be provided,
to be set upon the Communion Table, and reserved to that only use. 23. That
such Bishops and Presbyters as shall depart this life, having no Children,
shall leave their Goods or a great part of them to the Church and Holy Uses;
and that notwithstanding their having Children, they should leave some
Testimony of their love to the Church and advancement of Religion. 24. That no
Sentence of Excommunication should be pronounced, or Absolution given by any
Presbyter, without the leave and approbation of the Bishop: And no Presbyter
should reveal or make known what had been opened to him in Confession, at any
time, or to any Person whatsoever, except the Crime be such as by the Laws of
the Realm his own Life may be called in question for concealing the same. 25.
And finally, That no Person should be received into Holy Orders, nor suffered
to Preach, Catechize, Minister the Sacraments, or any other Ecclesiastical
Function, unless he first subscribe to be obedient to these present Canons,
Ratified and Approved by his Majesty's Royal Warrant, and Ordained to be
observed by the Clergy, and all others whom they concern.

These were the matters chiefly quarrelled in this Book of Canons, visibly
tending (as they would make the World believe) to subject that Kirk unto the
Power of the King; the Clergy to the command of their Bishops; the whole
Nation, to the Discipline of a Foreign Church; and all together by degrees, to
the Idolatries and Tyrannies of the Pope of Rome. But juster cause they seemed
to have for disclaiming the said Book of Canons, because not made nor imposed
upon them by their own approbation and consent, contrary to the usage of the
Church in all Times and Ages. Had his Majesty imposed these Orders on them by
the name of Injunctions, according to the example of King Henry viii. Anno
1536. of King Edward vi. Anno 1547. and of Queen Elizabeth, Anno 1559. he might
perhaps have justified himself by that Supremacy which had been vested in him
by the Laws of that Kingdom; which seems to have been the Judgment of King
James in this very case. At his last being in Scotland, Anno 1617. he had
prepared an Article to be passed in Parliament to this effect, ^
viz. That whatsoever his Majesty should determine in the External Government
of the Church, with the advice of the Archbishop, Bishops, and a competent
number of the Ministry, should have the strength of a Law. But understanding
that a Protestation was prepared against it by some of the most Rigid
Presbyterians, he commanded Hay the Clerk or Register, to pass by that Article,
as a thing no way necessary; 533.
the Prerogative of his Crown giving him more Authority than was declared or
desired by it. But as for Canons and Constitutions Ecclesiastical, if they
concerned the whole Church, they were to be advised and framed by Bishops, and
other Learned men, assembled in a General Council, and testified by the
Subscription of such Bishops as were then assembled. Or if they did relate only
unto National Churches, or particular Provinces, they were to be concluded and
agreed upon by the Bishops and Clergy; that is to say, so many of the Clergy as
are chosen and empowered by all the rest for that end and purpose, assembled in
a National or Provincial Synod. No Canons nor Constitutions Ecclesiastical to
be otherwise made; or if made otherwise, not to bind, without a voluntary and
free submission of all Parties to them. And though it could not be denied, but
that all Christian Emperors, Kings, and Princes reserved a Power unto
themselves of Ratifying and Confirming all such Constitutions as by the Bishops
and Clergy were agreed on; yet still the said Canons and Constitutions were
first agreed on by the Bishops and Clergy, before they were tendered to the
Sovereign Prince for his Ratification. The Scottish Presbyters had formerly
disclaimed the Kings Authority either in calling their Assemblies, or
confirming the Results and Acts thereof; which they conceived to be good and
valid of themselves without any additional power of his to add strength unto
them. And therefore now they must needs think themselves reduced to a very
great vassalage in having a body of Canons so imposed upon them, to the making
whereof they were never called, and to the passing whereof they had never
voted. But as they had broke the Rules of the Primitive Church in acting
Sovereignty of themselves without requiring the Kings approbation and consent
in the times foregoing; so were they now upon the point of having those old
Rules broken on them by the King, in making Canons, and putting Laws and Orders
on them for their future Government, to which they never had consented. And
therefore though his Majesty had taken so much care (as himself observed) for
facilitating and conveniencing their obedience, Bi^l. Regi^^ p. 1^0.
by furthering their knowledge in those points which before they knew not; yet
they did generally behold it, and exclaimed against it, as one of the most
grievous burdens that ever had been laid upon them.

More clamor, but on weaker grounds, was made against the Book of Common
Prayer when it first came out, which was not till the year 1637. and then we
shall hear further of it. Mean while we will return to England, and see what
our Archbishop does, as a chief Counselor and Statesman in his Civil Actings.
It was about four or five years since, Anno 1631, that he first discovered how
ill his Majesty's Treasury had been managed between some principal Officers of
his Revenue, to the enriching of themselves, to the impoverishing of their
Master, and the no small amazement of all good Subjects. But the abuses being
too great to be long concealed, his Majesty is made acquainted with all
particulars, who thereupon did much estrange his countenance from the principal
of them.

For which good service to the King none was so much suspected by them as the
Archbishop of Canterbury, against whom they began to practice, endeavoring all
they could to remove him from his Majesty's ear, or at the least to lessen the
esteem and reputation which his fidelity and upright dealing had procured of
him. Factions are heightened in the Court. Private ends followed to the
prejudice of Public Service, and every mouth talked openly against his
proceedings. But still he kept his ground, and prevailed at last, appointed by
his Majesty on the fifth of February 1634. to be one of the great Committee for
Trade and the Kings Revenue; and seeing Wes^ons Glories set under a cloud,
within few weeks after, Weston being dead, it pleased his Majesty to commit the
managing of the Treasury by Letters Patents under the Broad Seal, bearing date
on the fourteenth day of March, to the Lord Archbishop, Cottington Chancellor
of the Exchequer, Cook and Windebank, principal Secretaries, and certain
others; who with no small envy looked upon him as if he had been set over them
for a Supervisor. Within two days after his being nominated for this
Commission, his Majesty brought him also into the Foreign Committee, which
rendered him as considerable abroad as he was at home. This as it added to his
power, so it increased the stomach which was borne against him. The year 1635.
was but new began, when clashing began to grow between him and Cottington about
executing the Commission for the Treasury. And that his grief and trouble might
be the greater, his old Friend Windebank, who had received his preferment from
him, forsook him in the open field, and joined himself with Cottington and the
rest of that Party. This could not choose but put him to the exercise of a great
deal of Patience, considering how necessary a friend he had lost, in whose
bosom he had lodged a great part of his Counsels, and on whose Activity he
relied for the carrying on of his designs at the Council Table. But for all
this ^e carries on (...) Comm^^^ion the whole year about, acquaints himself
with the Mysteries and secrets of it, the honest advantages which the Lord
Treasurers had for enriching themselves (to the value of seven t^ousand pound a
year and upwards, as I have heard from his own mouth) without defrauding the
King, or abusing the Subject. He had observed, that diverse Treasurers of late
years had raised themselves from very mean and private Fortunes to the Titles
and Estates o^ Earls, which he conceived could not be done without wrong to
both; and therefore he resolves to commend such a man to his Majesty for the
next Lord Treasurer, who having no Family to raise- no Wife and Children to
provide for, might better manage the Incomes of the Treasury to the Kings
advantage than they had been formerly. And who more like to come into his eye
for that preferment than Iuxon, his old and trusty Friend, then Bishop of
London; a man of such a well tempered disposition as gave exceeding great
content both to Prince and People, and one whom he knew capable of as much
instruction as by a whole years experience in the Commission for the Treasury
he was able to give him.

It was much wondered at, when first the Staff was put into this man's hand; in
doing whereof the Archbishop was generally conceived neither to have consulted
his own present peace, nor his future safety. Had he studied his own present
peace, he should have given Cottington leave to put in for it, who being
Chancellor of the Exchequer pretended himself to be the next in that Ascendent,
the Lord Treasurers Associate while he lived, and the presumptive heir to that
office after his decease. And had he studied his own safety and preservation
for the times to come, he might have made use of the power by recommending the
Staff to the Earls of Bedford, Hartford, Essex, the Lord Say, or some such man
of Popular Nobility; by whom he might have been reciprocated by their strength
and interess with the People in the change of times. But he preferred his
Majesty's Advantages before his particular concernments, the safety of the
Public before his own. Nor did he want some seasonable considerations in it
for the good of the Church. The peace and quiet of the Church depended much on
the conformity of the City of London, and London did as much depend in their
trade and payments upon the Love and Justice of the Lord Treasurer of England.
This therefore was the more likely way to conform the Citizens to the
directions of their Bishop, and the whole Kingdom unto them; No small
encouragement being thereby given to the London Clergy for the improving of
their Tithes. For with what confidence could any of the old Cheats adventure on
a public Examination in the Court of Exchequer (the proper Court for suits and
grievances of that nature) when a Lord Bishop of London sat therein as the
principal Judge? Upon th^se Counsels he proceeds, and obtains the Staff, which
was delivered to the Bishop of London on Sunday March 6. sworn on the same day
Privy Counselor, and on the first of the next Term conducted in great state
from London House to Westminster Hall, the Archbishop of Canterbury riding by
him, and most of the Lords and Bishops about the Town, with many Gentlemen of
chief note and quality, following by two and two to make up the Pomp. It was
much feared by some, and hoped by others, that the new Treasurer would have
sunk under the burden of that place, as Williams did under the custody of the
Seal: but he deceived them both in that expectation, carrying himself with such
an even and steady hand, that every one applauded, but none envied his
preferment to it; insomuch as the then Lord Faulkland, in a bitter Speech
against the Bishops about the beginning of the Long Parliament, could not choose
but give him this fair Testimony, viz. That in an unexpected place and power
he expressed an equal moderation and humility, being neither ambitious before,
nor proud after, either of the Crozier or White Staff.

The Queen about these times began to grow into a greater preval^n^y over his
Majesty's Affections than formerly she had made show of: But being too wise to
make any open alteration of the conduct of a^^airs, she thought it best to take
the Archbishop into such of her Counsels as might by him be carried on to her
contentment, and with no dishonor to himself, of which he gives this
intimation in the Breviate p. 19.
on the thirtieth of August 1634. viz. That the Queen sent for him to Oatlands,
and gave him thanks for a business which she had trusted him withal, promising
him to be his Friend, and that he should have immediate access to her when he
had occasion. This seconded with the like intimation, given us May 18. 1635. of
which he writes, that having brought his account to the Queen on May 18.
Whitsunday, the Court then at Greenwich, it was put of till the Sunday after,
at which time he presented it to her, and received from her an assurance of all
that was desired by him. Panzani's coming unto London in the Christmas
holydaies makes it not improbable that the facilitating of his safe and
favorable reception was the great business which the Queen had committed to
the Archbishops trust; and for his effecting of it with the King, had given him
those gracious promises of access unto her, which the Breviate spoke of. For
though Panzani was sent over from the Pope on no other pretense than to prevent
a Schism which was then like to be made between the Regulars and the Secular
Priests, to the great scandal of that Church; yet under that pretense were
muffled many other designs which were not fit to be discovered unto Vulgar
eyes. By many secret Artifices he works himself into the favor of Cottington,
Windebank, and other great men about the Court, and at last grew to such a
confidence, as to move this question to some Court-Bishops, viz. Whether his
Majesty would permit the residing of a Catholic Bishop of the English Nation
to be nominated by his Majesty, and not to exercise his Function but as his
Majesty should limit? Upon which Proposition, when those Bishops had made this
Quaere to him, Whether the Pope would allow of such a Bishop of his Majesty's
nominating as held the Oath of Allegiance lawful, and should permit the taking
of it by the Catholic Subjects, he puts it off by pleading that he had no
Commission to declare therein one way or other. And thereupon he found some way
to move the King for the permission of an Agent from the Pope to be addressed
to the Queen for the concernments of her Religion; which the King, with the
Advice and Consent of his Council, condescended to, upon condition that the
Party sent should be no Priest. This possibly might be the sum of that account
which the Archbishop tendered to the Queen at Greenwich on the Whitsontide after
Panzani's coming, which as it seems was only to make way for Con (of whom more
hereafter) though for the better color of doing somewhat else that might bring
him hither, he composed the Rupture between the Seculars and the Regulars
abovementioned.

I cannot tell whether I have hit right or not upon these particulars: But sure
I am, that he resolved to serve the Queen no further in her desires than might
consist both with the honor and safety of the Church of England; which as it
was his greatest charge, so did he lay out the chief parts of his cares and
thoughts upon it. And yet he was not so unmindful of the Foreign Churches, as
not to do them all good offices when it came in his way, especially when the
Doctrine or Discipline of the Church of England was not concerned in the same.
For in the year 1634. having received Letters from the Queen of Bohemia (with
whom he held a constant course of Correspondence) about the furtherance of a
Collection for the exiled Ministers of the Palatinate; he moved the King so
effectually in it, that his Majesty granted his Letters Patents for the said
Collection to be made in all parts of the Kingdom; which Letters Patents being
sealed and brought unto him for his further Direction in prosecution of the
same, he found a passage in it which gave him no small cause of offense, and
was this that follows; viz. Whose cases are the more to be deplored, for that
this extremity is fallen upon them for their sincerity and constancy in the
true Religion which we together with them professed, and which we are all bound
in conscience to maintain to the utmost of our powers; ^
whereas these Religious and Godly persons being involved amongst other their
Countrymen might have enjoyed their Estates and Fortunes, if with other
backsliders in the times of Trial they would have submitted themselves to the
Antichristian Yoke, and have renounced or dissembled the Profession of the true
Religion. Upon the reading of which passage he observed two things: First, That
the Religion of the Palatine Churches was declared to be the same with ours.
And secondly, That the Doctrine and Government of the Church of Rome is called
an Antichristian Yoke; neither of which could be approved of in the same terms
in which they were presented to him. For first he was not to be told, that by
the Religion of those Churches all the Calvinian Rigors in the point of
Predestination and the rest depending thereupon were received as Orthodox; that
they maintain a Parity of Ministers directly contrary both to the Doctrine and
Government of the Church of England; and that Pareus, Profes^or of Divinity in
the University of Heydelberg, (who was not to be thought to have delivered his
own sense only in that point) ascribes a power to inferior Magistrates to curb
the power, control the persons, and resist the Authority of Sovereign
Princes, for which his Comment on the Romans had been publicly burnt by the
appointment of King James, as before is said. Which as it plainly proves, that
the Religion of those Churches is not altogether the same with that of ours, so
he conceived it very unsafe that his Majesty should declare under the Great
Seal of England, that both himself and all his Subjects were bound in
conscience to maintain the Religion of those Churches with their utmost power.
And as unto the other point he looked upon it as a great Controversy, not only
between some Protestant Divines and the Church of Rome, but between the
Protestant Divines themselves, p. 540.
hitherto not determined in any Council, nor positively defined by the Church
of England; and therefore he conceived it as unsafe as the other, that such a
doubtful controversy, as that of the Popes being Antichrist, should be
determined Positively by Letters Patents under the Great Seal of England, of
which there was great difference even amongst the Learned, and not resolved on
in the Schools. With these objections against that passage he acquaints his
Majesty, who thereupon gave order that the said Letters Patents should be
cancelled, and new ones to be drawn, in which that clause should be corrected
or expunged; and that being done, the said Letters Patents to be new sealed,
and the said Collection to proceed according to the Archbishops first desires
and proposition made in that behalf.

But before this Collection was finished, and the money returned, Charles
Lodowick, Prince Elector Palatine, eldest surviving Son of the Queen of
Bohemia, comes into England to bestow a visit on his Uncle, and to desire his
aid and counsel for the recovery of the Electoral Dignity and Estate which did
of right belong unto him. On the twenty second of November this present year
1635. he comes to Whitehall, graciously welcomed by the King, who assigned him
for his quarters in the Court, the Lodgings properly belonging to the Prince
his Son, where he continued whilst he made his abode in England, except such
times as he attended his Majesty in his Summers Progress. Knowing how forward
the Archbishop had expressed himself in doing all ready Services for the Queen
his Mother, and the good offices which he had done for her sake to the
distressed Ministers of his Dominions, on the 30 day of the same Month he crossed
over to Lambeth, and was present with the Archbishop at the Evening Prayer then
very solemnly performed; and upon that day fortnight came unexpectedly upon
him, and did him the honor to dine with him. And that he might the better
endear himself to the English Nation by showing his conformity and approbation
of the Rites and Ceremonies here by Law established, he did not only diligently
frequent the Morning and Evening Service in his Majesty's Closet, but upon
Christmas day received the Communion also in the Chapel Royal of Whitehall.
For whose accommodation, at the receiving of it, there was a Stool placed
within the Traverse, on the left hand of his Majesty, on which he sat while
the Remainder of the Anthem was sung, and at the Reading of the Epistle, with a
lower Stool and a Velvet Cushion to kneel upon both in the preparatory Prayers,
and the Act of Receiving, which he most reverently performed to the great
content of all beholders. During his being in the Court he published two Books
in Print by the advice of the King and Council, not only to declare his Wrongs,
but assert his Rights. The first he called by the name of a PROTESTATION,
against all the unlawful and violent proceedings and actions against him and
his Electoral Family. The second, called the MANIFEST, concerning the right of
his Succession in the Lands, Dignities, and Honors, of which his Father had
been unjustly dispossessed by the Emperor Ferdinand the Second. After which
Preparatory writings, which served to no other effect than to justify his own
and the Kings proceedings in the eye of the world, he was put upon a course for
being furnished both with men and money to try his fortune in the Wars, in
which he wanted not the best assistance which the Archbishop could afford him
by his Power and Counsels. But as he labored to advance his interess in the
recovery of his Patrimony and Estates in Germany, so he no less labored to
preserve the Interess of the Church of England against all dangers and
disturbances which might come from thence. And therefore when some busy heads,
at the time of the Princes being here, had published the Book entitled, A
Declaration of the Faith and Ceremonies of the Palsgraves Churches; A course
was took to call it in, for the same cause, and on the same prudential grounds
on which the Letters Patents before mentioned, had been stopped and altered. The
Prince was welcome, but the Book might better have stayed at home, brought
hither in Dutch, and here translated into English, Printed, and exposed to the
public view, to let the vulgar Reader see how much we wanted of the Purity and
simplicity of the Palatine Churches.

1636.
But we must now look back on some former Counsels in bringing such refractory
Ministers to a just conformity in publishing his Majesty's Declaration about
lawful Sports, as neither arguments and persuasions could p^eva^l upon. And
that the Suffragan Bishops might receive the more countenance in it, the
Archbishop means not to look on, but to act somewhat in his own Diocese which
might be exempla^y to the rest, some troublesome persons there were in it, who
publicly opposed all established orders, neither conforming to his Majesty's
Instructions, nor the Canons of the Church, nor the Rubricks in the public
Liturgy. (...), p. 149.
Culmer and Player, two men of the same a^^^ctions, and such as had declared
their inconformity in ^ormer times, were pressed unto the publishing of this
Declaration; Brent acting in it as Commissary to the Bishop of the Diocese,
(not Vicar General to the Archbishop) of the Province of Canterbury. On their
refusal so to do, they were called into the Consistory and by him suspended.
Petitioning the Archbishop for a release from that suspension, they were
answered by him, That if they knew not how to obey, he knew as little how to
grant. He understood them to be men of Factious spirits, and was resolved to
bring them to a better temper, or else to keep them from disturbing the public
peace. And they resolving on the other side, not to yield obedience, continued
under this suspension till the coming in of the Scottish Army, not long before
the beginning of the Long Parliament, Anno 1640. which wanted little of four
years before they could get to be released* Wilson, another of the same Crew,
was suspended about the same time also, and afterward severely sentenced in
the High Commission, the profits of his Living sequestered, (as the others were)
and liberal assignments made out of it for supplying the Cure. In which
condition he remained for the space of four years, and was then released on a
motion made by Dering in the House of Commons, at the very opening, in manner,
of the Long Parliament; that being the occasion which was taken by them to
bring the Archbishop on the Stage, as they after did. p. 4.
And though he suspended, or gave order rather for suspending of no more than
these; yet being they were leading-men, and the chief sticklers of the Faction
in all his Diocese, it made as much noise as the great Persecution did in
Norfolk and Suffolk. By one of which first County we are told in general, That
being promoted to this dignity, he thought he was now Plenipotentiary enough,
and in full capacity to domineer as he listed, and to let his professed enemies
feel the dint of his Spirit, but more particularly, that he caused the Book of
Sports to be published, for no other reason, than to gall and vex those Godly
Divines, whose Consciences would not vail to so much impiety, as to promote the
Work; and finally, That thereupon many of the most sound and orthodox Belief,
were compelled to desert their Stations, and abandon their Livings, in which
their livelihood consisted, rather than to submit unto it. And here I had took
my leave of Kent, but that I must first pass through the Diocese of Rochester,
(c. 151.)
where I find one Snelling to have been both Suspended and Excommunicated on
the same account (some other Inconformities (as not bowing at the Name of
JESUS) being taken into the Reckoning) by Wood then Chancellor of that Diocese
under Bishop Bowls, and afterward Sentenced to a Deprivation on the ninth of
February 1637.

But as for that great Persecution in Norfolk and Suffolk (greater, if Burton
were to be believed, than any which happened to the Church in Queen Mary's Days)
we shall hear it thus Preached up in that seditious Sermon of his, H. B. p. 65.
which he was pleased to entitle For God and the King; in which he tells us,
That in those Counties they had made the greatest havoc of good Ministers (and
their Flocks now left des^late and exposed to the Wolves, as Sheep without
their Shepherd) as our eyes had ever seen; That there were already threescore
Ministers in that one Diocese Suspended, and between three and fourscore more
had time given them till Christs-tide, by which time they must either bid their
good Consciences farewell, or else their precious Ministry, and therewith their
necessary Means: And finally, That in all Queen Mary's Time there was not so
great a havoc made (in so short a time) of the faithful Ministers of God, in
any part of, yea, in the whole Land. Wren had not long before succeeded Corbet
in the Sea of Norwich; a man who very well understood his Work, and resolved to
do it: but finding himself more deeply galled with these Reproaches, than he
had deserved, he caused his Registers to be searched, and the Acts of his Court
to be examined, out of which we may take this short Account of his Proceedings;
that is to say, 1. That the Clergy of that Diocese, comprehending all that are
in Spiritual Dignity or Office, and all Parsons, Vicars, Curates, and
Schoolmasters (taking in the Lecturers withal) amount unto the number of 1500,
or thereabouts. 2. That there were not above thirty of all sorts involved in
any Ecclesiastical Censure of what kind soever, and not above sixteen
Suspended. 3. That of those sixteen, eight were then Absolved, for a time of
further trial to be taken of them, and two did voluntarily resign their Places;
so that there were but six Suspended absolutely, and persisting so. 4. That of
the Residue, one was deprived, after notorious Inconformity for twelve years
together, and final Obstinacy after several Admonitions; eight Excommunicated
for not appearing at the Court, and four inhibited from Preaching; of which
four, one by Trade had been a Draper, another a Weaver, and a third a Tailor.
5. That for the other number between sixty and eighty, which were Suspended
upon day till Christmas, upon the Examination of the Register there appear but
eight, and those not all Suspended neither, two being Excommunicated for not
appearing in the Court. And 6. Taking it for granted, That sixty of all sorts
had been Suspended, as it was suggested in the Libel; yet sixty in so great a
number, comes to no more than four in one hundred, which would not have been
looked upon as a Persecution in Queen Mar^es days, nor in a time of better
temper and more moderation than the Libeller deserved to live in. And yet the
Minister of Lincoln Diocese, in his Holy Table, must needs fly out against this
Bishop, comparing him unto a Wren mounted on the wings of an Eagle, and finding
by the Index to the Acts and Monuments, That the Bishop of Norwich sent out
Letters of Persecution.

And yet it was not thought sufficient to justify themselves in matter of
fact, unless they Advocated for themselves, and the King under whom they acted,
by strong Reasons also. And first, it was alleged in behalf of the King (who
had commanded the said Declaration to be published by Order from the Bishops,
in all the Churches of their several and respective Diocesses) That all the
Commands of the King, which are not upon the first inference and illation
contrary to a clear passage in the Word of God, or to an evident Sunbeam of
the Law of Nature, are precisely to be obeyed. 2. That it was not enough to
find a remote and possible Inconvenience that might ensue therefrom; for every
good Subject is bound in conscience to rest assured, That his Prince, environed
with such a Council, will be able to discover, and as ready to prevent any ill
sequel that may come of it, as himself possibly can be. And 3. That we must not
by disobeying our Prince, commit a certain Sin, in preventing a probable but
contingent Inconveniency. And then it was alleged in behalf of themselves,
That the Declaration was commanded to be published by Order from the Bishops in
the Parish Churches; That there were none on whom the Bishops could impose the
Publishing of it in the Churches of their several Diocesses, but the Ministers
only; which was a sufficient warrant for them to enjoin the Ministers to do it.
And lastly, That though no Penalty was prescribed in it to such as should
refuse to publish the same; yet that some Penalty was implied, or otherwise the
Command had been impertinent, and to no purpose and effect whatsoever. Finally,
it was alleged, in respect of those who were enjoined the publishing of it,
That there was nothing contained in the said Declaration, which was either
plainly contrary to the Word of God, or the Canons of the Church, or the Laws
of the Land, or the Practice of the Protestant or Reformed Churches in all
parts of the World; That if it should appear otherwise with some scrupulous
men, yet even those scrupulous men were bound to obey their Superiors, in
making publication of it ^
, for fear of dissolving by their disobedience the whole frame of Government;
That if it should be lawful for particular Persons first to dispute, and
afterward to disobey the Commands of those higher Powers, to which the Lord
had made them subject, the Subject would seem to be in a better condition, and
more absolutely at his own disposing, than the Sovereign was; That by the Laws
a Sheriff is bound to publish his Majesty's Proclamations, though tending to
the Apprehension of his dearest Friends, or otherwise containing matter of
dangerous consequence to the Public Interest; That a Presbyter or Minister
without any sin, may safely pronounce an Excommunication, legally delivered
unto him, though in his own private conscience he be convinced, that the Party
is unjustly excommunicated; That when the Jews commanded by Antiochus, gave up
the Divine Books to his Officers to be destroyed, it was afterward adjudged in
favor of them by Optatus Bishop of Milevis, a right godly man, to be Peccatum
i^ip^^antis and mi^antis; non populi, cum ^olore and t^emore secu^dan^^^.
Optat. lib. 7.
sin rather in them that commanded, than of those who with fear and sorrow did
obey their Mandates; That when the Emperor Mauritius had made an Edict, That
no Soldier should be admitted into any Monastery, and sent it to be published
by Gregory surnamed the Great, the Pope forthwith dispersed it into all parts
of the Christian World, Quia ^rat sa^^^ectas ^^us jussi^at^us. Gr^g. Ma^^. lib.
2. l. p. 61.
because he was subject to his command; though in his own judgment he conceived
the said Edict to be unlawful in it self, and prejudicial unto many particular
persons, as well in reference to their spiritual as their temporal benefit; and
finally, That it was resolved by St. Augustine, in his Book against Faustus the
Manichee, cap. 75. That a Christian Soldier fighting under a Heathen Prince,
may lawfully pursue the War, or exercise the Commands of his immediate or
Superior Officers, in the course of his Service, though he be not absolutely
assured in the justice of the one, or the expedience of the other. Such were
the Reasons urged in behalf of all Parties concerned in this business; and such
the Defenses which were made for some of them in matter of fact: but neither
the one nor the other could allay that storm which had been raised against him
by the Tongues and Pens of unquiet Persons; of which more anon.

Nor was the Clamor less which was raised against such of the Bishops as
either pressed the use of his Majesty's Instructions, concerning Lecturers, and
silencing the Arminian Controversies; or urged the Ministers of their several
and respective Diocesses, to use no other form of Prayer before their Sermons
than that which was prescribed Canon 55. It had been prudently observed, That
by su^fering such long Prayers as had accustomably been used of late before the
Sermons of most Preachers, the Public Liturgy of the Church had been much
neglected; That the Puritan Preachers for the most part had reduced all Gods
Service in a manner to those Pulpit-Prayers; That the People in many places had
forborne to go into the Church till the Public Liturgy was ended, and these
Prayers begun; That by this means such Preachers prayed both what they listed,
and how they listed; some so seditiously, that their very Prayers were turned
into Sin; others so ignorantly and impertinently, that they dishonored God and
disgraced Religion. For remedy whereof, it was thought convenient by the
Archbishop, and some other Prelates, to reduce all to the form of Prayers
appointed in the Canon abovementioned, according to the like form prescribed
in the Injunctions of Queen Elizabeth, and before her time by King Edward the
Sixth, and before his time also by King Henry the Eighth; practiced accordingly
in the times of their several Reigns, as appears by the Sermons of Bishop
Latimer, Bishop Gardener, Archbishop Parker, Bishop Jewel, Bishop Andrews, and
generally by all Divines of the Church of England, till by the artifices and
endeavors of the Puritan Faction, these long Prayers of their own making had
been taken up, to cry down the Liturgy. Which being in charge in the
Visitation, and afterward in the Articles of several Bishops, made as much
noise amongst ignorant and factious People, under color of quenching the
Spirit of God, expressed in such extemporary Prayers of the Preachers
conceiving, as silencing the Doctrines of Predestination, changing the
afternoons Sermons into Catechisings, and regulating the Extravagances of some
of their Lecturers, under the color of a Plot to suppress the Gospel.

In which last Calumny, as most of the Bishops had a share, so did it fall as
heavy on Pierce of Bath and Wells, as on any other, though he did nothing in
that kind, but what he was required to do by the Kings Instructions. His Crimes
were, That he had commanded the Ministers in his Diocese to turn their
afternoons Sermons into Catechisings, and those Catechisings to be made
according to the Questions and Answers in the Catechism authorized by Law, and
extant in the Book of Common Prayer; which some few absolutely refusing to
conform unto; and others (contrary to the meaning of the said Instructions)
taking some Catechism-point for their Text, and making long Sermons on the
same, were by him suspended, and so continued till they found a greater
readiness in themselves to obey their Ordinary. But the Great Rock of Offenses
against which they stumbled, and stumbling filled all places with their Cries
and Clamours, was, That he had suppressed the Lecturers in most parts of his
Diocese; and some report, That he proceeded so far in it as to make his brag
(not without giving great Thanks to God for his good Success) That he had not
left one Lecturer in all his Diocese, of what sort soever, whether he Lectured
for his Stipend, or by a voluntary combination of some Ministers amongst
themselves. Which if it should be true, (as I have some reason to believe it is
not) ought to be rather attributed to some exiliency of humane frailty (of
which we are all guilty more or less) than to be charged amongst his Sins. But
for his Actings in this kind, as also for his vigorous proceedings in the Case
of Beckington, he had as good Authority as the Instructions of the King, and
the Directions of his Metropolitan could invest him in. And so far Canterbury
justified him in the last particular, as to take the blame (if any thing were
blameworthy in it) upon himself, though then a Prisoner in the Tower, and
under as much danger as the Power and Malice of his Enemies could lay upon him:
For such was his undaunted Spirit, that when Ash a Member of the House of
Commons, demanded of him in the Tower, Whether the Bishop of Bath and Wells had
received his Directions from him in the Case of Beckington? he answered
roundly, That he had; and that the Bishop had done nothing in it, Cant. D^om,
p. 100.
but what became an obedient Diocesan to his Metropolitan. So careful was he of
preserving those who had acted under him, that he chose rather to augment the
number of his own misfortunes, then occasion theirs. If all the Bishops of that
time had joined their hearts and hands together, for carrying on the work of
Uniformity, as they were required, the Service might have gone more happily
forwards, and the Envy would have been the less by being divided: but leaving
the whole burden upon so few, and turning it over to their Chancellors and
Underofficers (if they did so much) they did not only, for as much as in them
was, destroy the business, but expose such as took care of it, to the public
hat^ed. For such was their desire to ingratiate themselves amongst the People,
that some of them being required to return the names of such Ministers as
refused the reading of the Book, made answer, That they would not turn
Informers against their Brethren, there being enough besides themselves to
perform that Office. Others conceived, that they had very well performed their
duty, and consulted their own peace and safety also, by waving all Proceedings
against them in their own Consistories, wherein they must appear as the
principal Agents, and turning them over to be censured by the High Commission,
where their Names might never come in question. The like done also in
transposing the Communion Table; in which it was believed by many, that they
had well complied with all expectations, if they did not hinder it, but left
the Ministers to proceed therein as best pleased themselves; or otherwise, to
fight it out with the Churchwardens, if occasion were.

And yet the fortune of the Church had not been so wretched, if none of that
Order had pulled down more with one hand, than many of the rest had built up
with both. The Metropolitical Visitation being held in the Diocese of Norwich,
Anno 1635. Order was given by Brent, as in other places, for Railing in the
Communion Table at the East end of the Chancel, and there to dispose of it
under the Eastern Wall, with the ends of it North and South. In order
whereunto, it was found necessary in many places to remove such Seats as had
been built in that end of the Chancel, for the use and ^ase of private Persons.
The Churchwardens of St. Mary Towers in the Borough of Ipswich, a Town of
great Wealth and Trade in the Country of Suffolk, refusing to remove such
Seats, and advance the Table in their rooms, were Excommunicated for their
obstinacy and contempt, by one of Brent's Surrogates for that Visitation. The
Churchwardens, animated by some of the Town, who had better Purses than
themselves, appeal unto the Dean of the Arches, and after exhibited a Bill in
the Star Chamber against the Surrogate: but without remedy from either. And on
these terms the business stood, when Wren succeeded Corbet in the Sea of
Norwich; and looking upon Ipswich as a place of great influence and example on
the rest of the Diocese, took up his dwelling in the same. It was not long
before he came to understand, that a great part of the opposition which was
made as well against himself, as the Vicar General, about the removing and
railing in of the Holy Table, proceeded from a Letter written from the Bishop
of Lincoln to the Vicar of Grantham; which though it was written some years
since, and had long been dead; yet now it was revived again, and the Copies of
it scattered in all parts of the Kingdom (the better to discourage or
discountenance the Work in hand): but no where more than in the Diocese of
Norwich, being next neighbor unto Lincoln, and under the inspection of a
diligent and active Prelate. Some of them coming to his Hand, and an
Advertisement withal, That they were ordinarily sold amongst the Booksellers
in Duck-lane in written Copies, it was thought fit that an answer should be
made unto it; in which the Sophistry, Mistakes, and Falsehoods of that Letter,
whosoever was the Writer of it, might be made apparent: Which Answer being made
ready, approved, and licenced, was published about the middle of May, under the
Title of A COAL from the ALTAR, or, An Answer to a Letter not long since
written to the Vicar of Grantham, against the placing of the Communion Table at
the East End of the Chancel, etc. As it cooled the heat of some, so it inflamed
the hearts of others, not with Zeal, but Anger; the Book occasioning much
variety of Discourse on both sides, as men stood variously affected in the
present Controversy: But long it will not be before we shall hear of a Reply
unto it, a Rejoinder unto that Reply, and other Writings pro and con, by the
Parties interessed.

But it had been to little purpose to settle a Conformity in Parochial
Churches, if Students in the Universities (the constant Seminaries of the
Church) were not trained up to a good persuasion of the Public Counsels: Upon
which ground it had been prudently Ordained in the Canons of the year 1603. not
only, That the prescribed Form of Common Prayer should be used in all Colleges
and Halls; but, That the Fellows and Scholars of the said Houses should wear
the Surplice at those Prayers on the Sundays and Holydays, the better to inure
them to it, when they came to any Public Ministry in their several Churches.
Many things had been done at Cambridge in some years last past, in order to the
Work in hand; as beautifying their Chapels, furnishing them with Organs,
advancing the Communion Table to the place of the Altar, adorning it with Plate
and other Utensils for the Holy Sacrament, desending it with a decent Rail from
all prophanations, and using lowly Reverence and Adorations, both in their
coming to those Chapels, and their going out: But in most Colleges, all
things stood as they had done formerly* in some there were no Chapels at all,
or at the best, some places used for Chapels, but never Consecrated. In Sidney
College the old Dormitory of the Franciscans (on the Site of which Friery the
said College was built) was after some years trimmed and fitted, and without
any formal Consecration converted to a House of Prayer; though formerly, in the
opinion of those who allowed thereof, it had been no better nor worse than a
Den of Thieves. The Chapel of Emanuel College, though built at the same time
with the rest of the House, was both irregular in the situation, and never
Consecrated for Divine and Religious uses. And what less could this beget in
the minds of the Students of those Houses, than an Opinion touching the
indifferency of such Consecrations, whether used, or not? and at the last a
positive Determination, That the continued Series of DIVINE DVTIES in a place
set apart to that purpose, does sufficiently Consecrate the same? And what can
follow thereupon in some tract of time, but the executing of all Divine Offices
in Private Houses, the Ruin and Decay of Churches, the selling of their
Materials, and alienating their Glebe and Tithes to the next fair Chapman? It
is therefore thought expedient to carry on the Visitation to that University,
and put such things in order there, as were found in this. But against this the
University opposed, pretending an exemption from his Jurisdiction, by their
ancient Privileges; and that they had no Visitor but his Majesty only. But
Canterbury, who before had overruled the like Plea in the Bishop of Lincoln,
would not give way to this of Cambridge, which caused the matter on both sides
to be thoroughly canvased: But neither yielding to the other, and the Earl of
Holland stickling strongly for the University (of which he had the Honor to be
chosen Chancellor on the death of the Duke) the deciding of the Controversy is
referred to his Majesty. On Tuesday June 21. they both appear before the King
at Hampton Court, where the Counsel of both sides being heard, it pleased his
Majesty to give Judgment for the Metropolitan, and to submit that University to
his Visitation: But before any thing was done in it, the Troubles in Scotland,
and the Disturbances at home, kept it off so long, that a greater Visitation
fell upon the Visitor, than could have happened unto them. Howsoever, the bare
reputation of it did prevail so far, that many who were slack or fearful in
embelishing their Chapels and public Places of Divine Worship, went on more
confidently then before; insomuch that not only in the Chapels of some private
Colleges, but in St. Mary's Church it self, being the Public Church of that
University, the Table was railed in like an Altar, toward which many of the
Doctors, Scholars, and others usually bowed.

In Oxon. where he was more absolute, he found less comptroll. Chancellor of
the University by their own Election, Visitor of the Colleges of All Souls and
Merton in the right of his See, and such a Patron to the rest, that he could
hardly recommend that Affair unto them, which they did not expedite. In many of
their Letters and Addresses to him, they gave him the Title of His Holiness,
and most Holy Father; which though appropriated to the Pope in the darker
Times, were generally communicated to all Christian Bishops in the clear
Sunshine of the Gospel. And on the other side, in his Missives and Dispatches
to them, he recommends himself unto their Devotions, beseeching them, That as
often as they made their approaches toward the Altar, they would remember him
in their Prayers ^
to Almighty God. He had his breeding (as before was said) in that University,
and could not choose but know, That many of the old Statutes were grown out of
use by the change of Religion; others, by long neglect and discontinuance; some
never rightly understood; and all so mingled and confounded, that it was very
hard to say which of them were in force, which not; and yet all Students bound
to keep them under corporal Oaths, if not at their first Matriculations, yet at
their taking of Degrees. For remedy whereof, with great pains and judgment, he
digested a new Body of Statutes, to serve as a perpetual standing Rule for
their future Government, as well in commanding as obeying: Which being first
sent down unto them, advisedly considered of, explained, corrected, and
accommodated to their best advantages, were afterward revised by him, and upon
full deliberation engrossed in Vellum, fairly bound up, confirmed by his most
Sacred Majesty, and so obtained the strength of Laws: Received and published
for such in the Convocation, on Wednesday June 22. being the morrow after the
Judgment had passed on his side at Hampton Court, for the Visitation at
Cambridge. And in those Statutes, he took care that the Vice Chancellor,
Proctors, and all Proceeders, year by year in their several Faculties, A^
s^c^am (...)am cum de^^ta ^e^e^en^ia o^lationis facia^^.
should make their Offerings with that due and accustomed Reverence at the Holy
Table. He procured also from his Majesty a Confirmation of their former
Privileges over the Town, and an enlargement of them also in respect of the
Londoners: By which last they were enabled to Print all Books, which either his
Majesty's Printers or the Company of Stationers had engrossed to themselves, as
Bibles, Common Prayer Books, Homilies, Grammars, etc. which brought them in a
Composition of 200 l. per Annum for the times ensuing. Nor could his Care and
Providence for the encouragement of Learning, be confined to this side of the
Sea, the like course being taken by him shortly after, as well for revising and
perfecting the broken Statutes of the College near Dublin, as the enlarging of
the Privileges of that University.

And yet he could not hold his hand, till he had added Bounty and Munificence
to his former Cares. The University of Oxon. was long since honored with the
Title of Generale Studium H^bralieae, Chald^^^ae, A^rabicae. ^^ae^ae, Linguae
Stud^^um propag^^dae. Vide^ ergo (...) Academiis (...) tuit^r, etc. (...)
Angel. (...), p 214.
, conferred upon none else in the former times, but the Universities of Paris
in France, Bononia in Italy, and Salamanca in Spain: In all which, by a Decree
of Pope Clement the Fifth, in the Council of Vienna in France, Anno 1511. it
was Ordained, That there should be Professors of the Hebrew, Greek, Arabic,
and Chaldean Languages: But it was only so Ordained, no execution following on
it till some Ages after. The Arabic Tongue was known in Spain, by reason of
the great Command which the Moors had in that Country: but never entertained in
any of the other three. And as for the Hebrew, Greek, and Chaldee, those times
were so extremely ignorant of them, that the Study of the Greek Tongue was
sufficient to condemn a man of Heresy; and a small spattering in the Hebrew,
made him subject unto some suspicion of Heretical Fancies. And so it stood till
Reuchlin and Budaeus in France, Erasmus and Paulus Fagius in England, restored
again the Greek and Hebrew to those several Nations. The Greek so coursly
entertained in this University, whilst Erasmus taught it quietly enough at
Cambridge, that when a Hist. of Ca^b^idg* ^ 88.
Learned young man began publicly to read the Greek Tongue there, he was
encountered presently in a poor but popular declamation, with base and barbarous
Revilings. But long it was not before Cardinal Wolsey took a course to put this
University into a way of Nobler Studies, founding therein two Public Lectures
for the Greek and Hebrew, with a liberal Salary (according to the Standard of
that time) of 40 l. per Annum to either of them; which afterward being
confirmed by King Henry viii. continued without further encouragement and
augmentation, till such time as Laud was come to his Ascendent; when by the
Power and Favor which he had with his Majesty, a Canonry in Christ-Church was
annexed perpetually to the Public Professor for the Hebrew, Doctor John Morris
being the first who enjoyed the benefit of that Grant: By means whereof, the
Hebrew and Chaldaick Tongues, which few in Oxon. understood when I first came
thither, became to be so generally embraced, and so cheerfully studied, that it
received a wonderful proficiency, and that too, in a shorter time than a man
can easily imagine: So great a Spur the hope of Honor and Preferments, gives
to Arts and Languages. But all this while, the Arabic was utterly laid aside
in these parts of Europe; till, in conformity to the said Decree of the Council
holden at Vienna, it came into our Archbishops mind to establish a Public
Lecture in that Language also; which having for a long time taken up his
thoughts, was at last effected: The first Lecture in that Language, read
publicly on the tenth of August in this present year; a Revenue of 40 l. per
Annum settled upon the University for the maintenance of it; his first
Professor in that Tongue being Edward Pocock, Fellow of Corpus Christi
College, one who had spent much time in the Factory of Aleppo, and other
places of the East, returning home well studied in all the Languages of those
Countries. And that Rhetoric might thrive as well under his Encouragements, as
Grammar and the Tongues were in a hopeful way to do, he obtained from his
Majesty another Canonry in Christ-Church, to be annexed for ever to the Orators
place, (whose yearly Pension till that time was but twenty Nobles.) Enjoyed
first by Dr. William Strode, admitted thereunto on the first of July, Anno
1638. and after his decease by Dr. Henry Hammond, Anno 1644.

Such were the benefits which the University received from him in this present
year. And that he might both do himself and the University some honor in the
eye of the Kingdom, he invites the King, the Queen, the Prince Elector, and his
Brother, to an Academical entertainment, on the twenty ninth day of August then
next following, being the Anniversary day, on which the Presidentship of St.
John's College was adjudged to him by King James. The time being come, and the
University put into a posture for that Royal visit, their Majesty's were first
received with an eloquent Speech as he passed by the house, being directly in
his way betwixt Woodstock and Christ-Church, not without great honor to the
College, that the Lord Archbishop, the Lord Treasurer, the Chancellor, the
Vice Chancellor, and one of the Proctors should be at that time of the same
foundation. At Christ-Church his Majesty was entertained with another Oration
by Strode, the University Orator; the University presenting his Majesty with a
fair and costly pair of Gloves (as their custom was) the Queen with a fair
English Bible, the Prince Elector with Hookers Books of Ecclesiastical Polity,
his Brother Rupert with Caesar's Commentaries in English, illustrated by the
learned Explanations and Discourses of Sir Clement Edmonds. His Majesty was
lodged in Christ-Church, in the great Hall whereof (one of the goodliest in the
World) he was entertained, together with the Queen, the two Princes, and the
rest of the Court, with an English Comedy, (but such as had more of the
Philosopher than the Poet in it) called, Passions Calmed, or the settling of
the Floating Islands. On the morrow morning, being Tuesday, he began with a
Sermon, preached before him in that Cathedral on these words of St. Luke, viz.
Blessed is the King that comes in the name of the Lord, peace in heaven, and
glory in the highest, Luke 19.38. The Sermon being ended, the Archbishop, as
Chancellor of the University, calls a Convocation, in which he admits the
Prince Elector, his Brother Prince Rupert, and many of the chief Nobility to
the degree of Masters of Art; and that being done, attends the King and Queen
to St. John's College. Where in the new Gallery of his own building, he
entertains the King and Queen, the two Princes, with all the Lords and Ladies
of the Court, at a stately and magnificent Dinner, the King and Queen sitting
at one Table at the South end of the Room; the two Princes, with the Lords and
Ladies, at a long Table, reaching almost from one end to the other; at which
all the Gallantry and beauties of the Kingdom seemed to meet. Nor did he make
Provision only for those two Tables, but every Office in the Court had their
several diets, disposed of in convenient places for their reception with great
variety of Achates, not only sufficient for contentment, but for admiration.
After dinner he entertains his principal Guests with a pleasant Comedy,
presented in the public Hall; and that being done, attends them back again to
Christ-Church, where they were feasted after Supper with another Comedy,
called, The Royal Slave; the Enterludes represented with as much variety of
Scenes and motions as the great wit of Inigo Jones (Surveyor General of his
Majesty's Works, and excellently well skilled in setting out a Court- Masque to
the best advantage) could extend unto. It was the day of St. Felix (as himself
observes) and all things went happily. On Wednesday the next morning the Court
removed, his Majesty going that same night to Winchester, and the Archbishop
the same day, entertaining all the Heads of Houses at a solemn Feast; order
being given at his departure, that the three Comedies should be acted again,
for the content and satisfaction of the University in the same manner as
before, but only with the Alteration of the Prologues and Epilogues.

But to return unto the public. On the same day in which the new Statutes were
received at Oxon. he procured a Supplement to be added to the old Statutes of
Cathedral and Collegiate Churches, touching the letting of their Lands. Some
Informations had been given, that the Deans and Prebends of those Churches had
enricht themselves, their Wives and Children by taking great Fines, for turning
leases of twenty one years into leases for lives, leaving their Successors
destitute of that growing means, which otherwise might come in to help them.
This was the outside of the business, but the chief motive to it was, that the
Gentry and Yeomanry (and some of the Nobility also) holding Lands of those
Churches, might have a greater respect to the Church and Churchmen, when they
must depend upon them from time to time for renewing of their said Estates at
the end of every ten or twelve years at the most. For though it be a like
lawful by the Law of the Land, 13 Eliz. c. 20. to make Leases of three lives,
or one and twenty years, at the pleasure of the Dean and Chapter; yet the
difference is so great between them, that once a Tenant to my knowledge, after
a Lease for three lives had continued 29 years in being, chose rather to give a
Fine for the change of one life than to take a new Lease of 21 years without
paying any thing. All which his Majesty taking into his Princely consideration,
Bibl. Regia, p. 268.
he caused Letters under his Royal Signature to be sent to all the Deans and
Chapters of this Kingdom respectively, Calling and commanding them upon pain of
his utmost displeasure, that they presumed not to let any Lease belonging to
their Church into lives, which was not in lives already; and further that when
any fair opportunity was offered (if any such be) they fail not to reduce such
as are in lives, into years; requiring further that those his Majesty's said
Letters should be exemplified in the Register-books of the said Churches, and
pre^erved in the Registries of the Bishops of their several Diocese, to the end
that the said Bishop might take notice of their doing therein, and give his
Majesty and his Successors notice thereof, if any presumed to disobey. And in
regard that some of the Deans of the said Cathedrals were a Corporation of
themselves, and held their Lands distinct from the rest of their Chapters; a
clause was added to those Letters to preserve those Lands for the benefit of
their Successors, as formerly in his Majesty's Instructions for ordering and
disposing the Lands of Bishops on the like occasions. His Majesty therefore
first declares, That he had taken order by his late Instructions, that no
Bishop should let any Lease after they had been named to a better Bishopric,
but had not therein named the Deans, as he therein intended. And therefore
secondly, that no Dean should presume from thenceforth, after his being named
to a Bishopric, or a better Deanery, to renew any Lease either into lives or
years: His Majesty having well observed, that at such times of remove many men
care not what or how they let their Estates, to the prejudice of the Church and
their Successors. Which Letters bear date at Greenwich in the twelfth year of
his Reign, June 27.

Nor was he less careful to preserve the Parochial Clergy from being oppressed
by their neighbors in rates and taxes than he had been in maintaining the
Estates of Capitular bodies, for the greater honor of those bodies at the
present time, and the benefit of Succession for the time to come. During the
Remiss Government of King James, his Majesty's late embroylments with France
and Spain, and his entanglements at home, the Hollanders had invaded the
Regality of the Narrow Seas, and questioned the property of his Dominion in the
same; not only growing to such an height of insolency, as to dispute their
striking Sail in passing by any of his Majesty's Ships: but publishing a
Discourse in Latin, called, Mare Liberum, in defense thereof. These affronts
occasioned Noy, the Attorney General, to put his Majesty in mind of setting
out a strong power of Ships for the recovery of his Rights against all
pretenders. And the better to enable him for it, advises him to set on foot
the old Naval Aid, required of the Subject by his Predecessors. He was a man
extremely well versed in old Records, with which consulting frequently in the
course of his studies, he had excerpted and laid by many notes and precedents
for the Kings levying of such Navil Aid upon the Subjects, by his own
Authority, whenever the preservation and safety of the Kingdom did require it
of them, which Notes and Precedents he had taken as they came in his way, in
small pieces of Paper (most of them no bigger than ones hand) he kept in the
Coffin of a Pie, which had been sent him by his Mother, and kept there till the
mouldiness and corruptibleness of it had perished many of his Papers. And by
these Notes it did appear, that many times in the same years, wherein the Kings
had received Subsidies by way of Parliament, they levied this Naval Aid by
their own sole power. For if (as he discoursed it to me at his house near
Brentford) the King wanted money, either to support his own expenses, or for
the enlarging of his Dominions in Foreign Conquests, or otherwise to advance
his honor in the eye of the World, good reason he should be beholden for it to
the love of his People. But if the Kingdom was in danger, and that the safety
of the Subject was concerned in the business, he might, and did raise such sums
of money as he thought expedient for the preventing of the danger, and
providing for the public safety of him and his Subjects. According to which
precedents he prepares a Writ, by which his Majesty commands the Maritime
Counties to provide a certain number of Ships for defense of the Kingdom,
prescribing to each Ship its several burden, the number of Mariners, and great
Pieces of Ordnance, with Victuals, Arms, and Ammunition thereunto proportioned.
The Subject not daring at the first to dispute the Command, collected money for
the Service according to the several rates imposed on them in their several
Counties; but dealt so unmercifully with the Clergy in the levying of it, that
they laid upon them generally the fifth or sixth part of the sum imposed. The
Ice thus broken, and his Majesty finding that provision not sufficient to
effect his purpose, issued out his Writs in the next year after anno 1635. into
all the Counties of the Kingdom for preparing of a Royal Fleet to be in
readiness against the beginning of this year, in which the Clergy were as like
to suffer as before they did. By the best was, that they had not only a
gracious Patron, but a very powerful Mediator, Upon whose humble desire his
Majesty was pleased to direct his Letters to all the Sheriffs in England
respectively, requiring them that no Tax should be laid upon any Clergyman,
possessed of a Parsonage, above the tenth part of the Land-rate of their several
Parishes; and that consideration should be had of the poor Vicars in their
several Parishes, according to their small revenue, compared with the Abilities
of the Parishioners amongst whom they lived. The whole Sum levied by this Tax
amounted to 236000 li. or there abouts, which comes not to 20000 li. a month;
and being instead of all other payments, seemed to be no such heavy burden as
it was generally made by the Popular Party, many of which quarrelled and and
refused it.

But his Majesty was two just a Prince to exact any thing by power, when he had
neither Law nor Reason to make it good. And therefore as he had the opinion of
all his Judges subscribed by their hands for justifying the Legality of this
Naval Tax amongst the Subjects; so he thought fit to publish some defense of
his Dominion, Right, and Sovereignty in the Narrow Seas for the satisfaction of
his Neighbors. John Seldom of the Inner Temple, a name that stands in need of
no titles of honor, had written a Discourse in the time of King James, which
(in answer to that of Grotius, called, Mare Liberum) (...) entitled by the
name of Mare Clausum. But stomacking the submission and acknowledgment which he
was forced to make in the High Commission for publishing his book of Tithes,
and sensible of the smart which he had found from the Pens of Tillesly,
Montague, and Nettles, in their Answers to him, he did not only suppress the
^ook which he had written in the Kings defense, but carried an evil eye to the
Court and Church for a long time after. But being a man of great parts, and
eminent in the retired walks of Learning, he was worth the gaining, which
Canterbury takes upon him, and at last ef^ecteth. By his persuasion he not only
perfected, but published that laborious piece, which he dedicated to his
Majesty, whose cause he pleaded. By whom it was so well approved, that he sent
it by Sir William Beecher (one of the Clerks of his Council) to the Barons of
the Exchequer in open Court, by them to be laid up as a most inestimable Jewel
amongst the choice Records, which concerned the Crowns. In this book, which
came out this year, he first asserts the Sovereignty or Dominion of the
British Seas to the Crown of England. And that being cleared, he proved by
constant and continual practice, that the Kings of England used to levy money
from the Subjects (without help of Parliament) for the providing of Ships and
other necessaries to maintain the Sovereignty which did of right belong unto
them. This he brought down unto the times of King Henry the Second, and might
have brought it nearer to his own times had he been so pleased, and thereby
paved a plain way to the payment of Ship Money, as they commonly called it. But
then he must have crossed the proceedings of the House of Commons in the last
Parliament, (wherein he was so great a stickler) voting down under a kind of
Anathema the Kings pretensions of right to all help from the Subject, either in
Tunnage or Poundage, or any other way whatsoever, the Parliament not
cooperating and contributing toward it. Howsoever the Service was as grateful
as the Author acceptable, from henceforth both a frequent and a welcome guest
at Lambeth house, where he was grown into such esteem with the Archbishop, that
he might have chose his own preferment in the Court (as it was then generally
believed) had he not undervalued all other employments in respect of his
Studies. But possibly there might be some other reason for his declining such
employments as the Court might offer. He had not yet forgotten the affronts
which were put upon him about his History of Tithes, (for in the notion of
affronts he beh^ld them always) and therefore did but make fair weather for
the time, till he could have an opportunity to revenge himself on the Church
and Churchmen, the King being took into the reckoning. For no sooner did the
Bishop begin to sink in power and credit under the first pressures of the late
Long Parliament, but he published a book in Greek and Latin by the name
Fut^chius, with some Notes upon it. In which he made it his chief business to
prove, that Bishops did no otherwise differ from the rest of the Presbyters
than does a Master of a College from the rest of the Fellows, by consequents,
that they differed only in degree, not order. And afterward, when his Majesty
began to decline in the love of the Parliament, and that the heats grew strong
between them, he was affirmed to have written the Answer to his Majesty's
Declaration about the Commission of Array: Which in effect proved a plain
putting of the Sword into the hands of the People. So hard it is for any one to
discern the hearts of men by their outward actions, but the God that made them.

Thus leaving England for a time we must go for Scotland, in which we find the
Canons finished, and the Bishops busy and intent on a public Liturgy. It was
his Majesty's first intent to introduce the English Liturgy amongst them; and
to that end, had ordered that it should be daily read in his Chapel Royal of
that Kingdom, as before was said. But Ballentine, the Bishop of Dumblaine, and
Dean of the Chapel (to whom the care thereof had been recommended) was so
negligent in it, that the Archbishop found it necessary to remove him to some
other Bishopric on the next avoydance. The Sea of Aberdeen proving vacant, he
procured his translation thither, and preferred Wederbourne, a Scot by birth,
but bread in Cambridge, beneficed in Hampshire, and made one of the Prebends of
^ly by the learned Andrews, to be his Successor in those places, By this new
Dean his Majesty's design was followed with more care than ever; and possibly
might have took effect, if the rest of the Scottish Bishops had been pleased
therewith as well as this. But the Scottish Bishops having prevailed with his
Majesty, as before was noted, to have a distinct Liturgy of their own, His
Majesty commanded the Archbishop of Canterbury to give them the best assistance
he could in that way and work; which notwithstanding he delayed as long as he
could, in hope to bring them in the end to a better persuasion. But finding
them so resolved upon it, that they could not be altered he contributes his
assistance to it, humbly entreated so to do by some Letters brought unto him by
Maxwell (not long before made Bishop of Ross) bearing date April 2. 1635. and
subscribed by the Archbishops of St. Andrews and Glascow, the Bishops of
Murrey, Dumblaine, and Brechine. The Book being first hammered and prepared in
Scotland, and from thence transmitted to the Court, his Majesty referred it to
the consideration of the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Lord Treasurer Iuxon
Bishop of London, and Wren Bishop of Norwich: But the Lord Treasurer being
taken up with other employments the burden of the work remained on the other
two. They found on the perusal of it that Wederbourne had followed such
instructions as he had carried with him about the making of that book (if it
must be made) in keeping so much in it of the English Liturgy, and they found
also certain notes which he had sent together with it, to the end that as many
of them as his Majesty liked, might be made use of in that book. Thus
authorized and instructed they proceed unto the making of such Alterations as
were offered to them, consisting for the most part in these Particulars: First,
That the Magnificat and the rest of the Hymns, together with the Epistles and
Gospels, should be printed according to the last Translation in the time of
King James; conform therein to such Directions as they had received for
Printing the Psalms of David in the last Translation. Secondly, That for the
better singing of those Psalms to the Organ, a Colon should be made in the
middle of every Verse, as it was in the English. Thirdly, That they could not
agree to any more Emendations in the Creed of St. Athanasius, than they had
noted in that Book. Fourthly, That though the Bishops there desired some time
to consider further of the Holydays, yet it was never otherwise meant: but that
the Office appointed for every of them, should be kept in the Liturgy; the
Practice and Observation of them being respited for a time to their further
thoughts. Fifthly, That though they admitted of all the Sentences which they
found in the Offertory, yet they wished that some which were in the English
Book, might be added also. Sixthly, That every Prayer or Action through the
whole Communion, should be named in the Rubric before it, that it might be
known to the People what it is; as they should find done to their hands in the
Prayer of Consecration, and the Memorial of Oblation next after following.
Seventhly, That the Invitation, Confession, Absolution, Sentences, Prefaces,
and Doxologie, should be retained in the same place and order which they had in
the Liturgy of England; and that the Prayer of humble Access to the Holy
Table, would stand very well (as they conceived) before the very Act af
Participation. Eighthly, and finally, That in the Margin of the Prayer of
Consecration, they should add some Note, directing him that Celebrates, at what
words he should take the Patin with the Bread on it, and the Chalice with the
Wine in it, into his hands, according to the Practice of the Church of England.

These Alterations being not only made by his Majesty's Warrant, and approved
by him in a Memorial under his Hand, bearing date the nineteenth day of April
in this present year; but confirmed also with the like Royal Signature as they
stood in the Book: Of which Particulars, and some others, the Bishop gives an
account to Wederbourne by his Letters of the twentieth of April, being the
morrow after his Majesty had Signed the said Memorial. It seems that
Wederbourne had given our Archbishop notice of some defects which he had found
in the Book of Consecration of Archbishops, Bishops, etc. as it was then used
amongst the Scots, viz. 1. That the Order of Deacons was made but a Lay-Office
at the best, as by that Book might be understood. And 2. That in the Admission
to the Priesthood, the very essential Words of conferring Orders were left out.
With which the King being made acquainted, he gave command to the Archbishop to
make known unto them, That he would have them either to admit the English Book,
or else to rectify their own in those two great oversights. After which,
taking the whole business of that Church into his consideration, it pleased him
to direct his Further Instructions to the Archbishops and Bishops of it,
bearing date on the eighteenth of October following; In which he requires them
to take care, That the Proclamation to be made for Authorizing the
Service Book, should not derogate in any thing from his Royal Prerogative. 2.
That in their Calendar they should keep such Catholic Saints as were in the
English, such of the Saints as were most peculiar to that Kingdom (especially
those which were of the Royal Blood, and some of the most holy Bishops) being
added to them: but that in no case St. George and St. Patrick be omitted. 3.
That in their Book of Ordination, in giving Orders to Presbyters, they should
keep the words of the English Book without change, Receive the Holy Ghost, etc.
4. That they should insert among the Lessons ordinarily to be read in the
Service, out of the Book of Wisdom the first, second, third, fourth, fifth, and
sixth Chapters; and out of the Book of Ecclesiasticus, the first, second fifth,
eighth, thirty fifth, and forty ninth Chapters. 5. That every Bishop within his
Family twice a day cause the Service to be read; and that all Archbishops and
Bishops make all Universities and Colleges within their Diocesies, to use
daily twice a day the Service. 6. That the Preface to the Book of Common
Prayer, Signed by his Majesty's Hand, and the Proclamation for Authorizing the
same, should be Printed, and inserted in the Book of Common Prayer. According
to which Instructions, and the Corrections abovementioned, this Liturgy at
the last (after it had been twenty years in consideration) was fully finished
and concluded; and being thus finished and concluded, was Ratified and
Confirmed by his Majesty's Royal Edict, as follows, viz. CHARLES By the Grace
of God King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.
To Our Lovits
Messengers, Our Sheriffs in that part conjunctly and severally, specially
constitute, Greeting. Forasmuch as We, ever since Our entry to the Imperial
Crown of this Our ancient Kingdom of Scotland, especially since Our late being
here in the same, have diverse times recommended to the Archbishops and Bishops
there, the publishing of a Public Form of Service in the Worship of God, which
We would have uniformly observed therein, and the same being now condescended
unto: Although We doubt not but all our Subjects, both Clergy and others, will
receive the said Public Form of Service; yet thinking it necessary to make Our
Pleasure known, touching the Authority thereof, Our Will is, and We straightly
command, That incontinent these Our Letters seen, you pass, and in Our Name and
Authority command and charge all our Subjects both Ecclesiastical and Civil, by
open Proclamation at the Market-Crosses of the Head Buroughs of this Our
Kingdom, and other Places needful, to conform themselves to the said Public
Form of Worship, which is the only Form which We (having taken the Counsel of
Our Clergy) think fit to be used in Gods Public Worship in this Our Kingdom:
Commanding also all Archbishops and Bishops, and other Presbyters and
Churchmen, to take a special care that the same be duly obeyed and observed,
and the Contraveners condignly censured and punished; and to have special care,
that every Parish betwixt this and Pasche next, procure unto themselves two at
the least of the said Books of Common Prayer, for the use of the Parish; The
which to do, We commit to you conjunctly and severally Our full Power by these
Our Letters Patents, delivering the same to be by you duly executed, and
endorsed again to be delivered to the Bearer.

Given under Our Signet at Edenborough, 20 December, in the Twelfth year of Our
Reign, 1636.



Such was the form of Passing and Confirming the Scottish Liturgy, never
presented to that Kirk, nor tendered to the Approbation of any General Assembly;
as in the Restitution of Episcopal Government, and Introduction of the five
Articles of Perth, had been done before. And this is that at which the Scottish
Presbyters did seem to be most offended; sufficiently displeased with any
Liturgy at all, but more in having such an one as either was so near the
English, or so different from it. Which fault, if any fault it were, is rather
to to be charged upon the Scottish than the English Prelates. For when the way
of introducing it was in agitation, H^ld. Works, p. 155.
our Archbishop ever advised them, as well in his Majesty's presence, as
elsewhere, To look carefully to it, and to be sure to do nothing in it but what
should be agreeable to the Laws of the Kingdom; and not to fail of taking the
Advice of the Lords of the Council, and governing themselves according to it.
But as it seems, those Bishops durst not trust their Clergy, or venture the
reception or refusal of it to the Vote of a General Assembly, from which they
could not promise themselves any good success. So that the Case seems to be
much like that of King Edward vi. when the first Liturgy was Composed by some
few of the Bishops, and other Learned men (not above thirteen in number)
especially thereto Authorized: Or unto that of Queen Elizabeth, when the second
Liturgy of that King was fitted and corrected by her appointment. Neither of
which durst trust their Clergy, but acted Sovereignly therein of their own
Authority, not venturing either of the said Books to their Convocations: but
only giving them the strength of an Act of Parliament; and then the Point in
issue will be briefly this, viz. Whether the King, consulting with a lesser
part of the Bishops and Clergy, and having their consent therein, may conclude
any thing in the way of a Reformation, the residue and greatest part not
advised withal, nor yielding their consent in a formal way? Now for my Answer,
that it may be built upon the surer grounds, it is to be considered, 1. Whether
the Reformation be in corruption of Manners, or abuses in Government? Whether
in matters Practical, or in points of Doctrine? 2. It in matters Practical,
Whether such Practice have the Character of Antiquity, Universality, and
Consent imprinted on it? or that it be the Practice of particular Churches, and
of some Times only? And 3. It in Points of Doctrine, Whether such Points have
been determined o^ before in a General Council, or in Particular Councils
universally received and countenanced? or are to be defined de novo on emergent
Controversies?

And these Distinctions being thus laid, I shall Answer briefly. 1. If the
things to be reformed be either Corruptions in Manners, or neglect of Public
Duties to Almighty God,; Abuses either in Government, or the Parties governing;
the King may do it of himself, by his sole Authority: The Clergy are beholden
to him, if he takes any of them along with him when he goes about it. And if
the Times should be so bad, that either the whole body of the Clergy, or any
(though the greatest) part thereof, should oppose him in it, he may go forwards
notwithstanding, punishing such as shall gainsay him in so good a Work, and
compelling others. And this I look on as a Power annexed to the Regal Diadem,
and so inseparably annexed, that Kings could be no longer Kings, i^ it were
denied them. And on the other side, if the Reformation be in Points o^
Doctrine, and in such Points of Doctrine as have not been before defined, or
not defined in form and manner as before laid down, the King only, with a few
of his Bishops and Learned Clergy (though never so well studied in the Point
disputed) can do nothing in it. That belongs only to the whole body of the
Clergy in their Convocation rightly called and constituted; whose Acts being
Ratified by the King, bind not alone the rest of the Clergy, in whose name they
Voted: but all the residue of the Subjects of what sort soever, who are to
acquiesce in their Resolutions. But if the thing to be Reformed be a matter
practical, we are to look into the usage of the Primitive Times: And if the
Practice prove to have been both ancient, and universally received over all the
Church, though intermitted for a Time, and by Time corrupted, the King,
consulting with so many of his Bishops, and others of his most able Clergy, as
he thinks ^it to call unto him, and having their Consent and Direction in it,
may in the case of intermission revive such Practice, and in the case of
corruption and degeneration, restore it to its Primitive and Original Luster.
Now that there should be Liturgies for the use of the Church, And that those
Liturgies should be Celebrated in a Language understood by the People, That in
those Liturgies there should be some prescribed Forms, for Giving the Communion
in both Kinds, for Baptizing Infants, for the reverent Celebration of Marriage,
performing the (...) Office to the Sick, and the decent Burial of the Dead; as
also, for set Fasts and appointed Festivals, has been a thing of Primitive and
General Practice in the best times of the Church: And being such, though
intermitted and corrupted as before is said, the King advising with his Bishops
and other Churchmen (though not in a Synodical way) may cause the same to be
revised and revived; and having fitted them to Edification and increase of
Piety, either commend them to the Church by his sole Authority, or else impose
them on the People under certain Penalties, by his Power in Parliament. Saepe
Coeleste Regnum per Terrenum proficit.
The Kingdom of Heaven (said the Reverend Isidore of Sevil) does many times
receive increase from these Earthly Kingdoms; in nothing more, than by
regulating and well ordering of Gods Public Worship. Add hereunto what was
before alleged, for passing the Canons in the same way; and then we have the
sum of that which was, and probably might have been pleaded in defense hereof.

The prosecution of this Liturgy on the one side, and the exaction of those
Public Orders on the other, kindled such fires in the breasts of some of the
Puritan Faction, that presently they brake out into open Flames. For first the
Scots scattered abroad a virulent and seditio^s Libel in the year 1634. wherein
the King was not only charged with altering the Government of that Kingdom, but
traduced for very strong inclinations to the Religion of the Church of Rome.
The chief Abettor whereof (for the Author was not to be found) was the Lord
Balmerino; for which he was Legally convicted, and condemned of Treason: but
pardoned by the Kings great Goodness, and by that Pardon kept alive for the
mischiefs following. And as the English had Scotized in all their Practices (by
railing, threatening, and stirring up of Sedition) for bringing in the Genevian
Discipline in Queen Elizabeth's Time; so they resolve to follow their Example
now. Bastwick a Doctor of Physic (the second part of Leighton) first leads the
Dance, beginning with a Pestilent Pamphlet called Flagellum Episcoporum
Latialium, maliciously venomous against the Bishops, their Function, Actions,
and Proceedings. But this not being likely to do much hurt amongst the People,
because writ in Latin, he seconds it with another, which he called his Litany,
in the English Tongue: A Piece so silly and contemptible, that nothing but the
Sin and Malice which appeared in every line thereof, could possibly have
preserved it from being ridiculous. Prynne follows next, and publishes two
Books at once (or one immediately on the other) one of these called The
Quench-Coal, in answer unto that called A Coal from the Altar, against placing
the Communion Table Altar-wise: The other named The Vnbishoping of Timothy and
Titus, against the Apostolical Institution of Diocesan Bishops. But that which
was entitled to him by the name of a Libel, was, The News from Ipswich;
intended chiefly against Wren then Bishop of Norwich, who had taken up his
dwelling in that Town, as before is said: but falling as scandalously foul on
the Archbishop himself, and some of the other Bishops also, and such as acted
under them in the present Service. For there he descants very trimly (as he
conceived) on the Archbishop himself, with his Arch-Piety, Arch-Charity,
Arch-Agent for the Devil; that Beelzebub himself had been Archbishop, and the
like to those, a most triumphant Arch indeed to adorn his victories. With like
reproach he falls on the Bishops generally, calling them Luciferian Lord
Bishops, execrable Traitors, devouring Wolves, with many other odious names not
fit to be used by a Christian; and more particularly on Wren, telling us, That
in all Queen Mary's times no such havoc was made in so short a time of the
faithful Ministers of God in any part, nay, in the whole Land, than had been
made in his Diocese. And then he adds with equal Charity and Truth, That
Corbet, Chancellor to this Bishop, had threatened one or two godly Ministers
with pistolling, and hanging, and I know not what, because they had refused to
read his Majesty's Declaration about lawful Sports. More of this dish I could
have carved, but that this may serve sufficiently for a taste of the whole.

But the great Masterpiece of mischief, was set out by Burton (so often
mentioned before) who preaching on the fifth of November, in his own Parish
Church of St. Matthews in Friday Street, took for his Text those words in the
Proverbs, viz. My Son, fear th^n the Lord and the King, and meddle not with
them that are given to change, Chap. 24.22. In this Sermon (if I may wrong the
Word so far as to give it to so lewd a Libel) he railes most bitterly against
the Bishops, accuses them of Innovating both in Doctrine and Worship,
impeacheth them of exercising a Jurisdiction contrary to the Laws of the Land,
1 Edw. 6. c. 2. and for falsifying the Records of the Church by adding the
first clause to the twentieth Article; arraigneth them for oppressing the Kings
Liege people, contrary unto Law and Justice, exciting the people to rise up
against them; magnifying those disobedient Spirits, who hitherto have stood out
in defiance of them; and seems content in case the Bishops lives might be
called in question, to run the hazard of his own. For this being taken and
imprisoned by a warrant from the High Commission, he makes his appeal unto the
King, justifies it by an Apology, and seconds that by an Address to the
Nobility: In which last he requires all sorts of people, Noblemen, Judges,
Courtiers, and those of the inferior sort, to stand up stoutly for the Gospel
against the Bishops. And finally Prints all together with an Epistle Dedicatory
to the King himself; to the end that if his Majesty should vouchsafe the
reading of it, he might be brought into an ill opinion of the Bishops and their
proceedings in the Church. p. 74.
Whose actions tend only (as he tells us) to corrupt the Kings good peoples
hearts, by casting into them fears and jealousies, and sinister opinions toward
the King; as if he were the prime cause of all those Grievances, which in his
name they oppress the Kings good Subjects withal. Thus also in another place,
These Factors of Antichrist (says he) practice to divide Kings from their
Subjects, p. 75.
and Subjects from their Kings, that so between both they may fairly erect
Antichrists Throne again. For that indeed, that is to say, the new building of
Babble, the setting up again of the throne of Antichrist, the bringing in of
Popery to subvert the Gospel, is made to be the chief design of the Prelates
and Prelatical party; to which all innovations, usurpations, and more dangerous
practices, which are unjustly charged upon them, served only as preparatives
and subservient helps.

Such being the matter in the Libell, let us next look upon the Ornaments and
dressings thereof, consisting most especially in those infamous Attributes,
which he ascribes unto the Bishops. For Fathers he calls them Step-fathers; for
Pillars, Caterpillars; their houses haunted, and their Episcopal Chairs
poisoned, by the Spirit that bears rule in the air. They are (says he) the
Limbs of the Beast, even of Antichrist, taking his very courses to bear and
beat down the hearing of the Word of God, whereby men might be saved, p. 12.
Their fear is more toward an Altar of their own invention, toward an Image or
Crucifix, toward the sound and syllables of Jesus, then toward the Lord Christ,
p. 15. He gives then the reproachful Titles of Miscreants, p. 28. The trains
and wiles of the Dragons doglike flattering tail, p. 30. New Babel builders,
p. 32. Blind Watchmen, dumb dogs, thieves and robbers of Souls, False Prophets,
ravening Wolves, p. 48. Factors for Antichrist, p. 75. Antichristian Mushrumps.
And that it might be known what they chiefly aimed at, we shall hear him say
that they cannot be quiet, till ( res novas moliendo) they set up Popery again
in her full Equipage, p. 95. Tooth and nail for setting up Popery again, p.
96. Trampling under feet Christ's Kingdom, that they may set up Antichrists
Throne again, p. 99. According to the Spirit of Rome which breaths in them, by
which they are so strongly biassed to wheel about to their Roman Mistress, p.
108. The Prelates consederate with the Priests and Jesuits for rearing up of
that Religion, p. 140. Calling them upon that account in his Apology, Iesuited
Polipragmaticks, and Sons of Belial. Having thus lustily laid about him against
all in general, he descends to some particulars of most note and eminence,
Reviling White of Ely, with railing and perverting, in fighting against the
truth, which he makes to be his principal quality, p. 127. and Mountague of
Chichester for a tried Champion of Rome, and the devoted Votary to his Queen of
Heaven, p. 126. And so proceeding to the Archbishop (for of Wren he had spoke
enough before) he tells us of him, That he used to set his foot on the Kings
Laws, as the Pope did on the Emperors neck, p. 54. That with his right hand he
was able to sweep down the third part of the Stars in heaven, p. 121. And that
he had a Papal infallibility of Spirit, whereby, as by a divine Oracle, all
Questions in Religion are finally determined, p. 132. These are the principal
flowers of Rhetoric which grew in the Garden of H. B. sufficient questionless
to show how sweet a Champion he was like to prove of the Church and Gospel.

And yet this was not all the mischief which the Church suffered at that time,
for presently on the neck of these came out another, entitled, The holy Table,
name and thing, intended purposely for an Answer to the Coal from the Altar,
but cunningly pretended by him to be written long ago by a Minister in
Lincolnshire against Dr. Coal, a judicious Divine in Queen Mary's days;
Printed for the Diocese of Lincoln; by the Bishop whereof, under the name of
John Lincoln, Dean of Westminster, it was authorized for the Press. In managing
whereof, the point in Controversy was principally about the placing of the
Holy Table according to the practice of the Primitive Church, and the received
Rules of the Church of England at the first Reformation of it. In prosecution
of which point he makes himself an Adversary of his he know not whom, and then
he uses him he cares not how, mangling the Authors words whom we would
confute, that so he might be sure of the easier conquest; and practicing on
those Authors whom he was to use, that they may serve his turn the better to
procure the victory. Of the composure of the whole we may take this Character
from him who made the Answer to it, Pref^ce to A^tid. Linc.
viz. That he that conjectured of the house by the trim or dress, would think
it very richly furnished; the Walls whereof (that is the Margin) richly set out
with Antic hangings, and whatsoever costly workmanship all nations of these
times may be thought to brag of; and every part adorned with flourishes and
pretty pastimes, the gay devices of the Painter: Nor is there any want at all
of Ornaments or Vtensils to set out the same, such especially as may serve for
ostentation, though of little use; many a fine and subtle Carpet, not a few
idle couches for the credulous Reader, and every where a pillow for a Puritans
elbow; all very pleasing to the eye, but slight of substance; counterfeit stuff
most of it, and wrought with so much fraud and falsehood that there is hardly
one true stitch in all that work from the very beginning to the end. Hardly one
testimony or authority in the whole Discourse which is any way material to the
point in hand: but is as true and truly cited, as that the book it self was
writ long ago in answer unto D. Coal of Queen Mary's days. The King he
tacitly upbraides with the unfortunacies of his Reign by Deaths and Plagues,
the Governors of the Church with carrying all things by strong hand, rather by
Canon-shot than by Canon Law. The Bishop of Norwich he compares (as before was
noted) to a Wren mounted on the feathers of an Eagle, and fall upon his
Adversary with as foul a mouth as Burton does upon the Prelates; the Parable
betwixt him and Burton being very well fitted as appears by the Preface to the
Ministers of Lincoln Diocese in the Answer to him. A^tid. Linc. p 5.
Obliquely and upon the by he has some glancings against bowing at the name of
Jesus, Adoring toward the East, and Praying according to the Canon; and makes
the transposing of the Table to the place where the Altar stood, to be an
Introduction for ushering in the whole body or Popery. Which Eleusinian
Doctrine (for so he calls it) though these new Reformers (for fear of so many
Laws and Canons) dare not apparently profess, yet (says he) they prepare and
lay grounds for it, that the outworks of Religion being taken in, they may in
time have a bout with the Fort it self.

To these two Books his Majesty thought fit that some present Answer should be
made, appointing the same hand for both which had writ the History of the
Sabbath. The one being absolutely destructive of the uniformity in placing the
Communion Table, which was then in hand; The other laboring to create a
general hatred unto all the Bishops, branding their persons, blasting their
Counsels, and decrying the Function. And hard it was to say whether of the two
would have proved more mischievous if they were not seasonably prevented. H^^.
K. C. p. 151
The Answer unto Burton was first commanded and prepared; That to the Lincoln
Minister, though afterward enjoined, was the first that was published. This of
the two, the subtler and more curious piece; exceedingly cried up when it first
came out; the disaffection of the times, and subject matter of the Book, and
the Religious estimation which was had of the Author, concurring altogether to
advance the Reputation of it to the very highest, sold for four shillings at
the first, when conceived unanswerable; but within one month after the coming
out of the Answer (which was upon the twentieth of May) brought to less than
one. The Answer published by the name of Antidotum Lincolniense, with reference
to the Licencer and Author of the Holy Table. The publishing of the other was
delayed upon this occasion: A Resolution had been taken by command of his
Majesty to proceed against the Triumvirate of Libellers (as one fitly calls
them) to a public Censure, which was like to make much noise amongst the
ignorant People. It was thought fit by the Prudent Council of Queen Elizabeth
upon the execution of some Priests and Jesuits, that an Apology should be
published, by the name of Iustitia Britannica, to vindicate the public Justice
of the State from such aspersions, as by the Tongues and Pens of malicious
persons should be laid upon it. And on the like prudential grounds it was
thought expedient, that an answer should be made to the book which seemed most
material; and being so made, should be kept in readiness till the execution of
the Sentence, to the end that the people might be satisfied, as well in the
greatness of the Crimes, as the necessity and justice of the Punishment,
inflicted upon one of the Principals, by whom a judgment might be made of all
the rest. But the Censure being deferred from Easter until Midsummer Term, the
Answer lay dormant all the while at Lambeth in the hands of the Licencer, and
was then published by the name of A brief and moderate Answer to the seditious
and scandalous challenges of H. B. etc. Two other Books were also published
about that time, the one about the name and situation of the Communion Table,
which was called, Altar Christianum, writ by one P^cklington, then beneficed
in Bedfordshire, and seconded by a Chapel Determination of the well studied
Joseph Mede: The other against Burton by name, published by Dow of Basell in
Sussex, under the Title of Innovations unjustly charged, etc. And so much for
the Pen Combats, managed on both sides in the present Controversies.

But whilst these things were in agitation, there happened toward the end of this
year, such an Alteration in the Court, as began to make no less noise than the
rest before: It had been an ancient custom in the Court of England to have
three Sermons every week in the time of Lent. Two of them preached on
Wednesdaies and Fridaies, the third in the open preaching place near the
Council Chamber on Sundaies in the Afternoon. And so it continued till King
James came to this Crown. Who having upon Tuesday the fifth of August escapt
the hands and treasons of the Earl of Gowrie, took up a pious resolution, not
only of keeping the Anniversary of that day for a public Festival in all his
Dominions, but of having a Sermon, and other divine Offices every Tuesday
throughout the year. This custom he began in Scotland, and brought it with him
into the Court of England; and thereupon translated one of the Lent Sermons
from Wednesday to Tuesday. This Innovation in the Court, where before there
were no Sermons (out of Lent) but on Sundaies only, came in short time to have
a very strong Influence upon the Country, giving example and defense to such
Lectures and Sermons on the working days, as frequently were appointed and
continued in most Corporations, and many other Market Towns in all parts of the
Kingdom. In which respect it was upon the point of being laid aside at the
Court on the death of that King, in reference to whose particular concernments
it was taken up, and therefore his Successor not obliged to the observation.
But then withal it was considered, that the new King had married with a Lady
of the Roman Religion, that he was engaged in a War with Spain, which could not
be carried on without help from the Parliament, wherein the Puritan Party had
appeared to be very powerful. The discontinuing of that Sermon in this
conjuncture, might have been looked on in the King as the want of zeal toward
the preaching of the Gospel, and a strong tendency in him to the Religion of
the Church of Rome, and a betraying of the Court to Ignorance and Superstition
by depriving them of such necessary means of their Instruction. Upon these
grounds it stood as before it did, as well in the holy time of Lent as in other
Weeks. But now Laud being Archbishop of Canterbury, and Wren Dean of the
Chapel, it was resolved to move his Majesty, that the Lent Sermons might be
preached on Wednesdaies as they had been Anciently. To which his Majesty
condescending, and the Bill of Lent-Preachers being drawn accordingly, it was
first muttered secretly, and afterward made a public clamor, that this was
one of the Archbishops Artifices, a trick devised for putting down the Tuesday
Sermons of which you should never hear more, when this Lent was over: Which Cry
growing louder and louder, as the Lent continued, was suddenly hushed and
stilled again on the Easter Tuesday, when they saw the Preacher in the Pulpit,
as at other times. So usual is it with some men to be afraid of their own
shadows, and terrified with fears of their own devising.

This Interruption thus past over, I shall unwillingly resume my former
Argument concerning Bastwick and the rest of his fellow-Criminals, who being
called unto their Answer, used so many delays, that the Case could not come to
Sentence before Midsomer Term. Some Answers they had drawn: but they were so
Libellous and full of scandal, that no Counselor could be found to put his
hand to them, according to the course of that Court; Instead whereof, they
exhibited a cross Bill against Canterbury and his Confederates, (as they called
them) charging them with the greatest part of those Reproaches, which had been
made the subject matter of their former Libels; which being signed by no hands
but their own, and tendered so to the Lord Keeper, was by him rejected, and
themselves taken pro confessis, their obstinacy in not answering in due form of
Law, being generally looked on by the Court as a self-conviction, On the
fourteenth of June they received their Sentence, which briefly was to this
effect: Prynne to be fined 5000 l. to the King, to lose the remainder of his
ears in the Pillory, to be branded on both cheeks with the Letters S. L. for a
Schismatical Libeller, and to be perpetually imprisoned in Carnarvan Castle:
L^^strange's H^st. King Charles, p. 151.
Bastwick and Burton condemned in the like Fine of 5000 l. to be Pilloried, and
lose their Ears; the first to be imprisoned in the Castle of Lanceston in
Cornwall, and the second in the Castle of Lancaster. On the thirtieth of the
same Month, Burton being first degraded of his Ministry in the High Commission,
they were brought into the Palace-yard of Westminster to receive their
punishment, not executed on them with such great severity as was injuriously
given out: But being executed howsoever, it was a great trouble to the spirits
of many very moderate and well-meaning men, to see the three most Eminent
Professions in all the World ( Divinity, Law, and Physic) to be so wretchedly
dishonored in the Persons of the Malefactors, as was observed by the
Archbishop himself in his Epistle to the King. Which part of the Punishment
being inflicted, they were conveyed with care and safety to their several
Prisons, the People either foolishly or factiously resorting to them as they
passed, and seeming to bemoan their Sufferings as unjustly Rigorous. And such a
haunt there was to the several Castles, to which they were condemned of purpose
for preventing all Intelligence and Correspondence to be held between them,
that the State found it necessary to remove them further; Prynne to the Castle
of Mont Orgueil in the Isle of Iersey, Ad Sillinam I^sulam ultra Britanni^m
d^p^rta(...). S^lp. (...). l. 2.
Burton to Castle-Cornet in the Road of Guernsey, and Bastwick to St. Mary's
Castle in the Isle of Silly; which last remembers me of the like Confinement,
to which Instantius a professed Priscilianist (a very near Kinsman of the
English Puritan) had been condemned by the Justice of the Primitive Times.

At the pronouncing of this Sentence the Archbishop made a long and elaborate
Speech, in vindication of himself and the rest of the Bishops from any Design
to bring in Popery, or innovating in the Government and Forms of Worship, here
by Law established. He made his Introduction to it in a brief Discourse
touching the nature of the Crime, showing how odious a thing it was to think of
defending Religion in the way of Libels; a thing not used by any of the
Primitive Christians, in the greatest heats of Persecution; and then professing
for his own part* That he had done nothing as a Bishop, but with a sincere
intention for the good Government and Honor of the Church of England, and the
maintenance of the Orthodox Truth and Religion professed and established in it;
adding withal, That nothing but his Care of reducing the Church into Order in
the External Worship of God, and the settling of it on the Rules of its first
Reformation, had raised this Storm against himself and the rest of the Bishops,
for which alone they stood accused of Innovations, by those which were the
greatest Innovators in the Christian World. He spoke next touching the Calling
of Bishops, which he maintained to be Iure Divino, though not all the Adjuncts
of that Calling; averring further, That from the time of the Apostles, to the
days of Calvin, the Government of the Church was by Bishops only, Lay Elders
being never heard of; which Claim by Divine Right, derogateth not from the King
either in Right or Power (as the Libellers made it) no more than the Calling of
the Presbyters by the same Right, could be thought to do; in regard they
exercised not any Jurisdiction in the Kings Dominions, but with his License for
so doing: Or were it otherwise, yet that the Bishops stood in England in as
good a case as the present Laws could make them; and therefore they that
Libelled against them, Libelled against the King and State, by the Laws whereo^
they were established; and consequently, could aim at no other end, than the
stirring of Sedition amongst the People. As touching the design of bringing in
Popery (by which Artifice they chiefly hoped to inflame the People) he first
acquitted the King of it, by showing his sincerity and constancy in his
Religion, exemplified by his Carriage in Spain, where he wanted no temptations
to draw him from it; and his Deportment since in England, in which ^e had so
often declared a settled Resolution, to maintain the same: Or were it
otherwise, and that the King had any mind to change Religion, he must seek for
other Instruments than himself to effect that purpose; most humbly thanking
God, That as yet he knew not how to serve any Man, against the Truth of Christ;
so ^e hoped he should never learn: professing further, for the satisfaction of
all which heard him, That he knew of no plot nor purpose of altering the
Religion here established; and that for his own part, he had ever been far from
attempting any thing which might be truly said to tend that way, in the least
degree; to both which he was ready to take his Oath. Which said in general, he
briefly touched on those Innovations which in those Libels, had been charged on
him and the rest of the Bishops, in order unto that Design.

To the first Innovation, touching the suppressing of Sermons (during the time
of the late Fast) in infected places, contrary to the Orders in former times,
he answered, First, That after-Ages might without offense learn to avoid any
visible inconvenience observed in the former: And secondly, That the
suppressing of those Sermons was no Act of the Bishops, but a Command
proceeding (on a full debate) from the Lords of the Council, the better to
avoid the spreading of the Contagion: And thirdly, That as Sermons on the
Fast-days had been used of late, they were so far from humbling men in the
sight of God, that they were fitter for other operations, as the raising of
Sedition amongst the People; of which there could not be a clearer instance,
than in that of Burton. To the second, That by appointing the Weekly Fasts to
be on Wednesdays, and those Fasts to be kept without any Sermons, there was a
plot for suppressing all Wednesday Lectures for ever after: It was answered,
That Wednesday was the usual day for such Public Fasts; That it was named by
the Lord Keeper, no great Friend to Popery; and that those men had lived to see
the Fast ended, and the Wednesday Lectures still continued. To the third, That
the Prayer for Seasonable Weather was left out of the last Book; and that the
leaving of it out, was one cause of the Shipwracks and Tempestuous Weather
which followed after: He answered generally, first, That all Fast-Books are
made by the command of the King (who alone had Power to call such Fasts); and
that the Archbishops and Bishops, who had the ordering of those Books, had also
Power under the King, of putting in and leaving out of those Books, whatsoever
they think fit for the present occasion. Secondly, as to this particular, That
when the Fast-Book was made, the Weather was very Seasonable, and the Harvest
in; and that it was not the Custom of the Church to pray for seasonable Weather
when they had it, but when it was wanting. Thirdly, That it was very boldly
done, to ascribe the cause of those Tempests to the leaving out of that Prayer,
which God had never revealed unto them, and they could not otherwise know but
by Revelation. To the fourth, touching a Clause omitted in the first Collect,
in which Thanks had been given to God for delivering us from Popish
Superstition; He answered, That though our Forefathers had been delivered from
such Superstitions, yet (God be blessed) that for our parts, we were never in
them, and therefore could not properly be said to have been delivered. To the
fifth, touching the leaving out of a passage in one of the Orders for the Fast,
concerning the abuse thereof in relation to Merit, he answered, That it was
left out, because in this Age and Kingdom there was little opinion of Merit by
Fasting; insomuch that all Fasts were contemned and scorned (both at Lent, and
all other set times) except such as some humerous men called for of themselves,
to promote their ends. The sixth Innovation charged upon them, was the leaving
of the Lady Elizabeth and her Children* out of one of the Collects: And the
seventh, That out of the same Collect, the words, Father of thine Elect, and of
their Seed, was expunged also: To which it was answered, That the said Collect
was not in the Common Prayer Book confirmed by Law, neither King Edward vi. nor
Queen Elizabeth having any Children. Secondly, That it was added to the Book at
the coming in of King James, who brought a Princely Issue with him; and left
out again in the beginning of the Reign of King Charles, who at that time, and
for four years after, had no Issue neither. Thirdly, That as the Lady Elizabeth
and her Children were put into the Collect when the King had no Issue of his
own; so when the King had Issue of his own, there was as much reason to leave
them out. Fourthly, For the leaving out of that Clause, Father of thine Elect,
etc. it was done by his Predecessor; and that the leaving out of the Lady
Elizabeth and her Issue, was done by the Command of the King. The eighth
Innovation charged upon them, was bowing at the Name of JESUS, and altering to
that end the words in the Epistle on the Sunday next before Easter, by changing
IN the Name of Jesus, to AT the Name of Jesus. And it was answered unto this,
That bowing at the Name of JESUS, was no Innovation made by the Prelates of
this Age, but required by the Injunction of Queen Elizabeth, in the very first
beginning of the Reformation: And secondly, Though it be IN the Name of Jesus,
in the old Editions of the Liturgy; yet it is AT the Name of Jesus, in the
Translation of Geneva, Printed in the year 1567. and in the New Translation
Authorized by King James. The ninth relates to the Alteration of two Passages
in the Form of Prayer set forth by Act of Parliament, for the Fifth of
November; in which Form it is thus expressed, Root out the Babylonish Sect,
which say of Jerusalem, Down with it, etc. And in the other place, Cut off
those Workers of Iniquity, whose RELIGION is REBELLION: Which are thus altered
in the Books which came out last, viz. Root out that Babylonish and
Antichristian Sect (of them) which say, etc. And in the other, Cut off those
workers of Iniquity, who turn RELIGION into REBELLION, etc. To which it was
replied, That the Book of Prayer appointed for the Fifth of November, was
neither made, set forth, or commanded to be read by Act of Parliament: but only
made, and appointed to be read by the Kings Authority. Secondly, That being
made and appointed to be read by no other Authority than the Kings, the King
might alter in it what he thought convenient; and that he had the Kings hand
for those Alterations. (What Reasons there might be to move his Majesty to it,
we may enquire into hereafter on another occasion) To the tenth, for the
leaving out the Prayer for the Navy, he answered, that the King had then no
Fleet at Sea, nor any known enemy to assault, as he had when that Prayer was
first put in; and that howsoever, if there had been any design to bring in
Popery (to which these Innovations must be made subservi^nt) they should rather
have kept in that Prayer than have left it out.

Concerning the Communion Table there were three Innovations urged, the placing
of it Altarwise, reading the second Service at it, and bowing toward or before
it. For answer to the first, It was proved to have been no Innovation in regard
of Practice, because it had so stood in his Majesty's Chapels, and diverse
Cathedrals of this Kingdom since the first Reformation. Which posture if it be
decent and convenient for the Service of God, either in the Kings Chapels or
Cathedrals, it may be used also in other Churches: but if it served to bring in
Popery it was not to be used in them. Nor was it any Innovation in regard of
Law, the holy Table being appointed to be placed where the Altar stood by the
Queens Injunctions, Anno 1559. and that position justified by an order of Dr.
Davenant Bishop of Sarum (of which we have already spoken) whom the Libellers
themselves were not like to accuse for a man that purposed the ushering in or
advancing of Popery. The setting of a Rail before it, or about it, howsoever
placed, was only for avoiding of Profanation, and for that cause justifiable.
As for the reading of the Second (or Communion) Service at the holy Table, it
was no more than what had formerly been used in many places to his own
remembrance; first altered in those Churches where the Emissaries of that
Faction came to preach, and therefore the Innovation to be laid on them.
Secondly, That it is not only fit and proper for that part of the Divine
Service to be read at the Communion Table, but that it is required so to be by
the Rules and Rubricks of the Church: It being said in the first Rubric after
the Communion, that on the Holy Days (if there be no Communion) all shall be
read which is appointed at the Communion; and in the last Rubric before the
Communion, that the Minister standing at the North side of the holy Table,
shall say the Lords Prayer with that which follows. And finally, as to that of
bowing toward it at their first entrance in the Church, or approaches to it,
it is answered, that it was agreeable to the Practice of Moses, David,
Hezekiah, recorded in the holy Scriptures, and that Venite Adoremus, O come let
us worship and fall down, etc. was used constantly in the beginning of the
Ancient Liturgies, and preserved in the beginning of ours in England; and
therefore that the people may as well refuse to come, as at their coming not to
Worship: he added, that by the Statutes of the noble Order of St. George,
called the Garter, the Knights whereof were bound to do their Reverence versus
Altar, toward the Altar; that it had so continued ever since the time of King
Henry the fifth; that if there were any Idolatry in it, neither Queen Elizabeth
(who drove out Popery) nor King James (who kept out Popery) would have suffered
it to remain in Practice; and in a word, that if it were Gods Worship and not
Idolatry, he ought to do it as well as they: but if it were Idolatry, and no
Worship of God, they ought to do it no more than he. But the fourteenth and
last charge which most concerned him and the rest of the Bishops to make answer
to, was the forging of a new Article of Religion brought from Rome, (to
justify their proceedings and Innovations) and foysting it to the beginning of
the twentieth Article. The Clause pretended to be added, is, That the Church
has power to decree Rites and Ceremonies, and Authority in Controversies of
^aith, because not found (say they) in the Latin or English Articles of King
Edward the sixth, or Queen Elizabeth, ratified by Parliament; adding, that if
to forge a Will or Writing be censurable in the Star Chamber, though it be but
a wrong to a Private man: how much more should the forgery of an Article of
Religion be censured there, which is a wrong to the whole Church? And unto this
he answered, that the Articles made in the time o^ King Edward the sixth were
not now in force, and therefore not material whether that Clause be in or out;
that in the Articles as they passed in Queen Elizabeth's time this Clause was to
be found in the English Edition of the year 1612. of the year 1605. of the year
1593. and in Latin in the year 1563. being one of the first Printed Copies
after the Articles had been agreed on in the Convocation; that it was to be
found in the same terms in the Records of Convocation, Anno 1562. as he proved
by a Certificate under the hand of a public Notary; and therefore finally,
that no such forgery in adding that Clause unto that Article had been committed
by the Prelates to serve their own turns by gaining any power to the Church:
but that the said Clause had been razed out by some of those men, or some of
that Faction to weaken the just power of the Church, and to serve their own.

These Innovations thus passed over and discharged, he signifies unto their
Lordships, That some other Charges were remaining in matter of Doctrine; that
they should presently be answered, justo volumine, to satisfy all well-minded
people; and that when Burtons Book was answered, (his Book he said, but not his
raylings) none of the rest should be answered either by him or by his care;
leaving that Court to find a way for stopping the mouths of such Libellers, or
else for him, they should rail on as long as they listed. And thus beginning
to draw toward an end, he declares himself to be in the same case with St.
Cyprian, then Bishop of Carthage, bitterly railed upon by a pack of
Schismatics, and yet conceiving himself bound (which he made his own
Resolution also) not to answer them with the like Levities or Revilings, but to
write and speak only as becomes a Priest of God; that by Gods grace the
Reproaches of such men should not make him faint or start aside, (...) cum
(...) sac^re.
either from the right way in matter of Practice, or a certa Regula, from the
certain Rule of Faith. Which said, and craving pardon of their Lordships for
his necessary length, he thanks them for their just and honorable censure of
those men in their unanimous dislike of them, and defense of the Church; Makes
his excuse from passing any censure of them, in regard the business had some
reflection on himself; and so leaves them to Gods mercy and the Kings Justice.

Thus have I acted Phocion's part in cutting short the long and well-studied
Speech of this grave and Eloquent Demosthenes; which I have been the more
willing to reduce to so brief an Abstract, that the Reader may perceive,
without the least loss of time and labor, on what weak grounds the Puritan
Faction raised their outcry against Innovations, and what poor trifles many of
those Innovations were, against which they clamoured and cried out. But for the
Speech in its full length, as it gave great satisfaction unto all that heard
it: so by his Majesty's Command it was afterward Printed, for giving the like
satisfaction to all those who should please to read it. In obedience unto which
Command he caused the said Speech to be Printed and Published, although he was
not ignorant (as he declares in his Epistle to the King) that many things while
they are spoken, and pass by the ears but once, give great content, which when
they come to the eyes of men, and their open scanning, may lie open to some
exceptions. And so it proved in the event; for though the Speech was highly
magnified as it came from his mouth: yet it had not been long published in
Print, when it was encountered with a base and Libellous Answer, without the
name of any Author, Place, or Printer, or any Bookseller (according to the
unusual Custom) where, and of whom it might be bought. I shall not trouble my
self any more about it than by a Transcript of the Title, which was this that
follows: viz. DIVINE and POLITIC OBSERVATIONS, newly translated out of the
Dutch Language, wherein they were lately divulged, upon some lines in the
Speech of the Archbishop of Canterbury, pronounced in the STAR CHAMBER the
fourteenth of June, 1637. VERY expedient for preventing all prejudice which as
well through ignorance, as through malice and flattery, may be incident to the
judgment which men make thereby, either of his Graces power over the Church,
and with the King: or of the Equity, Justice and Wisdom of his ENDS in his said
Speech; and of the reasons used by him for attaining to his said ENDS. And
though he took great care and pains concerning that supposed additional clause
to the 20th Article, so much as might satisfy any man, not extremely partial;
yet find I a late Writer so unsatisfied in it, that he leaves it to the
State-Arithmeticians to decide the Controversy, whether the Bishops were more
faulty in the addition, than the opposites in their substraction of it.

One other Charge there was, and a great one too, which I find not touched at
in this Speech; and that is, that the Prelates neither had, nor sought to have
the Kings Letters Patents under the Great Seal of England for their keeping
Courts and Visitations, Burt. Sermon. p. 69.
etc. but did all in their own Names, and under their own Seals, contrary to
the Law in that behalf. Concerning which we are to know, that by a Statute made
in the first year of King Edward the Sixth, 1 Edw. 6. c. 2.
it was Enacted, That all Summons, Citations, and other Process Ecclesiastical
in all Suites and causes of Instance, and all causes of Correction, and all
causes of Bastardy, or Bigamy, or De jure Patronatus, Probates of Testaments,
and Commissions of Administrations of persons deceased, be made in the name,
and with the Style of the King, as it is in Writs Original or Judicial at the
Common Law, etc. As also that no matter of person or persons who has the
Exercise of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, use any other Seal of Jurisdiction but
wherein his Majesty's Arms be engraven, etc. on pain of incurring his Majesty's
indignation, and suffering imprisonment at his will and pleasure. Which
Statute, and every branch thereof, being repealed by Queen Mary, and not
revived by Queen Elizabeth in all her Reign, the Bishops of her time were safe
enough from any danger on that side. But in the first Parliament of King James
there passed an Act, for continuing and reviving of diverse Statutes, and for
repealing of some others, 1 Iac. c. 25. Into the Body whereof a Clause was
cunningly conveyed (his Majesty's Council learned, not considering, or
fraudulently conniving at it) for the repealing of that Statute of the Reign of
Queen Mary, by which King Edwards stood repealed; of which no notice being
taken for some while by those whom it chiefly did concern, it was now
discovered, and made use of as a Rod to affright the Prelates from exercising
their Jurisdiction over obstinate and incorrigible Non-conformists, as formerly
they had been accustomed. For remedy whereof, and for encouraging the Bishops
to perform their duties, i^ was declared by the Judges with an unanimous
consent, and so delivered by the Lords Chief Justices in the Star Chamber, the
fourteenth of May in this present year, That the said Act of Repeal, 1 of Queen
Mary, did still stand in force as unto that particular Statute by them so much
pressed. This was sufficient for the present, but the Archbishop would not
trust to it for the time to come; and thereupon in in his Epistle to the King,
before remembered, He humbly desired his Majesty in the Churches name, That it
might be resolved by all the Reverend Judges of England, and then published by
his Majesty, that the Bishops keeping of their Courts, and issuing Processes in
their own names, and the like exceptions formerly taken, and now renewed, were
not against the Laws of this Realm, that so the Church Governors might go on
cheerfully in their duty, and the peoples minds be quieted by this assurance,
that neither their Law, nor their Liberty, as Subjects, was thereby infringed.
A motion favorably heard, and graciously granted; his Majesty issuing out his
Royal Proclamation, on the eighteenth day o^ August then next following, For
declaring that the proceedings of his Ecclesiastical C^urts and Ministers were
according to Law. The Tenor of which Proclamation or Declaration was as
follows: By the King.
WHereas in some of the Libellous Books and Pamphlets lately published the most
Reverend Fathers in God, the Lord Archbishops and Bishops of the Realm are said
to have usurped upon his Majesty's Prerogative Royal, and to have proceeded in
the High Commission, and other Ecclesiastical Courts contrary to the Laws and
Statutes of the Realm: It was Ordered by his Majesty's High Court of
Star Chamber, the twelfth of June last, that the Opinion of the two Lords Chief
Justices, the Lord Chief Baron, and the rest of the Judges and Barons should be
had and certified in these particulars, viz. whether Processes may not issue
out of the Ecclesiastical Courts in the names of the Bishops? Whether a Patent
under the Great Seal be necessary for the keeping of the Ecclesiastical Courts,
and enabling Citations, Suspensions, Excommunications, and other Censures of
the Church? And whether the Citations ought to be in the Kings Name, and under
his Seal of Arms; and the like for Institutions and Inductions to Benefices,
and correction of Ecclesiastical offenses? And whether Bishops, Archdeacons,
and other Ecclesiastical persons may or ought to keep any Visitation at any
time, unless they have express Commission or Patent under the great Seal of
England to do it; and that as his Majesty Visitors only, and in his name and
right alone.

Whereupon his Majesty's said Judges having taken the same into their s^rious
consideration, did unanimously agree and concur in opinion, and the first day
of July last certified under their hands as follows: That Processes may issue
out of Ecclesiastical Courts in the name of the Bihops, and that a Patent under
the Great Seal is not necessary for the keeping of the said Ecclesiastical
Courts, or for the enabling of Citations, Suspensions, Excommunications, and
other Censures of the Church. And that it is not necessary that Summons,
Citations, or other Processes Ecclesiastical in the said Courts, or
Institutions, and Inductions to benefices, or correction of Ecclesiastical
offenses by Censure in those Courts be in the Kings name, or with the Style of
the King, or with the Kings Seal, or the Seals of the Office have in them the
Kings Arms; And that the Statute, 1 Edw. 6. c. 2. which enacted the contrary,
is not now in force; And that the Archbishops, Bishops, Archdeacons, and other
Ecclesiastical persons, may keep their Visitations, as usually they have done,
without Commission under the Great Seal so to do. Which opinions and
resolutions being declared under the hands of all his Majesty's said Judges,
and so certified into his Court of Star Chamber, were there recorded: And it
was by that Court further ordered the fourth of the said July, That the said
Certificate should be enrolled in all other his Majesty's Courts at
Westminister, and in the High Commission and other Ecclesiastical Courts for
the satisfaction of all men; That the proceedings in the High Commission and
other Ecclesiastical Courts are agreeable to the Laws and Statutes of this
Realm.

And his Royal Majesty has thought fit, with the Advice of his Council, that a
public Declaration of these the Opinions of his reverend and learned Judges,
being agreeable to the Judgment and Resolution of former times, should be made
known to all his Subjects, as well to vindicate the Legal Proceedings of his
Ecclesiastical Courts and Ministers from the unjust and scandalous imputation
of invading or intrenching on his Royal Prerogative, as to settle the minds and
stop the mouths of all unquiet Spirits, that for the future they presume not to
censure his Ecclesiastical Courts, or Ministers in these their just and
warranted pr^ceedings. And hereof his Majesty admonishes all his Subjects to
take warning as they will answer the contrary at their Peril.

Given at the Court at Lindburst the 13 day of August in the 13th year of his
Reign, 1637.


Having carried on this business as far as we can without breaking the rule of
time in too gross a manner, we must go back to the Star Chamber, where we left
the Bishop of Lincoln ready to put in his Answer after many delays. In which
estate the business stood, when Kilvert, a Proctor in the Arches, who had been
formerly employed in hunting Bennet, a corrupt Judge of the Prerogative Court,
to his final Sentence, was entertained to prosecute this Bishop to the like
confusion; who having found by diligent inquiry, and subtle practices, that the
Bishops purgation depended most upon the testimony of one Prigeon, the Register
of the Court at Lincoln, he made it his chief work, by discrediting the
Witness, to invalidate and make void his evidence, he lays a Bastard to his
charge, and there appeared sufficient ground to indict him for it. The Bishop
apprehending himself necessitated to weight up Prigeon his repute, engaged
himself more zealously therein than was consistent with the gravity of so great
a Prelate for so inconsiderable a person. The Fathering of this Bastard is
bandied betwixt Prigeon and one Boon from Sessions to Sessions, and from one
year unto another, till the Mother of the Child was found to have been tampered
with by some of the Bishops Creatures to charge it wholly upon Boon. On the
discovery of which practice Kilvert lets go his former hold, and exhibits a new
Bill against the Bishop for subornation of Witnesses, a crime most proper for
that Court. The Bishop now finds himself at a loss, and endeavors a
Composition with his Majesty, being willing to lay down a good Sum of Money,
for the purchasing of his own Peace and his Majesty's Favor; which afterward
was urged against him, to prove him conscious of the Crime which he stood
accused for. On Tuesday the eleventh of July he received his Doom, which was to
pay 8000 l. unto the King, to be Suspended a Beneficiis and Officiis, and stand
committed unto Prison at his Majesty's Pleasure. To this Sentence the
Archbishop consented amongst the rest, aggravating the fault of Subornation of
Perjury, with a pathetical Speech of almost an hour long, Chapter Hist. lib. 11. p.
157.
showing how the World was above three thousand years old, before it was ripe
enough to commit so great a Wickedness; That Iezabel was the first in
Scripture, which had been branded with that Infamy, whose Witnesses could find
no other name in Scripture than the Sons of Belial: And therefore, That
considering the greatness of the offense, though before he had been five times
on his knees before his Majesty in the Bishops behalf, yet now he could not but
agree to the heaviest Censure. To which Sentence the whole Court concurred, his
best Friends amongst them, who gave themselves not a little hope, that the
rigor of it (especially as unto the Fine) might receive mitigation; though in
the end, his Majesty looking on him, both as adjudged to be guilty, and well
known to be solvent, it was no wonder if the utmost penny of it were exacted.

He had not lain long under this Suspension and Imprisonment, but he began to
find how dreadful a thing it was to fall into a Kings displeasure; and
thereupon made use of all his Friends at Court, for the re-obtaining of his own
Liberty, and his Majesty's Favor: And to that end, he made means by the Queen
to be admitted to a Reconciliation with him, offering both his Bishopric, and
Deanery of Westminster, in confidence that the King would so provide for him,
that he should not go much less than he was. The King, upon the Queens desire,
sent the Earl of Dorset (from whose mouth I had it) to accept the Bishops Offer
on the one side; and on the other side, to promise him in his Majesty's Name,
the next good Bishopric which should fall in Ireland. Which Proposition being
made, the Bishop absolutely refused to hearken to it, telling the Earl of
Dorset, That he had made a shift, by the Power and Mediation of his Friends, to
hold out against his Enemies here for seven years together: but if they should
send him into Ireland, he should there fall into the hands of a man, who once
in seven Months would find out some old Statute or other to cut off his head.
Which double dealing did so cool the Affections of his Friends in Court, that
for three years and more there were no further Endeavors used for his
Enlargement: During which time, he never went unto the Chapel of the Tower,
where he was Imprisoned, to attend the Divine Service of the Church, or hear
the Sermon there, or receive the Sacrament, as all other Protestant Prisoners
had been used to do: but kept himself only to his Private Devotions, to which
his nearest Servants were not often admitted: Which whether it gave the greater
scandal to the Protestants, Puritans, or Papists, it is hard to say.

But great Persons must not fall alone. Three of his Servants which had been
most active in the business, were censured at the same time also; Walker his
Secretary, fined at 300 l. Powell an Officer of his Household, fined no more
than he: But Land, who left his Business in the Court of Lincoln to attend this
Suit, at 1000 Marks. All of them censured to Imprisonment, which none suffered
but he, and that but for a short time neither. Nor were their Fines exacted of
them, which (as the Bishop after found to his cost) were in short time to be
commuted into such other Offices as they were to do for Kilvert against their
Master: The Story whereof, desires the Readers further patience, though it
come somewhat out of time, and is briefly this. Osbaldston the late
Schoolmaster, and then Prebend of Westminster, a professed Creature of the
Bishops, and much employed by him in his greatest businesses, had written a
Letter to him about Christmas, in the year 1635. touching some Heats which
happened in that cold Season, betwixt the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Lord
Treasurer Weston: Osbaldston conceiving this to be a fit opportunity for the
Bishop to close in with Weston, and by his means to extricate himself out of
those Perplexities, in which this Star Chamber Suit had so long entangled him.
This Intelligence he disguised in these expressions, viz. The little Vermin,
the Vrchin and Hocus Pocus, is this stormy Christmas at true and real variance
with the great Leviathan. And this conceit, the Bishop out of too much jollity
makes known to others, by whom at last it came to Kilvert; who laying hold on
the Advantage, exhibits a new Bill against him, for divulging Scandalous Libels
against Privy Counselors; there being good proof to be produced, That by the
names of Little Vermin, Vrchin, and Hocus Pocus, the writer of that Letter
designed no other than the Archbishop, and the Lord Treasurer Weston by the
Great Leviathan. Both being made Parties to the Bill, Osbaldston answers for
himself, That by Leviathan, he intended Chief Justice Richardson; and Spicer a
Doctor of Laws, by the other Character: The differing statures of the men,
seeming to make good this Construction, which the Grammar of the Text might
bear, as well as the other. The Bishop pleaded for his part* That he remembered
not the receiving of any such Letter; and that if any such Letter had come unto
him, it could not be brought within the compass of a Libel, because not written
in such plain and significant terms as might apparently decypher and set forth
the Person intended in it. But all this proved to be but shifts on either side;
for Kilvert had a Letter ready (which Walker was supposed to have put into his
hands) to make sure work of it; a Letter which the Bishop had writ to the said
Walker, being then his Secretary, at the time of that falling out betwixt Laud
and Weston. Here is a strange thing (says that Letter) Mr. Osbaldston
importunes me to contribute to my Lord Treasurers use, some Charges upon the
Little Great Man, and assures me they are mortally out. I have utterly refused
to meddle in this business; and I pray you learn from Mr. S. and Mr. H. if any
such falling out be, or whether somebody has not gulled the Schoolmaster in
these three last Letters; and keep it unto your self, what I write unto you. If
my Lord Treasurer would be served by me, he must use a more near, solid, and
trusty Messenger, and free me from the Bonds of the Star Chamber; else let them
fight it out for me.

This Secret thus discovered, and the Mystery opened, it was not long before
the Cause was brought to Censure: For the two Letters being compared with the
Time and Circumstances, it was no hard matter to the Lords (who had their own
Concerment in it) to conclude both of them to be guilty of the Crime called
Scandalum Magnatum, a Libelling and defaming the Great Men of the Realm,
pro^ibited and punishable by the Laws of the Land. So that no Buckler being
^ound to bear off the Blow, a Fine of another 8000 l. was imposed on the
Bishop, Osbaldston fined 5000 l. to be deprived of all his Ecclesiastical
Preferments, his Ears to be tacked to the Pillory in the Palace-yard, and
Damages or Costs of Suit to be paid by both to the Archbishop of Canterbury. A
Censure greater than the Crime (as most men conceived) in respect of
Osbaldston, whose Indiscretion might have been corrected with far less
severity; and less severity was intended, then the Sentence intimated; For
though Osbaldston at that time conceived the Archbishop to be his greatest
Enemy, yet the Archbishop was resolved to show himself his greatest Friend,
assuring the Author of this History (before any thing was known of his supposed
flight) that he would cast himself at the Kings feet, for obtaining a discharge
of that corporal punishment unto which he was Sentenced. Which may obtain the
greater credit, first, in regard that no course was taken to stop his flight,
no search made after him, nor any thing done in order to his Apprehension. And
secondly, By Osbaldstons readiness to do the Archbishop all good Offices in the
time of his Troubles, upon the knowledge which was given him (at his coming
back) of such good intentions: For Osbaldston not hoping for so much favor,
and fearing more the shame of the Punishment, than the loss of Preferment, had
seasonably withdrawn himself to a Friend^ House in London, where he lay
concealed, causing a noise to be spread abroad of his going beyond Sea, and
signifying by a Paper which he left in his Study, That he was gone beyond
Canterbury. But this happened not till the latter end of the year next following,
though I have laid it here together, because of the coherence which it has
with the former Story.

To look back therefore where we left; The Bishop of Lincoln was no sooner
Suspended by the High Commission (that part of the Sentence being executed July
24.) but all the Profits of his Preferments in the Church, were Sequestered to
the Use of the King: A Privy Seal is sent to the Sub-Dean and Prebends of the
Church of Westminster, requiring them to set apart all the Profits, certain and
uncertain, which of right accrued unto that Dean, and to pay the same from time
to time into the Receipt of the Exchequer. And that his Majesty's Profits might
not suffer any diminution, nor the Prebends of that Church be punished for the
fault of their Dean, a Commission was issued under the Great Seal of England,
inabling them to Let and Set, to Renew Leases, keep Courts, and make Grants of
Offices; and finally, to act and do all manner of things which concerned the
Government of that Church, in as ample manner as if the Dean himself had been
present at the doing of them. The like course also taken, in gathering in the
Profits of his other Promotions; those of the Bishopric of Lincoln, naturally
flowing into the Exchequer, as in times of Vacancy. And as for his Episcopal
Jurisdiction, that fell as naturally to the Archbishop of the Province, as the
Temporal Revenue to the King; the Archbishop of Canterbury exercising all kind
of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction throughout the Diocese of Lincoln, not only as
Ordinary of that Diocese, but as Visitor of all those Colleges which had any
dependence on that See. Amongst which Colleges, as that of Eaton was the
chief, so there was somewhat in it which was thought to want a present Remedy;
some Information being given, That they had diminished the number of their
Fellows from Ten to Seven. This being a matter easily to be proved, they were
required to make up their number, according to their first Foundation by King
Henry vi. But against this, the Fellows pleaded, That out of an hatred to their
Founder, a great part of their Lands had been taken from them by King Edward
iv. conferred by him upon the Abbey of Westminster and the Church of Windsor,
and by them enjoyed until this day; and that they hoped his Grace would not tie
them to maintain the whole number of their Fellows, with little more than half
their Lands. To which so reasonable a desire, upon full proof made of the
Suggestion, his Grace did readily consent, and left them in the same state in
which he found them.

The noise of these Proceedings in England, in the June and July of this year,
being quickly posted to the Scots, became a principal Incentive of those
Combustions, which not long after inflamed that Kingdom; For it could be no
hard matter for the Presbyterians there, to possess the People with the sense
of the like smart Sufferings, by the Pride and Tyranny of their Bishops, if
they permitted them to grow great and powerful, and did not cast about in time
to prevent the mischief. And to exasperate them the more, the Superstitions of
the Liturgy, now at the point of being put in execution, were presented to
them; which if once settled amongst them, as was then intended, would in short
time reduce them under the Obedience of the Church of Rome. They could not but
confess, That many things which were found fault with in the English Liturgy,
were in this altered unto the better, the name of Priest (so odious unto them
of the Puritan Faction) changed to that of Presbyter; no fewer than sixty
Chapters, or thereabouts, taken out of the Apocrypha, appointed to be read by
the Church in the English Book, reduced to two, and those two to be read only
on the Feast of All Saints; The new Translation, Authorized by King James,
being used in the Psalms, Epistles, Gospels, Hymns, and Sentences instead of
the old Translation so much complained of in their Books and Conferences. But
what was this compared with those Superstitions, those horrible Corruptions,
and Idolatries, now ready to be thrust upon them, in which this Liturgy as much
exceeded that of England, as that of England had departed from the simplicity
and purity of the holier Churches? Now therefore somewhat must be done to
oppose the entrance of the Popish superstitious Service Book, either now or
never: But the Presbyterian Ministers, who had gone thus far, did not alone
bring fuel to feed this flame, to which some men of all degrees and qualities
did contribute with them. The Lords and Gentry of the Realm, who feared nothing
so much as the Commission of surrendries, above mentioned, laid hold on this
occasion also; and they being seconded by some malecontented Spirits of that
Nation, who had not found the King to be as prodigal of his bounties to them as
his Father had been before, endeavored to possess them with Fears and
Jealousies, that Scotland was to be reduced to the Form of a Province, and
governed by a Deputy, or Lord Lieutenant, as Ireland was. The like done also by
some Lords of secret Counsel, who before had governed as they listed, and
thought their power diminished, and their persons under some neglect, by the
placing of a Lord President over them to direct in Chief. So that the People
generally being fooled into this opinion, that both their Christian and Civil
Liberty was in no small danger, became capable of any impression which the
Presbyterian Faction could imprint upon them; nor did they want encouragements
from the Faction in England, to whom the Publication of the Book for Sports,
the transposing of the holy Table, the suppressing of so many Lecturers, and
Afternoon Sermons, and the inhibiting of Preaching, Writing, Printing, in
defense of Calvinism, were as distasteful and offensive, as the new Liturgy
with all the supposed superstitions of it, was to those of Scotland.

This Combination made, and the ground thus laid, it is no wonder if the people
brake out into those distempers, which soon after followed. Sunday the 23 of
July was the day appointed for the first reading of the New Liturgy in all the
Churches of that Kingdom; and how it sped at Edenborough (which was to be
exemplary to all the rest) shall be told by another, who has done it to my
hand already, July 23. being Sunday, the Dean of Edenborough began to read the
Book in St. Giles his Church (the chief of that City) but he had no sooner
entered on it than the inferior multitude began in a tumultuous manner to fill
the Church with uprore, whereupon the Bishop of Edenborough stepped into the
Pulpit, and hoping to appease them by minding them of the Sanctity of the
place, they were the more enraged, throwing at him Cudgels, Stools, and what
was in the way of Fury, unto the very endangering of his life. Upon this the
Archbishop of St. Andrews, Lord Chancellor, was enforced to call down from the
Gallery the Provost, Bailiffs, and other Magistrates of the City to their
assistance, who, with much ado, at length thrust the unruly Rabble out of the
Church, and made fast the doors. This done, the Dean proceeded in reading the
Book, the multitude in the mean while rapping at the doors, pelting the Windows
with stones, and endeavoring what in them lay to disturb the Sacred Exercise:
but notwithstanding all this clamor the Service was ended, but not the peoples
rage, Hist. K. C. p. 153.
who waiting the Bishops retiring to his Lodging, so assaulted him, as had he
not been rescued by a strong hand, he had probably perished by their violence.
Nor was S. Giles his Church thus only pestered and profaned, but in other
Churches also (though not in so high a measure) the peoples disorders were
agreeable. The Morning thus past, the Lord Chancellor and Council assembled to
prevent the like darings in the Afternoon, which they so effected as the
Liturgy was read without any disturbance: Only the Bishop of Edenborough was in
his return to his Lodging rudely treated by the people, the Earl of Roxboroughs
Coach, in which he passed, serving for no protection to him; though Roxborough
himself was highly favored of the People, and not without some cause suspected
to have had a hand in the Commotions of that day.

The business, having thus miscarried in Edenborough, stood at a stand in all
other Churches of that Kingdom; and therefore it will not be amiss to enquire
in this place into the causes and occasions of it: it seeming very strange to
all knowing and discerning men, that the Child that had so long lain in the
Womb, perfectly formed, and now made ready for the birth, should not have
strength enough to be delivered. Amongst which causes, if disposed into rank
and order, that which appears first is the confidence which Canterbury had in
the Earl of Traquaire, whom he had raised from the condition of a private Lord
to be a Peer of that Realm, made him first Treasurer Depute ( Chancellor of the
Exchequer we should call him in England) afterward Lord Treasurer and Privy
Counselor of that Kingdom. This man he wrought himself so far into Lauds good
liking, when he was Bishop of London only, that he looked upon him as the
fittest Minister to promote the Service of that Church, taking him into his
nearest thoughts, communicating to him all his Counsels, committed to his care
the conduct of the whole Affair, and giving order to the Archbishops and
Bishops of Scotland not to do any thing without his privity and direction. But
being an Hamiltonian Scot (either originally such, or brought over at last) he
treacherously betrayed the cause, communicated his Instructions to the opposite
Faction from one time to another, and conscious of the plot for the next days
tumult, withdrew himself to the Earl of Mortons house of Dalkeith, to expect
the issue. And possible it is, that by his advice, the executing of the Liturgy
was put off from Easter; at what time the reading of it was designed by his
Majesty, as appears by the Proclamation of December 20. which confirmed the
Book. By which improvident delay he gave the Presbyterian Faction the longer
time to confederate themselves against it, and to possess the people with Fears
and Jealousies, that by admitting of that book they should lose the Purity of
their Religion, and be brought back unto the Superstitions and Idolatries of
the Church of Rome. And by this means the People were inflamed into that
Sedition, which probably might have been prevented by a quicker prosecution of
the Cause at the time appointed, there being nothing more destructive of all
public Counsels than to let them take wind amongst the People, cooled by
delays, and finally blown up (like a strong Fortress undermined) by some
subtle practice. And there were some miscarriages also amongst the Prelates of
the Kirk in not communicating the design with the Lords of the Council, and
other great men of the Realm, whose Countenance both in Court and Country might
have sped the business. Canterbury had directed the contrary in his Letters to
them, when the first draughts of the Liturgy were in preparation, and seems not
well pleased in another of his to the Archbishop of St. Andrews, Cant. to
Traquaire. Sept. 11. H^^d. W^rke, p. 168.
bearing date September 4. that his advice in it was not followed, nor the
whole body of the Council made acquainted with their Resolutions, or their
advice taken, or their power called in for their assistance till it was too
late. It was complained of also by some of the Bishops, that they were made
strangers to the business, who in all Reason ought to have been trusted with
the knowledge of that intention, which could not otherwise than by their
diligence and endeavors amongst their Clergy, be brought to a happy execution.
Nor was there any care taken to adulce the Ministers, to gain them to the Cause
by fair hopes and promises, and thereby to take off the edge of such Leading
men as had an influence on the rest; as if the work were able to carry on it
self, or have so much Divine assistance as countervailed the want of all helps
from man. And which perhaps conduced as much to the destruction of the Service
as all the rest, a public intimation must be made in all their Churches on the
Sunday before, that the Liturgy should be read on the Lords day following, of
purpose, as it were, to unite all such as were not well affected to it, to
disturb the same.

And there were some miscarriages also, which may be looked on as Accessories
after the Fact, by which the mischief grew remediless, and the malady almost
incurable. For first, the Archbishops and Bishops most concerned in it, when
they saw what happened, consulted by themselves apart, and sent up to the King
without calling a Council, or joining the Lay Lords with them; whereas all had
been little enough in a business of that nature, and so much opposed by such
Factious persons as gathered themselves on purpose together at Edenborough to
disturb the Service. A particular in which the Lay Lords could not be engaged
too far; if they had been treated as they ought. But having run upon this error
they committed a worse in leaving Edenborough to it self, and retiring every
one to his own Diocese, except those of Galloway and Dumblaine, For certainly
they must needs think (as Canterbury writes in one of his Letters to Traquaire)
that the Adverse party would make use of the present time to put further
difficulties upon the work; and therefore that they should have been as careful
to uphold it, the Bishop of Ross especially, whose hand had been as much in it
as the most. But possibly the Bishops might conceive the place to be unsecure,
and therefore could not stay with safety, neither the Lords of the Council, nor
the Magistrates of the City having taken any course to bring the chief
Ringleaders of the Tumult to the Bar of Justice: which must needs animate all
disaffected and seditious persons, and almost break the hearts of those who
were well inclined. And such indeed was the neglect of the Civil Magistrate
that we hear of no man punished, scarce so much as questioned, for so great a
Riot, as was not to be expiated but by the death, or some proportionable
punishment of the chief offenders. Which had it been inflicted on some three or
four for a terror to others, it might have kept that City quiet, and the whole
Kingdom in obedience for the time to come, to the saving of the lives of many
thousands (some hundreds of thousands at the least in all the three Kingdoms)
most miserably lost in those long and cruel Wars, which ensued upon it. But the
Lords of Scotland were so far from looking before them, that they took care
only for the present, and instead of executing Justice on the Malefactors,
suspended the Liturgy it self as the cause of the Tumult, conceiving it a
safer way to calm the differences than to increase the storm by a more rigorous
and strict proceeding. All that they did in order to his Majesty's Service, or
the Churches peace, was the calling in of a scandalous Pamphlet, entitled, A
dispute against the English Popish Ceremonies obtruded on the Kirk of Scotland;
which not being done till October 20 following, rather declared their
willingness to suffer the said Book to be first dispersed and set abroad, then
to be called in and suppressed.

Nor seemed the business to be much taken to heart in the Court of England,
from whom the Scots expected to receive Directions: Nor Order given them for
unsheathing the Sword of Justice, to cut off such unsound and putrified
Members, which might have saved the whole Body from a Gangreen: the drawing of
some Blood in the Body Politic, by the punishment of Malefactors, being like
letting Blood in the Body Natural, which in some strong Distempers does
preserve the whole. Or granting that the Tumult had been grown so high, and so
strongly backed, that Justice could not safely have been done upon them; a way
might have been found to have cooled the Fever, without loss of Blood, by
bringing the whole Corporation under the danger of a forfeiture of their Lands
and Liberties in a Legal way; which course proved so successful unto King JAMES
on the like occasion, Anno 1597. Or finally, supposing that the Cause admitted
not such a long delay, if then his Majesty had but sent a Squadron of the Royal
Navy which he had at Sea, to block up their Haven, he had soon brought the
Edenburghers unto his devotion, and consequently kept all the rest of the
Kingdom in a safe Obedience. This was the way to keep them under; and of this
course the People of the City were more afraid, than of any other. Somewhat
they are to do, which might make his Majesty hope better of them than they had
deserved; and nothing they could do which might better please him, than to
express their cheerfulness in admitting the Liturgy. To this end they
addressed their Letters to the Archbishop of Canterbury, as more concerned in
this Affair than any other of the Lords which were near his Majesty, expressing
in the same their great dislike of the late Tumult; for their Innocence
therein, they refer themselves to his Majesty's Council in that Kingdom,
declaring further their concurrence with the Bishops which remained in the
City, and the Ministry of the same, for settling the Service Book; and offering
Means above their Power, to such as should undertake the Reading of it; and
finally, desiring his Grace to make known to his Majesty, how ready they were
at all points to advance the Service, which they promised to accept as an
accumulation of his Graces Favors unto them and their City. And that this
Letter of theirs, which bears date the nineteenth of August, might bear the
greater credit with him, they did not only seem industrious for the
apprehending of some, and the inquiring after others of the Principal Actors;
but bound themselves by an Obligatory Act of the Common Council, Hist. K. Chapter
(...) H. ^. p. 154.
both for the Indemnity and Maintenance of such as should read the Book, the
Ministers of Edenborough refusing to do their parts in it, without such
Encouragements. But the danger was no sooner over, by the coming home of the
Fleet, but they Petitioned the Lords of the Council to put them into the same
condition with the rest of the Subjects; and that the Service Book should be no
further pressed on them, than it had been in all the other parts of the
Kingdom: To which they were encouraged by a general confluence of all sorts of
People, such most especially, as had most shown their disaffection to the work
in hand.

For the Harvest was no sooner in, and the People at more leisure than before
to pursue that Quarrel: but the City swarmed with throngs of People from all
parts, even to a formidable number, which moved the Lords to publish two
Proclamations on the seventeenth of October; The first commanding all of them
to repair to their Dwellings, except such as should show sufficient reason for
their stay and continuance there: The second, for Adjourning the Sessions from
Edenborough, to the Town of Linlithgow. But this served rather like the pouring
on of Oil, to increase the Flame; than of Water, to quench it: For the next day
the Bishop of Galloway being to Sit with the Lord Chief Justice upon some
especial Business in the Council-House, he was pursued all along the Street
with bitter Railings to the very Door; and being drawn in from the rage of the
People, they immediately beset the House, demanding the delivery of him, and
threatening his destruction. The Earl of Traquair being advertised of the
Bishops danger (who formerly had been his Tutor) came to his Relief, and with
much ado forced an Entrance through the Press: But being got in, he was in no
better plight than the Bishop, the Clamor still increasing more and more, and
encompassing the Council-House with terrible Menaces. Hereupon the Provost and
City-Council was called to raise the Siege: but they returned answer, That
their condition was the same; for they were surrounded with the like Multitude,
who had enforced them, for fear of their Lives, to sign a Paper importing,
First, That they should adhere to them, in opposition to the Service Book:
Secondly, To restore to their Places Ramsey and Rollock two Silenced Ministers,
and one Henderson a Silenced Reader. No better Answer being returned, the Lord
Treasurer, with the Earl of Wigton, went in Person to the Town-Council-House,
where they found the heat of the fury somewhat abated, because the Magistrates
had signed the Paper; and returned with some hope that the Magistrates would
calm the Disorders about the Council-House, so as the Bishop might be
preserved: But they no sooner presented themselves to the Great Street, than
they were most boysterously assaulted, the Throng being so furious, as they
pulled down the Lord Treasurer, took away his Hat, Cloack, and White Staff, and
so haled him to the Council-House. The Lords seeing themselves in so great
danger, at length pitch upon the best expedient for their safety, and sent to
some of the Noblemen and Gentry, who were disaffected to the Service Book, to
come to their Aid. These Lords and Gentlemen came, as was desired, and offered
both their Persons and Power to protect them; which the Lords and the
Council-House readily embraced, and so were quietly guarded to Holy-Rood-House,
and the Bishop to his Lodging. The Lords of the Council not thinking themselves
to be secure, published a Proclamation the same day in the afternoon, for
repressing such Disorders for the time to come: But they found slender
Obedience yielded to it, Commissioners being sent unto them from the Citizens,
in an insolent manner, for demanding the Restitution of their Ministers to
their Place and Function, and performing all such Matters as had been agreed on
at the Pacification.

These Riots and Seditions might have served sufficiently in another Reign, to
have drawn a present War upon them, before they were provided in the least
degree to make any resistance: But the Edenburghers knew well enough what they
were to do, what Friends they had about the King, and what a Party they had got
among the Lords of his Council, which Governed the Affairs of that Kingdom: And
they were apt enough to hope, by the unpunishing of the first Tumult on July
23. That the King might rather have patience enough to bear such Indignities,
than Resolution to revenge them; so that he came at last to that perplexity,
which a good Author speaks of, Cum v^ excidenda sit natura, vel minuenda
dignitas. Vell. Paterc. Hist. L D. Bib. Reg. p. 1. and 144.
That he must either out-go his Nature, or fore-go his Authority. For instead
of using his just Power to correct their Insolences, he courts them with his
Gracious Proclamation of the seventh of December, in which he lets them know,
How unwilling he was that his Loyal and Faithful Subjects should be possessed
with groundless and unnecessary doubts and fears touching their Religion; and
therefore was pleased to declare, That as he abhors all Superstitions of
Popery, so he would be most careful that nothing should be allowed within his
Dominions, but that which should most tend to the Advancement of the true
Religion, as it was presently professed within his Ancient Kingdom of Scotland;
and that nothing was nor should be done therein, against the laudable Laws of
that his Native Kingdom. The Rioters perceived by this Proclamation, that the
King was more afraid than hurt: And seeing him begin to shrink, they resolved
to put so many fears upon him one after another, as in the end might fashion
him to their desires. First therefore they began with a new Petition, not of a
rude Multitude: but of Noblemen, Barons, Ministers, Burgesses, and Commons (the
very Flower of the whole Nation) against the Liturgy and Canons. This Petition
being sent to the Courts, could do no less (and it did no more) than produce
another Proclamation in Reply to the Substance of it, some Menaces being
intermingled: but sweetened in the close, to give them the better relish. His
Majesty first lets them know the Piety of his Intent in appointing the
Liturgy, Ibid. p. 14.
assuring them, That he had no other end in it, than the maintenance of the
true Religion there already professed, and the beating down of all
Superstition; That nothing passed in the said Book, but what was seen and
approved by himself, before the same was either divulged or printed; and that
he was assured, That the Book it self would be a very ready means to preserve
the Religion there professed, of which he doubted not to give them satisfaction
in his own time. Which said, he lets them know, That such as had Assembled for
subscribing the said Petition, had made themselves liable to his highest
Censures, both in Life and Fortune; That notwithstanding, he was pleased to
dispense with the error (upon a confidence that it proceeded rather from a
preposterous Zeal, than a disaffection to Sovereignty) on condition that they
retired themselves upon notice hereof, as became good and dutiful Subjects. He
interdicted also the like Concourse as had been lately made at Edenborough,
upon pain of Treason; commanding that none of them should repair to Sterling
(to which the Term was then Adjourned) or any other place of Counsel and
Session, without Warrant from the Lords of the Council; and that all such, of
what sort soever (not being Lords of the Council or Session) which were not
Inhabitants of the Town, should within six hours after publication thereof,
depart the same, except they were so Licenced and Warranted as before is said,
under pain of Treason: And finally, he concludes with this, That he would not
shut his ears against any Petition, upon this or any other Subject, which they
should hereafter tender to him; provided that the matter and form thereof be
not prejudicial to his Regal Authority.

Had his Majesty followed at the heels of this Proclamation, with a powerful
Army, according to the Custom of his Predecessors, Kings of England, it might
have done some good upon them. But Proclamations of Grace and Favor, if not
backed by Arms, are but like Cannons charged with Powder, without Ball or
Bullet, making more noise than execution; and serve for nothing in effect, but
to make the Rebel insolent, and the Prince contemptible, as it proved in this:
For on the very day, and immediately after the reading of it, it was
encountered with a Protestation, published by the Earl of Hume, the Lord
Lindsey, and others, justifying themselves in their Proceedings, disclaiming
all his Majesty's Offers of Grace and Pardon, and positively declaring their
Resolution to go on as they had begun, till they had brought the business to
the end intended. And in pursuance hereof, they erected a new Form of
Government amongst themselves, despotical enough in respect of those who
adhered unto them, and unaccountable to his Majesty for their Acts and Orders.
This Government consisted of four Tables, for the four Orders of the State,
that is to say, the Noblemen, Barons, Burgesses, and Ministers; each Order
consulting at his own Table, of such things as were necessary for the carrying
on of the Design; which being reduced into Form, were offered, debated, and
concluded at the General Table, consisting of a choice number of Commissioners
out of all the rest. And that this new Government might be looked on with the
greater reverence, they fixed themselves in Edenborough, the Regal City,
leaving the Lords of Council and Session to make merry at Sterling, where they
had little else to do than to follow their Pleasures. The Tables were no sooner
formed, but they resolved upon renewing of the Ancient Confession of that Kirk,
with a Band thereunto subjoined, but fitted and accommodated to the present
occasion, which had been signed by King James on the 28th. of January, Anno
1580. after their Account, and generally subscribed by all the Nation. And by
this Band they entered Covenant for Maintenance of their Religion then
professed, and his Majesty's Person: but aiming at the destruction of both; as
appears both by the Band it self, and their Gloss upon it: For by the one
they had bound themselves to defend each other against all Persons whatsoever,
the King himself not being excepted; and by the other they declared, That under
the general Names of Popery, Heresy and Superstition, which were there
expressed, they had abjured (and required all others so to do) not only the
Liturgy and Canons lately recommended to them, but the Episcopal Government,
and the five Articles of Perth, though confirmed by Parliament. And to this
Covenant, in this sense, they required an Oath of all the Subjects, which was
as great an Usurpation of the Regal Power, as they could take upon themselves,
for confirming their own Authority and the Peoples Obedience, in any Project
whatsoever which should afterward issue from those Tables.

In this Estate we leave the Scots, and return to England, where we shall find
all things in a better condition, at least as to the outward appearance,
whatsoever secret workings were in agitation amongst the Grandees and chief
Leaders of the Puritan Faction. Little or no noise raised about the publishing
of the Book for Sports, or silencing the Calvinian Doctrines, according to his
Majesty's Declaration before the Articles: No clamor touching the transposing
of the Holy Table, which went on leisurely in most places, vigorously in many,
and in some stood still. The Metropolitical Visitation, and the Care of the
Bishops, had settled these Particulars in so good a way, that men's Passions
began to calm, and their Thoughts to come to some repose, when the Commands had
been more seriously considered of, than at first they were. And now the
Visitation having been carried into all parts of the Realm of England, and
Dominion of Wales, his Grace began to cast his eye upon the Islands of Guernsey
and Iersey, two Islands lying on the Coast of Normandy, to the Dukedom whereof
they once belonged, and in the Right of that Dukedom to the Crown of England.
Iersey, the bigger of the two, more populous, and of richer soil: but of no
great Trading. Guernsey the lesser, the more barren: but nourishing a wealthier
People, Masters of many stout Barques, and managing a rich Trade with the
neighboring Nations. Attempted often by the French, since they seized on
Normandy: but always with repulse and loss, the People being very affectionate
to the English Government, under which they enjoy very ample Privileges, which
from the French they could not hope for. As parts of Normandy, they were
subject in Ecclesiastical Matters to the Bishops of Constance in that Dukedom,
and so continued till the Reformation of Religion here in England, and were
then added to the Diocese and Jurisdiction of the Bishops of Winchester. But
the Genevian Discipline being more agreeable to such Preachers as came to them
from France, they obtained the Exercise thereof in the eighth year of Queen
Elizabeth, Anno 1565. The whole Government distinguished into two Classes or
Colonies; that of Iersey of it self being one, and that of Guernsey, with the
Islands of Sark and Alderney, making up the other; both Classes meeting in a
Synod every second or third year, according to the Order of their Book of
Discipline, digested by Snape and Cartwright, (the two great Ringleaders of
that Faction here in England) in a Synod held at Guernsey, June 28. 1576. And
this manner they continued till the time of King James, when the Churches in
the Isle of Iersey falling into some disorder, and being under an immediate
Governor who was no great Friend to Calvin's Platform, they were
necessitated, for avoiding of a greater mischief, to cast themselves into the
Arms of the Church of England. The principal Ecclesiastical Officer, whilst
they were under the Bishops of Constance, had the Title of Dean; for each
Island one; the several Powers both of the Chancellor and Archdeacon, being
united in his Person. This Office is restored again, his Jurisdiction marked
out, his Fees appointed, his Revenue settled: but made accountable for his
Administration, to the Bishops of Winchester. The English Liturgy is
Translated also into French, to be read in their Churches: Instructions first,
and afterward a Body of Canons framed, for Regulating both the Ministers and
People in their several Duties; those Canons bearing date the last of June, in
the one and twentieth year of that King.

For the confirming of this Island in their Conformity to the Government and
Forms of Worship there established, and the reducing of the others to the like
condition, it was resolved, That the Metropolitical Visitation should be held
in each of them, at the next opening of the Spring. And that it might be
carried on with the greater assurance, the Archbishop had designed a Person for
his Principal Visitor, who had spent some time in either Island, and was well
acquainted with the Bailiffs, Ministers, and men of special note amongst them:
But the Affairs of Scotland growing from bad to worse, this Counsel was
discontinued for the present, and at last laid by for all together.

But these Islands were not out of his mind, though they were out of sight, his
care extending further than his Visitation. The Islanders did use to breed such
of their Sons as they designed for the Ministry either at Saumur or Geneva,
from whence they returned well seasoned with the Leaven of Calvinism. No better
way to purge that old Leaven out of the Islands than to allure the people to
send their Children to Oxon or Cambridge; nor any better expedient to effect
the same than to provide some preferments for them in our Universities. It
happened, that while he was intent on these Considerations, that one Hubbard, the
Heir of Sir Miles Hubbard, Citizen and Alderman of London, departed this Life;
to whom, upon an inquisition taken after his death in due form of Law, no Heir
was found which could lay claim to his Estate. Which falling to the Crown in
such an unexpected manner, and being a fair Estate withal, it was no hard
matter for the Archbishop to persuade his Majesty to bestow some small part
thereof upon pious uses. To which his Majesty consenting, there was so much
allotted out of it, as for the present served sufficiently to endow three
Fellowships for the perpetual Education of so many of the Natives of Guernsey
and Iersey; not without some probable ^ope of doubling the number, as the old
Leases of it should expire. These Fellowships to be founded in Exeter, Jesus,
and Pembroke Colleges, that being dispersed in several Houses, there might be
an increase both of Fellows, and Revenues of the said foundations. By means
whereof he did both piously and prudently provide for those Islands, and the
advancement of Conformity amongst them in the times to come. For what could
else ensue upon it: but that the breeding of some Scholars out of those Islands
in that University, where they might thoroughly acquaint themselves with the
Doctrine, Government, and Forms of Worship established in the Church of England,
they might afterward at their return to their native Countries, reduce the
Natives by degrees to conform unto it; which doubtless in a short time would
have done the work with as much honor to the King, and content to himself, as
satisfaction to those People.

It is not to be thought that the Papists were all this while asleep, and that
neither the disquiets in England, nor the tumults in Scotland were husbanded to
the best advantage of the Catholic Cause. Panzani, as before is said, had laid
the foundation of an Agency or constant correspondence between the Queens Court
and the Popes; and having so done, left the pursuit of the design to Con a
Scot, by birth, but of a very busy and pragmatical head. Arriving in England
about the middle of Summer, Anno 1636. he brought with him many pretended
relics of Saints, Medals and Pieces of Gold with the Popes Picture stamped on
them, to be distributed amongst those of that Party, but principally amongst
the Ladies of the Court and Country, to whom he made the greatest part of his
applications. He found the King and Queen at Holdenby House, and by the Queen
was very graciously entertained, and took up his chief Lodgings in a house near
the new Exchange. As soon as the Court was returned to Whitehall, he applied
himself diligently to his work, practicing upon some of the principal Lords,
and making himself very plausible with the King himself, who hoped he might
make some use of him in the Court of Rome for facilitating the restitution of
the Prince Elector. And finding* that the Kings Councils were much directed by
the Archbishop of Canterbury, he used his best endeavors to be brought into
his acquaintance. But Canterbury neither liked the man, nor the Message which
he came about, and therefore kept himself at a distance, neither admitting him
to Complement, nor Communication. Howsoever by the Kings Connivence, and the
Queens Indulgence, the Popish Faction gathered not only strength, but
confidence; multiplying in some numbers about the Court, and resorting in more
open manner to the Masses at Somerset house, where the Capuchins had obtained
both a Chapel and Convent. Of this none bears the blame but Laud, who is
traduced in Libels and common talk for the principal Architect in the Plot, and
the Contriver of the mischief.

On this account, and the proceedings of the Star Chamber, before remembered,
one Libel is dropped at the South Gate of St. Paul's, on August 23. declaring that
the Devil had left that house to him for the saying of Mass, and other
abominations of the Church of Rome; another two days after fastened to the
North Gate of it, signifying that the Church of England was like a Candle in a
Snuff, going out in a stench. His Speech in the Star Chamber put into a kind of
Pillory, and hanged up at the Standard in Cheapside; and another short Libel
made against him in Verse four days after that. Awakened by so many Alarms he
had good cause to look about him, but more at the great noise, not long after
raised, about the seducing of the Countess of Newport, a Kinswoman of the late
Duke of Buckinghams, to the Church of Rome; effected by the Practices of Walter
Mountague, a younger Son of the Earl of Manchester, and the importunities of
Toby Matthews, (an undeserving Son of a worthy Father) Con interposing in it as
he found occasion. The Archbishop had long stomackt at the Insolences of
Matthews, and Mountague, and had forborne the taking of any public notice of
them, till he had almost lost himself in the sight of the people. But laying
hold on this opportunity, he passionately declares himself at the Council
Table, on October 22. in a full and free Speech to the King, concerning the
increase of the Roman Party, the frequent resort of Papists to Somerset house,
the unsufferable misdemeanors of Matthews, and Mountague, in practicing upon
his Subjects, and chiefly upon those which lived within the verge of the Court,
and were nearest to him, humbly beseeching him to put some strong restraint
upon them, whereby they either might be barred from coming into the Court at
all, or to give no offense and scandal by their misbehaviours. Of this the
Queen had notice that very night, who seemed much displeased at the matter, and
let him see it in her Countenance, whenever he had any cause of coming where
she was. But the Pill was given in a very good hour, and wrought so effectually
with the King, that Mountague and Matthews were purged out of the Court; the
one betaking himself to his Country practice, the other for a time to his
former travels in France and Italy. Which the Queen finding to be past remedy,
and knowing how necessary a Servant the Archbishop was to his Great Master, and
how useful he might be to her in her own affairs, she admitted him to her
speech again in December following; and after some expostulations concerning
Mountague, she began to clear her Countenance, and to part fair with him.

Follow this business into the next year, and we shall find him moving for a
Proclamation, about the calling in of a Popish Book, written in French by
Francis Sales Bishop of Geneva, translated into English, ^
and published by the name of an Introduction to a devout life, which Book
being brought to Haywood, the Archbishops Chaplain, and by him purged of diverse
unsound passages apparently tending unto Popery before it was licenced to the
Press, was notwithstanding published as it came to his hands, without
alteration, the Translator inserting the same passages into it again, and the
Printer conniving at the same. The Printer was thereupon apprehended, and the
Translator diligently sought for to be brought to Justice; his Majesty's care
for maintaining the Religion professed in the Church of England in its natural
purity, being so remarkable that he caused the said Book to be called in, and
as many as could be seized on, to be publicly burned, But that which did most
generally vindicate his Reputation, ^
was the enlarging and re-printing of his Conference with Fisher the Jesuit,
to which he had been moved by some of his private friends (none of them knowing
that any other but himself had made the motion) when the Libellers were most
fierce against him, and afterward advised to it by the King himself at the
Council Table. The former Propositions had disposed him to it, and this desire
of the Kings served for a command to confirm him in it: But multiplicity of
business gave him so little leisure to attend his Studies, that the year was
almost ended before the Book could be made ready for the public view. But at
the last it came from the Press, and was presented to his Majesty on Sunday the
tenth of February, and the next day exposed unto open sale. A Piece so solidly
compacted, (...) K. C. ^. 187.
that one of our Historians (who shows himself to be none of his greatest
Friends) gives it the commendation of being the exactest Masterpiece of
Polemique Divinity of any extant at that time; further affirming, That he
declared himself therein to be so little theirs (he means the Papists) as he
had for ever disabled them from being so much their own as before they were.
(...). p 5.
And DERING, his most professed Adversary, in the Preface to his Book of
Speeches, could not but confess, but that in his Book, especially the last half
of it, he had muzzled the Jesuit, and should strike the Papists under the
fifth Rib, when he was dead and gone. And being dead, that wheresoever his
grave should be, Paul's would be his perpetual Monument, and his own Book his
Epitaph.

But such was his unhappy Fate, that many obstinate and malicious Puritans
would not be otherwise persuaded of him, than before they were; which they
spared not to express upon this occasion: One of his Majesty's Chaplains in
Ordinary had Preached two Sermons in January foregoing on Matt. 13.26. which
being brought into discourse at such time as the Archbishops Book was newly
published, it was affirmed by some moderate men, that the Doctor in those two
Sermons had pulled up Popery by the very roots; one of the company replying
thereunto, That the Archbishop might Print, and the Doctor might Preach what
they pleased against Popery, but that he should never think them, or either of
them, to be the less Papists for all that. A Censure of so strange a nature,
and so little savouring of Christianity, that I believe it is not easy to be
paralelled in the worst of times. And when no Priest nor Jesuit could be found
so confident as to venture on an Answer to it, one of the Presbyterian Scots
(for such he was then generally affirmed to be) published an unlicenced Piece
against him, under the Title of A Reply to a Relation of the Conference betwixt
William Laud and Mr. Fisher the Jesuit, said to be writ by a Witness of Jesus
Christ. In the whole course whereof the Author, whosoever he was, most
miserably perverts his words, and mistakes his meaning, wresting the most
Orthodox and innocent truths to his wicked ends, and putting his own corrupt
Gloss and sense upon them. And which is yet most strange of all, with an
unparalelled impudence he dedicates it to his Sacred Majesty, calling upon him,
To send out his Royal Edict for the taking down of all Altars, (which where
ever they stand, are by him said to stand in open defiance of Christ;) Another
for calling in the Book for Sports on the Lords day; A third, for calling in
his Declaration before the Articles of Religion; A fourth for calling in of all
Orders for the Restraint of Preaching; A fifth, for restoring to their place
and Ministry all those who out of Conscience of their duty to God had by the
Prelates been thrust out of all for refusing to read the said Book; And
finally, for releasing and setting at liberty the three poor banished
prisoners, the loud cry of whose oppressions might otherwise provoke the
thunderbolt of Divine Revenge to blast the beauty of his State.

Now as he labored by these means to preserve the Church of England from the
growth of Popery, so he took care for preventing the subversion of it, by the
spreading of the Socinian Heresies. He had before took care for suppressing all
Books of that nature which had been imported into England out of other
Countries, and had received thanks for it from the Pen of a Jesuit: But Burton
charge it upon him among his Crimes, reproaching him for suppressing those
books for no other reason but because they magnified the Authority of the holy
Scriptures; and by the late Decree for Printing (of which more anon) he had
took such order, that no Eggs of that pestiferous Brood should be laid in
England, or if they were, should ever peep out of the Shell, or appear in
sight. There had been published a Discourse, called, Disquisitio Brevis, in
which some of the principal Socinian Tenants were cunningly inserted,
pretending them for the best Expedients to appease some Controversies betwixt
us and Rome: The Book ascribed in common Speech to Hales of Eaton, a man of
infinite reading, and no less ingenuity; free of Discourse, and as
communicative of his knowledge as the Celestial Bodies of their light and
influences. There past also up and down a Discourse of Schism, not Printed, but
transmitted from hand to hand in written Copies (like the Bishop of Lincolns
Letter to the Vicar of Grantham) intended chiefly for the encouragement of some
of our great Masters of Wit and Reason, to despise the Authority of the Church.
Which being dispersed about this time, gave the Archbishop occasion to send for
him to Lambeth, in hope that he might gain the man, whose abilities he was well
acquainted with when he lived in Oxon. An excellent Grecian in those days, and
one whom Savil made great use of in his Greek Edition of St. Chrysostoms Works.
About nine of the Clock in the Morning he came to know his Graces pleasure, who
took him along with him into his Garden, commanding that none of his Servants
should come at him upon any occasion. There they continued in discourse till
the Bell rang to Prayers, and after Prayers were ended, till the Dinner was
ready, and after that too, till the coming in of the Lord Conway and some other
Persons or honor, put a necessity upon some of his Servants to give him notice
how the time had passed away. So in they came, high colored, and almost
panting for want of breath; enough to show, that there had been some heats
between them, not then fully cooled. It was my chance to be there that day,
either to know his Graces pleasure, or to render an account of some former
commands, but I know not which; and I found Hales very glad to see me in that
place, as being himself a mere stranger to it, and unknown to all. He told me
afterward, That he found the Archbishop (whom he knew before for a nimble
Disputant) to be as well versed in books as business; That he had been
ferretted by him from one hole to another, till there was none left to afford
him any further shelter; That he was now resolved to be Orthodox, and to
declare himself a true Son of the Church of England, both for Doctrine and
Discipline; That to this end he had obtained leave to call himself his Graces
Chaplain, that naming him in his Public Prayers for his Lord and Patron, the
greater notice might be taken of the Alteration. Thus was Hales gained unto the
Church, and gained a good preferment in it; promoted not long after by the
Archbishops Commendation to be Prebend of Windsor, and to hold the same by
special dispensation, with his place in Eaton.

Nor was the Archbishop less intent upon all Advantages for keeping down the
Genevian Party, and hindering them from Printing and Publishing any thing which
might disturb the Churches Peace, or corrupt her Doctrine. To this end he
procured a Decree to be passed in the Star Chamber, on July 1. Anno 1637. to
Regulate the Trade of Printing, and prevent all Abuses of that Excellent Art,
to the disturbance of the Church. By which Decree it had been Ordered, That the
Master-Printers from thenceforth should be reduced to a certain number; and
that if any other should secretly or openly pursue that Trade, he should be set
in the Pillory, or whipped through the Streets, and suffer such other
Punishment as that Court should inflict upon him; That none of the said
Master-Printers should from thenceforth Print any Book or Books of Divinity,
Law, Physic, Philosophy, or Poetry, till the said Books, together with the
Titles, Epistles, Prefaces, Tables, or Commendatory Verses, shall be lawfully
Licenced, either by the Archbishop of Canterbury, or the Bishop of London for
the time being, or by some of their Chaplains, or by the Chancellors or
Vice-Chancellors of either of the two Universities, upon pain of loosing the
Exercise of his Art, and being proceeded against in the Star Chamber, or the
High Commission Court respectively; That no Person or Persons do hereafter
Re-print, or cause to be Reprinted, any Book or Books whatsoever (though
formerly Printed with License) without being reviewed, and a new License
obtained for the Re-printing thereof: That every Merchant, Bookseller, or other
Person, who shall Import any Printed Books from beyond the Seas, shall present
a true Catalogue of them to the said Archbishop or Bishop for the time being,
before they be delivered, or exposed to Sale, upon pain of suffering such
Punishment as by either of the said two Courts respectively shall be thought
fit; That none of the said Merchants, Booksellers, or others, shall upon pain
of the like Punishment, deliver any of the Books so Imported, till the
Chaplains of the said Archbishop or Bishop for the time being, or some other
Learned Man by them appointed, together with the Master and Wardens of the
Company of Stationers, or one of them, shall take a view of the same, with
Power to seize on all such Books which they found to be Schismatical and
Offensive, and bring them to the said Archbishop or Bishop, or to the
High Commission Office: And finally, That no Merchant, Bookseller, etc. should
Print, or cause to be Printed beyond the Seas, any Book or Books, which either
totally, or for the greatest part, were written in the English Tongue, whether
the said Books have been here formerly Printed, or not; nor shall willingly or
knowingly Import any such Books into this Kingdom, upon pain of being proceeded
against in either of the said two Courts respectively, as before is said. By
means of which Decree he had so provided both at home and abroad, That neither
the Patience of the State should be exercised (as in former times) with
continual Libels; nor the Church troubled by unwarrantable and Outlandish
Doctrines.

But good Laws are of no effect without execution; and if he took no care for
that, he had lost his labor. King James had manifested his dislike of the
Genevian Bibles, and the Notes upon them; some of which did not only teach
Disobedience to Kings and Princes, but the murdering of them also, if they
proved Idolaters; and others did not only teach the Lawfulness of breaking
Faith and Promise, when the keeping of it might conduce to the hurt of the
Gospel: but ranked Archbishops, Bishops, and all men in Holy Orders, or
Academical Degrees, amongst those Locusts in the Revelation, which came out of
the Pit. That King gave Order thereupon, That the Bible of the New Translation
should be printed with no Notes at all; which course he also recommended to the
Synod of Dort, to be observed in the new Translation of the Bible into the
Dutch or German Tongue, which was then intended. Upon this ground, the Printing
of those Bibles with Notes upon them had been forbidden in this Kingdom: but
were Printed in Holland notwithstanding, and brought over hither, the better to
keep up the Faction, and a^^ront Authority. Some of them had before been seized
in Holland, by the care of Boswel the Resident at the Hague: And in the
beginning of this year, he received Advertisement of a new Impression of the
same designed for England, if the terror of this Decree did not stop their
coming. Because Holland, and the rest of the Provinces under the Government of
the States, was made the Receptacle of many of our English Malcontents, who
there and from thence vented their own Passions, and the Discourses of their
Party in this Kingdom, to the disturbance of the Church; it concerned him to
keep a careful watch over them and their Actions. Of these he had Advertisement
from time to time, by one John Le Maire; and thereupon, by the means of Boswell
his right trusty Friend, he dealt so effectually with the States General of
those Provinces, that they made a Proclamation against the Printers and
Spreaders of Libellous and Seditious Books against the Church and Prelates of
England; ^
and took Order with the Magistrates of Amsterdam and Rotterdam (two great
Towns in Holland) for apprehending and punishing of such Englishmen as had
Printed any of the said Lawless and Unlicenced Pamphlets.

There was a time when Queen Elizabeth beheld the Pope as her greatest Enemy,
in reference to her Mothers Marriage, her own Birth, and consequently her Title
to the Crown of England; and many of the Books which were Printed in and about
that time, were full of bitterness and revilings against the Church of Rome it
self, and all the Divine Offices, Ceremonies, and Performances of it. There was
a time also when the Calvinian Doctrines were embraced by many for the Genuine
Doctrines of this Church, to the great countenancing of the Genevian Discipline
and Forms of Administration: And not a few of the Books then Printed, and such
as after were Licenced in Abbot's Time, aimed principally at the Maintenance of
those Opinions, which the latter Times found inconsistent with the Churches
Doctrines. With equal diligence he endeavored by this Decree to hinder the
Reprinting of the one and the other, that so the Church might rest in quiet,
without any trouble or molestation in her self, or giving offense to any other.

As little Trouble could be feared from Lecturers, as they now were Regulated.
The greatest part of those who had been Superinducted into other Men's Cures
(like a Doctor added to the Pastor in Calvin's Platform) had deserted their
Stations, because they would not read the Common Prayers in their Hoods and
Surplices, according to the Kings Instructions before remembered; such as
remained being either founded on a constant or certain Maintenance, or seeing
how little was to be gotten by a fiery and ungoverned Zeal, became more pliant
and conformable to the Rules of the Church: Not a Lecturer of this kind found
to stand out in some great Diocesses, to keep up the Spirits of the Faction,
and create disturbances. And as for Combination-Lecturers, named for the most
part by the Bishops, and to them accountable, they also were required in some
places to read the second Service at the Communion Table, to go into the Pulpit
at the end of the Nicene Creed, to use no other form of Prayer than that of the
55th. Canon, after the Sermon ended, to go back to the Table, and there read
the Service. All which being to be done in their Hoods and Surplices, kept off
the greatest part of the rigid Calvinists from exercising their Gifts, as
formerly in great Market Towns. And as for the position of the Communion Table,
it was no longer left to private Instructions, as it was at the first, when the
Inquiry went no further, than, Whether the Lords Table was so conveniently
placed, that the Minister might best be seen and heard of the Congregation? The
more particular disposing of it, being left to Inference, Conjecture, or some
private Directions. It now began to be more openly avowed in the
Visitation-Articles of several Bishops and Archdeacons, some of which we shall
here produce, as a light to the rest: For thus we find it in the Articles for
the Archdeaconry of Buckingham, Anno 1637. Art. 5. Have you a decent Table, or
a Frame for the Holy Communion, placed at the East end of the Chancel? Is it
Railed in or Enclosed, so as Men or Boys cannot sit upon it, or throw their
Hats upon it? Is the said Rail and Enclosure so made with Settles and
kneeling-Benches, at the foot or bottom thereof, as the Communicants may fitly
kneel there at the Receiving of the Holy Communion? The like for the Diocese of
Norwich in the year before, Art. of the Visit. of B Wr^n.
where we find it thus; viz. Have you in your Church a Communion Table, a
Carpet of Silk? etc. And is the same placed conveniently, so as the Minister
may best be heard in his Administration, and the greatest number may reverently
Communicate? To that end, Does it ordinarily stand up at the East end of the
Chancel, where the Altar in former times stood, the ends thereof being placed
North and South? And in another Article it is thus inquired, viz. Do all your
Parishioners, of what sort soever, according as the Church expressly them
commands, draw near, and with all Christian Humility and Reverence, come to
the Lords Table, when they are to receive the Holy Communion? But because these
Articles might be thought too general, if not otherwise limited, certain
Injunctions were annexed in Writing, in one of which it was required, That the
said Tables should be Railed in, to avoid Prophanations; and secondly, That all
Communicants should come up by Files, and Receive the Sacrament at the same.
Which was performed in this manner: As many as could well kneel close to the
Rails, came up out of the Church or Chancel, and then upon their knees received
(from the Priest standing within the Rails) the Bread and Wine; who being thus
Communicated, retired into the Church or Chancel, and made room for others.
Which course was constantly observed, till they had all Received the Sacrament
in their ranks and forms, according to the ancient Custom of the Church of
England; till Novellism, and Compliance with the Forms of Geneva, had
introduced a deviation from their own appointments.

In this condition stood that Diocese, as to these particulars, when Wren,
translated unto Ely, left the place to Mountague; who though he was as zealous,
and as forward as he in railing in the Communion Table at the East end of the
Chancel where the Altar stood, (as appears by his Visitation Articles for this
present year) yet he had fancied to himself a middle Course between receiving
at the Rail and carrying the Communion to all parts of the Church, as had been
most irreverently used in too many places. And therefore that he might do
somewhat to be called his own, he caused a meeting of the Clergy to be held at
Ipswich for the parts adjoining, where he prescribed these following Orders:
That is to say, First, After the the words, or Exhortation pronounced by the
Minister (standing at the Communion Table, the Parishioners as yet standing in
the body of the Church) Draw near, etc. all which intended to Communicate
should come out of the Church into the Chancel, Secondly, That all being come
in, the Chancel door should be shut, and not opened till the Communion be done*
That no Communicant depart till the Dismission; That no new Communicant come in
amongst them; And that no Boys, Girls, or Gazers be suffered to look in as at a
Play. Thirdly, That the Communicants being entered should be disposed of orderly
in their several Ranks, leaving sufficient room for the Priest or Minister to
go between them; by whom they were to be communicated one Rank after another,
till they had all of them received. Fourthly, and finally, That after they had
all received, the Priest or Minister should dismiss them with the Benediction.
Which though it differed very little from the Rules prescribed by his
Predecessor, yet some diversity there was, for which he rendered an account to
his Metropolitan, and was by Wren sufficiently answered in all points thereof.
It was not coming up to the Rail, but going into the Chancel, which had been
stomacked, and opposed by the Puritan Faction, who loved to make all places
equal, and to observe as little reverence in the Participation as in all other
Acts of Worship: Which Mountague either not considering or fancying to himself
some hopes which he had no ground for, resolved to fall upon this course, which
he conceived to be more agreeable to the course of Antiquity, and most
consistent as he thought with the Rules of Polity. For by this condescension
he presumed, as himself informs us, to keep many men at home with their Wives
and Families, in obedience to his Majesty's Laws, who otherwise were upon a
resolution of departing the Kingdom; wherein how much he was deceived, the
event discovered.

For so it was, that the people in many great trading Towns, which were near
the Sea, having been long discharged of the Bond of Ceremonies, no sooner came
to hear the least noise of a Conformity, but they began to spurn against it.
And when they found that all their striving was in vain, that they had lost the
comfort of their Lecturers, and that their Ministers began to shrink at the
very name of a Visitation, it was no hard matter for those Ministers and
Lecturers to persuade them to remove their dwellings, and transport their
Trades. The Sun of Heaven, say they, does shine as comfortably in other places,
the Son of Righteousness much brighter: Better to go and dwell in Goshen, find
it where we can, than tarry in the midst of such an Egyptian darkness as was
then falling on this Land. The sinful corruptions of the Church (said they)
were now grown so general, that there was no place free from that Contagion,
and infections of it; and therefore go out of her my people, and be not
partaker of her sins. And hereunto they were the more easily persuaded by
seeing so many Dutch men with their Wives and Children to forsake the Kingdom;
who having got Wealth enough in England, chose rather to go back to their
Native Countries, than to be obliged to resort to their Parish Churches, as by
the Archbishops Injunctions they were bound to do. Amongst the first which
separated upon this account were Goodwin, Nigh, Buroughs, Bridge, and Sympson;
who taking some of their followers with them, betook themselves to Holland, as
their City of Refuge. There they filled up their Congregations to so great a
number, that it was thought fit to be divided; Goodwin and Nigh retiring unto
Arnheim, a Town of Gelderland; Sympson and Bridge fixing at Rotterdam in
Holland: but what became of Buroughs I am yet to seek. These men a^fecting
neither the severe Discipline of Presbytery, nor the Licenciousness incident to
Brownism, embraced Robinsons Moddel of Church Government in their
Congregations, consisting of a Coordination of several Churches for their
mutual comfort, not a Subordination of the one to the other, in the way of
direction or command. Hence came that name of Independents, continued unto
those amongst us, who neither associate themselves with the Presbyterians, nor
embrace the Frensies of the Anabaptists. But they soon found the Folly of their
Divisions, Rotterdam growing too narrow a place for Bridge and Sympson, so that
this last was forced to leave it, and Ward who succeeded him could not tarry
long. More unity there was at Arnheim, where their Preachers did not think they
had done enough in conforming their new Church to the Pattern which they saw in
the Mount, if it were not Apostolical in the highest perfection: To which end
they not only admitted of Hymns, and Prophecyings which the
Sister-Congregations had not entertained: but of Widows, and the holy Kiss,
cas^ired for the avoiding of Scandal in the Primitive times; yea, and of the
Extreme Unction also, the exercise whereof by Kiffin and Patients I had rather
the Reader should take out of the Gangraena, than expect from me.

The courteous entertainment which these people found in the Belgic Provinces,
might easily have served for a strong temptation to bring over the rest to
enjoy the like: But the Country was too narrow for them, and the Brethren of
the Separation desired elbow-room for fear of Enterfeering with one another.
New England was chiefly in their eye, a Puritan Plantation from the first
beginning, and therefore fitter for the growth of the Zuinglian or Calvinian
Gospel than any Country whatsoever. A Country first discovered to any purpose
by one Captain Gosnold, Anno 1602. and in the next year more perfectly surveyed
by some of Bristol; afterward granted by King James, Anno 1606. unto a
Corporation of Knights, Gentlemen, and Merchants, to be planted and disposed of
for the Public, under the Ordering and Direction of Chief Justice Popham, by
whom a Colony was sent thither in the year next following; at what time they
built St. Georges Fort to secure their Haven, that they might have a door open
for their going thence, which soon after followed. And though the Adventurers
made a further attempt in the year 1616, yet it never settled into Form till
the building of New-Plymouth, in the year 1620. and some encouragements being
sent thence to bring others on, it came in very short space to so swift a
growth, that no Plantation for the time ever went beyond it; New Bristol, new
Boston, and new Barnstable, being quickly added to the other. ^^quam (...) ex
fiat (...) rerum cupida (...) Hist. lib. 1.
The growth of old Rome and new England had the like foundation, both
Sanctuaries for such of the neighboring Nations as longed for Novelties and
Innovations both in Church and State. But let the Reader take their Character
from Primos ^os^e Cel^ios, uti and illos qui postea acc^sser^nt, p^tis^imum aut
om(...) ex ^orum hominum Secta quos in A^glia Brow^istas and Purita^o^ vocant,
etc. l^b. 3. cap. 8.
de Laet a right good Chorographer, in the third Book of his Description of
America, where he informs us, that the first Planters, and those which
followed after them were altogether of that Sect, which in England were called
Brownists or Puritans; many of which had formerly betaken themselves to
Holland, but afterward departed thence to join with their Brethren in
New England. The Churches cast into the same mould with those before, all of
them following the device of Robinson, that notorious Schismatic, at the
spawning of the second separation in Amsterdam: Who, to distinguish his
followers from the brethren of the first separation governed by a Try-formed
Presbytery of Pastors, Elders, and Deacons, introduced a new way of his own,
leaving as much Exercise of Church Discipline to the whole Congregation, as was
elsewhere enjoyed by the Pastors and Elders.

In this estate they stood in the year 1633. at what time John de Laet made
that Character of them: Exceedingly increased in short time after, both in Men
and Buildings, by those who frequently flocked thither from most parts of this
Kingdom, either for fear of Punishment, or for danger of Debt, or to enjoy the
folly of their Schism with the greater safety. But whatsoever were the causes
of the Separation, certain I am, the Crime was laid on the Archbishop of
Canterbury, amongst the Articles of whose Impeachment by the House of Commons,
I find this for one, viz. That in his own Person, and his Suffragans, Visitors,
Surrogates, Chancellors, or other Officers by his Command, he had caused diverse
Learned, Pious, and Orthodox Preachers of Gods Word to be silenced, suspended,
deprived, degraded, excommunicated, or otherwise grieved and vexed without any
just and lawful cause; whereby, and by diverse other means he has hindered the
Preaching of Gods Word, and caused diverse of his Majesty's Subjects to forsake
the Kingdom. So is the Judge to be accused for all those mischiefs, which the
condemned Malefactors, when they once break Prison, may design and execute. The
principal Bell-weathers of these Flocks, were Cotton, Chancy, Wells, Hooker,
and perhaps Hugh Peter's; the rest, let them look after, who affect such
Company. Not much took notice of at the first, when they were few in Numbers,
and inconsiderable for their Power: but growing up so fast both in strength and
multitude, they began to carry a face of danger. For how unsafe must it be
thought both to Church and State, to suffer such a constant Receptacle of
discontented, dangerous, and schismatical Persons, to grow up so fast; from
whence, as from the Bowels of the Trojan Horse, so many Incendiaries might
break out to inflame the Nation? New England, like the Spleen in the Natural
Body, by drawing to it so many sullen, sad, and offensive Humors, was not
unuseful and unserviceable to the General Health: But when the Spleen is grown
once too full, and emptieth it self into the Stomach, it both corrupts the
Blood, and disturbs the Head, and leaves the whole man wearisom to himself and
others. And therefore to prevent such mischiefs as might thence ensue, it was
once under Consultation of the chief Physicians, who were to take especial care
of the Churches Health, to send a Bishop over to them, for their better
Government; and back him with some Forces to compel, if he were not otherwise
able to persuade Obedience. But this Design was strangled in the first
Conception, by the violent breakings out of the Troubles in Scotland, which
call upon us from this place to look toward them.

And now again we are for Scotland, where we spent the last year in doing
nothing, and shall spend this in doing that which was worse than nothing. The
Insolences of the Covenanters were now grown so great, that some advised the
King to take the Sword into his hand, and to reduce them to Obedience by force
of Arms, before they had ripened their Intelligences, and formed a Party to
their will both at home and abroad: But the King would not hearken to it,
resolved upon his Fathers way of sending Commissioners, and trying what he
might effect by Treaty and Negotiation. Which Resolution being taken, the next
Consideration was for the choice of the man. The well-affected Scots pitched on
the Marquis of Huntley, a man of great Power in his own Country, true to the
King, and a professed Enemy to the Presbyterians. And to this end the Earl of
Sterling Principal Secretary of Estate, the Bishops of Ross and Brechin
Privy-Counsellors both, Hay the Clerk-Register, and Spotswood Lord President of
the Sessions (a most deserving Son of a Reverend Father) made a journey thence
unto the King, and used their best Endeavors with him, to commit the managing
of that great Trust into Hunt^^ys hands: But the Court-Faction carried it for
the Marquis Hamilton, whose Head was better than his Heart, a notable
dissembler, t^^e only to his own ends, and a most excellent Master in the Art
of In^^^uation, by which he screwed himself so far into his Majesty's good
opinion, that whosoever undertook the unrivetting of him, made him faster in
it. And so far had the man prevailed by his Arts and Instruments, that the Duke
of Lenox was brought over to contribute his Assistances to him; and rather
chose to commend the known Enemy of his House to that great Employment, than
that a private Country-Gentleman (such as Huntley was) should carry the Honor
from them both. And therefore briefly in this place to speak of Hamilton, and
his Proceedings in the weighty Charge committed to him (in which he has been
generally suspected to betray his Master) we will fetch the Story somewhat
higher, that we may see what ends he aimed at for himself, and what inclined
him rather to foment than quench the Flames which had been kindled in that
Kingdom.

Know therefore, That the Hamiltonian Family derives it self from one Hamilton
an Englishman, who went to try what Fortunes he could find in Scotland: Neither
himself nor his Posterity of any great note, till James iii. bearing a great
affection to Sir James Hamilton, married him to one of his Sisters whom he had
forcibly taken from the Lord Boyd her former Husband. From this unlawful
Marriage descended another James, the Grandchild of this, as impious and
^dulterous in his second Marriage, as his Grandmother had been before: For
having married a Wife of one of the Noble Houses of Scotland, he put her
shamefully away, and took into his Bed a Niece of Cardinal Beton's, who then
swayed all things in that Kingdom. Of this last Marriage came John Earl of
Arran, Created by King James vi. the first Marquis of Hamilton, the Father of
John, and Grandfather of James Marquis of Hamilton, of whom we now speak. This
man considering with himself, that he was descended from a Daughter of King
James ii. (but without taking notice of any intervenient Flaws which occurred
in the Pedigree) conceived by (...) and little, That a Crown would look as
lovely upon his Head, as on the Heads of any which descended from a Daughter of
James v. To give some life unto his Fancies, he found the Great Men amongst the
Scots in high discontentments, about the Revocation of Church Lands, which the
King then busily intended: The Popular Party in England no less discontented,
by the Dissolving of three Parliaments one after another; and the Puritans in
both, by the great Power and Credit which some Bishops had attained unto in
either Kingdom. In which conjuncture, it was not hard for him to conceive, That
he might make unto himself a strong Party in That, without fear of any
opposition to be made from This. And so ^ar had his hopes gone with him, when
he obtained the Conduct of an Army, intended by his Majesty for assisting of
the King of Sweden in the Wars of Germany: An Army for the most part raised in
Scotland, and most of the Commanders of that Nation also, whom he had so
obliged unto him by his Arts and Flatteries, that a Health was openly begun by
David Ramsey (a boisterous Ruffian of that Court) to King James the Seventh:
And so much of the Design was discovered by him unto Donald Maukie Baron of
Ree, than being in the Marquisses Camp, that the Loyal Gentleman thought
himself bound in duty to make it known unto the King. Ramsey denying the whole
matter, and the Lords having no proof thereof (as in such secret Practices it
could hardly be) more than a confident asseveration, and the Engagement of his
Honor, the King thought good to refer the Controversy to the Earl of Lindsey,
whom he made Lord High-Constable to that end and purpose. Many days were spent
accordingly in pursuance of it: But when most men expected that the matter
would be tried by Battle, as had been accustomed in such cases, the Business
was hushed up at Court, the Lord Ree dismissed to his Employment in the Wars,
and, contrary to the mind of all good men, the Marquis did not only continue in
the Kings great Favor: but Ramsey was permitted to hold the Place of Gentleman
of the Privy-Chamber, which had been formerly procured for him.

As for the Army of Scots, consisting of 7000. if my memory fail not,
transported into Germany in the Summer before, Anno 1631. they mouldred away by
little and little, without acting any thing; the King of Sweden being then in a
prosperous condition, and not desiring the Scots should carry away any part of
the Spoil and Honor which he doubted not of acquiring to his own Nation in the
course of the War. This put the Marquis upon new Counsels; and in the course of
these new Counsels, he was not only to ^oment those Animosities which had been
raised in that Nation against the King, but to remove all those Impediments
which might lie in the way betwixt him and his affected Greatness. Two men
there were whom he more feared than all the rest, both of the House of Graham,
and both descended from a Son of King Robert the Second; and that too by a
clearer Descent, than the Hamiltons could pretend from the Daughter of King
James ii. The first was William Earl of Menteith, descended from an
Heir-general of David Earl of Stratherne, one of the younger Sons of King
Robert ii. as before was said: A man o^ sound Abilities and approved
Affections, and therefore by the King made President of the Council in
Scotland: In which Office he behaved himself, and stood so stoutly in behalf of
the King his Master upon all occasions, that nothing could be done for Advance
of Hamiltons Designs, till he was removed from that Place. In order whereunto,
it was put into his head by some of that Faction, that he should sue unto the
King to be Created Earl of Stratherne, as the first and most honorable Title
which belonged to his House; That his Merits were so great, as to assure him
not to meet with a denial; and that the King could do no less, than to give him
some nominal Reward for his real Services. On these Suggestions, he repaired to
the Court of England 1632. where without any great difficulty, he obtained his
Suit, and waited on the King the most part of the Summer-Progress; no man being
so openly honored, and courted by the Scottish Nation, as he seemed to be: But
no sooner was he gone for Scotland, but the Hamiltonians terrified the King
with the Dangers which he had run into by that Creation, whereby he had revived
in that proud and ambitious Person, the Rights which his Ancestors pretended to
the Crown of Scotland; That the King could not choose but see how generally the
Scots flocked about him (after his Creation) when he was at the Court, and
would do so much more when he was in Scotland: And finally, That the proud man
already had so far declared himself, as to give it out, That the King held the
Crown of him. Hereupon a Commission was speedily posted into Scotland (in which
those of Hamiltons Faction made the greatest number) to inquire into his Life
and Actions, and to consider of the Inconveniences which might redound unto
the King by his affecting this new Title. On the Return whereof, the poor
Gentleman is removed from his Office, from being one of the Privy Council; and
not only deprived of the Title of the Earl of Stratherne, but of that also of
Menteith, which for a long time had remained in his Ancestors. And though he
was not long after made Earl of Airth, yet this great fall did so discourage
him from all Public Businesses, that he retired to his own House, and left the
way open to the Hamiltonians to play their own Game as they listed. Faithful
for all this to the King, in all changes of Fortune; neither adhering to the
Covenanters, nor giving the least countenance to them, when he might not only
have done it with safety, but with many personal Advantages which were tendered
him.

The other Bar to be thrust back, was the Earl of Montross, of the same House,
and descended from the same Original; as plausible with the Soldiers and Men
of War, as his Cousin of Menteith was powerful at the Council Table. This man
returning out of France in the flower and Bravery of his Age, had an intent of
putting himself into the Kings Service, and was advised to make his way by the
Marquis of Hamilton; who, knowing the Gallantry of the Man, and fearing a
Competitor in his Majesty's Favor, cunningly told him, That he would do him
any Service: but that the King was so wholly given up to the English, and so
discountenanced and slighted the Scottish Nation, that were it not for doing
Service to his Country (which the King intended to reduce into the form of a
Province) he could not suffer the Indignities which were put upon him. This
done, he repairs unto the King, tells him of the Earls return from France, and
of his purpose to attend him at the time appointed: but that he was so
Powerful, so Popular, and of such esteem amongst the Scots, by reason of an old
Descent from the Royal Family, that if he were not nipped in the bud (as we use
to say) he might endanger the Kings interest and affairs in Scotland. The Earl
being brought unto the King, with very great demonstrations of affection on the
Marquis his part, the King without taking any great notice of him, gave him his
hand to kiss, and so turned aside; which confirmed him in the truth of that
false Report, which Hamilton had delivered to him: So that in great displeasure
and disdain, he makes for Scotland. There finds he Colonel Alexander Lesly (an
obscure fellow, but made rich with the Spoils of Germany) as discontented as
himself, for being denied the honorable Title of a Baron, which he ambitiously
sought for at the Kings being there. And he found them there also, who
perceived on what foot he halted, and knew well how to work on such humors as
he brought along with him, till by seconding the Information which he had
brought from Hamilton, they had fashioned him wholly to their will: For they
prevailed so far upon him, that at the first he cordially espoused their
Quarrel against the Liturgy and Canons, and whatsoever else they found fault
withal in the Public Government; he being one of those Great Persons (and as
forward as any of them all) who published a Protestation at the Cross in
Edenborough, against one of his Majesty's Proclamations of Grace and Favor:
But afterward, being displeased that Lesly was preferred before him in
Commanding the Army; and looking thereupon more carefully into the depth of the
Design than at first he did, he estranged himself from them by degrees, and at
last became the most eminent Instrument that ever his Majesty employed in his
Wars with that People.

But Hamilton had another remove to make, without which all the rest were
nothing; and that was the removing of the Earl of Mar from the Custody and
Command of the Castle of Edenborough (some time Hereditary to that House) and
gaining it unto himself. To this Remove the Earl consented, because he found
how earnestly his Majesty desired it of him, from whom he received a
Compensation in Money for it. At so great charge was the King, to put Hamilton
into as full possession of the Strengths of that City, as he had got before in
the hearts of the Citizens. The way being thus prepared, and all Rules removed,
on Saturday May 26. he set forwards for Scotland, and in short time came to
Dalkeith, an House of the Earl of Mortons four Miles from Edenborough, where he
reposed himself a while; that he might make his Entry into the City with the
greater honor. After some seeming diffidences betwixt him and the Covenanters,
he puts himself into Holy-Rood House, where the first thing he did, was (...)
waving of his Attendance at the Reading of the English Liturgy, which had been
settled in the Chappel-Royal of that House by the care of King James, Anno
1617. and after some neglects and intermissions, restored by the Piety of King
Charles, Anno 1633. as before was signified. It was no hard matter to discern
by his Acts in this, whose Game it was he meant to play, for what it was that
he had held the s^uff^ing of the Cards so long, and who was like to win the
Set, when none but he had the dealing of them: For he so plied the King from
one time to another, sometimes by representing the extreme difficulties, and
sometimes the apparent dangers in which his Affairs there stood involved; That
he drew him to ^ling up all in less than three Months, which King James and he
had been projecting above thrice ten years. For first, by his Proclamation
bearing date June 28. he suspends the present execution of the Canons and
Liturgy, discharges all Acts of Council made for the Establishment of them,
and promises so to regulate the High Commission, that it should neither impugn
the Laws, nor be a just grievance to the Subject. By a second, bearing date
September 9. he discharges the Liturgy, Canons, and High Commission (this
last being of King James his instituting, Anno 1610.) rescinding all
Proclamations and Acts whatsoever, which had been made for the Establishing of
the same; and by the same, suspends the executing of the Five Articles of
Perth, though confirmed by Parliament. By the same also he subjecteth all his
Ministers, as well Ecclesiastical as Civil, to the Censure of Parliaments,
General Assemblies, or any other competent Judicatory: And fr^es all Ministers
at their Entry from taking the Oath of Canonical Obedience, that against
Symonie, or any other not enjoined by Acts of Parliament. By the same also he
commands the Subscribing of the Consession of Faith, with the Band thereunto
annexed, which the Covenanters before had pressed on the People, and upon which
they had placed such a great part of their confidence, that they solemnly
protested to Hamilton at his first coming thither, That they would rather
renounce their Baptism, than reli^quish their Covenant. And this he did for no
other Reason, as appears by a Letter of the same date to the Lords of the
Council, than to legitimate the Rebellion; (...) Reg. p. ^. p. 151.
Because not being Warranted before by Regal Authority, it must needs be in it
self ineffectual,, and prejudicial to the Ancient Form of Government kept
within that his Kingdom of Scotland. And finally, by his Royal Edict, bearing
date the 22d. of the same Month, he gives Order for a General Assembly, to be
held at Glasco on November 21. next following; in which he could not but be
sure, that after so many previous Condescensions on his part, they would be
able to do whatsoever they listed in defiance of him.

For, before the Assembly was Indicted, the Covenanters had so laid the Plot,
that none but those of their own Party should have Suffrage in it; as
afterward by several Orders from their Tables, they directed that no Chaplain,
nor Chapter-man, nor any who have not subscribed the Covenant, should be chosen
to it; not suffering the Archbishops or Bishops to sit as Moderators in their
Presbyteries, where the Elections were to pass; and citing them to appear as
Criminal Persons at the said Assembly: by means of which Exclusions and
Prelimitations, the greatest part of the Assembly did consist of such as either
were irregularly chosen by the overruling Voices of Lay Elders which were
thrust upon them, or else not capable of being Elected, some of them being
under the Censures of the Kirk of Scotland, others under the Censures of the
Church of Ireland, and some not having taken the Oath of Supremacy required by
the Laws of the Land. Upon which just and weighty Reasons, as also the
Admission of the Schismatical Clergy to sit as Judges over their Bishops; the
intrusion of so many Lay Elders, contrary to the Constitution of former General
Assemblies; the countenancing of a scandalous Libel against their Function and
Persons; and the prejudging of their Cause in their several Presbyteries, by
excluding them from having any Vote in the said Assembly, when they were not
present to interpose or speak any thing in their own behalf, the Archbishops
and Bishops, in the name of themselves, and all which did adhere unto them,
prepared their Declinator or Protestation against the said General Assembly,
and all the Acts and Conclusions of it, as being void, and null in Law to all
intents and purposes whatsoever. The day being come, Hamilton marches to the
place appointed for the Session, in the equipage of a High-Commissioner, the
Sword and Seal being carried before him, the Lords of the Council, and all the
Officers of State, attending on him like a King indeed. The reading of his
Commission, the putting in and rejecting of the Declinator, the choosing of
Henderson to be Moderator of the Assembly, the constituting of the Members of
it, and some Debates touching the Votes and Suffrages, challenged by Hamilton
for such as were Assessors to him, took up all the time between their first
Meeting and their Dissolution, which was by Proclamation solemnly declared on
the twenty ninth of the same Month, having ^ate only eight days by the Kings
Authority.

For notwithstanding the said Dissolution, the Members of the said Assembly
continued and kept their Session, and therein passed many Acts for the utter
overthrow of the Polity and Government of the Church, the infringing of his
Majesty's Prerogative Royal, and violating the Authority of Parliaments. For
they not only Excommunicated the Bishops and their Adherents, but condemned the
very Function it self to be Antichristian, and utterly to be abolished out of
the Church; notwithstanding that several Parliaments had confirmed the same.
The like Censure they also past on the Service Book and Canons, with the five
Articles of Perth; though the two first received the Stamp of Royal Authority,
and the five last were confirmed in Parliament also. They condemned in one
breath all the Arminian Tenants, in case of Predestination, without examining
the Arguments on which they were built; and declared all men subject to
Excommunication, and other Censures of the Church, who should refuse to yield
obedience to all their unlawful Actings and Determinations, And though his
Majesty by the same Proclamation had commanded all his faithful Subjects not to
yield any obedience to their Acts and Ordinances, and bound himself in the Word
of a King to defend them in it; yet those of the Assembly were resolved to
maintain their Authority. For notwithstanding his Majesty's late Declaration
and Commands, not only the Bishops and Clergy, but also as many of the Layty as
had refused to subscribe to the Acts thereof, were deprived of their Offices
and Preferments, banished their Country, and forced to fly into England, o^
other places, the King not being able to protect them from the power and malice
of their Adversaries. For having lost the opportunity of suppressing them in
their first Insurrection in the year precedent, and afterward of reducing them
by force of Arms in the year next following, he was forced to shuffle up such a
Pacification in the Parliaments of both Kingdoms, Anno 1641. as left his Party
d^^^^tute of all protection, but what they found in England by his Majesty's
Favor in providing the Clergy of some small Benefices for their present
subsistence, which possibly might amount to more than formerly they enjoyed in
their own Country.

And yet the Covenanters did not play all parts in this Assembly, the King and
his Commissioner had one part to act, which was the presenting of a
Declaration, containing the sum and substance of all his Majesty's gracious
Condescensions, expressed in the several Proclamations before remembered, and a
Command to have it registered in the Acts and Records thereof. But upon what
considerations and reasons of State his Majesty might be moved to commit that
Paper to be registered amongst the Acts of Assembly, is beyond my reach. (...)
^^ough many times the wisest Princes have sent out Proclamations of Grace for
redress of Grievances, and pardoning of fore-past o(...); yet were those
Proclamations and Acts of Grace beheld no otherwise than as temporary and
occasional Remedies for the present mischiefs, not to be drawn into Example,
and much less put upon Record for the times cusuing; his Majesty's
Condescensions had been large enough, and too much to the prejudice of his
Crown and Dignity without this Enrolment. Nor wants it somewhat of a ^iddle,
that at such time as Hamilton tendered the Paper of his Maj^sti^s ^racious
Concessions for discharging of the Service Book, etc. to be enrolled amongst
the Acts of the Assembly, he both declared, and protested that his so doing
should be no acknowledgment of the lawfulness and validity of that Convention
which was instantly to be dissolved: or that his Majesty should give order to
have those Acts of Grace and Favor enrolled in the Records of the Assembly, to
stand full and sure to all his good Subjects for their assurance of and in the
true Religion; which Assembly at the same time ^e declared to be illegal, and
all the Acts thereof to be null and void. I must confess I am not Oedipus
enough for so dark a Sphinx, and must therefore leave this depth of State-craft
to more able heads. Only I cannot choose but note, how little his Majesty got by
those Condescensions; the stubborn and rebellious Scots being so far
unsatisfied with these Acts of Grace, that they not only forced all those who
adhered unto him to fly the Country: but intercepted his Revenues, seized on
all his Forts and Castles, and put themselves into a Posture of open War. And
that they might be able to manage it with the greater credit, they called home
some of their Commanders out of Germany, and some which served under the Pay of
the States General; so far prevailing with those States as to continue such
Commanders in their Pay and Places as long as they remained in the Service of
the Scottish Covenanters. A favor which his Majesty could not get at their
hands, nor had he so much reason to expect it as the others had, i^ considered
rightly. It had been once their own case, and they conceived they had good
reason to maintain it in others.

It may deservedly be a matter of no small amazement, that this poor and
unprovided Nation, should dare to put such baffles and affronts upon their
Lawful King; the King being backed by the united Forces of England and Ireland,
obeyed at home, and rendered formidable unto all his Neighbors by a puissant
Navy, they must have some assurances more than ordinary which might inflame
them to this height; and what they were it may not be amiss to enquire into.
First then they had the King for their natural Countryman, born in that Air,
preserving a good affection for them to the very la^t; and who by giving them
the Title of his Ancient and Native Kingdom (as he did most commonly) gave them
some reason to believe, that he valued them above the English. They had in the
next place such a strong Party of Scots about him, that he could neither stir
or speak, scarce so much as think, but they were made acquainted with it. In
the Bedchamber they had an equal number of Gentlemen, and seven Grooms for
one; in the Presence Chamber more than an equal number amongst the Gentlemen
Ushers, Quarter-Waiters, etc. In the Privy-Chamber, besides the Carvers and
Cup-bearers, such disproportion of the Gentlemen belonging to it, that once at
a full Table of Waiters, each of them having a Servant or two to attend upon
him, I and my man were the only English in all the Company. By which the King
was so obs^rved, and betrayed withal, that as far as they could find his
meaning by Words, by Signs, and Circumstances, or the silent language of a
shrug, it was posted presently into Scotland, some of his Bedchamber being
grown so bold and saucy, that they used to Ransack his Pockets when he was in
bed, to transcribe such Letters as they found, and send the Copies to their
Countrymen in the way of intelligence. A thing so well known about the Court,
that the Archbishop of Canterbury in one of his Letters, gave him this memento,
that he should not trust his Pockets with it. For Offices of trust and credit
they were as well accomodated as with those of service, Hamilton, Master of the
Horse, who stocked the Stables with that People; The Earl of Morton, Captain of
his Majesty's Guard; The Earl of Ancram, Keeper of the Privy Purse; The Duke of
Lenox, Warden of the Cinque Ports, and Constable of Dover Castle; Balfore
Lieutenant of the Tower, the Fortress of most power and command in England; And
Wemmys, the Master Gunner of his Majesty's Navy, who had the issuing of the
Stores, and Ammunition, designed unto it. Look on them in the Church, and we
shall find so many of that Nation beneficed and preferred in all parts of this
Country, that their Ecclesiastical Revenues could not but amount to more then
all the yearly Rents of the Kirk of Scotland; and of all these scarce one in
ten, who did not cordially espouse and promote their Cause amongst the People.
They had beside no less assurance of the English Puritans than they had of
their own; those in Court (of which there was no very small number) being
headed by the Earl of Holland, those in the Country by his Brother the Earl of
Warwick; The f^rst being aptly called in a Letter of the Lord Conways to the
Lord Archbishop, The spiritual, and invisible head, the other, The visible and
temporal head of the Puritan Faction. And which was more than all the rest,
they had the Marquess of Hamilton for their Lord and Patron, of so great power
about the King, such Authority in the Court of England, such a powerful
influence on the Council of Scotland, and such a general Command over all that
Nation, that his pleasure amongst them past for Law, and his words for Oracles;
all matters of Grace and Favor ascribed to him, matters of harshness or
distate to the King or Canterbury. To speak the matter in a word, he was grown
King of Scots in Fact, though not in Title; His Majesty being looked on by them
as a Cipher only in the Arithmetic of State.

But notwithstanding their confidence in all these Items, taking in the
Imprimis too, they might have reckoned without their Host in the Summa Tetalis,
the English Nation being generally disaffected to them, and passionately
affecting the Kings quarrel against them. The sense and apprehension of so many
indignities prevailed upon the King at last to unsheath the Sword, more justly
in it self, and more justifiably in the sight of others; the Rebels having
rejected all (...) o^^ers of Grace and Favor, and growing the more insolent by
his Condescensions. So that resolved, or rather forced upon the War, he must
bethink himself of means to go through with it: To which end Burrows the
Principal King of Arms, is commanded to search into the Records of the Tower,
and to return an Extract of what he found relating to the War of Scotland;
which he presented to the Archbishop in the end of December, to this effect,
viz. 1. That such Lords and others as had Lands and Livings upon the Borders,
were commanded to reside there with their Retinue; and those that had Castles
there, were enjoined to Fortify them. 2. That the Lords of the Kingdom were
Summoned by Writ, to attend the Kings Army with Horse and Armor at a certain
time and place, according to their Service due to the King; or repair to the
Exchequer before that day, and make Fine for their Service: As also were all
Widows, Dowagers of such Lords as were deceased; and so were all Bishops and
Ecclesiastical Persons. 3. That Proclamations were likewise made by Sheriffs in
every County, That all men holding of the King by Knights-Service or Sergeancy,
should come to the Kings Army, or make Fines as aforesaid; with a strict
command, That none should conceal their Service under a great Penalty. 4. As
also, That all men having 40 l. Land per Annum, should come to the Kings Army
with Horse and Armor; of which if any failed to come or to make Fine, their
Lands, Tenements, Goods, and Chattels were distrained by the Sheri^f upon
Summons out of the Exchequer. 5. That Commissions should be issued out for
Levying of Men in every County, and bringing them to the Kings Army: That the
like be done for Mustering and Arraying the Clergy throughout England; or
otherwise, to furnish the King with a proportion of Armed Men for the present
Service. 6. That Writs be issued out into all Counties, for certifying the King
what number of Horse and Foot every County could afford him in his Wars with
Scotland. 7. The like also to the Borders, requiring them to come unto the
Kings Army well armed; Commissions to be made for punishing such as refused. 8.
That the Sheriffs of the Counties were commanded by Writ to make Provisions of
Corn and Victuals for the Kings Army, and to cause them to be carried to the
place appointed. The like Command sent to the Merchants in the Port-Towns of
England and Ireland; and the Ships of the Subject taken to Transport such
Provisions to the place assigned. 9. Several Sums of Money raised by Subsidies
and Fifteens from the English Subject, and Aid of Money given and lent by the
Merchant-Strangers, toward the Maintenance of the War. 10. That the King used
to suspend the payment of his Debts for a certain time, in regard of the great
occasions he had to use Money in the Wars of Scotland. Other Memorials were
returned to the same effect: but these the principal.

According to these Instructions, his Majesty directs his Letters to the
Temporal Lords, his Writs to the High-Sheriffs, his Orders to the
Lord-Lieutenants and Deputy Lieutenants in their several Counties, his
Proclamations generally to all his Subjects; Requiring of them all such Aids
and Services in his present Wars, as either by Laws, o^ Ancient Customs of the
Land, they were bound to give him. He caused an Order also to be made by the
Lords of the Council, directed to the two Archbishops, January 29. by which
they were Required and Commanded, To write their several and ^esp^ctive Letters
to all the Lords Bishops in their several Provinces respectively, forthwith to
convene before them all the Clergy o^ Ability in their Diocesses, and to incite
them by such ways and means as shall be thought best by their Lordships, to aid
and assist his Majesty with their speedy and liberal Contributions, and
otherwise, for defense of his Royal Person, and of this Kingdom: And that the
same be sent to the Lord Treasurer of England with all dili^ence* Subscribed by
the Lord Keeper Coventry, the Bishop of London Lord Treasurer, the Earl of
Manchester Lord Privy Seal, t^^ Duke of Lenox, the Earl of Lindsey Lord Great
Chamberlain, t^^ Earl of Arundel Earl-Marshal, the Earl of Dorset Lord
Chamberlain to the Queen, the Earl o^ Pembroke Lord Chamberlain to the King,
the Earl of Holland Chancellor of Cambridge, Cottington Ma^ter of the Wards,
Vane Treasurer of the Household, Cook and Win^^bank the two Principal
Secretaries. Which Warrant, whether it proceeded from the Kings own motion, or
was procured by the Archbishop himself to promote the Service, is not much
material: Certain I am, that he conformed himself unto it with a cheerful
diligence, and did accordingly direct his Letters to his Suffragan Bishops in
this ^ollowing ^orm.

My very good Lord,
I Have received an Order from the Lords of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy
Council, giving me notice of the great Preparations made by some of Scotland,
both of Arms and all other Necessaries for War: And that this can have no other
end, than to invade or annoy this his Majesty's Kingdom of England. For his
Majesty having a good while since, most graciously ^ielded to their Demands for
securing the Religion by Law established amongst them, has made it appear to
the World, That it is not Religion but Sedition that stirs in them, and fills
them with this most irreligious Disobedience, which at last breaks forth into a
high degree of Treason against their Lawful Sovereign. In this Case of so great
danger both to the State and Church of England, your Lordships, I doubt not,
and your Clergy under you, will not only be vigilant against the close
Workings of any Pretenders in that kind: but very free also to your Power and
Proportion of Means le^t to the Church, to contribute toward the raising of
such an Army, as, by Gods Bl^ssing and his Majesty's Care, may secure this
Church and Kingdom from all intended Violence. And according to the Order sent
unto me by the Lords (a Copy whereof you shall herewith receive) these are to
pray your Lordship to give a good Example in your own Person; and with all
convenient speed to call your Clergy, and the abler Schoolmasters (as well
those which are in Peculiars, as others) and excite them by your self, and such
Commissioners as you will answer for, to contribute to this Great and Necessary
Service; in which if they give not a good Example, they will be much to blame.
But you are to call no poor Curates, nor Stipendaries: but such as in other
Legal ways of Payment have been, and are by Order of Law bound to pay. The
Proportion I know not well how to prescribe you: but I hope they of your
Clergy whom God has blessed with better Estates than Ordinary, will give
freely, and thereby help the want of Means in others. And I hope also your
Lordship will so order it, as that every man will at the least give after the
Proportion of 3 s. 10 d. in the Pound, of the valuation of his Living, or other
Preferment, in the Kings Books. And this I thought fit to l^^ you further know,
That if any man have double Benefices, or a Benefice and a Prebend, or the
like, in diverse Diocesses; yet your Lordship must call upon them only for such
Preferments as they have within your Diocese, and leave them to pay for any
other which they hold, to the Bishop in whose Diocese their Preferments are. As
for the time, your Lordship must use all the diligence you can, and send up the
Moneys if it be possible by the first of May next. And for your Indemnity, the
Lord Treasurer is to give you such discharge, by striking a Tally or Tallies
upon your several Payments into the Exchequer, as shall be fit to s^cure you
without your Charge. Your Lordship must further be pleased to send up a List of
the Names of such as refuse this Service within their Diocese: but I hope none
will put you to that trouble. It is further expected, That your Lordship* and
every other Bishop, express by it self, and not in the general Sum of his
Clergy, that which himself gives. And of this Service you must not fail. So to
Gods blessed Protection I leave you, and rest,

Your Lordships very Loving Friend and Brother, WILL. CANT.
Lambeth, Ian. ult. 1638.

On the receiving of these Letters, the Clergy were Convented in their several
Diocesses, encouraged by their several Ordinaries not to be wanting to his
Majesty in the Present Service, and diverse Preparations used beforehand to
dispose them to it; which wroug^t so powerfully and effectually on the greatest
part of them (those which wished well unto the Scots, seeming as forward in it
as any other) that their Contributions mounted higher than was expected. The
Benevolence of the Diocese of Norwich only a^ounting to 2016 l. 16 s. 5 d. The
Archd^acorry of Winchester only, to the sum of 1305 l. 5 s. 8 d. And though we
may not conclude of all the rest by the greatness of th^se, yet may it be very
safely said, that they did all exceeding bountifully in their several
proportions, with reference to the extent of their Diocesses, and the ability
of their Estates. Nor were the Judges of the several Benches of the Courts at
Westminster, and the great Officers under them, Protonotaries, Secondaries, and
the like, deficient in expressing their good a^^ections to this general cause;
in which the safety of the Realm, was as much concerned as his Majesty's
honor. And for the Doctors of the Laws, Chancellors, Commissaries, Officials,
and other Officers belonging to the Ecclesiastical Courts, they were spurred on
to follow the example of the Secular Judges (as having a more particular
concernment in it) by a Letter sent from the Archbishop to the Dean of the
Arches, on February 11. and by him communicated to the rest. By which Free Will
offerings on the one side, some commanded duties on the other, and the
well-husbanding of his Majesty's Revenue by the Lord Treasurer Iuxon, he was
put into such a good condition, that he was able both to raise and maintain an
Army with no charge to the Common Subject: but only a little Coat and Conduct
money at their first setting out. These preparations were sufficient to give
notice of a War approaching without any further denouncing of it by a public
Herald; and yet there was another accident which seemed as much to
fore-signifie it as those preparations. Mary de Medices, the Widow of King
Henry i^. of France, and Mother to the Queens of England and Spain, arrived at
Harwich on October 19. and on the last of the same was with great State
conducted through the Streets of London to his Majesty's Palace of St. James. A
Lady which for many years, had not lived out of the smell of Powder, and a
guard of Muskets at her door, embroyled in wars and troubles when she lived in
France, and drew them after her into Flanders. where they have ever since
continued. So that most men were able to presage a Tempest, as Mari^e^s by the
appearing of some Fish, or the flying of some Birds about their ships, can
foresee a storm. His Majesty had took great care to prevent her coming,
knowing ^ull well how chargeable a guest she would prove to him, and how
unwelcome to the Subject. To which end ^eswel was commanded to use all his wits
for persuading her to stay in Holland, whither she had retired from Flanders in
the year precedent. But she was wedded to her will, and possibly had received
such invitations from her Daughter here, that nothing but everlasting foul
weather at Sea, and a perpetual cross-wind, could have kept her there.

All things provided for the War, his Majesty thought sit to satisfy his good
Subjects of both Kingdoms, not only of the Justice which appeared in this
Action: but in the unavoydable necessity which enforced him to it. To which end
he acquaints them by his Proclamation, of the 20 of February, How traitorously
some of the Scottish Nation had practiced to pervert his Loyal Subjects of this
Realm, by scattering abroad their Libellous and Seditious Pamphlets, mingling
themselves at their public meetings, and reproaching both his Person and
Government; That he had never any intention to alter their Religion or Laws,
Bibl. Regia^ p. 173.
but had condescended unto more for defense thereof than they had reason to
expect; That they had rejected the Band and Covenant which themselves had pressed
upon the people, because it was commended to them by his Authority; and having
made a Covenant against God and him, and made such Hostile preparations, as if
he were their sworn Enemy, and not their King; That many of them were men of
broken Fortunes, who because they could not well be worse, hoped by engaging in
this War to make themselves better; That they had assumed unto themselves the
power of the Press one of the chief marks of the Regal Authority, prohibiting
to Print what he commanded, and commanding to Print what he prohibited, and
dismi^^ng the Printer whom he had established in that Kingdom; That they had
raised Arms, blockt up and besieged his Castles, laid Impositions and Taxes
upon his people, threatened such as continued under Loyalty, with force and
violence; That they had contemned the Authority of the Council Table, and set
up Tables of their own, from which they send their Ed^cts throughout all parts
of the Kingdom, contrary to the Laws therein established, pretending in the
mean time that the Laws were violated by himself; That the question was not
now, whether the Service Book should be received or not, or whether Episcopacy
should continue or not, but whether he were King or not; That many of them had
denied the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance (for which some of them had been
committed) as inconsistent, and incompatible with their holy Covenant; That
being brought under a necessity of taking Arms, he had been traduced in some of
their writings for committing the Arms he had then raised, into the hands of
professed Papists, a thing not only dishonorable to himself, and the said
noble persons, but false and odious in it self; That some of power in the
Hierarchy had been defamed for being the cause of his taking Arms to invade
that Kingdom, who on the contrary had been only Counselors of peace, and the
chief perswaders (as much as in them lay) of the undeserved moderation
wherewith he had hitherto proceeded toward so great Offenders; That he had no
intent by commending the Service Book unto them to innovate any thing at all in
their Religion, but only to create a conformity between the Churches of both
Kingdoms, and not to infringe any of their Liberties which were according to
the Laws; That therefore he required all his loving Subjects not to receive any
more of the said seditious Pamphlets, but to deliver such of them as they had
received, into the hands of the next Justice of the Peace, by him to be sent to
one of his Majesty's principal Secretaries; And finally, That this his
Proclamation and Declaration be read in time of Divine Service in every Church
within the Kingdom, that all his People to the meanest, might see the notorious
carriages of these men, and likewise the Justice and Mercy of all his
proceedings.

And now his Majesty is for Action, beginning his Journey toward the North,
March 27. being the Anniversary day of his Inauguration. His Army was advanced
before, the best for quality of the Persons, compleatness of Arms, number of
serviceable Horse, and necessary Provision of all sorts, that ever waited on a
King of England to a War with Scotland. Most of the Nobility attended on him in
their Persons; and such as were to be excused for Age and indisposition,
testified their affections to his Majesty's Service in good Sums of money. The
Flower of the English Gentry would not stay behind, but cheerfully put
themselves into the Action, upon a confidence of getting honor for themselves,
as well as for their King or Country; many of which had been at great charge in
f^rni^^ing themselves for this Expedition, on an assurance of being repaid in
Favors what they spent in Treasure. And not a few of our old Commanders, which
had been trained up in the Wars of Holland, and the King of Sweden, deserted
their Employments (...) to serve their Sovereign, whether with a greater
gallantry or a ^ection, it is hard to say. The Horse computed to 6000. as good
as ever charged on a standing Enemy; The Foot of a sufficient number, though
not proportionable to the Horse, stout men, and well a (...) for the most part
to the Cause in hand; the Canon, Bullets, and all other sorts o^ Ammunition,
nothing inferior to the rest of the Preparations. An Army able to have
trampled all Scotland under their feet, (Gods ordinary providence concurring
with them) and made the King as absolutely Master of that Kingdom as many
Prince could be of a conquered Nation. The chief Command committed to the Earl
of Arundel, who, though not biassed toward Rome, (as the Scots reported him)
was known to be no friend to the Puritan Faction: The Earl of Holland having
been Captain of his Majesty's Guard, and formerly appointed to conduct some
fresh ^ecruits to the Isle of Rhee, was made Lieutenant of the Horse. And the
Earl of Essex, who formerly had seen some service in Holland, and very well
understood the Art of War, Lieutenant General of the Foot. Besides which power
that marched by Land, there were some other Forces embarked in a considerable
part of the Royal Navy, with plenty of Coin and Ammunition, which was put under
the command of Hamilton (who must be of the Quorum in all businesses) with
order to ply about the Coasts of Scotland, and thereby to surprise their Ships,
and destroy their Trade, and make such further attempts to Landward, as
opportunity should offer, and the nature of affairs require.

It is reported (and I have it from a very good hand) that when the old
Archbishop of St. Andrews, came to take his leave of the King, at his setting
forward toward the North, he desired leave to give his Majesty three
Advertisements before his going. The first was, That his Majesty would suffer
none of the Scottish Nation to remain in his Army; assuring him that they would
never fight against their Countrymen: but rather hazard the whole Army by their
^ergiversation. The second was, that his Majesty would make a Catalogue of all
his Counselors, Officers of Household, and domestic Servants; and having so
done, would with his Pen obliterate and expunge the Scots, beginning first with
the Archbishop of St. Andrews himself who had given the Counsel; conceiving (as
he then declared) that no man could accuse the King of Partiality, when they
found the Archbishop of St. Andrews, who had so faithfully served his Father
and himself, about sixty years, should be expunged amongst the rest. A third
was, That he must not hope to win upon them by Condescensions, or the sweetness
of his disposition, or by Acts of Grace: but that he should resolve to reduce
them to their duty by such ways of Power as God had put into his hands. The
Reason of which Counsel was, because he found upon a sad experience of sixty
years, that generally they were a people of so cross a grain, that they were
gained by Punishments, and lost by Favors. But contrary to this good Counsel,
his Majesty did not only permit all his own Servants of that Nation to remain
about him: but suffered the Earls of Roxborough and Traquaire, and other
Noblemen of that Kingdom with their several Followers and Retinues to repair to
York, under pretense of offering of some expedient to compose the differences.
Where being come, they plied their business so well, that by representing to
the Lords of the English Nation the dangers they would bring themselves into by
the Pride and Tyranny of the Bishops, if the Scots were totally subdued, they
mitigated the displeasures of some, and so took off the edge of others, that
they did not go from York, the same men they came thither. On the discovery of
which Practice, and some intelligence which they had with the Covenanters, they
were confined to their Chambers (the first at York, the other at Newcastle) but
were presently dismissed again, and sent back to Scotland. But they had first
done what they came for, never men being so suddenly cooled as the Lords of
England; or ever making clearer shows of an alteration in their words and
gestures.

This change his Majesty soon found, or had cause to fear; and therefore for
the better keeping of his Party together, he caused an Oath to be propounded to
all the Lords, and others of chief Eminency which attended on him, before his
departure out of York; knowing full well, that those of the inferior Orbs
would be wholly governed by the motion of the higher Spheres. The Tenor of
which Oath was this that follows: I A. B. do Swear before the Almighty and
Ever-living God, That I will bear all faithful Allegiance to my true and
undoubted Sovereign King CHARLES, who is Lawful King of this Island, and all
other his Kingdoms and Dominions both by Sea and Land, by the Laws of God and
Man, and by Lawful Succession; And that I will m^st constantly and most
cheerfully, even to the utmost hazard of my Life and Fortunes, oppose all
Seditions, Rebellions, Conjurations, Conspiracies whatsoever, against his Royal
Dignity, Crown, and Person, raised or set up under what pretense or color
soever: And if it shall come veiled under pretense of Religion, I hold it more
abominable both before God and Man. And this Oath I take voluntarily, in the
Faith of a good Christian and Loyal Subject, without Equivocation or mental
Reservation whatsoever; from which I hold no Power on Earth can absolve me in
any part.

Such was the Tenor of the Oath; which being refused by two, and but two of
the Lords, of which one would not Say it, nor the other ^rock it, the said
Refusers were committed to the Custody of the Sheriffs of York; and afterward,
for their further Trial, Interrogated upon certain Articles touching their
approbation or dislike of the War: To which their Answers were so doubtful and
unsatisfactory, that his Majesty thought it safer for him to dismiss them home,
than to keep them longer about him to corrupt the rest: By means whereof he
furnished them with an opportunity of doing him more disservice at home, where
there was no body to attend and observe their Actions, than possibly they could
have done in the Army, where there were so many eyes to watch them, and so many
hands to pull them back if they proved extravagant.

As to the carrying on of the War, the Earl of Essex was Commanded by his
Majesty, at his first coming to York, to put a Garrison into Berwick, and to
take with him such Provisions of Canon, Arms, and Ammunition as were assigned
for that Employment: Which as he cheerfully undertook, so he courageously
performed it, notwithstanding all the terrors and affrightments which he found
in his March. For being encountered in his way with the Earls of Roxborough,
Traquaire, and the rest of the Scots then going to York, they labored all they
could to dissuade him from it, assuring him, That either the Scots would be in
the Town before him; or that their whole Army would be so near, that he must
needs run the hazard of losing all, without doing any thing. Which
notwithstanding, he went on, entered the Town, repaired the Breaches in the
Walls, and placed his Cannon on the same, proceeding in the Work as became a
Soldier. With less fidelity and courage dealt the Earl of Holland, at the
Kings coming near the Borders, where long he had not been encamped, when he had
Intelligence that the Scots Army was advancing; on which Advertisement, he
dispatched Holland with a great Body of Horse to attend upon them. Lesly had
drawn his Army into a very large Front, his Files exceeding thin and shallow:
but intermingled with so many Ensigns, as if every twenty or thirty men had
been a Regiment; and behind all, a great Herd of Cattle, which raised up so
much dust with their feet, as did cloud the Stratagem. Holland dismayed with
such a formidable appearance, or being afraid that his great Horse would be
under-ridden with the Galloway Nags, sent Messenger after Messenger to acquaint
the King with his present condition, who sent him order to draw off and retire
again, and not to hazard himself and the Forces under him, on such a visible
disadvantage. How Hamilton behaved himself, we are next to see; who having
anchored his Fleet in the Frith of Edenborough, and landing some of his spent
men in a little Island, to give them breath, and some refreshments, received a
Visit from his Mother, a most rigid and pragmatical Covenanter; the Scots upon
the shore saying with no small laughter, That they knew the Son of so good a
Mother, could not do them hurt: And so it proved; for having loytered
thereabouts to no purpose, till he heard that the Treaty of the Pacification,
was begun near Berwick, he left his Ships, and came in great haste, as it was
pretended, to disturb the business, which was to be concluded before he came
thither.

For so it happened, That as soon as Essex had brought his Forces into Berwick,
the Scots began to fear the approaching danger which they had drawn upon
themselves; and thereupon some Chiefs amongst them addressed their Letters to
him on the 19th. of April, laying the cause of all these Troubles to some ill
Countrymen of their own, Bill. Regiae, p. 1. p. 3^3.
whom they conceived to have provoked the King against them; endeavoring to
make the Remedy of their Evils, and the scope of their deserved Punishment, the
beginning of an incurable Disease betwixt the two Nations, to whom the Quarrel
should in no way extend. They complained also, That there were many of the
English in Place and Credit, whose Private Bias did run clean contrary to the
Public Good; such as did rise early to poison the Public Fountain, and to sow
the Tares of unhappy Jealousies and Discords between the Kingdoms, before the
good Seed of our Love and Respect to the English Nation, could take place in
their hearts. They declared next, how strange and unexpected it was unto them,
to see his Forces drawn toward the Borders, which they could not but interpret
as a pregnant presumption of some further Project against their Nation by his
Power; which must needs cause them to bestir themselves in time, for their own
preservation. And though they gave themselves some assurance, grounded upon the
Reputation of his former Life, that his Lordship would be very wary to begin
the Quarrel, at which Enemies only would rejoice and catch advantage; yet at
the last (fearing that neither Threats nor Complements would do the business)
they fall to a downright begging of a Pacification. For having taken God to
witness, That they desired no National Quarrel to arise betwixt them, or to
taste any of the bitter Fruit, which might set their Childrens Teeth on edge;
They professed themselves obliged in conscience to God, their Prince, Nation,
and Brethren, to try all just and lawful means for the removal of all Causes of
Di^^erence betwixt the two Nations, and to be always ready to o^fer the
occasion of greater Satisfaction, for clearing of their Loyal Intentions to
their Prince, and to all those whom it may concern: ^ut more particularly to
his Lordship, in regard of his Place and Command at that time; And this to do
by any means whatsoever, which should be thought expedient on both sides. But
Essex, though perhaps he might like their Cause, did not love their Nation (the
Affront put upon him by Carr Earl of Somerset running still in his mind); so
that the Practice edified very little with him* for ought I can find;
whatsoever it might do with others about the King, to whom the Letter was
communicated, which in duty he was bound to do on the first receiving.

With greater comfort they applied themselves to the Earl of Arundel, whom at
first they feared more than all the rest: but had now placed the greatest part
of their confidence on him. For whilst the Puritans in both Kingdoms stood at a
gaze upon the Issue of this War, one Mosely Vicar of Newark upon Trent,
obtained leave to pass through the Army into Scotland: A man of zeal enough to
be put upon any business which the wiser ones durst not be seen in; and of such
silliness withal, that no body could fear any danger from him. By this Man (as
appears by their Letter) they understood of his Lordships particular Affection
to the continuance of the Common Peace betwixt the Nations, being before
assured of his Noble Disposition in the general (as the Letter words it.) And
this being said, they signify unto him, and wish that they could do the like
to all the good Subjects of England, That they were neither weary of
Monarchical Government, nor had entertained the least thoug^^s of casting of
the yoke of Obedience, or invading England; That they desired nothing else than
peaceably to enjoy their Religion, and the Liberties of their Country,
according to the Laws; and that all Questions about the same, might be decided
by Parliament and National Assemblies, which they conceived his Lordship would
judge to be most equitable, and for which no National Quarrel (as they hoped)
could justly arise. And finally, That they had sent him a Copy of the
Supplication, which they intended to present unto the King, as soon as he was
prepared for it; to the end that by the mediation of his Lordship, and other
Noble Lords of England, to whom they had written in like manner, his Majesty
might be pleased to hear them at large, and grant such things as they had
desired; which they conceived to tend to his Majesty's great Glory, to put an
end to all the present Questions to their mutual rejoicing, and to make the
blessed Instruments of so good a work to be thankfully remembered to Posterity.
In their letter to the Earl of Holland, of the seventh of June, they express
more confidence (as being more assured of him then of any other) not only
justifying themselves in their former proceedings: but requesting his
assistance to promote their desires in a petition tendered to his Majesty hands,
descending by degrees to this particular, That by a meeting in some convenient
place, and of some prime and well affected men to the Reformed Religion and the
Common Peace, all matters might be so well amended, and with such expedition,
that their evils (through further delays) might not prove incurable.

These preparations being made, they found an easier business of it, then they
had any reason to expect or hope, to bring his Majesty to meet them in the
middle way; who was so tender of their case that he was more ready to accept
their supplication, then they were to offer it. It was not his intent to fight
them, (as I have heard from a person of great trust and honor) but only by the
terror of so great an Army to draw the Scots to do him reason. And this I am
the more apt to credit, because when a Noble and well experienced Commander
offered him (then being in Camp near Berwick) that with two thousand horse
(which the King might very well have spared) he would so waste, and spoil their
Country, that the Scots should creep upon their bellies to implore his mercy,
he would by no means hearken to the proposition. And having no purpose of
out-going Muster and Ostentation, it is no wonder if he did not only willingly
give way to the presenting of their Petition, and cheerfully embraced all
Overtures tending to a Pacification: but make choice also of such persons, to
Negotiate in it, who were more like to take such terms as they could get, then
to fight it out. Commissioners being on both sides appointed, they came at last
to this conclusion on the seventeenth of June, viz. First, That his Majesty
should confirm whatsoever his Commissioner have already granted in his
Majesty's name, and that from thenceforth all matters Ecclesiastical should be
determined by the Assemblies of the Kirk, and all matters Civil by the
Parliament; and to that end a General Assembly to be Indicted on the sixth of
August, and a Parliament on the twentieth of the same Month, in which
Parliament an Act of Oblivion was to pass for the common peace and satisfaction
of all parties; that the Scots upon the publication of the accord, should
within forty eight hours disband all their Forces, discharge all pretended
Tables, and Conventicles, restore unto the King all his Castles, Forts and
Ammunition of all sorts; the like Restitution to be made to all his good
Subjects, of their Liberties, Lands, Houses, Goods, and Means whatsoever, taken
and detained from them, since the late pretended General Assembly held at
Glasco; that thereupon his Majesty should presently recall his Fleet, and retire
his Land Forces, and cause Restitution to be made of all persons of their Ships
and Goods Detained and Arrested since the first of February. But as for the
proceedings of the Assembly of Glasco, as his Majesty could not allow them with
Honor on the one side; so neither do I find that they were condemned, or that
the Scots were bound to abandon the conclusions of it, so that it seems to have
been left in the same condition, (as to all the Acts, Determinations, and
Results there) in which it stood before his Majesty's taking Arms; Which as it
was the chief ground of the Quarrel, so the King doing nothing in Order to the
Abrogating of it, and the conclusions therein made, when he was in the head of
a powerful Army, he could not give himself much hopes, that the Scots could
yield to any such Abrogation, when he had no such Army to compel obedience.

And this appeared immediately on his Majesty's signing the Agreement, and the
discharging of his Forces upon the same. For the Declaration of this accord was
no sooner published, but the Covenanters produced a Protestation; First, of
adhering to their late General Assembly at Glasco, as a full and free Assembly
of their Kirk, and to all the proceedings there; especially the sentences of
Deprivation, and Excommunication of the sometimes pretended Bishops of that
Kingdom: And secondly, of adhering to their Solemn Covenant, and Declaration of
the Assembly, whereby the office of Bishop is abjured. Thirdly, that the
pretended Archbishops and Bishops, that usurp the title and office abjured by
the Kirk and be contemners of the sentences of Kirk, have been malicious
Incendiaries of his Majesty against this Kingdom, by their wicked calamnies;
and that if they return to this Kingdom, they be esteemed and used as accursed,
and they delivered up to the Devil, and cast off from Christ his body, as
Ethnicks, and Publicans: And fourthly, that all the entertainers of the
Excommucated Bishops, should be orderly proceeded against with Excommunication,
conform to the Acts, and Constitutions of this Kirk. And this they did as well
to justify their proceeding in the said Assembly, as to terrify and affright
the Bishops from presenting themselves as members of Assembly and Parliament at
the next Conventions. Which done they dispersed abroad a scandalous Paper,
pretending to contain the heads of the late Agreement; but drawn so
advantageously for themselves, so disagreeably to the true intention of his
Majesty, that he could do no less in honor then call it in, and cause it to be
publicly burnt by the hand of the Hangman. And being conscious to themselves
how much his Majesty, must be incensed with these Indignities, they continued
their meetings and Consultations as before they did, maintained their
Fortifications at Leith the Port Town to Edenborough, disquieted molested, and
frighted all of different inclinations, and kept their Officers and Commanders
in continual pay, to have them in a Readiness on the next occasion. With which
disorders his Majesty being made acquainted, he sent for some of the Chiefs of
them to come to him to Berwick: but was refused in his Commands under pretense,
that there was some intention to entrap them at their coming thither; and that
his Majesty might be staved off from being present at the next Assembly in
Edenborough, as he had both promised, and resolved, they commit a riotous
assault on the Earls of Kinnoul, and Traquaire, Chief Justice Elphinsten, and
Sir James Hamilton, all Privy Counselors of that Kingdom. These they pulled
violently out of their Coach, on a suspicion that some Bishops were disguised
amongst them; but really that the King might have some cause to suspect that
there could be no safety for him in such a place, and amongst people so
enraged, notwithstanding his great clemency showed unto them in the
Pacification.

His Majesty was now at leisure to repent the loss of those Advantages which
God had put into his hands. He found the Scots so unprovided (not having above
3000. complete Arms amongst them) that he might have scattered them like the
dust before the wind at the very first onset. By making this agreement with
them he put them into such a stock of Reputation, that within the compass of
that year they furnished themselves out of Holland with Cannon, Arms, and
Ammunition upon days of Payment without disbursing any money, which he knew
they had not. He came unto the borders with a gallant Army, which might assure
him (under God) of a very cheap and easy victory; an Army governed by
Colonels, and other Officers of approved Valor, and mingled with the choicest
of the English Gentry, who stood as much upon his honor as upon their own.
This Army he disbanded wi^^out doing any thing which might give satisfaction to
the world, himself, or them. Had he retired it only to a further distance, he
had done as much as he was bound to by the Capitulations: But he disbanded it
before he had seen the least performance on their parts of the points agreed
on; before he had seen the issue and success of the two Conventions, in which
he did expect a settling of his peace and happiness; which had he done, he had
in all reasonable probabilities preserved his honor in the eye of Foraign
Nations, secured himself from any danger from that people, and crushed those
Practices at home which afterward undermined his Peace, and destroyed his
Glories. But doing it in this form and manner, without effecting any thing
which he seemed to Arm for, he animated the Scots to commit new Insolences,
the Dutch to affront him in his own Shores, by fighting and destroying the
Spanish Navy, lying under his protection, and (which was worst of all) gave no
small coffeehouse to the English Gentry. Who having with great charge
engaged themselves in this Expedition out of hope of getting honor to the
King, their Country, and themselves by their faithful service, were suddenly
dismissed, not only without the honor which they aimed at, but without any
acknowledgment of their Love and Loyalty. A matter so unpleasing to them, that
few of them appeared (...) the next years Army; many of them turned against him
in the following troubles, the greatest part looking on his Successes with a
careless eye, as unconcerned in his Affairs, whether good or bad.

In this condition of Affairs he returned toward London in the end of July,
leaving the Scots to play their own Game as they listed; having first nominated
Traquaire as his High Commissioner for managing both the Assembly, and the
following Parliament. In the first meeting of the two, they acted over all the
parts they had played at Glasco, to the utter abolition of Episcopacy, and the
destruction of all those which adhered unto it; their Actings in it being
confirmed in his name by the High Commission. In the Parliament they altered
the old form of choosing the Lords of the Articles, erected a third Estate out
of Lairds and Barons, instead of the Bishops; invaded the Sovereign power of
Coynage; Resolved upon an Act for abrogating all former Statutes concerning the
Judicature of the Exchequer for making of Proxies, and governing the Estates of
Wards; and finally, conceived the King to be much in their debt by yielding to
a prorogation till a further time. The news whereof reduced the King to such a
stand, that he was forced to send for Wentworth out of Ireland, where he had
acted things in settling the Estate of that broken Kingdom, beyond expectation
or belief. This charged on Canterbury, as a project and crime of his, and both
together branded for it in a Speech made by the Lord Faulkland, in the first
year of the Long Parliament, where speaking first of the Bishops generally, he
tells the Speaker, That they had both kindled and blown the fire in both
Nations; and more particularly, that they had both sent and maintained that
book, of which the Author has no doubt long since wished with Nero (Vtinam
nescissem Literas.) And of which more than one Kingdom has cause to wish, that
he who writ it, had rather burned a Library, though of the value of Ptolemies.
And then he adds, We shall see then (says he) who have been the first and
principal cause of the breach, I will not say of, but since the Pacification at
Berwick. We shall find them to have been the almost sole Abettors of my Lord of
Strafford, whilst he was practicing upon another Kingdom that manner of
Government which he intended to settle in this, where he committed so many, so
mighty, and so manifest enormities, as the like have not been committed by any
Governor in any Government since Veires left Sicily. And after they had called
him over from being Deputy of Ireland to be in manner Deputy of England (all
things here being governed by a Iuntillo, and that Iuntillo governed by him) to
have assisted him in the giving of such Counsels, and the pursuing of such
courses, as it is a hard and measuring cast, whether they were more unwise,
more unjust, or more unfortunate, and which had infallibly been our
destruction, if by the grace of God their share had not been as small in the
subtilty of Serpents as in the innocence of Doves. But these were only the
Evaporations of some Discontents, which that noble Orator had contracted; of
which more elsewhere.

Wentworth being called unto this Service, was presently made Lord Leiutenant
of Ireland, and not long after with great solemnity Created Earl of Strafford
in the County of York. As Lord Lieutenant he had Power to appoint a Deputy,
that so he might the better attend the Service here, without any prejudice to
that Kingdom; which Office he committed to Wansford a Yorkshire Gentleman, and
an especial Confident of his, whom he had took along with him into Ireland at
his first going thither. And because great Counsels are carried with most faith
and secrecy, when they are entrusted but to few, his Majesty was pleased to
commit the Conduct of the Scottish Businesses to a Iuncto of three; that is to
say, the Archbishop of Canterbury, the new Lord Lieutenant, and the Marquis of
Hamilton; which last the other two knew not how to trust, and therefore
communicated no more of their Counsels to him, than such as they cared or
feared not to make known to others. By these three joined in Consultations, it
was conceived expedient to move his Majesty to try his fortune once more in
calling a Parliament, and in the mean time to command some of the Principal
Covenanters to attend his Pleasure at the Court, and render an account of their
late Proceedings. In order to the first, they had no sooner signified what they
thought fit for his Majesty's Service, but it was cheerfully entertained by the
Lords of the Council, who joined together with them in the Proposition;
promising his Majesty to assist him in extraordinary ways, if the Parliament
should fail him in it, as they after did. Upon these Terms his Majesty yielded
to the Motion on the fifth of December, causing an Intimation to be publicly
made of his Intent to hold a Parliament on the 13th. of April, then next
following: An Intimation which the Londoners received with great signs of joy,
and so did many in the Country: but such withal, as gave no small matter of
disturbance unto many others, who could not think the calling of a Parliament
in that point of time, to be safe or seasonable. The last Parliament being
dissolved in a Rupture, the Closets of some Members searched, many of them
imprisoned, and some fined; it was not to be thought but that they would come
thither with revengeful Spirits. And should a breach happen betwixt them and
the King, and the Parliament be Dissolved upon it, as it after was, the breach
would prove irreparable, as it after did. Besides which fear, it was presumed,
that the interval of four Months time, would give the discontented Party
opportunity to unite themselves, to practice on the Shires and Buroughs, to
elect such Members as they should recommend unto them; and finally, not only to
consult, but to conclude on such Particulars as they inte^^ed to insist upon,
when they were Assembled. In which Res^^^^ the calling a Parliament at that
time, and with so long warning beforehand, was conceived unsafe: And if it was
unsafe, it was more unseasonable. Parliaments had now long been discontinued,
the People lived happily without them, and few took thought who should see the
next: And which is more, the Neighboring Kings and States beheld the King with
greater Veneration, than they had done formerly, as one that could stand on his
own Legs, and had raised up himself to so great Power both by Sea and Land,
without such discontents and brabbles as his Parliaments gave him. So that to
call a Parliament, was ^eared to be the likeliest way to make his Majesty seem
less in estimation both at home and abroad, the eyes of men being distracted by
so many objects.

But whatsoever others thought, it was thought by Wentworth, that he could
manage a Parliament well enough to the Kings Advantage; especially by setting
them such a Lesson as should make them all ashamed of not writing after such a
Copy. Two ends they had in advising the Intimation of the Parliament to be
given so long before the Sitting. First, That the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland
might in the mean time hold a Parliament in that Kingdom, which he did
accordingly, and governed the Affair so well, that an Army of 8000 Horse and
Foot (some of our Writers say 10000) was speedily raised, and Money granted by
the Parliament to keep them in pay, and furnish them with Ammunition, Arms, and
all other Necessaries. Secondly, That by the Reputation of a following
Parliament, he might be the better enabled to borrow Money for the carrying on
of that War, if the Parliament should chance to fail of doing their Duty;
wherein the Lords performed their parts, in drawing in great Sums of Money upon
that account. For causing a List to be made of most of the Persons of Ability,
which had relation to the Courts of Judicature, either Ecclesiastical or Civil,
of such as held Offices of the Crown as attained unto his Majesty's Service, or
otherwise were thought to be well affected to the present Cause, and had not
formerly contributed toward it, they called them to the Council Table, where
they endeavored, by the prevailing Rhetoric of Power and Favor, to persuade
them to a bountiful Contribution, or a cheerful Loan, according to the Sums
proportioned and requested of them. In which they did proceed so well, that
money came flowing in apace, enough to put the King into a condition of making
new Levies of Men both for Horse and Foot, Listing them under their Commanders,
and putting them into a Posture for the War approaching. And that they might be
sure to speed the better, by the encouragement of a good Example, the Lord
Lieutenant subscribed for a Loan of 20000 l. the other Lords with the same
Loyalty and Affection proportioning their Engagements to their Abilities, and
thereby giving Law to most of the Noblemen in all parts of the Kingdom. Nor was
the Queen wanting for her part to advance the Service; For knowing how great a
share she had in his Majesty's Fortune, she employed her Secretary Winter,
Mountague, Digby, and others of her Confidents of that Religion, to negotiate
with the rest of their party, for being Assistant to his Majesty in so just a
quarrel. In which design she found such a liberal correspondence from the Roman
Catholics, as showed them to be somewhat ambitious of being accounted amongst
the most Loyal and best affected, of his Majesty's Subjects.

These preparations being Resolved on and in some part made, it was thought
convenient that his Majesty should take the opportunity of the coming of some
Commissioners from the Scots to call for an account of their late proceedings.
According unto which advice his Majesty appointed a Select Committee from the
rest of the Council, to bring those Commissioners to a reckoning, to hear what
they could say for themselves and the rest of their fellows, and to make report
thereof to his Majesty; The Commissioners were the Earl of Dumfermelling, the
Lord London, Douglas and Barkley, both of inferior rank, but of like
Authority; Of which the Speakers part was performed by London, A confident bold
man, of a Pe^antical express^on, but one that loved to hear himself above all
men living. Being Commanded to attend the Committee at the time appointed, they
r^nted high, touching the Independency of the Crown of Scotland, and did not
think themselves obliged to Treat with any, but his Majesty only. His Majesty's
vouchsa^e^ng his presence at the said Committee; London begins with a defense
of their proceedings, both in the General Assembly, and the late Parliament
held at Edenborough by his Majesty's Order; Alleged that nothing was done in
them contrary to the Laws of the Land, and the Precedents of former times; and
finally besought his Majesty to ratify and confirm the Acts, and Results of
both Commissions. They could show none to qualify them in the nature of
Public Agents; Nor had they any power to Oblige their party in the performance
of any thing which might give his Majesty full satisfaction for the time to
come, whatsoever satisfaction he was able to give them in debating the
business. His Majesty endeavored not by reason only, but by all fair and
gentle means, to let them see the unreasonableness of their demands, the
legality of their proceedings, and the danger which would fall upon them, if
they continued obstinate in their former courses. But London governed all the
rest, who being of a fiery nature in himself, and a dependent on the Earl of
Argile, who had declared himself for the Covenanters at the Assembly at Glasco,
resolved to stand to the Conclusion which he brought along with him, though he
found himself unable to make good the Premises; so that some days being
unprofitably spent in these debates, the Archbishop and the rest of the
Committee, made a report of the whole business to the rest of the Council, who
upon full consideration of all particulars, came to this Result: That since the
Scots could not be reclaimed to their obedience by other means, they were to be
reduced by Force.

This was no more then what the Scots could give themselves Reason to expect;
and therefore they bestirred themselves as much on the other side. Part of the
Walls of the Castle of Edenborough, with all the Ordnance upon it, had fallen
down on the nineteenth of November last, being the Anniversary day of his
Majesty's Birth (not without some presage of that ill fortune which befell him
in the course of this War) for the Repair whereof, they would neither suffer
Timber, nor any other Materials to be carried to it: but on the contrary, they
began to raise Works and Fortifications against it, with an intent to block it
up, and render it unuseful to his Majesty's Service: And to keep the Soldiers
therein Garrisoned (most of them English) to hard meats, they would not suffer
them to come into the Market to recruit their Victuals. They made Provisions of
great quantity of Artillery, Munition and Arms from Foreign Parts; laid Taxes
of ten Marks in the hundred upon all the Subjects, according to their several
Revenues, which they Levied with all cursed Rigor, though bruiting them abroad
to be Free Will Offerings; scattered abroad many Seditious and Scandalous
Pamphlets, for justifying themselves and seducing others, some of which were
burnt in England by the hand of the Hangman; Fortified Inchgarvie and other
places, which they planted with Ordnance; Imprisoned the Earl of Southesk, and
other Persons of Quality, for their fidelity to the King; took to themselves
the Government of the City of Edenborough, contrary to their Charters and
Immunities, by which the Citizens were disabled from serving his Majesty in any
of his just Commands; and finally, employed their Emissaries in all Parts of
England, to dissuade those who were too backward of themselves, from
contributing to the War against them, and to solicit from them such several
Aids as might the better enable them to maintain the War against their
Sovereign.

But their chief Correspondence was with France and Ireland. In France they had
made sure of Cardinal of Richelieu, who Governed all Affairs in that Kingdom.
Following the Maxim of Queen Elizabeth, in securing the Peace of his own
Country by the Wars of his Neighbors, he practiced the Revolt of Portugal, and
put the Catalonians into Arms against their King, to the end that he might
waste the fiery Spirit of the French in a War on Flanders, with the better
fortune and success. But knowing that it was the Interest of the Crown of
England, to hold the Balance even between France and Spain; and that his
Majesty by removing the Ships of Holland, which lay before Duynkirk, Anno 1635.
had hindered the French from making such a Progress by Land, as might have made
them Masters of the Spanish Netherlands; he held it a chief piece of
State-Craft (as indeed it was) to excite the Scots against their King, and to
encourage them to stand it out unto the last, being so excited. Upon which
ground he sent Chamberlain, a Scot by Birth, his Chaplain and Almoner, to
assist the Confederates in advancing the business, and to attempt all ways for
exasperating the first heat; with Order not to depart from them, till (things
succeeding as he wished) he might return with good News: And on the same
appointed one of his Secretaries to reside in Scotland, to march along with
them into England, to be present at all Councils of War, and direct their
business. And on the other side, Hamiltons Chaplains had free accesses unto Con
the same Countryman also, at such time as Chamberlain was Negotiating for the
Cardinal, to ^oment the Flames, which had begun to rage already. And by a
Letter subscribed by the Earl of Rothes, and others of chief note amongst the
Covenanters, they craved the Assistance of that King, cast themselves upon his
Protection, beseeching him to give credit to Colvill the Bearer thereof, whom
they had instructed in all Particulars which concerned their Condition and
Desires. In Ireland they had a strong Party of Natural Scots, planted in Vlster
by King James, upon the forfeited Estates of Tir-Owen, Tir-Connel, Odighirtie*
etc. not Scots in Birth and Parentage only, but Design and Faction. But
Wentworth was not to be told of their secret Practices; he saw it in their
general disposition to Schism and Faction, and was not unacquainted with their
old Rebellions. It must be his care that they brake not into any new; which he
performed with such a diligent and watchful eye, that he crushed them in the
very beginning o^ the Combination, seizing upon such Ships and Men as came
thither from Scotland, Imprisoning some, Fining others, and putting an Oath
upon the rest: By which Oath they were bound to abjure the Covenant, not to be
aiding to the Covenanters against the King, nor to Protest against any of his
Royal Edicts, as their Brethren in Scotland used to do. For the refusing of
which Oath he Fined one Impeachment of Strafford, Art. 19.
Sir Henry Steward and his Wife (Persons of no less Power than Disaffection) at
no less than 5000 l. apiece; two of their Daughters, and one James Gray of the
same Confederacy, at the Sum of 3000 l. apiece; committing them to Prison for
not paying the Fines imposed upon them. All which he justified when he was
brought unto his Trial, on good Reasons of State; There Relation of the Answers
of the E. of Straff. p. 34.
being at that time one hundred thousand Souls in Ireland of the Scottish
Nation, most of them passionately affected to the Cause of the Covenanters, and
some of them conspiring to betray the Town and Castle of Carickfergus to a
Nobleman of that Country, for which the Principal Conspirator had been justly
Executed. Nor staid he here, but he gave finally a Power to the Bishop of Down
and Connor, and other Bishops of that Kingdom, and their several Chancellors,
to attach the Bodies of all such of the meaner sort, who either should refuse
to appear before them upon Citation, or to perform all Lawful Decrees and
Orders made by the said Bishops and their Chancellors; and to commit them to
the next Gaol, till they should conform, or answer the Contempt at the
Council Table. By means whereof, he made the poorer sort so pliant, and
obedient to their several Bishops, that there was good hopes of their
Conformity to the Rules of the Church.

Having thus carried on the affairs of Scotland till the end of this year, we
must return to our Archbishop; whom we shall find intent on the preservation of
the Hierarchy, and the Church of England, against the Practices of the Scots,
and Scotizing English: and no less busied in digesting an Apology for
vindicating the Liturgy commended to the Kirk of Scotland. In reference to the
last, he took order for translating the Scottish Liturgy into the Latin
Tongue; that being published with the Apology, which he had designed, it might
give satisfaction to the world of his Majesty Piety, and his own great care,
the Orthodoxie and simplicity of the Book it self, and the perverseness of the
Scots in refusing all of it. Which Work was finished and left with him, but it
went no further; the present distemper of the times, and the troubles which
fell heavily on him putting an end to it in the first beginning. But the best
was, that the English Liturgy had been published in so many Languages, and the
Scottish so agreeable to the English in the Forms and Offices, that any man
might judge of the one by perusing the other. The first Liturgy of King Edward
vi. translated into Latin by Alexander Alesius, a learned Scot, for the better
information of Martin Bucer, when he first came to live amongst us; the second
Liturgy of that King with Queen Elizabeth's Emendations by Walter Haddon,
President of Magdalen College in Oxon. and Dean of Exeter; and his Translation
rectified by Dr. Morket, in the times of King James, according to such
Explications and Additions as were made by order from the King. The same
translated into French, for the use of the Isle of Iersey, by the appointment
of the King also; into the Spanish for the better satisfaction of that Nation,
by the prudent care of the Lord Keeper Williams; And finally, by the
countenance and encouragement of this Archbishop, translated into Greek by
Petley, much about this time, that so the Eastern Churches might have as clear
an information of the English Piety as the Western had.

In order to the other he recommended to Hall, then Bishop of Exon. the writing
of a book in defense of the Divine Right of Episcopacy, in opposition to the
Scots and their Adherents. Exeter undertakes the Work, and sends him a rude
draught or Skeleton of his design, consisting of the two main points of his
intended discourse, together with the several Propositions which he intended to
insist on in pursuance of it. The two main points which he was to aim at, were,
First, That Episcopacy is a lawful, most ancient, holy, and divine institution
(as it is joined with imparity, and superiority of Jurisdiction) and therefore
where it has through Gods providence obtained, cannot by any humane power be
abdicated without a manifest violation of Gods Ordinance. And secondly, That
the Presbyterian Government, however vindicated under the glorious names of
Christ's Kingdom, and Ordinance, has no true footing either in Scripture, or
the Practice of the Church in all Ages from Christ's time till the present; and
that howsoever it may be of use in some Cities or Territories, wherein
Episcopal Government through iniquity of times cannot be had; yet to obtrude it
upon a Church otherwise settled under an acknowledged Monarchy, is utterly
incongruous and unjustifiable. In which two points he was to predispose some
Propositions (or Postulata, as he calls them) to be the ground of his
proceedings; which I shall here present in his own conceptions, that so we may
the better judge of those corrections which were made upon them. The Postulata
were as follows, viz. 1. That Government which was of Apostolical
Institution, cannot be denied to be of Divine Right. 2. Not only that
Government which was directly commanded and enacted, but also that which was
practiced and recommended by the Apostles to the Church, must justly pass ^or
an Apostolical Institution. 3. That which the Apostles by Divine Inspiration
instituted, was not for the present time, but for continuance. 4. The universal
Practice of the Church, immediately succeeding the Apostles, is the best and
surest Commentary upon the Practice of the Apostles, or upon their Expressions.
5. We may not entertain so irreverent an opinion of the Saints and Fathers of
the Primitive Church, that they who were the immediate Successors of the
Apostles, would, or durst set up a Government, either faulty, or of their own
heads. 6. If they would have been so presumptuous, yet they could not have
diffused an uniform form of Government through the world in so short a space.
7. The ancient Histories of the Church, and Writings of the eldest Fathers, are
rather to be believed in the report of the Primitive Form of the
Church Government, than those of this last Age. 8. Those whom the ancient
Church of God, and the holy and Orthodox Fathers condemned for Heretics, are
not fit to be followed as Authors of our Opinion or Practice for
Church Government. 9. The accession of honorable Titles or Privileges, makes
no difference in the substance of the calling. 10. Those Scriptures wherein a
new Form of Government is grounded, have need to be very clear and
unquestionable, and more evident than those whereon the former rejected
Polity, is raised. 11. If that Order which, they say, Christ set for the
Government of the Church (which they call the Kingdom and Ordinance of Christ)
be but one, and undoubted, then it would, and shall have been ere this, agreed
upon against them, what, and which it is. 12. It this (which they pretend) be
the Kingdom, and Ordinance of Christ, then if any Essential part of it be
wanting, Christ's Kingdom is not erected in the Church. 13. Christian Polity
requires no impossible or absurd thing. 14. Those Tenets which are new and
unheard of in all Ages of the Church, (in many, and Essential points) are well
worthy to be suspected. 16. To depart from the Practice of the Universal Church
of Christ (ever from the Apostles times) and to betake our selves voluntarily
to a new Form, lately taken up, cannot but be odious and highly scandalous.

These first Delineations of the Pourtraicture being sent to Lambeth, in the
end of October, were generally well approved of by the Metropolitan. Some lines
there were which he thought to have too much shadow and umbrage, might be taken
at them, if not otherwise qualified with a more perfect Ray of Light. And
thereupon he takes the Pensil in his hand, and with some Alterations of the
Figure, accompanied with many kind expressions of a fair acceptance, he sent
them back again to be completely Limned and Colored by that able hand. Which
alterations, what they were, and his reasons for them, I shall adventure to lay
down, as they come before me, that so the Reader may discern as well the
clearness of his apprehension, and the excellency of his judgment in the points
debated. The Letter long, and therefore so disposed of without further
coherence, that so it may be perused or pretermitted without disturbance to the
sequel; some preparations being made by the hand of his Secretary, he proceeds
thus to the rest.

^
The rest of your Letter is fitter to be answered by my own hand, and so you
have it. And since you are pleased so worthily and brother-like to acquaint me
with the whole plot of your intended work, and to yield it up to my censure,
and better advice (so you are pleased to write) I do not only thank you
heartily for it: but shall in the same brotherly way, and with equal freedom
put some few Animadversions, such as occur on the sudden, to your further
consideration, aiming at nothing but what you do, the perfection of the work in
which so much is concerned. And first, for Mr. George Graham (whom Hall had
signified to have renounced his Episcopal Function) I leave you free to work
upon his business, and his ignorance as you please, assuring my self that you
will not depart from the gravity of your self, or the cause therein. Next you
say in the first head, That Episcopacy is an ancient, holy, and divine
Institution. It must needs be ancient and holy, if divine. Would it not be m^re
full, went it thus? So ancient as that it is of Divine Institution. Next you
define Episcopacy by being joined with imparity and superiority of
Jurisdiction, but this seems short; for every Archp^esbyters or Archdeacons
place is so, yea, and so was Mr. Henderson in his Chair at Glasco, unless you
will define it by a distinction of Order. I draw the superiority, not from the
Jurisdiction which is attributed to Bishops jure positivo, in their Audience of
Ecclesiastical matters: but from that which is intrinsical and original in the
power of Excommunication. Again, you say in the first point; That where
Episcopacy has obtained, it cannot be abdicated without violation of Gods
Ordinance. This Proposition I conceive is inter minus habentes; for never was
there any Church yet, where it has not obtained. The Christian Faith was never
yet planted any where, but the very first feature of a Church was by, or with
Episcopacy; and wheresoever now Episcopacy is not suffered to be, it is by such
an Abdication, for certainly there it was a Principio. In your second head you
grant that the Presbyterian government may be of use, where Episcopacy may not
be had. First, I pray you consider whither this conversion be not needless
here, and in it self of a dangerous consequence: Next I conceive there is no
place where Episcopacy may not be had, if there be a Church more then in Title
only. Thirdly, since they challenge their Presbyterian Fiction to be Christ's
Kingdom and Ordinance (as your self expresses) and cast out Episcopacy as
opposite to it, we must not use any mincing terms, but unmask them plainly; nor
shall I ever give way to hamper our selves for fear of speaking plain truth,
though it be against Amsterdam or Geneva: and this must be sadly thought on.

Concerning your Postulata I shall pray you to allow me the like freedom;
amongst which the two first are true, but (as expressed) two restrictive. For
Episcopacy is not so to be asserted unto Apostolical Institution, as to bar it
from looking higher and from fetching it materially and originally in the
ground and Intention of it, from Christ himself; though perhaps the Apostles
formalized it. And here give me leave a little to enlarge. The adversaries of
Episcopacy are not only the furious Arian Heretics (out of which are now
raised, Prynne, Bastwick, and our Scottish Masters) but some also of a milder
and subtler all^y both in the Genevian and Roman Faction. And it will become
the Church of England so to vindicate it against the furious Puritans as that
we may not lay it open to be wounded by either of the other two, more cunning,
and more learned adversaries. Not to the Roman faction for that will be
content, it shall be Juris Divini mediati, by, far, from, and under the Pope,
that so the Government of the Church may be Monarchical in him; but not
Immediati, which makes the Church Aristocratical in the Bishops. This is the
Italian Rock, not the Genevan; for that will not deny Episcopacy to be Juris
Divini, so you will take it, ut suadentis vel approbantis but not imperantis;
for then they may take and leave as they will, which is that they would be at.
Nay (if I much forget not) Beza himself is said to have acknowledged Episcopacy
to be Juris Divini Imperantis, so you will not take it as universaliter
imperantis, For then Geneva might escape: and citra considerationem durantis;
for then though they had it before, yet now upon wiser thoughts they may be
without it, which Scotland says now, and who will may say it after, if this be
good Divinity: and then all in that time shall be Democratical. I am bold to
add, because in your second Postulatum I find, that Episcopacy is directly
commanded: but you go not so far as to meet with this subtilty of Beza, which
is the great Rock in the Lake of Geneva. In your nine Postulatum, that the
Accession of Honorable Titles, or Privileges, makes no difference in the
substance of the calling, You mean the titles of Archbishops, Primates,
Metropolitans, Patriarcks, etc. It Is well, And I presume you do so: But then in
any case take heed you assert it so, as that the Faction lay not hold of it, as
if the Bishops were but the Title of Honor, and the same calling with a
Priest; For that they all aim at, etc. The eleventh Postulatum is larger, and I
shall not Repeat it; because I am sure you retein a Copy of what you write to
me, being the Ribbs of the work; nor shall I say more to it, then that it must
be warily handled for fear of a saucy Answer, which is more ready with them a
great deal then a Learned one. I presume I am pardoned already for this freedom
by your submission of all to me. And now I heartily pray you to send me up,
(keeping a Copy to your self against the accidents of Carriage) not the whole
work together, but each particular head or Postulatum, as you finish it; that
so we here may be the better able to consider of it, and the work come on
faster. So to Gods blessed Protection, etc.


Such was the freedom which he used in declaring his judgment in the case, and
such the Authority which his reasons carried along with them, that the Bishop
of Exon found good cause to correct the obl^quity of his opinion according to
the Rules of these Animadversions; agreeably unto which the book was writ and
published not long after, under the name of Episcopacy by Divine Right, etc.

Such care being taken to prevent all inconveniences which might come from
Scotland, he casts his eye toward the Execution of his former Orders for
Regulating the French and Dutch Churches here in England. It had been to no
purpose in him to endeavor a Conformity amongst the Scots, as long as such
examples of separation did continue amongst the English. If the post-nati in
those Churches, born and bred in England, should not be bound to repair with
other of their Neighbors to their Parish Churches, it might create a further
mischief then the present Scandal, and come up close at last to formal Schism.
His Order had been published in all the Congregations of strangers within his
Province, as before is said; but Executed more or less, as the Minister and
Churchwardens stood affected to those Congregations. And therefore that the
Churchwardens might more punctually proceed in doing their duty, It was
thought fit that certain Articles should be framed and commended to them for
their future direction. The Reformation being pursued in his own Diocese, and
the Metropolitical City first, it was to be presumed, that those in other
places would gladly follow the Example. Of laying taxes on those strangers in
their several Parishes for repairing of, and adorning their several
Parish-Churches, and providing Ornaments for the same they were in all places
careful enough; because their own profit was concerned in it. And for their
proceedings in the rest they were directed by these Orders to inquire of all
such strangers as lived amongst them, the names of all married persons in their
Congregations as of the second descent in their several Parishes, to the end
that order might be taken for decent seats for them, according to their Estates
and qualities: that they should return the names and ages of those unmarried of
the second descent, and whose children and servants they were; to the end that
the like care might be taken of their due resort to the Church, there to be
Catechized, and Communicate according to their ages: that those at sixteen
years and upwards, that had not already Communicated should prepare themselves
to receive the blessed Sacrament in their Parish Church at the next Communion;
and from thence forward thrice in the year afterward as the Canons of the
Church require, as they would avoid presentment to their Ordinary for their
neglect therein: that such as were Parents and Masters of Families of the first
and second descent, did thenceforth every Lords day, half an hour after Evening
Prayer, send all such, their Children and Servants as were under sixteen to
their Parish Church, there to be Catechized according to the Orders of the
Church, as they themselves upon presentment would answer the Contrary. These
Articles being given in the middle of April, were Executed for the rest of the
year more punctually then in any of those before. But it held not much longer
then the rest of that year: The troubles which the Archbishop fell into, in the
year next following dissolving all his Orders and Injunctions of this kind, as
if never made.

With equal constancy he governed his Counsels in all other particulars. Some
informations had been given him of certain misdemeanors and corruptions in
Merton College, of which he was the Ordinary, and immediate Visitor, in the
Right of his See; and in that Right he resolves upon a Visitation both in Head,
and Members. To this employment he deputes his Right Trusty Friend and Assured
Servant, The Dean of the Arches; who entering on his charge in the year
foregoing 1638. made this Enquiry amongst others, viz. Whither they made due
Reverence (by bowing toward the Altar or Communion Table) when they came into
the Chapel. And finding by a return to this enquiry, that Corbet, and Cheynel
two of the Fellows, not only had neglected but refused to make any such
Reverence, he tried all fair and plausible persuasions by himself and others to
induce them too it. But not prevailing either way, he certified the Archbishop
of his Proceedings, who thereupon caused some Injunctions to be sent to the
College for their future Governance, Habe^^t ^^^tam ^ve^e^^iam, ad me^^am
Domini, etc.
Amongst which I find this for one, that they use due and lowly Reverence
toward the Lords Table, at their first entrance into the Quire. Upon the
coming whereof there was no more dispute about it, those Reverences being made
by most, and constantly continued by them till the Parliament of Novem. 3. In
matters which concerned the Warden, it was thought fit by Lamb the Chief
Commissioner, to do nothing without further direction, but only to acquaint the
Archbishop, in what State he found them; who thereupon recalled the business to
himself. The parties to appear before him October. following, at which time he
spent three days in hearing and examining the Points in difference between
Brent the Warden, and such of the Fellows of the College as complained against
him: But for determining the Cause ( the Warden appearing very foul, as himself
acknowledges) he took time till the first of July in this present year, that
Brent might have the better opportunities to content his Fellows, for the
Errors of his Government in the times precedent, and give them some assurance
of a Reformation for the time to come. Which noble Favor notwithstanding, and
that he went off with no other Censure than a fair and Fatherly Admonition: yet
Brent unmindful of so great a moderation toward him, expres'd more readiness in
contributing toward his Condemnation in the time of his Trial, than any of
those who did most eagerly desire his Ruin.

The course and method of my business having brought me to Oxon. I cannot
depart thence, without taking notice of his further Bounty and Munificence to
that University. He had before entertained some thoughts of clearing the great
Square betwixt St. Mary's and the Schools, intending to have raised a^fair and
capacious Room, advanced on Pillars; the upper part to serve for Convocations
and Congregations, which till that time were held in the Church it self; the
lower for a Walk or place of Conference, in which Students of all sorts might
confer together, at their repairing to the Schools, the Library, or any other
business which concerned the Public. But finding the Owners of those Houses
not so willing to part with them, as he had probably presumed, he was fain to
shift the Scene, though he held his purpose, which fell out very happily for
that University: For being resolved to free St. Mary's Church from those
Inconveniences, which the continual keeping of the Public Convocations and
Congregations must of necessity carry with it, he erected a stately and most
elegant Pile at the West end of the Divinity School, and Public Library; The
lower part whereof was fitted and accommodated for the Convocations, and other
Public Meetings of that Famous Body: The upper part, opening into the Bodleian
Library, he trimmed with all the Curiosities of Art and Cost, to serve as a
Repository for such Learned Writings, as the Piety of ensuing Times might
confer upon it. And that it might not be reported, that he had given them
nothing but an empty Box, ^e furnished it with no fewer than 1276 Manuscripts
in several Languages, 700 whereof had been sent before at diverse times, when
this beautiful Structure was in raising: The rest were sent on June 28. in this
present year; 100 of these last being in the Hebrew, Greek, Arabic and Persian
Tongues. And that he might make some Acknowledgment to the Town of Reading, in
which he was born, and in the Grammar School wh^reof he had received the first
part of his Education, he bestowed upon it about this time also a Revenue of no
less than 200 l. per Annum, to be thus disposed of; that is to say, 120 l.
thereof to be parcelled out every two years, for the pla(...) Apprentices, and
setting up of young Beginners who had honestly served out their Times; and
every third year, for the Marriage of five young Maidens which had lived with
one Master or Mistress for seven years together; 50 l. of it to be yearly added
for an Augmentation to the Minister of the Parish Church of St. Laurence in
which he was born, whose means before was miserably short of that which some
call a Competency; and having purchased the perpetual Parsonage of it, he
conferred it on St. John's College in Oxon. to be a fit Preferment for any one
of the Fellows of that House for the time to come: 20 l. of it he allotted
yearly to increase the Stipend of the Schoolmaster there; 8 l. for the yearly
Entertainment of the President and Fellows of St. John's College, whom he made
his Visitors, to see that all things should be carried as fairly on, as by him
piously intended; the remaining 40 s. being added as a yearly Fee to the
Town Clerk, for Registring the Names of those who should from time to time
enjoy the benefit of so great a Charity. Some other great Designs he had, but
of a far more Public and Heroic Nature; as the increasing of the Maintenance
of all the poor Vicars in England; To see the Tithes of London settled between
the Clergy and the City; For setting up a Greek Press at Oxon. and procuring
Letters and Mattrices for the same, wherewith to Print and Publish all such
Greek Manuscripts as were to be found in that Library; For obtaining the like
Grant from his Majesty for buying in all Impropriations, as had been made for
the Repairing of St. Paul's: but not to take beginning, till that Work was
finished; For procuring an Extract of all the Records of the Tower relating to
the Church and Clergy, to be written in a fair Vellom Book, which had been
drawn down from the 20th. of Edward 1. to the 14th. of Edward iv. with an
intent to carry on the Work till the last year of King Henry viii. that so the
Church might understand her own Power and Privileges. But the prosecution of
this Work from the said 14th. of King Edward iv. and of all the rest
beforementioned, which he had hammered in design, were most unfortunately
intermitted, by the great alteration of Affairs which soon after followed. I
cannot tell whether Posterity will believe or not, That so many great and
notable Projectments could be comprehended in one Soul; most of them Ripened in
a manner, the residue in the Bud or Blossom, and some of them bringing forth
the Fruits expected from them. But the best is, that none of his Designs were
carried in so close a manner, or left in so imperfect a condition, as not to
give some visible Remembrances, as well of his Universal Comprehensions, as his
Zeal and Piety.

For notwithstanding the present Distractions which the Faction and
Tumultuousness of the Scots, had drawn upon him (enough to have deterred a
right Constantine) let us look on him in the pursuit of his former purposes,
and we shall find him still the same. The Bishop of Exeter's Book being
finished, and recommended by the Author to his last perusal before it went unto
the Press, he took the pains to read it over with care and diligence; in the
perusal whereof he took notice, amongst other things, that the strict
Superstition of the Sabbatarians was but lightly touched at; whereas he
thought, that some smarter Plaster to that Sore, might have done no harm. He
observed also, that he had passed by this Point, viz. Whether Episcopacy be an
Order or Degree, as not much material; whereas in the Judgment of such Learned
Men as he had consulted, it was the main ground of the whole Cause: And
therefore he desired him to weigh it well, and to alter it with his own Pen as
soon as might be. ^ut that which gave him most offense was, That the Title of
Antichrist was positively and determinately bestowed upon the Pope; Which being
so contrary to the Judgment of many Learned ^^^testants, as well as his own, he
allowed not of: but howsoever thought it fit to acquaint his Majesty with the
Business; and having so done, to submit it to his Will and Preasure. Concerning
which, he writes thus to the Bishop in his Letter of January 14. this present
year, viz. The last (with which I durst not but acquaint his Majesty) is about
Antichrist, which Title in three or four places you bestow up is the Pope
positively and determinately; whereas King James of ^lessed Memory, having
brought strong proof in a Work of his, as you well know, to prove the Pope to
be Antichrist: yet being afterward challenged about it, he made this Answer,
when the King that now is went into Spain, and acquainted him with it; That he
writ, that not concludingly, but by way of Argument only: that the Pope and his
Adherents might see, there was as good and better Arguments to prove him
Antichrist, than for the Pope to challenge Temporal Jurisdiction over Kings.
The whole Passage being known to me, I could not but speak with the King about
it, who commanded me to write unto you, that you might qualify your Expression
in these Particulars, and so not differ from the known Judgment of his Pious
and Learned Father. This is easily done with your own Pen; and the rather,
because all Protestants join not in this Opinion of Antichrist. According to
which good advice, the Bishop of Exon. qualified some of his Expressions, and
deleted other, to the Contentment of his Sovereign, the Satisfaction of his
Metropolitan, and his own great Honor.

But whilst the Archbishop labored to support Episcopacy on the one side,
some of the Puritan Party did as much endeavor to suppress it, by lopping off
the Branches first, and afterward by laying the Ax to the root of the Tree.
Bagshaw a Lawyer of some standing of the Middle Temple, did first prepare the
way to the ruin of it, by questioning the Bishops Place and Vote in
Parliament, their Temporal Power, and the Authority of the High Commission. For
being chosen Reader by that House for the Lent Vacation, he first began his
Readings on February 24. selecting for the Argument of his Discoursings the
Statute 25 Edw. 3. cap. 7. In prosecuting whereof, he had distributed his
Conceptions into ten Parts, and each Part into ^^^^^^cial Cases; by which
account he must have had one hundred blows at the Church in his ten days
Reading. His main Design was in the first place, intended chiefly for the
defense of such Prohibitions as formerly had been granted by the Courts in
Westminster Hall to stop the Proceedings of the Court Christian, and specially
of the High Commission; and in the next place, to deny the Authority of the
Commission it self, as before was noted. In order whereunto, he began first to
state these Questions, viz. 1. Whether it be a good Act of Parliament without
the Assent of the Lords Spiritual? which he he held affirmatively. 2. Whether
any Beneficed Clerk were capable of Temporal Jurisdiction at the time of making
that Law? which he held in the negative. And 3. Whether a Bishop, without
calling a Synod, have Power as Diocesan to convict an Heretic? which he
maintained in the negative also. The News whereof being brought to Lambeth,
there was no need of warning the Archbishop to look about him, who was not to
be told what a strong Faction some of the Scotizing Lawyers had made against
the Church in Queen Elizabeth's Time, carried it on under the Government of King
James, and now began to threaten as much danger to it as in former times. He
thereupon informs his Majesty both of the Man and his Design, and how far he
had gone in justifying the Proceedings of the Scottish Covenanters, in decrying
the Temporal Power of Churchmen, and the undoubted Right of Bishops to their
Place in Parliament. His Majesty hereupon gives Order to Finch the new Lord
Keeper^ to interdict all further Reading on those Points, or any others of like
nature, which might administer any further Flame to the present Combustions.
The Lord Keeper having done his part, and the Reader addressing himself to him,
that by his leave he might proceed in the course of his Exercise, it was soon
found, that nothing could be done therein without leave from the King; and no
such leave to be obtained, but by the Approbation and Con^ent of the Lord
Archbishop. To Lambeth therefore goes the Reader, where he found no admittance
till the making of his third Address, and was then told, That he was fallen
upon a Subject neither safe nor seasonable, which should stick closer to him
than he was aware of. Bagshaw endeavored something in his own defense, as to
the choice of the Argument; and somewhat also, as to the impossibility of
settling to any other Subject in the present Conjuncture, desiring his Grace to
be a means unto the King, that he might proceed in performance of the Task he
had undertaken. To which the Archbishop stoutly answered, That his Majesty was
otherwise resolved in it; and that perhaps it had been better for the Reader
himself to have given over at the first, than have incurred his Majesty's Royal
Indignation by that unseasonable Adventure. No better Answer being given him,
away goes Bagshaw out of Town, accompanied with forty or fifty Horse (and it
was a great Honor to the House that he had no more) who seemed to be of the
same Faction and A^fections also, as their designed Reader was, being
instructed, though too late, that they could not have so great a care of their
Courts and Profit, as the Archbishops had of the Churches power. Such was the
constancy of his spirit, that notwithstanding the Combustions in Scotland, the
ill prosecuting of the last Summers Action, and the uncertainties of what might
happen in the next, he always steered his course with a steady hand to the
port he aimed at, though it pleased God to let him suffer shipwreck in the
mouth of the Haven.

The interrupting of this man in the course of his Reading, the holding of so
strict an hand over the Congregations of the French and Dutch within his
Province, and these compliances on the other side with the Church of Rome, were
made occasions of the clamor, which was raised against him concerning his
design to suppress the Gospel, and to bring in Popery and Arminianism; or at
the least to make a Reconciliation betwixt us and Rome, toward which the
Doctrine of Arminius was given out for a certain Preamble. Which general
clamor being raised against him and the rest of the Bishops, I find thus
flourisht over by one of their Orators in the House of Commons. (...) p. 3.1.41.
A little search (says he) will find them to have been the destruction of
Unity under pretense of Uniformity; To have brought in Superstition and Scandal
under titles of Reverence and Decency; To have defiled our Church by adorning
our Churches; To have slackned the strictness of that Union which was formerly
between us and those of our Religion beyond the Seas, An action as unpolitick
as ungodly: Or we shall find them to have resembled the Dog in the Manger, to
have neither preached themselves, nor employed those that should, nor suffered
those that would; To have brought in Catechizing only to thrust out Preaching,
and cried down Lectures by the name of Factions, either because their industry
in that duty appeared a reproof to their neglect of it, or with intention to
have brought in darkness, that they might the easier sow their tares while it
was night: and by that introduction of ignorance, introduce the better that
Religion which accounts it the Mother of Devotion. In which (says he) they
have abused his Majesty, as well as his People; for when he had with great
wisdom silenced on both parts those opinions which have often tormented the
Church, and have, and always will trouble the Schools, They made use of this
Declaration to tie up one side, and to let the other loose, whereas they ought
either in discretion to have been equally restrained, or in justice to have
been equally tolerated. And it is observable, that the party to which they gave
this License, was that, whose Doctrine, though it was not contrary to Law, was
contrary to Custom, and for a long while in this Kingdom was no oftener
Preached than Recanted, etc. We find them introducing such Doctrines, as
admitting them to be true, the truth could not recompense the scandal; Or such
as were so far false, as Sir Thomas More says of the Casuists, their business
was not to keep men from sinning, but to inform them, Quam prope ad peccatum,
sine peccato liceat accedere. So it seemed their work was to try how much of a
Papist might be brought in without Popery, and to destroy as much of the Gospel
without bringing themselves into danger of being destroyed by Law. To go yet
further, some of them have so industriously labored to deduce themselves from
Rome, that they have given great suspicion that in gratitude they desire to
return thither, or at least to meet it half way; some have evidently labored
to bring in an English, though not a Roman Popery. I mean not only the outside
and dress of it, but equally absolute, a blind dependence on the People upon
the Clergy, and of the Clergy upon themselves; and have opposed the Papacy
beyond the Seas, that they might settle one beyond the water.

Such being the general charge which was laid against him, we will consider in
this place what may be said in order to his defense, as to some seeming
Innovations into the Worship of God, his design to bring in Popery by the
backdoor of Arminianism, and his endeavoring of a Reconciliation betwixt us
and Rome. And first, as touching such Innovations in the Worship of God, he
makes a general purgation of himself in his Speech made in the Star Chamber,
the sum and substance whereof you have seen before. Out of which I shall only
take this short and pithy Declaration which he makes of himself, p. 4.
in relation to this part of his charge. viz. I can say it clearly and truly,
as in the presence of God, that I have done nothing, as a Prelate, to the
utmost of what I am conscious, but with a single heart, and with a sincere
intention for the good Government and honor of the Church, and the maintenance
of the Orthodox truth, and Religion of Christ, professed, established, and
maintained in the Church of England. For my care of this Church, the reducing
it to Order, the upholding of the External Worship of God in it, and the
settling of the Rules of its first Reformation, are the cause (and the sole
cause, whatsoever is pretended) of this malicious storm that has lowred so
black upon me, and some of my Brethren. The like Declaration he also makes in
his first Speech to the Lords, at the time of his trial, where we find it thus:
Ever since I came into place (says he) I have labored nothing more than that
the External Worship of God (so much slighted in diverse parts of this Kingdom)
might be preserved; and that with as much Decency and Uniformity as might be;
For I evidently saw, that the public neglect of Gods Service in the outward
face of it, and the nasty lying of many places dedicated to that Service, had
almost cast a damp upon the true and inward Worship of God, which while we live
in the body needs External helps, and all little enough to keep it in any
vigor. And this I did to the utmost of my knowledge according both to Law and
Canon, and with the consent and liking of the People; nor did any Command issue
out from me against the one or the other. And finally, we shall find the like
Declaration made by him on the Sca^fold at the time of his death, in which sad
hour there was no dissembling (and I conceive all charitable men will believe
so of it) before God or man. But because it relates also to the next
particular, ^
we shall there meet with it.

And for the next particular, concerning the designing to bring in ^^pery, it
has been further aggravated by his correspondency with the Popes Ministers
here in England, and his indulgence to that Party upon all occasions. But of
this he cleansed himself sufficiently in the (...)-Chamiber Speech before
remembered, p. 14
in which he publicly avowed: First, That he knew of no plot or purpose of
altering the Religion established. Secondly, That he had never been far from
attempting any thing that may truly be said to tend that way in the least
degree. And thirdly, having offered his Oath for the other two, that it the
King had a mind to change Religion (which he knew he had not) his Majesty must
seek for other Instruments, ^
how basely soever those men had conceived of him. The like (...) gives also in
the last hour of his life, when he was go^^^ to tender an account of all his
Actions before Gods Tribunal. ^here is a Clamor that I would have brought in
Popery, but I was (...) and baptized (says he) in the bosom of the Church of
England, established by Law; in that profession I have ever since lived, and in
that I come now to dye. This is no time to dissemble with God, least of all in
matters of Religion; and therefore I (...) it may be remembered, I have always
lived in the Protestant Religion established in England, and in that I come now
to die. And then he adds with reference to the point before, What Clamours and
slanders I have endured for laboring to keep an Uniformity in the External
Service of God, according to the Doctrine and Discipline of this Church, all
men know; and I have abundantly (...). His Conference with Fisher the Jesuit,
in the year 1622. and (...) of that Conference, Anno 1637. with Derings
attestation (...) before we had, do most abundantly evince this truth, at he
approved not the Doctrine of the Church of Rome. And as (...) approve^ not of
their Doctrines, so he as much disliked their (...) for gaining Proselytes, or
multiplying their followers in all (...) the Kingdom: concerning which he tells
his Majesty, That (...) never had advised a persecution of the Papists in any
(...), yet God forbid (says he) that your Majesty should let born Laws and
Discipline sleep for fear of a Persecution, and in the mean time let Mr. Fisher
and his Fellows Angle in all parts of your Dominions for your Subjects. If in
your Grace and Goodness you will spare their persons: yet I humbly beseech you
to see to it, that they be not suffered to lay either their Weels, or bait
their H^oks, or cast their Nets in every stream, least the Temptation grow both
too general, and too strong. So he in the Epistle Dedicatory to his Large
Relation of the Conference between him and Fisher, published in the end of the
year forgoing. Assuredly it must needs seem extremely ridiculous to others, and
contradictory to it self, to confute the chief Doctrines of the Papists, and
oppose their practicings, if he ^ad had any such design to bring in Popery.

And being thus averse from them in point of Doctrine he declined all
correspondence and acquaintance with them, whereby he might come under the
suspicion of some secret Practice. I hold it probable enough, that the better
to oblige the Queen unto him (of whose Prevalency in the Kings affections he
could not be ignorant) he might consent to Con's coming hither over from the
Pope, to be assistant to her in such affairs as the nature of her Religion
might occasion with the Sea of Rome: But he kept himself at such a distance,
that neither Con, nor Panzani before him (who acted for a time in the same
capacity) could fasten any acquaintance on him. The Pamphlet called, The Popes
Nuncio, Pop. Nunc. p 7.
Printed in the year 1643. has told us, That Panzani at his being here, did
desire a Conference with the Archbishop of Canterbury, but was put of and
procrastinated therein from day to day; That at the last he departed the
Kingdom without any Speech with him. The like we find in the discovery of
Andreas ab Habernfield, Su^olfecit ab D^mino, Archiepis^po Regifidelissim^^
^^tum animum Regis in cis pendulum, Re Mastr. p. 16.
who tells us of this Con, That finding the Kings Judgment to depend much on
the Archbishop of Canterbury, his faithful Servant, he resolved to move every
stone, and bend all his strength to gain him to his side: being confident he
had prepared, the means. For he had a command to make offer of a Cardinals Cap
to the Lord Archbishop in the name of the Pope of Rome; and that he should
allure him also with higher promises, that he might corrupt his sincere mind;
yet a fitting occasion was never offered whereby he might insinuate himself
into the Lord Archbishop, to whom free access was to be impetrated by the Earl
and Countess of Arundel, as also by Secretary Windebank, all whose
intercessions he neglected, and did shun (as it were the Plague) the company or
Familiarity of Con. He was also solicited by others of no mean Rank, well
known to him, and yet he continued unmovable. And whereas some found a way to
help at last by making Windebank the Internuncio betwixt him and them, that
only serves to make the matter rather worse than better, there being a great
strangeness grown betwixt him and Windebank; not only before Con's coming into
the Realm: but before Panzani had settled any course of intelligence in the
Court of England.

As for his favors toward those of the Catholic Party, and his connivence of
their Practices, which is next objected; as he had good reason for the one: so
there could be no reason to object the other. He had good reason for the one,
viz. That by showing favors to the Papists here, they might obtain the like
favors, for such Protestants as lived in the Dominion of Popish Princes. Upon
which ground King James extended many favors to them in his time, as (...)
(...) opinions as that Writer makes them, appears first by the Testimony of the
Archbishop of Spalato, declaring in the High Commission a little before ^i^
^oing hence, that he acknowledged the Articles of the Church to be true, or
profitable at the least; and none of them to be Heretical. It appears secondly
by a Tractate of Franciscus a Sancta Clara, (as he calls himself) in which he
p^tteth such a gloss upon the 39 Articles of the Church of England as renders
them not inconsistent with the Doctrines of the Church of Rome. And i^ without
prejudice to the truth, the controversies might have been composed, it is most
probable, that other Protestant Churches would have su^d by their Agents to be
included in the Peace: if not, the Church of England had lost nothing by it, as
being hated by the Calvinists, and not loved by the Lutherans.

Admitting then that such a Reconciliation was endeavored betwixt the Agents
for both Churches, Let us next see what our great Statesmen have discoursed
upon that particular, upon what terms the Agreement was to have been made, and
how far they proceeded in it. (...) p. 11.
And first the book entitled the Popes Nuncio, affirmed to have been written
by a Venetian Ambassador at his being in England, does discourse it t^us. As to
a Reconciliation (says he) between the Churches of England and Rome, there
were made some general Propositions and overtures by the Archbishops Agents,
they assuring that his Grace was very much disposed thereunto; and that if it
was not accomplished in his life time, it would prove a work of more difficulty
after his death; that in very truth for the last three years, the Archbishop
had introduced some Innovations approaching ^ear the Rites and Forms of Rome;
that the Bishop of Chichester a great Confident of his Grace, the Lord
Treasurer and eight other Bishops of his Graces party, did most passionately
desire a Reconciliation with the Church of Rome; that they did day by day
receed from their Ancient Tenants to accommodate with the Church of Rome; that
therefore the Pope on his part, ought to make some steps to meet them, and the
Court of Rome ^^mit something of its Rigor in Doctrine, or otherwise no accord
would be. The composition on both sides in so good a forwardness, before Panzam
le^t the Kingdom, that the Archbishop, and and Bishop of Chichester had often
said, that there were but two sorts of People likely to impede and hinder the
Reconciliation, to wit, the Puritans amongst the Protestants, and the Jesuits
amongst the Catholics.

Let us next see the judgment and Relation of another Author in a gloss or
Comment on the Former, entitled the English Pope Printed at London in the same
year 1643. And he will tells us that after Con had undertook the managing of
the affairs, matters began to grow toward some agreement. The King required,
says he, (...) 28.
(...) p. 24.
such a dispensation from the then Pope, as that his Catholic Subjects might
resort to the Protestant Churches, and to take the oaths of Supremacy, and
Fidelity, and that the Popes Jurisdiction here should be declared to be but of
humane Right. And so far had the Pope consented that whatsoever did concern the
King therein, should have been really performed, so far forth as other
Catholic Princes usually enjoy, and expect as their due; and so far as the
Bishops were to be Independent both from King and Pope: there was no fear of
breach on the Popes part. So that upon the point the Pope was to content
himself amongst us in England with a Priority instead of a Superiority over
other Bishops, and with a Primacy in stead of a Supremacy in th^se parts of
Christendom: ^
which I conceive no man of Learning, and Sobriety would have grudged to grant
him. It was also condescended to in the name of the Pope, that marriage might
be permitted to Priests; that the Communion might be Administered sub utraque
specie; and that the Liturgy might be officiated in the English tongue. And
though the Author adds not long after, that it was to be suspected, That so far
as the inferior Clergy, and the people were concerned, the after-performance
was to be le^t to the Popes Discretion; yet this was but his own suspicion,
without ground at all. And to obtain a Reconciliation upon these Advantages the
Archbishop had all the Reason in the world to do as he did, in ordering the
Lords Table to be placed where the Altar stood, and making the accustomed
Reverence in all approaches toward it, and accesses to it; in beautifying and
adorning Churches, and celebrating the Divine Service with all due Solemnities;
in taking care that all offensive and exasperating passages should be expunged
out of such Books as were brought to the Press; and for reducing the
extravagancy of some opinions to an evener temper. His Majesty had the like
Reason also for tolerating Lawful Recreations on the Sundays and Holy Days, The
rigorous Restraint whereof made some Papists think (those most especially of
the vulgar sort, whom it most concerned) that all honest Pastime were
incompetible with our Religion. And if he approved Auricular Confession, and
showed himself willing to introduce it into the use of the Church, as both our
Authors say he did; it is no more then what the Liturgy Commends to the care of
the Penitent (though we find not the word Auricular in it) or what the Canons
have provided for in the point of security, for such as shall be willing to
confess themselves: But whereas we are told by one of our Authors, ^
that the King should say, he would use force to make it be received, were it
not for fear of Sedition amongst the People; yet is but in one of our Authors
neither, who has no other Author for it then a nameless Doctor. And in the way
toward so happy an agreement (though they all stand accused for it by the
English Pope, page 15.) Sparrow may be excused for placing it with Auricular
Confession; and W^ll^ for for Penance; Heylyn for Adoration toward the Altar;
and Mountague for such a qualified praying to Saints, as his books maintain
against the Papists.

If you would know how far they had proceeded toward this happy
Reconciliation, the Popes Nuncio will assure us thus; That the Universities,
Bishops, and Divines of this Realm, did daily embrace Catholic Opinions,
though they professed not so much with Pen or Mouth for fear of the Puritans.
For example, they hold, That the Church of Rome is a true Church; That the Pope
is Superior to all Bishops; That to him it appertains to call General
Councils; That it is lawful to pray for the Soul of the Departed; That Altars
ought to be erected of Stone: In sum, That they believe all that is taught by
the Church, but not by the Court of Rome. (...) pres. (...).
Another of their Authors tells us (as was elsewhere noted) That those amongst
us of greatest Worth, Learning, and Authority, began to love Temper and
Moderation; That their Doctrines began to be altered in many things, for which
their Progenitors forsook the Visible Church of Christ; as for example, The
Pope not Antichrist, Prayers for the Dead, Limbus Patrum, Pictures; That the
Church has Authority in determining Controversies of Faith, and to interpret
Scriptures about Free will, Predestination, Universal Grace; That all our Works
are not Sins, Merit of Good Works, Inherent Justice, Faith alone does justify,
Charity to be preferred before Knowledge, The Authority of Traditions,
Commandments possible to be kept; That in Exposition of the Scripture, they are
by Canon bound to follow the Fathers; And that the once fearful Names of
Priests and Altars, are used willingly in their Talk and Writings. In which
Compliances, so far forth as they speak the truth (for in some Points, through
the ignorance of the one and the malice of the other, they are much mistaken)
there is scarce any thing which may not very well consist with the established
(though for a time discontinued) Doctrine of the Church of England; the
Articles whereof, as the same Jesuit has observed, seem patient, or ambitious
rather, of some sense wherein they may seem Catholic: And such a sense is put
upon them by him that calls himself Franciscus a Sacta Clara, as before was
said. And if upon such Compliances as those before, on the part of the English,
the Conditions offered by the Pope might have been confirmed, Who sees not,
that the greatest Benefit of the Reconciliation would have redounded to this
Church, to the King and People? His Majesty's Security provided for, by the
Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, so far as it concerned his Temporal Power;
The Bishops of England to be independent of the Popes of Rome; The Clergy to be
permitted the use of Marriage; The People to receive the Communion in both
KINDS, and all Divine Offices officiated in the English Tongue; No Innovation
made in Doctrine: but only in the qualifying of some Expressions, and
discharging some Outlandish Glosses as were put upon them. And seeing this,
What man could be so void of Charity, so uncompassionate of the Miseries and
Distractions of Christendom, as not to wish from the very bottom of his Soul,
That the Reconciliation had proceeded upon so good Terms? as not to magnify
the men to succeeding Ages, who were the Instruments and Authors of so great a
Blessing?

But then admitting, as we may, That no such Reconciliation was upon the Anvil;
and that our two Discoursers have proceeded only upon Suppositions: yet
Canterbury had good ground for what he did, were it no other than the settling
of the Church of England upon the first Principles and Positions of her
Reformation. But he had further aims than so. He had some thoughts (and I have
reason to believe it) by Conferences first; and if that failed, by the ordinary
course of Ecclesiastical Censures, Can. 3*1040.
of gaining the Papists to the Church; and therefore it concerned him in point
of Prudence, to smooth the way, by removing all such Blocks and Obstacles which
had been laid before them by the Puritan Faction. He knew, that from their
Infancy they had been trained up in a Regular Order of Devotion; and that they
loved that Religion best, which came accompanied with Decency and External
Splendor: That they objected nothing more against us, than the Novelty of our
Doctrine, the Heterodoxies maintained in Public by some of our Preachers, the
slovenly keeping of our Churches, the Irreverence of the People in them, the
rude and careless slubbering over of our Common Prayers. And what
Encouragements had they for resorting to the Congregation, when they should
hear the Pope defamed, whom they beh^ld with Reverence as their Common Father;
their Ceremonies to be counted Antichristian, their Mass ^^^latrous, their
whole Religion worse than that of the Turks and Moors; con^ormity to whom in
Rites and Ceremonies, was held to be more tolerable by the Puritan Preachers,
than to those of Rome. These ^ubs were first to be removed, before they could
have any thoughts of uniting to us. And for the removing of those Rubs, he ^^ll
up on the courses beforementioned; which being Renovations only of some
ancient Usages, were branded by the odious name of Innovations, by some of
those who out of cunning and design had long disused them. Some zealous
Protestants beheld his Actings with no small fear, as bya^sing too strongly
toward Rome; that the Puritans exclaimed against him for a Papist, and the
Papists cried him up for theirs, and gave themselves some flattering hopes of
our coming toward them: But the most knowing and understanding men amongst
them, found plainly, That nothing could tend more to their destruction, than
the introducing of some Ceremonies which by late negligence and Practice had
been discontinued. For I have heard from a Person of known Nobility, That at
his being at Rome with a Father of the English College, one of the Novices
came in and told him with a great deal of joy, That the English were upon
returning to the Church of Rome; That they began to set up Altars, to Officiate
in their Copes, to Adorn their Churches, and to paint the Pictures of the
Saints in the Church Windows: To which the old Father made Reply, with some
indignation, That he talked like an ignorant Novice; That these Proceedings
rather tended to the Ruin, than Advancement of the Catholic Cause; That by
this means the Church of England coming nearer to the ancient Usages, the
Catholics there would sooner be drawn off from them, than any more of that
Nation would fall off to Rome.

In reference to Doctrinal Points, Heterodoxies, and new Opinions, and such
extravagant Expressions, both from Press and Pulpit, he took as much care as in
the other. And to that end, he was not pleased that the Pope should be any
longer stigmatized by the name of Antichrist; and gave a strict Charge unto his
Chaplains, That all exasperating Passages (which edify nothing) should be
expunged out of such Books, as by them were to be Licenced to the Press; and
that no Doctrines of that Church should be writ against: but such as seemed to
be inconsistent with the established Doctrine of the Church of England. Upon
which ground it was, that Baker Chaplain to the Bishop of London refused to
License the Reprinting of a Book about the Gunpowder-Treason, Cant. Po^m, p.
184.
saying to him that brought the Book, That we were not so angry with the
Papists now, as we were about twenty years since; and that there was no need of
any such Books to exasperate them, there being now an endeavor to win them to
us by fairness and mildness. And on the same ground, Bray Chaplain to the
Archbishop, refused the Licencing of another, called, The Advice of a Son,
unless he might expunge some unpleasing Expressions, I^id. p. 253. and 526.
affirming, That those Passages would offend the Papists, whom we were now in a
fair way of winning, and therefore must not use any harsh Phrases against them.
The Chaplains not to be condemned for their honest care, and much less their
Lords; though I find it very heavily charged as a Crime in all. In the English
Litany set out by King Henry viii. and continued in both Liturgies of King
Edward vi. there was this Clause against the Pope, viz. From the Tyranny of the
Bishop of Rome, and all his detestable Enormities, Good Lord, etc. Which being
considered as a means to affright those of the Romish Party from coming
diligently to our Churches, was prudently expunged by those who had the
Revising of the Liturgy, in the first year of the Queen. In imitation of whose
Piety and Christian Care, it was thought fit by the Archbishop to change some
Phrases which were found in the Books of Prayer appointed ^or the Fifth of
November. The first was this, Root out the Babylonish and Antichristian Sent,
which say of Jerusalem, Down with it, etc. Which he changed only unto this,
Root out the Babylonish or Antichristian Sect (of them) which say, etc. The
second was, Cut off those Workers of Iniquity, whose Religion is Rebellion, and
whose Faith is Faction; which he changed no otherwise than thus, Cut off those
Workers of Iniquity, who turn Religion into Rebellion, etc. The Alterations
were but small, but the clamor great which was raised about it. The Puritans
complaining, That the Prayers so altered, were intended to reflect on (...),
seemed to be conscious to themselves of turning Religion into Rebellion, and
saying of Jerusalem (like the old Babylonish Sect) Down with it, down with it
to the ground. But he had better reason for it, than they had against it. For
if the first Reformers were so careful of giving no offense to the Romish
Party, as to expunge a Passage out of the Public Liturgy, when the Queen was
a Protestant; much greater reason had the Archbishop to correct those Passages
in a formal Prayer not confirmed by Law, when the Queen was one of that
Religion.

Nothing in this or any of the rest before, which tends to the bringing in of
Popery, the prejudice of the true Protestant Religion, or the suppressing of
the Gospel. Had his Designs tended to the Advancing of Popery, he neither would
have took such pains to confute their Doctrines, nor they have entertained such
secret practices to destroy his Person (of which more hereafter.) Had he
directed his endeavors to suppress the Protestants, he would not have given so
much countenance to Dury a Scot, who entertained him with some hopes of working
an Accord betwixt the Lutheran and Calvinian Churches. In which Service, as he
wasted a great deal of time to little purpose; so he received as much
Encouragement from Canterbury, as he had reason to expect. Welcome at all times
to his Table, and speaking honorably of him upon all occasions, till the Times
were changed; when either finding the impossibility of his Undertaking, or
wanting a Supply of that Oil which maintained his Lamp, he proved as true a
Scot as the rest of that Nation; laying the blame of his miscarriage in it, on
the want of Encouragement; and speaking disgracefully of the man which had
given him most. Had he intended any prejudice to the Reformed Religion,
Reformed according to the Doctrine of Calvin, and the Genevian Forms, both of
Worship and Government, he would not have so cordially advanced the General
Collection for the Palatine Churches, or provided so heartily for the
Rochellers and their Religion; touching which last, we find this Clause in a
Prayer of his for the Duke of Buckingham, when he went Commander of his
Majesty's Forces for the Isle of The, Diary, p. 14.
viz. Bless my dear Lord the Duke, that is gone Admiral with them, that Wisdom
may attend all his Counsels, and Courage and Success all his Enterprises; That
by his and their means thou will be pleased to bring Safety to this Kingdom,
Strength and Comfort to Religion, Victory and Reputation to our Country. Had he
projected any such thing as the suppressing of the Gospel, he would not have
showed himself so industrious in preventing Socinianism from poisoning those of
riper years, in turning afternoon Sermons into Catechizing for the instruction
of Children; in prohibiting all Assemblies of Anabaptists, Familists, and other
Sectaries, which oppose the Common Principles of the Christian Faith. For that
his silencing of the Arminian Controversies, should be a means to suppress the
Gospel; or his favoring of those Opinions, designed for a backdoor to bring
in Popery, no wise man can think. The Points in Controversy between the
Calvinists and Arminians, in the Reformed Churches of Calvin's Platform, are
agitated no less fiercely by the Dominicans on the one side, the Jesuits and
Franciscans on the other side, in the Church of Rome; the Calvinists holding
with the Dominicans, as the Arminians do with the Jesuit and Franciscan Friars.
And therefore, why any such compliance with the Dominicans (the principal
Sticklers and Promoters in the Inquisition) should not be looked on as a
Backdoor to bring in Popery, as well as a Compliance in the same Points with
the other two Orders, is beyond my reach. With which I shut up my Discourse
touching the Counsels and Designs which were then on foot, and conclude this
year.

1640.
The next begins with a Parliament and Convocation; the one Assembled on the
thirteenth, the other on the fourteenth of April. In Calling Parliaments, the
King directs his Writs or Letters severally to the Peers and Prelates,
requiring them to attend in Parliament to be holden by the Advice of his Privy
Council, at a certain Time and Place appointed, and there to give their Counsel
in some great and weighty Affairs, touching himself, the safety of the Realm,
and the defense of the Church of England: A Clause being added in all those to
the several Bishops, to give notice to all Deans and Archdeacons to attend the
Parliament in their own Persons, all Chapters by one Proxy, and the Diocesan
Clergy by two; for yielding their Consent and Obedience to such Laws and
Ordinances as by the Common Council of the Kingdom shall be then Enacted: Which
Clause remains still in those Letters, though not still in practice. Writs are
sent out also to the several Sheriffs, acquainting them with his Majesty's
purpose of consulting in a Parliamentary way with the Peers and Prelates, and
other Great Men of the Realm (the Judges and Officers of State, etc.) and then
requiring them to cause two Knights to be elected for every County, two
Citizens for every City, or more Burgesses for every Borough (according as the
place is privileged) in their several Shires. All of them to attend in
Parliament at the time appointed; no otherwise Empowered than the Deans,
Archdeacons, and the rest of the Clergy by their formal Writs. But in the
calling of a Convocation, the form is otherwise; for in this case the King
directs his Writs to the two Archbishops, requiring them for the great and
weighty Reasons abovementioned, to cause a Convocation of the Clergy to be
forthwith called, leaving the nominating of the Time and Place to their
discretion; though for the ease of the Bishops and Clergy, commanded to attend
in Parliament, as before was said, the Archbishop used to nominate such Time
and Place as might most sort with that Attendance. On the receiving of which
Writ, the Archbishop of Canterbury sends his Mandate to the Bishop of London,
as Dean of the Episcopal College, requiring him to Cite and Summon all the
Bishops, Deans, Archdeacons, and Capitular Bodies, with the whole Clergy of the
Province, according to the usual form, to appear before him at such place and
time as he therein nominated; and that the Procurators for the Chapter and
Clergy be furnished with sufficient powers by those that sent them, not only to
treat upon such points as should be propounded for the peace of the Church, and
defense of the Realm of England, and to give their Counsel in the same, but
also to ^
consent both in their own names, and in the names of them that sent them unto
all such things as by mature deliberation, and consent, should be there
ordained. Which Mandate being received by the Bishop of London, he sends out
his Citations to the several Bishops of that Province, and they give intimation
of it to the Clergy of their several Diocesses; according whereunto the
Chapters and Parochial Clergy do elect their Clerks, binding themselves Su^
Hypotheca ^m^ium (...) juorum ^am mo^i^tum q^am (...), etc.
under the forfeiture of all their goods, movable, and immovable, to stand to
and perform whatsoever the said Clerks shall say or do in their behalf. Both
Bodies, being thus assembled, are to continue their attendance in the public
Service during the pleasure of the King; the Acts of both to be invalid till
confirmed by his Majesty, the one most commonly by himself, sitting upon his
Royal Throne in open Parliament* the other always by Letters Patents under the
Great Seal; neither of the two to be dissolved but by several Writs, That for
the Parliament directed to the Lord Chancellor, or Lord Keeper, (as the case
may vary) That for the Convocation issued out to the Metropolitans of the
several Provinces. In this, and this alone, they di^fer as to matter of Form,
that the Peers and People assembled in Parliament may treat, debate, and
conclude of any thing which is to be tendered to the King for his Royal Assent
without any other power than the first Writ, by virtue whereof they are
assembled: But the Bishops and Clergy are restrained in their Covocation by the
Statute of the 25 Henry viii. from treating, debating, forming, and concluding
of any Canons or Constitutions, or doing any Ecclesiastical Acts, tending to
the determination of Controversies, or decreeing Ceremonies, till they are
licenced thereunto by the Kings Commission. All which particulars I have
thought fit to touch at in this present place, because we are to relate unto
them in the course of our business.

At the opening of the Parliament the Sermon was preached before his Majesty,
the Peers and Prelates, by the Bishop of Ely. The Sermon being done, they
passed in the accustomed State to the Parliament House: to which the Commons
being called, his Majesty acquainted them with the indignities and affronts,
even to the taking up of Arms against him, which he had suffered from some of
his Subjects in Scotland, required their assistance to reduce them to their due
obedience, advising them to go together for choosing their Sp^aker, and so to
proceed unto their business. But all they did in order to his Commands, was the
admitting of Glanvile, a right learned Lawyer, whom his Majesty had commended
to them, to be the Speaker for their House. Their Grievances must first be
heard, and the safety of Religion provided for before the matter of supply was
to be considered. This was enough to give a^ hint to the Archbishop, that an
enquiry would be made into all his Actions, to the disturbance of the work
which he had begun, and was in no small hope to perfect. For remedy whereof he
was resolved to make use of a friend in the House of Commons for offering this
motion to the rest, viz. That a certain number of that House would join in
Conference with as many of the Clergy assembled in Convocation, touching all
doubts and differences which might happen to arise amongst them in matters
which concerned the Church. And this he did upon this reason, that if the
motion were accepted, the Committee for the Clergy in Convocation, might give
satisfaction to that of the House of Commons in all such matters Doctrinal, or
points of Ceremony which should come before them: But if the motion were
rejected, he should then get the start in point of Reputation amongst knowing
men; the refusing of so fair an offer, bearing witness for him that their
Proceedings were directed rather by power and interest, than by truth and
reason. But the short life of this Parliament made that Counsel useless. For
the Commons doing nothing which the King desired, and the King desiring nothing
more, than that they would speedily resolve one way or other, the Lords agreed
upon a Vote for desiring a Conference with the Commons, the better to dispose
them to this point, that his Majesty's supply should have precedence of the
Subjects Grievances. This voted by the Commons for a breach of their
Privileges, and the Peers censured for it, as having been transported beyond
their bounds. To calm which heat his Majesty made offer for twelve Subsidies,
to relinquish all his right to the Naval aid, of late called Ship Money, which
had been anciently enjoyed by his Predecessors: But the Proposition, though it
came but to three years purchase, would not down amongst them. At last they
came unto a resolution of yielding somewhat toward his Majesty's supply; but in
the grant thereof, blasted his Majesty's Expedition against the Scots, whose
Cause they resolved to make their own, and received thanks from them for that
favor in their next Remonstrance. Which coming to his Majesty's ears on Monday
the fourth of May, he called his Council together on the next Morning betimes,
by whose unanimous consent he dissolved the Parliament.

On Tuesday, April 14, the Convocation assembled in the Chapter House of the
Church of St. Paul, from whence they waited on his Grace and the rest of the
Bishops, to hear the Sermon in the Quire. The Sermon preached by Turner,
Residentiary of the Church. His Text was taken out of Mat. 10.16. Behold I send
you forth as Sheep in the midst of Wolves, which he followed home unto the
Purpose. In the close of the Sermon he had a passage in these words, or to this
effect, that all the Bishops held not the Reins of Church Discipline with an
even hand, but that some of them were too easy and remiss in the ordering
thereof. Whereby though they sought to gain to themselves the popular plause of
meekness and mildness, they occasionally cast on other Bishops (more severe
than themselves) the unjust imputation of Rigor and Tyranny; and therefore he
advised them withal with equal strictness to urge an universal Conformity. The
Sermon ended, the Clergy fell to the electing of their Prolocutor (as before
commanded) pitching unanimously on Dr. Richard Steward Clerk of his Majesty's
Closet, and Dean of Chichester to be presented the next day to the Archbishop
and the rest of the Prelates in the Chapel of King Henry vii. at Westminster,
to which the Synod was adjourned. The next day being come (after a Protestation
made in writing by the Sub-Dean and Prebendaries of that Church for not
acknowledging the Archbishop of Canterbury, or the rest of the Bishops, to have
any Jurisdiction in that place, and the admitting of the same for good and
valid) they were permitted to proceed in their Convocation. The business of
that day was the presenting of the Prolocutor by Sheldon, Warden of All Souls,
his Admission by the Archbishop, and Stewards unwilling readiness to discharge
the Office; each of them delivering their conceptions in Elegant Latin
Speeches, as the custom is, but the Archbishops longer than both the rest.
Which Ceremonies being performed, his Grace produced a Commission under the
Great Seal, by which they were enabled (according to the said Statute of King
Henry viii.) to propose, treat, consult, and agree upon the Exposition or
Alteration of any Canon then in force, and upon such new Canons, Orders, and
Constitutions, as the said Bishops and Clergy (of which the Lord Archbishop to
be always one) should think ^it, necessary, and convenient for the honor and
service of Almighty God, the good and quiet of the Church, and the better
Government thereof to be performed and kept by the said Archbishops, Bishops,
and the rest of the Clergy in their several places; as also by the Dean of the
Arches, and by all others having Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in the Province of
Canterbury, and by all other persons within this Realm, so far as being Members
of this Church they may be concerned. Provided always that no such Canons,
Orders, or Constitutions, so to be considered on as aforesaid, be contrary or
repugnant to the Liturgy established, or the Rubricks in it, or the 39
Articles, or any Doctrinal Orders, and Ceremonies of the Church of England
already established; as also that nothing should be done in execution of the
same, till being exhibited to his Majesty in writing, to be allowed, approved,
confirmed, and ratified; or otherwise disallowed, annihilated, and made void as
he should think fit, requisite, and convenient: and then to be allowed,
approved, and confirmed by Letters Patents under the Great Seal of England,
Also the said Commission to continue and remain in force during the present
Session of Parliament, and to expire together with it.

For the procuring of this Commission, as the Archbishop had good reason, as
well for countenancing and confirming his former Actings, as for rectifying
many other things which required reformation; so had his Majesty as good
reasons for the granting of it, the grounds whereof contained in his Commission
of June 13. for confirming all the Acts of this Convocation, (...). R^gia. p
287. to 295.
are to this effect: He had been given to understand, that many of his Subjects
being misled against the Rites and Ceremonies then used in the Church of
England, had taken offense at the same upon an unjust supposal, That they were
not only contrary to Law, but also introductive unto Popish Superstitions;
whereas it well appeared unto him upon mature deliberation, that the said Rites
and Ceremonies, which were then so much quarrelled at, were not only approved
of, and used by those godly and learned Divines to whom, at the time of the
Reformation under King Edward vi. the compiling of the Book of Common Prayer
was committed (diverse of which suffered Martyrdom in Queen Mary's days) but
also again taken up by this whole Church under Queen Elizabeth. Which Rites so
taken up, had been so duly and ordinarily practiced for a great part of her
Reign (within the memory of diverse living) as that it could not then be
imagined, that there would need any Rule or Law for the observation of the
same, nor that they could be thought to savor of Popery. He found too plainly,
that since those times, for want of an express Rule therein, and by the subtle
practices of some men, the said Rites and Ceremonies began to fall into disuse;
and in place thereof other Foreign and unfitting usages by little and little to
creep in: But being he found withal that in the Royal Chapels, and in many
other Churches most of them had been ever constantly used and observed, his
Majesty could not but be very sensible of the inconvenience. And he had cause
also to conceive, that the Authors and Fomenters of those Jealousies; though
they colored the same with a pretense of zeal, and did seem to strike only at
some supposed iniquity in the said Ceremonies: yet aimed at his Royal Person,
and would have his good Subjects think, that he himself was perverted, and did
worship God in a superstitious way, and that he did intend to bring in some
alteration in the Religion here established. From which how far he was, and how
utterly he detested the very thought thereof, he had by his many Declarations,
p. 294.
and upon sundry other occasions, given such assurance to the World, that no
man of wisdom and discretion could ever be so beguiled as to give any serious
entertainment to such brainsick Jealousies. And as for the weaker sort, who
were prone to be misled by crafty seducers, he always assured himself, that as
many of them as had loyal, or but charitable hearts, would from thenceforth
utterly banish all such causeless fears and surmises upon those his Sacred
Professions so often made, as a Defender of the Christian Faith, their King and
Sovereign. He perceived in the next place, That the Ringleaders of many
well-minded people, did make the more advantage (for the nourishing of such
distempers amongst them) because the aforesaid Rites and Ceremonies, or some of
them, were now insisted upon but only in some Diocesses, and were not generally
received in all places, nor constantly nor uniformly practiced throughout all
the Churches in the Kingdom; and thereupon have been liable to be quarrelled
and opposed by them who use them not. In imitation therefore of the pious
Examples of King Edward vi. Queen Elizabeth, I^id. p. 2^^.
and King James of Blessed Memories, he thought it most agreeable to his own
Honor, and the good of his People, to License the Archbishops, Bishops, and
the rest of the Clergy in their several Convocations, to make such further
Orders, Ordinances, and Constitutions, as should be found necessary for the
Advancing of Gods Glory, the Edifying of the Holy Church, and the due Reverence
of his Blessed Mysteries and Sacraments. And this he did to this end and
purpose, That as he had been ever careful and ready to cut off Superstition
with the one hand, so he might also expel Profaneness and Irreverence with the
other: p. 297.
By means whereof it might please Almighty God to bless him, and this Church
committed to his Government, that it might at once return to the true former
splendor of Uniformity, Devotion, and holy Order; the last whereof, for many
years last past, had been much obscured by the devices of some ill affected to
it, where it had long stood from the very beginning of the Reformation, and
through inadvertency of some in Authority in the Church under him.

Such were the Motives which induced his Majesty to grant this Commission,
which was exceeding acceptable to the greatest and best affected part of the
whole Assembly, as being an evident demonstration of the Trust and Confidence
which his Majesty had reposed in them. In a grateful acknowledgment whereof,
for the support of his Majesty's Royal Estate, and the effectual furtherance of
his most Royal and Extraordinary Designs abroad, they gave him six Subsidies,
after the rate of four shillings in the pound, to be paid in the six years then
next following, by two equal parts or moyeties in every year; appointing a
Committee to put the Grant into form, and make it ready for a Confirmation by
Act of Parliament. But the first thing in which they acted by this Commission,
was the tendering of a Canon to them by the Archbishop of Canterbury, For
suppressing the further growth of Popery, and reducing Papists to the Church;
with Order to the Prolocutor and inferior Clergy, to enlarge and perfect it as
to them seemed most conducible to the end desired: But afterward considering
how much it might redound to his estimation, that the said Canon should proceed
entirely from himself alone, he recalled the Paper into his own hands; and
after some time of deliberation, returned it back unto the Clergy in the very
same words in which it passed.

By which so framed and enlarged, it was Ordained, That all and every Person or
Persons, of what Rank soever, having and exercising any Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, as also all Persons entrusted with Cure of Souls, should use
respectively all possible care and diligence, by open Conferences with the
Parties, and by Censures of the Church in inferior and higher Courts, as also
by Compl^ints unto the Secular Power, to reduce all such to the Church of
England, who were misled into Popish Superstition. Those public Conferences to
be managed by the Bishop in person (if his Occasion will permit it) or by some
one or more Learned Men of his especial appointment. The time and place of such
Conferences, with the Names of the Persons to be admitted to the same, to be of
the Bishops nomination. Such Papists as refuse to appear at any of the said
Co^ferences, to be counted obstinate; and such Ministers as should refuse to
act therein, without a reasonable Cause approved by the Bishop, to be Suspended
for six Months: Provided, That the place appointed for the said Conferences, be
not distant above ten miles from their dwelling Houses: That in case such
Conferences produce not the effect desired, all Ecclesiastical Persons shall
then be careful to inform themselves of all Recusants, above the age of 12
years, in their several Parishes, as well concerning their not coming to the
Church, as their resorting to other places to hear Mass; of all such as be
active in seducing the Subjects from coming to Church, and dissuading them from
taking the Oath of Allegiance; the Names of all such to be presented, that
being cited, and found obstinate, they might be publicly Excommunicated, as
well in the Cathedral as their Parish Churches. The like course to be also
taken by the Diocesans, in places of exempt Jurisdiction, and the Offenders to
be turned over to the High Commission. That the Names of all such as are
presented in any Inferior Jurisdiction, be transmitted within six Months to
the Diocesans, by them to be returned, to^ether with the Names of such as have
been presented in their own Visitations, to his Majesty's Justices of Assize in
their several Circuits. And the same course to be also taken in returning the
Names of all such persons as have been either Married or Buried, or have ^ave
had their Children Christened in any other form, than according to the Rules of
the Church of England; to the intent they may be punished according to the
Statutes in that behalf. That Information be given by all Churchwardens upon
their Oaths, what persons are employed as Schoolmasters in Recusants Houses; to
the end that if they have not or will not subscribe, they may be forbidden and
discharged from teaching Children any longer: And the Names of all Persons
which entertain such Schoolmasters, to be certified at the next Assizes. Such
Schoolmasters to incur the public Censure of the Church, as do not carefully
instruct the Children committed to them, in the public Catechism; and the
Names of such Parents, as either thereupon shall take away their said Children,
or otherwise send them to be educated beyond the Seas, to be presented upon
Oath at the Visitations, and certified also to the said Justices, as before is
said, that the said Parents may be punished according to Law: The said
Certificate to be presented to the Judges by the Bishops Registers, immediately
on the Reading of the Commission, or at the end of the Charge, upon pain of
Suspension for three Months from their several Offices: The said Judges and
Justices being entreated and exhorted, not to fail of putting the said Laws in
execution; and not to admit of any vexatious Suit or Suits, against any
Churchwardens, or other sworn Officers, for doing their duty in this kind: That
a Significavit be made in Chancery by all the several Bishops, of the Names of
all such persons as have stood Excommunicated beyond the time limited by the
Laws, desiring that the Writ De Excommunicato capiendo may be issued against
them ex Officio. And finally, That no person or persons subject to the said
Writ, shall be Absolved by virtue of an Appeal into any Ecclesiastical Court,
till they have first taken in their own persons the usual Oath De parendo juri,
and stando mandatis Ecclesiae: With a Petition to his Majesty, in the Name of
the Synod, to give command both to his Officers in Chancery, and the Sheriffs
of the several Counties, for sending out and executing the said Writs from time
to time, without any Charge to the Diocesans (whose Estates it would otherwise
much exhaust) as often as it should be desired of them. Such is the substance
of this Canon, in laying down whereof I have been the more punctual and exact,
that the equal and judicious Reader may the better see what point it was, which
the Archbishop aimed at, from the first beginning of his Power and Government,
as before was noted. In the mean time, whilst this Canon was under a Review,
another ready drawn was tendered to the Prolocutor by the Clerk of Westminster,
for the better keeping of the day of his Majesty's most happy Inauguration: By
which it was decreed, according to the Example of the most pious Emperors of
the Primitive Times, and our own most Godly Kings and Princes since the
Reformation, and the Form of Prayer already made, and by his Majesty's
Authority Appointed to be used on the said days of Inauguration, That all
manner of persons within the Church of England, should from thenceforth
celebrate and keep the morning of the said day, in coming diligently and
reverently unto their Parish Church or Chapel at the time of Prayer, and there
continue all the while that the Prayers, Preaching, or other Service of the day
endures: That for the better observing of the said day, two of the said Books
should be provided at the Charge of each several Parish, by the Churchwardens
of the same; with an Injunction to all Bishop^, Archdeacons, and other
Ordinaries, to inquire into the premises at their Visitations, and punish such
as are delinquent, as in case of such as absent themselves on the other
Holydays.

Another Canon was brought in against Socinianism, by the spreading of which
damnable and cursed Heresy, much mischief had already been done in the Church:
For the suppressing whereof, it was ordained by the Synod (after some
explication and correction of the words and phrases), That no Stationer,
Printer, or other person, should print, buy, sell, or disperse any Book,
broaching or maintaining the said Abominable Doctrine or Positions, upon pain
of Excommunication ipso facto, and of being proceeded against by his Majesty's
Atturney-General, on a Certificate thereof to be returned by the several
Ordinaries to their Metropolitan, according to the late Decree of Star Chamber
against Sellers of prohibited Books; That no Preacher should presume to vent
any such Doctrine in any Sermon, under pain of Excommunication for the first
Offense, and Deprivation for the second: That no Student in either of the
Universities, nor any person in Holy Orders, excepting Graduates in Divinity,
or such as have Episcopal or Archidiaconal Jurisdiction, or Doctors of Law in
Holy Orders, shall be suffered to have or read any such Socinian Book or
Discourse, under pain (if the Offender live in the University) that he shall be
punished according to the strictest Statutes provided there against the
publishing, reading, and maintaining of false Doctrines; or if he lived in the
City or Country abroad, of a Suspension for the first O^fence, Excommunication
^or the second, and Deprivation for the third, unless he should absolutely and
in terminis abjure the same: That if any Lay-person should be seduced unto that
Opinion, and be convicted of it, he should be Excommunicated, and not Absolved
but upon due Repentance and Abjuration, and that before his Metropolitan, or
his own Bishop at least: With several Clauses for seizing and burning all such
Books as should be found in any other hands than those before limited and
expressed. Which severe course being taken by the Convocation, makes it a
matter of no small wonder, That Cheynell the Usufructuary of the (...)
Parsonage of Petworth, should impute the Rise and Growth of (...), in a
Pamphlet not long after Printed, unto many of those who had been principal
Actors in suppressing of those wicked and detestable Heresies. Another Canon
was presented to the Prolecut^r, by one of the Members of that Body, advanced
the next year to a (...) Dignity, for Restraint of Sectaries: By which it was
de^^^^d, That all those Proceedings and Penalties which are menti^^^d in the
Canon against Popish Recusants, so far forth as may be appliable, should be in
full force and vigor against all Anabaptists, Brownists, S^peratists,
Familists, or other Sect or Sects, Person or Persons whatsoever, who do or
shall either obstinately refuse: or ordinarily, not having a lawful impediment
(that is, for the space of a Month) neglect to repair to their Parish Churches
or Chapels where they inhabit, for the hearing of Divine Service established,
and receiving of the Holy Communion according to Law; That the Clause in the
former Canon against Books of Socinianism, should also extend to the Makers,
Importers, Printers, and Publishers or Dispersers of any Book, Writing, or
Scandalous Pamphlet, devised against the Discipline and Government of the
Church of England; and unto the Maintainers and Abettors of any Opinion or
Doctrine against the same. And finally, That all despisers and depravers of the
Book of Common Prayer, who resorted not according to Law to their Church or
Chapel, to join in the Public Worship of God in the Congregation, contenting
themselves with the hearing of Sermons only, should be carefully inquired
after, and presented to their several and respective Ordinaries; The same
Proceedings and Penalties mentioned in the aforesaid Canons, to be used against
them, unless within one whole Month after they are first Denounced, they shall
make Acknowledgment and Reformation of their fault.

So far the Bishops and Clergy had proceeded in the Work recommended to them,
when the Parliament was most unhappily Dissolved: And possibly the Convocation
had expired the next day also, according to the usual custom, if one of the
Clergy had not made the Archbishop acquainted with a Precedent in Queen
Elizabeth's Time, for the granting a Subsidy or Benevolence by Convocation, to
be Taxed and Levied by Synodical Acts and Constitutions, without help of the
Parliament; directing to the Records of Convocation where it was to be found.
Whereupon the Convocation was Adjourned from Wednesday, till the Friday
following, and then till the next day after, and so till Monday, to the great
amazement of many of the Members of it, who expected to have been Dissolved
when the Parliament was, according to that clause in the Commission aforesaid,
by which it was restrained to the Time of the Parliament only. Much pains was
taken by some of the Company, who had been studied in the Records of
Convocation, in showing the difference betwixt the Writ for calling a
Parliament, and that for assembling a Convocation; their different Forms, and
the independence of the one upon the other: but more especially betwixt the
Writ by which they were made a Convocation, and that Commission by which they
were enabled to the making of Canons; That though the Commission was expired
with the Parliament, yet the Writ continued still in force; and by that Writ
they were to remain a Convocation, until they were Dissolved by another. With
which Distinction, the greatest part of those who before had scrupled at their
Sitting, did appear well satisfied; but better satisfied on the Monday, by a
Paper which was sent unto them from the Court. For the King being made
acquainted with these scrupulosities, proposed the Question on Sunday May 10.
to the greatest Lawyers then about him, who gave their Judgment in these words,
viz. The Convocation called by the Kings Writ, is to be continued till it be
dissolved by the Kin^s Writ, notwithstanding the Dissolution of the Parliament.
Subscribed by ^inch Lord Keeper, Manchester Lord Privy Seal, Littlet^^ Chief
(...) of the Common Pleas, Bancks Attorney General, Whitfeild and Heath two of
his Majesty's Counsel Learned in the Laws of this Land. Encouraged with which
assurance, and Animated by a New Commission to remain in Force during the
Pleasure of the King, they settled to their work again on Wednesday the
thirteenth of that Month, but not without some trouble of mind in regard of
the Apparent Danger which seemed to threaten them. The Archbishops house at
Lambeth had been assaulted on Monday by a Rabble of Anabaptists, Brownists, and
other Sectaries, to the Number of five hundred and upwards, who seeing they
could not force that house resolved to turn their fury on the Convocation. Of
which his Majesty being Informed, he caused a guard to be set about them
consisting of some Companies of the trained Bands of the County of Middlesex
under the Command of Endymion Porter, one of the Grooms of the Bedchamber; an
honest man, and of good affections to the Church and his Majesty's Service. To
such extremities were the poor Clergy brought during these confusions; in
danger of the Kings displeasure if they Rose, of the Peoples fury if they Sat;
in danger of being beaten up by tumults, when they were at their work, of being
beaten down by the following Parliament, when their work was done. But they
went forward howsoever to the end of their journey, and did the business as
they went, dispatching more work in so short a time then could be easily
imagined.

T^ree things there were which Canterbury was to take special ca^e of in
reference to the Public peace of the Church and State; That is to say* the
Reparation of the breaches made in the Regal, and Episcopal Power by the late
batteries of the Scots, and their adherents, on the commending of the
Uniformity to all parts of the Kingdom, which had been happily begun in so many
places. (...) r^ference to the first, some propositions touching the
institution, Power and Privileges of Sovereign Princes, were recommended to
the consideration of the Prolocutor and the Rest of the Clergy, by them to be
corrected if they saw occasion; and being so corrected to pass into a Canon.
The Propositions six in number, and were these that follow, I. The most High,
and Sacred Order of Kings is of Divine Right, b^in^ the Ordinance of God
himself, founded in the prime Laws of Nature, and clearly established by
Express Texts, both of the Old and the New Testaments. A Supreme Power is given
to this most Excellent Order by God himself in the Scriptures, which is, That
Kings should Rule, and Command in their several Dominions, all Persons of what
Rank or Estate whatsoever, whether Ecclesiastical or Civil, and that they
should Restrain and Punish with the Temporal Sword all Stub^^^n and wicked
doers. II. (...) care of Gods Church is so committed to Kings in Scripture,
that they are commanded when the Church keeps the Right way, and taxed when it
Runs Amiss; and therefore her Government belongs in Chief unto Kings: For
otherwise one man would be commended for another care, and taxed but for
another negligence, which is not Gods way. III. The Power to Call and Dissolve
Councils both National and Provincial, is the true Right of all Christian Kings
within their own Realms, and Territories. And when in the first times of
Christ's Church, Prelates used this Power, 'twas therefore only because in those
days they had no Christian Kings, And it was then so only used as in time of
persecution, that is, with supposition (in case it were required) of submitting
their very lives, unto the very Laws and Commands, even of those Pagan Princes,
that they might not so much as seem to disturb their Civil Government, which
Christ came to confirm but by no means to undermine. IV. For any Person or
Persons to set up, maintain or avow in any the said Realms, or Territories
Respectively, under any pretext whatsoever any Independent Co-active Power,
either Papal or Popular (whether directly or indirectly) is to undermine their
Great Royal Office, and cunningly to overthrow the Most Sacred Ordinances which
God himself has established: And so it is Treasonable against God as well as
against the King. V. For Subjects to bear Arms against their Kings, Offensive
or Defensive upon any pretense whatsoever, is at least to Resist the Powers
which are ordained by God. And though they do not invade but only Resist, S.
Paul tells them plainly, They shall receive to themselves damnation. VI. And
although Tribute, and Custom and Aid, and Subsidies, and all manner of
necessary Support, and Supply, be respectively due to Kings from their Subjects
by the Law of God, Nature, and Nations for the Public Defense, care and
Protection of them: yet nevertheless Subjects have not only possession of, but
a true and Just Right, Title, and Propriety, to, and in, all their Goods, and
Estates, and ought for to have: And these two are so far from crossing one
another, that they mutually go together, for the Honorable and Comfortable
support of both. For as it is the duty of Subjects to supply their King; so is
it part of the Kingly office to support his Subjects, in the Propriety and
Freedom of their Estates.


These Propositions being Read and Considered of, were generally past and
approved without contradiction, but that a little stop was made touching the
Necessity of Aid and Subsidy to Kings from their Subjects, which some thought
fitter to leave at large according to the Laws of several Countries then to
entitle it to the Law of God, Nature and Nations: but after a very light
dispute that clause was allowed of with the Rest, and a Canon presently drawn
up by a ready hand, according to the Vote of the House to make them Obligatory
to the Clergy in the course of their Ministries. The preamble which was sent
with the Propositions, required them to be read distinctly and audibly by every
Parson, Vicar, Curate, or Preacher upon some one Sunday in every Quarter of the
year at Morning Prayer. And it was added by the Canons that if any Parson,
Vicar, Curate, or Preacher, should Voluntarily or carelessly, neglect his duty
in publishing the said Explications and Conclusions according to the Order
above prescribed, he should be suspended by his Ordinary till his Reformation;
That all Bishops, Priests and Ministers, should Teach, Preach, and Exhort their
People to Obey, Honor, and Serve their King; and that they presume not to
speak of his Majesty's Power, any other way then in the Canon is expressed;
with reference to Excommunication, and a Suspension of two years for the first
Offense, and Deprivation for the second, to be inflicted by his Majesty's
Commissioners for Causes Ecclesiastical upon all Persons whatsoever which in
any Sermon, Lecture, Determination or Disputation should maintain any point of
Doctrine, contrary to the said Propositions, and Explications.

In reference to the preservation of the Episcopal power, an Oath was d^awn up
in the Upper, and sent down to the Lower House of Convocation, by them to be
debated, approved, and ratified upon Approbation; Which Oath was required to be
taken by all Archbishops, Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, before the second day
of November then next following to be tendered in the presence of a public
Notary, to all Priests and Deacons by the Bishop in person, or his Chancellor
or some grave Divines named and appointed by the Bishop under his Episcopal
Seat. In the first words of the Oath a^ it came from the Lords, it was
expressed in these words, that every man should Swear to the Doctrine and
Discipline established in Church of England. And this occasioned some dispute,
concerning the extent of the word Discipline, whither it comprehended the
Episcopal Government, and the public Forms of Divine Worship; or was to be
restrained only to the use of the Keys, as it was practiced in Ecclesiastical
Courts. Some would have had the words run thus, I. A. B. do swear that I
approve the Doctrines, Discipline or Government established, etc. But against
this it was objected, First, that the Government of the Church was sufficiently
provided for by the following clause, in which there was an especial
Enumerat^^^ of all Offices empowered in the Government of the Church; and that
it was incongruous to make that Discipline and Government to be the same, and
that Government should be said to contain all things, or any thing which was
necessary to Salvation. And they that thus objected, would have had it pass in
these words, viz. I approve the Doctrine, Discipline, and Forms of Worship
established in the Church of England, as containing all things necessary unto
Salvation. Which though it seemed, more plausible and intelligible then the
other was; yet being put unto the vote, it was carried for Discipline or
^^^^rnment, under pretense of not clogging the Oath with things unnecessary and
such as might be made capable of a variation. According to which Vote the Canon
was drawn up with this title, viz. An Oath enjoined for the preventing of all
Innovations in Doctrine and Government; and the Oath it self enjoined in this
form following, that is to say, I. A. B. Do swear that I do Approve the
Doctrine and Discipline or Government Established in the Church of England; as
containing all things necessary to salvation. And that I will not endeavor by
my self or any other, directly or indirectly, to bring in any P^pish Doctrine,
contrary to that which is so established. Nor will I ever give my consent to
alter the Government of this Church, by Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, and
Archdeacons, etc. As it stands now established, and as by Right it ought to
stand; nor yet ever to subject it to the usurpations and Superstitions of the Sea of Rome. And all these things I do plainly and seriously acknowledge, and
swear, according to the plain, and Common sense and understanding of the same
words, without any Equivocation, or mental evasion, or secret reservation
whatsoever. And this I do heartily, willingly, and truly upon the faith of a
Christian, So help me God in Jesus Christ.

The Oath being past, the Canon was drawn up by the former hand according to
such Instructions as were sent along with it. By which it was required that all
Masters of Art, (the Sons of Noblemen only excepted) all Bachelors or Doctors
in Divinity, Law, or Physic, all that are licenced to practice Physic, all
Registers ^^ctuaries, and Procters, all Schoolmasters, all such as being
natives o^ Naturalized, do come to be incorporated into the Universities here,
having taken any Degree in any Foreign University should be bound to take the
said Oath; the same Oath to be Administered to all such of the persons
abovenamed residing in any University, by the Governors of their several
Houses; and by the Bishop Respectively, to all which should from thenceforth be
admitted to holy Orders, or receive any Institution, Collation, or License for
the serving of any cure: with several Penalties to all beneficed Parsons, and
all such as were then in any Ecclesiastical dignity, for their Refusal of the
same; that is to say, a suspension ab officio for the first Refusal, a
beneficio and officio, for the second, and Deprivation for the t^ird, a Months
deliberation being granted betwixt each Refusal.

These two great matters being thus concluded, A message is delivered by the
Prolocutor from the house of Bishops, by which the Clergy were desired to
consider of the best expedient for inducing an Uniformity in the Church about
the situation of the Lords Table, the Receiving of the blessed Sacrament, and
the due Revenue to be used in the house of God, and to prepare a Ca^^^ to that
purpose if they found it necessary. On the Receiving of (...) message a grand
Committee was selected out of the Ablest men o^ the House, to take that great
and weighty business into consideration, and to Report unto the House
whatsoever they should do therein, that it might pass or be rejected as the
House thought fit. The Committee consisted of 27. the Prolocutor being reckoned
into the number, their meeting to be held the same afternoon in the Chapel of
King Hen. 7. Where being met, and sitting about the table provided for the use
of the Bishops, the points were seriously debated, every man speaking his
opinion in them when it came to his turn without interruption; beginning with
the Prolocutor, and so proceeding from man to man till it concluded with the
Clerk for the Church of Westminster; So placed of purpose that he might answer
all such arguments, as had been brought against any of the points proposed, and
were not answered to his hand. The Prolocutor having taken the sum of every
man's Judgment, declared that the far Major part had appeared for placing the
Lords Table where the Altar stood, the drawing near unto it to receive the
Sacrament, and the making of due Reverences at the entering into the Church and
going out of it; and thereupon put it to the question, whether they thought it
convenient that a Canon should be prepared to that purpose or not? Which being
carried in the affirmative, without any visible dissent, one of the Clerks for
the Diocese of Bristol presented a Canon ready drawn for the same effect, but
drawn in such a commanding, and imperious Style, that it was disliked by all
the company but himself; and thereupon a Sub-committeee was appointed to
prepare the Canon, and make it ready with as much dispatch as they could
conveniently. Which was no sooner agreed on, and the Committee continued for
some following business; but the Archdeacon of Huntington who was one of the
number, made his first appearance, so extremely discontented that he was not
stayed for, and that the business was concluded before he came, and earnestly
pressing the Prolocutor, that the debate might be Resumed, or at the least his
Reasons might be heard against the Vote: which when the Prolocutor upon very
good Reasons had refused to yield too, he fell upon him with such heats, and
used him so exceeding coursly; that on complaint made thereof and of some other
intervening harshness, made by the Prolocutor in a full House of the Clergy, he
was ordered by the far Major part to quit the House, though afterward Restored
again on the acknowledgment of his Error, when his heats were down. Which Rubb
removed, the Canon went very smoothly on without opposition, commended
Generally for the Modesty and Temper of it; in which Respect I hold it worthy
to be presented to the Reader in its full proportion, without any Abbreviation
of it as of those before.

A Declaration concerning some Rites and Ceremonies.
BEcause it is generally to be wished, that Unity of Faith were accompanied
with Uniformity of Practice in the outward Worship and Service of God; chiefly
for the avoiding the groundless suspicio^ of those who are weak, and the
malicious Aspersions of the professed enemies of our Religion; the one, fearing
Innovations; the other* flattering themselves with a vain hope of our
backsliding unto their Popish Superstition by reason of the situation of the
Communion Table, and the approaches thereunto, the Synod declares as
follows: That the standing of the Communion Table side-way under the East
Window of every Chancel^or Chapel, is in its own nature indifferent, neither
commanded nor condemned by the Word of God, either expressly, or by immediate
deduction; and therefore that no Religion is to be placed therein, or scruple
to be made thereon. And albeit at the time of reforming this Church from the
gross superstition of Popery, it was carefully provided, that all means should
be used to ro^t out of the Minds of the People both the inclination thereunto,
and memory thereof; especially of the Idolatry committed in the Mass, for which
cause all Popish Altars were demolished: yet notwithstanding it was then
ordered by the Injunctions and A^v^rtisements of Queen Elizabeth, of blessed
mem^ry, that the holy Table should stand in that place where the Altar stood,
and accordingly have been continued in the Royal Chapels of three famous and
pious Princes, and in most Cathedral, and some Parochial Churches, which does
sufficiently acquit the manner of placing the said Tables from any illegality
or just suspicion of Popish Superstition or Innovation. And therefore We judge
it fit and convenient that all Churches and Chapels do conform themselves in
this particular to the example of the Cathedral or mother Churches, saving
always the general liberty left to the Bishop by Law during the time of the
Administration of the holy Communion. And We declare, that this Situation of
the holy Table, does not imply that it is or ought to be esteemed a true and
proper Altar, whereon Christ is again really sacrificed: But it is and may be
called an Altar by us, in that sense which the Primitive Church called it an
Altar, and no other.

And because experience has showed us, how irreverent the behavior of many
people is in many places, some leaning, other casting their hats, and some
sitting upon, some standing at, and others sitting under the Communion Table in
time of Divine Service: For the avoiding of these and the like abuses, it is
thought meet and convenient by this present Synod, that the said Communion
Table in all Churches or Chapels be decently severed with Rails to preserve
them from such or worse prophanations.

And because the Administration of holy things is to be perform^d with all
possible decency and reverence, therefore we judge it fit and convenient,
according to the word of the Service Book, established by Act of Parliamen^,
Draw near, etc. that all communicants with an humble reverence shall draw near
and approach to the holy Table, there to receive the divine mysteries, which
have heretofore in some places been unfitly carried up and down by the
Minister, unless it should be otherwise appointed in respect of the incapacity
of the place, or other inconvenience, By the Bishop himself in his
Jurisdiction, and other Ordinaries respectively in theirs.

And lastly, whereas the Church is the House of God, dedicated to his holy
Worship, and therefore ought to mind us both of the greatness and goodness of
his divine Majesty; certain it is, that the acknowledgment thereof, not only
inwardly in our hearts, but also outwardly with our bodies, must needs be pious
in it self, profitable unto us, and edifying unto others. We therefore think it
very meet and behoveful, and heartily commend it to all good and well-affected
people, Members of this Church, that they be ready to tender unto the Lord the
said acknowledgment, by doing reverence and obeisance both at their coming in
and going out of the said Churches, Chancels, or Chapels, according to the
most ancient custom of the Primitive Church in the purest times, and of this
Church also for many years of the Reign of Queen Eliza^eth. The receiving
therefore of this ancient and laudable Custom we heartily commend to the
serious consideration of all good People, not with any intention to exhibit any
Religious Worship to the Communion Table, the East, or Church, or any thing
therein contained, in so doing; or to perform the said Gesture in the
Celebration of the holy Eucharist, upon any opinion of the Corporal presence of
the Body of Christ on the holy Table, or in the mystical Elements: but only for
the advancement of Gods Majesty, and to give him alone that honor and glory
that is due unto him, and no otherwise. And in the practice or omission of this
Rite we desire that the Rule of Charity, prescribed by the Apostle, may be
observed, which is, That they which use this Rite, despise not them who use it
not; and that they wh^ use it not, condemn not those that use it.

No sooner was this Declaration passed, and sent up to the Lords, but on the
same day, or the next, an Address was made to the Prolocutor by the Clerk for
Westminster concerning the confusion which happened in most parts of the Church
for want of one uniform body o^ Articles to be used in Visitations; those of
the Bishop many times t^^^^tning the Archdeacons; one Bishops differing from
another, the Successors from his Predecessors; and the same person not
consist^nt to the same Articles which himself had published. By means whereof
the people were much disturbed, the Rules of the Church contemned for their
multiplicity, unknown by reason of their uncertainty, and despised for the
inconstancy of them that made them. Of all which he desired the Convocation to
provide a remedy, by setting out one Uniform Book of Articles to be the
standing Rule o^ all Visitations for the time to come. The motion pleased the
Prolocutor, and the rest of the Clergy, who thereupon desired him (in pursuit
of his own project) to undertake the compiling of the said Book of Articles,
and to present it to the House with convenient speed. Which notwithstanding,
there wanted not some secret practices to illude the motion, and frustrate the
design, approved of by the general Vo^e. Some who observed the moderation of
the Articles which had been drawn for the Metropolitical Visitation, and
finding them to leave a greater liberty about placing the Communion Table, and
the order of officiating the Divine Service, than the new Articles might allow
of, addressed themselves unto his Grace, desiring that those Articles might be
commended to the Convocation, to be a standing Rule for all Visitations in the
times succeeding; which Proposition was thought to relish well enough with him
at the first proposal, though afterward on further consideration he suffered
the business to proceed in the former course. It was not long before another
Canon was tendered to the Prolocutor for advancing a more general Conformity
than that which was contained in the Declaration. And it was tendered by the
same hand which had before presented that against Sectaries; in reference to
whom it passed without opposition or alteration. Can. 9.
It was enjoined by that Canon under pain of suspension, that all Preachers, as
well beneficed men as others, should positively and plainly preach and instruct
the People in their public Sermons that the Rites and Ceremonies in the Church
of England were lawful and commendable; and that the People ought not only to
conform themselves to those Rites and Ceremonies: but cheerfully to submit
themselves unto the Government of the Church, as it was then established under
his Majesty. Another was brought in, but by whom I know not, Concerning the
Conversation of the Clergy, by which it was desired in compliance to the
ancient Canons of the Church, Can. 10
and in particular to Canon 74, 75. of the year 1603. That all Clergy men in
this Church, setting before their eyes the glory of God, the holiness of their
Calling, and the edification of the People committed to them, should carefully
avoid all excess and disorders, that by their Christian and Religious
Conversation they might shine forth, as lights unto others, in all godliness
and honesty; and that all those to whom the Government of the Church was
committed should set themselves to countenance and encourage Godliness,
Gravity, Sobriety, and all unblameable Conversation in the Ministers of it; and
diligently labor, by the due execution of the Canons aforesaid, and all other
Ecclesiastical Provisions made for that end, to reform all offensive and
scandalous persons which were in the Ministry. Which Canon was so well approved
of, that it past without any stop or resistance.

All matters going thus calmly on, the Clergy began to take into consideration
the great exces^es, and abuses, which were complained of in many Offices of
Ecclesiastical Courts. They found the Exorbitancies of the Chancellors to be
grown so great, that they contemned the lower Clergy, and thought themselves
independent of the Bishops under whom they served. They found that many abuses
had been committed in the Sentences of Excommunication and Absolution, (the
slovenly executing whereof had been very offensive) as also in Commutations of
Penance, and conniving at unlawful Marriages, out of which some Officers in
those Courts raised no small advantage; Complaint was also made of some
oppressions which had been laid upon the Subject, by concurrent Jurisdictions
partly, and partly by vexatious Citations, in which nothing was more aimed at,
than the Officers Fees which must be paid, though nothing could be proved
against the Party when he came before them. The consideration and redress of
all which grievances being referred to the Committee of twenty six, the said
Committee was desired by the Prolocutor to hold their meetings in his house,
situate under the North-side of the Abbey-Church, and therefore most convenient
both for himself and them. The Grievances were great, and yet not greater than
the Clamor which was raised about them, which made the Committee very intent
upon the stilling of the noise; by providing better for themselves, their
Brethren, and the rest of the Subjects: but not without all due respect to the
Professors in that honorable Faculty of the Civil Laws. Lamb Dean of the
Arches, and Heath Judge of the Audience, being both Members of the Convocation,
were taken into that Committee; not only to assist their Consultations in point
of Law: but to moderate the ^ervor of their Proceedings by the Fan of Reason.
The whole Reformation brought within the compass of these seven Canons: 1.
Concerning Chancellors Patents. 2. Chancellors not alone to censure any of the
Clergy in sundry cases. 3. Excommunication and Absolution not to be pronounced
but by a PRIEST. 4. Concerning Commutations, and the disposing of them. 5.
Touching current Jurisdictions. 6. Concerning Licenses to marry. 7. Against
vexatious Citations.

In the first of the seven it was required, That no Bishop should grant any
Patent to any Chancellor, Commissary, or Official, for any longer time than the
life of the Grantee only; That in all such Patents the Bishops should reserve
to themselves and their Successors the power of giving institution to
Benefices, Can. 11.
of giving Licenses to teach School or Preach, as also of exercising their
Jurisdiction, either alone, or with the Chancellor, at his own discretion, all
the accustomed Fees to be reserved unto the Chancellor, etc. as in former
times; That no Dean and Chapter should confirm any Patent to any Chancellor,
etc. wherein the said conditions were not expressed, under pain of Suspension to
be inflicted on them severally by their Metropolitan; And finally, That under
the heaviest Censures no reward should be taken for any of the Offices and
Places abovementioned. In the composure of which Canon, as the first branch was
made to cut off Reversions, so was the ^^st added to prevent corruptions; For
he most commonly sells Justice that has bought his Office. In the second it
was ordered, That no Chancellor, Commissary, or Official, unless he be in holy
Orders, should proceed to Suspension, or any higher Censure against any of the
Clergy in any criminal cause other than neglect of appearance upon legal
Citing: Can. 1^*
but that all such cases should be heard by the Bishop in person, with the
assistance of his Chancellor or Commissary; or if the Bishops occasions will
not permit, then by his Chancellor, or Commissary, and two grave dignified or
beneficed Ministers of the Diocese to be assigned by the Bishop, under his
Episcopal Seal, who shall hear and censure the said cause in that Consistory.
By the third it was ordained, That no Excommunications or Absolutions should be
good or valid in Law except they be pronounced either by the Bishop in person,
or by some other in holy Orders having Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, or by some
grave Minister beneficed in the Diocese, Can. 13.
being a Master of Arts at least, and appointed by the Bishop, the name of the
said Priest or Minister being expressed in the Instrument under the Seal of the
Court; And that no such Minister should pronounce any such Sentence but in open
Consistory, or at least in some Church or Chapel, the Penitent humbly craving
and taking Absolution upon his knees. (...) 14*
By the fourth it was provided, That no Chancellor, etc. should have power to
commute any Penance in whole or in part, but either together with the Bishop in
person, or with his privity in writing; That if he do it by himself, he should
give up a full and just account of such Commutations once every year at
Michaelmas to the Bishop, under pain of being suspended from his Jurisdiction
for the space of a year; the said Commutations to be disposed of by the Bishop
and Chancellor in such charitable and pious uses as the Law requires; Can. 15.
and that Commutation to be signified to the place from whence the complaint
proceeded, in case the crime were publicly complained of, and approved
notorious.

For preventing those vexations and inconveniences which formerly had been
occasioned by concurrent Jurisdictions, It was decreed by the fifth Canon, under
the several penalties therein contained, That no Register or Clerk should give,
nor Apparitor execute a Citation upon any Executor to appear in any Court or
Office till ten days after the Death of the Testator; And that nevertheless it
might be lawful for any Executor to prove such Wills when they think good,
within the said ten days before any Ecclesiastical Judge respectively, to
whose Jurisdiction the same might or did appertain. By the sixth it was
ordained for the better preventing of any further invasions to be made on the
Prerogative of the Sea of Canterbury, (...) 16
and of many other inconveniences which did thence arise, no License of
Marriage should be granted from any Ordinary, in whose Jurisdiction one of the
parties has not been Commorant for the space of a month, immediately before
the same shall ^e desired, under pain of such Censure as the Archbishop should
think fit to inflict; And that the said Parties being commorant in the said
Jurisdiction, as before is said, shall be made one of the Conditions of the
Bond accustomably given for securing that Office. And for preventing of
vexatious Citations for the time to come, it was required by the last Canon,
That no Citation should from thenceforth be issued out of any Ecclesiastical
Court, except it be upon Presentment, but such as should be sent forth under
the Hand and Seal of the Chancellor, within thirty days after the fault
committed; the Return thereof to be made on the first or second Court-day after
the serving of the same: And that the Party so cited, not being convinced by
two Witness^s, on his denial of the Fact by his corporal Oath, should be
forthwith dismissed without any payment of Fees. Provided, That this Decree
extend not to any grievous Crime; as Schism, Incontinence, Misbehaviour at the
Church in the time of Divine Service, obstinate Inconformity, or the like.
Finally, For preventing all unnecessary Tautologies and Repetitions of the same
thing, it was declared once for all, That whatsoever had been declared in the
former Canons, concerning the Jurisdiction of the B^sh^ps, their Chancellors,
or Commissaries, should be in force (as far as by Law it was appliable)
concerning all Deans, Deans and Chapters, Collegiate Churches, Archdeacons, and
all in Holy Orders, having exempt or peculiar Jurisdiction, and their several
Officers respectively.

To the Proceedings of this Committee in digesting these Canons, the
interposing of another business gave no stop at all, though it seemed to be of
more weight than all the rest. His Majesty on the twentieth of May directed his
Letters sealed with his Royal Signet, and attested by his Sign Manual, to the
Bishops and Clergy assembled in Convocation* Requiring and thereby Authorizing
them to proceed in making Synodical Constitutions, for Levying the six
Subsidies formerly Granted. This the most easy Task of all. The Grant of the
six Subsidies had been drawn before; and there was nothing now to be altered in
it, but the changing of the name of Subsidy into that of Benevolence, according
to the Advice of the Council-Learned; by whom it was resolved, That no Moneys
could be raised in the name of a Subsidy, but by Act of Parliament. And for the
Synodical^ Acts or Constitutions for the Levying of it, they were made to their
hands; So that there was nothing left for them to do, but to follow the
Precedent which was laid before them out of the Record of Convocation, Anno
1585. and to transcribe the same (the Names and Sums being only changed)
without further trouble. So that it was dispatched by the Committee, Voted by
the Clergy, and sent up to the Bishops before the end of the next day. Nor did
the framing or compiling of the Book of Articles, give any stop at all to him,
to w^om the digesting of them was committed, from attending the Service of the
Committee and the House upon all occasions; though for the better Authorizing
of them, he had placed in the Margin before every Article, the Canon, Rubric,
Law, Injunction, or other Authentic Evidence upon which it was grounded. Which
being fini^hed in good time was by him openly read in the House, and by the
House approved and passed without alteration: but that an Exegetical or
Explanatory Clause, in the fourth Article of the fourth Chapter, touching the
Reading of the Second or Communion-Service at the Lords Table, was desired by
some to be omitted, which was done accordingly; Which Articles being too many
and too long to be here inserted, the Reader may consult in the Printed Book,
first published for the Visitation of the Bishop of London, and by him fitted
in some points for the use of that Diocese. The said Clerk brought a Canon also
with him, For enjoining the said Book to be only used in all Parochial
Visitations, for the better settling of an Uniformity in the outward Government
and Administration of the Church, and for the preventing of such just
Grievances, which might be laid upon Churc^wardens and other sworn men, by any
impertinent, inconvenient, or illegal Inquiries in the Articles for
Ecclesiastical Visitations: The same to be deposited in the Records of the
Archbishop of Canterbury. To which a Clause was added in the House of Bishops,
giving a Latitude to themselves for adding some Articles peculiar to their
several Jurisdictions, for the space of three years; The same to be allowed by
their Metropolitan: And afterward to content themselves with the said
Articles, so enlarged and accommodated, for all times succeeding.

Some other t^ings there were in Proposition and Design, that never ripened
into Act or Execution. There had been a Design in deliberation, touching the
drawing and digesting of an English Pontifical, to be approved by this
Convocation, and tendered to his Majesty's Confirmation. Which said Pontifical
was to contain the form and manner of his Majesty's late Coronation, to serve
for a perpetual standing Rule on the like occasions; Another form to be
observed by all Archbishops and Bishops, for Consecrating Churches,
Churchyards, and Chapels; and a third for Reconciling such Penitents as
either had done open Penance, or had revolted from the Faith to the Law of
Mahomet. Which three, together with the form of Confirmation, and that of
Ordering Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, which were then in force, were to make
up the w^ole Body of the Book intended. But the Troubles of the Time growing
greater and greater, it was thought expedient to defer the Prosecution of it
till a fitter conjuncture. Many had took exception against the tying up of
Preachers to the Form of Prayer appointed to be used before their Sermons, Can.
55. For whose Relief therein, a short Prayer was drawn, containing all the
Heads of that in the Canon: And being so drawn up, it was to have been tendered
by the hands of one of the Clergy, who would have undertaken that it should be
universally received by all those which dislike the other. But the Archbishop
chose rather to adhere to the Canon, than to venture on any new Experiment;
that Canon being founded on the Injunctions of Queen Elizabeth and King Edward
vi. at the first Reformation. And so the Proposition fell without moving
further. Gryffith a Clerk for one of the Welsh Diocesses, a moderate and sober
man, proposed unto the House, That a new Edition might be made of the Welsh
Church-Bible, the old one being corrupt in some places, and defective in
others, which he instanced in. The Motion well approved by the Clergy, and by
the House of Bishops committed to the care of the ^our Welsh Bishops; of whose
proceeding in the Work, by reason of the following Troubles, there was little
hope. Nor did the Archbishop speed much better in a Motion of his, which was,
That his Majesty might be moved for the new Printing of the Common Prayer Book
in the Latin Tongue, to the end (though I cannot positively say that he
expressed so much at that time) that it might be used in all Colleges and
Halls, in Officiating the Morning-Prayer, at which no^e are bound to be
present, but such as are presumed to understand the Language. For doing
whereof, he conceived he had good ground in the first Rubricks after the
Preface to the Common Prayer Book; in which it is declared, That though it be
appointed in the aforesaid Preface, that all things should be Read and Sung in
the English Tongue, to the end that the Congregation may be thereby Edified:
yet it is not meant, but when men say Morning and Evening Prayer privately,
they may say the same in any Language that they themselves do understand. And
he had also the constant example of Christ-Church in Oxon. in which the first
Morning-Prayers were continually Officiated in the Latin Tongue, for the
Prebends, Students, and others of the Foundation; and at the Cathedral-hours,
in the English only, for Instruction and Devotion of the Choir-men, Alms-men,
Servants, and all others which resort unto them.

It is a matter which deserves no small Admiration, That these Canons (like the
first building of the Temple, without the noise of Ax and Hammer) should pass
the House with such a general calm and quiet, and be received with so many
Storms and Tempests when they went abroad. The very sitting of the Convocation
condemned ^or an illegal Act; as if it were a Crime to outlive the Parliament.
And much sport made by ignorant and malicious men, touching the Metamorphosis
of an old Convocation, into a new Synod, as they scoffed it; which has
sufficiently been answered in that before. The whole Body of the Canons Voted
by the House of Commons in the following Parliament, ^
to be against the Fundamental Laws of the Realm, against the Kings
Prerogative, Property of the Subject, the Right of Parliaments, and to tend to
Faction and Sedition; which shall be answered as sufficiently in that which
follows. The seven las^ passionately opposed by Martin, and some other
Ecclesiastical Judges, before they passed the Royal Assent, as tending to the
visible discouragement, if not the plain overthrow of their Profession. To
which it was answered by the Archbishop, and the Council too, That nothing but
their Excrescences and Exorbitances, were by those Canons pared away; all their
Preferments, with the Profits and Lawful Fees which belonged unto it, remaining
as before they were. Yet the Civilians made not so much noise as some Common
Lawyers, who looked upon the Granting of a Benevolence by Convocation, and the
Levying of it by Synodical Acts and Constitutions, as being an Incroachment on
the Privileges and Rights of Parliament, without the Midwifery whereof, the
Clergy could Enact no Canons to bind the Subjects, in such pecuniary Payments
as were laid upon them. Which were it so, and that the Clergy could not give
away their own without leave from others, they must needs be the greatest
Slaves the Sun ever shined on: Whereas in truth, the Clergy in Convocation
have as much power to give away the money of the Clergy by whom they are
chosen to that Employment; as the Commons in Parliament have to command the
Money of the Cities, Towns, and Counties for which they serve. For in the
choosing of the Clerks for the Co^vocation, there is an Instrument drawn and
sealed by the Clergy, in which they bind themselves to the Archdeacon or
Archdeacons of their several Diocesses, ^
upon pain of for^eiting all their Lands and Goods, to allow, stand to, and
perform whatsoever their said Clerks or Proctors shall say, do, or condescend
to on their behalf. Greater Authority than this, as the Commons have not; so
why the Clergy in the Convocation should not make use of this Authority as
they see occasion, I can find no reason. Nor is it a speculative Authority
only, and not reducible unto Practice; an Authority which was then in force,
but not in use, as is distinguished in some Cases. They had a Precedent for it
in Queen Elizabeth's time, as before was noted; not then beh^ld as an
Incroachment on the Right of Parliaments. But then was then, and now is now;
the change of Times (without any alteration o^ the Laws) diversifying the same
Action into good and bad.

But nothing raised so much noise and clamor, as the Oath required by the
sixth Canon; Exclaimed against both from the Pulpit and the Press; Reproached
in printed Pamphlets, and unprinted Scribbles; and glad they were to find such
an excellent Advantage, as the discovering of an etc. in the Body of it, did
unhappily give them. This voiced abroad to be the greatest Mystery of Iniquity
which these last Ages had produced, containing in it so much of the Depths of
Satan; that as no man could see the bottom of the Iniquity: so neither they
that made the Oath, nor they that were to take it, unde^stood the Mystery. But
unto this it has been answered, as (...) the fact, That in all the Canons
which were made before this (b^ing five in number) there was a particular
enumeration of all the persons* vested with any Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction;
that is to say, Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, Archdeacons, Deans and Chapters,
and other persons having peculiar or exempt Jurisdiction; which having been
repeated distinctly or particularly in such of the Canons as were first made,
was in the first drawing of their Oath, for avoiding of a Tautologie so often
iterated, cut off with this etc. with an intention nevertheless to make the
Enumeration perfect (and consequently to expunge this unlucky etc.) before it
came to be Engrossed. But the King being weary of the Charge and Clamor, which
the keeping of a Guard on the Convocation did expose him to, did hasten them to
a Conclusion by so many Messages brought by Vane and others, that in the haste
this unlucky etc. was forgotten, and so committed to the Press accordingly. It
has been secondly answered, as in point of Reason, That the etc. as it stands
in that part of the Oath, is so restrained and limited by the following words,
viz. as it stands now established, that there can be no danger of any Mystery
of Iniquity in it: So that in the Construction of this Text, the etc. as it now
remains, is a mere impertinency: For being left in, it signifies nothing, in
regard of the Restriction following; and being left out, the sense is current
and complete without it. Which all those witty Gentlemen who so often spoke,
and others of less wit and quality, which so frequently writ against this Oath,
could not choose but see: but that they were not willing to see any thing which
might make against them. The Paramount Objection being thus refell'd, the rest
which have been made against it will be easily satisfied. It has been charged
by some, That the exacting of an Oath not to consent to the Alteration of the
Government of the Church by Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, Archdeacons, etc. is
an affront to the fundamental Rules of Civil Polity. To which it has been
answered, That it is indeed an affront to Government, not to submit or yield
Obedience unto Civil Sanctions when made, and legally established: But it is no
affront not to give consent to any such Establishments, while they are in
Treaty; for then the liberty of assenting or dissenting, of Yea or Nay, would
be taken away from every Member in the Houses of Parliament, and every Man must
give consent to every Bill which is offered to him. But besides this, there
were but few of the Convocation whose consent was likely to be asked, when any
change of Church Government should be set on foot; so that their dissenting or
assenting was not much material: but only so far as by their readiness of
consenting to such Innovations in the Public Government, they might encourage
others to proceed against it. Here then is no affront to Government, much less
to the Fundamentals of it; the Oath not binding any man not to yield Obedience,
but not to give consent to such Alteration. As for the last Objection, That he
who takes the Oath declares therein, That he takes it willingly, being
constrained so to do under grievous Penalties. This as it comes last, is the
least considerable; for if this were a Crime in the Convocation, it was such a
Crime as the High Court of Parliament has been guilty of, in drawing up the
Oath of Allegiance in the third year of King James; in which the Party is to
swear, That he makes that Recognition not only heartily and truly, but also
willingly: and yet the taking of that Oath is imposed on all the Subjects,
under several Penalties, if any of them shall refuse it.

And yet these Quarrels at the Oath, the Unparliamentary Levying of the said
Benevolence, and the pretended Illegality of their very Sitting after the
Parliament expired, were but the outsides of the business, but only colors
and disguises to conceal the chief cause of their displeasure from the public
view. Somewhat there was which galled them more than all these together; that
is to say, the Propositions for asserting the Regal Power, making it absolute
and independent with reference both to Pope and People, to the great discontent
and trouble of the Popular Party, since better known by the name of
Commonwealths-men. Which since the English were not confident enough to speak
out at first, we must take their meaning from the Scots, who in the Articles
exhibited against our Archbishop by their Commissioners, have expressly charged
him with this Crime, Cant. D^om, p. 56.
viz. That he made Canons and Constitutions against them, their just and
necessary defense; Ordaining under all highest Pain, That hereafter the Clergy
should Preach four times in the year such Doctrine as was contrary not only to
their Proceedings, but to the Doctrine and Proceedings of other Reformed Kirks,
to the Judgment of all sound Divines and Politics; as tending to the utter
slavery and ruining of all Estates and Kingdoms, and to the dishonor of Kings
and Monarchs. This the true cause of those high Displeasures, conceived by some
prevailing Members of the House of Commons, and openly declared by their Words
and Actions, branding those innocent Canons for a tendency to Faction and
Sedition, which they most labored to suppress; condemning all that Voted to
them, in great sums of Money; and afterward destroying them one by one, as
they came in their way. Compared with this, neither the Benevolence, nor the
Oath, nor any thing else before objected, was esteemed considerable; though all
were joined together to amuze the People, and make them fearful of some Plot,
not only to subvert Religion, but their Civil Rights.

But the best is, that howsoever some few men for their private ends reproached
these Canons, as before; his Sacred Majesty, the Lords of his most Honorable
Privy Council, the Reverend Judges, and the Great Lawyers of the
Council-Learned, conceived otherwise of them; in the hearing of all which they
were publicly read by the Archbishops procurement, before they were tendered to
the Clergy to be subscribed: and by all which they were approved, not without
thanks to the Archbishop from the King himself, for his pains therein. And
certainly it had been strange that they should pass the Approbation of the
Judges and Learned Lawyers, had they contained any thing against the
Fundamental Laws of the Land, the Property of the Subject, and the Rights of
Parliaments; or been approved by the Lords of his Majesty's Privy Council, had
any thing been contained in them derogatory to the Kings Prerogative, or
tendin^ to Faction and Sedition. So far they were from being liable to
Condemnation in those respects, that Justice Crook (whose Argument in the Case
of Ship Money was Printed afterward by Order from the House of Commons) is
credibly affirmed to have lifted up his hands, and to have given hearty Thanks
to Almighty God, that he had lived to see so good Effects of a Convocation. On
these Encouragements, and such a solemn Approbation, the Clergy were called up
to the House of Bishops, to be present at the subscribing o^ them; which was
accordingly performed May 29. by the Bishops, Deans, and Archdeacons in their
Seniority, and promiscuo^sly by the rest of the Clergy, till all the Members
had Subscribed; every man's heart going together with his hand; as it is to be
presumed from all men of that holy Profession. Recusant there was none, but the
Bishop of Gloucester, suspected of some inclinations to the Romish Religion in
the Times preceding; which inclinations he declared more manifestly by this
Refusal; for which there could be no imaginable Reason to prevail upon him, but
the severity of the Canon for suppressing the Growth of Popery. Some pains was
taken with him in the way of persuasion, and some Commands laid on him by his
Metropolitan, as President of the Convocation: But when neither of the two
Endeavors could remove him from his former obstinacy, the Prolocutor and
Clergy were required to return to their House again, and to consider of the
Penalty which he had incurred, according to the Rules and Practice of the
Catholic Church in National and Provincial Councils. Which being done, the
Prolo^^tor had no sooner put the Question, but the Clergy unanimously condemned
him to a Suspension a Beneficio and Officio; and found at their return, that
the House of Bishops (who had had some speech thereof before) had pronounced
the same Sentence against him also. A Sentence which might have produced more
dangerous effects on this obstinate Prelate, if he had not prevented it in time
by his submission. For the Sentence being reduced into Writing, subscribed by
the Archbishops hand, and publicly pronounced in (...) Convocation, his
Majesty took such just offense at so great a scandal, that he committed him to
Prison, where he staid not long; (...) on the tenth of July he made
acknowledgment of his fault before the Lords of the Council, and took the Oath
enjoined in the sixth Canon, for preserving the Doctrine and Discipline of the
Church of England, against all Popish Doctrines which were thereunto repugnant.
Upon the doing whereof, his Majesty was graciously pleased to restore him to
his former Liberty; though this Submission appeared within few years after, to
be made either with some mental Reservation, or Jesuitical Equivocation, which
he came prepared with. For in the time of his last Sickness, he declared
himself to be a Member of the Church of Rome, and caused it so to be expressed
in his last Will and Testament, that the news thereof might spread the further,
and his Apostasy stand upon Record to all future Ages. A Scandal so
unseasonably given, as if the Devil himself had watched an opportunity to
despite this Church,

But these things happened not till after. The Sentence of Suspension was no
sooner pronounced, but the Archbishop giving great thanks to the Bishops and
the rest of the Clergy for their pains and diligence, in doing so much Work in
so little time, produced his Majesty's Writ for dissolving the said
Convocation; which he accordingly executed, and dissolved the same. The Acts
whereof being transmitted unto York, were by the Convocation for that Province
perused, debated, and approved without any disputing; and so presented to his
Majesty with their Names subscribed, according to the ancient Custom. There
remained now nothing more to do, for giving these Canons the Authority and
Reputation of his Majesty's Ecclesiastical Laws, but the signifying of his
Royal Assent, and confirming them by Letters Patents under the Great Seal of
England. And this his Majesty, upon mature deliberation, was graciously pleased
to do, commanding in the same, That they should be diligently observed,
executed, and equally kept by all his Subjects, both within the Provinces of
Canterbury and York respectively: That for the better observation of them, all
Ministers should audibly and distinctly read all the said Canons in the Church
or Chapel in which they Minister, at the time of Divine Service; The Book of
the said Canons to be provided before Michaelmas, at the charge of their
Parishes: And finally, That all Archbishops and Bishops, and others having
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, shall take special care that the said Canons and
Ordinances be in all points duly observed; not sparing to execute the Penalties
in them severally mentioned, upon any that shall wittingly or wilfully break or
neglect to observe the same, as they tendered the Honor of God, the Peace of
the Church, the Tranquillity of the Kingdom, and their Duties and Service to his
Majesty their King and Sovereign. With which his Majesty's Letters Patents,
bearing date on June 13. confirmatory of the Acts of the said Convocations, I
conclude the fourth and busiest part of this present History,

THE LIFE OF The most Reverend FATHER in GOD WILLIAM Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury.
LIB. V. Extending from the end of the Convocation, Anno 1640. till the day of
his Death, Jan. 10th. 1644.
THus have we brought this Renowned Prelate, Anno Dom. 1640.
and with him the Church unto the very Battlement and Pinnacle of External
Glories. But such is the vicissitude of humane affairs, that being carried to
the height they begin to fall; it being no otherwise with the fortunes of
States or Men, then it is with Plants, which have their times of taking Root,
their Growing, Flourishing, Maturity, and then their Fading, and decay. And
therefore it was very well observed by Paterculus, an old Roman Historian, that
when either Emulation or natural Courage had given to any man an edge to ascend
to the highest, after they had N^tu^ali^e^ quod p^ocedere (...) potest, recedit
Vell. Pat. Hist. Lib. 1.
attained that height, they were according to the course of Nature to descend
again; and that it was no otherwise Gentium, urbium, (...) orum nunc (...)
fortuna, nunc seen cit, al^qu ^^do in^cri^. (...)
with States and Nations then with Private men. It was just fourscore years
from the beginning of the Reformation under Queen Eliz. to the Pacification
made at Berwick, when the King so unfortunately dismissed his Forces, and thereby
left himself and his party in a worse condition then before the raising of his
Army. The Church till then might seem to be in the Ascendent in the point of
Culminating; and was then ready to decline, which our Judicious Hooker
Ecclesia^t. Po^t. (...). 5. Sect. ^9.
had before presaged: Who had assigned her fourscore years for her growth and
flourishing, and nothing afterward but sorrow and disconsolation. For taking
notice of the inclination of the times to Sacrilege, and Spoil, and Rapine;
and finding nothing more frequent in the mouths of men, then this, that they
which endowed Churches with Lands poisoned Religion; that Tithes and Oblations
are now in the sight of God but as the sacrificed blood of Goats; and that
fullness of bread having made the Children wanton, it was without any scruple to
be taken away from them, He made upon the whole matter, this ensuing Judgment:
By this means (says he) or the like suggestions received with all joy, and
with like sedulity practiced in certain parts of the Christian World, they have
brought to pass that as David does say of man, so it is in hazard to be
verified concerning the whole Religion and service of God, The time thereof may
peradventure fall out to be threescore and ten years, or if strength do serve
unto fourscore, what follows is like to be small joy for them whosoever they
be that behold the same. An Observation which seems to savor more of the
Prophet, then it did of the Priest; and to have as much Divination, as Divinity
in it.

Thus also in reference to himself, he was now growing toward the term of 70
years, which the Psalmist had assigned to the Life of man; and there wanted not
many sad Presages of his Fall and Death. He was much given to take notice of
his Dreams, and commit them to writing, Amongst which I find this for one, that
on Friday night the 24th of Ian. 1639. his father (who died 46 years before)
came to him, and that to his thinking he was as well, and as cheerful, as ever
he saw him; that his Father asked him what he did there; that after some speech
he demanded of his Father how long he would stay there; and that his Father
made this Answer, that he would stay till he had him along with him. A dream
which made such Impression on him as to add this Note to it in his Breviate,
that though he was not moved with Dreams, yet he thought fit to remember this.
On Friday night just a Month before, being the 27th of December and the night
following the day of S. John the Evangelist, there was raised such a violent
Tempest that many of the Boats which were drawn to Land at Lambeth, were dashed
one against the other, and were broke to pieces; and that the shafts of two
Chimneys were blown down upon the Roof of his Chamber, and beat down both the
Lead and Ra^ters upon his bed, in which ruin he must needs have Perished, if
the Roughness of the water had not forced him to keep his Chamber at
White Hall. A mischance somewhat of this nature befell the same night at Croyden
(a retiring place belonging to the Archbishop of Canterbury) where one of the
Pinacles fell from the Steeple, beat down the Lead and Roof of the Church above
twenty foot square. But that which was more remarkable then either of these,
happened the same night at the Metropolitical Church in the City of Canterbury;
where one of the Pinacles upon the top of the Bell-frey Tower, which carried a
vane, with this Archbishops Arms upon it, was violently struck down, but born a
good distance from the Steeple, to fall upon the Roof of the Cloister under
which the Arms of the Archiepiscopal See it self, were engraven in stone; which
Arms being broken to pieces by the fall of the other, gave occasion unto one
who loved him not, to collect this Inference, that the Arms of the present
Archbishop of Canterbury, breaking down the Arms of the Sea of Canterbury, not
only portended his own fall, but the Ruin of the Metropolitical dignity by the
weight thereof. Of these misfortunes, (which some men perhaps may call
Presages) he took not so much notice, as he did of an accident which happened
on S. Simon and Iude's e^e, not above a week before the beginning of the late
long Parliament, which drew him to his final Ruin. On which day going into his
upper study to send some Manuscripts to Oxon, ^e found his Picture at full
Length, and taken as near unto the life as the Pensil was able to express it,
to be fallen on the Floor, and lying flat upon its face, the string being broke
by which it was hanged against the wall. At the sight whereof he took such a
sudden app^ehension, that he began to fear it as an Omen of that ruin which
was coming toward him, and which every day began to be threatened to him, as the
Parliament grew nearer and nearer to consult about it. Which accidents
happening one in the neck of anot^er, gave him some occasion to look back on a
former misfortune, which chanced on the 19th of September. 1633. being the very
day of his Translation to the Sea of Canterbury; When the Ferry Boat
transporting his Coach and Horses with many of his Servants in it, sunk to the
bottom of the Thames. And though he lost neither man nor Horse by the
misadventure, yet much discourse was made upon it, and most beheld it, as a
sign of no good Fortune, which should be^al him in the course of his Future
Actions.

But worse Presages then all these, were the breaking out of diverse Plots and
Practices against him, by the Opposite Factions; not only the Puritans but the
Papists, conspiring against him, and both Resolved to bring him to his Fatal
end by some means or other. The Papists which had hope to effect great matters
by the Power and Prevalency of the Queen, found the Archbishop so averse from
their courses, and the King so resolute in the maintenance of the true
Protestant Religion here by Law established, that they perceived it necessary
to remove them both out of the way, before any thing could be effected
answerable to their expectation. A confederacy was formed amongst them,
consisting of some of the most subtle heads in the whole Jesuitical party; by
whom it was concluded to foment the broils began in Scotland, and to heighten
the combustions there, that the King being drawn into a War might give them the
better opportunity to effect their enterprise for sending him and the
Archbishop to the other world. Which being by one of the party on compunction
of Conscience, made known to Andreas ab Habernsfield, who had been Chaplain as
some said to the Queen of Bohemia, they both together gave intimation of it, to
Sir William Boswel, his Majesty's Resident at the Hague; having first Found him
by his Oath not to reveal the same to any man Living but to the Archbishop
himself, and by the Archbishop to the King. This signi^ied by Boswel's Letters
of the 9^h of September. Together (...) a general draught of the design
transmitted to Canterbury under the hand of Habernsfield himself, the first
discoverer of the plot. On the Receipt of which dispatches the Archbishop
giving directio^s to Boswel to proceed to a further discovery of it, sends the
Intelligence with all speed imaginable, by his Letters of the 11th of the same
Month to the King at York; beseeching nothing more then his see ^^y in it,
that he would not trust his Pockets with those dangerous Papers; and finally,
that he would declare what his Pleasure was for the Prosecution of the
business. And so far both the King and he had very good Reason to be sensible
of the dangers which were threatened to them. But when the large discovery was
brought unto him transmitted in Boswel's letter of the 15th o^ October. ^e found
some names in it, which discredited the whole Relation as well in his Majesty's
Judgment as his own. For besides his naming of some professed Papists, as the
Duchess of Buckingham, the Countesses of Arundel and Newport, Mountague, Digby,
and Winter, o^ whose Fidelity the King was not willing to have any suspicion,
(...) named the Earl of Arundel, Windebank, Principal Secretary of State, and
Porter one of the Grooms of the Bedchamber, whom (...) charged to be the Kings
utter enemies, and such as betrayed his secrets to the Popes Nuncio upon all
occasions; all which his (...) beheld as men of most approved Loyalty and
affections to him; By reason whereof no further credit being given to the
Advertisement, which they had from Boswel, the danger so much scared at first,
became more slighted and neglected then consisted with his Majesty's safety,
and the condition of the times which (...) apt to mischief; For though the
Party who first brake the ^ee to this Intelligence, might be mistaken in the
names of some of the Accomplices, which were interessed in the design, whose
Relations unto those of the Church of Rome might give some ground for the
mistake; yet the calamities which soon after ^ell upon them both, the
deplorable death of the Archbishop first, and his Majesty afterward, declare
sufficiently, that there was some greater Reality in the Plot then the King was
willing to believe. But it ^ad been a Maxim with King James, his Father, That
Suspicion was the sickness and disease of a Tyrant; which laid him open to all
the subtle Practices of malicious cunning. And it had been taken up by this
King for an Axiom also, That it was better to be deceived than to distrust;
which paved a plain and easy way to all those misfortunes which in the whole
course of his Reign, especially for ten years last past, had been brought upon
him.

And as for Canterbury himself he had so many dangers threatened from the
Puritan Faction as made him bend his whole thoughts to prevent their Practices,
who had already declared their Purpose toward his Destruction. For a brui^e
being maliciously spread abroad, that the late Parliament had been dissolved by
his Procurement, the Rabble became so in^lamed, that a Paper was pasted up at
the Exchange, on Saturday the ninth of May, advising and animating the
Apprentices to Sack his House at Lambeth on the Monday following. This gave him
a sufficient warning to expect a storm, and to prepare himself against it;
which he did with so much care and courage, that though he was assaulted that
night with a confused Raskal Rabble of five hundred persons, yet they were not
able either to force the House, or do any visible harm unto it. The next day he
procured some pieces of Cannon, which he caused to be planted for defense of
the great Gate which leads into the house, and strengthened all the lesser doors
which opened toward the Garden, and other places; so that there was no danger
to be feared from the like alarms, though prudently he withdrew to his Chamber
at Whitehall till the Rage of the People was blown over. Some of the principal
Actors in this Sedition being apprehended and committed to the Goal in
Southwark, were forcibly delivered by others of their Accomplices, who brake
open that and all the other Prisons in that Precinct; for which one Benslead,
who appeared in the head of that Riot, was on the 21. of May condemned for
Treason, and was accordingly drawn, hanged, and quartered, for a terror to
others. Which seasonable Execution put an end to the Outrage, but not to the
malice of the People; Libels against him being scattered in most parts of the
City. For though about the end of August a Paper was dropped in the Covent
Garden, encouraging the Soldiers and Apprentices to fall upon him in the Kings
Absence (his Majesty being then newly gone against the Scots) yet there was no
Tumult raised upon it; the People standing in more fear of the Hangman than to
expose themselves again to the Knife and Halter. Howsoever thinking it as
unsafe as it was imprudent to tempt the Rabble to bestow another visit on him
at his house in Lambeth, he gave order that the High Commission should be kept
in St. Paul's, and he did well and wisely in it. For the Commissioners sitting
there, on October 22. were violently assaulted by a mixed multitude of
Pr^wnists, Anabaptists, and Puritans, of all sorts to the number of 2000. and
upwards, crying out they would have no Bishops, nor no High Commission. In
which Tumult, having frighted away the Judges, Advocates, and Officers of the
Court, they brake down all the Seats and Benches which they found in the
Consistory, putting the King to a new necessity of keeping a Guard upon that
Church, as before at Westminster, not only at the next sitting of the said
Commissioners, but at the first meeting of the Convocation, which soon after
followed. And though one Quatreman had appeared in the head of this company,
and animated all the rest to commit these insolences; yet there was nothing
done in order to his Punishment or Apprehension: the Party being grown so
audacious in their disorders, partly upon the near approach of the Parliament,
but principally by the coming in of the Scots, that they contemned the Law, and
defied the Magistrates.

For the Scots, being put into a stock of Reputation by the Kings Recalling of
his Forces the year before, had took up store of Arms and Ammunition (as before
was said) upon days of Payment. Advertised of his Majesty's Preparation to make
war upon them, and confident o^ a strong party which they had in England, they
entered the Realm in hostile manner, taking in all places of importance which
they found in their way. And having put by his Majesty's Forces near a place
called Newbourn, they past over the Tine, and presently made themselves Masters
of the strong Town of New Castle, by which they put a bridle into the mouths of
the Londoners, his Majesty's Forces looking on, or not very far distant. The
news of this Invasion being brought to the King, on August 20. he began a
Posting Journey toward his Army in the North: But he neither found the same
men, nor the same affections, as he had so unfortunately discharged the year
before. Many of these Soldiers being so ill principled, or so ill persuaded,
that in their marchings through the Country they brake into Churches, pulled up
the Railes, threw down the Communion Tables, defaced the Common-Prayer-Books,
tore the Surplices, and committed many other Acts of outrageous insolence. The
chief Command he had entrusted to the Earl of Northumberland, whom he had
before made Admiral of his Royal Navy for defense of the Kingdom, honored him
with the Order of the Garter, and made him one of the Lords of his Privy
Council; so that no greater characters of Power and Favor could be imprinted
on a Subject. The Office of Lieutenant General he had committed unto the Earl
of Strafford Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, of whose Fidelity and Courage he could
make no question; And the Command of the Horse to Edward Lord Conway, whose
Father had been raised by King James from a private condition to be one of his
principal Secretaries, and a Peer of the Realm. Of which three great Commanders
it was observed, that one had sufficient health, but had no will to the
business; That another had a good will to it, but wanted health; and that a
third had neither the one nor the other. And yet as crasie and infirm as the
Earl of Strafford found himself, he cheerfully undertook the charge of the Army
in the Generals abs^nce, and signified by Letter to the Archbishop of
Canterbury, that he durst venture upon the peril of his head to drive the Scots
out of England: but that he did not hold it Counsellable, as the case then
stood. If any other of the Lords had advised the King to try his Fortune in a
Battle, he doubted not of sending them home in more haste than they came: but
the Scots had rendered him unfit to make the motion, for fear it might be
thought that he studied more his own Concernments, than he did the Kings.

For these Invadors, finding by whose Counsels his Majesty governed his
Affairs, resolved to draw them into discredit, both with Prince and People. And
to that end it was declared in a Remonstrance, published before their taking
Arms, R^m^nst. of the Scots, p. 7
That their Propositions and Desires, so necessary and vital unto that Kingdom,
could find no access unto the ears of the gracious King by reason of the
powerful Diversion of the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Deputy of Ireland,
who (strengthened with the high and mighty Faction of Papists near his Majesty)
did only side in all matters of Temporal and Spiritual affairs; making the
necessity of their Service to his Majesty to appear in being the only fit
Instruments (under the pretext of vindicating his Majesty's Honor) to oppress
both the just Liberties of his Free Subjects, and the true Reformed Religion in
all his Kingdoms. Seconding this Remonstrance with another Pamphlet, called,
The Intention of the Army; they signified therein to the good People of
England, that they had no design either to waste their Goods, or spoil their
Country: but only to become Petitioners to his Sacred Majesty to call a
Parliament, and to bring the said Archbishop and Lord Lieutenant to their
condign Punishments. Intent. of the Army. p 7.
In which those modest men express, That as they desired the unworthy Authors
of their trouble, who had come out from themselves, to be tried at home,
according to their own Laws; so they would press no further Process against
Canterbury, and the Lieutenant of Ireland, and the rest of those pernicious
Counselors in England, whom they called the Authors of all the miseries of
both Kingdoms, than what their own Parliament should discern to be their just
deserving. And that the English might see the better whom they chiefly aimed
at, a book was published by the name of Laudensium Autocatacrisis, or the
Canterburians Self-conviction; in which the Author of it did endeavor to
prove, out of the Books, Speeches, and Writings of the Archbishop himself, as
also of some Bishops, and other learned men, who had exercised their Pens in
the late disputes, That there was a strange design in hand for bringing in
Superstition, Popery, and Arminianism, to the subversion of the Gospel, and of
suppressing the Religion here by Law established.

But as these Reproaches moved not him, so neither did their Remonstrance, or
any other of their Scribbles distract his Majesty's Resolutions, until he
found himself assaulted by a Petition from some Lords in the South, which
threatened more danger at his back than he had cause to fear from the Northern
Tempest which blew directly in his teeth; Complaint was made in this Petition
of the many inconvenicences which had been drawn upon this Kingdom by his
Majesty's engagings against the Scots; as also of the great increase of Popery;
the pressing of the present payment of Ship Money; the dissolving of former
Parliaments; Monopolies, Innovations, and some other gr^evances, amongst which
the Canons which were made in the late Convocation could not be omitted. For
Remedy whereof, his Majesty is desired to call a Parliament, to bring the
Authors of the said pretended grievances to a Legal Trial, and to compose the
present War without Bloodshed; Subscribed by the Earls of Essex, Hartford,
Rutland, Bedford, Exeter, Warwick, Moulgrave, and Bullingbrooke, the Lords Say,
Mandevil, Brook, and Howard; presented to the King at York on the third of
September; And seconded by another from the City of London to the same effect.
His Majesty, being thus between two Milstones, could find no better way to
extricate himself out of these perplexities, than to call the great Council of
his Peers, to whom at their first meeting, on the 24 of the same month, he
signified his purpose to hold a Parliament in London on the third of November;
and by their Counsel entertained a Treaty with those of Scotland, who building
on the confidence which they had in some Lords of England, had petitioned for
it. According unto which Advice a Commission is directed to eight Earls, and as
many Barons of the English Nation, (seven of which had subscribed the former
Petition) enabling them to treat with the Scots Commissioners, to hear their
Grievances and Demands, and to report the same to his Majesty, and the Lords of
his Council. These points being gained, which the Puritan Faction in both
Kingdoms had chiefly aimed at, the Scots were insolent enough in their
Proposals, Requiring freedom of Commerce, Reparation of their former Losses,
and most especially the maintenance of their Army at the charge of the English;
without which no Cessation would be harkned to. Satisfaction being given them
in their last Demand, and good Assurances for the two first, they decline York,
as being unsafe for their Commissioners, and procure Rippon to be named, for
the place of the Treaty; where the Lord Lieutenant was of less influence than
he was at York; and where being further from the King, they might shuffle the
Cards, and play the Game to their best contentment. The rest of October, from
the end of the first week of it, when they excepted against York, was drilled
on, in requiring that some persons of quality, entrusted by the Scottish
Nation, might have more Offices than they had about his Majesty, and the Queen,
and in the Court of the Prince. That a Declaration might be made for
naturalizing and settling the Capacities and mutual Privileges of the Subjects
in both Kingdoms: but chiefly that there might be an Unity and Uniformity in
Church Government, as a special means for conserving of the Peace between the
two Nations. And thus they entertained the time till the beginning of the
Parliament, which removed the Treaty from Rippon to London, where the Scots
were sure of more Friends, and of warmer Quarters, than the Northern Counties
could afford them.

In the mean time it may be asked what became all this while o^ the Irish Army,
consisting of 8000 Foot, and 1000 Horse, which had been raised with so much
zeal by the Earl of Strafford at the beginning of the Spring; and by the power
whereof (kept ever since in constant pay and continual exercise) his Majesty
might have reduced the Scots to their due obedience, as was declared by the
Earl at the Council Table on May 6. being the next day after the dissolving of
the former Parliament. Which Army if it had been put over into Cumberland (to
which from the Port of Carickfergus in Ireland is but a short and easy
passage) they might have got upon the Back of the Scots, and caught the
wretched People in a pretty Pitfall; so that having the English Army before
them, and the Irish behind them, they could not but be ground to powder as
between two Milstones. But this design, if it were ever thought of, was never
put in execution; so as that Army was dissolved without doing any thing in
order to his Majesty's Service: the Commons in the following Parliament not
thinking themselves or their affairs in any security as long as those Forces
were maintained and held together. It may be asked in the next place, why the
Parliament, called at such a time, and on such an occasion, (that is to say,
the overrunning of the Northern parts of the Kingdom by a Scottish Army)
should be held at Westminster; when York (where the King was then in Person)
lay nearer to the danger and the Scene of Action, and to the place of Treaty
betwixt the Nations. These Reasons were sufficient to have moved the King to
hold this Parliament at York, and not at Westminster, had he known nothing of
the disaffections and engagements of the neighboring City, as he knew too
much. And he had some good Presidents too, which might have added no small
weight to the consideration: For when King Edward was busy in the Conquest of
Wales, he called his Parliament to Acton Burnel, being in the Marches of that
Country; and when he turned his Forces to the Conquest of Scotland, he called
his Parliament to Carlisle (if my memory fall me not) being on the borders of
that Kingdom. Had the King made choice of the like Place for this present
Parliament (which he did afterward endeavor to alter when it was too late (he
had undoubtedly prevented all those inconveniences (or rather mischiefs) which
the Pride, Purse, Faction, and Tumultuousness of the Londoners, did afterward
enforce upon him. And finally, It might be asked, What might move his Majesty
to transfer the Treaty from Rippon to London, where the Commissioners of the
Scots were Complemented, Feasted, and presented by the wanton Citizens; Their
Lodgings more frequented for Prayers and Sermons, than the houses of Foreign
Ambassadors had ever been for hearing Mass by any of the English Papists. By
means whereof they had the greater opportunity to inflame that City, and make
it capable of any impression which they thought fit to imprint upon it; expressed
not long after by their going down in such huge multitudes after Alderman
Pennington, to present a Petition to the Parliament, subscribed by some
Thousands of hands against the Government of Bishops here by Law estalis^t; as
afterward in no less number to clamor at the Parliament doors for Justice on
the Earl of Strafford, which were the points most aimed at by the Scottish
Covenanters. To which no Answer can be given, but that all these things were so
disposed of by the supreme and overruling power of the Heavenly Providence,
contrary to all reason of State, and Civil Prudence.

But to proceed, the third of November drawing on, when the Parliament was to
take beginning, A Letter was writ to the Archbishop of Canterbury, advertising,
that the Parliament of the twentieth year of King Henry viii. which began in
the Fall of Cardinal Wolsey, continued in the Diminution of the Power and
Privileges of the Clergy, and ended in the dissolution of the Abbeys and
Religious Houses, was begun on the third day of November; and therefore that
for good-luck sake he would move the King to Respite the first sitting of it
for a day or two longer: But the Archbishop not harkning to this Advertisement,
the Parliament had its first sitting at the time appointed. Which Parliament as
it began in the Fall and Ruin of the Archbishop himself, and was continued in
the total Dissipation of the remaining Rites and Privileges of the English
Clergy; so did it not end till it had subverted the Episcopal Government,
dissolved, as much as in them was, all Capitular Bodies, and left the
Cathedrals of this Land (not presently ruined I confess, but) without means to
keep them up for the time to come. The day appointed being come, his Majesty
declined the accustomed way of riding in a Magnificent Pomp from Whitehall to
the Church of Westminster, and making his entry there at the great Western
Gate: but rather chose to pass thither privately by water, attended by such of
the Lords as could accommodate themselves with convenient Barges. Entering the
Church at the Little door which opens toward the East, he was received by the
Sub-Dean and Prebendaries under a Canopy of State, and so conducted to the
place where he heard the Sermon; the performance of which work was commended by
his Grace of Canterbury to the Bishop of Oxon. and by him learnedly discharged.
The Sermon being done, his Majesty, attended by the Peers and Prelates,
returned the same way to Westminster Hall, and from thence went to the
Parliament House; where causing the Commons to be called before him, he
acquainted both Houses with the Insolences committed by the Scots, who not
content to embroyle their own Country had invaded this; requiring their timely
assistance to drive the Rebels out of the Kingdom, and casting himself upon the
good affections of his English Subjects. The Commons were not more willing to
hear that his Majesty was resolved to cast himself wholly on their good
affections, than many zealous Patriots seemed to be troubled at it, knowing how
ill it sorts with Kings when they have no way to subsist, or carry on their
great Designs, but by casting themselves wholly on the love of the People.
These on the other side were not better pleased with hearing his Majesty call
the Scots by the name of Rebels, whom he had too long courted by the name of
his Scottish Subjects, than the Prevailing Members in the House of Commons were
offended at it; the name of Rebels rendering them incapable of those many
Favors which were designed them by that House. And the displeasure went so
high, that his Majesty finding into what condition he had cast himself, was
fain to call both Houses before him within two days after, R^^iquiae
Car^linae, p. 3
there to Explain, or rather to Retract so harsh a Title, calling them
afterward by the name of his Subjects of Scotland, as he used to do; which
gave the Commons such a sense of their Power, and of his Compliance, that they
resolved to husband both to their best advantage, and not so easily to part
with their Friends of Scotland, as his Majesty first hoped they would. The
differences might have been agreed at York or Rippon, if the Commissioners of
the Scots had been as forward as the English; but the Scots so delayed them (as
his Majesty noted in that Speech) that it was not possible to end it there. The
Scots had other work to do besides their own, and must be kept in pay at the
charge of the English, till they had brought his Majesty into such a condition,
that it was not safe for him to deny them any thing, which they had the
confidence to require. Such a beginning had this long and unhappy Parliament,
unhappy to the King, and to all that loved his Power or Person; most men who
looked on his Affairs with the eye of Judgment, presaging that this thrif^y
omission of the Public Pomp in the present Conjunctures, would prove as
inauspicious to him as the like neglect had done at his Coronation; and that
this Parliament which began without solemnity would prove a Parliament of
sorrows unto him and his.

With little better Fortune did the Convocation take beginning at S. Paul's
Church on the morrow after, handselled at their first meeting by the sad news
of the Decease of Dr. Neile, Archbishop of York, which had been brought unto
the Town the day before. A man he was who had past through all Degrees and
Orders in the Church of England, and thereby made acquainted with the
conveniences, or distresses, incident to all conditions. He had served the
Church as Schoolmaster, Curate, Vicar, Parson, Master of the Savoy, Dean of
Westminster, Clerk of the Closet to both Kings successively, Bishop of
Rochester, Lichfield, Lincoln, Durham, and Winchester, and finally, Archbishop
of York, in which place he died. Many good Offices he had done to the Church
and Churchmen in his attendance at the Court, crossing the Scots in most of
their suits, their Ecclesiastical Preferments, which greedily and ambitiously
they hunted after, and thereby drawing on himself the general hatred not only
of the Scots, but Scotizing English. But of this Prelate we have spoke so much
upon other occasions, that we may save the labor of any further addition, than
that he died as full of years as he was of honors, an affectionate Subject to
his Prince, an indulgent Father to his Clergy, a bountiful Patron to his
Chaplains, and a true friend to all which relied upon him; more fortunate in
the time of his death than the course of his life, in being prevented by that
blessed opportunity from seeing those calamities which afterward fell upon the
King, the Church, and all that wish well to either of them; which must have
been more grievous to him than a thousand deaths. But this bad news retarded
not the Convocation from proceeding forwards, the Prelates and Clergy attending
the Archbishop from the Chapter House into the Choire, where they heard the
Sermon, Preached at that time by Bargrave then Dean of Canterbury; which done,
the Clergy settled to the choice of a Prolocutor, electing the same man who had
before discharged the Place with so much dexterity. Adjourned to Westminster,
and Protestation made by the Sub-Dean and Prebends, according to the usual
custom, the Prolocutor was presented to the Archbishop and Bishops in the
Chapel of King Henry vii. at what time the Archbishop in an eloquent but sad
Oration, bemoaned the infelicities which he saw hanging over the Church,
advising every one there present to perform their Duties, and not to be wanting
to themselves, or the cause of Religion, as far forth as they were concerned in
their several places. Nothing more done of any moment in this Convocation, but
that a motion was made by Warmistre, one of the Clerks for the Diocese of
Worcester, to this effect; viz. That they should endeavor (according to the
Levitical Laws) to cover the Pit which they had opened, and to prevent their
Adversaries intention by condemning such offensive Canons as were made in the
last Convocation. He had before offered at many things in that Convocation, but
such was his ill-luck, that the Vote was for the most part passed before he
spoke; nor had he better fortune in his motion now, than his offers then, the
Members of that House not being willing to condemn themselves till they were
accused. So that not having any other way to obtain his purpose, he caused a
long Speech, which he had made upon this occasion, to be put in Print; bitter
enough against some Canons and Proceedings in the former Session: but such as
could not save him from a Sequestration, when the rest of the Clergy were
brought under the same condition.

Whilst these things were acting on the Stage of Westminster, the Earl of
Strafford was not Idle in acting his part at York, amongst the Soldiers, whose
affections he had gained so far, that he was generally beheld with esteem and
veneration. He had before sufficient proof, how strongly the Scots aimed at his
destruction, expressed in their Remonstrance, and the Intentions of their Army,
(as they called the Pamphlet) but more especially by the refusal of the Scots
Commissioners to hold the Treaty at York, and the reasons given for their
refusal; for in a Paper of theirs, presented on October 8. They had insisted on
the danger apprehended by them in going to York, and casting themselves and
others, who might be joined with them, into the hands of an Army commanded by
the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, against whom (as a chief Incendiary according
to their demands, which was the subject of the Treaty it self) they resolved to
proceed. They complained also in that Paper, That in the Parliament of Ireland
he had proceeded against them as Traitors and Rebels; That he honored them in
his common talk with no better Titles; That his Commission was to destroy them;
And that by all means, and by all occasions, he had hindered all Propositions
tending to a Pacification, for fear himself might be excluded from the benefit
of it. He was not without a strong presumption, that the Scots were animated
unto these Demands, and encouraged to invade the Kingdom, by some of those
which were of greatest Prevalency in both Houses of Parliament. And lying so
near the Scots, in the head of his Army, he had not only gained assurance (as
he conceived) in many particulars to confirm it, but that there was a
Confederacy made between the Heads of the Covenanters and some of the leading
Members of both Houses, his most Capital Enemies, to subject the Government of
the Church, and innovate in that of the Civil State; which Intelligence being
digested into the Form of an Impeachment, he intended to present to the House
of Peers as soon as he had taken his place amongst them: and to that end
prepared for his last Journey to London, from whence he never was to return
alive. Calling together some of his especial Friends, and many of the chief
Officers and Commanders which remained in the Army, he made them acquainted
with his purpose of going to Westminster to attend the Parliament, leaving to
them the Charge of his Majesty's Forces, and the preserving of those parts from
the spoil of the Enemy. An Enterprise from which he was dissuaded by most of
his Friends, alleging that he could not choose but know, that the Scots, and
Scotizing English had most infallibly resolved on his destruction; and that
innocence was no Armor of Proof against the fiery Darts of malicious Power;
That seeing such a storm hang over his head, rather keep himself in the English
Army, (being under his Command, which he had gained upon exceedingly by his
noble carriage) or pass over into Ireland, where the Army rested wholly at his
Devotion; or transport himself to some Foreign Kingdom, till fairer weather
here (in reference to his own safety and the public peace) should invite him
home; That it was no betraying of his innocence to decline a Trial where
Partiality held the Scales, and Self Ends backed with Power, and made blind with
Prejudice, were like to overbalance Justice; That if Sentence should be
passed against him for default of appearance (which was the worst that could
befall him) yet he would then keep his head on his shoulders until better times,
and in the mean season might do his Majesty as good Service in the Courts of
many Foraign Princes, as if he were sitting in White Hall at the Council Table.

Turning a deaf car to these considerations, he Resolved to prosecute his
design, but was scarce entered into the House of Peers, when followed at the
heels by Pym (whom it concerned as much as any) who fearing or knowing his
intendments, impeacht him of high Treason, in the name of all the Commons of
England, requiring their names that he might be sequestered from the House, and
Committed to Custody. And here again it was conceived that the Earl showed not
that praesentiam animi, that readiness of Courage and Resolution, which
formerly had conducted him through so many difficulties, in giving over his
design; For though he lost the opportunity of striking the first blow, yet he
had time enough to strike the second, which might have been a very great
Advantage to his preservation. For had he offered his impeachment, and
prosecuted it in the same paces and method as that was, which was brought
against him, it is possible enough that the business on both sides might have
been hushed up without hurt to either. And for so doing he wanted not a fair
Example in the second Parliament of this King, when the Earl of Bristol being
impeached of high Treason by the Kings Attorney at the instance and procurement
of the Duke of Buckingham, retorted presently a recrimination or impeachment
against the Duke, and by that means took of the edge of that great Adversary
from proceeding further. Nor gave it little cause of wonder unto many wise men,
that a person of so great Spirit and knowledge, should give himself up so
tamely on a general accusation only, without any particular Act of Treason
charged upon him, or any proof offered to make good that charge; not only to
the loss of his Liberty as a private Person: but to the forfeiture of his
Privilege as a Member of Parliament. But the impeachment being made, his
Restraint desired, and nothing by him offered to the Contrary, he was committed
the same day ( November. 11.) to the Custody of the Gentleman Usher, called the
Black-rod, and not long after to the Tower; Sir George Ratcliff one of his
especial confidents, being presently sent for out of Ireland by a Sergeant at
Arms, as concriminal with him. In this condition he remained, till the 16th of
December. without any particular Charge against him; Which at the last was
brought into the House of Peers by the Scots, and presented in their Names by
Lord Paget one of the Members of that House. In which they did inform against
him, in reference to matters which concerned Religion, that in promoting the
late pretended Innovations he had been as forward as Canterbury himself; and to
that end had preferred his Chaplain Bramhall to the Sea of Derrie, and Chapel
to the College of Dublin: that he had threatened to burn the Articles of
Ireland, agreed upon in Convocation Anno 1615. by the hand of the Hangman, and
would not hearken to the Primate, when he desired a Ratification of them by Act
of Parliament, for preventing and suppressing the said Innovations; that he
countenanced diverse books against them and their Covenant, which were Printed
at Dublin, and caused all Persons above the age of sixteen years, to abjure the
said Covenant by a solemn Oath, or otherwise to be Imprisoned or to fly that
Kingdom; that at his last coming into England he had openly said, that if ever
he returned unto the Honorable Sword he would not leave any of the Scots in
that Kingdom, either Root or Branch; and that he did advise the great Council
of Peers assembled at York, to send them back again in their own blood, and
that he might whip them out of England.

In further pursuance of this Charge, it was pressed against him in the Articles
Exhibited by the House of Commons on the 16^h of February (for so long it was,
before he heard any more news from them) That he maintained a correspondence
with the Papists of Ireland, endeavored to raise hostility between England and
Scotland, and had consented to the betraying of New Castle into the hands of
the Scots; to the end that the English being nettled by so great a loss, might
be more Cordially engaged in the War against them; that he gave a Warrant under
his hand to some Bishops in the Church of Ireland, and their Chancellors and
other Officers, to Arrest the Bodies of such of the meaner sort, as after
Citation, should refuse to appear before them, or should refuse to undergo and
perform all Lawful decrees and sentences, given or issued out against them, and
the said persons to keep in the next Common Goal, till their Submission to the
said Orders and Decrees, and otherwise show some Reason to the Contrary to the
Lords of the Counsel; that in the Month of May in the year 1639. he caused a
new Oath to be contrived, Enforced especially upon those of the Scottish Nation
in the Realm of Ireland, by which the party was obliged to Renounce the
Covenant, and to swear that he would not Protest against any of his Majesty's
Royal Commands, but submit himself in all obedience thereunto, and had put
diverse grievous fines upon many of them on their Refusal of the same; that he
required the like Oath for the Observation of all Rites and Ceremonies then
established, or from thenceforth to be established, by the Kings Authority,
saying, that he would prosecute all Repugners of them to the very Blood. The
Rest of the Articles relating unto Civil matters I omit of purpose, as neither
being pertinent or proper to my Present History; observing only in this place,
that for the better carrying on of their charge against him, they had gained
two points, more necessary to be craved than fit to be granted; The first was
(which they carried in the House of Lords by a Major Vote) that no Bishop
should be of that Committee for the Preparatory Examinations in the present
case, under color that they were excluded from acting in it by some Ancient
Canons, as in Causa sangiums, or the cause of blood; concerning which a brief
discourse entitled De jure Paritatis Episcoporum, was presented to his Grace
of Canterbury, and some other Bishops for asserting all their Rights of Peerage
(and this of being of that Commit amongst the rest) which either by Law or
Ancient Custom did belong unto them. The second was that the Lords of the
Council should be examined upon Oath, for anything which was said or done by
the Earl of Strafford at the Council Table, Which being yielded by the King;
though tending visibly to the Derogation of his Power, and the discouragement
of all such as either were or should be of his Privy Council, the Archbishop
was accordingly Examined on December 4th being the next day after the said
Condescension.

Nor was it long before the like Oath was required and obtained by them against
the Archbishop himself, being the next man whom the Scots and their
Confederates in both houses, had an eye upon. He knew there was some danger
coming toward him by the said combination, but thought not at the first it
would reach so far, as to touch his Life. The most he looked for, as he told
the Author of these Collections on the second or third day after the beginning
of the Parliament, was to be sequestered from his Majesty's Councils, and
confined to his Diocese, to which he professed himself as willing as any of his
Enemies were desirous of it. And as it seems his Enemies at the first had no
further thoughts. For it appears by a passage in his Diary that on Thursday
December. 24th four Earls of Great Power in the Upper House declared unto a
Parliament man, that they were resolved to Sequester him only from the Kings
Council, and deprive him of the Archiepiscopal dignity, and no more then so;
which though it were too much, and savoured of too little Justice to be so
resolved before any particular charge was brought against him: yet I consider
it as an Argument of their first intentions, that they aimed not at his Life,
but at his removal. In Order whereunto it was thought expedient, that his
Majesty should be moved to release the Bishop of Lincoln from his long
imprisonment, and to restore him to his place in the house of ^^^rs, knowing
full well how Active an Instrument they were sure to find him, by reason of
some former grudges, not only against the Archbishop but the Earl of Stafford.
Which motion being made and granted he was conducted into the Abbey Church by
six of the Bishops, and there officiated (it being a day of Humiliation) as
Dean of Westminster; more honored at the first by the Lords and Commons, then
ever any of his Order, his person looked upon as Sacred, his words deemed as
Oracles. And be conti^^^d in t^is height, t^ll having served their turn against
the Arch^is^op and the Lord Lieutenant, he began sensibly to decline, and grew
at last to be generally the most hated man of all the Hierarchy. Orders are
also made by the House of Commons for releasing such as were Imprisoned by the
Star Chamber, Council Table, or High Commission; and more particularly for the
remanding of Bastwick, Prynne, and Burton, from the several Islands, to which
they were before confined. Upon which general Jail-delivery, Burton and Prynne
had so contrived it as to come together, met on their way as far as Brainford
by some thousands of the Puritan Faction out of London, and South-wark, and by
them silently conducted with Bays and Rosemary in their hands, to their several
Houses to the intolerable affront of the Courts of Justice, and his Majesty's
Government, his Majesty conniving at the insolency or not daring to punish it.
Not well reposed after the toil and trouble of so long a journey, Prynne, joins
himself with Bagshaw before remembered, and both together are admitted to a
private conference with the Bishop of Lincoln in the beginning of December,
which boded no great good to the Church or State, or any who had formerly
appeared in defense of either.

These preparations being made, the Project was carried on a main; For on the
16^h of that month the Canons made in the late Convocation, were condemned in
the House of Commons, as being against the Kings Prerogative, the Fundamental
Laws of the Realm, the Liberty and Property of the Subject, and containing
diverse other things tending to Sedition, and of dangerous Consequence. A Vote
was also past for making Canterbury the Principal Author of the said Canons;
for a Committee to be nominated to enquire into all his former Actions; and for
preparing a Bill against all those of the said Convocation by whom these Canons
were subscribed: but the sorrows of that day, did not end there neither. For on
the same, a charge was laid against him in the house of Peers by the Scots
Commissioners (that being the day in which they had accused the Earl of
Strafford) for doing ill offices, and being an Incendiary between the Nations.
And in pursuance of the plot, on Friday the 18^h of the same Month, he was
Impeacht by Hollis in the name of all the Commons of England, of no less then
Treason; and thereupon, without any particular charge against him, he was
committed to the custody of the Gentleman Usher, leave only being granted him,
to repair to his house at Lambeth, for the Collecting of such Papers as were
necessary for his Justification. At Maxwells house (for so was the Usher of the
Black-Rod called) he remained ten weeks, before so much as any General charge
against him, was brought up to the Lords. During which time he gained so much
on the good opinion of the Gentlewoman of the House, that she reported him to
some of her Gossips, to be one of the goodest m^n, and most Pious Souls, but
with all one of the sillest fellows to hold talk with a Lady that ever she met
with in all her life. On the 26^h of February, This charge was brought up to
the Lords ^y ^ane the younger, consisting of fourteen General Articles, which
Generals he craved time to prove in particular; and thereupon a Vote was passed
for transmitting the Prisoner to the Tower, with leave however to remain at
Maxwell's till the Monday following. Which day being come, he was conveyed in
Maxwell's Coach without any disturbance, till he came to the end of Cheapside,
from whence he was followed by a railing Rabble of rude and uncivil People, to
the very Gates of the Tower: Where having taken up his Lodging, and settled his
small Family in convenient Rooms, he diligently resorted to the Public Chapel
of that place at all times of Worship, being present at the Prayers and
Sermons, and some(...) ^earing himself uncivilly reviled, and pointed at as it
were, by (...) Preachers, sent thither of purpose to disgrace and vex (...).
All which Indignities he endured with such Christian meek^^ss, as rendered him
one of the great Examples both of Patience and (...) these latter Times.

The principal things contained in the Charge of the Scots Commissioners, were
these that follow; viz. That he had pressed upon that (...) many Innovations in
Religion, contained in the Liturgy and (...) of Canons, contrary to the
Liberties and Laws thereof; That he had written many Letters to Ballentine
Bishop of Dumblane, and Dean of the Kings Chapel in Scotland, in which he
required him and the (...) of the Bishops to be present at the Divine Service
in their Whites, (...) blamed the said Bishop for his negligence and slackness
in it, and ^^xing him for Preaching Orthodox Doctrine against Arminianism; that
he had caused the said Bishop to be reprehended for commanding a Solemn Fast to
be kept in his Diocese on the Lords day, as if they had offended in it against
Christianity it self; That he gave order for the ^aking down of Stone Walls and
Galleries in the Churches of Edenboroug^, to no other end but for the setting
up of Altars, and Adoration (...) the East; That for their Supplicating against
these Novations, they were encountered by him with terrible Proclamations from
his Ma^^^^, declared Rebels in all the Parish-Churches of England, and a (...)
against them by his Arts and Practices; That after the Pa(...) made at Perwick,
he frequently spoke against it as dishonou(...), and unfit to be kept; their
Covenant by him called ungodly, and (...) Oaths imposed upon their Countrymen
to abjure the same; That (...) not in the presence of the King and their
Commissioners to (...) the General Assembly held at Glasco, and put his Hand
un(...) for Imprisoning some of those Commissioners, sent from the Parliament
of Scotland for the Peace of both Nations; That when the late Parliament could
not be moved to assist in the War against them, he had caused the same to be
dissolved, and continued the Con(...) to make Canons against them and their
Doctrines, to be punished four times in every year; That he had caused six
Subsidies to (...) on the Clergy for maintaining the War, and Prayer to be made
(...) all Parish-Churches, That shame might cover their faces, as Enemies to
God and the King: And finally, That he was so industrious in advancing Popery
in all the three Kingdoms, that the Pope himself could not have been more
Popish, had he been in his place. Such was the Charge exhibited by the Scots
Commissioners; in which was nothing criminal enough to deserve Imprisonment,
much less to threaten him with Death. And as for that brought up from the House
of Commons, it consisted of fourteen General Articles, as before was said,
ushered in with a short Preamble made by Pym, and shut up with a larger
Aggravation of the Offenses comprehended in the several Articles; the substance
of which Articles was to this effect: 1. That he had Traitorously endeavored
to subvert the Fundamental Laws of the Realm, to introduce an Arbitrary and
Tyrannical Government, and to persuade his Majesty, That he might Lawfully
raise Money of the Subject, without their common Consent in Parliament. 2. That
to this end he had caused diverse Sermons to be Preached, and Books to be
Printed, against the Authority of Parliaments, and for asserting an absolute
and unlimited Power over the Persons and Goods of the Subjects, to be not only
in the King, but also in himself and the rest of the Bishops; and had been a
great Promoter of such by whom the said Books and Sermons had been made and
published. 3. That by several Messages, Letters, Threatenings, etc. he had
interrupted and perverted the Course of Justice in Westminster Hall, whereby
sundry of his Majesty's Subjects had been stopped in their just Suits, and
thereby made subject to his will. 4. That he had traitorously and corruptly
sold Justice to such as had Causes depending before him, and taken unlawful
Gifts and Bribes of his Majesty's Subjects; and had advised and procured his
Majesty to sell Places of Judicature and other Offices. 5. That he had caused a
Book of Canons to be Composed and Published without lawful Authority, in which
were many things contained contrary to the Kings Prerogative, the Fundamental
Laws, etc. and had caused many of the same to surreptitiously passed, and
afterward by fear and compulsion to be subscribed by the Prelates and Clerks
there assembled, notwithstanding they had never been Voted and Passed in the
Convocation. 6. That he has assumed to himself a Papal and Tyrannical Power,
both in Eccesiastical and Temporal Matters, over his Majesty's Subjects in this
Realm, and other places, to the disherison of the Crown, dishonor of his
Majesty, and derogation of his Supreme Authority in Ecclesiastical Matters. 7.
That he had endeavored to alter and subvert Gods true Religion, by Law
established in this Realm, and instead thereof to set up Popish Superstition
and Idolatry; and to that end had maintained many Popish Doctrines, enjoined
many Popish and Superstitious Ceremonies, and cruelly vexed and persecuted such
as refused to conform unto them. 8. That (...) order thereunto he had intruded
into the Rights of many of his Majesty's Officers and Subjects, in procuring to
himself the Nomination of diverse Persons to Ecclesiastical Benefices; and had
taken upon him the commendation of Chaplains to the King, promoting and
commending none but such as were Popishly affected, or otherwise unsound in
Doctrine, or corrupt in Manners. 9. That to the same intent he had chosen such
men to be his Chaplains, whom he knew to be notoriously disaffected to the
Reformed Religion; and had committed unto them, or some of them, the Licencing
of Books to be Printed, whereby many false and Superstitious Books had been
Published, to the great scandal of Religion, and the seducing of many of his
Majesty's Subjects. 10. That he had endeavored to reconcile the Church of
England to the Church of Rome, confederating to that end with diverse Popish
Priests and Jesuits, holding Intelligence with the Pope, and permitting a
Popish Hierarchy or Ecclesiastical Government to be established in this
Kingdom. 11. That in his own Person, and by others under his Command, he had
caused diverse Godly and Orthodox Ministers of Gods Word to be Silenced,
Suspended, and otherwise grieved, without any lawful or just cause, hindered the
Proaching of Gods Word, cherished Profaneness and Ignorance amongst the
People, and compelled many of his Majesty's Subjects to forsake the Kingdom.
12. That he had endeavored to cause discord between the Church of England, and
other Reformed Churches; and to that end had suppressed and abrogated the
Privileges and Immunities which had been by his Majesty and his Royal
Ancestors granted to the Dutch and French Churches in this Kingdom. 13. That he
had endeavored to stir up War between his Majesty's Kingdoms of England and
Scotland; and to that end had labored to introduce into the Kingdom of
Scotland diverse Innovations both in Religion and Government: for their refusing
whereof, he first advised his Majesty to subdue them by force of Arms, and
afterward to break the Pacification made between the Kingdoms; forcing the
Clergy to contribute toward the Maintenance of the War. 14. And finally, That
to preserve himself from being questioned for these and other his traitorous
courses, he had labored to divert the ancient course of Parliamentary
Proceedings, and by false and malicious slanders to ^^cease his Majesty against
Parliaments. This was the substance of the Charge, to which afterward they
added other which were more Particulars, when they found themselves ready for
his Trial, Anno 1644. and there we shall hear further of them. I note here only
by the way, That one of those which had been added to make up the Tale, and
create a greater hatred of him, as selling Justice, taking (...), etc. (for
which never any Man of Place and Power was more cleary innocent) was found so
far unfit for a Prosecution, that it was suppressed. An excellent Evidence of
his Integrity and Uprightness, in such a long-continued course of Power and
Favor.

But Sorrows seldom come alone. The Danger first, and afterward the
questioning of so great a Prelate, left the Church open to the Assaults of a
potent Faction, and the poor Clergy destitute of a constant Patron. The first
Assault against the Church, was made at St. Margarets Church in Westminster, on
a day of Public Humiliation, November 17. the same on which the Bishop of
Lincoln was ^^^e^tated with such Triumph in the Abby-Church: At what time the
Minister Officiating the Second Service at the Communion Table, according to
the ancient Custom, was unexpectedly interrupted by the naming and singing of a
Psalm, to the great amazement of all sober and well-minded men. And at the
Meeting of some Anabaptists to the number of 80. at a House in Southwark, it
was preached, That the Statute 35 Eliz. for restraining the Queens Majesty's
Subjects in their due Obedience, was no good Law, because made by Bishops;
striking at once both at the Liturgy and Government of the Church by Law
established. The Bishops left out of the Committee for Examinations, in the
business of the Earl of Strafford; and in all other Committees, by the fraud
and artifice of the Clerk of the Parliament, not named in such proportion to
the Temporal Peers, as had been accustomed. The same Clerk at the Reading of
such Bills as came into that House, turned his back toward them in disdain,
that they might not distinctly hear what he read; as if their consenting or
dissenting to the point in question, had been judged unnecessary. And to
prepare the way the better for their Declination, Pennington attended by some
hundreds of the Raskal Rabble, presents a Petition to the Commons, in the name
of the City of London, subscribed by 15000 hands of several qualities, most of
them indigent in Estate, and of known disaffections to the present Government.
In which Petition it was prayed, That the Government of Bishops might be
abolished; That Rites and Ceremonies might be pressed no longer upon the
consciences of the weak; and that many other things at which they found
themselves grieved, might be also abrogated. After which followed many bitter
Speeches made against them by the Lord Faulkland, Bagshaw, White, and others,
in the House of Commons; by the Lords Say and Brook in the House of Peers; by
Brook alone in a Printed Pamphlet, in which he reproacheth them as born of the
Dregs of the People: the names of the Lords Spiritual being despitefully left
out of all Bills which passed this Session, to show how insignificant they were
in an Act of Parliament. And all this seconded by many Petitions of like
nature, in the name of many whole Counties and Populous Cities, and in their
names presented to the Houses of Parliament; though the said Petitions, for the
most part, were never either seen or heard of by the greatest and most
considerable number of those in whose names they were subscribed. Which coming
to his Majesty's knowledge, he called both Houses unto Whitehall, January 25.
Where he informed them of the Distractions that were then occasioned through
the connivence of the Parliament, there being some men who more maliciously
than ignorantly, would put no difference between Reformation and Al^eration of
Government; from whence it came, that Divine Service was irreverently
interrupted, and Petitions in an indirect way procured and presented; That he
was willing to concur with them for reforming all Innovations both in Church
and Commonwealth, and for reducing all things to the same condition in which
they stood in the best and happiest times of Queen Elizabeth; That he could not
but take notice of many Petitions given in the name of diverse Counties, against
the established Government of the Church; and of the great threatenings against
the Bishops, That they will make them to be but Ciphers, or at least their
Voices to be taken away; That if upon serious debate, they could show him that
the Bishops had some Temporal Authority not so necessary for the Government of
the Church, and upholding Episcopal Jurisdiction, he would not be unwilling to
desire them to lay it down: And finally, If they had encroached too much upon
the Temporality, he was content that all Abuses of that kind should be
redressed; and that he would go with them so far, and no further. And to say
truth, it concerned the King to look about him, when his own Regal Power, not
that of the Bishops only, was so openly struck at; it being Preached by the
said Anabaptists but the Week before, That he could not make a good Law,
because not PERFECTLY REGENERATE, and was only to (...) in Civil Matters. But
all this little edified with such of the Lords and Commons as had the carrying
on of the Plot against Episcopacy: they ^ound the temper of the King; and
having got him on the Anvile, they resolved to hammer him.

As an Expedient to the Work, it was sound necessary to question and disgrace
all those, who either had been active in advancing those Public Orders, which
were now branded by the name of Innovations, or otherwise industrious in his
Majesty's Service; some to be sacrificed to the pleasure of particular Persons,
others to satisfy the fury or discontentments of the People generally. Of the
first sort were Pocklington and Bray, both Doctors in Divinity; the first of
late made Chaplain in Ordinary to the King, the second Chaplain of long time to
the Archbishop of Canterbury. This last had Licenced two of Pocklington's
Books, the one being a Sermon Preached at a Visitation before the Bishop of
Lincoln, the other a Discourse of Altars, and the most proper situation of the
Lords Table, in which were many Passages against that Bishop: To pacify which
o^fended Deity, Pocklington must be sacrificed on his own Altar, deprived of
all his Preferments at the present, and made incapable of receiving others for
the time to come: Bray being enjoined to Preach a Recantation-Sermon in St.
Margarets Church, and (...) to retract one and thirty Articles which the Bishop
had collected out of those Books. Heylyn had been Petitioned against by Pry^^^
at his first coming home, as a subservient Instrument (under the Archbishop
himself) of all his Sufferings; and was kept four days in Examination: but
finally dismissed without shame or censure. Cosens (informed against by Smart
(who had been deprived for his factious Inconformity, of some good Preferments
in the Bishop^ick and Church of Durham) was under a great Storm at first: but
being one that would not shrink in the wetting, he stood stoutly to it, and in
conclusion was dismissed without any other loss but of Time and Charges. The
like happened also unto Heywood Vicar of St. Giles's in the Fields, Squire of
St. Leonard's in Shoreditch, and Finch of Christchurch. The Articles against
which four, and some others more, being for the most part of the same nature
and effect, as namely, Railing in the Communion Table, Adoration toward it,
Calling up the Parishioners to the Rail to receive the Sacrament, Reading the
Second Service at the Table so placed, Preaching in Surplices and Hoods,
Administering the Sacrament in Copes, Beautifying and Adorning Churches with
Painted Glass, and others of the like condition; which either were to be h^ld
for Crimes in the Clergy generally, or else accounted none in them. And though
the Informations were so slight and inconsiderable, that none of those who were
impeached, could legally be made obnoxious to any Punishment; and that the
credit of the Informers* not proved by Oath (which the Commons had no power to
give) was the chief ground o^ their Proc^edings: yet that these poor men might
appear more monstrous in the eye of the World, the Articles against
Pocklington, Cosens, Heywood, Squ^^e, Finch, etc. were ordered to be put in
Print, without care taken whether they were true or not. They knew full well,
that when dirt was once thrown upon any man, ^
some of it must needs stick upon him, or about his Garments, how careful
soever he might be to wipe it of.

This course they also held with the Bishop of Ely, impeaching him of many
pretended Misdemeanors in the Sea of Norwich, viz. That he deprived or
banished within the space of two years, fifty godly, learned, painful
Ministers; His placing the Communion Table Altar-wise, and causing a Rail to be
set before it; The practicing of Superstition in his own Person, his bowing
toward it, Consecrating the Bread and Wine at the West side of the Table, with
his back toward the People, and elevating the same above his head, that the
People might see it, (which last Points, as they made most noise, so they found
least proof) causing the Seats in all places to be so contrived, that the
people must of necessity kneel toward the East, according to the pious Custom
of the Primitive Times; Turning all afternoons Sermons into Catechisings by
Question and Answer, according to the Kings Instructions; Appointing no Prayer
to be used by Preachers before their Sermons, but that prescribed by the Canon;
and that the Bells should give no other warning for Sermons, than they did for
Prayers, that the People might resort unto the Church at all times alike, as by
the Laws and Statutes of the Realm they were bound to do. In considerati^^
whereof, it was resolved upon the Question to be the Opinion o^ that House,
That the said Bishop was unfit to hold or (...) Office or Divinity in the
Church or Commonwealth: and that a Message should be sent to the Lords,
desiring them to join with t^^ Commons in Petitioning his Majesty to remove him
bot^ from his Person and Service. By which this wise Prelate understood, that
his neerness to the Kings Person was his greatest Crime; and thereupon, in
imitation of the Castor, (having first obtained his Majesty's consent thereto)
he discontinued that attendance which might occasion more danger to him than it
brought in profit. Which Prosecutions of the Clergy, but this last especially,
have brought me unto the year 1641. Which brought more trouble to the Country
Clergy than the last year had done to those which lived in London. The
Committee Authorized by the House of Commons for Affairs of Religion, finding
their work begin to fail them, and that Informations came not up so last as had
been expected, dispatched Instructions (...) all parts of the Kingdom for an
enquiry to be made into the (...) and A^tions of the Clergy in their several
Parishes. And that the Inquisition might be made with the greater diligence,
not only (...) as were in Authority, but every ingenious Person was required to
(...) Active in improving the present opportunity, by giving true In^^^mation
of all the Parishes in their several Counties. I know it was pretended by the
said Instructions, that enquiry should be made into Pluralities and defect of
maintenance, as well as into scandalous and ^^preaching Ministers; yet the main
business was to bring the Clergy on the Stage, and find some matter of
complaint against them. Quite contrary in this to the Emperor Trajan, who in
the midst of the Persecutions, which he had raised against the Church,
commanded by his Imperial Edict, ^
That no strict Inquisition should be made of those who did profess the Faith
of Christ; but only that they should be punished, if accidentally or by the
voice of Common Fame they should be offered unto judgment. What mischief
hereupon ensued in animating the Parishioners against their Minister, seducing
Servants to accuse and betray their Masters, alienating the affections of the
Clergy from one another, and by that means subjecting them to that dissipation
which soon after followed, shall be shown hereafter, so far forth as it coms
within the compass of this present History.

But while these clouds were gathering together in the Country, ^s great a
tempest seemed to be brewing in the City, which threatened no less danger to the
Church it self than those proceedings to the Clergy. For in the beginning of
this year we find some Divines of name and note, convened in the Dean of
Westminsters Lodgings, to consult about matters of the Church; the occasion
this: The Convocation was then sitting, but not empowered by his Majesty's
Commission to act in any thing of concernment. It was therefore ordered by the
Peers March 21. that a Committee of ten Earls, ten Bishops, and ten Barons
should be nominated, in the name of the rest, for settling the a^fairs of the
Church; by whom a Sub-Committee was the same day named to prepare such matters
as were to be discoursed and concluded by them, the Bishop of Lincoln being in
the (...) both. Which Sub-Committee being made up of the Divines
abovementioned, consisted of three Bishops, nine Doctors in Divinity, and four
of some inferior Degree in the Universities; some of them being Prelatical,
and some Presbyterian in point of Government, but all of them Calvinians in
point of Doctrine. Beginning first with points of Doctrine, complaint was made
that the whole body of Armimanism, and many particular points of Popery (for so
they called all which agreed not with Calvin's sense) had been of late
maintained in Books and Sermons, and sometimes also in the Divinity Schools.
And then descending to matter of Discipline, they discoursed of many
Innovations, which they conceived to have been thrust upon the Church, most of
them in disposing and adorning the Communion Table, and the more reverent
Administration of the holy Sacraments; some of them positively required, or at
least directed by the Laws of the Land, as reading the Communion Service at the
Lords Table on Sundaies and Holidaies, reading the Litany in the midst of the
Church, the Ministers turning toward the East in the Creed and Prayers, and
praying no otherwise before Sermons than in the words of the Canon; some of
them never having been disused in many Parochial Churches, and retained in most
Cathedrals since the Reformation, as standing at the Hymns, and the Gloria
Patri, placing the Table Altarwise, and adoring toward it; some being left
indifferent at the choice of the Minister, as the saying or singing of the Te
Deum in Parochial Churches, officiating the Communion and the daily prayers in
the Latin tongue, in several Colleges and Halls, by and amongst such as are
not ignorant of that Language; And others not of so great moment, as to make
any visible alteration in the face of the Church, or sensible disturbance in
the minds of the People: Which therefore might have been as well forborne as
practiced, till confirmed by Authority, or otherwise might have been borne
without any such clamor, as either out of ignorance or malice had been raised
against them.

They also took into consideration some Rubricks in the Book of Common Prayer,
and other things, which they thought sit to be rectified in it. Amongst which
they advised some things not to be utterly disliked, viz. That the Hymns,
Sentences, Epistles and Gospels, should be reprinted according to the new
Translation; That the Meeter in the Psalms should be corrected, and allowed of
Publicly; and that no Anthems should be sung in Colleges or Cathedral
Churches but such as were taken out of the Scripture, or the public Liturgy;
That fewer Lessons might be read out of the Books called Apocryphal, and the
Lessons to be read distinctly, exclusive of the Liberty which is given to sing
them as appears by the Rubric; That the Rubric should be cleared concerning
the Ministers power for repulsing scandalous and notorious sinners from the
holy Communion; and that the general Confession before the Communion be ordered
to be said by the Minister only, the People repeating it after him; That these
words in the Form of Matrimony viz. With my body I thee worship, may be
explained and made more intelligible; And that instead of binding the married
Couple to receive the Communion on their Wedding day (which is seldom done)
they may be obliged to receive it on the Sunday after, or the next Communion
day following; That none be licenced to marry, or have their Banes asked, who
shall not first bring a Certificate from their Minister, that they are
instructed in the Catechism; and that it be not required that the Infant be
dipped in the water (as is enjoined by the Rubric) in the case of extremity.
Some Passages they observed impertinently, and not worth the altering, as the
expunging of some Saints (which they falsely called Legendaries) out of the
Calendar; The constant adding of the Doxology at the end of the Pater noster;
Reading of Morning and Evening Prayer daily by the Curate, if not otherwise
let; The leaving out of the Benedicite, and the changing of the Psalm used
in the Churching of Women; That those words ( which only workest great marvels)
be left out of the Prayer for the Bishops and Clergy; That Grievous sins
instead of Deadly sins be used in the Letany; That the sanctifying of the Flood
Jordan, be changed into sanctifying the Element of water, in the Form of
Baptism; That those words, In sure and certain hope of Resurrection, which are
used at Burials, may be changed to these, knowing assuredly that the dead shall
rise again; And that the Commination should be read at the Desk, and not in the
Pulpit: all which remaining as they did could give no offense, and might have
easily been changed to give some content. And finally, some things there were
of which they desired a Reformation, which seemed to have so much of the
Anti-Papist, that they came close to the Puritan, viz. That the Vestments
prescribed by the first Liturgy of King Edward vi. should not be required, and
the rule in that case to be altered; That the Alms should be gathered rather
after, than before the Communion; These words, This is my body, This is my
blood, not to be Printed in great Letters; and that a Rubric be inserted to
declare, that kneeling at the Communion is required only in relation to the
Prayer of the distribution, Preserve thee body and soul, etc. That weekly
Communion every Sunday be changed to monthly in Colleges and Cathedral
Churches; That the Cross in Baptism be either explained, or quite disused; and
that in the Form of Confirmation these words importing, that Children baptized,
are undoubtedly saved, be no longer used; That no times of Restraint may be
laid on Marriage; And that the Authoritative Form of Absolution in the
Visitation of the sick may be turned to a Pronouncing or declaring of it.

I have the longer stood on the result of these Consultations, because of the
different apprehensions which were had of the Consequents and Issue of them.
Some hoped for a great Reformation to be prepared by them, and settled by the
Grand Committee both in Do^^^i^e and Discipline; and others as much feared (the
affections of the men considered) that Doctrinal Calvinism being once settled,
more alterations would be made in the Public Liturgy than at first appeared,
till it was brought more near the Form of the Gallick Churches, after the
Platform of Geneva. Certain I am, that the imprisoned Archbishop had no fancy
to it, fearing least the Assembly of Divines in Ierusalem-Chamber (so the place
was called) might weaken the foundations of Jerusalem in the Church of England;
That this Assembly on the matter might prove the National Synod of England, to
the great dishonor of the Church; and that when their Conclusions were brought
unto the great Committee, the business would be overruled by the Temporal
Lords, as double in number to the Bishops. But whatsoever his fears were they
were soon removed, that Meeting being scattered, about the middle of May, upon
the bringing in of a Bill against Deans and Chapters; which so divided the
Convenors both in their persons and affections that they never after met
together. Concerning which we are to know, that not only most of the Lords of
the Lower House, and many Lower House Lords in the Upper House, resolving to
pull up Episcopacy by the very roots, thought it convenient to begin with
lopping the Branches as laying no pretense to Divine Institution. The voting of
which Bill exceedingly amazed all those of the Prelatical Clergy, as knowing at
what Root it struck; though none seemed presently concerned in it but such as
had some benefit or subsistence in those foundations. To still the great noise
which was raised about it, the Commons seemed not unwilling that some of the
Cathedral Clergy should advocate for the continuance of those Capitular Bodies,
and others of the contrary Party to present their Reasons for their
Dissolution. The time appointed being come, Hacket, Archdeacon of Bedford, and
one of the Prebends of St. Paul's, pleaded both learnedly and stoutly in behalf
of those Churches; and Burges of Watford, who not long before brought down his
Myrmidons to cry for Justice against Strafford, to the Parliament doors, was
all for down with them, down with them to the very ground. But though they
differed in their Doctrine, yet they agreed well enough in their applications:
Burges declaring it unlawful, as well as Hacket, that the Revenues of those
Churches should otherwise be employed than to pious uses. This seemed to put
the business to a stand for the present time, but Canterbury knowing with what
case it might be resumed, advised the drawing of a Petition to both Houses of
Parliament in the name of the University of Oxon. which had a great stock going
in the Ship of the Church, not only for the preservation of the Episcopal
Government, but of those Foundations, as being both the Encouragements and
Rewards of Learning. In which Pet^tion having spoken in few words of the
Antiquity and Succession of Bishops from the Apostles themselves, they insist
more at large upon such Suggestions as might best justify and endear the cause
of Cathedral Churches; which being the most material of all those motives,
which were laid before them to that purpose, we shall ^^re subjoyn.

And we become further suitors (says that University) for the continuance of
the Pious Foundations of Cathedral Churches with their Lands and Revenues: As
Dedicate to the Service and Honor of God, soon after the Plantation of
Christianity in the English Nation; As thought fit and usefully to be preserved
for that end, when the Nurs^^^^ of Superstition were demolished, and so
continued in the last and (...) times since the Blessed Reformation under King
Edward the sixth, Queen Elizabeth, and King James, Princes Renowned through the
world for their Piety and Wisdom; As approved and confirmed by the Law^ (...)
this Land, Ancient and Modern: As the Principal and outw^rd (...), and
encouragements of all Students, especially in Divi^^^^, and the f^ttest Reward
of some deep and Eminent Scholars: As (...) in all Ages, many Godly and Learned
men (...) strongly asserted the truth of the Religion we Profess, (...) the
many fierce oppositions of our Adversaries of Rome: As (...) a competent
Portion in an Ingenious way to many younger brothers of good Parentage, who
devote themselves to the Ministry of the Gospel: As the only means of
subsistence to a multitude of Officers, and other Ministers, who with their
families depend upon them, and are wholly maintained by them: As the main
Authors or upholders of (...) Schools, Hospitals, Highways, Bridges, and other
Pious works: (...) special causes of much Profit and advantages to those Cities
where (...) are situate; Not only by Relieving the Poor, and keeping conve(...)
H^^pitality: but by occasioning a frequent Resort of strangers (...) other
parts to the great benefit of all tradesmen and inhabi(...) in those places:
As the goodly Monuments of our Predecessors (...), and present Honor of this
Kingdom in the Eye of Foreign Na(...): As the Chief support of many thousand
families of the Layety who enjoy fair Estates under them in a free way: As
yielding a con(...) and ample Revenue to the Crown: And as by which many of the
(...) Pro^essors in our Universities are maintained. The subver(...) whereof
must (as we conceive) not only be attended (...) consequences as will redound
to the Scandal of many well (...) our Religion* but open the mouths of our
Adversaries, and if (...) against us, and as likely in time to draw after it
harder condi(...) in a considerable part of the Layety, and Universal cheapness
(...) upon the Clergy, a lamentable drooping and defection of (...) knowledge
in the Universities; which is easy to firesee but will be hard to Remedy.

The like petition came from Cambridge, as much concerned in this ^^mmon cause,
as their sister of Oxon. But neither of them could (...) so far as take off the
edge of the ax, which had been thus (...) at the Root of the tree, though it
did blunt it at the present. (...) they which had the managing of the Design,
finding that the (...) Churches were two strongly Cemented, to be demolished at
an Instant, considered seasonably for themselves, that the furthest way about,
did many times prove the nearest way to the journeys end; A Bill was therefore
passed in the House of Commons and sent up to the Lords, by which it was to be
Enacted (if their Vote had carried it); First, that the Bishops should have no
Voices in Parliament; Secondly, that they should not be Commissioners for the
Peace, or Judges in any Temporal Courts; And that they should not fit in the
Star Chamber nor be Privy Counselors. Which Bill being Voted part by part; The
two last parts were passed, by a general consent, not above one or two
dissenting: But the first branch was carried in the Negative by such an Unison
consent in the Lords then present, that if the Bishops had not Voted in defense
of themselves, the Temporal Lords alone who appeared for them, had carried it
by sixteen Voices. The point being still upon debate, those Lords which had
showed themselves against the Bishops, resolved to put it to the Fortune of
another day, protesting that the Former manner of Voting the said Bill by
Branches was both Vnparliamentary and Illegal; and therefore that the Bill was
either wholly to be passed, or ejected wholly: which being condescended to, the
whole Bill was utterly cast out of the House by so many voices, that the
Bishops might have spared their own till another time. And though according to
the Rules of all former Parliaments that a Bill which had been once cast out of
the House, should never be pressed again the same Session; yet this Bill found a
way to it within few months after, and almost twelve years before the end of
this Session, as we shall see too soon in the course of this History. In the
mean time, the Anti-Prelatical party in the house of Peers so bestirred
themselves, that they prevailed upon the Rest to put a lower valuation on the
Bishops then they had done formerly; insomuch, that at a Solemn Fast following
not long after, the Temporal Lords took Precedence of the Bishops, contrary to
the Custom of their Predecessors in all times foregoing: the Bishops not
thinking it convenient to contend for place, at such time as their whole Order
was in danger of Falling. Which being observed by the Lord Spencer; Is this,
said he, a day of Humiliation, wherein we show so great a Pride, in taking
place of those to whom it was allowed by all our Ancestors? A day of
Humiliation if it might be called; it was made such to the Bishops only, the
Temporal Lords being never higher in their Exaltation.

But now we must look back on the Earl of Strafford, the prosecution of whose
Impeachment had been long delaid upon some probable hope, that the displeasures
of his greatest adversaries m^^^ be mitigated by some Court-preferments. In
Order where(...) was agreed upon (if my intelligence or memory fail not); that
the Earl of Bedford should be made Lord Treasurer, and (...) Chancellor of the
Exchequer, the Earl of Essex Governor of the Prince, and that Hambden should
be made his Tutor, the Lord Say Ma^ter of the Wards, and Hollis Principal
Secretary in the Place of Windebank; the Deputieship of Ireland was disposed of
also, and some command appointed for the Earl of Warwick in the Royal Navy.
Which Earls together with the Earl of Hartford, and the Lord Kimbolton (eldest
Son to the Earl of Manchester) were taken at this time into his Majesty's
Council, that they might witness to the Rest of that Party, with what sincerity
and Piety his Majesty's Affairs were Governed at the Council Table. And in
Relation to this purpose the Bishop of London delivered to the King the
Treasurers Staff, the Earl of New Castle relinquished the Governance of the
Prince, and the Lord Cottington resigned his Offices both in the Exchequer, and
the Court of Wards, there being no doubt but that Bishop Duppa in Order to so
good a work, would relinquish the Tutorship of the Prince, when it should be
required of him: So gallantly did these great persons deny themselves, to
advance the Service of their Master. But before all these things were fully
settled and performed, the Kings mind was altered, (but by whom altered, has
been more conjectured then affirmed for certain) which so exasperated them who
were concerned in this designation, that they persued the Earl of Strafford
with the great eagerness. And somewhat to this purpose was hinted in the Kings
Declaration of the 12^h of August; in which he signified what over^^^es had
been made by them, and with what importunity for Offices and preferments, what
great services should have been done for him, and what other undertaking even
to have saved the Life of the Earl of Stra^^ord. By which discovery as he
blemished the Reputes of some Principal Members in the eyes of many of the
people; so he gave no small cause of wonder to many others, when they were told
from his own Pen, at how cheap a Rate (a Rate which would have cost him
nothing) he might have saved the Life of such an able and deserving Minister.

This design being thus unhappily dashed, the Earl was called unto h^^ Trial on
the 22^h day of March last past; which being continued many days with great
expectation, his Adversaries (though the ablest men in the House of Commons)
perceived that his Defenses were so strong, and their proof so weak that they
thought it not sale to leave the Judgment of the Cause to the House of Peers
in way of Judicature. For finding that their proofs amounted not to a Legal
Evidence; and that nothing but Legal Evidence, could prevail in a Court of
Judicature, they Resolved to Steer their course by another wind, and to call
the Legislative power to their assistance; according unto which both Lords, and
Commons might proceed by the Light of their own Understanding without further
Testimony. And so it was declared by Saint-Iohns then Solicitor General in a
conference between the Committees of both Houses, April 29. 1641. Where it is
said, That although single Testimony ^ight be sufficient to satisfy private
Consciences, yet how far it would have been satisfactory in a judicial way,
where forms of Law are more to be stood upon, was not so clear; whereas in this
way of Bill, private satisfaction to each man's Conscience, is sufficient,
although no Evidence had been given in at all. Thus they Resolved it in this
Case; But knowing of what dangerous consequence it might be to the Lives, and
Fortunes of themselves and the Rest of Subjects, a saving clause was added to
the Bill of Attainder, that it should not be drawn into Example for the time to
come. By which it was Provided, That no Judge or Judges, Justice or Justices
whatsoever, shall adjudge or Interpret any Act or thing to be Treason, nor hear
or determine any Treason, nor in any other manner, then he or they should or
ought to have done before the making of this Act, and as if this Act had never
been made.

His Majesty understanding how things were carried, Resolved to use his best
endeavors to preserve the man, who had deserved so bravely of him. And
therefore in a Speech to both Houses of Parliament on the first of May,
absolved him from all Treasons charged upon him; conjuring them by the merit of
his former graces, and the hopes of greater, not to compel him to do any thing
against his conscience, to which no worldly consideration whatsoever, should be
able to tempt him. This put the Lords to such a stand, who were before
enclinable enough to that unfortunate Gentleman, that multitudes of the Rabble
were brought down out of London and Southwark, to cry for speedy Justice, and
Execution; the names of such as had not voted to the Bill, being posted up in
the Palace-yard, by the Title of Straffordians, and Enemies to the
Commonwealth. Which course so terrified the Lords, that most of them
withdrawing themselves from the House of Peers, the Attainder passed, and
certain Bishops nominated to attend the King, for satisfying his Conscience,
and persuading him to sign that Destructive Bill. Never was Poor Prince,
brought to so sad an Exigent, betwixt his Conscience on the one side, and the
Fears of such a Public Rupture on the other, as seemed to threaten nothing but
destruction to himself and his Family. But humane frailty, and the continual
Solicitation of some about him; so prevailed at last, that on Monday morning
the ninth of May, he put a most unwilling hand to that fatal Bill, Issuing a
Commission unto certain Lords to pass the same into an Act, and with the same
to speed another (which he had also signed with the same Penful of Ink) for the
continuance of the present Parliament during the pleasure of the Houses. The
Act thus past on Monday Morning, the Earl was brought unto the Scaffold on the
Wednesday following, desiring earnestly, but in vain, to Exchange some words
with the Archbishop before his Death; Which gave occasion to a report, that a
little before his Death he had charged his misfortunes, oversights and
misdemeanors upon the Archbishop of Canterbury, as the Prime Author of the
same; and had bitterly Cursed the day of their first acquaintance: Which being
so scandalous and dishonorable to this great Prelate, I shall lay down the
whole truth in this particular, as it came from the Archbishops own mouth, in
the presence of Balfore a Scot, and then Lieutenant of the Tower, who was
required to attest to each period of it.

(...). p. 99.
The Lord Strafford the night before the Execution, sent for the Lieutenant of
the Tower, and asked him whether it were possible he might speak with the
Archbishop: The Lieutenant told him, he might not do it without Order from the
Parliament. Whereupon the Earl replied, You shall hear what passes between us;
for it is not a time now either for him to plot Heresy, or me to plot Treason.
The Lieutenant answered, That he was limited; and therefore desired his
Lordship would Petition the Parliament for that Favor. No (said he) I have
gotten my dispatch from them, and will trouble them no more; I am now
Petitioning an Higher Court, w^ere neither partiality can be expected, nor
Error ^eared. But my Lord, said he, (turning to the Primate of Ireland, whose
company he had procured of the Houses in that fatal Exigent) I will tell you
what I should have spoken to my Lords Grace of Canterbury. You shall desire the
Archbishop to lend me his Prayers this night, and to give me his Blessing when
I do go abroad to morrow; and to be in his Window, that by my last Farewell I
may give him thanks for this, and all other his former Favors. The Primate
having delivered the Message without delay, the Archbishop replied, That in
conscience he was bound to the first, and in duty and obligation to the second:
but he feared his weakness and passion would not lend him eyes to behold his
last Departure. The next morning at his coming forth he drew near to the
Archbishops Lodging, and said to the Lieutenant, Though I do not see the
Archbishop, yet give me leave I pray you to do my last observance toward his
Rooms. In the mean time the Archbishop, advertised of his approach, came out to
the Window; Then the Earl bowing himself to the ground, My Lord (said he) your
Prayers and your Blessing. The Archbishop lift up his hands, and bestowed both:
but overcome with grief, fell to the ground in Animi deliquio. The Earl bowing
the second time, said, Farewell my Lord, God protect your Innocence. And
because he feared, that it might perhaps be thought an effeminacy or vnbecoming
weakness in him to sink down in that manner, he add^d, That he hoped by Gods
Assistance, and his own Innocence, that when he came to his own Execution
(which he daily longed for) the World should perceive he had been more sensible
of the Lord Strafford's Loss, than of his own: And good reason it should be so
(said he) for the Gentleman was more serviceable to the Church (he would not
mention the State) than either himself, or any of all the Churchmen had ever
been. A gallant Farewell to so eminent and beloved a Friend.

Thus marched this Great Man to the Scaffold; more like a General in the Head
of an Army, to breath out Victory; than like a Condemned Man, to undergo the
Sentence of death. The Lieutenant of the Tower desired him to take Coach, for
fear the People should rush in upon him and tear him in pieces. No (said he to
the Lieutenant) I dare look Death in the face, and I hope the People too; Have
you a care that I do not escape, and I care not how I die, whether by the hand
of the Executioner, or the madness and fury of the People; If that may give
them better content, it is all one to me. In his last Speech upon the Sca^fold,
he declared, That in all his Employments, since he had the honor to serve his
Majesty, he never had any thing in the purpose of his heart, but what tended to
the joint and individual prosperity both of King and People; That he was so far
from being an Enemy to Parliaments (which had been charged amongst his Crimes)
that he did always think the Parliaments of England to be the most happy
Constitution that a^y Kingdom or Nation lived under, and the best means under
God to make the King and People happy; That he acquitted all the World for his
death, heartily beseeching the God of Heaven to forgive all them that contrived
it, though in the intentions and purposes of his heart, he was not guilty of
the O^fences which he was to die for; That it was a great comfort to him, that
his Majesty conceived him not meriting so severe and heavy a Punishment, as the
utmost execution of this Sentence: And finally, (after many other Expressions)
That he died a true Son of the Church of England, in which he had been born and
bred; for the Peace and Prosperity whereof he most heartily prayed. Turning his
eyes unto his Brother Sir George Wentworth, he desired him to charge his Son to
fear God, to continue an obedient Son to the Church of England, and not to
meddle with Church Livings, as that which would prove a Moth or Canker to him
in his Estate. And having several times recommended his prepared Soul to the
Mercies of God, he submi^ted his Neck with most Christian Magnanimity to the
stroke of the (...), which took his Head from him at one blow, before he had
filled up the number of fifty years. A man on whom his Majesty looked as one
whose great Abilities might rather make a Prince afraid, (...) p. 5.
than ashamed to employ him in the greatest Affairs of State: ^or those were
pro^e to create in him great confidence of Undertakings, and this was like
enough to betray him to great Errors, and many Enemies; whereof he could not
but contract good store, while moving in so high a Sphere, and with so vigorous
a Luster, he must needs (as the Sun) raise many envious Exhalations, which
condensed by a Popular Odium, were capable to cast a Cloud upon the highest
Merit and Integrity. So far he stood commended by the Pen of his sorrowful
Sovereign, who never could sufficiently ^^wa^l his own Infelicity, in giving
way unto an Act of such (...)justice (as he calls it there) of which he gives
this Testimony in his Meditation on the Death of this unfortunate Earl, That he
wa^ (...) far from excusing or denying that Compliance on his part (for plenary
consent it was not) to his destruction, whom in his own judgment he thought not
by any clear Law, guilty of death; that he did never bear any touch of
Conscience with greater regret: which, as a sign of his Repentance, he had
often with sorrow confessed both to God and Men, as an Act of so sinful
frailty, that it discovered more a ^ar of Man than of God, whose Name and Place
on Earth no man is worthy to bear, who will avoid Inconveniences of State by
Acts of so high Injustice, as no Public Convenience can comp^nsat^.

(...) loss of this Gentleman's Life after such a manner, so terrified (...) o^
his Majesty's Servants; that as some had deserted him in (...) appearance of
his Troubles: so there were few that durst stand to him, or put him upon
^^solute or courageous Counsels, when he most wanted such Assistance. In which
respect, it was no (...) matter for the Houses of Parliament to wire draw him
by de(...) Con^^sec^sions, as finally left the Church without any Authority,
and the Crown with little more Prerogative than a T^tular and precarious
Empire. He had before passed an Act for Tri^^nial Parliaments, to be called in
his default by Sheriffs and Constaples; and signed a Bill for the continuance
of the present Parliament during the pleasure of the Houses, at such time as he
passed away this poor Gentleman's Life. He must now give up so much of his Power
at once, as would disable him from subsisting by any other means than the Alms
of his Parliament; or keeping down those factions and seditious Humors, for
which the ordinary Courts of Justice, tied to Formalities of Law, could provide
no remedy. In reference to the first, having kept him hungry and in appetite
for seven Months and more, from their first meeting in November, they present
him with a Bill for Tonnage and Poundage, to be paid only for the three Months
following; and that too clogged in the Preamble with such a Condition, as to
disclaim all such Right unto, it as had been formerly enjoyed by his
Predecessors. They prepared also other Bills, for Repealing the Statute
concerning Knighthood, made by K. Edward ii. and then made rather for the ease
of the Sub^^ct, than the advantage of the Crown; as also, For abolishing his
Pre^^ntions to the Raising of Ship Money, For retrenching the Perambu(...) of
his Forests, For suppressing the Court of Stanneries in Cornw^^. And (...)
long-continued Jurisdiction of his Clerk of the Market. A^^ in relation to the
other, they prepared two Bills more; the one for p^^ting down the Court of
Star Chamber, the other for destroying the Hig^ Commission, without which
bridles there had been no ruling of the Puritan Faction. But as in the Bill for
putting down the Star Chamber, there were some Clauses which extended to the
overthrow of the Court of the Marches, and the Council established in the
North, and for Regulating the Authority of the Council Table; so (...) for
destroying the High Commission, there was a Clause which took away the Coercive
power of Bishops, Chancellors, Archdeacons, and all other Ecclesiastical
Judges. To these two last (the Royal Assent having been passed unto all the
former without any difficulty) the King was pleased to demur, which bred such a
heat amongst the Commons, that he was forced on Monday the fifth of July,
(being but two days after his passing of the other) to make an excuse for this
small delay; the business being of such importance as the Altering in a great
measure those Fundamental Laws, both Ecclesiastical and Civil, which so many of
his Predecessors had established. How great a blow was given by the first Act
to the Royal Authority I leave to be considered by our Civil Historians. What
the Church suffered by the second will appear by these words, in which it was
Enacted (under the several penalties therein contained) That from the fifth day
of August then next following no Archbishop, or Bishops, or any other Person or
Persons, having or exercising any Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction under the Kings
Majesty, within the Realm of England and Dominion of Wales, should award,
impose or inflict any Pain, Penalty, Fine, Amercement, Imprisonment, or any
Corporal Punishment for any Contempt, Misdemeanour, Crime, Offense, Matter, or
Thing whatsoever, belonging to Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Cognizance or
Jurisdiction; or should Ex Officio, ^
or at the instance or promotion of any person whatsoever, urge, enforce,
tender, give, or minister unto any Churchwarden, Sideman, or person whatsoever,
any Corporal Oath, whereby they shall be obliged to make any Presentment
concerning others, or confess any thing against themselves, which might make
them liable, or expose them to any Censure, Pain, Penalty of what sort soever.
Which in effect was to take away the Power of Ecclesiastical Censures,
belonging naturally and originally to the Episcopal Function, that is to say,
Suspensions, Excommunications, Deprivations, and Degradations, (all which are
both inflicted and renounced as Pains or Penalties) to the no small
encouragement of Inconformity, Incontinency, and all other irregular Courses,
both in Clergy and Laity, because it nourisht an opinion of impunity in the
hearts of those who formerly had been awed respectively by those several
Censures. For when the Subject fears neither Pain nor Penalty, the Superior
under whom he lives will find little obedience, and the Laws much less.

But we have too long left our Archbishop in his cares and sorrows, and
therefore must return to ease him of some part of his cares, though his sorrows
continued as before. Hitherto he had given himself no improbable hopes of being
called unto his Trial, and given such strong proof of his integrity and
innocence from the Crimes objected, as might restore him to a capacity of doing
those good offices to the University as that place of Chancellor did require.
But finding by the late proceedings of the Houses of Parliament in the business
of his dear Friend the Earl of Strafford, that his affairs were like to grow
from bad to worse, he would no longer undergo the name of that Office which he
was not able to perform. Resolved to put the University into such a condition
as might enable them to proceed in the choice of a more fortunate Patron, he
acquaints the King with his intent by the Bishop of London; and finding his
Majesty's Concurrence in opinion with him, he sends his Resignation in his
Letter of June 28. Which being published, and excepted in the Convocation of
the University on July 1. The Earl of Pembroke was now elected to succeed him,
who had before been named in competition for the Office with him.

MY Present Condition (says the Letter) is not unknown to the whole World, yet
by few pitied or deplored; The righteous God (...) knows the Justice of my
sufferings, on whom both in life and death I will ever depend: the last of
which shall be unto me most welcome, in that my life is now burdensome unto me,
my mind attended with variety of sad and grievous thoughts, my soul continually
vexed with Anxietie, and troubles, groaning under the burden of a displeased
Parliament, my name aspersed and grossly abused by the multiplicity of Libellous
Pamphlets, and my self debarred from wonted access to the best of Princes, and
it is Vox Populi that I am Popishly affected. How earnest I have been in my
Disputations, Exhortations, and otherwise to quench such sparks, lest they
should become Coals, I hope after my death you will all acknowledge; yet in the
midst of all my afflictions there is nothing (...) has so nearly touched me as
the remembrance of your free and joyful acceptance of me to be your
Chancellor, and that I am now shut up from being able to do you that Service
which you might justly expect from me. When I first received this honor I
intended to have carried it with me to my Grave; neither were my hopes any
less, since the Parliament (called by his Majesty's Royal Command) committed me
to this Royal Prison. But since (by reason of matters of greater consequence yet
in hand) the Parliament is pleased to procrastinate my Trial, I do hereby as
thankfully resign my Office of being Chancellor, as ever I received that
Dignity, entreating you to Elect some Honorable Person, who upon all occasions
may be ready to serve you; and I beseech God send you such an one as may do all
things for his glory, and the furtherance of ^^ur most famous University. This
is the continual Prayer of

Your dejected Friend and Chancellor, Being the last time I shall write
so,Will. Cant.
Tower, June 28, 1641.

This Resignation having eased him of some part of his cares, it was no small
refreshment to him in the midst of his sorrows, that notwithstanding all the
clamor about Innovations, the Parliament had made no Order to alter any thing
which he had labored to establish. The Commons might perhaps have some
thoughts that way, but they either kept them to themselves, or found but little
comfort in them when they suffered them to go abroad, or show themselves in any
motion to the House of Lords. The Peers were then so far from entertaining any
such extravagant Fancies, that taking notice of the Irregular Zeal of some
forward men, who had not patience enough to attend the leisure of Authority,
they joined together with the Prelates, in this Order of January 16. for
putting a stop to their Exorbitancies at the first breaking out. For by that
Order it was signified to be the pleasure of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal
assembled in the High Court of Parliament, That the Divine Service be performed
as it is appointed by the Acts of Parliament of this Realm: And that all such
as shall disturb that wholesome Order, shall be severely punished according to
the Law: And the Parsons, Vicars, and Curates in the several Parishes shall
forbear to introduce any Rites or Ceremonies that may give offense, otherwise
than those which are established by the Laws of the Land. Which last Clause
being couched in such general terms, related only to such Rites and Ceremonies,
as otherwise might have been introduced for the time to come, not unto such as
had been entertained and settled by any former Authority. Countenanced and
secured by which Declaration, the Ordinaries went on cheerfully in the exercise
of their Jurisdiction, suffering no alteration or disturbance to pass
unquestioned, if any troublesome or unquiet person did begin to stir. But no
sooner was the Coercive power of Bishops and other Ecclesiastical Judges
restrained, or rather utterly abolished, by the late Act of Parliament; and the
Kings Journey into Scotland left men and matters at more liberty than before
they were: but presently the House of Commons took upon them such a Reformation
(so it must be called) in which they neither found concurrence of the House of
Peers, or could expect it from the King. But finding that they were strong
enough to set up for themselves, without working Journey-work any longer unto
either of them, they made the following Order of September 8. to be the first
Experiment or Essay of their undertakings. For though in a Conference, had the
same day with the Lords, they desired their consent therein, and that the Lords
returned them no other Answer than by sending them the next day (being the day
of the Recess) a Copy of the former Order of January 16. in which they desired
then to concur; yet Pym, who governed the Committee during that Recess,
dispatched his Mandate o^ the 29th. of the same month over all the Kingdom,
requiring all Ministers and Churchwardens to publish the said Order in their
several Churches, to see it put in execution, and cause Certificates to be made
thereof by the time appointed. Which Order being the Leading Card to the Game
that followed, was verbatim thus: viz. WHereas diverse Innovations in or about
the Worship of God have been lately practiced in this Kingdom, by enjoining
some things, and pr^^^^^^ng others, without warrant of Law, to the great
grievance and discon^ent of his Majesty's Subjects; For the suppression of such
Innovations, and for preservation of the Public Peace, It is this day Ordered
by the Commons in Parliament assembled, That the Churchwardens of every Parish
Church or Chapel respectively does forthwith remove the Communion Table from
the East end of the Church, Chapel, or (...) some other convenient place, and
that they take away the (...) the Chanc^ls as heretofore they were before the
late (...). That all Crucifixes, scandalous Pictures, of any one or (...) of
the Trinity, and all Images of the Virgin Mary shall (...) and a^olished; and
that all Tapers, Candlesticks, and (...) from the Communion Table. That all
Corporal B^w(...) JESUS, or toward the East end of the Church, (...), or
toward the Communion Table be henceforth (...). That the Orders aforesaid be
observed in all the several Ca(...) Churches of this Kingdom, and all the
Colleges, Churches, or (...) in the two Universities, or any other part of
this Kingdom, (...) in the Temple Church, and the Chapels of other Inns of
Court, (...) the Dea^s of the said Cathedral Churches, by the Vice-Chancellours
of the said Universities, and by the Heads and Governors of the several
C^lle^ges and Halls aforesaid, and by the Benchers and Readers in (...) Inns ^f
Court respectively. That the Lords day shall be duly obs^r^ed and sanctified:
All Dancing, or other Sports either before or after Di^i^e Service be forborne
and restrained; and that the Preaching (...) ^^rd be permitted in the Afternoon
in the several Churches and Chapels of this Ki^gdom, and that Ministers and
Preachers be encou^^g^d thereunto. That the Vice-Chancellours of the
Universities, Heads (...) Colleges, all Parsons, Vicars, Churchwardens, do
(...) C^rtificate of the performance of these Orders: and if the same shall
(...) be observed in any places aforementioned upon complaint ther^of made to
the two next Justices of the Peace, Major, and Head-Officers of Cities and
Towns Corporate, It is ordered, That the said Justices, Major, and other
Head-Officer respectively shall examine the (...) of all such complaints, and
certify by whose default the same are ^^mitted. All which Certificates are to
be delivered in Parliament before the thirtieth of October next ensuing, Anno
1641.




It may be justly wondered at, that all this while we have heard nothing of the
Scots, the chief promoters of these mischiefs; but we may rest ourselves
assured that they were not idle, soliciting their affairs both openly and
underhand, instant in season, and cut of season, till they had brought about
all ends which invited them hither. They had made sure work with the Lord
Lieutenant, and feared (...) the Resur^^ction of the Lord Archbishop though
Do^med at that time only to a Civil death. They had gratified the Commons in
procuring all the Acts of Parliament before remembered, and paring the Bishops
nails to the very quick, by the only terror of their Arms; and were
reciprocally gratified by them with a gift of three hundred thousand pounds of
good English money, in the name of a brotherly assistance, for their pretended
former losses, which could not rationally be computed to the tenth part of that
Sum. And in relation to that Treaty they gained in a manner all those points
which had been first insisted on in the meeting at Rippon, and many additionals
also, which were brought in afterward by London. In their Demand concerning
Unity in Religion, and Uniformity in Church Government, the Answer savoured
rather of delay than satisfaction; amounting to no more than this, That his
Majesty, with the Advice o^ both Houses of Parliament, did well approve of the
affections of his Subjects of Scotland, in their desires of having a Conformity
of Church Government between the two Nations; And that as the Parliament had
already taken into consideration the Reformation of Church Government, so they
would proceed therein in due time as should best conduce to the glory of God,
and peace of the Church and of both Kingdoms. Which Condescensions and
Conclusions being ratified on August 7. by Act of Parliament in England, a
Provision was also made for the security of all his Majesty's Party in
reference to the former troubles, excluding only the Scottish Prelates, and
four more of that Nation, from the benefit of it. And that being done, his
Majesty s^t forwards toward Scotland on Tuesday the tenth of the same month,
giving order as he went for the Disbanding of both Armies, that they might be
no further charge or trouble to him. Welcomed he was with great joy to the City
of Edenborough, in regard he came with full desires and resolutions of giving
all satisfaction to that People which they could expect, though to the
Diminution of his Royal Rights and just Prerogative. He was resolved to sweeten
and Caress them with all Acts of Grace, that so they might reciprocate with him
in their Love and Loyalty, though therein he found himself deceived. For he not
only ratified all the Transactions of the Treaty confirmed in England by Act of
Parliament, in that Kingdom; but by like Act abolished the Episcopal
Government, and yielded to an alienation of all Church Lands, restored by his
Father or himself for the maintenance of it. A matter of most woeful consequence
to the Church of England. For the House of Commons being advertised of these
Transactions, pressed him with their continual importunities after his Return, to
subvert the Government o^ Bishops here in England, in the destruction whereof
he had been pleased to gratify his Scottish Subjects, which could not be
r^puted so considerable in his estimation, nor were so in the eye of the World
as the English were. What followed hereupon we may hear too soon.

^^is good suc^^ss of the Scots encouraged the Irish Papists to attempt the
like, and to attempt it in the same way the Scots had gone; that is to say, by
se^sing his Majesty's Towns, Forts and Castles, putting themselves into the
body of an Army, banishing and imprisoning all such as opposed their Practices,
and then Petitioning the King for a public exercise of their Religion. And
they had this great furtherance to promote their hopes; For when the King was
pressed by the Commons for the disbanding of the Irish Army, a suite was made
unto him by the Ambassador of Spain, that he might have leave to list three or
four thousand of them for his Masters Service in the Wars; to which motion his
Majesty readily condescending gave order in it accordingly. But the Commons
never thinking themselves (...), as long as any of that Army had a Sword in his
hand, never (...) in^p^^tuning the King (whom they had now brought to the
condition (...) d^^ying nothing which they asked) till they had made him ^at
his word, and revoke those Orders to his great dishonor; which so ^x^^p^rated
that Army consisting of 8000 Foot, and 1000 Horse, that it was no hard matter
for those who had the managing of that Plot to make sure of them. And then
considering that the Sc^^s by raising of an Army had gained from the King an
abolition of the Episcopal Order, the Rescinding of his own and his Fathers
Acts a^out the reducing of that Church to some Uniformity with this, and
settled their Kirk in such a way as best pleased their own humors, Why might
not the Irish Papists hope, that by the help of such an Army, ready raised to
their hands, or easily drawn together, t^ough dispersed at present, they might
obtain the like indulgences and grants for their Religion? The 23 of October
was the day designed for the seizing of the City and Castle of Dublin, and many
places of great Importance in that Kingdom: But failing in the main d^^ign,
which had been discovered the night before by one O Conally, they brake out
into open Arms, dealing no better with the Protestants there, than the
Covenanters had done with the Royal Party in Scotland. O^ this Rebellion (for
it must be called a Rebellion in the Irish, though not in the Scots) his
Majesty gives present notice to the Houses of Parliament, requiring their
Counsel and assistance for the extinguishing of that Flame, before it had
wasted and consumed that Kingdom. But neither the necessity of the Protestants
there, ^ot the Kings importunity here, could persuade them to Levy one man
toward the suppression of those Rebels, till the King had disclaimed his power
of pressing Soldiers in an Act of Parliament, and thereby laid himself open to
such Acts of violence, as were then hammering against him.

But to proceed, his Majesty having settled his Affairs in Scotland to the full
contentment of the People by granting them the Acts of Grace before remembered,
and giving some addition of Honor to his greatest enemies, (amongst whom
Lesly, who commanded their two l^te Armies, most undeservedly was advanced to
the Title of Earl of Leven) prepared in the beginning of November. for his
journey to London; where he was welcomed by the Lord Mayor, and Citizens with
all imaginable expressions of Love and Duty. But the Commons at the other end
of the Town entertained him with a sharp Declaration, Entitled, The
Remonstrance of the State of the Kingdom, which they presented to him at
Hampton Court, with a Petition thereunto annexed, within few days after his
return; In which it was desired amongst other things, that he would please to
pass an Act for depriving the Bishops of their place and Vote in Parliament:
which Bill had formerly been cast out of the House of Peers, as before was
said, and was not by the course of Parliaments to be offered again. To this
Demand and others which concerned Religion he returned this Answer, Bill. Reg.
Sect. 4. ^. 4.
That for preserving the peace and safety of this Kingdom from the designs of
the Popish party, he had and would still concur with all the just desires of
his people, in a Parliamentary way; That for the depriving of the Bishops of
their Votes in Parliament, he wished them to consider that their right was
grounded upon the Fundamental Law of the Kingdom, and constitution of
Parliament; That he conceived the taking away of the High Commission had well
moderated the Inordinate power of the Clergy, but if there continued any
usurpations, or Excesses in their jurisdictions, he then neither had nor would
protect them; That he would willingly concur in the removal of any illegal
Innovations, which had crept into the Church; That if the Parliament should
advise to call a National Synod, which might duly Examine such Ceremonies, as
gave just cause of offense to any, he would take it into consideration and
apply himself to give due satisfaction therein; That he was very sorry to hear
Corruptions in Religion to be Objected in such General terms, since he was
persuaded in his Conscience that no Church could be found upon earth, that
professed the true Religion with more purity of Doctrine then the Church of
England at that time; That by the grace of God he was resolved to maintain both
the Government and Doctrine of it in their Glory and Purity, and not only
against all invasions of Popery, but from the Irreverence of those many
Schismatics, and Separatists wherewith of Late this Kingdom and the City of
London did so much abound, to the great dishonor and hazard both of Church and
State, for the suppressing of whom he required their aid and timely assistance.

This Resolute, and Religious Answer did not so satisfy the Commons, but that
they were Resolved to pursue the Enterprise till they had gained the Point they
aimed at. Some endeavors ^ad formerly been used by the Earl of Essex and the
Baron of Kimbolton to persuade the Bishops, so far to gratify the importunate
desires of the house of Commons, as voluntarily to Relinquish their Votes in
Parliament; upon assurance that the Peers would be bound in Honor to preserve
them in all the essential parts of their calling and Function. But the Bishops
who had little or nothing left to keep them up in Reputation amongst the
People, but their Rights of Peerage, could not be easily entreated to betray
themselves, and become Felones de se (as the Lawyers Phrase it) as long as his
Majesty would be pleased to maintain their Interest, and in theirs, His own.
Doubly Repulst, the Apprentices are drawn in huge multitudes to cry at the
Parliament doors No Bishops, No Bishops; Petitions daily brought against them
as the Common Grievances, imputing to them the decay of Trade, and the
obstruction of all businesses in both Houses of Parliament; their Persons
presented with Revilings, and sometimes with stones, so that they could neither
come out of their Coa^^es if they came by Land, nor out of their Barges if they
came by water, without manifest danger of their lives; the Abbey of Westminster
Violently Assaulted, and as Courageously defended by the Scholars, Choiremen,
Officers, and other Servants, concluding in the death of Wiseman a Knight of
Kent, who having taken on himself the Conduct of the Tumult, was killed by one
of the Defendants, with a Tile from the Battlements. Hereupon Williams the ^ate
Bishop of Lincoln having been translated unto York, invites as many of the
Bishops as were left in London to a Private Conference to be h^ld amongst them
in the Lodgings of the Dean of Westminster; where they subscribed to a
Protestation, and Petition to be presented to his Majesty in the House of
Peers, containing a Relation of the abuses offered them for some days last
past, together with a Declaration of their sense and meaning, for the time to
come. The Apprehension of their own dangers inclined them willingly to any such
course, as visibly conduced to the preservation of their Rights as Bishops, and
their lives as men; For both which the subscribing of this Petition and
Protestation, and the entering of it in the Journal of the House of Lords, seems
to have provided. It was about the middle of Christmas, when some of the
Bishops were retired into the Country, others not returned from their Recess,
and no fewer then five Sees, either vacant, or not filled Actually, at the
present; so that no more of them met at this Assembly, then the Archbishop of
York, the bishops of Durham, Lichfield, Gloucester, Norwich, Asaph, (...),
Her^ford, Oxon, Ely, Peterborough, and Landaff; all which subscribed this last
preservative for their Place and Persons. And being it was the last flash of
their dying light, I shall not think it improper to keep it from Expiring, as
long as I can, by serving as a Prol^nger to it in this present History; Now the
Petition, and Protestation was as follows.

(...) p. 41.
WHereas the Petitioners are called up by Several and Respective Writs, and
under great Penalties to attend the Parliament, and have a clear and
indubitable right to vote in Bills and other matt^^s whatsoever, Debateable in
Parliament by the Ancient Customs, Laws and Statutes of this Realm, and ought
to be Protected by your Majesty quietly to attend and prosecute that Great
Service. They humbly Remonstrate and Protest before God, Your Majesty, and the
Noble Lords and Peers now Assembled in Parliament; that as they had an
Indubitate Right to sit and Vote in the House of Lords: so are they, if they
may be Protected from force and violence, most Willing and Ready to Perform
their Duties accordingly. And that they do abominate All Actions or Opinions
tending to Popery or the maintenance thereof, as also all propension and
Inclination to any Malignant Party or any other Side or Party whatsoever, to
the which their own Reasons and Conscience shall not move then to adhere. But
whereas they have been at several times Violently Menaced, Affronted, and
Assaulted by multitudes of People in their coming to perform their Services in
that Honorable House, and lately chased away and put in danger of their lives,
and can find no Redress or Protection upon sundry Complaints, made to both
Houses in these particulars; They humbly pr^^est before Your Majesty and the
Noble House of Peers, That, saving unto themselves all their Right, and
Interess of Sitting and Voting in that House at other times, they dare not Sit
or vote in the House of Peers, until Your Majesty shall further secure them
from all Affronts, Indignities, and Dangers in the Premises. Lastly, Whereas
these fears are not built upon Conceits, but upon such Grounds and Objects as
may well terrify Men of Resolution and much Constancy, they do in all Humility
and Duty Protest before Your Majesty and the Peers of the Most Honorable House
of Parliament, against all Laws, Orders, Votes, Resolutions and Determinations,
as of themselves Null and of None Effect, which in their Absence, since the
27th of this Instant Month of December, 1641. have already passed; As
likewise, that all such as shall hereafter Pass in the Most Honorable House,
during the time of this their Forced and Violent Absence from the said Most
Honorable House: not denying but if their absenting of themselves were Wilful
and Voluntary, that Most Honorable House might Proceed in all their Premises,
their Absence or this Protestation Notwithstanding. And humbly beseeching Your
Most Excellent Majesty to Command the Clerk of the House of Peers, to Enter
this their Petition and Protestation among his Records.

They will ever Pray God to bless, etc.


This Petition being presented to his Majesty, was by him deli^vered to the
Lord Keeper Littleton, to be Communicated the next day, being the 30th of
December. to the House of Peers: But the Lord Keeper contrary to his Majesty's
directions, did first imp^rt i^ to some of the Preaching party in both Houses
of Parliament; and after, ^
as the plot was laid, to the Peers in general. Upon the ^eading whereof a
conference was desired with the House o^ C^mmons, to whom the Lord Keeper whom
they had under the La^^, was pleased to signify, that this Petition, and
Protestation of the twel^e Bishops, contained matters of high and dangerous
consequence, extending to the deep intrenching upon the Fundamental Privileges
and Being of Parliament. Whereupon the said twelve Bishops were Impeached by
the Commons of high Treason. The Usher called Black-Rod, Commanded to find them
out, and to bring them to the Bar in the House of Peers, which by reason of
their scattered and divided Lodgings, could not be effected till eight of the
Clock at night, at what time being brought together their offense was signified
unto them, and an Order presently made for their commitment to the Tower,
whither they were all carried the next day, Except the Bishops of Durham and
Lichfield who found the favor (the one by reason of his Eminent Learning, and
both of them in regard of their age and Infirmities) to stand committed to the
custody of the Gentleman Usher. Our Archbishop had now more Neighbors then ^e
desired, but not more company then before, it being prudently Ordered amongst
themselves, that none of them should bestow any visits on him, for fear of
giving some advantage to their common enemy; as if they had been hatching some
conspiracy against the Public: But they refrained not on either side from
sending me^^ages of Love and consolation unto one another; those mutual
civilities being almost every day performed betwixt the two Archbishops also,
though very much differing both in their Counsels and Affections in the times
foregoing. The Archbishop of York was now so much declined in favor, that he
stood in as bad terms with the Common People, as the other did. His picture cut
in Brass, attired in his Episcopal Robes, with his square Cap upon his head,
and Bandileers about his Neck, shouldering a Musket upon one of his shoulders
in one hand, and a Rest in the other, either presaging that which followed, or
else relating unto that which had passed in defense of the Abbey; Together with
which a book was Printed, in which he was Resembled to the Decoy-Duck,
(alluding to the Dec^yes in Lincolnshire where he had been Bishop) restored to
Liberty on design, that he might bring more company with him at his coming
back, and a device Engraven for the Front of the Book, which represented the
conceit; and that not unhappily. Certain I am that our Archbishop in the midst
of those sorrows seemed much pleased with the Fancy, whither out of his great
Love to wit, o^ some other self-satisfaction which he found therein, is beyond
my knowledge.

These Bishops b^ing thus secured, and no body left in a manner to solicit the
Common Cause but the Bishop of Rochester, the Bill against their Votes passed
currantly in the House of Peers on February 6. the Citizens who before had
feasted the King with such signs o^ Affection, now celebrating the Concurrence
of the House against his Interest, with B^lls and Bonfires. Nor was it long
before the ^ing gave over the Cause, for which he had so long contended* For
either terrified with the Apprehension of his own Dangers, or wrought on by the
importunity of some about him, he signed the Bill at Canterbury on February 14.
to which place he had accompanied the Queen in her way toward Holland: And by
that Bill it was desired to be Enacted, Bibl. Regia.
That no Archbishop, Bishop, or any other Person in Holy Orders, from February
15. then next following, should have any Seat or Place, Suffrage or Voice, use
or execute any Power or Authority in the Parliaments of this Realm; nor should
be of the Privy Council of his Majesty, his Heirs, or Successors, or Justices
of the Peace of Oyer and Terminer, or Jail-deliver; or execute any Temporal
Authority, by virtue of any Commission: but should be wholly disabled, or be
incapable to have, receive, use, or execute any of the said Offices, Places,
Powers, Authorities, and Things aforesaid. The passing of which Act, what
specious Pretenses soever were given out for it, redounded little to his
Majesty's Benefit, and far less to his Comfort. For by cutting off so many of
his Friends at a blow, he lost his Power in the House of Peers, and not long
after was deprived of his Negative Voice, when the great Business of the
Militia came to be disputed. And though he pleased himself sometimes with this
persuasion, ^icon Basil. cap. 17.
of their contentedness in suffering a present diminution of their Rights and
Honors, for his sake and the Commonwealths; yet was it no small trouble to his
Conscience at other times, that he had added this to the former injury, in
consenting to the taking away of the Coercive Power of their Jurisdiction, for
this we find to be one of those three things which lay heaviest on him, in the
time of his Solitude and Sufferings, as appears by this passage in one of his
Prayers, viz. Was it through ignorance that I suffered innocent Blood to be
spilt by a false pretended Justice? Or that I permitted a wrong way of Worship
to be set up in Scotlan? Or injured the Bishops in England? By which we see,
that the Injury done unto the Bishops of England, is put into the same scale
with his permitting a wrong way of Worship to be set up in Scotland, and the
shedding of the innocent Blood of the Earl of Strafford. And if this Act proved
so unpleasing to the King, it must needs be grievous to the Bishops themselves;
to none more than the Archbishop of Canterbury, who had s^t so great a part of
his affections on the preserving of this Church in her Power and Glory. Whose
sense hereof is thus expressed, by one who for the time was his greatest
Adversary, (...) p. 35.
That it struck proud Canterbury to the heart, and undermined all his
Prelatical Designs to advance the Bishops Pomp and Power; whether with greater
bitterness or truth, is hard to say.

Their great h^pe was (though it was such a hope as that of ^^^aham, which the
Scripture calls a hope against hope) that havin^ p^red the Jurisdiction of the
Bishops, and impaired their Power* t^^y would have suffered them to enjoy their
Function with Peace and quiet, as the only remaining Ornament and Honor of the
Church o^ England. Conform therein unto the gallantry of the Ancient Romans,
who when they had brought the Carthaginians unto that condition, as to compel
them to deliver up their Ships, Arms, and Elephants, and to make neither War
nor Peace without their permission, (...) l. 2.
esteemed it an especial honor to their Commonwealth, to preserve the City
which was no longer to be feared, though formerly it had contended for the
Superiority. But the Bishops Crimes were still unpunished: And as the old Roman
Citizen cried out upon his fine Country House and pleasant Gardens, when he
found his name posted up amongst the Proscripts, in the time of Sylla; so might
these Holy men complain of those fair Houses and goodly Manors which belonged
to their Episcopal Sees, as the only m^ans of the Subver^^on of their Sacred
Calling. This had been formerly resolved o^, but was not to be done at once, as
before was no^ed; nor to be followed now, but on some such color as was
pretended ^or depriving them of their Jurisdiction and Place in Parliament. It
was pretended for suppressing the Court of High-Commissi^n, and the coercive
Power of Jurisdiction, ^
That the Prelates had abused them both, to the insufferable wrong and
oppression of his Majesty's Subjects; And for the taking away of their Votes in
Parliament, with all other Civil Power in Churchmen, That it was found to be
an occasion of great mischief both to Church and State, ^he Office of the
Ministry being of such great importance as to take up the whole Man. And now to
make way for the Abolition of the Calling it self, it was given out amongst the
People to have been made of no use to the Church, by the Bishops themselves;
against whom these Objections were put in every man's mouth, That they had laid
aside the use of Confirming Children, though required by Law, whereby they had
deprived themselves of that dependence, which People of all sorts formerly had
fastened on them; That they had altogether neglected the duty of Preaching,
under the color of attending their several Governments; That in their several
Governments they stood only as Ciphers, transmitting their whole Jurisdiction
to their Chancellors and Underofficers; That none of them used to sit in their
Consistories, for hearing Grievances, and Administering Justice to the Subject,
whether Clergy or Laity, leaving them for a prey to Registers, Proctors, and
Apparitors, who most unconscionably extorted from them what they pleased; That
few or none of them held their Visitations in person, whereby the face of the
Bishop was unknown to the greatest part of the Clergy, and the greatest part of
the Clergy was unknown to him, to the discouragement o^ the Godly and painful
Ministers, and the encouragement of vicious and irregular Parsons; That few of
them lived in their Episcopal Cities, and some there were who had never seen
them, whereby the Poor (which commonly abound most in populous places) wanted
that Relief, and those of the better sort that Hospitality, which they had
reason to expect; the Divine Service in the mean time performed irreverently
and perfunctorily in the Cathedrals of those Cities, for want of the Bishops
Residence and Superinspection; That they had transferred the solemn giving of
Orders from the said Cathedrals, to the Chapels of their private Houses, or
some obscure Churches in the Country, not having nor requiring the Assistance
of their Deans and Chapters, as they ought to do; That they engrossed a sole or
solitary Power to themselves alone, in the Sentence of Deprivation and
Degradation, without the Presences and Consents of their said Deans and
Chapters, or any Members of the same, contrary to the Canons in that behalf; by
which last Acts they had rendered those Capitular Bodies as useless to the
Church as they were themselves: And finally, That seeing they did nothing which
belonged unto the place of a Bishop, but the receiving of their Rents, living
in ease and worldly pomp, and domineering over the rest of their Brethren, it
was expedient to remove the Function out of the Church, and turn their Lands
and Houses unto better uses. This I remember to have been the substance of
those Objections made by some of the Gentry, and put into the mouths of the
Common People; in which if any thing were true (as I hope there was not) such
Bishops as offended in the Premises, or in any of them, have the less reason to
complain of their own misfortunes, and the more cause to be complained of, for
giving such Advantages to the Enemies of their Power and Function. Nor was the
alienating of their Lands and Houses the Total Sum of the Design, though a
great part of it. As long as the Episcopal Jurisdiction stood, much Grist was
carried from the Mills in Westminster Hall, Toll whereof was taken by the
Bishops Officers; Therefore those Courts to be suppressed (which could not be
more easily done, than in abolishing the Bishops whose Courts they were) that
so the managing of all Causes, both Ecclesiastical and Civil, might be brought
into the hands of those who thought they could not thrive sufficiently by their
own Common Law, as long as any other Law was Common, besides their own. By
means whereof, all Offices and Preferments in the Admiral, Archiepiscopal, and
Diocesan Courts, being taken from the Civil Lawyers, nothing can follow
thereupon but the discouragement and discontinuance of those Noble Studies,
which formerly were found so advantageous to the State and Nation.

It is not to be thought that such a general Concussion should befall the
Church, so many Practices entertained against it, and so many Endeavors used
for the Ruin of it; and that no man should lend a helping hand to support the
Fabric, or to uphold the Sacred Ark when he saw it tottering. Some
well-affected in both Houses, appeared stoutly for it; amongst which, none more
cordially than the Lord George Digby, in a Speech made upon occasion of the
City-Petition, and Sir Lucius Carry Viscount Faulkland, both Members of the
House of Commons: Which last, though he expressed much bitterness against the
Bishops, in one of his Speeches made in the first heats and agitation of
business; yet afterward in another of them he showed himself an especial
Advocate in behalf of the Episcopal Order. In which Speech of his it is
affirmed, That the ground of this Government by Episcopacy is so ancient, and
so general, so uncontradicted in the first and best times that our most
laborious Antiquaries can find no Nation, no City, no Church, no Houses under
any other, that our first Ecclesiastical Authors tell us of; That the Apostles
not only allowed but founded Bishops, so that the Tradition for some Books of
Scripture, which we receive as Canonical, is both less ancient, less general,
and less uncontradicted than that is. So he when he was come again to his
former temper, and not yet entered nor initiated into Court preferments. Nor was
the point only canvased within those walls, but managed in a more public way
by the Pens of some, than there it had been tossed on the Tongues of others.
The Bishop of Exon. leads the way, presenting An humble Remonstrance to the
High Court of Parliament in behalf of Liturgy and Episcopacy, which presently
was encountered with an answer to it, w^erein the Original of Liturgy and
Episcopacy is pretended to be discussed, etc. This Answer framed by a Juncto of
five Presbyterian Ministers in or about the City of London, the first Letters
of whose names being laid together made up the word Smectymnuus, which appears
only for the Author. The Bishop hereunto replies in a Vindication (by which
name he called it) which Vindication had an Answer or Rejoinder to it, by the
same Smectymnuus. During which Interfeats of Arms, and exchange of Pens, a
Discourse was published by Sir Thomas Ashton Knight and Baronet. In the first
part whereof he gives us A survey of the Inconveniences of the Presbyterian
Discipline, and the inconsistences thereof, with the constitution of this
State. And in the second, The original Institution, Succession, and
Jurisdiction of the ancient and venerable order of Bishops. This last part
seconded within the compass of this year by the History of Episcopacy, first
published as the work of Theophilus Churchman, and not till many years after,
owned by the Authors name. The next year bringing forth a book of Dr. Tailors,
called Episcopacy asserted, and the Acriomastix of John Theyer, etc. All of
them backed, and the two last encouraged by many Petitions to his Majesty and
both Houses of Parliament, not only from the two Universities, whom it most
concerned; but from several Counties of the Kingdom, of which more hereafter.

I shall conclude this year with a remembrance of some change of Officers in
the Court, but of more in the Church. Windebanke, Secretary of State, being
questioned for releasing diverse Priests and Jesuits, contrary to the
established Laws, conveyed himself over into France; and Finch Lord Keeper, on
some distrust which he had of his safety, for acting too zealously in the
Forrest-business, and the (...) of Shipmoney, withdrew at the same time into
Holland. Pembroke, Lord Chamberlain of the household, was discharged of his
Office by the King upon just displeasures, before his late going into Scotland;
The Earl of Newcastle for the Reasons before remembered, had relinquished his
charge of the Princes Person, and Cottington his Offices in the Exchequer and
Court of Wards; Neile Archbishop of York died some few days before the
beginning of the Parliament, Mountague of Chichester, Bancroft of Oxon.
Davenant of Salisbury, Potter of Carlisle, and Thornborough of Worcester within
few months after. Nature abhors nothing more than Vacuity, and it proved to
be very agreeable to the Rules of Polity, not to su^fer their preferments to
lie longer in a state of Vacancy. To fill these Places, the Earl of Hertford
(about that time advanced to the Title of Marquess) was made and sworn
Governor of the Prince; Essex, Lord Chamberlain of the Household; Say, Master
of the Court of Wards and Liveries; Littleton, Chief Justice of the
Common Pleas, preferred to the honor of Lord Keeper; Faulkland made Secretary
of Estate, and Culpepper Chancellor of the Exchequer: Which two last being
Members of the House of Commons, and well acquainted with such designs as were
then in Project, and men of good parts withal, were thought worth the gaining,
and fastened to the Court by these great Preferments. Next for the Vacancies in
the Church they were supplied by preferring Williams, Bishop of Lincoln, to the Sea of York; and Winiff, Dean of St. Paul's, to the Sea of Lincoln; Duppa of
Chichester, to Salisbury; and King, then Dean of Rochester, to succeed at
Chichester; Hall, Bishop of Exon. translated to Norwich; and Brownrigg, Master
of Catharine Hall in Cambridge, preferred to Exon. Skinner of Bristol removed
to Oxon. and Westfield, Archdeacon of St. Albons, advanced to Bristol; the
Bishopric of Carlisle was given in Commendam to the Primate of Ireland, during
the troubles in that Kingdom; and Worcester, by the power of Hamilton,
conferred on Prideaux, who formerly had been his Tuto^; all of them of good
parts and merit, and under some especial Character of esteem and favor in the
eyes of the People, though some of them declined afterward from their former
height. Nor were there more Changes after these, till the suppressing of
Episcopacy by the Ordinance of the Lords and Commons, bearing date October 9.
anno 1646. but that Frewen, Dean of Gloucester, and President of Magdalen
College in Oxon. was consecrated Bishop of Coventry and Lichfield on the death
of Wright, in the beginning of the year 1644. and Howel, one of the Prebends of
Windsor, and Chaplain in Ordinary to his Majesty, was preferred to the
Bishopric of Bristol on the death of Westfield, before the end of the same
year.

The passing of this Act forementioned, 1642.
put the imprisoned Bishops in some hope of a speedy deliverance, though it
proved not so quick as they expected. For though on Monday February 14. an
Order came that they might put in bail if they would, that they should have
their hearing on the Friday following, and that some of them went out of the
Tower the morrow after, as appears by Breviate, fol. 25. yet the Commons took
it so indignly, that either that Order was revoked, or the Bishops had some
private Advertisement to return and continue where they were. The Bishops being
deprived of their right of Peerage, must be supposed to stand on the same
ground with the rest of the People; and consequently to be accountable for
their Actions to the House of Commons, whose Privileges, if the Peers invade,
they must look to hear of it, as well as the poor Bishops had done before. And
on these terms the business stood till May 5. being just eighteen weeks from
their first Imprisonment; at which time, without making suite to the House of
Commons, the Peers releast them upon bail, and dismissed them to their several
dwellings. There they continued all of them at their own disposing, till the
War forced them to provide themselves of safer quarters, except the Bishop of
Ely only, who, within few months after he was discharged from the Tower, was
seized on by a party of Soldiers at his house of Douwham, and brought back
again to the Tower, where he continued till the end of the year 1659. without
any Charge or Accusation produced against him.

But as for the Archbishop of Canterbury, as he first took possession of that
Fatal Lodging before any of the rest came to him; so he continued there after
their dismission, without hope of finding his passage out of it by any other
door than the door of Death: which as he did not look for before it came, so
when it came he did not fear it. He had then been fifteen months a Prisoner
since his first Commitment to that place, as far from being brought unto his
Trial as he was at the first; and is to lie there as much longer before he
should hear any thing of them which might tend that way: only they had some
pulls at him from one time to another, to keep him in remembrance of his
present condition, and to prepare him by degrees to his last dissolution. For
on October 23. in the year foregoing, the House of Peers sequestered his
Jurisdiction from him, conferring it on Brent, and others of his
underofficers; and ordered that he should bestow none of the Benefices within
his gift without acquainting them with the name and quality of the party whom
he intended to prefer, leaving to them the Approbation, if they saw cause for
it. And on October 15. this present year, for so long he remained without
further disturbance, it was resolved upon the Question, That the Fines, Rents,
and Profits of Archbishops and Bishops, should be sequestered for the use and
service of the Commonwealth. In which though he was no more concerned, yet he
was as much concerned as any other of the Episcopal Order; so much the more, as
being sure to find less favor, whenever that Vote should be put in execution
by them that made it. For on the ninth of November following, his house at
Lambeth was forcibly possessed by a Party of Soldiers to keep it for the
public Service, and 78 pounds of his Rents as forcibly taken from some of his
Officers, by an Order under the hands of some of the Lords upon pretense of
employing it to the maintenance of his Majesty's Children. But upon his
Petition, shortly after he had an Order for securing of his Goods and Books,
though he secured them rather from the power of the Soldiers than from the
hands of any other on whom the Houses should bestow them, when they saw time
for it. Upon the neck of that came another Order to bar him from having
Conference with any of the other Prisoners; or speaking with any other, but in
the presence of the Warder who was appointed to attend him; and from having the
Liberty of the Tower; or from sending any of his Servants into the City but on
occasion of providing Victuals, and other necessaries. Not long after, the
Soldiers brake open the doors of his Chapel in Lambeth house, and began to
make foul work with the Organs there: but before any great hurt was done, their
Captain came, and put a period to their fury. On December 21. his Saddle-horse
was seized on by Order from some Members in the House of Commons; and on 23.
Leighton the Schismatic, who had before been sentenced in the Star Chamber for
his libellous and seditious Pamphlets, came with an Order from that house to
disposses the Soldiers of their quarters there, and turn his house into a
Prison. His Wood and Coals seized on, without any permission to make any use of
them for himself. On March 14. he had word brought him of a plot for sending
him and Bishop Wren, his fellow Prisoner to perpetual Exile in New England; and
that Wells, a factious Preacher, which came lately thence, had laid wagers of
it: but when the matter came in agitation in the House of Commons, it appeared
to be so horrible and foul a practice, that it was generally rejected. In the
beginning of May 1643 the Windows in his Chapel were defaced, and the steps
torn up; his Goods and Books seized on by Leighton, and some others. And on the
sixteenth of the same month he was served with an Order of both Houses,
debarring him from bestowing any of his Benefices, which either were or should
be vacant for the time to come. And on the last day of the same an Order issued
from some Members of that close Committee, directed unto Prynne and others, to
seize on all his Letters and Papers, to be perused by such as should be
Authorized to that end and purpose.

So far they had proceeded in pulling him from himself piecemeal, before they
were ready for his Trial, or seemed to have any thoughts which might look that
way. They had then a greater game to play, and on this occasion. His Majesty at
his late being in Scotland expostulated with some of the chief amongst them
touching their late coming into England in an hostile manner, and found that
some who were now leading men in the Houses of Parliament had invited them to
it; and having furnished himself with some proofs for it, he commanded his
Attorney General to impeach some of them of High Treason; that is to say, the
Lord Kimbolton, a Member of the House of Peers, Hollis, Pym, Hasterig, Stroud,
and Hambden, of the House of Commons. But sending a Sergeant at Arms to Arrest
their persons, there came a countermand from the House of Commons, by which the
Sergeant was deferred from doing his office, and the Members had the
opportunity of putting themselves into the Sanctuary of the City. The next day,
being January 4. his Majesty being no otherwise attended than with his ordinary
Servants, and some few Gentlemen, armed no otherwise than with Swords and
Courage, went to the House of Commons to demand the five Members, that he might
proceed against them in a way of Justice; but his intention was discovered, and
the birds flown before his coming. And this was voted by the House of Commons
for such an unexpiable breach of Privilege, that neither the Kings qualifying
of that Action, nor his desisting from the prosecution of that impeachment, nor
any thing that he could either say or do, would give satisfaction; nothing must
satisfy their Ieal^usies, and secure their Fears, but the putting the Tower of
London into their hands, together with the Command of the Royal Navy, as also
of the Forts, Castles, and the Train-bands of the Kingdom, all comprehended
under the name of the Militia; which if his Majesty would fling after all the
rest, they would continue his most loyal and obedient subjects. On this the
King demurs a while, but having shipped the Queen for Holland, and got the Prince
into his own power, he becoms more resolute, and stoutly stands on the denial.
But finding the Members too strong for him, and London, by reason of the
continual tumults, to be a dangerous Neighbor to him, he withdraws to York;
that being in a place of safety he might the better find a way to compose those
differences which now began to embroil the Kingdom. At Hull he had a Magazine
of Arms and Ammunition, provided for the late intended War against the Scots,
and laid up there when the occasion of that War was taken away. Of this Town he
intended to possess himself, and to make use of his own Arms and Ammunition for
his own preservation; but coming before the Gates of the Town he was denied
entrance by Ho^ham, who by the appointment of the House of Commons had took
charge of that place. The Gentry of Yorkshire, who had Pe^^tioned the King to
secure that Magazine, became hereby more firmly united to him. The like had
been done also by the Yeomandry, and those of the inferior sort, if his
proceedings had not been undermined by a Committee of four Gentlemen, all the
Members of the House of Commons, and all of them Natives of that County, sent
thither purposely (in a new and unprecedent way) to lie as Spies upon his
Counsels, and as Controllers to his Actions. Some Messages there were betwixt
him and the Houses of Parliament concerning the atoning of these differences,
whilst he was at York; but the nineteen Propositions sent thither to him, did
declare suffici^^tly that there was no peace to be expected on his part, unless
he had made himself a Cipher, a thing of no signification in the affairs of
State.

It was desired in the eighth of these Propositions, That his Majesty would be
pleased to consent to such a Reformation as should be made, of the Church
Government and Liturgy, Husb. Exact. Collect p. 3^^.
as both Houses of Parliament should Advise, wherein they intended to have
Consultation with Divines, as was Expressed in their Declaration; And that his
Majesty would contribute his best assistance to them for the raising of a
sufficient maintenance, for Preaching Ministers throughout the Kingdom; And
that his Majesty would be pleased to give his Consent to Laws for taking away
of Innovations, and Superstitions, and of Pluralities, and against Scandalous
Ministers. For satisfaction whereunto he first repeats unto them so much of a
former Answer returned to their Petition, which accompanied the Remonstrance of
the State of the Kingdom, as has already been laid down in the year foregoing;
and after calls to their Remembrance a material clause in his Message of the
14th of February, at such time as he yielded his consent to deprive the Bishops
of their Votes in Parliament. In which it was declared, That his Majesty had
Observed great and different troubles to arise in the hearts of his people
concerning the Government and Liturgy of the Church; Id. Ib. p. 3^^.
and therefore that he was willing to refer the whole consideration to the
Wisdom of his Parliament, which he desired them to enter into speedily, that
the present Distractions about the same might be composed; that he desired not
to be pressed to any single Act on his part, till the whole was so digested and
settled by both Houses, that his Majesty might clearly see what was fit to be
left, as well as what was fit to be taken away. Of which he adds, that he the
more hoped for a good success to the general satisfaction of his People,
because they seemed in their Proposition to desire but a Reformation, and not
(as had been daily Preached for Necessary, in those many Coventicles, which for
the ninteen Months last past had so swarmed in this Kingdom) a Destruction of
the Present Discipline and Liturgy; that he should most cheerfully give his
best assistance for raising a sufficient maintenance for Preaching Ministers,
in such course as should be most for the encouragement of Piety and Learning;
that to the Bills they mentioned, and the Consultation which they intimated, as
he knew nothing of the particular matters of the one (though he liked the
Titles of themselves) so neither did he of the manner of the other, but by an
Informer, (to whom he gave little credit, and wished no man did more) Common
Fame, he could say nothing till he saw them. With which general well studied
answer he dismissed that Article.

These Propositions, and the entertaining of so many Petitions by the Houses of
Parliament visibly tending to the Abolition of Episcopal Government, made it
appear most necessary in the Eyes of those who wished well to it, to hasten the
publishing of such Petitions, as had been presented to the King in behalf
thereof, and by his Majesty had been Ordered to be published accordingly; For
what could otherwise be expected, but that many such Petitions should be
presented to his Majesty, and both Houses from several Counties in the Kingdom,
for the preserving of that Government, under which this Church had flourished
with Peace and Happiness, since the Reformation. Amongst which none did plead
the cause with greater servency, then that which was tendered in the name of the
Gentry and Clergy of the Diocese of Canterbury; partly out of the esteem they
had to their Metropolitan, and partly out of the affection, which they carried
to the cause it self. In which Petition it was s^ewed, That notwithstanding
this Kingdom, has by the singular Providence of Almighty God for many years
last past happily flourished above all other Nations in the Christian World,
under the Religion and Government by Law Established; yet has it been of late
m^st miserably dis^racted through the sinister Practices of some private
persons ill affected to them both; By whose means the present Government is
disgraced and traduced, the houses of God are profaned and in part de^aced, the
Ministers of Christ are contemned and despised, the Ornaments and many Vtensils
of the Church are abused, (...) p. 45.
the Liturgy and Book of Common Prayer, depraved and neglected, That absolute
model of Prayer, the Lords Prayer vilified, the Sacraments of the Gospel in
some places unduly administered, in other places omitted, Solemn days of Fas^ing
observed, and appointed by private Persons, Marriages Illegally Solemnized,
Burials uncharitably performed, And the very Fundamentals of Religion subverted
by the Publication of a new Creed, and teaching the Abrogation of the Moral
Law. For which purpose many offensive Sermons are daily Preached, and many
Impious Pamphlets Printed; And in contemning of Authority many do what seems
good in their own Eyes only, as if there were no King nor Government in this
our Israel; Whereby God is highly provoked, his Sacred Majesty dishonored, the
Peace of the Kingdom endangered the C^nsciences of the People disquieted, the
Ministry of Gods word disheartened, and the Enemies of the Church imboldned in
their enterprise. For redress whereof, May it please this great and Honorable
Council, speedily to Command a due observation of the Religion and Government
by Law Established; in such manner as may seem best to the Piety and Wisdom of
his Royal Majesty and this Honorable Court. Your Petitioners as they shall
confidently expect a blessing from heaven upon this Church, and Kingdom; so
shall they have this further cause to implore the Divine Assistance upon this
Honorable Assembly

To this Petition there subscribed no fewer then 24 Knights and Baronets,
Esquires and Gentlemen of note above 300. Divines 108. Freeholders and Subsidy
men 800. A greater number in the total ^^en might have been expected from so
small a Diocese, consisting (...) of 257. Parishes, distempered by the mixture
of so many Churches of French and Dutch, and wholly under the command of the
Houses of Parliament. Many Petitions of like nature came from other Counties,
where the People were at any Liberty to speak their own sense, and had not
their hands tied from Acting in their own concernments; All which with some of
those, which had led the way unto the Rest, were published by Order from his
Majesty, bearing date May 20. 1642. under the title of a Collection of the
Petitions of diverse Countries, etc. Which Petitions being so drawn together,
and besides many which were presented after this Collection, amounted to
nineteen in all, that is to say, two from the County of Chester, two from
Cornwall, one from the University of Oxon. and another from the University of
Cambridge; One from the Heads of Colleges and Halls, this from the Diocese of
Canterbury; another from the Diocese of Exeter, one from the six Counties of
North Wales, and one apiece from the Counties of Notingham, Huntington,
Somerset, Rutland, Stafford, Lancaster, Kent, Oxford and Hereford. Nor came
these Petitions thus collected, either from Persons ^ew in Number or
inconsiderable in quality (like those of the Porters, Watermen, and other poor
people which clamored with so much noise at the doors of the Parliament) but
from many thousands of the best and most eminent Subjects of the Realm of
England. The total Number of Subscribers in seven of the said Counties only,
besides the Diocese of Canterbury, and the Borough of Southwark (the rest not
being computed in the said Collection) amounting to 482. Lords and Knights,
1748. Esquires and Gentlemen of Note, 631. Doctors and Ministers, 44559.
Freeholders; which shows how generally well affected the People were, both to
the Government, and Liturgy of the Church of England, if they had not been
perverted, and overawed by the Armies and Ordinances of the House of
Parliament, which Commanded the greatest part of the Kingdom. And though
perhaps the Subscribers on the other side might appear more numerous,
considering how Active and United that party was; yet was it very well observed
in reference to the said Subscriptions, by a Noble Member of that House, A
Draught ^ Speech b. (...) L^^d (...)
That the numberless number of those of a different sense, appeared not
publicly, nor cried so loud as being persons more quiet, secure in the
goodness of their Laws, the wisdom of their Lawmakers; and that it was not a
thing usual to Petition for what men have, but for what they have not. But
notwithstanding the importunity of the Petitioners on the one side, and the
Moderation of the Kings Answer on the other, the prevailing party in both
Houses had Resolved long since upon the Question, which afterward they
declared by their public Votes. For on the 11^h of September the Vote passed
in the house of Commons for abolishing Bishops, Deans, and Chapters, celebrated
by the in^atuated Citiz^ns (as all other public mischiefs were) with Bells and
Bonfires; ^the Lords not coming in till the end of January, when it past there
also.

The War in the mean time begins to open; The Parliament had their Guards
already, and the affront which Hotham had put upon his Majesty at Hull prompted
the Gentlemen of Yorkshire to tender themselves for a Guard to his Person. This
presently Voted by both Houses to be a leavying of War against the Parliament,
for whose defense not only the Trained Bands of London must be in readiness,
and the Good people of the Country required to put themselves into a posture of
Arms; but Regiments of Horse and Food are Listed, a General appointed, great
Sums of Money raised, and all this under pretense of taking the King out of the
hands of his Evil Counselors. The noise of these preparations hastens the King
from York to Notingham where he sets up his Standard inviting all his good
Subjects to repair unto him, for defense of their King, the Laws and Religion
of their Country, He increased his forces as he marched, which could not come
unto the Reputation of being an Army, till he came into Shropshire, where great
Bodies of the Loyal, and Stout hearted Welsh resorted to him. Strengthened
with this, and furnished sufficiently with field Pieces, Arms, and Ammunition,
which the Queen had sent to him out of Holland, he resolves upon his March to
London; but on Sunday the 23th of October. was encountered on the way at a place
called Edghill by the Parliaments Forces. The Fight very terrible for the time,
no fewer then 5000 men slain upon the place; The Prologue for a greater
slaughter, if the Dark night had not put an end to that dispute. Each part
pretended the Victory, but it went clearly on the Kings side, who though he
lost his General; yet he kept the Field, and possessed himself of the Dead
bodies, and not so only: but he made his way open unto London, and in his way
forced Banbury Castle in the very sight, as it were, of the Earl of Essex, who
with his flying Army made all the have he could toward the City (that he might
be there before the King) to serve the Parliament. More certain signs there
could not be of an absolute victory. In the battle of Turo, between the
Confederates of Italy, and Charles the 8th of France, it happened so, that the
Confederates kept the Field, possessed themselves of the Camp, Baggage and
Artillery, which the French in their breaking through, had left behind them.
And yet the Honor of the day was generally given unto the French; For though
they lost the Field, their Camp Artillery and Baggage: yet they obtained what
they fought for, which was the opening of their way to France, and which the
Confederates did intend to deprive them off. Which Resolution in that Case may
be a Ruling Case to this; the King having not only kept the Field, possessed
himself of the dead bodies, Pillaged the Carriages of the Enemy: but forcibly
opened his way toward London, which the Enemy endeavored to hinder, and
finally entered Triumphantly into Oxon, with no fewer then one hundred and
twenty Colors ta^en in the fight.

Having assured himself of Oxon. for his Winter Quarters, he Resolved on his
Advance toward London: but made so many Halts in the way, that Essex was got
thither before him, who had disposed of his Forces at Kingston, Branford,
Acton, and some other places thereabouts, not only to stop his March, but to
fall upon him in the Rere as occasion served. Yet he goes forward
notwithstanding as far as Brainford, out of which he beats two of their best
Regiments, takes 500 Prisoners, sinks their Ordnance, with an intent to march
forward on the morrow after, being Sunday November 13. But understanding that
the Earl of Essex had drawn his Forces out of Kingston, and joining with the
London Auxiliaries, lay in the way before him, at a place called Turnhom-Green
near Chiswick, it was thought safer to retreat toward Oxon. while the way was
open, than to venture his Army to the fortune of a second Battle, which if it
were lost, it would be utterly impossible for him to raise another. At Oxon. he
receives Propositions of Peace from the Houses of Parliament: but such as
rather did beseem a conquering than a losing side: Amongst which I find this
for one. That his Majesty would be pleased to give his Royal Assent,
Prop^si^ion 4.
for taking away Superstitious Innovations; and to the Bill for the utter
abolishing and taking away all Archbishops, Bishops, their Chancellors and
Commissaries, Deans, Subdeans, Deans and Chapters, Archdeacons, Canons, and
Prebendaries, and all Chanters, Chancellors, Treasurers, Sub-Treasurers,
Succentors and Sacrists, and all Vicars Choral and Choristers, old Vicars or
new Vicars of any Cathedral or Collegiate Church, and all other their
Underofficers out of the Church of England; To the Bill against Scandalous
Ministers; To the Bill against Pluralities, and to the Bill for Consultation to
be had with Godly, Religious, and Learned Divines; That his Majesty would be
pleased to pass such other Bills for settling of Church Government, as upon
Consultation with the Assemby of the said Divines shall be Resolved on by both
Houses of Parliament, and by them to be presented to his Majesty.


Which Proposition, with the rest, being presented to him on Candlemas-day, he
referred to the following Treaty to be held at Oxon. in which he found the
Commissioners of the Houses so streighted in Time, 164^.
and so tied up to their Instructions, that nothing could be yielded by them,
which might conduce to the composing of the present Distempers.

But it was indifferent to them what Success they found, either in the
Propositions or the Treaty, who had already entered on the Rents and Profits of
all the Episcopal Sees and Capitular Bodies, which were within the Power of
their Armies; and Sequestered the Benefices of all such as stood in their way,
under the common notion of scandalous Ministers: who if they had offended
against the Laws of the Realm, by the same Laws were to have been proceeded
against; that so being legally deprived, the vacant Churches might be left to
be filled by the Patrons with more deserving Incumbents. But such a course was
inconsistent with the present Design: Most of the Silenced Lecturers and
Factious Ministers, which within ten years then last past had left the Kingdom,
either for Inconformity, or Debt, or their own intemperance of Spirit, had of
late flocked into it amain, like so many Birds of Rapine to seek after the
Prey. And upon these, and such as these, the Sequestered Benefices were
bestowed, to be held no otherwise by them, than as Vsufructuaries or Tenants at
Will, that so they might continue in a servile obsequiousness to the Power and
Pleasure of their great Landlords. With which his Majesty being made
acquainted, he presently signified his dislike and resentment of it, by his
Royal Proclamation bearing date at Oxon. May 15. 1643. ^ibl. R^^ia. ^.1. p. ^. 5
In which he first complains, That diverse of the Clergy, eminent for their
Piety and Learning, were forced from their Cures and Habitations, or otherwise
silenced and discharged from exercising their Ministry, for no other reason but
because (contrary to the Laws of the Land, and their own Consciences) they
would not pray against him and his Assistants, or refused to publish any
illegal Commands and Orders for fomenting the unnatural War raised against him:
but conformed themselves according to the Book of Common Prayers, and Preached
Gods Word according to the purity thereof, without any mixture of Sedition.
Next, That the said Clergy being so forcibly driven out or discharged of their
Cures, many Factious and Schismatical Persons were intruded into them, to sow
Sedition, and seduce his good Subjects from their Obedience, contrary to the
Word of God and the Laws of the Land: Part of the Profits of the said Benefices
allotted to the said Intruders; the rest converted to the Maintenance of the
War against him. And thereupon he straightly commands all his good Subjects
to desist from such illegal courses against any of the Clergy aforesaid; to pay
their Tithes to the several and respective Incumbents, or their Assigns,
without guile or fraud, notwithstanding any Sequestration, pretended Orders or
Ordinances whatsoever, from one or both Houses of Parliament; and this to do,
under pain of being proceeded against according to Law, as they should be
apprehended and brought to the hands of Justice; their Lands and Goods in the
mean time to be sequestered, and taken into sa^e custody for their disobedience:
Requiring all Churchwardens and Sides-men, to be assistant in gathering and
receiving their Tithes, Rents and Profits; and to resist all such Persons as
much as in them lay, which were intruded into any of the Benefices or Cures
aforesaid. But this served rather to declare his Majesty's Piety, than to stop
the course of those Proceedings: For justifying whereof, the Clergy must be
branded with Offenses of diverse conditions; some of them of such a scandalous
and heinous nature, as were not to be expiated with the loss of Livings, but of
Lives, if any Legal Evidence had been found to prove them. And that nothing
might be wanting to their infelicity, an infamous Pamphlet is dispersed,
Licenced by White Chairman for the Committee for Religion, under the Title of,
The first Century of Scandalous and Malignant Priests, etc. Which though his
Majesty abominated upon very good reason, when it first came unto his
knowledge; yet would he not give way that a Recrimination should be made of the
adverse Party, by such as undertook to do it on far juster grounds.

In like manner they proceeded to the execution of another part of their
design, mentioned and presented in the said Proposition, touching a
Consultation to be had with Godly, Religious, and Learned Divines. For not
intending to expect his Majesty's pleasure, their Commissioners were no sooner
returned from the Treaty at Oxon. but they caused such an Assembly to be called
by their own Authority, as should be sure to do the Work recommended to them.
The Convocation was in force, but not fit to be trusted; nor durst they venture
to commit the choice of men to the Beneficed Clergy, according to the course of
National and Provincial Synods: That Power they kept unto themselves,
committing the Nomination unto such as served for the several Counties, that so
each County might be furnished with such Persons to perform the Service, as
could have no Authority to bind them by their Constitutions, or any other
Public Acts, made and agreed upon in that Assembly. An Assembly of a very
strange mixture, consisting of a certain number of the Lords and Commons, with
a greater proportion of Divines, some of which were Prelatical, some
Independent, and the greater part of them Presbyterians, out of which spawned
another Fry by the name of Erastians. And that they might not be bound to this
Journey-work without daily Wages, they had each of them their 4 s. per diem
well and truly paid, and were besides invested in several Lectures in and about
the City of London, and the best Benefices (some of them three or four for
failing) which could be found in all the Kingdom. His Majesty looks on this as
a new Provocation, a strange and unparalleled Incroachment on his Royal
Prerogative, to which alone the calling of such Assemblies did belong by the
Laws of the Realm. He sees withal the dangerous ends for which it was called,
of what Ingredients for the most part the whole Assembly was composed, what
influence the prevailing party in both Houses was to have upon it, and the sad
consequents which in all probability were to be expected from it to the Church
and State. And thereupon by his Proclamation of June 22. (being just ten days
after the date of the Ordinance by which the Assembly was indicted) He inhibits
all and every Person named in that pretended Ordinance (under several pains)
from assembling together for the end and purpose therein set down; Bi^l. R^gia*
331. p.
declaring the Assembly to be illegal; and that the Acts thereof ought not to
be received by any of his good Subjects, as binding them, or of any Authority
with them. Which Prohibition notwithstanding, most of the Members authorized by
that Ordinance assembled in the Abbey of Westminster, on the first of July, in
contempt of his Majesty and the Laws: But what they did, or whether they did
any thing or not, more than their taking of the Covenant, and issuing a new
Form of Worship by the name of a Directory, comes not within the compass of my
Observation.

Such were his Majesty's pious Cares for preserving the Peace of the Church,
the Purity of Religion, and the possessions of his Clergy; in the midst whereof
he kept his eye on the course of that War* which ^itherto he had prosecuted
with such good success, with hopes of better fortune for the time to come. For
having triumphantly brought the Queen into Oxford in the beginning of the
Spring, with some Supplies of Men, and a considerable Stock of Powder, Arms,
and Ammunition, which she bought in Holland, he finds himself in a condition to
take the Field, and in this Summer becomes Master of the North and West, some
few places only being excepted. The Earl of Newc^s^le with his Northern Army,
had cleared all parts beyond Trent (but the Town of Hull) of the Enemies
Forces. And with his own Army, under the Command of Prince Rupert and Prince
Maurice (two of the younger Sons of his Sister Elizabeth Queen of ^^hemia) ^e
reduced the Cities of Bristol and Exeter, the Port-Town of Weymouth, and all
the Towns of any importance in the Western Parts, except Poole, Lime, and
Plymouth: So that he was in a manner the absolute Commander of the Counties of
Wilts, Dorset, Sommerset, Devon, and Cornwall. And though the Towns of Plymouth,
Lime, and Poole, still held out against him; yet were they so bridled by his
neighboring Garrisons, that they were not able to create him any great
disturbance. The noise of which successes was so loud at London, that most of
the leading men in both Houses of Parliament, prepared for quitting of the
Kingdom, and had undoubtedly so done, if the King had followed his good
Fortunes, and advanced toward London: But unhappily diverting upon (...), he
lay so long there without doing any thing to the purpose, that the Earl of
Essex came time enough to raise the Siege, and relieve the Town, though he made
not haste enough to recover (...) without blows. For besides some Skirmishes on
the by, which ^^ll out to his loss, the King with the whole Body of his Army
overtook him at Newbury, where after a sharp Fight (with the loss of the Earl
of Carnarvan, the Earl of Sunderland, and the Lord Viscount Faulkland on his
Majesty's side) he had the worst of the day, and had much a do to save his
Cannon, and march off orderly from the place; followed so hotly the next
morning, that his own Horse which were in the Rere, were fain to make their way
over a great part of his ^oo^, to preserve themselves. But being returned to
Oxford (with Success and Honor) he Summons the Lords and Commons of Parliament
to attend there on January 22. then next following, and they came accordingly.
And for their better welcome, he advances Prince Rupert to the Titles of Earl
of Holderness and Duke of Cumberland, and creates James his Second Son (born
October 13. Anno 1633.) Duke of York, by which name he had been appointed to be
called at the time of his Birth, that they might Sit and Vote amongst them. But
being come, they neither would take upon themselves the name of a Parliament,
nor acted much in order to his Majesty's Designs: but stood so much upon their
terms, and made so many unhandsom Motions to him upon all occasions, that he
had more reason to call them A Mongrel Parliament, in one of his Letters to the
Queen, than they were willing to allow of.

Scarce were they settled in their several and respective Houses, when they
were entertained with a hot Alarm, made by the coming in of the Scots with a
puissant Army; the greatest and best accommodated with all sorts of Arms and
Ammunition, that ever was mustered by that Nation, since it had a being. His
Majesty's wonderful Successes in the North and West, struck such a terror in
the prevailing Party of both Houses, that they were forced to cast themselves
upon the Scots for Support and Succor; dispatching Armine, and some other of
their active Members, to negotiate a new Confederacy with them. The Scots had
thrived so w^ll by the former Service, as made them not unwilling to come under
the pay of such bountiful Masters; and by the Plunder of so many of the
Northern Counties, had made themselves Masters of a greater stock of Arms and
Horses, than that Kingdom formerly could pretend to in its greatest Glories.
But knowing well in what necessity their dear Brethren in England stood of
their assistance, they were resolved to make Hay while the Sun shined, and
husband that necessity to their best advantage. The English must first enter
into Covenant with them, for conforming of this Church with that; They must be
flattered with the hopes of dividing the Bishops Lands amongst them, that they
might plant themselves in some of the fairest Houses and best Lands of this
Kingdom; So great a stroke is to be given them in the Government of all
Affairs, that the Houses could act nothing in order to the present War, no not
so much as to hold a Treaty with the King, without the consent of their
Commissioners; Some of their Ministers ( Gillespie, Henderson, etc.) with as
many of their Ruling Elders, to ^it in the Assembly of Divines at Westminster,
that nothing might be acted which concerned Religion, but by their Advice; One
hundred thousand pounds for Advance-money, to put them into heart and provide
them Necessaries, before they would budge toward the Tweed. And yet all these
Temptations were not of such prevalency with the Principal Covenanters, as an
Assurance which was given them, of calling Canterbury, their supposed old
Enemy, to a present Trial: Who having been imprisoned upon their complaint,
almost three years since, seems to have been preserved all this while for no
other purpose, than for a bait to hook them in for some new Employments. The
Walls of some Confederacies, like that of Catiline, are never thought to be
sufficiently well built but when they are cemented with blood.

All matters thus resolved on, the Covenant agreed on betwixt them and the
Scots was solemnly taken by both Houses in St. Margarets Church, and generally
imposed upon all such as were obnoxious to their power, and lived under the
command of their Forts and Garrisons: the taking whereof conduced as visibly to
the destruction of this most reverend and renowned Prelate, as to the present
subversion of the Government, and Liturgy here by Law established. In the first
branch it was to be covenanted and agreed between the Nations (that is to say,
between the Puritan or Presbyterian Factions in either Kingdom) That all
endeavors should be used for the preservation of the Reformed Religion in the
Church of Scotland, both in Doctrine, Worship, Liturgy, and Government; and for
bringing the three Kingdoms to the nearest Conjunction, and Uniformity in
Religion, Confession of Faith, Form of Church Government, Directory for Worship
and Catechizing. And in the second, That in like manner they endeavor without
any respect of Persons, the extirpation of Popery, Prelacy, that is,
Church Government by Archbishops and Bishops, their Chancellors or
Commissaries, Deans, Deans and Chapters, Archdeacons, and all other
Ecclesiastical Officers depending on the Hierarchy, Superstition, Heresy,
Schism, Profaneness, and what soever should be found contrary to sound
Doctrine, and the power of Godliness. But all this might have been pursued to
the end of the Chase without danger to the life of any, whether they
endeavored it or not, whether their lives might be an hindrance, or their
deaths give a spur to put on the work. And therefore in the fourth place it was
also Covenanted, That they should with all diligence and faithfulness discover
all such as have been, or shall be Incendiaries, Malignants, or evil
Instruments, by hindering the Reformation of Religion, dividing the King from
his People, or one of the Kingdoms from one another, or making any Faction or
Parties amongst the People contrary to this League and Covenant, that they may
be brought to public trial, and receive condign punishment as the degree of
their offenses shall require or deserve, or the supreme Judicatories of both
Kingdoms respectively, or others having power from them for that effect, shall
judge convenient. Which Article seems to have been made to no other purpose but
to bring the Archbishop to the Block, as the like clause was thrust into the
Protestation of the third of May, Anno 1641. to make sure work with the Earl of
Strafford, whom they had then designed to the said sad end. And this may be the
rather thought because the Covenant was contrived, and framed in Scotland,
where none but his sworn Enemies could be supposed to have had any hand in it;
and being by them so contrived was swallowed without much enewing by the Houses
of Parliament, who were not then in a con(...) to deny them any thing.

But by whomsoever it was framed, his Majesty saw well enough that it aimed at
the subversion of the present Government, and the diminution of his Power, if
not the destruction of his Person; the preservation and safety whereof was to
be endeavored no further than in defense of the true Religion and Liberties of
the Kingdom. Which how great or little it might be, or what was meant by true
Religion and the public Liberties, was left wholly unto their construction,
who would be sure not to interpret any thing to his best advantage. His Majesty
therefore looking on it as a dangerous Combination against himself, Pri. C.
Reg. p. 1. p. 332.
the established Religion, and the Laws of this Kingdom, for the bringing in of
Foreign Forces to subvert them all, interdicted all his Subjects from imposing,
or taking the same, as they would answer the contrary at their utmost Perils.
Which Proclamation, bearing date on the ninth of October, came out too late to
hinder the taking and enjoining of this Covenant, where the restraint thereof
might have been most necessary. For the Commons were so quick at their work,
that on Monday, September 25. it had been solemnly taken by all the Members of
that House, and the Assembly of Divines at St. Margarets in Westminster; in the
same Church, within two days after, it was administered with no less solemnity
to diverse Lords, Knights, Gentlemen, Colonels, Officers, Soldiers, and others
residing in and about the City of London, a Sermon being preached by Coleman
(though otherwise a principal Erastian in point of Government) to justify the
Piety and Legality of it; and finally, enjoined to be taken on the Sunday
following in all Churches and Chapels of London, within the Lines of
Communication, by all and every the Inhabitants within the same, as afterward,
by all the Kingdom in convenient time. Prosecuted in all places, with such
cursed rigor, that all such who refused to subscribe the same, and to lift up
their hands to God in testimony that they called him to witness to it, were
turned both out of house and home, as they use to say, not suffered to compound
for their Goods or Lands till they had submitted thereunto. A terrible and
woeful time, in which men were not suffered to enjoy their Estates without
betraying themselves to the Kings displeasure, and making shipwreck of a good
conscience in the sight of God. Upon which ground, considering it consisted of
six Principal branches, it was compared by some to the six knotted whip, or the
Statute of the six Articles in the time of King Henry viii. this Covenant
drawing in the Scots, and thereby giving an occasion of shedding infinitely
much more blood than those Articles did. Certain I am, that if all such as died
in the War upon that account may not go for Martyrs; all such as irrecoverably
lost their Estates and Livings for refusal of it, may be called Confessors.
Others with no unhappy curiosity observing the number of the words which make
up this Covenant, abstracted from the Preface and Conclusion of it, found them
amounting in the total to 666. neither more nor less, which being the number of
the Beast in the Revelation, pursued with such an open persecution, and
prosecuted to the loss of so many lives, the undoing of so many Families, and
the subverting of the Government both of Church and State, may very justly
entitle it to so much of Antichrist, as others have endeavored to confer on
the Popes of Rome. For if the Pope showed any thing of the Spirit of Antichrist
by bringing Cranmer, the first Protestant Archbishop of Canterbury, to the
Stake at Oxon. this Covenant, and the Makers of it, did express no less, in
bringing the Last Protestant Archbishop to the Block in London.

For no sooner was this Covenant taken, but to let the Scots see that they were
in earnest, a further impeachment consisting of ten Articles was prepared
against him, which being digested into Form and Order, were to this effect viz.
1. That to introduce an Arbitrary Government, and to destroy Parliaments, he
had caused the Parliament, held in the third and fourth year of his Majesty, to
be dissolved, and used many reproachful speeches against the the same. 2. That
out of an endeavor to subvert the fundamental Laws of the Land he had labored
to advance the power of the Council Table, the Canons of the Church, and the
Kings Prerogative against the said Fundamental Laws, and had used several
Speeches to the same effect. 3. That to advance the Ecclesiastical Power above
the Laws of the Land, he had by undue means to the Judges, procured a stop of
his Majesty's Writs of Prohibition, whereby Justice had been delayed and
hindered, and the Judges diverted from doing their duties. 4. That a judgment
being given against one Burly for wilful non-residency, he caused execution on
it to be staid, saying, That he would never suffer a Judgment to pass against
any Clergyman by a nihil dicit. 5. That he had caused Sir John Corbet of
Shropshire to be committed to prison by an Order of the Council Table, for
calling for the Petition of Right, and causing it to be read at the Sessions of
the Peace for the County upon just and necessary occasion, and had used some
other Acts of Injustice toward him. 6. That he had suppressed the Corporation of
Feoffees for buying in Impropriations, under pretense of being dangerous to the
Church and State. 7. That contrary to the known Laws of the Land he had
advanced Popery, and Superstition within this Realm; and to that end had
wittingly and willingly harbored diverse Popish Priests, as Sancta Clara, and
St. Giles. 8. That he had said, about four years since, there must be a blow
given to the Church, such as has not been yet given, before it could be
brought to Conformity. 9. That after the dissolution of the Parliament 1640. he
caused a Synod or Convocation to be held, and diverse Canons to be made therein,
contrary to the Laws of the Realm, the Rights and Privileges of Parliament,
etc. and particularly the Canon which enjoins the Oath, which he caused many
Ministers of the Church to take upon pain of Suspension, etc. 10. That a Vote
having been passed at the Council Table a little before the last Parliment, for
supplying his Majesty in Extraordinary ways, if the said Parliament should
prove peevish, he wickedly advised his Majesty to dissolve the same, telling
him not long after, that now he was absolved from all Rules of Government, and
left free to use Extraordinary ways for his supply. Such was the substance of
the Charge, which some intended Chiefly for an Introduction to bring on the
Trial, or to revive the noise and clamor amongst Ignorant People which rather
judge of such particulars by tale then weight: For otherwise there is nothing
in these last ten, which was not easily reducible to the first fourteen, no not
so much as his suppressing the Feoffees for Impropriations, which seemed most
odious in the eyes of any knowing men.

These Articles being thus digested, were sent up to the Lords the 23th of
October. presented by the hands of Wild, a Sergeant at Law, and one of the
Members of the House of Commons, by whom he was designed to manage the
Evidence, when the cause was Ready for a hearing; on the Receipt whereof it was
Ordered that he should appear on that day Sevennight, and to bring in his
answer in writing to the particular Articles of the several charges: which
Order being served upon him, within few hours after found him not very well
provided for a present conformity. He had obtained leave at his first
Commitment to repair to his Study at Lambeth House, and to take thence such
Papers and Memorials as might conduce to his defense; but all these had been
forcibly seized on, and in a manner ravished from him by Prynne and others,
which made his case not much unlike to that of the Israelites in the House of
Bondage, deprived first of their former allowance of Straw and Stubble, and yet
enjoined to make up their whole tale of Brick, as at other times. His Rents,
and Goods were Sequestered for the use of others, so that he had not a
sufficiency for a poor Subsistence, but by the Charity of his Friends; much
less a superabundance, out of which to Fee his Counsel and reward his
Solicitors. And what were seven days to the drawing up of an Answer unto twenty
four Articles, most of them having young ones in their bellies also, as like to
make as Loud a cry as the Dams themselves. No way to Extricate himself out of
this perplexities but by petitioning the Lords, and to them he flys, humbly
beseeching, that Chute and Hearn two able Lawyers might be assigned him for his
Counsel; that he might be allowed money out of his own Estate to reward them
and others for their pains in his business; his Books and Papers restored to
him, for the instruction of his Counsel, and his own Defense; some of his own
Servants to attend him for following all such necessary occasions, as the cause
required; and that a Solicitor, and further time might be allowed, as well for
drawing up his answer as providing witnesses, To which this Answer was
returned. Upon reading of the Petition of the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury
this 24th day of October. It is Ordered, etc. that time is given him until Monday
the 6th of November next for putting in his answer in writing into this house
unto the particular Articles brought up from the House of Commons, in
maintenance of their former impeachment of High Treason, etc. That Master
Hearn, and Master Chute, are hereby assigned to be of Counsel for the drawing
up of his Answer, who are to be permitted to have free access in and out to
him. That this house does hereby recommend to the Committee of Sequestrations,
that the said Lord Archbishop shall have such means afforded him out of his
Estate, as will enable him to pay his Counsel, and defray his other Charges.
That when his Lordship shall set down particularly what Papers and Writings are
Necessary for his Defense that should be restored unto him, their Lordships
will take it into consideration. That upon his Lordships nominating who shall
be hi^ Solicitor, the Lords will return their Answer. And for the witnesses
when a day shall be appointed for his Lordships trial, this House will give
such directions therein as shall be ju^^.




This doubtful Answer gave him small assurance of an equal hearing. His desired
Counsel was allowed him, Hales superadded to the ^e^t, and three of his
Servants nominated to attend the business: But he was left uncertain of
providing for their satisfaction. His Solicitor must be first approved by them
before he could settle to his cause, and whether they would approve of such an
one as he thought sit to trust with his life and same, was to him unknown; and
if he point particularly to such of his Papers and Remembrances, as he
conceived most necessary to his preservation, it was only promised to be taken
into consideration, which kept him in as great suspense as all the rest. In
this distress he was advised by his Counsel to move their Lordships, that a
Discrimination might be made betwixt the Articles; to the end that such of them
as were held to contain High Treason might be distinguished from such matters,
as were to be c^arged for misdeamenors: But no clear answer coming from their
Lordships in that behalf he was Commanded to make his personal appearance
before them on the 13th of November. where by the advice of his Counsel he
pleaded not guilty to the whole charge, without answering more particularly to
any Article or clause contained in it. And on that day month it was Ordered by
the House of Commons, that the Committee Formerly appointed to prepare the
Evidence for his Trial, should put the business into a quick and speedy course,
with power to send for Parties, Witnesses, Papers, Records, etc. And to make
all things ready for the sight of the House: the care thereof Committed
specially to Wild who had before brought up the additional Articles. Brought
to the Bar again on Tuesday the 16th of January, their Lordships were informed
by Maynard, in the name of the House of Commons, that ^is former Answer being
made only to the Additional Articles, and (...) to the Original also, they
could not in defect thereof proceed (as otherwise they would have done) to draw
up the Issue; and thereupon he was required peremptorily to prepare his Answer
to those also against Monday following, though deemed so General by his
Counsel, as not to be sufficiently capable of a Particular Reply. Which day
being come he claimed the benefit of the Act of Pacification, for his discharge
from all matters comprehended in the 13th Article relating to the troubles of
Scotland; and to the rest pleaded not Guilty as before. Which put the cause to
such a stand, that there was no further speech of it in the House of Commons
till the 22th of February, when the Committee was required to prepa^e their
evidence and the distribution of the parts thereof, with all possible speed.
And thus the business was drilled on, hastened, or slackned, as the Scots
advanced in their expedition; and as the expedition prospered in success and
fortune, so was it prosecuted and advanced to its fatal Period. For
understanding that the Scots were entered England and had marched victoriously
almost as far as the Banks of the River Tine, they pressed the Lords to name a
day for the beginning of his Trial, who thereupon fixed it upon Tuesday the
twelfth o^ March next ensuing.

The day being come, and the Archbishop brought unto the Ba^ in the House of
Peers, the Articles of the Impeachment were first read by the Clerk of the
House, together with the several answers of Not Guilty before remembered; upon
the hearing whereof he most humbly prayed, that the Commons might be Ordered to
sever the Articles which were pretended to be Treason, from those which
contained misdemeanors only, that so he might know which of them were Treason
and which not. To which it was replied by Maynard, that the Commons would not
give way to that Proposition, in regard that all the Articles together, not any
of them by it self, made up the Treason wherewith he was charged, that is to
say, his several endeavors to subvert and destroy Religion, the Fundamental
Laws of the Land and Government of the Rea^m, and to bring in Popery, and an
Arbitrary Tyrannical Government against Law. So that we have a Cumulative and
Constructive Treason, (such as had formerly been charged on the Earl of
Strafford) A Treason in the conclusion, which could not be gathered from the
Premis^s* A Treason in the Summa Totalis, when nothing but misdemeanors at the
most, could be found in the Items. Which being thus Resolved upon, a long
Studied Speech was made by Wild, in which there wanted neither words nor
animosity to make him culpable of the crimes wherewith he was charged, if his
words could ^ave done it. One passage there was in it, which was Subject to
some mis^^nstruction, and so interpreted by those, which otherwise had no good
a^^ection to the Prisoners Person; for having set forth his offenses in their
foulest Colors, he seems to make a wonder of it that any thing could be
expected of the people, but that they should have been Ready to have stoned
him, as they did him that did but Act the part of Bellerophon in Rome. Which
Passage was interpreted for an intimation to the Raskal multitude to save the
Houses the dishonor of putting him to death in a form of Law, by Stoneing him
to death o^ Tearing him in pieces, or laying violent hands upon him on some
other way, as he past between his Barge and the House of Peers. Wild having
done, he humbly craved Liberty to wipe of the dirt, which so injuriously had
been cast upon him, that he might not depart thence so foul a Person as he had
been rendered to their Lordships. Which leave obtained (as it could not
reasonably be denied a far meaner Person) without any trouble in his
Countenance, or perturbation of his Mind, he spoke as follows; My Lords,
MY being in this Place in this Condition, recalls to my Memory that which I
long since read in Seneca, Tormentum est, etiam si absolutus quis merit, caus^m
dixiffe ( 6. de Benef. c. 28.) It Is not a (...), no, it is no less than Torment,
for an ingenious man to ^l^^d ca^it^lly or criminally, though it should so fall
out that he be absolved. The great Truth of this I find at present in my self;
and so much the more, because I am a Christian; and not that only, but in Holy
Orders; and not so only, but by Gods Grace and Goodness preferred to the
greatest place this Church affords; and yet brought causam dicere, to plead for
my self at this Great Bar. And whatsoever the World think of me (and they have
been taught to think much more ill of me, than, I humbly thank Christ for it, I
was ever acquainted with) yet my Lords, this I find, Tormentum est, it is no
less than a Torment to me to appear in this Place; nay, my Lords, give me leave
to speak plain truth, No Sentence that can justly pass upon me (and other I
will never fear from your Lordships) can go so near me, as causam dicere, (...)
plead for my self upon this occasion in this place. But as for the ^^ntence, ^e
it what it shall, I thank God for it, I am for it at St. Paul's word (Acts
25.11.) If I have committed any thing worthy of death, I refuse not to die; For
I thank God I have so lived, that I am neither afraid to die, nor ashamed to
live. But seeing the Malignity which has been raised against me by some men, I
have carried (...) Life in my hands these diverse years past. I may not in this
Case, and at this Bar, appeal unto Caesar; yet to your Lordships Justice and
Integrity, I both may and do: not doubting, but that God of his Goodness will
preserve my Innocence. And as Job in the midst of his afflictious said to his
mistaken Friends, so shall I to my Accusers, God forbid I should justify you;
till I die I will not remove my Integrity from me, I will hold it fast and not
let it go: my heart shall not reproach me as long as I live, Job. 27.5, 6. My
Lords, the Charge against me is brought up in Ten Articles; but the main Heads
are two, An Endeavor to subvert the Laws of the Land, and the Religion
Esta^li^^ed: Six Articles (the five first and the last) concern the (...), and
the other four Religion.

For the Laws first, I think I may safely say, I have been, to my
understanding, as strict an Observer of them, so far as they concern me, as any
man has; and since I came into the Place, I have followed them, and have been
as much guided by them, as any man that sat where I had the honor to sit: And
of this I am sorry I have lost the Testimony of the Lord Keeper Coventry, and
other Persons of Honor since dead. And the Counselors which attended the
Council Board can witness, some of them here present, That in all References to
the Board, or Debates arising at it, I was for that part o^ the Cause where I
found Law to be; and if the Counsel desired to have the Cause left to the Law,
well might I move in some Cases Charity or Conscience to them: but I left them
to the Law, if thither they would go. And how such a Carriage as this, through
the whole course of my Life in private and public, can stand with an intention
to overthrow the Laws, I cannot see. Nay, more, I have ever been of opinion,
That Laws bind the Conscience, And have accordingly made conscience in
observing of them: and this Doctrine I have constantly Preached, as occasion
has been offered me; and how is it possible I should seek to overthrow those
Laws, which I held my self bound in conscience to keep and observe?

As for Religion, I was born and bred up under the Church of England, as it
stands established by Law. I have by Gods Blessing grow^ up in it to the years
which are now upon me, and the Place of Preferment which I now bear. I have
ever since I understood ought of my Pro^e^^ion, kept one constant Tenor in this
my Profession, without variation, or shifting from one Opinion to another for
any worldly ends. And if my conscience would have suffered me to do so, I could
easily have slid through all the difficulties which have been pressed upon me in
this kind: But of all Diseases, I ever held a Palsy in Religion most
dangerous; well knowing, and ever remembering, That that Disease often ends in a
Dead Palsy. Ever since I came in place, I have labored nothing more, than
that the External Public W^rship of God* (so much slighted in diverse parts of
this Kingdom) might be preserved; and that with as much Decency and Uniformity
as might be. For I evidently saw, That the public neglect of Gods Service in
the outward face of it, and the nasty lying of many Places dedicated to that
Service, had almost cast a damp upon the true and inward Worship of God, which
while we live in the body needs external helps, and all little enough to keep
it in any vigor. And this I did to the utmost of my knowledge, according both
to Law and Canon, and with the consent and liking of the People: Nor did any
Command issue out from me, against the one, nor without the other. Further, my
Lords, give me leave I beseech you, to acquaint you with this also, That I have
as little acquaintance with Recusants, as I believe any m^n of my place in
England, has, or eve^ had since the Reformation: And for my Kindred, no one of
them was ever a Recusant, but Sir William Webb, Grandchild to my Uncle Sir
William Webb, sometimes Lord Mayor of London; and since which some of his
Children I reduced back again to the Church of England. On this, I humbly
desire one thing more may be thought on, That I am fallen into a great deal of
Obloquy in matter of Religion, and that so far (as appears by the Articles
against me) that I have endeavored to advance and bring in Popery. Perhaps, my
Lords, I am not ignorant what Party of men have raised these Scandals upon me,
nor for what end, nor perhaps by whom set on: but howsoever, I would fain have
a good Reas^n given me, if my Conscience stood that way, and that with my
Conscience I could subscribe to the Church of Rome, what should have kept me
here before my Imprisonment, to endure the Libelling, and the Slander, and the
base Usage that has been put upon me; and these to end in this Question for my
Life? I say, I would know a good Reason for this.

first, my Lords, Is it because of any Pledges I have in this World, to sway me
against my Conscience? No sure; for I had neither Wife nor Children to cry out
upon me to stay with them: And if I had, I hope the calling of my Conscience
should be heard above them. Is it because I was both to lose the Honor and
Profit of the Place I was risen to? Sur^ly no; For I desire your Lordships and
all the World should kn^w, I do much scorn the one and the other, in comparison
of my Conscience. Besides, it cannot be imagined by any man, but that if I
should (...) gone over to them, I should not have wanted both Honor and (...):
and suppose not so great as this I have here; yet sure would (...) have served
my self of either, less with my Conscience, (...) have prevailed with me more,
then greater against my Consci(...) because I lived here at Ease, and was loath
to venture the (...) that? Not so neither; For whatsoever the World may be
pleased to think of me, I have led a very painful Life, and such as I would
(...) been content to change, had I well known how: And would my Conscience
have served me that way, I am sure I might have lived at far more ease, and
either have avoided the barbarous Libelling, and ^^her bitter grievous Scorns
which have been put upon me; or at least, been ^ut of the hearing of them. Not
to trouble your Lordships too long, I am so innocent in the Business of
Religion, so free from all Practice, or so much as thought of Practice, for any
Alteration unto Popery, or any blemishing of the true Protestant Religion
established in England, as I was when my Mother first bore me into the World.
And let nothing be spoken but truth, and I do here re-challenge whatsoever is
between Heaven and Hell, that can be said against me in point of my Religion,
in which I have ever hated dissimulation. And had I not hated it, perhaps I
might have been better for worldly safety, than now I am: but it can no way
become a Christian Bishop to halt with God.

Lastly, If I had a purpose to blast the true Religion established in the
Church of England, and to introduce Popery, sure I took a wrong w^^ to it. For,
my Lords, I have staid more going to Rome, and reduced more that were already
gone, than I believe any Bishop or Divine (...) this Kingdom has d^ne; and
some of them men of great Abilities, and some persons of great place. And is
this the way to introduce Popery? My Lords, If I have blemished the true
Protestant Religion, how could I have brought these men to it? And if I had
promised to introduce Popery, I would never have reduced these men from it. And
that it may appear unto your Lordships how many, and of what condition the
persons are, which by Gods blessing upon my labors, I have settled in the true
Protestant Religion, established in England, I shall briefly name some of them,
though I cannot do it in order of time as I converted them; First Henry
Berkinstead of Trinity College in Oxon. seduced by a Jesuit, and brought to
London. Two Daughters of Sir Richard Lechford in Surrey, sent toward a
Nunnery. Two Scholars of S. John's College in Cambridge, Toppin, and Ashton,
who had got the French Ambassadors Pass; and after this I allowed means to
Toppin, and then procured him a Fellowship in St. John's: And he is at this
present as hopeful a young man as any of his time, and a Divine. Sir William
Webb my Kinsman, and two of his Daughters; and his Son I took from him, and his
Father being utterly decayed, I bred him at my own charge: and he is a very
good Protestant. A Gentleman brought to me by Mr. Chesford, his Majesty's
Servant, but I cannot recall his name. The Lord Mayo of Ireland, brought to me
also by Mr. Chesford. The Right Honorable the Lord Duke of Buckingham, almost
quite gone between the Lady his Mother and Sister. The Lady Marquess Hamilton
was settled by my direction, and she died very Religiously, and a Protestant.
Mr. Digby who was a Priest. Mr. James a Gentleman brought to me by a Minister
of Buckinghamshire, as I remember. Dr. Heart the Civilian, my Neighbors Son at
Fulham. Mr. Christopher Seaborne, a Gentleman of an ancient Family in
Herefordshire. The Right Honorable the Countess of Buckingham. Sir William
Spencer of Parnton. Mr. Chillingworth. The Sons and Heirs of Mr. Winchcomb, and
Mr. Wollescot, whom I sent with their Friends liking to Wadham College Oxon.
and received a Certificate Anno 1638. of their continuing in Conformity to the
Church of England. Nor did ever any one of these named relapse again, but only
the Countess of Buckingham and Sir William Spencer; It being only in Gods
power, not mine, to preserve them for relapse. And now let any Clergyman in
England come forth, and give a better account of his zeal to the Church.




This being said, and all Parties commanded to withdraw, their Lordships, after
some short time of consideration, appointed the next Morning at nine of the
clock for the beginning of the Prosecution to be made against him. In order
whereunto the twenty four Articles (for so many there were in both
impeachments) were reduced under these four general Heads, viz. 1. His
traitorous Endeavors and Practices to alter and subvert Gods true Religion by
Law established in this Realm, and in stead thereof to set up Popish
Superstition and Idolatry; the particulars whereof are specified in the 5, 6, 7,
8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13 Original, and 6, 7, 8, 9 Additional Articles. 2. His
traitorous usurpation of a Papal and Tyrannical Power in the Church of England
in all Ecclesiastical affairs, to the prejudice and derogation of his Majesty's
Royal Prerogative, and the Subjects Liberties; comprised in the sixth Original
Article. 3. His traitorous Attempts and Endeavors to subvert the Fundamental
Temporal Laws, Government and Liberties of the Realm and Subjects of England,
and instead thereof to introduce an Arbitrary and Temporal Government, against
Law and the Subjects Liberty; expressed in the 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 13 Original;
and 1, 2, 2, 3, 4, 5, 10 Additional Articles. And 4. His traitorous Endeavors
to subvert the Rights of Parliament, and ancient course of Parliamentary
Proceedings, and by ^alse and malicious slanders to incense his Majesty against
them, contained in the 14 Original, and the 1, 9, 10 Additional Articles. The
managing of the Evidence committed to Maynard, Wild, and Nicholas, all Members
of the House of Commons; by whom the business was drawn out to so great a
length, that it took up no less than seventeen days; not altogether, but with
so many pauses and intermissions (as the Scots prospered and came forwards)
that the pleadings were not fully finished till the end of July. I hope it will
not be expected that I should lay down the proceedings on both sides, the
Proofs and Testimonies which were brought against him, or the defenses which
were made by him in full Answer to them; that being a work, which of it self
would make a greater Volume than our present History. All I shall say, amounts
to no more but this, That there wanted neither wit nor will in the Prosecutors
to make him appear as guilty in the eye of the Lords, as his Accusers could
desire. And as for him, it is related by the Pen of his greatest Adversary,
(...). D^om. p. 462.
That he made as Full, as Gallant, as Pithy a Defense, and spoke as much for
himself as was possible for the wit of man to invent; and that with so much
Art, Vivacity, Oratory, Audacity, and Confidence, that he showed not the least
acknowledgment of Guilt in any of the particulars which were charged upon him.
And though the Relator, putting the worst gloss upon the Text, be pleased to
say, that these Abilities did argue him rather Obstinate, than Innocent;
Impudent, than Penitent; a far better Orator, Sophister, than Protestant or
Christian; a truer Son of the Church of Rome, than of the Church of England:
yet in the midst of these Reproaches he gives him the Commendations of Wit and
Eloquence, of being a good Orator, and a subtle Disputant; which with the rest
of the Abilities ascribed unto him, considering the suddenness of his
Preparations, the frailty of his Memory, the burden of seventy years, with
other natural infirmities then lying heavy on him, may not unjustly be imputed
to Divine assistance. What sense the Commons had of his justification, and what
satisfaction was found in it by the House of Peers, we shall see hereafter.

And here we leave him for a time, to see how far the Scots pro^eeded, and what
they did in order to the service of those that so (...) ^ired them, which might
be equal to the merit of so great a Sacrifice. Of whom we are to know, that
passing by the Town of Berwick, they entered England in the middle of January
with a puissant Army, consisting of eighteen thousand Foot, two thousand Horse,
and one thousand Dragoons, accommodated with all things necessary for the
Expedition; not hindered in their March till they came almost to the River Tine,
where they were stopped by the interposition of the Northern Army, under the
Conduct and Command of the Marquess of Newcastle, but so that they remained
unfought with, unless it were in petit Skirmishes and Pickeerings, without
engaging the whole Power on either side. Langdale, a Gentleman of approved
Valor and Fidelity, was commonly reported to have been earnest with the
Marquess to give them battle, or at the least to suffer him with a Party of
Horse to assault them in such places where they lay most open to Advantage; not
doubting but to give a good account of his undertakings. In all which motions
and desires he is said to have been crossed by General King, an old experienced
Soldier, but a Scot by Nation, whom his Majesty had recommended to the
Marquess of Newcastle, as a fit man to be consulted with in all his
Enterprises, and he withal took such a fancy to the man, that he was guided
wholly by him in all his Actions. Which King if he had been employed in any of
the Southern or Western Armies, he might have done his Majesty as good service
as any whosoever: But being in this Army, to serve against the Scots, his own
dear Countrymen, he is said to have discouraged and dissuaded all attempts
which were offered to be made against them, giving them thereby the opportunity
of gaining ground upon the English, till the Marquisses retreat toward York.
For in the opening of the Spring News came unto the Marquess of the taking of
Selby by the Forces Garrisoned in Hull; by which necessitated to put himself,
and the greatest part of his Army, into the City of York, on the safety whereof
the whole fortune of the North depended. Followed at the heels by Lesly, who,
notwithstanding the undeserved Honors conferred upon him by the King, and his
own vehement protestations of a future Loyalty, commanded this third Army also
as he did the two first, and leaving Newcastle at his back, struck like a
Soldier at the head, not troubling himself in taking in such places as
imported nothing in reference to the main concernment. Resolving on the siege
of the Capital City, they were seconded by the Army of the Earl of Manchester,
drawn out of the Associated Counties, and the remaining Yorkshire Forces under
the Command of the Lord Fairfax: By which, beleaguered on all sides, that great
City was reduced to some distress for want of Victuals, and other necessary
Ammuni^ion to make good the place.

The News whereof being brought to Oxon. Prince Rupert is dispatched with as
much of the Kings Army as could well be spared, with a Commission to raise more
out of the Counties of Chester, Stafford, Darby, Leicester, and Lancaster; so
that he came before York with an Army of twelve thousand men, relieved the Town
with some Provisions for the present, and might have gone away unfought with,
but that such counsel was too cold for so hot a stomach. Resolved upon the
onset, he encountered with the Enemy at a place called Marston More, where the
Left Wing of his Horse gave such a fierce Charge on the Right Wing of the
Enemy, consisting of Fairsax his Horse in the Van, and the Scots Horse in the
Rear, that they fell ^oul on a part of their Foot which was behind them, and
trod most of them under their Horses feet: But Ruperts Horse follow^^g the
Execution too ^ar, and none advancing to make good t^^ place which they had
le^t, the Enemy had the opportunity to ^ally again, and got the better of the
day, taking some Prisoners o^ good not^, and making themselves Masters of his
Cannon. So that not being able to do any thing in order to the regaining of the
Field, ^e marched off un^ortunat^ly; the greatest part of his Army mouldring
away, he retired to Bristol. After this blow the Affairs of the North growing
more desperate every day than other, York yielded upon Composition on July 16.
(being a just ^ortnight after the fight) the Marquess of Newcastle and some
principal Gentlemen passing over the Seas, so that the strong Town of Newcastle
was taken by the Scots o^ the nineteenth of October following.

While these things were Acting in the North, Essex and Waller with their
Armies drew near to Oxford, hoping to take it unprovided, in the absence of so
great a part of his Majesty's Forces. On whose approach his Majesty leaving the
greatest part of his Army for defense of that place, marched on directly toward
Wales. Upon the news whereof it was thought fit by the two Generals to divide
their Armies: it being agreed upon, that Waller should pursue the King, and
that the Earl of Essex should march toward the West for the regaining of those
Countries. And now the Mystery of iniquity appeared in its proper colors; for
whereas it was formerly given (...) by the Houses of Parliament, that they had
undertaken the Wa^ for no other reason, but to remove the King from his evil
Couns^llors, those Evil Counselors were left at Oxon. and the Kings Person
only hunted. But the King understanding of this Division, ^^ought himself able
enough to deal with Waller, and giving him (...) go-by, returned toward Oxon.
drew thence the remainder of (...) A^my, and gave him a sharp meeting at a
place called Cropready (...), where he obtained a signal Victory on the twenty
eighth of Iun^, and entered triumphantly into Oxon. This done, he marched after
the Earl of Essex, who had made himself Master of some places in the West of
good importance. During this March it happened that one of the Carriages brake in
a long narrow Lane, which they were to pass, and gave his Majesty a stop, at a
time of an intolerable (...) Rain which fell upon him. Some of his ^word, and
(...) were about him, offered to hew him out a way through (...) with their
^words, that he might get shelter in some of the Villages adjoining; but he
Resolved not to forsake his Cannon upon any occasion. At which when some about
him seemed to admire, and marvelled at the patience which he showed in that
Extremity, his Majesty lifting up his Hat, made Answer, That as God had given
him afflictions to exercise his patience, so he had given him patience to bear
his afflictions. The carriage being mended he went forward again, and trod so
close upon the heels of Essex, that at last he drove him into Cornwall, and
there reduced him to that point, that he put himself into a Cock-boat, with
Stapleton and some others of his principal Friends, and left his whole Army to
his Majesty's mercy. His Horse taking the Advantage of a dark night made a
shift to escape, but the Commanders of the Foot came to this Capitulation with
his Majesty, that they should depart without their Arms, which with their
Cannon, Baggage and Ammunition, being of great Consideration, were left wholly
to his disposing.

Immediately after this success, his Majesty dispatched a message from
Tavestock to the two Houses of Parliament, in which he laid before them the
miserable Condition of the Kingdom, remembering them of those many Messages
which he had formerly sent unto them for an accommodation of the present
differences; and now desiring them to bethink themselves of some expedient by
which this Issue of blood might be dried up, the distraction of the Kingdom
settled, and the whole Nation put into an hope of Peace and Happiness. To which
message as to many others before, they either gave no Answer, or such an one as
rather served to widen then close the breach, falsely conceiving, that all his
Majesty's offers of Grace and Favor, proceeded either from an inability to
hold out the War, or from the weakness and irresolution of his Counsels. But if
instead of th^s Message from Tavestock his Majesty had gone on his own errand,
and marched directly toward London, it was conceived in all probability that he
might have made an end of the War, secured the life of the Archbishop his most
trusty Servant, and put an end to those calamities which the continuance and
conclusion of the War, brought with it. The Army of Essex being thus broken,
and that of Manchester not returned from the Northern Service, He could not
choose but have observed in the course of that Action, with what a Military
Prudence, Lesly had followed at the heels of the Marquis of Newcastle, not
stopping or diverting upon the by, till he had brought his Army before York;
the gaining whereof, as being the chief City of those parts, brought in all the
Rest. And certainly it has been counted no dishonor in the greatest Soldiers
to be instructed by their enemies in the feats of War. But the King sitting
down before Plymouth (as before Gloucester the last year) and staying there to
perfect an Association of the Western Counties, he spent so much time that
Essex was again in the head of his Army; and being seconded by Manchester, and
Waller, made a stand at Newbury, where after a very sharp dispute, the Enemy
gained some of his Majesty's Cannon, which struck such a terror into many of
those about him, that they advised him to withdraw his Person out of the danger
of the Fight, as he did accordingly. But this he did so secretly and with so
slender a Retinue, that he was not mist, His Army holding on the ^ight with a
greater courage, because they thought the safety of his Majesty's Person did
depend upon it; whose departure if it had been known, would questionless have
created such a general dejection in the hearts of his Soldiers, as would have
rendered them to a cheap discomfiture. But the Lost Cannon being regained, and
the fight continued with those of his Majesty's party with greater advantage
then before, each Army drew of by degrees, so that neither of them could find
any great cause to boast of the victory.

This Summers Action being ended, in which the Scots had done very good service
to the Houses of Parliament, it was thought necessary to proceed in the Trial
of the Archbishop of Canterbury, which had taken up so much time already, that
it seemed ready for a sentence. But there appeared more difficulty in it, then
at first was looked for. For being admitted to a Recapitulation of his whole
defense before the Lords, in the beginning of September, it gave such a general
satisfaction to all that heard it, that the mustering up of all the evidence
against him would not take it off. To prove the first branch of the charge
against him, they had ripped up the whole course of his Life, from his first
coming to Oxford, till his Commitment to the Tower; but could find no
sufficient Proof of any design to bring in Popery, or suppress the true
Protestant Religion here by Law Established. For want whereof, they insisted
upon such Reproaches as were laid upon him when he lived in the University, the
beautifying of his Chapel Windows with Pictures and Images, the Solemn
Consecration of Churches and Chapels, the Placing of the Communion Table
Altar-wise, and making Adoration in his Accesses to, or Approches toward it;
Administering the Sacrament, with some more Solemnities, then in Ordinary
Parochial Churches, though constantly observed in his Majesty's Chapels; the
care and diligence of his Chaplains in expunging some offensive passages out of
such Books, as were to be licenced for the Press, and t^eir permitting of some
passages to remain in others which were supposed to ^avor of Popery and
Arminianism, because they crossed the sense of Calvin; the preferring of many
able men to his Majesty's Service, and to advancements in the Church, who must
the Stigmatized for Papists, or Arminians, because they had not sworn
themselves into Calvin's Faction; his countenancing two or three Popish Priests,
(for no more are named) of whom good use was to be made in Order to the Peace
and Happiness of the Church of England, as had before been done by Bancroft,
and others of his Prede^^ssors, since the Reformation. Such were the proofs of
his designs to bring in Popery; and yet his plots and purposes for suppressing
the true Protestant Religion, had less proofs then this. Of which sort were,
His severe proceedings in the High Commission against some Factious Ministers,
and Seditious Lecturers; the sentencing of Sherfield, for defacing a Parish
Church in Salisbury, under color of a Vestry-order, in contempt of the
Diocesan Bishop who then Lived in that City; the pressing of his Majesty's two
Declarations, the one for Lawful Sports, the other for Silencing unnecessary,
though not unlawful, Disputations; His zeal in overthrowing the Corpo^ation of
Feoffees, which had no Legal Foundation to stand upon, and seemed destructive
to the Peace of the Church and State in the eyes of all that pierced into it;
and finally the Piety of his endeavors, for uniting the French, and Dutch
Congregations to the Church of England, in which he did nothing without
Warrant, or against the Law.

Such were the Crimes or Treasons rather, which paint him out with such an ugly
countenance in the Book called Canterburies Doom, Cant. Doom, p. 565.
as if he were the Greatest Traitor, and the most Execrable Person, that ever
had been bred in England. And he is promised to be Painted out in such Lively
Colors in the following Branches of his Charge, as should for ever render him
as Treasonable, and as Arch a Malefactor as he was in the others, and in both
alike; that promise never being performed in the space of a Dozen years and
more since it first was made, in all which time, we hear no news of that
performance for which the Ground could be but Little, and the evidence less. To
the other branches of his Charge, consisting in Words or Actions he answered
first, That the Dissolving of the said Parliaments was no Act of his, the
business being publicly debated at the Council Table and carried by the
Unanimous consent of all then Present; that the hard measure which he was
complained of to have shown to Corbet of Shropshire (he being but a Private
Subject) could not be called an Act of Treason; That the words charged upon him
at the Council Table and elsewhere, might well have been spared; That no ill
effect did follow on them; and that they were innocently though suddenly
spoken, which he hoped might proceed from a man of such a hasty, and
Incircumspect humor as himself (made so as well by nature, as by the
multiplicity of vexations which were put upon him) without involving him in the
crime or guilt of Treason; That for his words unto the King, touching his being
absolved from the Rules of Government, they contained only matter of opinion,
and in opinion delivered at the Council Table, where all had Liberty to speak
their own sense as he did at time; which if it were Erroneous and contrary to
the sense of others, he hoped that no man should justly be condemned of
Treason, for showing himself no wiser then God had made him. And thereupon he
desired the Lords from his misfortune to provide for their own safety, and
seriously to consider what a way was chalked out to ruin them, both in their
Lives and their Estates, if for every Opinion given in Council, or Words
suddenly or hastily spoken, they (who are born to wield the great affairs of
the Kingdom) should be Arraigned or Sentenced as Traitors. To which he added in
the close, That there was no likelihood that he had committed Real Acts of
Treason, when his adverse Party was content to trifle away so much time about
Words: Neither was there any Treason in them, though they had been fully
verified; and therefore in that (as in all other Articles) he reserved a Power
for his Counsel to dispute in matter of Law. Which when it came to the Dispute
(not called on by the Commons till October 11.) the Question or Point in Issue
was, Whether any Treason was contained in all or any of the Articles which were
charged against him? And therein Hearn so played his part, as the mouth of the
rest, that after the expectation of more months, and the expense of almost as
many days as had been spent in the Arraignment of the Earl of Strafford, his
Enemies in the House of Commons were forced to fall again on a Bill of
Attainder, as they had been before, after so much ^^ise and ostentation of Wit
and Eloquence, in the case of that Gentleman.

For being too far engaged to go back with Honor, and yet not having
confidence enough to venture him to the Judgment of the House of Peers, as in
the way of Legal Trial, they seemed to be at such a stand, as the Thames is
said to be at, under London Bridge, betwixt Ebb and Flood. In which perplexity,
some who were fit for any mischief, employed themselves to go from door to
door, and from man to man, to get hands against him; and so Petition those to
hasten to his Condemnation, who must forsooth be forced to their own desires
(whereof, and of the Magistrates standing still and suffering them to proceed
without any Check, he gave them a Memento in his dying Speech) Which
Preparations being made, they followed it with such double diligence, that by
the beginning of November most men were great with expectation of a final
Sentence; Conceived by some, That the whole Evidence being transmitted with the
Prisoner to the Justices of his Majesty's Bench, he should have been put over
to a Middlesex-Iury: but they were only some poor Ignorants which conceived so
of it. The Leading Members of the House thought of no such matter; and to say
truth, it did concern them highly not to go that way. For though there was no
question to be made at all, but that they could have Impanelled a Jury to have
found the Bill: yet by a Clause in the Attainder of the Earl of Strafford, they
had bound the Judges not to declare those Facts for Treason in the time to
come, for which they had Condemned and Executed that Heroic Peer. And
therefore they resolved on the same course now, which they had found before so
prosperous and successful to them, to proceed now as then, by Bill of
Attainder, and condemn him by Ordinance; in which being Parties, Witnesses, and
Judges too, they were assured to speed as they would themselves. And though for
fashion sake he was brought unto the Commons Bar on the eleventh of that Month,
not without magnifying the Favor of giving him leave to show some Reason, why
the Bill should not pass against him: yet was this but a matter of Formality
only, the Ordinance passing in that House within two days after.

But yet the Business was not done; for the Lords stuck at it: some of which
having not extinguished all the Sparks of Humanity, began to find themselves
compassionate of his Condition; not knowing how soon it should or might be made
their own, if once disfavoured by the Grandees of that Potent Faction. For the
Ordinance having been transmitted to the House of Peers, and the House of Peers
deliberating somewhat long upon it, it was Voted on December 4. That all Books,
Writings, and Evidences which concerned the Trial, should be brought before the
Lords in Parliament; to the end that they might seriously and distinctly
consider of all Particulars amongst themselves, as they came before them. But
meaning to make sure work of it, they had in the mean time (after no small
Evaporations of Heat and Passion) prepared an Ordinance, which they sent up
unto the Lords, importing the displacing of them from all those Places of Power
and Command which they had in the Army. Which being found too weak to hold,
they fall upon another and a likelier Project, which was to bring the Lords to
sit in the Commons House, where they were sure they should be inconsiderable
both for Power and Number. And to effect the same with more speed and
certainty, they had recourse to their old Arts, drawing down Watkins with his
general muster of Subscriptions, and putting a Petition into his hands, to be
tendered by him to the Houses, that is, themselves; wherein it was required,
amongst other things, That they should vigorously proceed unto the punishment
of all Delinquents; and that for the more quick dispatch of Public Businesses
of State, the Lords would please to Vote and Sit together with the Commons. On
such uncertain terms, such a ticklish Tenure, did they then hold their Place
and Power in Parliament, who so officiously complied with the House of Commons,
in depriving the Bishops of their Vote, and the Churches Birthright. And this
was it which helped them in that time of need. And yet not thinking this Device
sufficient to fright their Lordships to a present compliance, Stroud was sent
up with a Message from the House of Commons, to let them know, That the
Londoners would shortly bring a Petition, with 20000 Hands, to obtain that
Ordinance. By which stale and common Stratagem, they wrought so far on some
weak Spirits, the rest withdrawing themselves (as formerly in the case of the
Earl of Strafford) that in a thin and slender House, not above six or seven in
number, it was passed at last. The day before they passed the Ordinance for
establishing their new Directory; which, in effect, was nothing but a total
abolition of the Common Prayer Book: and thereby showed unto the World, how
little hopes they had of settling their new Form of Worship, if the foundation
of it were not laid in the blood of this famous Prelate, who had so stoutly
stood up for it against all Novellism and Faction, in the whole course of his
Life. ^e was certified by some Letters to Oxon. and so reported in the
Mercurius Aulicus of the following week, That the Lord Bruce ((...) better
known by the name of the Earl of Elgin) was one of the number of those few
Lords which had Voted to the Sentence of his Cond^mnation: The others which
concurred in that fatal Sentence, being the Earls of Kent, Pembroke, Salisbury,
and Bullingbrook; together with the Lord North, and the Lord Gray of Wark. But
whatsoever may be said of the other six, I have been advertised lately from a
very good hand, That the said Lord Bruce has frequently disclaimed that
Action, and solemnly professed his detestation of the whole Proceedings, as
most abhorrent from his nature, and contrary to his known a^fections, as well
unto his Majesty's Service, as the Peace and Preservation of the Church of
England.

This Ordinance was no sooner passed, but it revived many of those Discourses,
which had before been made on the like occasion in the Business of the Earl of
Strafford. For hereupon it was observed, That as the predominant Party in the
United Provinces, to bring about their ends in the death of Barnevelt,
subverted all those Fundamental Laws of the Belgic Liberty, for maintenance
whereof they took up Arms against Philip ii. So the Contrivers of this
Mischief, had violated all the Fundamental Laws of the English Government, for
maintenance whereof they had pretended to take up Arms against the King. It was
(said they) a Fundamental Law of the English Government, and the first Article
in the Magna Charta, ^
That the Church of England shall be free, and shall have all her whole Rights
and Privileges inviolable. Yet to make way unto the Condemnation of this
Innocent Man, the Bishops must be Voted out of their Place in Parliament, which
most of them have held far longer in their Predecessors, than any of our Noble
Families in their Progenitors; and if the Lords refuse to give way unto it (as
at first they did) the People must come down to the House in multitudes, and
cry No Bishops, no Bish^ps, at the Parliament doors; till by the terror of
their Tumults, (...) extort it from them. It is a Fundamental Law of the
English (...), ^
That no Freeman shall be taken or imprisoned, without cause (...); or be
detained, without being brought unto his Answer in due form of Law. Yet here we
see a Freeman imprisoned ten whole weeks together, before any Charge was
brought against him; and kept in Prison three whole years more, before his
General Accusation was by them reduced unto Particulars; and for a year almost
detained close Prisoner, without being brought unto his Answer, as the Law
requires. It is a Fundamental Law of the English Government, (...) be disserz^^
of his Freehold or Liberties, but by the known Laws of the Land. Yet here we
see a man disseized of his Rents and Lands, spoiled of his Goods, deprived of
his Jurisdiction, divested of his Right of Patronage; and all this done, when
he was so far from being convicted by the Laws of the Land, that no particular
Charge was so much as thought of. It is a Fundamental Law of the English
Liberty, That no man shall be condemned or put to death, b^^ by the Lawful
Judgment of his Peers, or by the Law of the Land; that is, in the ordinary way
of Legal Trial: And sure an Ordinance of both Houses, without the Royal Assent,
is no part of the Law of England, nor held an ordinary way of Trial for the
English Subject, or ever reckoned to be such in former times. And finally, It
is a Fundamental Law in the English Government, That if any other cause (than
those recited in the Statute of King Edward iii.) which is supposed to be
Treason, ^
do happen before any of his Majesty's Ju^tices, the Justices shall tarry
without giving Judgment, till the Cause be sh^wn and declared before the King
and his Parliament, whether it ought to be judged Treason, or not: Yet here we
have a new found Treason, never known before, nor declared such by any of his
Majesty's Justices, nor ever brought to be considered of by the King and his
Parliament; but only Voted to be such, by some of those Members which ^are at
Westminster, who were resolved to have it so for their private Ends. The first
Example of this kind, the first tha^ ever suffered death by the shot of an
Ordinance, as himself very well observed in his dying Speech upon the Scaffold
(though purposely omitted in Hind's Printed Copy) to which now he hasteneth.

For the passing of the Ordinance being signified to him by the then Lieutenant
of the Tower, he neither entertained the news with a St^ical Apathy, nor wa^led
his fate with weak and womanish Lamentations (to which Extremes most men are
carried in this case) but (...) it with so even and so smooth a Temper, as
showed he neither was ashamed to live nor afraid to die. The time between the
Sentence and Execution, he spent in Prayers and Applications to the Lord his
God; having obtained, though not without some di^l^^n^ty, a Chaplain of his own
to attend upon him, and to assist him in the Work of his Preparation: though
little Preparation ^^^ded to receive that blow, which could not but be welcome,
because long expected. For so well was he studied in the Art of Dying
(especially in the last and strictest part of his Imprisonment) that by
continual Fastings, Watchings, Prayers, and such like Acts of Christian
Humiliation, his Flesh was rarefied into Spirit, and the whole man so fitted
for Eternal Glories, that he was more than half in Heaven, before Death brought
his bloody (but Triumphant) (...), to convey him thither. He that had so long
been a Confess^^ ^ould not but think it a Release of Miseries to be made a
(...). It is Recorded of Alexander the Great, ^
That the night before his last and greatest Battle with Darius the Persian, he
fell into so ^ound asleep, (...) his Princes ^ardly could awake him when the
morning came And it was likewise certified of this Great Prelate, That on the
Evening before his Passover, the night before the dismal Combat betwixt him
and Death, after he had refreshed his Spirits with a moderate Supper, he betook
himself unto his Rest, and slept very soundly, till the time came, in which his
Servants were appointed to attend his Rising. A most assured sign of a Soul
prepared.

The fatal morning being come, he first applied himself to his private Prayers,
and so continued till Pennington, and others of their Public Officers, came to
conduct him to the Scaffold; which he ascended with so brave a Courage, such a
cheerful Countenance, as if he had mounted rather to behold a Triumph, than be
made a Sacrifice; and came not there to Die, but to be Translated. And though
some rude and uncivil People reviled him as he passed along, with opprobrious
Language, as loath to let him go to the Grave in Peace; yet it never discomposed
his Thoughts, nor disturbed his Patience: For he had profited so well in the
School of Christ, that when he was reviled, he reviled not again; when he
suffered, he threatened not, but committed his cause to him that judges
righteously. And as he did not fear the Frowns, so neither did he covet the
Applause of the Vulgar Herd; and therefore rather chose to read what he had to
speak unto the People, than to affect the ostentation either of Memory or Wit
in that dreadful Agony: whether with greater Magnanimity than Prudence, I can
hardly say. As for the matter of his Speech, besides what did concern himself
and his own Purgation, his great care was to clear his Majesty, and the Church
of England, from any inclination to Popery; with a persuasion of the which, the
Authors of the then present Miseries had abused the People, and made them take
up Arms against their Sovereign. A faithful Servant to the last: By means
whereof, as it is said of Samson in the Book of Judges, That the men which he
slew at his death, were more than they which he slew in his life: So may it be
affirmed of this famous Prelate, That he gave a greater blow unto the Enemies
of the Church and the King at the hour of his death, than he had given them in
his whole life before. But this you will more clearly see by the Speech it
self, which follows here according to the best and most perfect Copy,
delivered by his own hands unto one of his Chaplains, and in his name presented
to the King by the Lord John Bellasis at the Court in Oxon.

The Speech of the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, spoken at his Death, upon the
Scaffold on the Tower Hill, Ian. 10. 1644.
Good People,
THis is an uncomfortable time to preach, yet I shall begin with a Text of
Scripture, Heb. 12.2. Let us run with Patience the Race which is set before us,
looking unto JESUS the Author and Finisher of our faith, who for the joy that
was set before him, en^dured the Cross, despising the shame, and is set down at
the right hand of the Throne of God.

I have been long in my Race, and how I have looked to JESUS the Author and
finisher of my faith, he best knows. I am now to come to the end of my Race,
and here I find the Cross, a death of shame: but the shame must be despised, or
no coming to the right hand of God. JESUS despised the shame for me, and God
forbid but that I should despise the shame for him. I am going apace (as you
see) toward the Red Sea, and my feet are now upon the very brinke of it; an^
Argument I hope that God is bringing me into the Land of Promise, for that was
the way through which he led his people: But before they came to it, Ex^d. ^2.^.
he instituted a Passover for them, a Lamb it was, but it must be eaten with
sour herbs, I shall obey, and labor to digest the sour herbs, as well as the
Lamb. And I shall remember it is the Lords Passover; I shall not think of the
Herbs, nor be angry with the hand which gathers them: but look up only to
him, who instituted that, and governs these; ^
for men can have no more power over me, than what is given them from above. I
am not in love with this passage through the Red Sea, for I have the weakness
and infirmities of flesh and blood plentifully in me; And I have prayed with my
Savior, Ut transir^t Calix iste, that this Cup of red wine might pass from me:
but if not, Gods will (not mine) be done, and I shall most willing drink of
this Cup as deep as he pleases, and enter in this Sea; yea, and pass through it
in the way that he shall lead me.

But I would have it remembered (Good People) That when G^^^ Servants were in
this boisterous Sea, and Aaron amongst them, the Egyptians which persecuted
them (and did in a manner drive them into that Sea) were drowned in the same
Waters, while they were in pursuit of them. Dan. 3^
I know my God, whom I serve, is as able to deliver me from the sea of blood,
as he was to deliver the three Children from the Furnace: and (I humbly thank
my Savior for it) my Resolution is now as theirs was then, They would not
worship the Image the King had set up, nor will I the Imaginations which the
People are setting up; nor will I forsake the Temple and the truth of God, to
follow the bleating of Jeroboams Calves in Dan and Bethel. And as for this
People, they are at this day miserably misled (God of his mercy open their ^^es
that they may see the right way) for at this day the blind lead the blind, and
if they go on, both will certainly fall into the ditch. For my self, I am (and
I acknowledge it in all humility) a most grievous sin^^ many ways, by thought,
word, and deed; I cannot doubt but that (...) has mercy in store for me (a
poor Penitent) as well as for other sinners. I have now, and upon this sad
occasion, ransacked every corner of my (...), and yet (I thank God) I have not
found (among the many) any (...) sin which deserves death by any known Law of
this Kingdom: and yet hereby I charge nothing upon my Judges; for if they
proceed upon proof (by valuable witnesses) I, or any other innocent, may be
justly condemned. And (I thank God) though the weight of my Sentence he heavy
upon me, I am as quiet within as ever I was in my life. And though I am not
only the first Archbishop, but the first man that ever (...) by an Ordinance in
Parliament; yet some of my Predecessors have gone this way, though not by this
means. For Elphegus was hurried away, and lost his head by the Danes; and Simon
Sudbury in the fury of Wat Tiler and his Fellows; Before these, St. John
Baptist had his head danced off by a lewd woman; and St. Cyprian, Archbishop of
Carthage, submitted his head to a persecuting Sword. Many examples (great and
(...)) and they teach me patience; for I hope my cause in heaven, will (...) of
another dye than the color that is put upon it here. And some comfort it is to
me, not only that I go the way of these great men in their several Generations,
but also that my charge (as foul as it is made) (...) like that of the Jews
against St. Paul ( Acts 25.3.) for he was accused for the Law, and the Temple,
i. e. Religion; and like that of St. Steven ( Acts 6.14.) for breaking the
Ordinances which Moses gave, i. e. Law, and Religion, the holy place and the
Temple ( v. 13.) But you will then say, Do I then compare my self with the
Integrity of St. Paul and St. Steven? No, far be that from me; I only raise a
comfort to my self, that these great Saints and Servants of God were laid at
(...) their time, as I am now. And it is memorable that St. Paul, who helped on
this accusation against St. Steven, did after fall under the very same himself.
Yea, but here is a great clamor, that I would have brought in Popery; I shall
answer that more fully by and by. In the mean time you kn^w what the Pharisees
said against Christ himself: If we let him alone, all men will believe in him,
ET VENIENT ROMANI, and the Romans will come, and take away both our Place and
Nation. Here was a causeless cry against Christ, that the Romans would come;
and see how just the Judgment was, they Crucified Christ for fear least the
Romans should come, and his death was it which brought in the Romans upon them,
God punishing them with that which they most feared. And I pray God this
clamor of Venient Romani (of which (...) no cause) help not to bring them in;
For the Pope never had such an harvest in England since the Reformation, as he
has now upon the Sects and Divisions that are amongst us. In the mean time by
Honor and dishonor, by good report and evil report, as a Deceiver and yet
true, am I passing through this world (2 Cor. 6.8.) Some Particulars also I
think it not amiss to speak of.

And first, This I shall be bold to speak of the King our Gracious Sovereign.
He has been much traduced also for bringing in of Popery, but on my conscience
(of which I shall give God a very present account) I know him to be as free
from this Charge as any man living; and I hold him to be as sound a Protestant
(according to the Religion by Law Established) as any man in this Kingdom: And
that he will venture his life as far and as freely for it. And I think I do, or
should know both his affection to Religion, and his grounds for it, as fully as
any man in England.

The second Particular is concerning this great and Populous City (which God
bless) Here has been of late a Fashion taken up to gather Hands, and then go
to the great Court of this Kingdom (the Parliament) and clamor for Justice; as
if that great and wise Court, before whom the Causes come (which are unknown to
many) could not, or would not do Justice, but at their Appointment. A way which
may endanger many an Innocent man, and pluck his blood upon their own heads,
and perhaps upon the Cities also; and this has been lately practiced against
my self, the Magistrates standing still, and suffering them openly to proceed
from Parish to Parish without any check. God forgive the Setters of this (with
all my heart I beg it) but many well-meaning People are caught by it. Acts.
6.12.
In St. Stevens case, when nothing else would serve, they stirred up the People
against him; and Herod went the same way when he had killed St James: yet he
would not venture on St. Peter, till he found how the other pleased the People.
But take heed of having your hands full of blood, Isay 1.10.
for there is a time (best known to himself) when God (above other sins) makes
Inquisition for blood; and when that Inquisition is on foot, Psalm. 9 12.
the Psalmist tells us, That God remembers, (that is not all) He remembers and
forgets not the complaint of the poor, that is, whose blood is shed by
oppression, ver. 9. Take heed of this, It is a fearful thing to fall into the
hands of the living God, but then especially, when he is making Inquisition for
blood. And (with my prayers to avert it) I do heartily desire this City to
remember the Prophecy that is expressed, Jer. 26.15.

The third Particular is the poor Church of England. It has flourished, and
been a shelter to other Neighboring Churches, when storms have driven upon
them: But alas! now it is in a storm it self, and God only knows whether, or
how it shall get out; and (which is worse th^^ the storm from without) it is
become like an Oak cleft to shivers with wedges made out of its own body, and
at every cleft Profaneness and Irreligion is entering in, while, as Prosper
speaks (in his second book De vitae contemptu, cap. 4.) Men that introduce
profaneness, are cloaked over with the name, Religionis Imaginariae, of
Imaginary Religion; for we have lost the substance, and dwell too much in
opinion: and that Church, which all the Jesuits Machinations could not ruin,
is fallen into danger by her own.

The last Particular (for I am not willing to be too long) is my self. I was
born and baptized in the Bosom of the Church of England establ^^hed by Law; in
that Profession I have ever since lived, and In that I come n^w to die. This is
no time to dissemble with God, least of all in (...) of Religion; and therefore
I desire it may be remembered, I ^ave always lived in the Protestant Religion
established in England, and ^ that I come now to dye. What clamours and
slanders I have endured (...) to keep an Uniformity in the external Service of
God, accordin^ t^ the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church, all men know, and
I (...) abundantly felt.

Now at last I am accused of High Treason in Parliament, a Crime which my soul
ever abhorred. This Treason was charged to consist of two parts, An endeavor
to subvert the Laws of the Land; and a like endea^our to overthrow the true
Protestant Religion established by Law. Besides my Answers to the several
Charges, I protested my innocence in ^oth Houses. It was said, Prisoners
Protestations at the Bar, must (...) taken. I can bring no witness of my heart,
and the inten(...) thereof; therefore I must come to my Protestation, not at
the Bar, ^ut my Protestation of this hour and instant of my death, in which I
(...) all men will be such charitable Christians, as not to think I would (...)
and dissemble, being instantly to give God an account for the truth of (...)
therefore here in the presence of God and his holy Angels take it (...) death,
that I never endeavored the subversion of Law or Religion; and I desire you
all to remember this Protest of mine for my in(...) this, and from all Treasons
whatsoever. I have been accused (...) an Enemy to Parliaments; No, I understood
them, and the benefit that comes by them too well, to be so: But I did mislike
the (...) governments of some Parliaments, many ways, and I had good Reason
for it; For Corruption optimi est Pessima, there is no Corruption i^ the World
so bad, as that which is of the best thing within it self; F^r the better the
thing is in nature, the worse it is corrupted. And that being the Highest
Court, over which no other has Jurisdiction, when it is misinformed or
misgoverned, the Subject is left without all remedy. ^ut I have done, I forgive
all the the World, all and every of these (...) Enemies which have persecuted
me; and humbly desire to be forg^v^n of God first, and then of every man,
whether I have offended him or not, if he do but conceive that I have, Lord do
thou forgive me, and I beg forgiveness of him. And so I heartily desire you to
join in Prayer with me. Which said, with a distinct and audible voice he prayed
as follows: O Eternal God, and Merciful Father, look down upon me in mercy,
in the Riches and Fullness of all thy mercies look down upon me; but not till
thou have nailed my sins to the Cross of Christ, not till thou have bathed me
in the blood of Christ; not till I have hid my self in the wounds of Christ's:
that so the punishment due unto my sins may pass over me. And since thou art
pleased to try me to the utmost, I humbly beseech thee, give me now in this
great instant full Patience, Proportionable Comfort, and a heart ready to die
for thine Honor, the Kings Happiness, and this Churches preservation. And my
Zeal to this (far from Arrogance be it spoken) is all the sin (humane Frailty
excepted and all the incidents thereunto), which is yet known to me in this
particular, for which I now come to suffer, I say in this particular of
Treason; but otherwise my sins are many and great; Lord pardon them all, and
those especially (what ever they are) which have drawn down this present
Judgment upon me: and when thou have given me strength to bear it, do with me
as seems best in thine own Eyes: and carry me through death that I may look
upon it in what visage soever it shall appear to me. Amen. And that there may
be a stop of this Issue of blood in this more then miserable Kingdom (I shall
desire that I may pray for the people too, as well as for my self) O Lord I
beseech thee give grace of Repentance to all blood-thirsty people, but if they
will not Repent, O Lord confound all their devices, Defeat and frustrate all
their designs and endeavors upon them; which are or shall be contrary to the
Glory of thy Great name, the truth and sincerity of Religion, the establishment
of the King and his Posterity after him in their just Rights and Privileges,
the Honor and Conservation of Parliaments in their just power, the
preservation of this poor Church in her truth, peace, and Patrimony, and the
settlement of this Distracted, and distressed People, under their Ancient Laws
and in their Native Liberty. And when thou have done all this in mere mercy to
them, O Lord fill their hearts with thankfulness and with Religious Dutiful
obedience to thee and thy Commandments all their days. Amen, Lord Jesus, Amen.
and receive my soul into thy Bosom. Amen.

Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.



The Speech and Prayers being ended ^e gave the Paper which he Read into (...)
hands o^ Stern his Chaplain, permitted to attend him in his last extremity;
whom he desired to Communicate it to his other Chaplains that they might see in
what manner ^e le^t this world; and so prayed God to show his blessings and
mercies on them. And taking notice that one Hind had employed himself in
writing the words of his Speech as it came from his mouth, he d^sired him not
to do him wrong in publishing a false or imperfect Copy. This done he next
applied himself to the fatal Block, as to the H^ven of his Rest: But finding
the way full of people who had placed themselves upon the Theater to behold the
Tragedy, he desired ^e might have room to die, beseeching them to let him have
an end of his miseries which he had endured very long. All which he did with so
Serene and calm a mind, as if he rather had been taking Order for a Noble Man's
Funeral, then making way for his own. Being come near the block, he put o^ his
Doublet, and used some words to this (...). Gods will be done, I am willing to
go out of this world, none can ^e ^^re willing to send me. And seeing through
the Chink of the ^oards that some people were got under the Scaffold about the
very place where the block was seated, he called to the Officer for some dust
to stop them, or to remove the people thence, saying, it was ^o part of his
desires that his blood should fall upon the heads of the people. Never did man
put off mortality with a better courage, nor look upon his bloody and malicious
Enemies with more Christian Charity. And thus far he was on his way toward
Paradise, with such a Primitive Magnanimity as equalled, if not exceeded, the
example of the Ancient Martyrs, when he was somewhat interrupted by one of
those who had placed himself on the Sca^^old, not otherwise worthy to be named,
but as a Firebrand brought from Ireland to inflame this Kingdom. Who finding
that the mockings and revilings of malicious people had no power to move him or
sha^pen him into any discontent or show of passion, would needs put in and try
what he could do with his Sponge and Vinegar, and St^pping to him near the
Block he would needs propound unto him some Impertinent questions; not so much
out of a desire to learn any thing of him: but with the same purpose as was
found in the S^ribes and Pharisees, in propounding questions to our Savior;
that is to say, either to entrap him in his Answers, or otherwise to ^^pose him
to some disadvantage with the standers by. Two of the qu^stions he made answer
to withal Christian meekness. The first question was, What was the
Comfortablest saying, which a dying man would have in his mouth, to which he
meekly made answer. Cupio (...) and esse cum Christo: being asked again what
was the fittest Speech a man could use to express his Confidence and Assuranc^*
he answ^^ed with the same Spirit of meekness, That such Ass^^anc^ was to be
found within, and that no words were able (...). But t^is not satisfying this
busy man (w^o aimed at something else (as is probable) then such satisfaction)
unless he gave some Word or Place of Scripture, whereupon such Assurance might
be truly founded. He used some words to this effect, That it was the Word of
God concerning Christ, and his dying for us. But then finding that there was
like to be no end of the troublesome Gentleman, he turned away from him,
applying himself directly to the Executioner, as the gentler and discreeter
person. Putting some money into his hand he said unto him without the least
distemper or change of countenance; Here honest friend, God forgive thee and I
do, and do thy Office upon me with mercy, and having given him a sign when the
blow should come, he kneeled down upon his knees, and prayed as follows, viz.
Lord I am coming as fast I can, I know I must pass thorough the shadow of
death, before I can come to see thee; But it is but Umbra Mortis, a mere shadow
of death, a little darkness upon nature; but thou by thy Merits and Passion,
have broke thorough the jaws of death, the Lord receive my Soul, and have mercy
upon me, and bless this Kingdom with peace and plenty, and with brotherly love
and charity, that there may not be this effusion of Christian blood amongst
them, for Jesus Christ his sake, if it be thy will.

Then laying his head upon the Block and Praying silently to himself he said
aloud, Lord receive my Soul, which was the Signal given to the Executioner, who
very dexterously did his Office, and took of his head at a blow, his Soul
ascending on the wings of Angels into Abraham's bosom, and leaving his body on
the Scaffold, to the care of men.

This blow thus given, his life-less body remained a spectacle so unpleasing
unto most of them who had desired his death with much heat and passion, that
many who came with greedy eyes to see him suffer, went back with weeping eyes
when they saw him dead; their own Consciences perhaps, bearing witness to them,
God knows whose did, that they had sinned in being guilty of such Innocent
blood. Of those whom only Curiosity and desire of Novelty, brought thither to
behold that unusual sight, many had not the Patience to attend the Issue, but
went away as soon as the Speech was ended; others returned much altered in the
opinion which before they had of him, and bettered in their Resolutions toward
the King and the Church, whose Honor and Religious Purposes, they saw so
clearly vindicated in his dying, but never dying words. And for the Rest (the
most considerable, though perhaps the smallest part of that Great Assembly) as
they came thither with no other intention, then to assist him with their
Prayers, to embalm his body with their tears, and to lay up his last Speeches
in their hearts and memories: so when they had performed those Offices of
Christian duty, they comforted themselves with this, that as his life was
honorable, so his death was glorious; the pains whereof were short and
momentary to himself, the benefit like to be perpetual unto them and others,
who were resolved to live and die in the Communion of the Church of England.
And if the Bodies o^ us men be capable of any happiness in the Grave, he had as
great a share therein, as he could desire; his Body being accompanied to the
Earth with great multitudes of People, whom love, or curiosity, or remorse of
Conscience had drawn together purposely to perform that Office, and decently
interred in the Church of Alhallows Barking (a Church of his own Patronage and
Jurisdiction) according to the Rites and Ceremonies of the Church of England,
In which it may be noted as a thing remarkable, That being whilst he lived the
greatest Champion of the Common Prayer Book ^ere by Law establi^^ed, he had the
honor being dead, to be buried in the form therein prescribed, after it had
been long disused, and almost reprobated in most Churches of London. Nor need
Posterity take care to provide his Monument; he built one for himself whilst he
was alive: It b^eing well observed by Deering (one of his most malicious
Enemies, and he that threw the first stone at him in the beginning of this
Parliament) that St. Paul's Church will be his perpetual Monument, and his own
Book (against the Jesuit) his lasting Epitaph.

Thus ^ell Laud, and St. Paul's ^ell with him: The yearly Contribution toward
whose Repair, Anno 1641. when he was plunged into his Troubles, fell from the
sum of 15000 l. and upward, to somewhat less than 1500. and afterward by
degrees to nothing. No less than 17138 l. 13 s. 4 d. ob. q. which remained in
the Chamber of London toward the carrying on of the Work, is seized on by an
Order of both Houses of Parliament, for the beginning of their War against the
King; that so they might not only encounter him with his own Arms and
Ammunition, which he had bought with his own Money: but with that Money too,
which he alone had raised by his own Care and Piety. Most of the Materials
intended for finishing the Work, were turned into Money; and the rest bestowed
on the Parish of St. Gregory's, for the Rebuilding of that Church: And all the
Scaffolding of the Tower or Steeple, allotted to the payment of Iephson's
Regiment, who challenged an Arrear of 1746 l. 15 s. 8 d. for their Service in
that cruel and unnatural War. The Pa^ement of the Church dug up, and sold to
the wealthier Citizens, for beautifying their Country-Houses; The Floor
converted into Saw-pits in many places, for cutting out such Timber as was
turned into Money; The Lead torn off in some places also; the Timber and Arches
of the Roof being thereby exposed to Wind and Weather; Part of the Stone-work
which supported the Tower or Steeple, fallen down, and threatening the like
Ruin unto all the rest; The gallant Portico at the West End thereof, obscured
first by (...) House looking toward Ludgate; and afterward turned into an
Exchange for Haberdashers of small Wares, Hosiers, and such Petit Chapmen: And
finally, the whole Body of it converted to a Stable or Horse-Garrison, for the
better awing of that City, whose Pride and Faction raised the Fire, and whose
Purse added Fuel to it, for the enflaming of the Kingdom.

Thus Laud fell, and the Church fell with him; The Liturgy whereof was Voted
down about the same time in which the Ordinance was passed for his
Condemnation; The Presbyterian Directory authorized for the Press, by Ordinance
of March 13. next following; Episcopacy Root and Branch, which had before been
precondemned, suppressed by Ordinance in like manner on October 9. 1646. The
Lands of all Cathedrals sold, to the exposing of those stately and magnificent
Fabrics to an inevitable Ruin; The Bishops dispossessed of their Lands and
Rents, without the Charity of a small Annual Pension toward their Support; The
Regular and Conformable Clergy sequestered, ejected, and turned out of all, to
the utter undoing of themselves, their Wives and Children; A wide gap opened
for letting in of all Sects and Heresies, many of which had been exploded and
condemned in the Primitive times, others so new (and every day begetting newer)
that few of them have served out their Apprenticeship, and yet Trade as freely
as if they had served out all their Time; The Sacred Ministry in the mean time,
or that part of it at the least which consists in Preaching, usurped by
Handicra^ts-men, Boys, and Women, to the dishonor of God, the infamy and
disg^^ce of the English Nation, and the reproach of our Religion, so much
renowned (as long as he remained in Power) both for external Glory and internal
Purity. And yet it cannot be denied, but that he fell very opportunely in
regard of himself, before he saw those horrible Confusions which have since
brake into the Church, the dissipation of the Clergy, the most calamitous death
of his Gracious Sovereign, and the Extermination threatened to the Royal Family:
any of which would have been far more grievous to him, than a thousand deaths.
The opportunity of a quiet and untroubled death, was reckoned for a great
felicity in the Noble (...) in vita Agric.
Agricela, who could not but in the course of a long life, have felt the
hundredth part of those Griefs and Sorrows, which would have pierced the Soul
of this Pious Prelate, had not God gathered him to his Fathers in so good an
hour.

But fallen he is; and being fallen, there is no question to be made, but most
men would spend their Judgments on his Life and Actions. Dering^^ Col^^ctio^ of
Speeches.
One tells us of him, That the roughness of his uncourtly Nature, sent most men
discontented from him; though afterward, of his own accord, he would find
means to sweeten many of them again, when they least looked for it. Chapter Hist.
B. 11. p 219.
Another, That he had so little command of his passions, that he could not
repress them at the Star Chamber, or the High Commission; which made his
Censure always follow the severer side. Some thought, That out of a dislike of
that Popularity, which was too much affected by his Predecessor, he was carried
on so ^ar to the the other extreme, as to fail in many necessary Civilities to
the Nobility and Gentry, by which he might have obliged them, and indeed
himself. Others, that by this reserved, and implausible humor, he so far lost
the love of his own Diocese (the Gentry whereof he neither entertained at
Canterbury, nor f^ailed at Lambeth, as all his Predecessors had done before
him) that one of them who served in Parliament for the County of Kent, threw
the first dirt at him. Some said that he trusted too much to his own single
judgment, in the Contriving and carrying on of his designs; seldom advising
with any of the other Bishops, till he had digested the whole business, and
then referring nothing to them b^t the Execution, which made it less Cordially
followed by the greater part, then it had been otherwise. And others, that he
pre^^med too much on the Love and Goodness of the King, whose Love and Goodness
not being seconded by Power, proved afterward so insufficient to save him
harmless, and keep his head upon his shoulders, that it served rather to expose
him to the public hat^ed. In which Respect it was conceived that the Lord
Protector ^ommerset followed his work more like a Statesman (though of himself
he was accounted no deep Politician) not venturing on the Alteration of
Religion which he had projected, till he had put himself into the head of an
Army, under Pretense of making War against the Scots; nothing but the
unseasonable disbanding whereof could (...) plunged him into those Calamities,
which ensued upon it. It was discoursed by some that he was too sudden and
precipitate, in the persuit of his undertakings, the fruits whereof he desired
to ^aile before they were ripe; and did not think the work well do^e, except he
might enjoy as well the comfort of it in his Life, as the Honor of it after
his death: quite contrary therein to the Grandees of the Puritan faction, who,
after the first heats were over in Queen Elizabeth's time, carried their work
for thirty years together, like M^l^s under the Ground, not casting up any
earth before (...), till they had made so strong a party in the House of
Commons (...) was able to hold the King to their own Conditions. And there^^^^
it was thought by others, that his business was not so well (...) as it should
have been; the three first Parliaments of this King (...) dissolved in such
discontentments, as could not easily be for(...) the Scots as much exasperated
by the Commission of Sur(...) which they expressed plainly by their disaffections
to his Person and Government, at his first Parliament in that Kingdom; and the
English shortly after, startled by the Writs for Shipmony, which seemed to
threaten a destruction to that Legal Property, which every man challenged in
his own.

Some who seemed wiser then the Rest complained, that his Em^^acements were two
large and general; and that he had more (...) in the fire at once, then could
be well hammered in one forge. Not suffering any one of his Counsels to hold on
a Probationship, before it was retarded and pulled back by another. By means
whereof the whole piece being laid open at once, the Figures of it appeared
more terrible, and unhansomly wrought then otherwise they would have done, in
case they had been shown by little and little. By these it was discoursed, that
within the spa^e o^ one year after his coming to the Chair of Canterbury, he
had en^aged himself, in Six several Counsels and designs, all of them o^ so
high a nature, that each of them might have been enough to take up that short
remainder of time which he had to live. It was confesse^* that the connivence
and Remisness of his Predecessor had left him work enough to do; but then it
was averred withal, and proved by Ordinary observation, that an unskil^ful
Carpenter might pull down more in one day then the ablest Architect in the
World could build up in twenty; and therefore that the Ruins of twenty years
were not to be repaired in one. And for the Proof of this they we^^ pleased to
note, that within six weeks after his coming to th^^ Chair, his Majesty had
laid the Foundation of the Scottish Liturgy* by Issuing out his Instructions of
the 8 of October. for Officiatin^ the Divine Service in his Chapel at
Edenborough* according to (...) form and Ceremony of his Royal Chapel at White
Hall; that ^e had seconded it within ten days after by reviving his Fathers
Declaration about Lawful Sports, with some additions of his own; and thirded it
in the very beginning of November. by an Order o^ the Council Table in the case
of S. Gregory's, for transposing the Communion Table to the Place of the Altar;
and that within the first six Months of the year next following, he sent out
two Injunctions for reducing the Congregations of the French and Dutch to the
Liturgy and Church of England; Countenanced the Petition of the London
Ministers, for increase of maintenance, in the just payment of their Tithes;
and procured the Repealing of the Irish Articles, and those of England to be
approved and received in the plac^ thereof. And what said they could be more
unadvisedly, and un^politickly done, then to draw upon himself at once the
(...) pleasure of three Kingdoms in the several Concernments of each Nation; as
also all the Genevian Churches abroad in their Prop^ Interesses; Fomented by
the Pride and Purse of the City of (...) and prosecuted by the Malice and
Activity of the Puritan ^^ction* in them all united in the Common quarrel or
the Lords day Sabbath* They added that King Edward the first, began not with
the Conquest of Wales, before he had well settled his affairs in England, and
that he undertook not the following War against the Scots (whom afterward he
brought under his obedience) till some years after he had finished the Conquest
of Wales; that as all Sup^r^^tations are dangerous to the Product of the Births
of Nature; and nothing more Repugnant to a Regular Diet than to fill the (...)
with fresh viands, before it is Emptied of the Former; so not^ing (...) i^ more
destructive to the Body Politic, than to try two many Exp^riments at once upon
it, which cannot possibly work well together to the public health; and
therefore, that he should have practiced upon one Kingdom after another as best
became so able a Physician, and so exact a Ma^ter in the Art of a Christian
Warfare; that one of them might have followed the good Example of the other,
and not all join together (like so many ill humors) to the common disturbance
of the work.

Such were the Censures and Discourses, which were passed upon him betwixt his
Imprisonment and his Death, and for some years after. In which how much or
little there is of truth, is left unto the ^udgment of those, who are more
thoroughly acquainted with his disposition and a^^ections, his secret Counsels,
and the Reasons which directed him in the conduct of them, than I can honestly
pretend to. All I can say, is that, which may be said by any other, which ^ad
no more access to him than my self: Of Stature he was low, but of strong
Composition; so short a Trunck never contained so much excellent Treasure,
which therefore was to be the stronger, by reason of the wealth which was
lodged within it. His Countenance cheerful and well-bloudied, more fleshy (as I
have often heard him say) than any other part of his body; which cheerfulness
and vivacity he carried with him to the very Block, notwithstanding the
Afflictions of four years Imprisonment, and the infelicity of the times. For at
his first Commitment he besought God (as is observed in the Breviate) to give
him full patience, proportionable comfort, and contentment with whatsoever he
should send; and he was heard in what he prayed for: for notwithstanding that
he had fed long on the bread of carefulness, and drank the water of affliction;
yet as the Scripture tells us of the four Hebrew Children, His Countenance
appeared fairer and fatter in flesh, than any of those who eat their portion of
the Kings Meat, and drank of his Wine; A gallant Spirit being for the most part
like the Sun, which shows the greater at his setting. But to proceed in that
weak Character, which my Pen is able to afford him, Of Apprehension he was
quick and sudden, of a very sociable Wit, and a pleasant Humor; and one that
knew as well how to put off the Gravity of his Place, and Person, when he saw
occasion, as any man living whatso^ver; Accessible enough at all times but when
he was tired out with multiplicity and vexation of business, which some, who
did not understand him, ascribed unto the natural ruggedness of his
Disposition; Zealous he was in the Religion here established, as has been made
apparent in the course of this History; Constant not only to the Public
Prayers in his Chapel, but to his private Devotions in his Closet; A special
Benefactor to the Town of Reading, where he had his Birth, and to the
University of Oxon. where he had his Breeding; so much the more to this last,
as he preferred his Well(...) (...) his B^^^i^. Happy in this, that he
accomplished those good works in the time of his Life, which otherwise must
have ^hrunk to nothing in the hands of Executors. To speak of the Integrity of
so great a Person, would be an injury to his Virtues: One Argument whereof may
be, if there were no other, That in so long a time of Power and Greatness,
wherein he had the principal managing of Affairs both in Church and State, he
made himself the Master of so small a Fortune, that it was totally exhausted in
his Benefactions unto Oxon. and Reading, before remembered. The rest I shall
refer to the Breviate of his Life and Action, though published of purpose to
defame him, and render him more odious to the Common People: In which it will
appear, to an equal and impartial Reader, That he was a man of such eminent
Virtues, such an exemplary Piety toward God, such an unwearied Fidelity to his
Gracious Sovereign, of such a public Soul toward Church and State, so fixed a
Constancy in Friendship, and one so little biased by his private Interesses,
that Plutarch, if he were alive, would be much troubled to find a sufficient
Parallel wherewith to match him in all the Lineaments of perfect Virtue.

Thus lived this most Reverend, Renowned, and Religious Prelate; and thus he
died; when he had lived seventy one years, thirteen Weeks, and four days, if
at the least he may be properly said to die: the great Example of whose Virtue
shall continue always, not only in the Minds of Men, but in the Annals of
succeeding Ages with Renown and Fame. His Death the more remarkable in falling
on St. Williams day, as if it did design him to an equal place in the English
Calendar, with that which William, Archbishop of Bourgeois, had obtained in the
French; Who being as great a Zealot in his time against the spreading and
increase of the Albigenses, (as Laud was thought to be against those of the
Puritan Faction, and the Scottish Covenanters) has ever since been honored as
a Saint in the Gallican Church; the tenth of January being destined for the
solemnities of his Commemoration, on which day our Laud ascended from the
Scaffold to a Throne of Glory.

The End of the Second Part.
ERRATA.
PAge 12. l. 33. read acc^rding to. p. 14. l. 4. r. out of. l. 5. r. that it
is. p 31. l. 32. r. P^^se^^nce. p. 35. l. 13. r. there be no. p. 47. l. 30. r.
Lord ^ip. p. 59. l. 43. for (...) College, r. P^rn^^^ke Hall. p. 66 l 41. r.
redounded. p. 68. l. 42. ^. Chair. (...). 14. r. ^^^sances. l. 30. r. divu^ged
it over. r. also The City was. p. 74. l. 21. ^. (...) sm^^^. p. 91. l. 38. r.
commends and propounds. p. 108. l. 40. r. P^pe. p. (...). l. 25. r. Church of.
p. 112. l. 39 r. was commanded. p. 113. l. 40. r. Scrinia. p. 119. l. 26. r.
home. p* 134. l. 24. (...), it. p. 144 l. 23 r. named any. p. 150. l. 4. (...).
p. 151. 4. 11. r. ^een. p. 161. l. 1. r. land p. 170. l. 8. r. in the. p. 172.
l. 14. ^. ^^gden. p. 174. l. 17. r. at it. p. 181. l. 26. r. the supp^sed. p.
182. l. 28. r. there ^. p. ^^9. l. 36. r. tares. p. 192. l. 14. for worse, r.
wiser. p. 194. l. 19. r. Acts of Grace. p. 197. l. 4. ^eie, for. l. 27. r.
Embarrass^s. p. 215. l. 40. r. Twisse. p. 219. l. 41. r, Subscripti^ns. p. 233.
l. 3. r. given. p. 250. l. 31. r. of them. p. 271. l. 20. r. Dauphine. p.
(...). 33. (...) them. p. 298. l. 36. r. quarrelled with. p. 308. l. 38. r. in
a manner. p. 321. l. 25^. but. p. 331. l. 11. r. knows. p. 340. l. 26. r. they
come. p. 343. l. 37. r. keep. p. 345. l. 15. r. Osbeston. p. 378 l. 36. r.
distaste. p. 381. l. 8. r. too blame. p. 390. l. 23, r. sentences of the Kirk.
l. 25. r. calumnies. p. 392. l. 39. r. V^rres. p. 401. l. 43. r. (...). p. 407.
l. 8. dele, be. p. 410. l. 35. dele, as. p. 412. l. 39. r. employ. p. 413. l.
23. r, (...). p. 415. l. 45. dele, for. p. 432. l. 28. r. in the. p. 436. l.
37. r. thwarting. p. 465. l. 45. r. ^y the Lord. p. 464. l. 46. r. he. l. 46.
till, p. 465. l. 45. r. silliest, p. 467. l. 31. r. t^le. p. 476. l. 44. r. as
to take. p. 488. l. 37. r. nor. p. 491. l. 11. r. them. p. 493. l. 30. r.
Scotland. p. 495. l. 9.^, Consents of. p. 500. l. 40. dele, the. p. 515. l. 29.
r. nor.

AN ELEGY ON THE DEATH OF The most Reverend FATHER in GOD WILLIAM Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury, etc. January 10. 1644.
Horat. Carm. Lib. 4. Od. 8. Dignum Laud Virum musa vetat mori.

AND yet not leave thee thus, I fain would try
A Line or two in way of Elegy;
And wail so sad a Loss, if to express
The greatness of it, would not make it less*
If to Lament thee, might not vex thee more
Than all the Scorns thou have endured before,
And make thee think we envied thee thy start,
Or doubted that thou were not where thou art.
Yet, with thy leave, I needs must drop a Verse,
Write it with Tears, and fit it for thy Hearse;
And at this distance from thy Grave, which lacks
The Pomps of Sorrow, hang my Heart with Blacks.
Religious Prelate, What a Calm have thou,
In The midst of those turbulent Storms, which now
Shipwreck this Island! At how cheap a Rate
Have thou procured this Change of thy Estate!
The Mitre, for a Crown; A few poor days,
For endless Bliss; Vile Earth, for Heavenly Joys!
Such Glories has thou found, such Alteration
In this thy Highest, as thy last Translation.
How were thine Enemies deceived, when they
Advanced thee thus and chalked thee out the Way?
A Way so welcome to thee! No Divine
But knows the Red Sea leads to Palestine:
And since Christ Jesus Sanctified the Cross,
Death's the best Purchase, Life the greatest Loss.
Nor be thou grieved, Blessed Soul, that Men do still
Pursue thee with black Slanders, and do kill
Thy Shadow now, and trample on thy Ghost,
(As Hectors Carcass, by the Grecian Host)
Or that thou want Inscriptions, and a Stone,
TO ingrave thy Name, and write thy Titles on.
Thou art above those Trifles, and shall stand
As much above Men's malice. Though the hand
Of base Detraction has defiled thy Name,
And spotless Virtues; yet impartial Fame
Shall do thee all just Honors, and set forth
To all succeeding Times thy matchless Worth.
No Annals shall be writ, but what Relate
Thy happy Influence both on Church and State;
Thy Zeal to Public Order, Thy Great Parts
For all Affairs of Weight, Thy Love to Arts;
And, to our shame, and his great Glory, tell,
For whose dear Sake, by whose vile Hands he fell.
(A Death so full of Merits, of such Price,
To God and Man so sweet a Sacrifice,
As by good Church-Law may his Name prefer
To a fixed Rubric in the Calendar.
And let this silence the Pure Sects Complaint,
If they make Martyrs, we may make a Saint)
Or should Men envy thee this Right, thy Praise
An Obsequie unto it self can raise.
Thy brave Attempt on Paul's, in time to come,
Shall be a Monument beyond a Tomb:
Thy Book shall be thy Statua, where we find
The Image of thy Nobler Part, thy Mind:
Thy Name shall be thy Epitaph, and he
Which hears and reads of that, shall publish thee
Above the reach of Titles, and shall say
None could express thy Worths a braver way.
And thus, though murdered, thou shall never die,
But live Renowned to all Posterity.
Rest thou then happy in the Sweets of Bliss,
The Elyzian, the Christians Paradise,
Exempt from Worldly Cares, secure from Fears;
And let us have thy Prayers, as thou our Tears.
FINIS.

